Heteroatom-doped nanomaterials/core–shell nanostructure based electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09861F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09861F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 987-1021Heteroatom-doped nanomaterials/core–shell nanostructure based electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction

        
          
            Saravanan 
            Nagappan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Malarkodi 
            Duraivel
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shamim Ahmed 
            Hira
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kandasamy 
            Prabakar
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Sik 
            Ha
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sang Hoon 
            Joo
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ki Min 
            Nam
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Kang Hyun 
            Park
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, 2 Busandaehak-ro 63beon-gil, Geumjeong-Gu, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chemistry@pusan.ac.kr; saravananagappan@gmail.com
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, 2 Busandaehak-ro 63beon-gil, Geumjeong-Gu, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Polymer Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, 2 Busandaehak-ro 63beon-gil, Geumjeong-Gu, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea
dSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50 UNIST-gil, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea
Received 
      18th November 2021
    , Accepted 6th December 2021First published on 10th December 2021AbstractRecently, heteroatom doped core–shell nanostructures (HCSNs) have been widely used as superior electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) owing to their enhanced ORR performance and stability under harsh environmental conditions. In this review, we provide the importance of HCSNs and explain how the ORR performance can be enhanced by various heteroatom dopants, such as nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, boron, and combinations of two or more heteroatoms. Various types of nitrogen doping were performed with different forms of nitrogen-containing organic compounds in CSNs, such as metal–organic frameworks, zeolitic imidazolate frameworks, and transition metals containing nitrogen sources, which have been used widely for the ORR because they form a high surface area, a facet surface structure, and reactive active sites in the presence of elements that are useful for the ORR catalytic activity. Furthermore, we briefly discuss the synthesis and fabrication of highly efficient ORR electrodes using a combination of di-, tri-, or multi-heteroatom-doped CSNs. Finally, we discuss the superior ORR activities of the HCSNs reported in recent literature and compare the activity with various reactive descriptors and the broad scope of these HCSNs for practical applications, along with their drawbacks and future demands.Saravanan NagappanSaravanan Nagappan is working as a Post-Doc Fellow under Professor Kang-Hyun Park in the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research studies include the synthesis and fabrication of various organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, MXene, graphene, carbon, and nanoclay based materials for coatings, catalysis, environmental-remediation, biomedical, electrocatalysis, and energy storage and conversion applications.Malarkodi DuraivelMalarkodi Duraivel is pursuing PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (September 2018) under the supervision of Professor Kandasamy Prabakar at Pusan National University, Korea. Her current research focuses on the development of low cost and efficient electrocatalysts for energy conversion applications including water splitting and oxygen reduction reaction.Shamim Ahmed HiraShamim Ahmed Hira has completed PhD (August, 2021) in the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials under the supervision of Professor Kang Hyun Park at Pusan National University, Korea. His research work focuses on the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks and their composite materials and their application in electrochemical sensors as well as in energy applications.Kandasamy PrabakarKandasamy Prabakar is a Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea. His current research is focused on the development of various nanohybrid electrodes for energy conversion and storage applications. Especially, he is working on the development of novel electrodes for hybrid capacitors, photo-electrocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions for total water-splitting and reduction reactions for metal air batteries.Chang-Sik HaChang-Sik Ha is a University Distinguished Professor at the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests are polyimides for flexible substrates, organic/inorganic nanohybrid materials, mesoporous materials, carbon, and graphene based materials for wide variety of applications.Sang Hoon JooSang Hoon Joo is a Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Korea. His research group focuses on the development of electrocatalysts for energy conversion reactions and molecular-level understanding of structure–catalytic property relationships.Ki Min NamKi Min Nam is an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests are the phase control of metal and metal oxide nanocrystals, and inorganic materials for electrocatalytic reactions.Kang Hyun ParkKang Hyun Park is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests include the development of new transition metal-nanoparticle catalyzed reactions. Currently, his research interest focused on the development of multifunctional nanohybrid materials for electrocatalysis, especially on the synthesis of multifunctional nanohybrid electrodes for fuel cell and battery applications.
1. Introduction
The continuous demand for energy conversion and storage (ECS) systems such as electric vehicles such as bikes, cars, and buses, rechargeable batteries, flexible displays, heating and cooling systems in buildings, electrochromic smart windows, and electrochemical reactors for fuel cells and chemical production has necessitated the development of novel materials that are economically viable, safe, and robust.1–3 Electrocatalysts based on nanohybrid materials play vital roles in the synthesis and development of novel materials for ECS applications.2 In the past few decades, much effort was dedicated to the development of such materials and their introduction in various ECS systems such as green-energy electric vehicles using solar panels, hydrogen fuel cells and direct methanol fuel cells, and metal–air and lithium-ion batteries.1–4 Electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) play an effective role in ECS systems such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells.5,6 Among the various metal sources, platinum (Pt) is broadly used as the electrode material in the ORR because it has a higher electrical conductivity than various noble metals and Pt-group metal (PGM)-free transition-metal oxides.7–10 On the other hand, Pt-based electrodes exhibit poor stability and methanol tolerance, which are major drawbacks for the ORR as well as for commercial products because they lead to reduced performance under harsh environmental conditions.8,11 Pt-based electrodes also have other drawbacks in the ORR: they show instability due to their slow kinetics and degradation behaviors.8,11 In several studies, these drawbacks were mitigated through techniques such as alloying of the Pt-based material with various earth-abundant metals and the mixing of the Pt atom in the core or shell with one or more transition metals.12–14
The electrode performance in the ORR has been significantly improved by doping with heteroatoms or carbonizing the sample and loading a thin layer of platinum or platinum with other transition-metal oxides on the shell.15,16 Moreover, these methods gradually enhance the stability and tolerance against harsh conditions and result in enhanced electrocatalytic behaviors.17,18 Meanwhile, recent studies have dedicated significant effort to determining the role of the core and shell in the ORR because it might be difficult to predict whether a core or shell containing a metal source plays a vital role in the ORR.19–21 To overcome this difficulty, surface modeling studies based on methods such as density functional theory (DFT) were recently performed to selectively predict the role of the core and shell as well as their thickness in the ORR.22,23 Several reviews and research studies focused on the numerous possibilities of developing electrocatalysts for the ORR.24–26
Core–shell nanostructures (CSNs) have been reported to play an important role in the electrocatalysis of reactions such as the oxygen evolution/reduction reaction (OER/ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and overall water splitting for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells and battery applications owing to their large available surface area and abundant active sites and defects.19–21,27 Various metals, metal oxides, single as well as bimetallic materials, and carbon based and heteroatom doped materials were used to synthesise the CSNs by introducing either in the core or shell structures.28,29 Chaudhuri et al. comprehensively reviewed the various aspects of CSN synthesis with different approaches and methods.30 They emphasized the important advantages and disadvantages of these approaches and reviewed analytical approaches to predict the successful development of CSNs and their applications in various fields. Further, they reported that the choice of materials depends on various factors such as performance, long-term stability, cost, ease of mass production, and tolerance behavior against acids, bases, and organic compounds. CSNs have also been applied in various other applications such as drug delivery, catalysis, metal adsorption, energy and environmental conservation, and biomedical engineering.31–33 In particular, extensive studies on CSNs in recent years have led to various approaches for the improvement of electrodes for the ORR.19
As for CSNs, a vast amount of research has been conducted on heteroatom doping in carbon or other supports to fabricate an advanced electrode with improved properties.34,35 In these studies, CSNs have attracted much attention in the fabrication of electrodes for the ORR because they make the tuning of the metal composition of the core or shell surface easier. The tuning of the metal composition of the core or shell minimizes the use of Pt and enhances performance, in addition to reducing the total cost of the product. A considerable amount of research studies has proved the improved electrocatalytic ORR activity using well-designed CSNs with a controlled architecture.36–40 Among them, heteroatom-doped CSNs (HCSNs) also demonstrated excellent electrochemical activity for the ORR in recent years.42–44
To the best of the authors' knowledge, none of the existing reviews provide details on the synthesis of HCSNs for the ORR. Fig. 1 shows the number of papers published in the last 10 years under the topics of (a) core–shell nanostructures, (b) heteroatom doping, (c) ORR, and (d) heteroatoms for the ORR. The histograms show a steady growth in the publication of papers on these topics. Furthermore, Fig. 1d shows the important role of heteroatoms in the ORR. The introduction of heteroatoms into CSNs has recently attracted much attention. Therefore, we discuss the various possibilities for the synthesis of HCSNs and their wide applicability in the ORR (Fig. 2). In particular, we focus on the important role of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, boron, and combinations of two or more heteroatoms in CSNs for the ORR and discuss how the heteroatom dopant in CSNs can enhance the ORR performance. We also found that studies using nitrogen doping in CSNs for the ORR outnumber those using any other dopant. Therefore, we focus on nitrogen doping with materials such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) containing nitrogen for the ORR (Fig. 2). Furthermore, we discuss the role of nitrogen-based CSNs containing iron, cobalt, and other metals in the ORR. CSNs and HCSNs also work as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the ORR and HER, as well as the ORR and OER. These bifunctional electrodes can be used as both the cathode and anode for fuel cell and battery applications. So, we also cover the effect of bifunctional electrocatalysts developed by using HCSNs for the ORR. We hope that this review can provide clear insight into the multiple advantages and usage of HCSNs for a variety of applications.
 Fig. 1  Number of papers published under the topics of (a) core–shell nanostructures, (b) heteroatom doping, (c) oxygen reduction reaction, (d) heteroatoms for the oxygen reduction reaction from 2011–2020 (source: https://apps.webofknowledge.com/). 
 Fig. 2  Various routes of synthesis of HCSNs for the ORR. 
2. Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
The ORR is one of the prominent electrocatalytic approaches in energy conversion and storage and is highly useful for fuel cell and battery applications.44–46 In general, the electrocatalytic ORR activity occurs via the reduction of oxygen to water or peroxides.5,47 There are two possible mechanisms for the ORR in an electrolyte: (i) direct 4-electron reduction pathway from oxygen (O2) to water (H2O) in acidic solutions and to OH− in alkaline solutions and (ii) 2-electron reduction pathway from O2 to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).5,47–50 The reaction mechanisms for the ORR under acidic and alkaline conditions occurred according to eqn (1)–(6).51
Under acidic conditions: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2 (two electron process)(1) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O(2) O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O (four electron process)(3)
Under alkaline conditions: O2 + H2O + 2e− → H2O− + OH− (two electron process)(4) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−(5) O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (four electron process)(6)
The ORR selectivity of 4e− and 2e− is set from reactions (7) and (8).52 *OOH + (H+ + e−) → *O + H2O(7) *OOH + (H+ + e−) → H2O2(8)
These two routes of electron reduction generally occur based on the electrocatalyst, electrolyte, active sites, binder, selection of materials for electrode fabrication, electronic structure, and acid/base levels, among other factors.5,49,53 In general, the 4-electron oxygen reduction pathway is highly recommended for the ORR as well as for further applications because 2-electron reduction to peroxide delivers less energy than the 4-electron transfer.49 At the same time, 2-electron reduction was also considered largely in recent years for the H2O2 production.54–56 It is quite challenging to convey whether 2-electron or 4-electron reduction plays a valuable role in the ORR because each have unique characteristics to generate H2O2 and H2O that can be useful for various applications. On the other hand, 4-electron reduction is largely considered as the cathode electrode in battery and fuel cell applications as compared with 2-electron reduction. So, in this review article we briefly cover the various HCSNs having 4-electron reduction for the electrochemical ORR activity.
According to the US Department of Energy (DOE), approximately 4 mg cm−2 or more of Pt or other catalysts is recommended to fabricate a cathode for ORR activities as well as for PEM fuel cells.45 Pt is one of the best electrocatalysts for the ORR and exhibits outstanding and stable ORR activity even in acidic media, while some other electrocatalysts have lower ORR activity in acidic media.16,57–61 On the other hand, as Pt is highly expensive, it may not be suitable for practical applications. Several studies have been conducted to find an alternative for Pt; these studies have used PGM-free transition-metal or metal oxides to reduce the cost of the electrode.16,58,59 Furthermore, to improve the performance of ORR active electrodes as well as for other applications, various types of sources have been used, such as heteroatom-doped carbon materials, transition-metal oxides with low quantities of Pt or other metal sources, heteroatom-doped sources, transition-metal chalcogenides, and transition-metal carbides (Fig. 3).62 In the succeeding sections, we provide more details on experiments on the electrocatalysis of the ORR using HCSNs and discuss recent trends, along with materials synthesis, fabrication, and applications.
 Fig. 3  An overview illustration of M@C composites, where the metal core can be a noble metal (Pt, palladium (Pd), ruthenium (Ru), gold (Au), etc.), non-noble metal (iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu), tin (Sn), etc.), or their alloy, and the carbon shell varies in thickness, ranging from carbon nanotubes (CNTs), to graphene, and graphitic carbon with or without dopants (nitrogen (N), sulfur (S), phosphorous (P), boron (B), etc.). These catalysts can be used for the ORR, OER, HER, and carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and devices such as overall water splitting and rechargeable metal–air batteries. A third component material such as metal oxide, Fe3C, Co9S8, CoP, Co(OH)2, etc., can also be integrated as part of the core or shell, or with the M@C materials forming a more complicated composite structure with a further enhanced performance. Adapted with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. 
3. Core–shell nanostructures for the ORR
Recently, CSNs have attracted considerable attentions in various fields especially for electrocatalysis for ECS applications (Fig. 3).19,22,62–65 CSNs have also been widely synthesized by tuning the metal composition to enhance the electrochemical mass activity and stability for the ORR.66 Numerous studies were conducted in this regard; examples include the synthesis of PtPd–NF/SG,40 O–PtCuNF/C,61 Ru@Pt,66,67 Pt in PtIr/Pd/C,68 Pd–Pt,69 Ir–Pt,70 PtxGd,71 PtML/AuNi0.5Fe,72 Pd–Fe@Pt/C,73 Pt3Co/C,74 Pd@Pt/CNT,75 Co@Pd–Pt/CNT,76 Pt3Fe/C,77 PtxNiy,78 Pt@Ni,79 Cu/FePtCu,80 Ni(OH)2@Pt/C,81 PdCu2@Pt,82 PdCu@PtCu,83 and AuNi@Pt,84 based on CSNs for enhancing the mass and specific activities as well as stability for the ORR. The excellent performance of these electrocatalysts for the ORR was due to their high surface area, high reactivity, good electron transfer ability for oxygen reduction, and ability to accommodate large numbers of active sites.40,61,66–84 In most cases, the ORR activity mainly occurs at the surface of the catalyst, so the size and shape of CSNs are much important parameters to achieve an outstanding catalytic activity.85–87 The electrocatalyst having uniform size and shape can deliver better electrochemical ORR activity and highly stable properties.88 Zhang et al. analyzed the effect of size and shape of Au@Ni/Pt CSNs for the ORR using a Au core (diameter 2.2 to 10.3 nm) containing a Ni/Pt shell and demonstrated that the CSNs with a Ni/Pt shell thickness above 1 nm can have excellent ORR activity.89 Moreover, CSNs reduce the cost of the electrocatalyst by reducing the amount of Pt loading or mixing with other metals or heteroatoms and carbon. In addition, CSNs improve the stability and performance of the ORR. We also discuss the effective role of mono-, bi-, and tri-metallic CSNs in the electrocatalysis of the ORR.82,90–92 An important note to the reader of this review article: in some places, the name of CSNs was not mentioned uniformly because we just follow the name of the CSNs according to the referenced papers in order to avoid confusions between this review article and published paper.
4. Heteroatom doping for the ORR
Recently, doping with single heteroatoms such as N, S, P, and B and the dual doping of two or more heteroatoms have received tremendous attention for creating defects and abundant active sites for ECS applications.19,93,94 In addition, the doped electrode material can show superior electrocatalytic activity because of the charge polarization caused by the dopant. Zhang et al. provided a broad overview of doping methods for transition metal compounds (TMCs) with their technical advancement for various electrocatalysis applications.95 Heteroatom doping in carbon supports can be widely used in numerous applications. For example, nitrogen-doped graphene exhibits three configurations: graphitic N, pyridinic N, and pyrrolic N.34 These structures can exhibit more defects at the edges of graphene networks than in the middle of the plane.34 The defects at the edges facilitate contact with oxygen molecules and enhance the ORR activity. The spin-density redistribution of the carbon network and changes in the local charge density of the doped material can enhance the ORR activity. Moreover, the dopant can enhance the interaction between the carbon support and metal nanoparticles, which also leads to the enhanced catalytic activity and stability of the active material. The electrons in the sp2 hybridized carbon atoms are too inert for instantaneous use in the ORR.34 These inert electrons can be activated by doping with heteroatoms (N, S, P, B, etc.). In this manner, the O2 molecule might be reduced on the positively charged atoms.96 If a heteroatom is bonded to the carbon framework, it can create some defects on the adjacent site because of the difference in the bond length and atomic size.97 For example, as carbon exhibits a higher electronegativity (2.55) than B (2.04), a positive charge is generated on the B atoms, which become conducive to capturing O2 molecules.98 Additionally, owing to the B doping in the carbon matrix, the electrons from the C–C Π* orbital shift to the vacant 2pz orbital of B. Consequently, a charge transfer occurs in oxygen, causing the stretching of the O–O bond. Thus, oxygen reduction occurs more efficiently. This type of cost-effective and highly efficient catalyst has attracted tremendous attention as a catalyst based on N–B codoped carbon materials.99 The development of a non-precious single or bimetallic site coordinated heteroatom-doped carbon based electrocatalyst has displayed tremendous advantages in ORR activity as well as improvement in its stability due to the monodispersed catalytic M–Nx sites on the carbon support as well as maximum use of the atom in the electrocatalytic activity.100 The bimetallic coordinated N-doped carbon exhibits much improved electrocatalytic ORR activity as compared with single metal coordinated N-doped carbon due to much suitable active sites for cleaving the bond in oxygen during the ORR.100 Guo et al. briefly proposed the two types of mechanisms of the heteroatom doped carbon for the ORR.101 Initially, the carbon atom present near pyridinic N can adsorb the oxygen molecule and deliver two possible mechanisms such as a 4-electron (4e−) mechanism in a single step and 2-electron (2e−) mechanism in two steps (Fig. 4a).101 In the 4e− mechanism, 2H+ attached to the 2O2 atoms can break the O–OH bond and produce an OH moiety. The remaining H+ reacts with the OH group and produces H2O. In contrast, the 2e− mechanism occurs on the adsorbed OOH group by reacting with another H+ to produce H2O2. However, further readsorption of H2O2 and the reduction of 2H+ may lead to the formation of H2O. Guo et al. also described that the presence of pyridinic N with Lewis basicity closer to the carbon atom would play a pivotal role for the adsorption of oxygen molecules in the ORR mechanism.101Fig. 4b also shows the two pathway mechanisms of the heteroatom doped core–shell carbon nanostructure for the ORR.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the two pathway mechanisms of the (a) heteroatom doped carbon material (adapted the idea from ref. 101 and redrawn the image, copyright © 2016, The American Association for the Advancement of Science) as well as (b) heteroatom doped core–shell carbon nanostructure for the ORR. 
Recently, considerable attention has been paid to the introduction of homogeneous catalytically active sites using heteroatoms on a porous organic polymer (POP) skeleton without further modification.102,103 These heteroatom-doped POPs can display outstanding electrocatalytic activity and stability in both acidic and basic media in the ORR owing to their high surface area and tunable surface structure.103,104 Nanoporous carbon materials developed using POPs as templates or precursors can also display excellent catalytic activity because of the special confinement originating from controlled open channels and nanoscale cavities.104 Moreover, such POPs contain some types of heteroatoms based on the choice of the ligand and organic compounds. Based on the nature and choice of heteroatoms, the developed catalyst can exhibit different electrocatalytic activities in ECS.
5. Structural performances and advantages of HCSNs for the ORR
The HCSNs have great advantages due to the presence of single or bimetallic materials as well as the presence of heteroatoms and carbon with a uniform and hierarchical morphology, higher surface area, active sites and electronic structure, and durability under acidic and alkaline conditions.105 The HCSNs having a hierarchical porous structure with carbon networks have demonstrated excellent electrocatalytic activity due to generation of reasonable surface area, highly active heteroatoms, excellent electrical conductivity, and abundant edge defects.106 Similarly, the development of a highly hierarchical porous structure with macro–meso–microporous frameworks or hollow structures and heteroatoms lead to an outstanding electrocatalytic ORR activity.107 The presence of heteroatoms can deliver a faster charge transfer rate at the electrode/electrolyte interface which facilitates the electron and proton transfer in the electrocatalysts.108 The introduction of defects as well as heteroatoms on CSNs with a carbon support has achieved superior ORR activity as compared with various materials in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes.106,109 An enhanced electrocatalytic activity of HCSNs was also due to better charge and electron transfer behaviours as well as stronger interactions between the heteroatom–metal–carbon structure as well as special structural characteristics with CSNs.110 Recently, the HCSNs derived by the electrospinning method have drawn great attention due to the easier process, formation of a uniform structure, and also act as a template for growing the nanomaterials along with the polymeric nanofibers.41,108,111 Pyrolysis of these nanofibers can result in excellent electrocatalytic activity for the ORR due to the uniform distribution of the metallic material along with heteroatoms and carbon and also the presence of higher surface area and active sites in the electrocatalyst.108 At the same time, CSNs containing a transition metal carbide core and graphitic carbon shell were used as one of the best electrocatalysts for the ORR in both acidic and alkaline environments.111,112 Moreover, the presence of the carbon shell would safeguard the leaching and contact of the metal core from the acid electrolyte.111,112 The better ORR electrocatalytic activity of these kinds of electrocatalysts was due to the equal balance between the graphitization degree, interconnected network structure, and the type of heteroatom dopant in the electrocatalyst.41 The shell thickness on the core surface also plays a vital role in better electrocatalytic ORR activity because the catalytic activity and performance can be easily tuned based on their shell thickness in addition to the doping agents.113 The electrochemical ORR performance of the core–shell nanostructure can also improve based on the selection of materials and controlled synthesis of CSNs with a uniform shell thickness. The size of the core–shell particles, controlled shell thickness, and stabilization of the core with a minimum amount of noble metal play a vital role in long-term stability as well as for enhancing the ORR activity.20 A considerable amount of research studies was focused on the effect of the shell thickness in CSNs with respect to the ORR activity.20,36,89,114,115 Zhang et al. synthesized Au-d@NimPtm based CSNs using a Au core and NiPt shell and studied the effect of the NiPt shell thickness for the ORR.89 They observed that the durability of the Au-d@NimPtm electrocatalyst was improved by increasing the NiPt shell thickness. Zhou et al. also studied the role of the CoO shell thickness in the Fe3O4@CoO CSNs and found that the ORR performance was totally controlled based on the optimised CoO shell thickness.115 The synthesis of intermetallic CSNs, also considered as one of the best electrocatalysts for the ORR because of the stability and electrocatalytic activity, was enhanced by using the intermetallic CSNs as compared with the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst.116,117 Jiang et al. reported the excellent ORR activity and durability of Ni–Pd core–shell nanoparticles in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes.118 The Ni@Pd3/C nanoparticles were synthesized by using a Ni core surrounded by the Pd shell which when further immobilized on carbon black can deliver an outstanding ORR activity and stability due to the maintenance of the structural stability of the electrocatalyst even after several cycles. The Ni@Pd3/C electrocatalyst delivers superior catalytic activity with onset potential (Eonset) and half-wave potential (E1/2) values of 0.99 V and 0.87 V for the 0.1 M perchloric acid (HClO4) electrocatalyst. On the other hand, the electrocatalyst also exhibits the Eonset and E1/2 values of 0.98 V and 0.86 V in the 0.1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) electrolyte. The Ni@Pd3/C electrocatalyst exhibits an average electron transfer number (n) of 3.91 and 3.98 in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes.
6. Synthesis and fabrication of electrodes based on heteroatom-doped core–shell nanostructures for the ORR
HCSNs have been synthesized through various approaches such as the sol–gel method, in situ addition of heteroatoms such as N, B, S, and P, and combinations of one or more heteroatoms with other metal compounds or metal oxides and carbon-based materials, followed by pyrolysis or solution mixing, blending, and the addition of suitable heteroatom-containing ligands and polymers.119–121 Heteroatom doping in CSNs leads to enhanced ORR activity and stability as well as better performance in both acidic and basic media.122,123 In this section, we discuss the synthesis of various HCSNs in detail as well as fabrication approaches for stable electrodes based on these HCSNs for the ORR.
6.1 Nitrogen-doped CSNs
In the recent past, considerable attention has been paid to N doping in various supports, especially carbon (C) supports such as porous and activated carbon (AC), graphene, and CNTs, for electrocatalysis and ECS applications.124,125 This is because the electronegativity of N (3.04) is higher than that of C (2.55), while the radius of the N atom (0.74 Å) is almost equal to that of the C atom (0.77 Å).126 These properties facilitate the doping of the C support with N atoms. Moreover, N is an electron donor that is capable of increasing the conductivity of C, which is also responsible for changes in the structural and electronic configuration for enhancing the ORR kinetics. N doping is the most widely used heteroatom doping method for the ORR because of the easier doping process and greater stability as compared to other dopants.127 Various organic compounds and polymers containing nitrogen sources, ammonia vapor, or nitrogen gas were used as N dopants on C or other supports for developing active electrocatalysts for the ORR.128,129 The ORR activity is also influenced by the loading amount of the N dopant, type of the N source, and reaction conditions.128,129 In addition, the catalytic activity of the N-doped C electrocatalyst is nearly identical to and greater than that of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst in alkaline and acidic media, respectively, under the same conditions; the enhanced catalytic activity in acidic media is due to the higher amount of active sites and defects in the N-doped electrocatalyst.126 As discussed above, three types of N doping are possible on C supports. Pyridinic N shows more favorable ORR catalytic activity than other types of N dopants. This may be due to the fact that pyridinic N is formed mostly at the edges or defects of carbon materials. Doping with pyridinic N on a carbon support was increased using the ball-milling method to enhance the edges or defects on the N dopant.126 The N doping of CSNs has attracted considerable attention in relation to the ORR catalytic activity as well as for further applications in fuel cells and batteries owing to the enhanced catalytic activity and stability. Moreover, N doping plays a more dominant role than several other dopants in the electrocatalysis of the ORR. N-doped CSNs were synthesized using various methods, such as hydro- and solvo-thermal methods, pyrolysis, the sol–gel method, simple metal–ligand coordination, solution mixing, and blending with one, two, three, or multiple heteroatoms, based on the type of supporting materials, ligand, and metal sources.130–133
Wassner et al. developed a spherical CSN hybrid composite having a carbon nitride core with a titanium (oxy)nitride shell through a hydrothermal method and studied the electrocatalytic performance in the ORR.130 The experiment was performed by first synthesizing C spheres as a core material through a hydrothermal method using glucose at 165 °C for 10.5 h and then modifying the surface by developing a thin layer of the Ti shell through the sol–gel method using titanium(IV) butoxide (Ti(oBu)4). Further, N doping was performed on the carbon core modified with the titanium shell surface by nitridation with ammonia vapor at a flow rate of 2.5 nL h−1 and pyrolysis in a tubular furnace at different reaction temperatures. The obtained material showed excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability for the ORR.130 A similar method was also reported by the same research group using tantalum(V) butoxide (Ta(oBu)4) instead of (Ti(oBu)4) to produce tantalum (oxy)nitride on nitrided carbon composites.131Fig. 5a shows the synthesis pathways of N-doped CSNs fabricated using the above methods.130,131 Gebremariam et al. developed N-doped bimetallic nanoparticles on a C nanofiber (CNF) support by using a core–shell approach.132 A 0.2 g bundle of CNFs was dispersed in 80 mL of ethanol by sonication, following which a mixture of manganese acetate (0.36 mmol) and cobalt acetate (0.72 mmol) was slowly added with gentle stirring. Further, 2 mL of 27% NH3 was added and refluxed at 80 °C for 12 h, followed by solvothermal treatment at 150 °C for another 12 h. The surface of the obtained manganese cobalt oxide (MCO) nanoparticles on CNFs was further modified by in situ polymerization using polydopamine (PDA), followed by carbonization at 800 °C for 1 h in an argon (Ar) atmosphere. The schematic pathways for the synthesis of MCO/CNFs@NC are shown in Fig. 5b.132 Here, MCO/CNFs act as a core and nitrogen-doped carbon act as a shell. An electrochemical test was performed in a three-electrode setup by using a modified glassy carbon (GC) electrode, Pt wire, and Hg/HgO as the working, counter, and reference electrodes in a 1 M KOH solution. The catalyst ink (5 μL) was prepared by dispersing the synthesized MCO/CNFs@NC (5 mg) in 1 mL of a mixture of ethanol and water (1:1 v/v) and 5 wt% Nafion (10 μL).132 The catalyst ink was drop-casted on the GC working electrode and dried at room temperature for 10 min and then at 50 °C for 5 min to obtain a modified GC electrode. The fabricated substrate displayed excellent ORR and OER activities as well as excellent performance in zinc–air batteries and supercapacitor applications. Additionally, various methods have been used to successfully synthesize N-doped CSN-based electrocatalysts for the ORR.132 Here, we briefly explain some of the important N-doped CSNs for the development of electrocatalysts for the ORR.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis procedure. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route of MCO/CNFs@NC catalysts. MCO is MnCo2O4, CNFs is carbon nanofibers, and NC is nitrogen-doped carbon. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

6.1.1 Nitrogen-doped CSNs with MOFs. 
MOFs have a porous structure with a high surface area, making them highly suitable as a precursor or template for developing different types of novel porous materials for numerous applications.134–138 Among the various types of MOF materials, Prussian blue (PB) is a type of MOF synthesized by the supramolecular assembly of N-containing organic ligands with an iron source. PB has attracted significant attention for various applications, especially in organic catalysis and electrochemical studies because it allows good confinement through its morphology and structure as well as the control of porosity and surface area.139 Recently, MOF-based materials have attracted significant attention in the ORR owing to their unique properties such as a high surface area, porosity, a large number of active sites, and the presence of N or other heteroatoms in the ligands.17,140–144 The synthesis of PB-type MOFs covered with active carbon also has a synergetic effect in the electrocatalysis of the ORR. Xue et al. briefly reviewed the important aspects of MOF-derived heteroatom doped carbon for the ORR.145 The heteroatom doped carbon materials can be prepared in most cases by direct carbonization of the MOF containing precursor and can be modified further by loading with guest molecules.145 Hou et al. synthesized a novel core–shell architecture with well-defined N-doped porous Fe/Fe3C@C nanoboxes on graphene (reduced graphene oxide (RGO)) sheets through the pyrolysis of the synthesized PB and GO in a tubular furnace at 800 °C for 3 h in an Ar atmosphere at a rate of 2 °C min−1.139 Here, Fe/Fe3C acts as the core, and a thin C shell layer covers the core surface. The pyrolysis of PB and GO can lead to the development of a thin C shell as well as the formation of N atoms on the surface and the further reduction of GO at 800 °C. The produced N-doped Fe/Fe3C@C/RGO sample exhibited excellent ORR activity with a Tafel slope (∼72 mV per decade) nearly equal to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. These results suggest that the synthesized N-doped Fe/Fe3C@C/RGO and the commercial Pt/C catalyst have similar reaction mechanisms. Moreover, the kinetic current density of N-doped Fe/Fe3C@C/RGO is somewhat higher than that of Pt/C at approximately 1.0 V. Here, the rate-determining step mainly depends on the protonation of O2− on the active sites of the catalyst.139
Fang et al. synthesized bifunctional CSNs containing nitrogen-doped CoCx/FeCo@C hybrids on RGO sheets obtained from Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 MOFs with excellent applicability in the ORR and OER (Fig. 6A(a)).146 The TEM images of the synthesized Co3[Co(CN)6]2 MOF and single Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles show a highly uniform particle structure with excellent dispersibility (Fig. 6A(b and c)). On the other hand, the core–shell Co3Fe7@Fe2N/RGO nanostructure (Co3Fe7 alloy core and Fe2N nano shell on RGO) and Co3O4@Co/N-doped carbon nanotube matrix (NCNT) synthesized by the annealing of MOFs (here, Co and Co3O4 behave as the core and shell on the NCNT matrix) are also suitable for bifunctional ORR and OER applications.147,148 Furthermore, the MOF-derived Co3O4@Co/NCNT nanocomposite also acts as an excellent electrocatalyst for multiple applications, such as flexible zinc–air batteries, HER, and overall water splitting.149 Various other types of MOF-derived HCSN-based electrocatalysts also displayed outstanding ORR activities due to the presence of heteroatoms in materials with a well-defined architecture, high surface area, and large number of active sites.150,151 Similar to MOF-derived materials, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have also shown emerging interest in recent days for the ORR and various other electrocatalysis.152
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route and structural model of N-doped CoCx/FeCo@C/RGO (a); TEM images of the Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 MOF (b), and single nanoparticle of Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 (c). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier Inc. (B) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Co@DNC@FeS2. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


6.1.2 Nitrogen-doped CSNs with ZIFs. 
A ZIF is a type of MOF that mainly consists of a zeolitic structure formed by the coordination of an imidazolate-based ligand or linker and metal ions prearranged in metal–N4 ligations.153 The excellent porosity, chemical and thermal stability, high functionality, and large number of active sites make ZIF-based materials suitable for a wide variety of applications.153 Here, we focus on the N-atom-doped CSNs based on ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 and their electrochemical behaviors.154,155 ZIF-8 is synthesized through the reaction of zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O) or zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) with a 2-methylimidazole (HmIm) ligand at a Zn:HmIm molar ratio of 1:16 in an aqueous medium or a mixture of water and an organic solvent with different synthesis methods, reaction temperatures, and other conditions.154 Similarly, ZIF-67 is synthesized by the same approach but with cobalt acetate dihydrate (Co(CH3COO)2·2H2O) or another cobalt source instead of zinc acetate dihydrate.155 ZIF N-doped electrodes have recently attracted significant research interest owing to their high surface area and large number of active sites necessary for the catalytic reaction.156
Liu et al. synthesized dodecahedral Co@N-doped graphitized carbon (Co@DNC) from ZIF-67 through the in situ solution polymerization of (Co(NO3)2·6H2O) and HmIm precursors followed by pyrolysis at 700 °C for 2 h (2 °C min−1), washing with acid and deionized water, and vacuum oven drying at 60 °C overnight (Fig. 6B).157 The synthesized Co@DNC (core) showed that the rhombic dodecahedral morphology of ZIF-67 was modified further by forming a thin layer of FeS2 (shell) through the solvothermal method by using iron(III) chloride hexahydrate and (FeCl3·6H2O) and thioacetamide (TAA) in ethylene glycol (EG) at 160 °C for 2 h (Fig. 6B).157 The synthesized Co@DNC@FeS2 CSNs also demonstrated a similar rhombic dodecahedral morphology, indicating the maintenance of structural integrity even after loading and covering certain parts of the core surface with FeS2 shell layers. The electrochemical reaction was performed on a GCE working electrode by coating it with a catalyst ink. The ink was prepared through the mixing and ultrasonication of the synthesized Co@DNC@FeS2 catalyst (5 mg) with Nafion (50 μL of 5 wt%) and ethanol (100 μL) for 30 min, followed by drop casting on the GCE surface and drying prior to the electrochemical study. The fabricated electrocatalyst showed ORR activity comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C electrode and retained its original structure, particle size, and morphology even after 10000 CV cycles, indicating the excellent stability of the catalyst. The obtained results spurred continuous research to develop similar types of ZIF-based N-rich heteroatom doping on CSNs to enhance the electrochemical properties. Wang et al. synthesized ZIF-67-based Co core@Co oxide shell (Co@CoOx) catalysts by mixing the as-synthesized ZIF-67 with GO, followed by pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere to produce a metallic Co core and further air treatment to produce a Co oxide shell.158 The acquired Co@CoOx catalyst showed exceptional stability and activity for the ORR after thermal treatment under the optimal conditions of 800 °C for 5 h followed by air treatment at 200 °C for 6 h.158 A DFT study was performed on the four active sites of the Co@CoOx catalyst. The calculated density of states (DOS) revealed band-gap values of 2.95 eV for CoO and 1.32 eV for Co3O4. On the other hand, the Bader charge values obtained for the Co oxides indicate that the Co sites of pure Co3O4 (+1.16e) exhibit a slightly higher electron affinity than Co@CoOxca. (+1.12e).158 The free-energy change of oxygen adsorption on pristine Co3O4 is 0.35 eV and that on the synthesized Co@Co3O4 is 0.41 eV, demonstrating the excessive affinity on the core–shell structure. The Bader charge and oxygen-adsorption free-energy change indicated the presence of a lower-valence oxide that plays a significant role in O2 adsorption and leads to faster ORR activity.158


6.1.3 Cobalt–nitrogen-doped CSNs. 
Recently, non-noble transition-metal oxides have been considered for the ORR owing to the abundance of non-noble transition metals and low cost compared to precious metals. Among the various transition metals, metallic cobalt, cobalt oxide (Co3O4), and manganese oxide (Mn3O4) have shown excellent catalytic activity for the ORR.159,160 Senthilkumar et al. developed novel bifunctional Co3O4-based three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical CSNs by using nickel oxide (NiO) and manganese dioxide (MnO2) on a carbon cloth (CC) surface; these CSNs showed outstanding activity for both the ORR and the urea oxidation reaction (UOR) and can thus be applied to direct urea fuel cells.161 The binding of carbonaceous materials such as activated carbon, CNTs, and graphene on Co3O4 and CoO can further enhance the electrocatalytic activity. In addition, the heteroatom doping of carbonaceous materials containing Co3O4 can yield excellent catalytic properties.160 Cobalt-based HCSNs are widely used as electrocatalysts because of their improved electrocatalytic activity and stability as compared to other metal oxides.162 CoO@Co (here Co and CoO resemble the core and shell) based CSNs anchored with N-doped RGO (CoO@Co/N/RGO) obtained under microwave treatment delivered excellent multifunctional characteristics and wide applicability in various applications such as the HER, OER, and ORR.162
Hai et al. studied the effect of single-atom electrocatalysts (SAECs) on ORR activity and zinc–air batteries.163 Generally, SAECs produced with the special confinement of coordination bonds show large porosity and excellent conductivity. In addition, SAECs anchored with carbon show better catalytic activity than the commercial Pt/C catalyst.163 The ZIF structure produced using a cobalt source can provide high porosity and good electrical properties. Therefore, the author synthesized a highly active Co–N3C1@GC electrocatalyst from ZIF-based materials. First, a Co/Zn-ZIF was synthesized using cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O) and zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) with 2-methylimidazole (MeIm), following which ZIF-67 was formed in situ on the Co/Zn-ZIF by using Co(NO3)2·6H2O. The pyrolysis of the Co/Zn-ZIF at 800 °C, 900 °C, and 1000 °C produced Co–N4, Co–N3C1, and Co–N2C2, respectively (Fig. 7).163 Here, the sample prepared with the Co–N3C1 structure through pyrolysis at 900 °C showed higher electrochemical activity than those prepared through pyrolysis at 800 °C and 1000 °C. This result is confirmed by the half-wave potential (E1/2) and onset potential (Eonset) values for Co–N4 (0.787 mV and 0.876 mV, respectively), Co–N3C1 (0.824 mV and 0.904 mV, respectively), and Co–N2C2 (0.806 mV and 0.900 mV, respectively). On the other hand, the mixing of the synthesized ZIF-67 and Co/Zn-ZIF@ZIF-67 followed by pyrolysis and acid washing can lead to the formation of highly conductive N-doped and graphitic carbon shell-covered Co-based CSNs (Co–N3C1@GC) (Fig. 7) that show higher ORR activity at 300 °C than other oxidizing temperatures.163 Electrocatalysts synthesized using the above method exhibited superior electrocatalytic properties for the ORR, resulting in a smaller Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1, more positive E1/2 of 0.846 V, and larger diffusion-limited current density of 5.16 mA cm−2. The fabricated Co–N3C1@GC electrode also exhibited excellent performance in Zn–air batteries.163
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the formation of the locally and globally engineered structure of Co–N3C1@GC. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Xiao et al. formulated bamboo-like N-doped CNTs implanted on core–shell Co@Co3O4 nanoparticles through the thermal treatment of cobalt carbonate hydroxide and urea at 750 °C for 1 h under an Ar atmosphere, followed by acid washing and further oxidation at different temperatures such as 250, 300, 350 °C in air.164 The obtained Co@Co3O4/BNCNT composites displayed the best ORR activity when oxidization was performed at 300 °C. The authors noted that oxidation at 300 °C yielded the highest N/C molar ratio with a N doping of 1.6% in the materials. However, increasing the oxidation number drastically decreases the N/C molar ratio. For this reason, the oxidized Co@Co3O4/BNCNT-300 composites produce around 7.5% of peroxide species in a slightly higher value than Pt/C and ∼12.5 for the Co3O4/CNT catalyst. Similarly, the n values of Co@Co3O4/BNCNT-300 composites, Pt/C, and Co3O4/CNT are at 3.85, 3.90, and 3.75, respectively. These results also demonstrate that the four electron transfer reaction occurred for Co@Co3O4/BNCNT-300.
The N-doped and layered porous C supported Co@C/CoOx fabricated via a one-pot approach also revealed magnificent ORR activity and CO2 capture behavior.165 This material formed a high surface area (1524–1883 m2 g−1), high pore volume (0.94–1.09 cm3 g−1), and hierarchical porous structure. Further, a sample prepared at 800 °C showed improved ORR activity. Peera et al. designed N- and C-supported Co-based CSNs from MOFs by using a simple mechanochemical coordination self-assembly process.166 Mechanochemical synthesis is a method of using mechanical force or energy to achieve the simple blending of two or more materials. Generally, ball milling or mortar-pestle grinding is used for this method, followed by thermal treatment under an inert atmosphere to yield a new class of materials. The authors first synthesized an MOF-like structure by using a pyrazole linker with Co and Zn sources through a mechanochemical synthesis method.166 The materials were mixed through mortar-pestle mixing followed by pyrolysis at 800 °C, 900 °C, and 1000 °C to yield Co@NC-MOF-2 electrocatalysts. The pyrolysis temperature of 900 °C produced better diffusion-controlled ORR activity than 800 °C and 1000 °C. This is due to the good distribution of Co nanoparticles on the NC support. The prepared electrocatalyst showed E1/2 = 0.88 V, which is 30 mV higher than that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst (E1/2 = 0.85 V vs. RHE). Thus, these materials can be suitable for application in fuel cells. Co@NC-MOF-2 has a lower Tafel slope (55 mV dec−1) than Pt/C (84 mV dec−1); further, both Co@NC-MOF-2 and Pt/C show excellent mass activity at 0.90 V vs. RHE at 49 and 23 mA mg−1 and nearly equal n values of 3.97 and 3.98, respectively. These results suggest that the development of novel materials can lead to superior electrocatalytic activity and excellent usability for various applications.


6.1.4 Iron–nitrogen-doped CSNs. 
Iron is the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust. Owing to its excellent electrical conductivity and electron transfer characteristics, it can be used in numerous ESC applications.167 Yusuf et al. synthesized highly uniform core–shell palladium (Pd)-decorated magnetite (α-Fe2O3) nanospindles (Fig. 8a).168 For the synthesis, they first performed the simple surface modification of an α-Fe2O3 core (80 nm) with a silane precursor (TEOS) along with water, ethanol, and ammonia, following which they formed a thin shell layer (15 nm) by the hydroxylation and condensation of TEOS using the Stöber method on the α-Fe2O3 core surface to obtain a material named FS-CSNs. FS-CSNs were further surface-treated with tin(II) chloride (SnCl2) and decorated with Pd (2 nm) using potassium tetrachloropalladate(II) (K2PdCl4) to obtain a material named PdFS-CSNs (Fig. 8a).168 The synthesized FS-CSNs exhibited excellent ORR activity with an electrochemical active surface area (ECSA), E1/2, Eonset, and a normalized current density (jk-geo) of 42.96 m2 g−1, 1.01 V, 0.892 V, and 4.0 mA cm−2, respectively, which are comparable to those of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst.168 Moreover, PdFS-CSNs show an n value of almost 4 with a H2O2 generation of only 0.3%, which clearly indicates excellent applicability to the ORR as well as good stability and tolerance behavior. Further, Fe3C@C nanocrystals synthesized with an edge active surface wrapped on RGO display a unique structural design with a high surface area and stability as well as good ORR activity.169 The Fe3C@C-RGO electrocatalyst shows an E1/2 value of nearly 1.0 V with a small Tafel slope of 65 mV dec−1 and excellent durability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the step-by-step synthetic procedure of the PdFS-CSN electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Fe–N–C catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Elsevier Inc. 
The CSNs obtained from the formation of the Fe–N–C structure have attracted more attention than those without N and C because further heteroatom doping and carbonization to form the Fe–N–C structure promote the generation of graphitic structures on the CSNs.170 This graphitic carbon also contains sp2 carbon, which is highly important for electron transfer and strongly attaches to the catalyst to prevent aggregation and promote better ORR activity and stability. Furthermore, N heteroatoms also facilitate the availability of more active sites to improve the required properties for the ORR and other applications. Liu et al. prepared Fe–N–C-type CSNs through a facile in situ chelating technique through the addition of ammonia iron citrate while performing the polymerization of dopamine, followed by calcination at 800 °C in an ammonia atmosphere.170 Iron could develop different structural forms while reacting with C and N sources such as Fe3C, Fe2C, Fe4N, Fe3N, and Fe2N. Among these, Fe2N-based carbon showed excellent stability and ORR activity, which are comparable to those of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. The excellent catalytic activity of Fe2N-based carbon is due to the formation of a mesoporous structure with highly graphitic carbon layers.170
Furthermore, Fe–N–C-based CSNs developed by pyrolysis of polyimide-incorporated CNTs doped with iron (CNTs@Fe–N–C) have led to the preparation of highly stable electrocatalysts for the ORR.171 First, the CNTs (core) were modified by amino functionalization using p-phenylenediamine and reacted further with 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)porphyrin (TAPP), followed by polymerization on the CNT surface. FeCl3·6H2O was used to immobilize the iron source in the CNTs@P-PI, and the sample was pyrolyzed to yield CNTs@Fe–N–C (Fe–N–C acts as a shell).171 Various factors affect the electrocatalytic ORR behavior; these include the pyrolysis temperature, nitrogen and iron contents, size, shape, and morphology of the particles, surface area, porosity, active sites, and type of N attachment with carbon. The authors also studied the important aspects of the iron content (7, 18, and 25 wt% Fe) and N doping on the CNTs at pyrolysis temperatures of 600, 700, and 800 °C.171 CNTs@Fe–N–C prepared at 700 °C with 18 wt% Fe demonstrated superior catalytic activity as compared with those prepared at other temperatures and Fe contents as well as the pristine sample without pyrolysis treatment. The higher catalytic activity of CNTs@Fe–N–C-700 with 18 wt% Fe was due to the uniform distribution of small Fe particles in the material as well as the formation of a large amount of the highly active Fe3N4/C, pyridine, and graphitic species.171 The HCSNs obtained from the chitosan Schiff-base manganese (Mn) complex and Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles can improve the ORR catalytic behavior.172,173 Here, Fe3O4 acts as a core material, which is modified by the formation of a N-doped C layer with Mn as a shell through the pyrolysis of a chitosan Schiff-base manganese (Mn) complex at 800 °C in a N2 atmosphere for 2 h at a rate of 5 °C min−1.
Recently, HCSNs were also developed by the formation of iron carbide doped with N to improve the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.172,174 The improvement in catalytic activity might be due to the uniform distribution of iron with graphitized carbon nitride in the CSNs or the uniform coverage of Fe3C nanoparticles by graphitized carbon nitride through pyrolysis. In addition, enhancing the porosity of these materials creates abundant active sites, improving the mass transfer and leading to better catalytic activity.174 Wu et al. achieved the solution-free synthesis of iron carbide/nitrogen-doped carbon CSNs by first preparing Prussian blue (Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3) by grinding a mixture of ferrous chloride (FeCl2·4H2O) and potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]) at room temperature and then mixing with melamine and polyethylene glycol 4000 (PEG, Mw = 3600–4400) (Fig. 8b).172 The obtained solid powder was pyrolyzed stepwise at various temperatures such as 180 °C for 100 min, 200 °C for 100 min, and 800 °C for 90 min. The product was leached using sulfuric acid (H2SO4) for 24 h and washed with deionized water, followed by drying at room temperature.172 Fe–N–C obtained using these CSNs showed activity comparable to that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst. The improved catalytic activity of Fe–N–C is due to the formation of a graphitic carbon shell, which reduces the aggregation and dissolution of nanoparticles of Fe species. Moreover, an atomic Fe–N codoped ordered mesoporous carbon nanosphere (meso-Fe–N–C) synthesized through coordination-assisted polymerization assembly leads to a high surface area with a hierarchical structure possessing approximately 2.9 wt% Fe and 4.4 wt% N.175 This meso-Fe–N–C catalyst showed better stability and tolerance to methanol with excellent ORR performance.


6.1.5 Other metal–nitrogen-doped carbon-based CSNs. 
Research on N-doped carbon-based CSNs has employed numerous approaches.176 For example, in one study, the direct grinding of nitrogen-containing compounds was performed with a carbon source, following which pyrolysis was performed in an inert atmosphere; in another study, activated as well as porous carbon sources were first prepared from bio-masses or from other carbonaceous materials, following which in situ surface modifications or doping processes were employed to generate N-doped carbon-based materials.177,178 Liu et al. studied the important role of Co and Fe in the N-doped CNTs for Zn–air battery applications.179,180 The Co-encapsulated CNT arrays delivered superior bifunctional performance with an E1/2 of 0.861 V for the ORR and low potential of 1.51 V at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER.179 On the other hand, Co and Fe loaded CNTs on carbon fiber cloth (CFC) also display excellent bifunctional activity with an E1/2 of 0.831 V for the ORR and a potential of 1.506 V at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER.180 The fabricated bifunctional electrodes were also used as a flexible Zn–air battery and manifest exceptional activities such as large power density (37.7 mW cm−2) and open-circuit potential (1.426 V) with better initial energy efficiency (69%).180 The appearance of more active sites in the presence of N heteroatoms on the carbon material can be responsible for the enhanced electrochemical activity. Moreover, the presence of porous carbon network structures facilitates a higher surface area. In addition, the formation of graphitic sp2 carbon improves the electrical conductivity and catalytic activity. Furthermore, different N-containing groups such as pyridinic and graphitic forms of the N atom can occur in the carbon lattice.181 Among these, pyridinic N is effective in achieving high ORR activity owing to the presence of a lone pair of electrons, in addition to the formation of conjugated bonds produced by the donation of another electron, which activates the electron transfer from the C electronic bands to antibonding O2.181
Several studies suggest that graphitic N also plays an important role in improving the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.50 Ejaz et al. discussed the important role of pyrrolic, pyridinic, and graphitic nitrogen in the palladium nanoparticle loaded N-RGO and their importance in ORR activities.182 Generally, these active structures were developed by incorporation of nitrogen atoms to the basal plane of carbon.183 Pyridinic-N and graphitic-N both show a sp2 hybridized carbon structure, whereas, pyrrolinic-N can have a sp3 hybridized carbon structure. In graphitic-N, the N atom can replace the C atom in the hexagonal ring which adsorb OOH and further reduce O2 to H2O2via the two-electron pathway in the ORR, whereas, pyridinic-N and pyrrolinic-N can form a strong bond on the C atom either at edges or defects by one p electron to the p system and two p electrons to the p system which undergoes the four-electron pathway in the ORR.182 These phenomena suggest that pyridinic-N can play a significant role in enhancing the ORR via the four-electron pathway than graphitic-N in the carbon based material.184,185 However, some reports suggest that graphitic-N is better than pyridinic-N due to the maintenance of excellent structural characteristics as well as specific activity after the ORR stability cycles, and require smaller Gibbs free-energy in the rate-determining step.184,185 However, some pyridinic-N in the carbon based material partially oxidized during the stability test. To overcome the issue, the preparation of the hybrid material containing the mixture of pyridinic-N and graphitic-N in the heteroatom doped carbon material can deliver much improved ORR activity.186,187
The continuous research on this topic also shows the N content in the carbon chain and the significant role of carbon in controlling the catalytic function of the ORR.50 In addition to Co and Fe, other cost-effective transition metals such as copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), titanium (Ti), zinc (Zn), and nickel (Ni) and noble metals such as Pt, gold (Au), silver (Ag), and ruthenium (Rh) were used for studying the ORR electrocatalytic activity and other applications.35,151 Jin et al. synthesized a graphene-supported g-C3N4@CoO core–shell hybrid electrode (CoO-core and g-C3N4 shell) for controlling the stability and activity of the electrocatalyst for the ORR.178 The prepared hybrid electrode expressed the typical four-electron transfer pathway in an alkaline solution. The g-C3N4 structure has limited electrical conductivity, whereas wrapping g-C3N4 with carbon enhances the electrical conductivity and charge transfer. Furthermore, the doping of g-C3N4–C with transition metals significantly impacts various properties and improves the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR as compared with the pristine g-C3N4 structure.178 N-doped materials have showcased much interest as an electrocatalyst for the ORR as compared to other dopants such as S, P, and B because of the simple synthesis or preparation, very cost effective approach, and much environmental-friendliness. N-doped HCSNs have showcased much interest as an electrocatalyst for the ORR as compared to other dopants such as S, P, and B because of simple and sustainable synthesis or preparation, cost-effective approach, much environmental-friendly than other dopants, and also possess identical atomic radius of N atoms as like C atoms and one extra electron than C.106,166 Moreover, N-doped HCSNs easily complex with various materials as compared with other dopants.106 These points have become the major advantages and help to prepare a variety of N-doped HCSNs for the ORR.

6.2 Sulfur-doped CSNs
The sulfur (S) atom is more electron-rich than carbon. Recently, the electrocatalysis of the ORR was performed through the adsorption of S-accommodating compounds on a platinum (Pt) surface; this development attracted considerable attention owing to the abundance of S-based molecules in air.188 Similarly, doping with S species such as S atoms and metal sulfides has been performed to improve electrocatalysis because of the modifiability of the spin-density distribution around the metal centers and a synergistic effect between S doping and further doping with heteroatoms.189 Moreover, sulfur doping can result in a small charge-transfer resistance, and metal sulfides and S–C bonds can act as active sites for the electrocatalysis of the ORR.190 Mono-doping a carbon surface with sulfur atoms produces structural defects in the matrix and improves oxygen adsorption by charge dislocation.191 On the other hand, dual doping with S and N or multi-doping with S, N, and a metal can have a massive impact on the enhancement of the ORR performance.192,193 Recently, the sulfur doping of CSNs has attracted much attention in relation to the ORR performance.173,194
Perivoliotis et al. designed CSNs obtained by the formulation of a Ni core with a Pd shell which is wrapped on the S-doped graphene surface which notably improved the electrocatalytic ORR performance and was also further applied for methanol oxidation.194 The material was fabricated in a three-step synthesis pathway; for example, S doping was performed by first modifying GO through a reaction with a S-based compound (Lawesson's reagent) in diethylene glycol methyl ether via sonication, followed by refluxing at 185 °C for 48 h in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 9a).194 In the second step, the polyol-assisted synthesis method was employed to grow Ni nanoparticles as a core material on S-doped graphene (SG). The SG was dispersed in ethylene glycol (EG), following which nickel acetate tetrahydrate (Ni(OAc)2·4H2O) was added and a mixture of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolved in EG was slowly introduced. The continuous stirring of this mixture in a nitrogen atmosphere for 1 h resulted in the uniform growth of NiNPs on the SG surface. Furthermore, in the third step, a Pd shell was grown on the NiNPs surface through the galvanic replacement method using potassium tetrachloropalladate (K2PdCl4) dissolved in distilled water with sonication for 10 min followed by stirring at room temperature for 24 h (Fig. 9a).194 Pd@NiNPs/SG developed via this method showed excellent electrocatalytic performance for the ORR owing to the presence of S heteroatoms as well as the highly electrically active Ni and Pd with graphene in the material. Moreover, the CSN morphology, uniform and homogeneous dispersion of Pd@NiNPs on SG, and the absence of a surfactant contributed to the high electrocatalytic activity.194
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustrative scheme of the preparation of the Pd@NiNPs/SG hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic procedure for synthesizing the Co2P@am-FePO4 core–shell electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
6.3 Phosphorus-doped CSNs
Phosphorus (P)-doped carbon electrocatalysts also offer tremendous ORR catalytic activity in alkaline media, and few studies have been performed in acidic media owing to the dissimilarity in the atomic size and electronic structure between P and carbon; in contrast, B and N possess similar properties to carbon.195 In general, phosphoric acid was used as a P source to activate the carbon. Similar to CNTs doped with other dopants, the P-doped CNTs and graphite layers show a considerable improvement in the ORR activity.195,196 P-doped CSN-based materials have also been widely used to study the electrocatalytic activity for the OER and HER.197,198 A porous carbon microsphere with highly uniform CSNs containing crystalline/amorphous Co2P@FePO4 was obtained through the in situ polymerization and reduction of a sample containing pre-synthesized hierarchal porous polystyrene (PS) microspheres along with iron(III) nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO3)3·9H2O), cobaltous acetate tetrahydrate (C4H6CoO4·4H2O), dopamine, phytic acid, and Tris–HCl buffer in methanol (Fig. 9b).199 The suspension was stirred at room temperature for 24 h, filtered, and dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven overnight. Subsequently, calcination was performed at 450 °C for 2 h at a rate of 5 °C min−1 and then at 800 °C at a rate of 2 °C min−1 in a N2 atmosphere.199 The calcination was continued for 4 h in a 50% NH3/N2 (100 sccm) atmosphere to develop a core–shell electrocatalyst. Here, the crystalline region of Co2P acts as a core material, and the amorphous region of ferric phosphate (am-FePO4) acts as a shell. Such a combination of crystalline and amorphous regions with 3D porous carbon microspheres improves the electrocatalytic properties of the Co2P@FePO4 catalyst for the ORR. Moreover, the presence of am-FePO4 in the shell may result in more active sites on the surface, and crystalline Co2P in the core could show significant conductivity, which helps in transferring electrons to the shell to improve the catalytic performance. Various types of p-doped CSNs have also been developed using different approaches for improving the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.200,201 Research has also been conducted to study the role of phosphate-adsorbed materials in the enhancement of ORR performance.202
6.4 Boron-doped CSNs
Carbon-based materials (CNMs) have attracted significant attention owing to their fascinating optical, catalytic, and electrical properties.203 As for N doping, boron (B) doping on carbon supports has also been studied broadly for enhancing electrocatalytic properties for the ORR because the B atom acts as an electron acceptor.204 Moreover, B doping may increase the number of hole-type charge carriers, which activate two-dimensional carbon materials through the conjugation of the carbon π electrons with the electron-deficient B atom. In addition, the electron-accepting character of B and charged sites (B+) formed by B doping facilitates the adsorption of oxygen and –OOH and improves the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.205 The positively polarized B atoms solicit the negatively polarized oxygen atoms through chemisorption. B-doped CNTs and graphene show improved electrocatalytic properties for the ORR. Arun et al. emphasized a simple method to convert red onion into carbon nanomaterials (CNMs) that show superior electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.203 Using a single step, they first synthesized CNMs@C (core) from the self-assembly of CNMs on carbon microspheres. Subsequently, CNMs@C was further treated with boric acid to form BCNMs@C. The newly formed B shell protected each CNM from agglomeration and carbon corrosion. Thus, the electrocatalytic performance of the core–shell BCNMs@C microspheres for the ORR is higher than that of CNMs@C and comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. The BCNMs@C exhibits a peak at 0.72 V vs. RHE for the ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Additionally, it shows a more positive onset potential than the pristine CNMs@C (0.87 V vs. 0.75 V).203 Zhong et al. synthesized N- and B-doped metal-free CSNs through the in situ polymerization of dopamine using a tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) solution in the presence of carbon particles (CPs) by maintaining a reaction pH of 8.5 (Fig. 10).99 B doping was performed on the synthesized polydopamine (PDA) using 3-aminobenzene boronic acid (ABA) by magnetic stirring for 5 h at room temperature. The obtained product was pyrolyzed at 900 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere for 2 h to yield N- and B-doped CPs or NB-CPs. Fig. 10 shows the TEM images of the CPs and the synthesized NB-CPs; the images show smooth edges on the CPs, whereas a thin layer of the ABA–PDA covers the shell of the pyrolyzed NB-CPs.99 The images clearly show the formation of CSNs doped with N and B on carbon. This dual doping can remarkably improve the electrocatalytic activity of the catalyst for the ORR and other applications.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the process for preparing NB-CPs; corresponding TEM images of the carbon particles (A and B) and NB-CPs (C and D). Reproduced from ref. 99. with permission from Elsevier B.V. 
6.5 Di, tri-, or multi-heteroatom-doped CSNs
Doping with two or more different heteroatoms can result in improved ORR activity due to the formation of new active sites. For example, the dual doping of B in N-doped carbon, S and N doping in carbon supports, and P–N codoped nanocarbons show outstanding electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.99,192,193,201 Similarly, the secondary doping of N-doped carbon materials with heteroatoms such as B and P or B and S can further enhance the catalytic activity for the ORR because it leads to easier regulation of the surface polarity and electronic properties of the electrode. Compared to single-heteroatom-doped carbon materials, recent studies have shown that dual- or multi-heteroatom-doped carbon materials show significantly enhanced ORR activity.133,206

6.5.1 N- and B-doped CSNs. 
Both N and B draw electrons from carbon atoms, creating a net positive charge and thereby reduce the chemisorption overpotential. Xue et al. reported a three-dimensional B-, N-doped graphene foam as a metal-free catalyst for efficient ORR.207 They utilized a facile CVD technique to fabricate a new class of graphene foam (GF) doped with nitrogen, boron, or both. The electrochemical technique displayed high electrocatalytic activities for the ORR with a higher current generation capability, better stability, and superior tolerance to the methanol crossover effect compared to commercial platinum catalysts. In another study, Zhu et al. reported boron and nitrogen dual-self-doped graphene sheets (BNGs) as non-metal catalysts for the ORR.208 The BNGs exhibited remarkable activity and high stability for the ORR as well as an onset potential of 0.95 V, which is very close to that of platinum carbon, indicating that the catalyst remains very stable without degradation after 5000 cycles. Dahal et al. synthesized polyacrylonitrile (PAN)- and (Zn, Co)-MOF-based core–shell carbon nanofibers.209 Subsequently, it was doped with N and B using a single dopant, ammonium hydrogen borate trihydrate (NH4HB4O7·3H2O). The resulting material exhibits outstanding onset and half-wave potentials of 0.94 and 0.86 vs. RHE, respectively, with superior cycling stability towards the ORR. Zhong et al. developed a facile method to fabricate metal-free N–B codoped (NBCP) catalysts using dopamine and 3-aminophenyl boronic acid as a nitrogen and boron source, respectively.99 The as-synthesized catalyst exhibited superior activity for the ORR in microbial fuel cells. Likewise, Liu et al. also synthesized a B–N codoped graphitic carbon/nanodiamond (BN–C/ND) shell–core structure as an active electrocatalyst with an electron transfer number of 3.8 which is almost identical to four electron transfer for the ORR in alkaline media.210


6.5.2 N- and P-doped CSNs. 
Pei et al. reported a N and P doped carbon layer over a MnO2 nanorod by an in situ polymerization reaction between aniline and phytic acid and used it as an efficient catalyst for the ORR.211 Further, Dar et al. synthesized a N–P dual-doped carbonised shell–core electrocatalyst using polyphosphazenes (C-PCTNB@CNTs, CNTs-core and PCTNB-shell) and demonstrated its effectiveness for the ORR.201 The reported electrocatalysts exhibited higher catalytic activity, methanol tolerance activity, and stability compared to catalysts based on other non-precious metals. Generally, carbon-based ORR catalysts have been reported to be less active under acidic conditions than under alkaline conditions, and it is difficult to make them active under acidic conditions. Thus, the N-, P-, and O-doped materials are superior catalysts for the ORR.


6.5.3 N- and S-doped CSNs. 
Chen et al. synthesized a N–S codoped nanocomposite by using a facile method involving the simultaneous sulfurization and carbonization of ZIF-67.212 Owing to its unique core–shell structure, high porosity, homogeneous dispersion of active components, and heteroatom doping effects, the as-synthesized catalyst exhibited outstanding ORR and OER activities, a four-electron pathway, excellent durability, and high methanol tolerance in alkaline media; these characteristics were superior to those of the conventional Pt/C catalyst. Guo et al. reported a N–S codoped carbon material, which was used successfully in the ORR.41 It shows outstanding performance with onset and half-wave potentials of −0.14 V and −0.03 V, respectively. Additionally, it exhibited high electrocatalytic activity, long-term stability, and negligible methanol crossover. Further, Han et al. described the facile synthesis of a CoS NW core encapsulated by a N–S codoped graphitic shell; this structure was found to be a highly efficient ORR catalyst.213 The as-synthesized CoS NWs@NSC exhibited superior catalytic activity toward the ORR with a four-electron pathway, long-term stability, and high methanol tolerance activity in alkaline media; these characteristics were also superior to those of the conventional Pt/C catalyst, paving the way to fabricate other cost-effective catalysts for the ORR. In addition, the rapid synthesis of N- and S-doped honeycomb-ordered carbon embedded in nanocrystals of the binary alloy PdNi was reported, and this material also showed significantly improved ORR activity.214


6.5.4 Tri- or multi-heteroatom-doped CSNs. 
Cao et al. reported CSNs (Ni3S2/NiS/NOSCs) of Ni3S2 (core) and NiS (shell) containing N-, O-, and S-doped carbon layers (NOSCs) through the pyrolysis of S- and Ni(II)-containing polypyrrole solid precursors and subsequent acid treatment.206 The synthesized materials were applied as catalysts for the ORR in alkaline media. Ni3S2/NiS/NOSC-900 exhibited superior electrocatalytic activity, affording positive onset and half-wave potentials and a high electron transfer number (n) of ∼4, as well as robust stability and methanol crossover tolerance. Huang et al. reported the formation of multiple heteroatoms (N/O/S/P) on a carbon surface through the simple pre-treatment of layered guanine molecules in sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and phosphoric acid (H3PO4) followed by pyrolysis at different temperatures such as 400, 550, 700, 800, 900, and 1000 °C in a N2 atmosphere.133 The pyrolysis of the sample at 1000 °C resulted in outstanding ORR activity with an E1/2 of 0.84 V vs. RHE and a diffusion-limited current density (jL) of 5.40 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH, which is superior to those of various carbon-based materials as well as the Pt/C catalyst.

7. Application of HCSNs to the electrocatalytic ORR
In general, the electrochemical ORR performance of a prepared electrode has been evaluated in a three-electrode system containing the working, counter, and reference electrodes.215–217 The ORR activity has been checked through cyclic voltammetry (CV) in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1 (0 to 1.2 V). Similarly, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), chronoamperometry (CA), accelerated durability tests (ADTs), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and Tafel tests were performed to evaluate the ORR activity and stability.157 In order to study the n value of an electrocatalyst, rotating disk electrode (RDE) and rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) measurements were performed at various rotation rates from 400 to 2500 rpm at a fixed scan rate. Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots (j−1vs. ω−1/2), which indicate the relationship between the apparent current density (j) and the angular velocity (ω) of the disk, have been analyzed. These plots further help predict the electron transfer number (n) with the following equations: (9) B = 0.62nFACoDo2/3v−1/6(10)where jL and jk are the diffusion-limiting current density and kinetic current density, respectively; n is the electron transfer number; F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1); A is the area of the disk electrode (0.126 cm−2); Co is the bulk concentration of O2 (1.2 × 10−6 mol cm−3); D is the diffusion coefficient of O2 in electrolytes (1.9 × 10−5 cm2 s−1), and v is the kinematic viscosity (0.01 cm2 s−1).157
The n value and H2O2 (%) were additionally obtained using a rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) with a fixed electrode rotation speed (1600 rpm) at a scan rate of 0.001 V s−1 and from the following equations:157 (11) (12)where Id and Ir are the disk current and ring current, respectively, and N is the H2O2 collection efficiency of the Pt ring (0.37).157
Tan et al. synthesized highly uniform cobalt@cobalt oxide core nanoparticles from ZIF-67 covered with a N-doped carbon shell coupled with hierarchical porous graphene (GCN–Co@CoO). In an alkaline solution, these HCSNs showed outstanding catalytic activity, which is equivalent to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst, with exceptional ORR stability.218 A comparison study was also performed using a sample without the addition of graphene and CTAB; this sample was named CN–Co@CoO. Meanwhile, GCN–Co@CoO was further subjected to acid treatment in 3 M HCl for 20 h, followed by washing and drying in deionized water to yield GCN. The CV of the above samples was studied in a N2- and O2-saturated alkaline solution (0.1 M KOH) (Fig. 11a).218 The samples did not show any peculiar peak in the N2-saturated medium, whereas a clear cathodic peak appeared in the O2-saturated medium, suggesting that the prepared catalyst exhibited improved ORR activity (Fig. 11a).218 The LSV of the samples was further performed in the O2-saturated KOH solution on an RDE system (Fig. 11b).218 A large negative E1/2 value (−0.194 V vs. SCE) and a high diffusion-limit current density of 4.91 mA cm−2, which is close to that of the Pt/C catalyst (4.92 mA cm−2), were observed for the GCN–Co@CoO catalyst. The kinetic parameters of the GCN–Co@CoO catalyst were further analyzed at different rotation speeds. The n value was determined from the LSV curves at different rotation speeds by using the K–L equation (Fig. 11c).218 The GCN–Co@CoO catalyst has an n value of 3.92, which is close to that of the Pt/C catalyst (n = 4), indicating that the typical 4-electron transfer reaction occurred for the GCN–Co@CoO catalyst (Fig. 11d).218 The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) and EIS of the catalyst were examined to confirm the ORR performance (Fig. 11e and f).218 As shown in Fig. 11e, the electrochemical double-layer capacitance (Cdl) of the GCN–Co@CoO catalyst (6.38 mF cm−2) was much higher than that of CN–Co@CoO (4.61 mF cm−2) and GCN (3.25 mF cm−2). The obtained results indicate that N-doped graphene can increase the number of electroactive sites on the catalytic surface. Further, Nyquist plots indicate that the graphene in the GCN–Co@CoO catalyst plays a significant role in improving the electron transfer capacities owing to the presence of abundant reactive sites (Fig. 11f).218
 Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of different catalysts in O2- and N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, (b) LSV curves, (c) K–L curves, and (d) the electron transfer number of different catalysts. (e) Capacitive current density of the different catalysts as a function of scan rates. (f) EIS curves of different catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Liu et al. also studied the viable ORR mechanisms of the Co@DNC@FeS2-0.5 catalyst they synthesized with a Co@C core and FeS2 shell (Fig. 12a).157 They suggested that the outstanding ORR activity of the Co@DNC@FeS2-0.5 catalyst is due to the presence of a Co-coordinated pyridinic N structure (Co–Nx); pyridinic N exhibits a one-site dual mechanism and can show reduction behavior for both O2 and HO2. The O2 adsorbed on Co@DNC was initially reduced to HO2 at the Co–Nx sites, which reacted further with CoO to produce OH− through chemical deprotonation or electrochemical reduction. FeS2 in the Co@DNC@FeS2-0.5 catalyst can strengthen the adsorption of O2 molecules on Co@DNC. Moreover, the Fe ions of FeS2 crystals are connected with H2O in the alkaline electrolyte, which can prevent the direct reaction between the Fe ions and O2 molecules. Consequently, the O2 atoms in the electrolyte have a greater affinity towards the hydrogen atoms of H2O via hydrogen bonds and produce H2O–O2–H2O structures. The S–S bond of the S22− ion of FeS2 can show fast charge-transfer phenomena; it donates electrons to the H2O–O2–H2O structure containing hydrogen bonds and secures four electrons to result in four OH− ions. On the other hand, Co/CoO has a strong affinity for O2 molecules on the Co–Nx active sites. At the same time, S–S bonds can donate electrons to Co–Nx to promote the breakage of O–O bonds via a simple four-electron transfer ORR pathway. These results suggest that the highly active sites of Co–Nx and Co/CoO in NDC, as well as the multivalent redox behavior, can induce the adsorption and reduction of O2 molecules and charge-transfer phenomena, which lead to the superior electrocatalytic activity of the synthesized Co@DNC@FeS2-0.5 catalyst for the ORR.157 Here, we perform an in-depth analysis and study various possibilities for the synthesis and fabrication of electrodes for ORR activity.
 Fig. 12  (a) Deduced reaction mechanisms of the ORR on the Co@DNC@FeS2 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the ORR process catalyzed by Zn/Co@C-NCNFs. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. 
Niu et al. synthesized bimetallic heteroatom-doped Zn/Co@C-NCNFs (0.50) obtained from Zn–Co-ZIF-0.5/PAN at 800 °C and demonstrated outstanding ORR activities with Eonset, E1/2, and n values of 0.099 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, and 3.65, respectively.108 In addition, the Zn/Co@C-NCNF (0.50) catalyst exhibits superior stability and methanol tolerance as compared to the commercial 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst.108Fig. 12b schematically shows the four-electron transfer phenomena during the ORR of the Zn/Co@C-NCNF (0.50) catalyst.108 The Zn/Co@C-NCNF (0.50) catalyst has a 3D network structure, which facilitates the transport of electrons and electrolyte ions owing to the synergistic effect between the core and shell. The N-doped CNF (NCNF) core ensures good electrical conductivity, and the highly crystalline Zn/Co nanoparticles with the homogeneously wrapped Zn/Co@C shell further enhance the electrical conductivity, which controls the oxygen adsorption and electrolyte diffusion during the ORR process.206 Oxygen receives an electron and is reduced on the surface of Zn/Co@C-NCNFs during the catalytic process, leading to the superior ORR activity.108 Furthermore, mesoporous Pt cage-bell nanostructures (Pt@mPt CBNs) synthesized through a two-step surface modification of Pt nanoparticles showed unique surface properties that facilitate the penetration of oxygen molecules at the inner and outer surfaces, resulting in outstanding ORR catalytic activity.219 The Eonset and E1/2 values of the Pt@mPt CBN catalyst are 1.03 and 0.90 V, respectively, which are comparable to those of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.95 and 0.89 V, respectively). In addition, the n value at 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 V were calculated to be 3.96, 3.95, 3.95, and 3.96, respectively, suggesting a 4-electron transfer pathway and confirming the superior catalytic activity of Pt@mPt CBNs.219
7.1 Reactivity descriptors of HCSNs for the ORR
Various reactive descriptors such as the number of electrons in metal centers, metal–oxygen binding energy, redox potential of the catalyst, donor–acceptor intermolecular hardness, activity correlation, and main catalysts used for selective four and two electron transfer, respectively were considered for the heteroatom doped materials for the ORR.50,220–222 The catalytic activity on the Pt based CSNs was studied for the ORR using the DFT model using various kinds of 3d–5d transition metal based nanoparticles as a core and Pt as a shell.223 The adsorption energy decreases for both O and OH based on the strain, so more strain is required to develop higher adsorption energy.223 This result suggests that the light metal core can deliver excellent catalytic activity as compared to heavier metals. The chemical effect also known as the ligand effect occurred on the core metal based on the changes in the 5d-band surface of Pt which makes some changes in the adsorption energy of the adsorbates.223 The catalytic activity of CSNs also delivers some changes in their catalytic activity based on the nanoparticle sizes. Zagal et al. emphasized the various reactivity descriptors of macrocyclic MN4 metal complexes for the ORR.220 The reactivity of these kinds of metal complexes is mainly due to the binding nature of the reaction intermediate to the metal center and decides the changes that occur in the properties of the catalyst (for the solid metal catalyst) based on the interaction between the reaction intermediate and active center.220 The ORR volcano plot for the MN4 based catalysts suggests the production of H2O2 and H2O at the weak and strong binding sites of the catalyst, respectively.220 Specchia et al. also reviewed the important aspects of various descriptors such as turnover frequency (TOF), active site density, and heat treatment on the metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts used for ORR activity in PEM fuel cells.224 For example the Fe–N–C catalyst was prepared by using the Fe complexe based phenanthroline hexaazamacrocycle, ((phen2N2)Fe) and pyrolyzed to obtain pyridinic N4 coordination based compounds which demonstrate high TOF (1.8 s−1) for the ORR in acids.225 The pyrolysis of Fe based metal complexes lead to the active sites such as Fe–N4, Fe–N3, Fe–N2, Fe–N2+2, Fe–N4+1, N–Fe–N2+2, and Fe–Nx–N4−x which are largely present at the out-of-plane and in-plane sites used for the ORR activity.226 Holby et al. found the importance of active sites and thermodynamic phase stability on Fe–Nx–C defects by first principles modeling for the ORR.227 The FexNy sites with either the 4N or 3N structure can demonstrate stable Fe-containing defects with superior ORR activity. Nørskov et al. studied the use of DFT for predicting the role of free energy in the ORR using the Pt(111) electrocatalyst.228 The catalyst surface adsorbed by the reactant and product molecules was calculated based on the adsorption free energy (ΔGads) which is obtained according to the following equation:50,229 ΔGads = ΔEads + ΔEZPE − TΔS(13)where ΔEads, ΔEZPE, T, and ΔS, denote the binding energy of adsorption, zero-point energy of each adsorbate, temperature, and entropy change, respectively.229
Li et al. studied the mechanism of N-doped graphene by DFT theory with its overpotential for the ORR.229 The volcano plot of free energy vs. overpotential of the N-doped graphene indicates that the armchair nanoribbon structure of N-doped graphene showed the best ORR performance with a low overpotential value of 0.445 V (Fig. 13a).229 The free energy at different electrode potentials such as 0 V in downhill and 1.23 V in uphill was due to the short and open circuit conditions of fuel cells (Fig. 13b), whereas, the adsorption of O2 as OOH− takes place at an electrode potential of 0.785 V, suggesting the intermediate step during the ORR process.229 Furthermore, the authors also studied the role of N atoms at the edge in the overpotential (Fig. 13c). The near-edge doping with N atoms in the graphene structure illustrates the better adsorption of O2 as OOH− with an overpotential of 1.96 V.229 On the other hand, Fazio et al. studied the mechanism of B-doped graphene and the effect of free energy by DFT for the ORR at a fuel cell cathode under both acidic and basic conditions (Fig. 13d and e).230 The free energy diagram for the B doped graphene suggests that the electrode potential under acidic conditions occurred at 0 V and 1.23 V for the downhill and uphill due to short circuiting of the cell and maximum potential with a low onset of 0.87 V and overpotential of 0.29 V, respectively.230 Under basic conditions, the material showed that the potential was varied from 0 to 0.40 V with a low onset of 0.05 V and overpotential of 0.28 V, respectively.230 The acidic and basic reactions occurred according to eqn (6) and (7).230 The dual/multi-doped heteroatoms on the graphene structure on pz-orbitals of active sites were also experimented with their free energy and overpotential by the DFT study for the ORR.231 O2(g) + 4(H+ + e−) → 2H2O(aq)(14) O2(g) + 2H2O(aq) + 4e− → 4OH−(15)
 Fig. 13  Volcano plots for the (a) ORR on different sites of armchair and zigzag graphene nanoribbons, (b) free energy diagram for the ORR on site 1 for the Z2 structure (Z2-1) at different electrode potentials U, (c) ORR overpotential versus the distance from the edge to N atoms. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier Inc. (d and e) The free energy (ΔGw/sol) diagram for the ORR reaction catalyzed by B-doped graphene under acidic conditions (pH = 0) and alkaline conditions (pH = 14). Reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from Elsevier Inc. 
Kang et al. designed multi-metallic core/inter layer/shell nanostructures using nickel (Ni), gold (Au), and Pt on the carbon support and studied the electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR.86 The Ni@Au@PtNi/C based electrocatalyst delivered higher catalytic activity and durability due to the formation of a stable catalyst by Au atoms which enhances the durability, deactivates the Pt–Ni electrocatalyst by blocking the active sites, and reduces the inactive precious metal contents and enhances the catalytic activity.86Fig. 14a–c clearly show the important role of the Ni@Au core in the PtNi/C shell for improving the ECSA as well as specific and mass activities as compared to Pt/C and PtNi/C skeletons.86 The multi-layered Ni@Au@PtNi/C electrocatalyst showed eight times higher specific and mass activity as compared to the Pt/C catalyst and also show an excellent stability for over 10000 cycles of electrochemical cycling up to 1.1 V. The TEM images of the electrocatalyst were analysed before and after 10000 cycles which showed the maintenance of the identical structure for the Ni@Au@PtNi/C electrocatalyst as compared with the Pt/C and PtNi/C skeletons (Fig. 14d).86 The temperature of the electrolyte also plays a vital role in delivering higher catalytic activity in the ORR. Schmidt et al. emphasised the importance of the temperature effect of the electrolyte for improved catalytic activity.232 The study was carried out in an alkaline electrolyte at temperatures from 293–333 K on Pt(hkl) surfaces. The OHad on the Pt(hkl) surfaces based on the temperature and potential determines the rate of the ORR.232 At elevated temperature, a low quantity of peroxide is developed, whereas, this may be increased by increasing the temperature of the electrolyte.
 Fig. 14  Bar charts showing (a) electrochemically active surface areas, (b) specific activities, and (c) mass activities of Pt/C, PtNi/C (with Pt-skeleton), and Ni@Au@PtNi/C (with quasi Pt-skin) electrocatalysts before and after 10000 cycles of electrochemical cycling up to 1.1 V. The activity is normalized to the kinetic current density measured at 0.95 V. The specific activity is the activity normalized to the ECSA measured by CO-stripping. (d) TEM images of Pt, PtNi, and Ni@Au@PtNi nanoparticles before and after 10000 cycles up to 1.1 V. All the images are at a size of 100 nm × 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
7.2 Achieving high catalytic activity using HCSNs for the ORR
Recently, more attention was paid to design, synthesise, and fabricate stable and robust electrocatalysts and electrocatalytic surfaces with high catalytic activity for the ORR.233 CSNs and HCSNs have attracted considerable attention in order to attain such superior catalytic activity for the ORR due to diverse advantages of CSNs and HCSNs as discussed in the above sections.42,160,234 Zhang et al. discussed the preparation of N and P co-doped carbon networks by self-assembly of melamine, phytic acid, and graphene oxide (MPSA/GO) followed by pyrolysis at 1000 °C which would deliver excellent bifunctional electrocatalytic activity for both the ORR and HER due to the uniform N and P doping on the graphene structure.235 Doping N and P on the graphene surface not only enhances the catalytic activity but also improves the electrical conductivity. The advantages of this bifunctional catalyst also expressed an outstanding performance in Zn–air batteries with robust durability and high peak power density (310 W g−1).235 The high catalytic activity for the ORR was also achieved by the use of materials having more active sites and defects. It is somewhat difficult to predict which HCSNs can deliver remarkable ORR performance because each HCSN has some unique features based on the chemical compositions, hierarchical morphology, surface area, porosity, and electronic properties of the HCSNs. Here, we present the various catalysts obtained from CSNs and HCSNs to obtain higher electrocatalytic activity for the ORR in both alkaline and acidic environments, and the obtained results are summarized in Tables 1–3. In addition, we further discussed the various materials designed with active sites and defects for superior electrocatalytic activity.
Table 1 Comparison of higher ORR catalytic activity with onset (Eonset) and half-wave potential (E1/2), and electron transfer number (n) values obtained for the N-doped CSNs in alkaline medium




Catalyst
Electrolyte

E
onset [V vs. RHE]

E
1/2 [V vs. RHE]

n

Ref.




Co–C@NWCs
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.83
3.99

118



MCO/CNFs@NC
0.1 M KOH
1.0
0.76
4.00

132



N-doped Fe/Fe3C@C/RGO
0.1 M KOH
1.00
0.93
3.08–3.52

139



Co@NPC@FeS2-0.5
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.84
3.86–3.88

157



CoO@Co/NRGO
0.1 M KOH
0.95
0.81
3.97

162



Co–C@NWCs
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.83
3.82–3.99

236



1.0S–Fe/N/C
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.75
4.01

237



PMSEPE/MIL-101(Fe)-800
0.1 M KOH
0.94
—
3.79

238



N–Fe/G
0.1 M KOH
0.93
0.83
4.01–4.06

239



Fe–MnOx/N-KB
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.78
3.72–3.92

240



FeN-CNT/CS
0.1 M KOH
—
0.78
>3.98

241



FN-B-800
0.1 M KOH
0.82
—
3.81

242



Fe/Fe3C@N-RGO
0.1 M KOH
0.95
0.82
∼4.00

243



Ionogel-Fe–C–N
0.1 M KOH
1.00
0.87
3.99

244



Fe–N/C-900
0.1 M KOH
0.04
−0.07
3.94

245



(Co@NPC-900)
0.1 M KOH
1.05
0.82
3.96

246



FeNC-20-1000
0.1 M KOH
1.04
0.77
3.99

247



MIL-88B-Fe CNPs
0.1 M KOH
1.03
0.92
3.97

248



Co@Co3O4@C–CM
0.1 M KOH
0.93
0.81
3.8–3.9

249



(Fe,Co)@GNC
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.85
3.70

250



NHPC-900-1000
0.1 M KOH
0.96
0.84
3.80

251



ZIF-67 derived NCNTF-700
0.1 M KOH
0.97
—
3.70

252



Zn-ZIF/GO-800
0.1 M KOH
0.96
—
4.00

253



ZIF-derived carbon-L
0.1 M KOH
0.86
0.70
3.68

254



C60-SWCNT
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.84
—

255



Co0.85Se@NC
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.82
3.98

256



Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.81
3.80

257



Co/CoNx/CNT
0.1 M KOH
0.90
0.80
3.77

258



GO–PANI–FP
0.1 M KOH
0.90
0.75
3.85

259



CoO@Co/N–C
0.1 M KOH
0.97
0.82
∼4.00

260



Co0.50Mo0.50OyNz/C
0.1 M KOH
0.92
0.76
3.85–3.9

261



Fe–N/C-800
0.1 M KOH
0.92
0.81
3.96

262



Co–CoO/N-RGO
0.1 M KOH
0.88
0.78
3.7–3.9

263



Fe-NGM/C–Fe SAC
0.1 M KOH
1.05
0.86
4.15

264



N-doped graphene derived carbon nitride
0.1 M KOH
1.03
0.92
3.97

265



CS-Co/NG-650
0.1 M KOH
0.03
−0.15
3.80

266





Table 2 Comparison of higher ORR catalytic activity with onset (Eonset) and half-wave potential (E1/2), and electron transfer number (n) values obtained for the S-, B-, and P-doped CSNs in alkaline medium




Catalyst
Electrolyte

E
onset [V vs. RHE]

E
1/2 [V vs. RHE]
[n]
Ref.




Ni3S2/NiS/NOSC-900
0.1 M KOH
0.87
0.72
4.00

206



CoxSy@C-1000
0.1 M KOH
−0.04
∼−0.02
3.69–3.78

212



CoS NWs@NSC-2
0.1 M KOH
0.93
0.84
3.93

213



Co0.5Fe0.5S@NMC
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.81
3.8–4.0

257



Fe3C@Fe,N,S-GCM
0.1 M KOH
0.98
0.78
3.92

267



FeS–PPy–BP
0.1 M KOH
0.89
—
3.83–3.91

268



Co1−xS/SNG/CF
0.1 M KOH
0.99
—
3.93–3.98

269



FeCN–S-800
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.76
3.99

270



CoO@NS-CSs
0.1 M KOH
0.95
0.82
>3.90

271



CD/NSPC
0.1 M KOH
0.98
0.85
3.7–3.97

272



Co9S8/CNT
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.82
3.90

273



N–Co9S8/G
0.1 M KOH
0.94


3.90

274



Co9S8@CNS900
0.1 M KOH
0.92
0.80
3.98

275



Co3S4–S/G-800
0.1 M KOH
0.92
0.80
3.96

276



Co9S8/N,S-CNS
0.1 M KOH
0.90
—
3.80

277



NS–GR/Fe3C
0.1 M KOH
1.04
0.86
3.96

278



Co9S8@NSCM
0.1 M KOH
0.97
0.81
4.02

279



Co9−xNixS8/NC
0.1 M KOH
0.91
0.86
3.85

280



S–Co9−xFexS8@RGO
0.1 M KOH
0.94
0.84
3.97

281



NiCo2S4@N-CNT
0.1 M KOH
0.93
0.80
3.82

282



Co–S/SNGX
0.1 M KOH
0.90
0.66
3.90

283



B0.5CNMs@C1.0
0.1 M KOH
0.90
0.72
3.80

203



Co2P@am-FePO4
0.1 M KOH
1.00
0.91
4.00

199





Table 3 Comparison of higher ORR catalytic activity with onset (Eonset) and half-wave potential (E1/2), and electron transfer number (n) values obtained for the HCSNs in acidic medium




Catalyst
Electrolyte

E
onset [V vs. RHE]

E
1/2 [V vs. RHE]
[n]
Ref.




Ni@Pd3/C
0.1 M HClO4
0.99
0.87
3.91

118



PtA@FeSA–N–C
0.1 M HClO4
1.01
0.923
—

284



PtNi–BNCs/C
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.923
—

285



Pt–Pd SBCNC
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.912
—

286



NCNT-MLD-Pt
0.1 M HClO4
—
0.89
—

287



N,S-CA
0.1 M HClO4
0.89
0.76
4.0

288



0.5 M H2SO4
0.89
0.76


N,S-enriched hierarchically porous carbon
0.1 M HClO4
0.85
0.73
3.86–3.96

289



0.5 M H2SO4
0.85
0.73


N/S co-doped carbon nanotubes
1 M HClO4
0.8
0.57
4.0

290



B,N-doped graphene
0.1 M HClO4
0.86
0.61
4.0

291



N and P-doped graphene
0.1 M HClO4
0.87
0.64
4.0

291



N,P-doped CGHNs
0.1 M HClO4
0.90
0.68
4.0

292



N,P-doped mesoporous carbon
0.1 M HClO4
0.82
0.62
4.0

293



Fe2–Z8–C
0.5 M H2SO4
0.85
0.81
4.0

294



GNCN-FeCo
0.5 M H2SO4
0.85
0.79
3.2

295



ISAS-Co/HNCS
0.5 M H2SO4
0.85
0.77
3.87

296



Fe-SAs/NPS-HC
0.5 M H2SO4
0.84
0.79
3.96–3.99

297






7.2.1 Effect of active sites of HCSNs for the ORR. 
Active sites play an important role in electrocatalytic activity. Doping heteroatoms on the carbon matrix or metal support or doping trace amounts of metal in the carbon support can develop the active sites on the surface which enhances the ORR activity. Masa et al. discussed the important role of trace metals with N-based heteroatoms in the superior ORR activity.298 Various kinds of active sites such as non-noble metal-based active sites, Pt-based active sites, N-, S-, B-, and P-based active sites, and trace metal-based active sites were used to improve the ORR activity.299 Sa et al. synthesised a carbon nanotube decorated thin layer of porphyrinic carbon (CNT/PC) by pyrolysis of a mixture of CNTs and iron-containing porphyrin precursor to develop an active site of Fe–Nx in the CNT/PC electrocatalyst (Fig. 15a).300 At the same time, the authors also found that the decoration of the uniform porphyrinic carbon layer (Fe–Nx active site) on the CNT was achieved with the use of a silica layer for CNT/PC as compared to the absence of the silica layer (Fig. 15a).300 This indicates the formation of higher density active sites which are responsible to enhance the ORR activity and also useful in alkaline exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs). Chen et al. also synthesised N and S doped hierarchical CNTs which was surrounded by an atomically dispersed Fe–Nx species.301 The presence of the Fe–Nx species and the formation of a hierarchical structure by the decoration with N and S atoms in addition to the active CNTs would facilitate the development of more active sites which obviously lead to the enhancement of the catalytic activity and electrical conductivity and an outstanding electrocatalytic performance in the ORR with more positive E1/2 and higher limiting current density.301 Furthermore, the fabricated electrode derived from the synthesised materials also exhibited excellent properties for Zn–air batteries. The outstanding bifunctional catalytic activity of the S,N_Fe/N/C-CNT catalyst was due to reasons such as Fe–Nx species can render higher active sites, hierarchical structure can give a way for disclosure of more active sites, and the presence of N and S atom can display non-even charge distribution and enhance the electrical conductivity.301 The Fe–N–C based electrocatalyst also synthesized by various research groups with more Fe–Nx active sites can also be applied for ORR applications.302–306
 Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic scheme for the preparation of CNT/PC catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 300 from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Fe–N-SCCFs. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Wang et al. prepared a Fe and N co-doped 3D-simple cubic carbon frameworks (Fe-NSCCFs) by the self-assembly and in situ carbonization of Fe3O4 nanocubes followed by etching with hydrochloric acid and activated with ammonia (Fig. 15b).307 The uniform distribution of Fe and N co-doping on the SCCFs with a mesoporous structure, improved electron transfer and mass transport, and fully accessible active sites were responsible for excellent ORR activity and used for Zn–air batteries. Mulyadi et al. prepared a metal free electrocatalyst using a N,S-doped carbon nanofibers/N,P-doped carbon hybrid which showed excellent ORR activity and reduction in onset potential (233 mV), Tafel slope (99 mV per decade), and current density (331 mV at 10 mA cm−2) for the HER.308 CSNs with active sites have showed excellent electrocatalytic properties which can be further enhanced by doping with various heteroatoms which also increase the active sites which facilitate the enhanced catalytic activity.306,309,310


7.2.2 Defect engineering of HCSNs for the ORR. 
The creation of defects on carbon and various other materials can deliver excellent catalytic activity for the ORR as well as other electrochemical reactions.15,106,311 Jiang et al. studied the role of defects in the carbon nanocages (CNCs) by DFT calculations and suggested three kinds of defects on the CNCs such as pentagonal defects in the corners, edge defects due to the broken fringes, and hole defects to the micropores.312 The CNCs with pentagonal defects and zig-zag edge defects predicted from DFT calculations showed lower energy barriers. Zhu et al. synthesized defective N and S co-doped cheese-like porous carbon derived from biomass exhibited excellent catalytic activity.313 The defects on the carbon material created by alkaline and ammonia activation exhibit the formation of high content of heteroatoms on the carbon material and perform outstanding catalytic activity with an E1/2 of 0.835 V which is almost similar to that of the commercial Pt/C electrode (0.846 V).313 Rauf et al. also studied the N and S doped Fe/N/C core–shell electrocatalyst for the ORR in both acidic and basic medium.314 The oxygen-vacancy and edge-N rich cobalt oxysulfide on graphene nanomeshes (CoO0.87S0.13/GN) have showed remarkable ORR activity and also delivered excellent applicability in Zn–air batteries.315 The negatively charged S dopant and positively charged O vacancy defects created on Co with electrostatic attraction force and the presence of N-rich graphene nanomesh promote the enhanced ORR activity by fast exchange kinetics of O2−/OH−. The CoO0.87S0.13/GN electrocatalyst expressed the E1/2 of 0.83 V and Eonset of 0.94 V vs. RHE with quasi four-electron reduction of oxygen to OH−.315

8. Conclusions and perspectives
Recently, CSNs have been widely employed in numerous applications because of their outstanding properties such as high surface area, controlled surface architecture, and uniform morphology and particle size, as well as the ability to tune the core–shell compositions based on the need, cost, and application. Similarly, hollow cores consisting of transition metals, metal oxides, and noble metals as well as shells with heteroatom doping (N, S, P, B, and others) and uniform surface coverage can express better catalytic activity as like or higher than the commercial Pt/C catalyst for the ORR. In this review, we briefly explained the various synthesis pathways of highly stable electrocatalysts using HCSNs for the ORR. We also discussed the major advantages and drawbacks of HSCN-based electrodes for electrocatalysis as well as possible ways to improve their properties, with numerous relevant examples from recent literature. In addition, we discussed the various possibilities of modifying the surface properties of HCSN-based electrodes for further enhancing the electrocatalytic ORR activity. We also focused on various types of heteroatom doping in CSNs and the possibilities for their use in multiple applications. Among the various electrocatalytic reactions, studying and improving the catalytic properties of ORR electrodes are highly important for various applications. So, the outstanding electrocatalytic activity for the ORR was achieved by the following ways.
(1) The use of HCSNs based on low-cost and earth-abundant materials with highly stable and alcohol-tolerant properties is necessary for developing industrial energy-conversion and energy-storage devices in order to achieve superior properties in an affordable way. Likewise, the development of CSNs with a light metal core can provide a low overpotential to the fabricated electrode due to the low *O and *OH binding energies, so that these material can deliver exceptional catalytic activity as compared to the Pt based electrodes. In addition, the use of heteroatoms in the CSNs also improves the electrocatalytic ORR activity.
(2) The development and exploration of different HCSNs with various core–shell compositions, shapes, sizes, and morphologies are in continuous demand to enhance the electrocatalytic properties in numerous applications, and studies have paid an increasing amount of attention to these aspects. The heteroatom doping on CSNs can create more active sites, deliver faster electron transfer and lead to better electrocatalytic activity.
(3) HCSNs can be synthesized with improved stability, robustness, and tolerance properties by simply tuning the surface properties through either direct doping with heteroatoms or in situ solution growth of uniform nanoarchitectures on the inner and outer surfaces of CSNs, the fabrication of thin carbon shell layers covering the core surface through the direct mixing of carbon-based materials, or the mixing and pyrolysis of carbon-based compounds in an inert atmosphere to improve the conductivity and electron transfer properties. Moreover, there are many possibilities to explore in the electrolyte solution to facilitate electron transfer between the catalyst electrode and electrolyte. The control of the porosity and surface area of HCSNs can also improve the contact of the catalyst and enhance the electrocatalytic behavior.
(4) The introduction of a thin Pt coating on a conducting core improves the electrical and catalytic properties as well as the stability for the ORR. However, CSNs also have some drawbacks that reduce their performance in electrocatalytic reactions; in particular, the insufficient surface coverage of materials in the shell or blockage of the core with non-conducting or low-conductance materials in the shell reduces the contact of the catalyst and electron transfer from the core. These drawbacks depend on the types of shell materials and various other factors, such as porosity, surface area, and number of active sites. The proper selection of highly conducting materials in either the core or shell with excellent electron transfer properties can lead to improved electrocatalysis performance for electrochemical reactions. In most cases, well-controlled conductive materials on the shell with superior properties, such as more active sites and edge defects on the CSN surface, can lead to significantly improved ORR catalytic activities.
(5) Another important aspect of CSNs is the maintenance of structural properties under thermal and mechanical stress. Therefore, the choice of materials for the core and shell is highly important to achieve a highly stable and robust electrocatalyst. Such stable CSNs can be synthesized through one-pot chemical synthesis, seed-mediated growth, and post-selective oxidation treatments, respectively.
(6) At present, only a few research studies were focussed on the important role of various descriptors used to enhance the ORR electrocatalytic activity on CSNs and HCSNs. The detailed theoretical role of HCSNs in the ORR needs to be addressed properly with different reactive descriptors in order to empower the outstanding electrocatalyst at a reasonable cost. The important aspects of various descriptors on HCSNs also need to be studied for enhancing the electrocatalytic ORR activity.
(7) Recently, superaerophilic surfaces manifested much attention for the ORR due to the complete wettability of gas bubbles with an underwater gas bubble contact angle less than 10°. Numerous experiments were performed in these areas to study the effectiveness of the superaerophilic surface for various electrocatalytic applications.316 However, HCSNs with superaerophilic properties can also have a huge scope for improving the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR.317 At high current density, superaerophilic surfaces can also reduce the energy loss. In addition, the presence of heteroatom doping with a micro–nano hierarchical structure provides abundant active sites which helps to provide enough oxygen for superior ORR activity.
(8) Furthermore, research on HCSNs for other ECS applications is slowly gaining momentum owing to the excellent properties and applicability of HCSNs. Therefore, continuous research on HCSNs is highly important to improve the electrocatalytic properties for various electrochemical reactions. The future demand for these types of HCSNs can be met by improving the synthesis methodologies, reducing the product cost through the appropriate selection of materials, and enhancing the performance and stability in both acidic and alkaline media to produce superior electrocatalysts for commercial products.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (NRF-2020R1I1A3067208).
References
P. Goel, S. Sundriyal, V. Shrivastav, S. Mishra, D. P. Dubal, K. H. Kim and A. Deep, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105552 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Lu, Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1555–1565 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qu, Y. Wang, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, H. Chen and Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21827–21846 RSC .
X. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2008376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. Li, H. Wang, L. Zhang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 518–538 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2020, 4, 45–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802234 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, Z. P. Cano, A. Yu, Z. Chen, G. Jiang, X. Fu, L. Yang, T. Wu, Z. Bai and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18334–18348 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Rui, J. Li and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30381–30389 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Wu, X. F. Lu, S.-Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Tan, J. Lin, X. Luo, S. Wang, J. You, Y. M. Kang, Y. Bando, Y. Yamauchi and J. Kim, Nano Today, 2018, 21, 91–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharma, N. Jung and S. J. Yoo, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2–24 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh, E. B. Tetteh, H. Y. Lee, T. H. Kang and J. S. Yu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8622–8645 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. A. Shah, T. Najam, M. K. Aslam, M. Ashfaq, M. M. Rahman, K. Wang, P. Tsiakaras, S. Song and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628–7658 RSC .
X. Huang, T. Shen, T. Zhang, H. Qiu, X. Gu, Z. Ali and Y. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1900375 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, X. Zeng, W. Wang and D. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704537 CrossRef .
Q. Ren, H. Wang, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700515 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, S. On Tung, Z. Tang, L. Li, L. Ding, X. Xi, Y. Liu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 260–276 CrossRef .
P. Strasser and S. Kühl, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 166–177 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, X. Guo, Y. Luo, Q. Li, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 208–237 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strasser, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2658–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Tsai, Y. C. Hsieh, T. H. Yu, Y. J. Lee, Y. H. Wu, B. V. Merinov, P. W. Wu, S. Y. Chen, R. R. Adzic and W. A. Goddard, ACS Catal., 2015, 3, 1568–1580 CrossRef .
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, H. L. Wang and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273–1307 RSC .
T. Al-Zoubi, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, B. Janicek, C. Sun, C. E. Schulz, X. Zhang, A. A. Gewirth, P. Huang, P. Zelenay and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5477–5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, L. Yang and Q. Gao, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15944–15969 RSC .
N. Jung, Y. Sohn, J. H. Park, K. S. Nahm, P. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, H. Tang, J. Luo, H. Nan, T. Shu, L. Du, J. Zeng, S. Liao and R. R. Adzic, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3810–3817 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef .
R. Kumar, K. Mondal, P. K. Panda, A. Kaushik, R. Abolhassani, R. Ahuja, H. G. Rubahn and Y. K. Mishra, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 8992–9027 RSC .
H. P. Feng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, J. Tang, Y. C. Deng, M. Yan, Y. N. Liu, Y. Y. Zhou, X. Y. Ren and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7310–7337 RSC .
Q. Shao, P. Wang, S. Liu and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20478–20493 RSC .
F. Li, H. Shu, X. Liu, Z. Shi, P. Liang and X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14434–14442 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarapuu, E. Kibena-Põldsepp, M. Borghei and K. Tammeveski, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 776–804 RSC .
R. Choi, S.-I. Choi, C. H. Choi, K. M. Nam, S. I. Woo, J. T. Park and S. W. Han, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8190–8198 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Li, B. A. Lu, L. Gan, N. Tian, P. Y. Zhang, W. Yan, W. X. Chen, Y. H. Chen, Z. Y. Zhou and S. G. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 2173–2180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takahashi, N. Todoroki, R. Myochi, T. Nagao, N. Taguchi, T. Ioroi, F. E. Feiten, Y. Wakisaka, K. Asakura, O. Sekizawa, T. Sakata, K. Higashi, T. Uruga, Y. Iwasawa and T. Wadayama, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 842, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jang, E. Lee, J. Park, G. Kim, S. Hong and Y.-U. Kwon, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2872 CrossRef .
A. M. Jauhar, F. M. Hassan, Z. P. Cano, M. A. Hoque and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701508 CrossRef .
J. Guo, Q. Niu, Y. Yuan, I. Maitlo, J. Nie and G. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 118–123 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Thanh, N. D. Chuong, H. Van Hien, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4672–4681 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, B. Chen, J. Guo, J. Nie, X. Guo and G. Ma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 RSC .
S. Sui, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Su, S. Riffat and C. Jun Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1808–1825 RSC .
N. I. Kim, Y. J. Sa, T. S. Yoo, S. R. Choi, R. A. Afzal, T. Choi, Y. S. Seo, K. S. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, W. S. Choi, S. H. Joo and J. Y. Park, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, aap9360 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh and R. N. Basu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11241–11280 RSC .
S. Siahrostami, S. J. Villegas, A. H. Bagherzadeh Mostaghimi, S. Back, A. B. Farimani, H. Wang, K. A. Persson and J. Montoya, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7495–7511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Shan, M. Yang and J. Wang, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 78 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Woo, J. S. Lim, J. H. Kim and S. H. Joo, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 7350–7361 RSC .
K. Singh, F. Razmjooei and J. S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20095–20119 RSC .
C. Xia, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, L. Fan and H. Wang, Science, 2019, 366, 226–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Xia, C. Xia and H. Wang, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 942–953 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, X. Zhao, C. Xia, Z.-Y. Wu, P. Zhu, J. Y. Kim, X. Bai, G. Gao, Y. Hu, J. Zhong, Y. Liu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628–7658 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, L. Gao, G. Zeng, M. Li and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. Diascro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8195–8217 RSC .
H. Y. Kim, T. Kwon, Y. Ha, M. Jun, H. Baik, H. Y. Jeong, H. Kim, K. Lee and S. H. Joo, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 7413–7421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng and S. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 335–351 CrossRef .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Kong, L. Wang, S. Wang, W. Chen, R. Mao, L. Turyanska, G. Jia and X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100438 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jackson, A. Strickler, D. Higgins and T. F. Jaramillo, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 38 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Takimoto, T. Ohnishi, J. Nutariya, Z. Shen, Y. Ayato, D. Mochizuki, A. Demortière, A. Boulineau and W. Sugimoto, J. Catal., 2017, 345, 207–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirovic, K. Sasaki, A. U. Nilekar, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12480–12481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli, K. Gong, M. B. Vukmirovic, W. P. Zhou, E. Sutter, S. S. Wong and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9783–9795 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Strickler, A. Jackson and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 244–249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, F. Masini, A. F. Pedersen, M. Escudero-Escribano, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, T. W. Hansen, D. Friebel, A. Nilsson, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 297–307 CrossRef .
K. Gong, D. Su and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14364–14366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Y. Yang, F. J. Disalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7248–7255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, L. Xiao, Y. Yang, F. J. Disalvo and H. D. Abruña, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1532–1539 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xia, Y. Liu, Z. Wei, S. Chen, K. Xiong, L. Li, W. Ding, J. Hu, L. J. Wan, R. Li and S. F. Alvia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14443–14448 RSC .
S. Dai, J. P. Chou, K. W. Wang, Y. Y. Hsu, A. Hu, X. Pan and T. Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 440 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jung, C. Lee, K. Bang, J. Lim, H. Lee, H. J. Ryu, E. Cho and H. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31806–31815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mezzavilla, C. Baldizzone, A. C. Swertz, N. Hodnik, E. Pizzutilo, G. Polymeros, G. P. Keeley, J. Knossalla, M. Heggen, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and F. Schüth, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8058–8068 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oh, H. Baik, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Cheon, B. Kim, H. Kim, S. J. Kwon, S. H. Joo, Y. Jung and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 3, 2856–2867 CrossRef .
X. Chen, H. Wang, H. Wan, T. Wu, D. Shu, L. Shen, Y. Wang, P. Ruterana, P. D. Lund and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 280–287 CrossRef CAS .
F. Godínez-Salomón, C. P. Rhodes, K. S. Alcantara, Q. Zhu, S. E. Canton, H. A. Calderon, J. L. Reyes-Rodríguez, M. A. Leyva and O. Solorza-Feria, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 958–969 CrossRef .
H. Y. Park, J. H. Park, P. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Chen, K. Chen, F. Quan and C. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
W. An and P. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6328–6336 CrossRef CAS .
W. An and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16144–16149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, J. Snyder, M. Chi, D. Li, K. L. More, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6361–6367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, C. Li, H. Liu, F. Ye and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11949 CrossRef .
H. U. Park, A. H. Park, W. Shi, G. G. Park and Y. U. Kwon, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 58, 104673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, S. Miao and B.-Q. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4668–4677 RSC .
A. L. Strickler, M. Escudero-Escribano and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6040–6046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, M. Luo, Y. Sun, C. Li, B. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Li, L. Wang and S. Guo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5581–5590 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Yin, Y. Xu, X. Li, A. A. Alshehri, Y. Yamauchi, H. Xue, Y. V. Kaneti and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8662–8668 RSC .
S. K. Singh, K. Takeyasu and J. Nakamura, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804297 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Li, P. X. Hou and C. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1702002 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Zhang, Z. Geng and J. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9817–9844 RSC .
E. Yoo, J. Nakamura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6928–6932 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Zhao, H. Yu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14706–14712 RSC .
D. W. Kim, O. L. Li and N. Saito, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 407–413 RSC .
S. Zhong, L. Zhou, L. Wu, L. Tang, Q. He and J. Ahmed, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 344–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, L.-L. Cui, Z. Dou, X. Ge, X. He, W. Zhang and T. Asefa, Small, 2020, 16, 2000742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, D. H. Kwak, S. B. Han, Y. W. Lee, J. Y. Lee, I. A. Choi, H. S. Park, J. Y. Park and K. W. Park, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5095–5102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, D. Gehrig, F. Zhang, C. Lu, C. Zhang, M. Cai, Y. Wang, F. Laquai, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8255–8265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Xu, J. Wang, S. Jin and B. Tan, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4200 CrossRef .
W. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Chen, M. Liu and J. Jia, Carbon, 2019, 147, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Zhang, F. He, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, D. Wang, S. Mu and H. Y. Yang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 65 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, X. Li, Z. Wang, G. Yan, H. Guo, Q. Hu, L. Li, Y. Liu and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, J. Guo, B. Chen, J. Nie, X. Guo and G. Ma, Carbon, 2017, 114, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604942 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Hou, R. C. T. Slade, J. Wang, D. Shi, D. Wexler, H. Liu and J. Chen, Front. Chem., 2016, 4, 36 Search PubMed .
G. Ren, X. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Dai and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4118–4125 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Liu, X. Yue, J. Jia and S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, M. B. Vukmirovic, D. Su, K. Sasaki, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, S. Liao and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1748–1753 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Wang, H. Inada, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Choi, P. Liu, W.-P. Zhou and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17299–17302 Search PubMed .
L. Zhou, B. Deng, Z. Jiang and Z.-J. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 525–528 RSC .
J. Guan, S. Yang, T. Liu, Y. Yu, J. Niu, Z. Zhang and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21899–21904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, Q. Shao, F. Lv, L. Bu, J. Guo, S. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1800178 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, H. Gao, S. Lu, X. Zhang, C.-Y. Wang, W.-K. Wang and H.-Q. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9233–9240 RSC .
P. W. Xiao, L. Zhao, Z. Y. Sui and B. H. Han, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 6038–6045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. Fu, X. Wang and X. Guo, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 4173–4181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, C. T. J. Low, R. I. Walton, T. McNally and C. Wan, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 5632–5641 RSC .
D. Dong, X. Guo, C. Ma, L. Gong, L. Su, T. Xie, Y. Zhu and J. Wang, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 24, 101127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Sa, J. Woo and S. H. Joo, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 1077–1100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, K. Li, D. Cheng, W. L. Pang, J. Lv, X. Chen, H. Y. Zang, X. L. Wu, H. Q. Tan, Y. H. Wang and Y. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7762–7769 RSC .
Y. Xu, P. Deng, G. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Yan, K. Qi, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906081 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lv, W. Si, J. He, L. Sun, C. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Li, X. Wang, W. Deng, Y. Long, C. Huang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3376 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Naumov, S. Naumov, B. Abel and A. Varga, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6724–6733 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Dai, J. Li, L. Zhao, Z. Ren, Y. Ren, Y. Qiu and J. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 4673–4682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, X. Yu, L. Cao, B. Zhang, X. Wu, F. Xie, W. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Xie, W. Mai and H. Meng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 13493–13503 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wassner, M. Eckardt, C. Gebauer, N. Hüsing and R. J. Behm, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 1641–1654 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wassner, M. Eckardt, C. Gebauer, G. R. Bourret, N. Hüsing and R. J. Behm, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 367–381 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Gebremariam, F. Chen, Q. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wang and A. Qaseem, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1612–1625 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, Y. Liu, X. Huang and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22277–22286 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, X. Guo, C. He and C. Duan, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7935–7947 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali, A. Dhakshinamoorthy and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15188–15205 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fang, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, Y. Li and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3638–3687 RSC .
S. A. Hira, M. Nallal, K. Rajendran, S. Song, S. Park, J. M. Lee, S. H. Joo and K. H. Park, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1118, 26–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, T. Huang, Z. Wen, S. Mao, S. Cui and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400337 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. Ding, R. Zhu and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15519–15540 RSC .
H. F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 44, 2168–2201 Search PubMed .
X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4634–4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. He, Y. Wang, X. Lv, X. Gu, P. Dai, D. Liu and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1964–1988 RSC .
A. Kim, N. Muthuchamy, C. Yoon, S. H. Joo and K. H. Park, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 138 CrossRef .
W. Xue, Q. Zhou, X. Cui, S. Jia, J. Zhang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106073 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, T. Huang, Y. Sun, B. Kang, D. Liang, S. Yao, J. Yu, M. M. Dinesh, S. Wu, J. Y. Lee and S. Mao, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 185–195 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liang, H. Zhang, X. Ma, S. Liu, J. Mao, H. Fang, J. Yu, Z. Guo and T. Huang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 27, 100433 CrossRef .
N. Sikdar, B. Konkena, J. Masa, W. Schuhmann and T. K. Maji, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 18049–18056 CrossRef CAS .
T. Singh, C. Das, N. Bothra, N. Sikdar, S. Das, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3160–3170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Zhang, M. Kiani, Y. Chen, J. Chen, G. Wang, S. H. Chan and R. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 12087–12095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, W. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Jia, Y. Ke, L. Yang, K. Zhou, X. Liu, Z. Tang, L. Li and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1045–1053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, S. Lei, A. C. Wang, L. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104525 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Z. Yang, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16811–16831 RSC .
M. Thomas, R. Illathvalappil, S. Kurungot, B. N. Nair, A. A. P. Mohamed, G. M. Anilkumar, T. Yamaguchi and U. S. Hareesh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29373–29382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. You, J. Du, Y. Dai, H. Chen, Z. Cai, N. Ren and J. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25853–25864 RSC .
X. Chen, K. Shen, J. Chen, B. Huang, D. Ding, L. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 330, 736–745 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. Xing, B. Jiang, Y. Yu, Z. Cai, J. Li and J. Zou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4194–4206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Kou, Q. Jin, Y. Liu, F. Yin, C. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Ma, Y. Ren, N. Liu and B. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1590–1597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, L. Wan, X. Wang, Q. Kuang, S. Dong, F. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3794–3800 RSC .
Z. Zhen, Z. Jiang, X. Tian, L. Zhou, B. Deng, B. Chen and Z. J. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14462–14472 RSC .
N. Senthilkumar, G. Gnana Kumar and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702207 CrossRef .
X. X. Liu, J. B. Zang, L. Chen, L. B. Chen, X. Chen, P. Wu, S. Y. Zhou and Y. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5865–5872 RSC .
X. Hai, X. Zhao, N. Guo, C. Yao, C. Chen, W. Liu, Y. Du, H. Yan, J. Li, Z. Chen, X. Li, Z. Li, H. Xu, P. Lyu, J. Zhang, M. Lin, C. Su, S. J. Pennycook, C. Zhang, S. Xi and J. Lu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5862–5870 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, C. Chen, J. Xi, Y. Xu, F. Xiao, S. Wang and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7056–7064 CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Tian, Z. Qian, T. Ouyang, M. Saunders, J. Qin, S. Wang, M. O. Tadé and H. Sun, Carbon, 2018, 133, 306–315 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Peera, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Small, 2018, 14, 1800441 CrossRef .
W. Y. Noh, E. M. Kim, K. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, P. Sharma, G. Lee, J. W. Jang, S. H. Joo and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18891–18902 RSC .
M. Yusuf, M. Nallal, K. M. Nam, S. Song, S. Park and K. H. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 325, 134938 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Mao, Y. Hou, L. Lei and C. Yuan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3292–3298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Yu, X. Li, L. Zhang, D. Luo, X. Liu, X. Liu, S. Liu, H. Feng, G. Wu, P. Guo, H. Li, Z. Wang and X. S. Zhao, Carbon, 2018, 127, 636–642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Xie, A. Liu, W. Jia and Y. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 566, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, H. Xiao, P. Wang, P. Su, Z. Shao and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11768–11775 RSC .
J. Tong, Y. Li, L. Bo, W. Wang, T. Li and Q. Zhang, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 692 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. Sun, T. Yang, S. Deng, M. Wu and Z. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, D. Ma, A. C. Foucher, L. Xiong, J. Zhang, E. A. Stach, Q. Yue and Y. Kang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Xia, Q. Yang, Y. Valentino Kaneti, X. Xu, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, M. S. A. Hossain, J. Na, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, R. Ma, Y. Zhou, R. Xing, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu and J. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 261, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, X. Fu, Q. Liu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10538–10545 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Yan, C. Zhu, B. Geng, Y. Chen and S. Chou, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, X. Zhang, F. Yan, B. Geng, C. Zhu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18162–18172 RSC .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 RSC .
A. Ejaz and S. Jeon, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 5690–5702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ejaz, Y. Joo and S. Jeon, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 297–307 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, B. Lu, L. Li, W. Niu, Z. Tang, X. Kang and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6827–6836 CrossRef CAS .
H. Begum, M. S. Ahmed and Y.-B. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 12431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Faisal, E. Haque, N. Noorbehesht, W. Zhang, A. T. Harris, T. L. Church and A. I. Minett, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17950–17958 RSC .
X. Ning, Y. Li, J. Ming, Q. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Cao, F. Peng, Y. Yang and H. Yu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1589–1596 RSC .
R. Wang, D. C. Higgins, M. A. Hoque, D. Lee, F. Hassan and Z. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2431 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Park, Y. J. Jang, Y. J. Kim, M. S. Song, S. Yoon, D. H. Kim and S. J. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 103–109 RSC .
H. Tavakol and F. Keshavarzipour, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63084–63090 RSC .
W. Yan, X. Cao, J. Tian, C. Jin, K. Ke and R. Yang, Carbon, 2016, 99, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Huang, Y. C. Lin, S. T. Chang, C. C. Liu, K. C. Wang, H. P. Jhong, J. F. Lee and C. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19790–19799 RSC .
D. K. Perivoliotis, Y. Sato, K. Suenaga and N. Tagmatarchis, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3869–3880 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Z. Wei and X. Gou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4133–4142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3257–3261 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Alsabban, X. Yang, W. Wahyudi, J. H. Fu, M. N. Hedhili, J. Ming, C. W. Yang, M. A. Nadeem, H. Idriss, Z. Lai, L. J. Li, V. Tung and K. W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20752–20761 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Ni, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2645–2653 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheng, Z. Wang, C. Chen and K. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8026–8034 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Ma, M. Cui, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. Su, C. B. Murray, J. X. Wang and S. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7870–7875 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Dar, M. A. Ud Din, M. U. Hameed, S. Ali, R. Akram, Z. Wu and D. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, S. J. Yoo, D. Ahn, S. K. Kim, S. J. Hwang, Y. E. Sung, H. J. Kim, E. Cho, D. Henkensmeier, T. H. Lim and J. H. Jang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8802–8810 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Periasamy, R. Ravindranath, P. Roy, W. P. Wu, H. T. Chang, P. Veerakumar and S. Bin Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12987–12994 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Z. Guo, L. Zhang, T. Hou and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17427–17434 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Meng, S. Huang, S. He, X. Li, S. Tong and M. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15582–15590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .
J. Zhu, C. He, Y. Li, S. Kang and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14700–14705 RSC .
B. Dahal, S. H. Chae, A. Muthurasu, T. Mukhiya, J. Gautam, K. Chhetri, S. Subedi, G. P. Ojha, A. P. Tiwari, J. H. Lee and H. Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227883 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Dong, X. Chen, G. Xin, Y. Zhang and J. Zang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 194, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pei, R. Ding, X. Yu and L. Feng, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4617–4623 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, R. Li, G. Ma, X. Gou, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20674–20684 RSC .
C. Han, Q. Li, D. Wang, Q. Lu, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703642 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Lin, X. Ren, H. Mi, P. Zhang, L. Sun, L. Deng and Y. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 445–454 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Kim, J. M. Kim, Y. Ha, J. Woo, A. Byun, T. J. Shin, K. H. Park, H. Y. Jeong, H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11242–11254 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chinnadurai, M. Nallal, H. J. Kim, O. L. Li, K. H. Park and K. Prabakar, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2348–2355 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajendiran, M. Nallal, K. H. Park, O. L. Li, H. J. Kim and K. Prabakar, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, Q. R. Pan, X. T. Wu, N. Li, J. H. Song and Z. Q. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6335–6344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Yin, K. Eid, Y. Li, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Xue and L. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11768–11774 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, H. Liu, Y. Jia, L. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang and X. Yao, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100083 CrossRef .
C. Wei, Z. Feng, G. G. Scherer, J. Barber, Y. Shao-Horn and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606800 CrossRef .
J. Shin, J. H. Choi, P. R. Cha, S. K. Kim, I. Kim, S. C. Lee and D. S. Jeong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15830–15839 RSC .
S. Specchia, P. Atanassov and J. H. Zagal, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 27, 100687 CrossRef CAS .
T. Marshall-Roth, N. J. Libretto, A. T. Wrobel, K. J. Anderton, M. L. Pegis, N. D. Ricke, T. Van Voorhis, J. T. Miller and Y. Surendranath, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Asset and P. Atanassov, Joule, 2020, 4, 33–44 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Holby, G. Wu, P. Zelenay and C. D. Taylor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14388–14393 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fazio, L. Ferrighi and C. Di Valentin, J. Catal., 2014, 318, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Q. Zhi, L. Gong, Y. Shen, D. Sun, Y. Guo, L. Zhang and Z. Xia, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19375–19382 RSC .
T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 400–406 RSC .
D.
S. He, D. He, J. Wang, Y. Lin, P. Yin, X. Hong, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1494–1497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L. Niu, Z. Zhang, L. Yan and L. Chou, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 2018, 1734040 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Cheng, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Xu and S. Guo, Small, 2016, 12, 2839–2845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, L. Wang, Y. Gao and G. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 3625–3635 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, B. Chen, X. Wang, J. Nie and G. Ma, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 231–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhao, M. Cheng, A. Li and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 1–7 CrossRef .
F. Li, Z. Chen, P. Shi, P. Tan, G. Li and Y. Liu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 100, 230–238 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Yuan, S. Chen and Z. F. Ma, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 1427–1435 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Xu, H. Chai, Y. Wang, D. Jia and W. Zhou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 838, 16–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, D. Lin, J. Zhao, C. Liu, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1213–1222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Yang, M. Li, L. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Lv, Z. Qin, X. Zhao, P. Zhu and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, H. Chen, D. Yang, Y. Gao and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 152–159 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Li, N. Xu and G. Zhang, Carbon, 2018, 132, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, P. Zhao, X. Hua, W. Luo, S. Chen and G. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11357–11364 RSC .
S. Zhao, H. Yin, L. Du, L. He, K. Zhao, L. Chang, G. Yin, H. Zhao, S. Liu and Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12660–12668 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, R. Zou, L. An, D. Xia and S. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 568–576 RSC .
J. Xi, Y. Xia, Y. Xu, J. Xiao and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10479–10482 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Fu, W. Li, X. Fan, G. Xin, J. Zheng and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14064–14070 RSC .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. Bin Wu, X. W. D. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Liang, B. Kong, J. Zhang, J. Song, Q. Bao, G. P. Simon, S. P. Jiang and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5768–5777 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 RSC .
R. Gao, Q. Dai, F. Du, D. Yan and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11658–11666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Meng, J. Qin, S. Wang, D. Zhao, B. Mao and M. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7001–7014 RSC .
M. Shen, C. Ruan, Y. Chen, C. Jiang, K. Ai and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1207–1218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, Y. Luo, S. He, P. Tang, D. Li, N. Alonso-Vante and Y. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2541–2549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Destro, K. Horkka, O. Loreau, D. A. Buisson, L. Kingston, A. Del Vecchio, M. Schou, C. S. Elmore, F. Taran, T. Cantat and D. Audisio, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13490–13495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Huang, Y. Luo, S. Li, B. Zhang, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1054–1064 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, G. M. Veith, R. E. Diaz, J. Liu, E. A. Stach, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10753–10757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Q. Zhu and A. W. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11027–11033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Liu, M. Ko, M. Park, M. G. Kim, P. Oh, S. Chae, S. Park, A. Casimir, G. Wu and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5799–5808 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Cheng, H. Zhao and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9915–9922 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Han, X. Qin and M. Zhao, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 2282–2288 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Gao, X. Liang, H. Zhang, H. Xiao, P. Xu and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2019, 150, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, H. Qin, J. Jia, Z. Ji, H. Chi, H. Ni, J. Wang, Y. He and J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 769, 136–140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, C. Li, T. Chen, L. Cui, J. Han, Z. Peng and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 699–706 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Huang, C. Y. Su, K. C. Wang, H. Y. Chen, Y. C. Chang, Y. L. Chen, K. C. W. Wu and C. H. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3185–3194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, X. Guo and G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liang, L. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, Y. Fang, W. Xia and Y. N. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Guo and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21353–21361 RSC .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
Q. L. Zhu, W. Xia, T. Akita, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6391–6398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, L. Hu, W. Hong, X. Jia, J. Li and E. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4167–4173 RSC .
C. Wu, Y. Zhang, D. Dong, H. Xie and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12432–12440 RSC .
K. Kohila Rani, C. Karuppiah, S. F. Wang, S. O. Alaswad, P. Sireesha, R. Devasenathipathy, R. Jose and C. C. Yang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 66, 105111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, J. Dong, Y. Luo, P. An, J. Liu, X. Wu, G. Xu, H. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2649–2657 RSC .
Z. Cai, I. Yamada and S. Yagi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5847–5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1703748 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Wu, C. Zhong, Y. Deng, N. Zhao and W. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 541–550 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, M. Qiao, W. Li, Y. Lu, T. Zhao, R. Zou, B. Li, J. A. Darr, J. Hu, M. M. Titirici and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600214 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ao, W. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Ding, G. Nam, L. Soule, A. Abdelhafiz, C. Wang and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3032–3040 RSC .
X. Tian, X. Zhao, Y.-Q. Su, L. Wang, H. Wang, D. Dang, B. Chi, H. Liu, E. J. M. Hensen, X. W. Lou and B. Y. Xia, Science, 2019, 366, 850–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, P. Tsiakaras and P. K. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. N. Banis, K. Adair, Z. Song, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, J. Li, S. Wang, R. Li, S. Ye and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Jia, G. Chang, J. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Xia, D. Yang and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 2345–2356 CAS .
Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Huang, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Wang and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 742–749 RSC .
Q. Shi, F. Peng, S. Liao, H. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Liu, B. Zhang and D. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14853–14857 RSC .
C. H. Choi, M. W. Chung, H. C. Kwon, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3694–3699 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Sun, H. Liang, H. Ji, L. Song, C. Gao and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4606–4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Liu, L. Zheng and J. Shui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1204–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, G. Hu, S. Zhao, X. Meng, F. Meng, C. Li and Y. Cong, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2021, 16, 21079 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y.-G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R.-A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W.-C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, A. Zhao, W. Xia, Z. Sun, B. Mei, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Xing, K. Xu, Y. Tong, H. Xie, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 610–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Sa, H. Y. Jeong and S. H. Joo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9567–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Malko, A. Kucernak and T. Lopes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16056–16068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, D. Xu, C. Wang, J. Guo and F. Yan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701641 CrossRef .
J. Xiao, Y. Xia, C. Hu, J. Xi and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11114–11123 RSC .
H. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Y. Xu, S. Dong, J. Xiao, F. Wang, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10610–10617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zou, Y. Yan, S. Xie, G. Hu, Y. Li and A. Dong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2003–2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mulyadi, Z. Zhang, M. Dutzer, W. Liu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 336–346 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, T. Asefa, H. Guo, A. V. Biradar, D. L. Peng, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540–7590 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Zou, Y. Meng, E. Mikmeková, H. Chen, D. Voiry, A. Goswami, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1978–1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, X. Zou, X. Yan, C. L. Brown, Z. Chen, G. Zhu and X. Yao, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 417–421 RSC .
Y. Jiang, L. Yang, T. Sun, J. Zhao, Z. Lyu, O. Zhuo, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma and Z. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6707–6712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, W. Li, S. Li, J. Zhang, H. Zhou, C. Zhang, J. Zhang and S. Mu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800563 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rauf, J. Wang, W. Iqbal, M. Abbas, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, X. Ren, P. Zhang and Y. Li, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, F. M. Hassan, C. Zhong, J. Lu, H. Liu, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702526 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Li, X. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7155–7161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Hayashi, Q. Meng, Q. Wang, H. Liu, K. Hashimoto and L. Jiang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601250 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Saravanan Nagappan	Saravanan Nagappan is working as a Post-Doc Fellow under Professor Kang-Hyun Park in the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research studies include the synthesis and fabrication of various organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, MXene, graphene, carbon, and nanoclay based materials for coatings, catalysis, environmental-remediation, biomedical, electrocatalysis, and energy storage and conversion applications.
Malarkodi Duraivel	Malarkodi Duraivel is pursuing PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (September 2018) under the supervision of Professor Kandasamy Prabakar at Pusan National University, Korea. Her current research focuses on the development of low cost and efficient electrocatalysts for energy conversion applications including water splitting and oxygen reduction reaction.
Shamim Ahmed Hira	Shamim Ahmed Hira has completed PhD (August, 2021) in the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials under the supervision of Professor Kang Hyun Park at Pusan National University, Korea. His research work focuses on the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks and their composite materials and their application in electrochemical sensors as well as in energy applications.
Kandasamy Prabakar	Kandasamy Prabakar is a Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea. His current research is focused on the development of various nanohybrid electrodes for energy conversion and storage applications. Especially, he is working on the development of novel electrodes for hybrid capacitors, photo-electrocatalytic hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions for total water-splitting and reduction reactions for metal air batteries.
Chang-Sik Ha	Chang-Sik Ha is a University Distinguished Professor at the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests are polyimides for flexible substrates, organic/inorganic nanohybrid materials, mesoporous materials, carbon, and graphene based materials for wide variety of applications.
Sang Hoon Joo	Sang Hoon Joo is a Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, Korea. His research group focuses on the development of electrocatalysts for energy conversion reactions and molecular-level understanding of structure–catalytic property relationships.
Ki Min Nam	Ki Min Nam is an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests are the phase control of metal and metal oxide nanocrystals, and inorganic materials for electrocatalytic reactions.
Kang Hyun Park	Kang Hyun Park is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute for Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Korea. His research interests include the development of new transition metal-nanoparticle catalyzed reactions. Currently, his research interest focused on the development of multifunctional nanohybrid materials for electrocatalysis, especially on the synthesis of multifunctional nanohybrid electrodes for fuel cell and battery applications.

 	Fig. 1  Number of papers published under the topics of (a) core–shell nanostructures, (b) heteroatom doping, (c) oxygen reduction reaction, (d) heteroatoms for the oxygen reduction reaction from 2011–2020 (source: https://apps.webofknowledge.com/).	 

 	Fig. 2  Various routes of synthesis of HCSNs for the ORR.	 
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2 (two electron process)	(1)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	(2)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O (four electron process)	(3)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → H2O− + OH− (two electron process)	(4)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−	(5)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (four electron process)	(6)
*OOH + (H+ + e−) → *O + H2O	(7)
*OOH + (H+ + e−) → H2O2	(8)

 	Fig. 3  An overview illustration of M@C composites, where the metal core can be a noble metal (Pt, palladium (Pd), ruthenium (Ru), gold (Au), etc.), non-noble metal (iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu), tin (Sn), etc.), or their alloy, and the carbon shell varies in thickness, ranging from carbon nanotubes (CNTs), to graphene, and graphitic carbon with or without dopants (nitrogen (N), sulfur (S), phosphorous (P), boron (B), etc.). These catalysts can be used for the ORR, OER, HER, and carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and devices such as overall water splitting and rechargeable metal–air batteries. A third component material such as metal oxide, Fe3C, Co9S8, CoP, Co(OH)2, etc., can also be integrated as part of the core or shell, or with the M@C materials forming a more complicated composite structure with a further enhanced performance. Adapted with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the two pathway mechanisms of the (a) heteroatom doped carbon material (adapted the idea from ref. 101 and redrawn the image, copyright © 2016, The American Association for the Advancement of Science) as well as (b) heteroatom doped core–shell carbon nanostructure for the ORR.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis procedure. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route of MCO/CNFs@NC catalysts. MCO is MnCo2O4, CNFs is carbon nanofibers, and NC is nitrogen-doped carbon. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route and structural model of N-doped CoCx/FeCo@C/RGO (a); TEM images of the Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 MOF (b), and single nanoparticle of Fe-doped Co3[Co(CN)6]2 (c). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier Inc. (B) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Co@DNC@FeS2. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the formation of the locally and globally engineered structure of Co–N3C1@GC. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the step-by-step synthetic procedure of the PdFS-CSN electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Fe–N–C catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustrative scheme of the preparation of the Pd@NiNPs/SG hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic procedure for synthesizing the Co2P@am-FePO4 core–shell electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the process for preparing NB-CPs; corresponding TEM images of the carbon particles (A and B) and NB-CPs (C and D). Reproduced from ref. 99. with permission from Elsevier B.V.	 
	(9)
B = 0.62nFACoDo2/3v−1/6	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of different catalysts in O2- and N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, (b) LSV curves, (c) K–L curves, and (d) the electron transfer number of different catalysts. (e) Capacitive current density of the different catalysts as a function of scan rates. (f) EIS curves of different catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Deduced reaction mechanisms of the ORR on the Co@DNC@FeS2 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the ORR process catalyzed by Zn/Co@C-NCNFs. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.	 
ΔGads = ΔEads + ΔEZPE − TΔS	(13)
O2(g) + 4(H+ + e−) → 2H2O(aq)	(14)
O2(g) + 2H2O(aq) + 4e− → 4OH−	(15)

 	Fig. 13  Volcano plots for the (a) ORR on different sites of armchair and zigzag graphene nanoribbons, (b) free energy diagram for the ORR on site 1 for the Z2 structure (Z2-1) at different electrode potentials U, (c) ORR overpotential versus the distance from the edge to N atoms. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier Inc. (d and e) The free energy (ΔGw/sol) diagram for the ORR reaction catalyzed by B-doped graphene under acidic conditions (pH = 0) and alkaline conditions (pH = 14). Reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  Bar charts showing (a) electrochemically active surface areas, (b) specific activities, and (c) mass activities of Pt/C, PtNi/C (with Pt-skeleton), and Ni@Au@PtNi/C (with quasi Pt-skin) electrocatalysts before and after 10000 cycles of electrochemical cycling up to 1.1 V. The activity is normalized to the kinetic current density measured at 0.95 V. The specific activity is the activity normalized to the ECSA measured by CO-stripping. (d) TEM images of Pt, PtNi, and Ni@Au@PtNi nanoparticles before and after 10000 cycles up to 1.1 V. All the images are at a size of 100 nm × 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

Co–C@NWCs	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.83	3.99	
118

MCO/CNFs@NC	0.1 M KOH	1.0	0.76	4.00	
132

N-doped Fe/Fe3C@C/RGO	0.1 M KOH	1.00	0.93	3.08–3.52	
139

Co@NPC@FeS2-0.5	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.84	3.86–3.88	
157

CoO@Co/NRGO	0.1 M KOH	0.95	0.81	3.97	
162

Co–C@NWCs	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.83	3.82–3.99	
236

1.0S–Fe/N/C	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.75	4.01	
237

PMSEPE/MIL-101(Fe)-800	0.1 M KOH	0.94	—	3.79	
238

N–Fe/G	0.1 M KOH	0.93	0.83	4.01–4.06	
239

Fe–MnOx/N-KB	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.78	3.72–3.92	
240

FeN-CNT/CS	0.1 M KOH	—	0.78	>3.98	
241

FN-B-800	0.1 M KOH	0.82	—	3.81	
242

Fe/Fe3C@N-RGO	0.1 M KOH	0.95	0.82	∼4.00	
243

Ionogel-Fe–C–N	0.1 M KOH	1.00	0.87	3.99	
244

Fe–N/C-900	0.1 M KOH	0.04	−0.07	3.94	
245

(Co@NPC-900)	0.1 M KOH	1.05	0.82	3.96	
246

FeNC-20-1000	0.1 M KOH	1.04	0.77	3.99	
247

MIL-88B-Fe CNPs	0.1 M KOH	1.03	0.92	3.97	
248

Co@Co3O4@C–CM	0.1 M KOH	0.93	0.81	3.8–3.9	
249

(Fe,Co)@GNC	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.85	3.70	
250

NHPC-900-1000	0.1 M KOH	0.96	0.84	3.80	
251

ZIF-67 derived NCNTF-700	0.1 M KOH	0.97	—	3.70	
252

Zn-ZIF/GO-800	0.1 M KOH	0.96	—	4.00	
253

ZIF-derived carbon-L	0.1 M KOH	0.86	0.70	3.68	
254

C60-SWCNT	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.84	—	
255

Co0.85Se@NC	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.82	3.98	
256

Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.81	3.80	
257

Co/CoNx/CNT	0.1 M KOH	0.90	0.80	3.77	
258

GO–PANI–FP	0.1 M KOH	0.90	0.75	3.85	
259

CoO@Co/N–C	0.1 M KOH	0.97	0.82	∼4.00	
260

Co0.50Mo0.50OyNz/C	0.1 M KOH	0.92	0.76	3.85–3.9	
261

Fe–N/C-800	0.1 M KOH	0.92	0.81	3.96	
262

Co–CoO/N-RGO	0.1 M KOH	0.88	0.78	3.7–3.9	
263

Fe-NGM/C–Fe SAC	0.1 M KOH	1.05	0.86	4.15	
264

N-doped graphene derived carbon nitride	0.1 M KOH	1.03	0.92	3.97	
265

CS-Co/NG-650	0.1 M KOH	0.03	−0.15	3.80	
266


Ni3S2/NiS/NOSC-900	0.1 M KOH	0.87	0.72	4.00	
206

CoxSy@C-1000	0.1 M KOH	−0.04	∼−0.02	3.69–3.78	
212

CoS NWs@NSC-2	0.1 M KOH	0.93	0.84	3.93	
213

Co0.5Fe0.5S@NMC	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.81	3.8–4.0	
257

Fe3C@Fe,N,S-GCM	0.1 M KOH	0.98	0.78	3.92	
267

FeS–PPy–BP	0.1 M KOH	0.89	—	3.83–3.91	
268

Co1−xS/SNG/CF	0.1 M KOH	0.99	—	3.93–3.98	
269

FeCN–S-800	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.76	3.99	
270

CoO@NS-CSs	0.1 M KOH	0.95	0.82	>3.90	
271

CD/NSPC	0.1 M KOH	0.98	0.85	3.7–3.97	
272

Co9S8/CNT	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.82	3.90	
273

N–Co9S8/G	0.1 M KOH	0.94	
	3.90	
274

Co9S8@CNS900	0.1 M KOH	0.92	0.80	3.98	
275

Co3S4–S/G-800	0.1 M KOH	0.92	0.80	3.96	
276

Co9S8/N,S-CNS	0.1 M KOH	0.90	—	3.80	
277

NS–GR/Fe3C	0.1 M KOH	1.04	0.86	3.96	
278

Co9S8@NSCM	0.1 M KOH	0.97	0.81	4.02	
279

Co9−xNixS8/NC	0.1 M KOH	0.91	0.86	3.85	
280

S–Co9−xFexS8@RGO	0.1 M KOH	0.94	0.84	3.97	
281

NiCo2S4@N-CNT	0.1 M KOH	0.93	0.80	3.82	
282

Co–S/SNGX	0.1 M KOH	0.90	0.66	3.90	
283

B0.5CNMs@C1.0	0.1 M KOH	0.90	0.72	3.80	
203

Co2P@am-FePO4	0.1 M KOH	1.00	0.91	4.00	
199


Ni@Pd3/C	0.1 M HClO4	0.99	0.87	3.91	
118

PtA@FeSA–N–C	0.1 M HClO4	1.01	0.923	—	
284

PtNi–BNCs/C	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.923	—	
285

Pt–Pd SBCNC	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.912	—	
286

NCNT-MLD-Pt	0.1 M HClO4	—	0.89	—	
287

N,S-CA	0.1 M HClO4	0.89	0.76	4.0	
288

0.5 M H2SO4	0.89	0.76
N,S-enriched hierarchically porous carbon	0.1 M HClO4	0.85	0.73	3.86–3.96	
289

0.5 M H2SO4	0.85	0.73
N/S co-doped carbon nanotubes	1 M HClO4	0.8	0.57	4.0	
290

B,N-doped graphene	0.1 M HClO4	0.86	0.61	4.0	
291

N and P-doped graphene	0.1 M HClO4	0.87	0.64	4.0	
291

N,P-doped CGHNs	0.1 M HClO4	0.90	0.68	4.0	
292

N,P-doped mesoporous carbon	0.1 M HClO4	0.82	0.62	4.0	
293

Fe2–Z8–C	0.5 M H2SO4	0.85	0.81	4.0	
294

GNCN-FeCo	0.5 M H2SO4	0.85	0.79	3.2	
295

ISAS-Co/HNCS	0.5 M H2SO4	0.85	0.77	3.87	
296

Fe-SAs/NPS-HC	0.5 M H2SO4	0.84	0.79	3.96–3.99	
297


 	Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic scheme for the preparation of CNT/PC catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 300 from the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Fe–N-SCCFs. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
