Sustainability of green solvents – review and perspective  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC03662A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC03662A
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 410-437Sustainability of green solvents – review and perspective

        
          
            Volker 
            Hessel
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Nam Nghiep 
            Tran
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Mahdieh Razi 
            Asrami
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Quy Don 
            Tran
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nguyen 
            Van Duc Long
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Marc 
            Escribà-Gelonch
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jose Osorio 
            Tejada
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Steffen 
            Linke
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Kai 
            Sundmacher
          
        
      fg
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, University of Adelaide, Australia. E-mail: volker.hessel@adelaide.edu.au; namnghiep.tran@adelaide.edu.au
bSchool of Engineering, University of Warwick, UK
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Can Tho University, Vietnam
dDepartment of Civil and Environment Engineering, University of Ulsan, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Chemistry, University of Lleida, Spain
fProcess Systems Engineering, Otto von Guericke University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany
gProcess Systems Engineering, Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg, Germany
Received 
      5th October 2021
    , Accepted 3rd December 2021First published on 3rd December 2021AbstractSolvents define pivotal properties for chemical processing and chemical reactions, and can be as game-changing as catalysts. A solvent can be the key to a good chemical process, rather than being just an asset and a reaction space. It determines the solubility, meaning the concentration at which reactants can be processed, determines the stability of excited states, and thus guides the potential-energy curves of activation. As a net outcome, solvents rule over productivity and economic/environmental benefit. Expanding the capabilities of conventional solvents, a new class of so-called master solvents has been proposed and investigated in the last two decades, which have also been termed “green” or “designer” solvents. They comprise first of all ionic liquids and supercritical carbon dioxide, yet also deep eutectic, thermomorphic and fluorous solvents. There is a vast literature on and experience with these solvents and their applications. However, their sustainability has been reported mostly by considering only one class of master solvent and hardly benchmarking several classes. Thus, a comparative, complete, and holistic view of their sustainability is missing. This perspective review aims to fill this gap and focuses on a holistic overview of sustainability assessments of master solvents. It encompasses green chemistry principles, life cycle assessments, and modern circularity evaluations based on the “10R framework”; standing for 10 principles starting with “R” such as recycling, reuse, repair, rethink, remanufacture, and so on. This review will show what “green” actually denotes and means for each class of master solvent when it comes to a ‘weighting’ by a certified sustainability assessment.
1. Introduction
Solvents define pivotal properties for chemical processing and chemical reactions. They can be as game changing as catalysts. They are a constitution part of the 12 Green Chemistry principles,1 which have widely changed the practices of organic chemists in the last 30 years, and solvents have gained similar importance for chemical process engineers making their designs under the auspices of circularity with its “10R framework”;2 standing for 10 principles starting with “R” such as recycling, reuse, repair, rethink, remanufacture, and so on. Today, solvent recycling is the most prominent outcome here. Solvents can do much more than to be simple carriers for reactants and reaction spaces for their interaction. They determine solubility, meaning the concentration at which reactants can be processed, finally determining productivity and economic benefit. They can also support the stability of excited states, and thus guide the potential-energy curves of activation.3 They can govern the stability and activity of the catalysts, including labile catalyst classes such as biocatalysts/enzymes or sophisticated transition metal catalysts.4 Solvents usually constitute 70–80% of the process medium and thus are crucial in reducing waste. Solvents can be reactants in the sense of reactive solvents. A sustainable and green solvent can solve issues related to the environment, cost, and contribute to the optimisation of the overall process.5 A solvent can be the key to a good chemical process, rather than just being an asset.
Against this background, specialty solvents were introduced in the last two decades, which have been termed “master” or “designer” or just “green”; for reasons of simplicity, we will use the latter term, which is also widely used in the literature. A vast number of reviews provide an overview of the features of green solvents and their applications.6–9 The green solvents considered in this paper comprise ionic liquids and supercritical carbon dioxide, as well as deep eutectic, thermomorphic and fluorous solvents. Some of them are widely used, even on a production level, such as ionic liquids; some have more specialty uses such as fluorous solvents. We consider all of them in this review paper, because we found that seeming curiosity solutions such as microfluidic devices can become essential enablers for industrial transformation as a key disruptive technology after 1–2 decades of serious, concerted development10,11—in a new shape and in “new clothes” as “continuous-flow manufacturing”. Early-stage sustainability assessments can be key to translating curiosity science into attractive industrially relevant applications. This is the first motif of this perspective review.
The second motif is to demystify the overarching assignment of “green” to the advanced solvents considered here and the promise behind coining them “master” or “designer”. We are aware that our perspective paper cannot solve such complex questions or the notable consequences of doing so; thus, we are critical in our approach and cautious in our conclusions. Yet, within such limits, we feel there is value in (1) compiling and summarising sustainability assessments made for “green solvents” and prudently generalising them, where justified and sensible, and (2) aiming for a direct benchmarking of those solvents in one model chemical process, an exercise which, to the best of our knowledge, is presented here for the first time. Again, benchmarking cannot be taken as a final answer; but this paper hopes to give the first answer. Those who specialise in sustainability assessments, and in particular in life cycle assessments, would agree that all conclusions that are made deal with a complexity of information and depend on the setting of system boundaries; which embrace the life cycle inventory, the methodology, and finally the question to be answered. This is to say, complexity is intrinsic to matters of sustainability, and assessments do not (always) provide simple, straightforward answers. Yet, we do our best here to give plain, understandable messages to our wide range of audience members, for example, chemical engineers and chemists who are interested in the choice of solvents, recognising their pivotal role in the control of chemical reactions.
To sum up and in simple words, the focus of this review is (only) the sustainability of green solvents, and not about green solvents themselves or their uncontradicted usefulness including some sustainability consideration; for which numerous reviews exist. Beyond just reviewing, an added original technical study translates the review into a perspective in its second part.
2. Classes of green solvent
2.1. Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids (ILs) are defined as a large category of salts that, due to differences in their cation and anion sizes, are normally liquid at a temperature less than 100 °C.12,13 Thermal and chemical stability along with negligible vapor pressure and low flammability coming from strong electrostatic forces between ions has turned ILs into “green solvents” based on the twelve principles of green chemistry (12th principle).14 Imidazolium, phosphonium, ammonium, and pyrrolidinium cations, with halides, bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) amide, tetrafluoroborate anions are the most common choices in recent studies.15–18 Since the physicochemical properties of ILs can be simply altered by changing the type of cation and anion, ILs are described as designer solvents. Accordingly, the application of ILs has expanded in various fields, such as solvent extraction,19,20 CO2 capture,21 battery technology,22 solar cells,23 catalysts,24 and medicine.25
ILs are highly tunable so, using an appropriate design of new structures with improved processes by adding electrolytes or applying efficient reactors can be very desirable.26,27 ILs are probably the class of master solvent being mostly employed on an industrial scale and have attracted attention at commercial scales. Examples are BASF in acid scavenging technology,28 the IoLiTec/Wanders purification process,29,30 Petronas,31 G24 power in dye-sensitised solar cell processes,32 Pionics and Nohms in a lithium-ion battery, and the Degussa,33 Linde and Clariant companies.34 The largest commercial-scale use of ILs was reported in April 2021 by Chevron and Honeywell using an industrial ISOALKY™ Ionic Liquids Alkylation unit.34
2.2. Deep eutectic solvents
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) were first introduced by Abbott et al.35 as a mixture of two or more chemicals, which had melting points much lower than their parent compounds. DESs share similar properties to ILs, such as high tunability for operation and high versatility in usage.36,37 The “greenest” of DESs have been further boosted with the recent discovery of natural deep eutectic solvents (NADES).38 NADES are made from plant-based primary metabolites, i.e. organic acids, sugars, alcohols, etc.39 Eutectic solvents have become greener, far more biocompatible40,41 and biodegradable42 than some unconventional solvent counterparts. Therefore, DESs have been widely applied in metal- and biocatalysed processes, in the synthesis of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) as well as other biologically active compounds.43
2.3. Supercritical carbon dioxide
Supercritical fluids (SCFs) are fluids operated at conditions slightly above their critical temperature (Tc) and pressure (Pc), and have been receiving increasing attention. They have not only the gaseous property of being able to penetrate anything, but also the liquid property of being able to dissolve materials.44 Their thermophysical properties can be adjusted by simply changing the operating conditions in terms of pressure and/or temperature. With simple expansion, they can separate a product, while a purification process is not required in the recovery and reuse of the gas.45
Due to the aforementioned remarkable properties, many applications of SCFs have been investigated as sustainable alternatives to reduce the consumption of numerous conventional organic solvents. The applications of SCFs include chemical extraction,46 purification,47 synthetic chemical reactions,48 polymer processing,49 and biocatalysis.50 Besides, supercritical fluids are also used in drying51 and cleaning,52 and in the energy domain.53 Recently, combining the advantages of size reduction provided by microsystems with the unique properties of SCFs to form supercritical microfluidics, which can address the limitations of both macroscale SCFs reactors and conventional liquid microfluidic reactors, has attracted increasing interest.54
2.4. Thermomorphic solvents
Thermomorphic solvents are switchable multicomponent solvent mixtures that change their phase state upon temperature change to provide beneficial phase conditions in different process steps.55,56 One of the most common applications of these thermomorphic solvent systems (TMSs) is homogeneously catalysed reactions, performed under single-phasic conditions supporting fast reaction kinetics by avoiding mass transfer limitations. Subsequently, upon cooling, the mixture is split into two liquid phases, allowing the separation of the catalytic species from the products.57–59 In particular, the recovery of the catalyst is usually the key challenge in such processes with regard to economics and sustainability.56,60 TMSs can be established by combining suitable conventional organic solvents, but the concept can also be realised by using deep eutectic solvents,61–63 ionic liquids64–67 or fluorous solvents.68,69 Typically, commercially available homogeneous catalysts and ligands can be used without the need for tailored modification.70 Apart from TMSs, thermomorphism is considered for energy-efficient CO2 capture processes71,72 which are not further discussed here.
The most intensively studied reaction in a TMS is hydroformylation, especially for long-chain olefins in the lab73–76 and at mini-plant scale.77–80 Besides that, telomerisation,81 metathesis82 and many other reactions were investigated.59 Recently, challenging hydroaminomethylation, in which water is formed as a co-product, was successfully carried out in a continuous process.83,84 Besides transition metal catalysis, the use of enzymes in a TMS has also been reported, which is also advantageous in terms of sustainability.66,70,85,86
2.5. Fluorous solvents
Fluorous solvents (FSs) were first introduced in the 1950s by Horvath87 as highly fluorinated (or perfluorinated) solvents. They can be synthesised through the attachment of a fluorocarbon chain to an organic solvent, resulting in the formation of a biphasic system. Since the intermolecular bonding in a fluorous solvent is relatively weak, it usually has a lower boiling point than the corresponding n-alkane and can be used as an extremely low-polarity solvent. As a result, an FS is hardly dissolvable in water while it tends to absorb gases (i.e. CO2, O2, H2, etc.) much better than water or other hydrophobic organic solvents. The most important property of an FS is its temperature-dependent miscibility with organic solvents, which allow self-manifestation in very different forms. Thus, in reaction engineering, an FS is often employed to switch a reaction that is heterogeneous into a homogeneous one to improve the mass and heat transfer efficiency.

Fig. 1 shows the application of an FS to create a biphasic system in a catalytic reaction.88 In such a biphasic mixture, the soluble reagent or catalyst is in the fluorous phase while the starting materials are dissolved in the immiscible solvent phase, which could be an organic solvent, water, or non-organic solvent.89 These two distinct layers become mono-phasic upon heating, allowing the reactants to come into contact, which enables the reaction to take place. The two phases can be separated again through cooling in which the products tend to stay in the organic phase while the remaining reactants and catalysts dissolve in the perfluorous phase. This special phasic behavior allows easy separation of the reaction products and catalyst recycling without using additional organic solvents for extraction.
 Fig. 1  Application of a fluorous biphasic system in catalytic reactions.88 
Nowadays, FSs are popularly produced for commercial purposes, such as refrigerants (R-134, R-227ea); greases and lubricants to be operated at high temperature (>300 °C); and reagents for chemical synthesis and catalysis. The major types of commercial FS include perfluoroalkanes, perfluorodialkyl ethers and polyethers, perfluorotrialkyl amines, and hydrofluoroethers. Perfluorohexane (also known as FC-72), perfluoromethylcyclohexane (PFMC), and perfluorodecalin are frequently used perfluoroalkanes.
2.6. The ideal green solvent
An ideal fully sustainable green solvent would not have an ecological impact at any stage, and it would ease process conditions and at the same time make them milder and more sustainable (Fig. 2). The production of a green solvent would be energetically and economically efficient and would come from renewable feedstock, which would not generate emissions, a carbon footprint or waste. In a further stage, the application of this solvent would be very versatile, contributing positively to process performance, and reducing solvent loads by subsequent recycling processes due to high stability. The ecological payback would be low not only in terms of the environment but also in terms of human health and safety. The solvent recovery would be simple and efficient, being suitable for easy reuse. At the end of its lifetime, it would be fully biodegradable without a trace.
 Fig. 2  Life cycle of an ideal green solvent. 
3. Energy Efficiency
In each of the following sections, we focus on one sustainability category, which either refers directly to an impact category in life cycle assessment (LCA) or a 10R-framework quantity of the circularity assessment. Not all LCA and circularity criteria are covered, for the simple fact that there are no or only scattered studies in the literature concerning green solvents.
The investigation starts with energy efficiency, and heating and cooling processes are obviously crucial assets in the use of solvents and also crucial for our environment, e.g. their global warming potential. Energy efficiency has different facets: the energy needed to make designer solvents, and their power to reduce the energy needed to make a chemical process happen, in which they function as solvents.
3.1. Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids have been tested in a plethora of applications, and examples are.90–93 Thus, the respective potential of reducing the energy efficiency of chemical processes is well documented. This impact has positive collateral effects; the energy efficiency can also reduce the cost of the process and reduce the pollutants causing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while necessitating the lower use of process media, i.e. water consumption, thus reducing waste.
To illustrate the impact of using IL, higher energy efficiency was demonstrated for extractive distillation using diverse azeotropic boiling mixtures, such as ethanol/water, methylcyclohexane (MCH)/toluene, and ethylbenzene/styrene using ethylene glycol (EG) and [hmim][B(CN)4], N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and [4-mebupy][BF4] and sulfolane.94 For the ethanol/water system, it is reported that the energy use was reduced by 16% in the presence of [emim][N(CN)2] compared to the system with EG. In this case, a purity of 99.9% for ethanol was reached. In another example, a purity of 100% for MCH was achieved with [hmim][B(CN)4], while the total energy consumption dropped by 50% compared to the process with NMP. Yet ILs do not achieve a better result in all cases, as evident in an extractive distillation of ethylbenzene/styrene system using IL, which showed no superiority over using sulfolane as a solvent.95 Recently, the energy consumption needed for the absorption of benzene, toluene, and xylenes (BTX) was compared between using a triethylene glycol (TEG) and [Emim][Tf2N] IL.93 The energy consumption for the BTX absorption process with TEG was 1.08 and 0.74 times bigger than that for the IL-based process which includes both cooling and heating energies. The total annual cost for the process based on [Emim][Tf2N] was 26% lower than for the TEG-based process, showing potential for industrialisation. The methanol/ethanol/water separation process was simulated by using an IL of [Emim][DCA], comparing it again to a performance using the conventional solvent EG.96 In this study, conventional ternary extractive distillation (CTED) and extractive dividing wall column ternary extractive distillation (EDWC-TED) were employed in presence of EG and IL separately and also in a mixture of both solvents. The presence of the IL resulted in significant energy savings. In the EDWC-TED process, the energy consumption and total annual cost (TAC) using the ionic liquid-based mixed entrainer dropped by 4.5% and 7.8%, respectively (see Fig. 3). The mixed entrainer reduced the energy consumption by 2.9% and TAC by about 6.0%.
 Fig. 3  Process performance analysis of different configurations: (a) TAC; (b) CO2 emissions.96 
A good point about ILs is that they have been studied at pilot and even industrial scales. Converting biomass to ethanol using a choline-based IL of [Ch][Lys] as a pretreatment solvent was studied at pilot scale.97 Assuming optimised results, the selling price of ethanol would be reduced to 3$ per gge and the carbon footprint would go down to 16.4 g CO2 e per MJ, meaning a decline of as much as 82% relative to gasoline.
3.2. Deep eutectic solvents
Regarding the manufacturing of DESs, only mixing and heating of readily accessible chemicals are required for the synthesis of eutectic solvents. Furthermore, in most cases, DESs can be used without the need for a post-purification process. Therefore, DESs are considered to be an energy-efficient, cost-efficient, and environmentally-friendly class of solvents.
With a focus on the processing potential of DESs, Procentese et al.98 studied the pretreatment of waste lettuce leaves using a choline chloride–glycerol DES system for bio-butanol production. Compared with different pretreatment methods, including acid/base hydrolysis, and a steam explosion process, the use of a DES reduces the energy required for the process by 28%–75% with efficient sugar yield and fermentation inhibitors. Haghbakhsh and Raeissi reported the application of DESs in petroleum industries.99 Three solvents, namely reline, glyceline, and the commercial Selexol, were applied for the pressure swing adsorption process. Simulated results show that the overall load of the entire plant was less when using deep eutectic solvents (−51.27, −11.13 kW for reline and glyceline, respectively, and 15.17 kW for Selexol). They also reported that exergy reductions of approximately 146.78, 165.64, and 96.54 kW were estimated for reline, glyceline, and Selexol, respectively. The obtained results prove the potential use of DESs for CO2 capture processes since they can be more energy efficient than traditional solvents.99
In another study, Zhong et al. reported a class of DESs formulated with choline chloride (ChCl), phenol (PhOH), and ethylene glycol (EG) for NH3 capture.100 They investigated the impacts of temperature, pressure, and DES composition on the capacity of NH3. Results show that the maximum absorption capacity of NH3 obtained in prepared DESs is 9.619 mol kg−1 (0.162 g g−1) (at 298.2 K and 101.3 kPa) which was claimed to be among the best reported to date. Additionally, a moderate enthalpy change of −36.91 kJ mol−1 can also be obtained, indicating the potentially energy-efficient feature of a subsequent desorption process.100
3.3. Supercritical carbon dioxide
The use of supercritical fluids can improve energy efficiency. Using supercritical n-butanol in recycling carbon fiber reduced polymer waste to 31% compared to the steam thermolysis method.101 In addition, energy analysis of butanol extraction shows that the energy cost of supercritical CO2 extraction is 3 MJ per kg butanol, which is much lower than that of conventional extraction (9 MJ per kg butanol).102 Tompsett et al. studied semi-batch extraction of several representative higher alcohols, including n-butanol, n-pentanol, and n-hexanol from dilute aqueous solutions using supercritical CO2.103 The results show that the energy efficiency for SFE recovery of butanol from aqueous solution is between 0.26 MJ kg−1 and 4 MJ kg−1 compared to 8 MJ kg−1 to 14 MJ kg−1 for conventional methodologies.103 For pentanol and hexanol, the benefits of supercritical CO2 extraction are even more apparent than for butanol, with energy efficiencies for supercritical CO2 extraction of n-pentanol and n-hexanol of 3.1 and 2.4 MJ kg−1, respectively.103 In addition, the energy consumed in preparing one mole of a chemical compound is compared for a variety of technologies.104 As a result, a supercritical reaction has been reported that still requires energy considerably higher than the microwave reaction but is twice as energy-efficient as the traditional thermal method.104
3.4. Thermomorphic solvents
Homogeneous catalysis is known for its energy-saving, mild reaction conditions, i.e., reaction temperatures often below 150 °C and pressures below 40 bar, which also apply to catalytic reactions in TMS.56,105 As an example, Brunsch et al. performed the hydroformylation of dodecene at 100 °C and varied the phase splitting temperature in a subsequent decantation step from +25 to −9 °C. Because catalyst recovery was best at the lowest temperature, −9 °C was chosen for 30 batch runs with catalyst recycling.73 The reaction temperature was studied between 95 and 115 °C for kinetic rather than energetic reasons.106,107 It can be stated that the reaction temperature is fixed according to the needs of reaction kinetics, while energetic considerations play no or only a minor role. For continuous operation, the decanter temperature has been shifted to typically 5 °C to reduce the energy cost.77–79,108 Interestingly, McBride et al. showed that the separation temperature can be increased to ambient conditions if multistage extraction is used, making the whole TMS process more energy efficient.109 On the overall process level, it should be noted that the production phase after decantation is still mixed with one of the pure solvents of the TMS, which requires another separation operation causing additional energy demand.
3.5. Fluorous solvents
Since FSs have a relatively low boiling point, they are preferred for reactions with temperature sensitivity, such as enzymatic reactions, pharmaceutical synthesis, and other bio-applications. In other words, less energy is required for FS-involved reactions while they can also significantly reduce energy consumption for product separation, owing to their switchable property through temperature changes.87,88 The biphasic system, created through the application of an FS, has been proven to be a promising reaction system to reduce product inhibition, avoid substrate hydrolysis, and facilitate product separation as well as solvent recovery. For example, in a catalysis system, high-affinity catalysts, which are soluble in the organic solvent, can react in one phase at a higher temperature and then be separated in a biphasic system at a lower temperature. This improves the energy efficiency of the reactions by eliminating heating and other mixing processes. However, fluorous liquids typically require multistage syntheses, and the increased impact of the extra manufacturing and purification steps needs to be weighed carefully against the advantages of separation and reuse that these alternative media may bring to a process.
4. Global warming potential – greenhouse gases
Climate change and global warming resulting from greenhouse gas emissions are classified as one the most critical environmental problems faced by the global community.110 The industrial revolution combined with the increase in the use of fossil fuels has raised the emission of hazardous chemicals in the air, escalating the global warming problem. To prevent droughts, arctic sea ice melting and the planet's temperature rising, capturing harmful greenhouse gases, such as recycling fluorinated gases and CO2, is urgently needed.111
4.1. Ionic liquids
Due to the low stability and high volatility and corrosivity of materials used in conventional CO2 capturing processes, such as amine-based absorption, water and organic liquid scrubbing, and hollow fiber membranes, they potentially infract green chemistry principles.21,111,112 Therefore, ILs have gained specific interest due to their advantages of good dissolution properties, low volatility, high decomposition temperature, energy, and cost-efficient separation of CO2 from post-combustion flue gas. A large number of papers studied imidazolium-based ILs for CO2 capture.113,114 Anions are considered to play a primary role in CO2 absorption compared with the cations of ILs. Recently, Lepre et al. have investigated the absorption of 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane, commonly known as R134a which has a global warming effect hundreds to thousands of orders of magnitude higher than that of CO2 using 5 ionic liquids.115 Their research showed that the gas solubility follows the order [C2C1Im][NTf2] < [C8C1Im][NTf2] < [C8C1Im][BETI] < [C8H4F13C1Im][NTf2] < [C8H4F13C1Im][BETI], meaning ionic liquids with fluor moieties especially in anions have better gas solubility which is related to the favorable entropy of solvation.115–117
4.2. Deep eutectic solvents
DESs have been studied for their ability to remove harmful gaseous substances by an absorption process. The higher the solubility of gases in the solvent the greater is the reduction in energy penalties. A high value of 2.7 mol kg−1 DES of carbon dioxide (CO2) absorption was found for the choline chloride/monoethanolamine (MEA) system by Sarmad, Xie.118 DESs demonstrated chemical variability in the absorption of other relevant gases, such as sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitric oxide (NO), and ammonia (NH3) at respective performance rates of: 1.54 g SO2 per g DES for KSCN/caprolactam (1:3),119–122 4.1 mol NO per mol DES for TBPC/DMTU (1:3),123 and 10.0 mol kg−1 DES for choline chloride/tetrazole/ethylene glycol.124
4.3. Thermomorphic solvents
Environmental aspects, such as water pollution, persistence, or exposure limits, were considered as constraints in several TMS solvent design approaches.125–127 To the best of the authors’ knowledge, studies quantifying CO2 emissions or the global warming potential of TMS processes are not available.
4.4. Fluorous solvents
It is believed that the application of FSs can reduce environmental impact and improve the protection of employee health since FSs are extremely stable and have no effect on the ozone layer.128,129 The application of these systems has advantages for certain types of reduced toxicity while the environmental impacts of their persistence continue to be evaluated as a class.
Some of the negative aspects that prevent fluorochemicals being considered as totally environmentally friendly are the following:130
• Their persistence in the environment is very high because of the C–F bond strength, and consequent stability, which is especially appreciated when perfluorinated compounds are used as solvents, but assumes a negative role in terms of degradation.
• FSs are highly resistant to oxidative chemical processes in the lower atmosphere that break down most atmospheric pollutants, and the removal mechanism by UV radiation in the mesosphere is extremely slow. As a result, FSs accumulate in the atmosphere and remain there for several thousand years.
• Their synthesis involves large quantities of fluorine and hydrogen fluoride, which are very corrosive and harsh.
5. Recyclability
The recycling of solvents is essential for the effective use of resources and environmental conservation. It is a constitutional part of the 10R framework of circularity; and also low ranked there, as it is the major industrial practice of the 10R framework today. Recyclability is one of the most important economic drivers in an industrial process, leading to the reusability of a designer solvent for multiple separations, which can decrease the initial costs of a process.
5.1. Ionic liquids
Depending on the hydrophobicity of an IL, the method of recyclability can differ. Thermal treatment can be one of the first options for the recycling and reuse of ILs, due to their low vapor pressure, as evidenced in the case of hydrophilic ILs.131 Nevertheless, thermal treatment would not be efficient for thermal-sensitive and non-volatile solutes. Adsorption,132 centrifugation,133 and membrane-based technology134 such as nanofiltration, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis are other techniques that can be used for the recycling of ILs.135
In the case of the metal extraction process with hydrophobic ILs, stripping agents such as HCl, H2SO4, NaOH, ammonia, and EDTA can be favorable.136–138 For instance, the recycling of Cyphos IL 104 using HCl solution in germanium oxide extraction from Zener diodes after twelve such extraction–stripping cycles showed no noticeable change in extraction performance.139 Nakasu et al. studied the pretreatment of biomass using the low-cost IL of [MEA][OAc] with different acetic acid contents.140 The solvent recovery rates during the evaporation and centrifugation for [MEA][OAc] were 97% over 6 cycles and no extra solvent was needed. Meanwhile, in the presence of a higher acid content, the extraction yield increased, but the IL recovery rate decreased. While in comparison with [MEA][OAc], the recycling of [TEA][HSO4] resulted in a higher recovery rate of 99%, which could be related to the non-volatility of sulfuric acid.
5.2. Deep eutectic solvents
DESs are claimed to be easily separated from downstream products and recycled without significant changes in performance strength.141 This information is supported by studies by Di Gioia et al.142 and Cui et al.143 reported that the DES can be simply reused up to six times by adding water and simple filtration, followed by a water evaporation process. The performance of a DES after several recycles has already been widely discussed in the literature.144–146 Shen et al.147 reported a reduction in the recovered yield of DES per cycle, and Morais et al.148 stated that recycled DES efficiency was reduced by 5% after the first two cycles.
5.3. Supercritical carbon dioxide
Solvent recovery by simple depressurisation allows the collection of pure SCF solvent (gas). Thus, it can be recirculated into storage and is ready for reuse, leading to a reduction in total energy costs and an increase in the overall sustainability of SCF-based processes.16 The example of butanol extraction using supercritical CO2 shows that up to 97.8% of the solvent can be recycled.102 In addition, a supercritical solvent recovery of 90% can be achieved, as reported for metal oxide nanoparticle production.150
5.4. Thermomorphic solvents
The applications being considered for TMS are a key reason for calling it sustainable. TMSs are especially suitable for reactions using fats and oils, where common recycling strategies suffer from high boiling products and slow reaction rates.151 These reactants can be produced from renewables and help to reduce dependence on fossil resources.70,105,152
TMSs were invented for the recovery of homogeneous catalysts.57 Using a polyethylene glycol (PEG)/dioxane/heptane TMS and a PEG-modified ligand, Yang et al. achieved very high catalyst recovery rates of 99.4% on average in 23 consecutive recycling batch experiments for the hydroformylation of dodecene.75 Brunsch et al. performed 30 batches in a DMF/decane TMS, recording a loss of activity after 13 runs, which was compensated by longer reaction times. This loss was caused by catalyst leaching into the production phase that was quantified as 1% in the last run. It was concluded that the catalyst recovery can usually be improved by (i) lowering the separation temperature, causing an increased energy demand, (ii) reducing the catalyst concentration, leading to a slower reaction, and (iii) choosing solvents with larger polarity difference, which is limited by the requirement to be single-phasic at the reaction temperature.73 In a cyclic repeated semi-batch reactor, two sets of reaction parameters were tested for 93 and 100 runs (<90 hours each), achieving successfully stable operation. Rhodium leaching was on average 1.4% h−1 and 0.7% h−1, respectively.78 Dreimann et al. additionally closed the loop for decane recovery using a classic CSTR-decanter mini-plant and reported stable operation for 120 hours.80 For a more sustainable process, nanofiltration of the product phase after decantation was introduced, reducing rhodium leaching to 0.25% h−1.79,108 For many other examples, TMSs have been shown to work stably and can be used as a recycling concept as well.59
5.5. Fluorous solvents
Whether the purpose is to meet or exceed sustainability goals, or to improve cost efficiency, fluorinated solvents are also an excellent choice to implement solvent recycling and recovery programs.88 The reason is that fluorous solvents are extremely stable, allowing them to be utilised again and again without loss of quality.153 Additionally, since they usually have very low boiling points, FSs can be easily recovered through an evaporator while leaving very little residue.9
6. Stability
Designer solvents are more labile to chemical, thermal or other degradation, as they are typically more complex chemical molecules than conventional solvents, i.e. they are more prone to any conversion. Degradation relates to the generation of waste, and thus to one of the 12 Green Chemistry Principles.
6.1. Ionic liquids
Thermal stability, chemical stability, and electrochemical stability must be considered, and have been exemplified for ILs.154,155 High thermal stability is critically important for high-temperature applications, such as gas purification, biomass dissolution, distillation, and extraction of the organic compound, while electrochemical stability plays a considerable role in order to reach strong power density and high energy in electrochemical devices, such as batteries and fuel cells.156,157
The decomposition temperature of ionic liquids usually starts from 150 °C, which is related to choline-based ionic liquids.158 The anion type is the main parameter in the thermal stability of ILs, and thereafter the type of cation as well. Generally, the thermal stability of anions decreases in the following order: [PF6] > [Beti] > [NTf2] > [BF4] > [I] > [Cl] > [Br].156,158,159 Investigation of the thermal properties of carboxylate ILs by Xu and Wang has shown that introducing hydroxyl (OH), phenyl (C6H5) or ether groups to the anion considerably improves the thermal stability.160 The effect of cations on the thermal decomposition of ILs is discussed in ref. 161. Although increasing the alkyl chain length of imidazolium IL with [BF4], [PF6], [NTf2] or [Cl] anions reduces the thermal stability, this trend is reversed in the case of quaternary ammonium and choline carboxylate Ils, in which the thermal decomposition temperature decreases with increasing alkyl chain length.160 Indeed, the reduction in the thermal decomposition temperature for quaternary ammonium and choline-based ILs with carboxylate anion decreases with increasing alkyl chain length. However, adding alkoxylated side chains in the ILs with pyrrolidinium, piperidinium or imidazolium cations can reduce the thermal stability.158,160,162
Furthermore, in terms of electrochemical stability, both the cation and the anion are controlling agents on the electrochemical window of ILs.22 Generally, a higher operation temperature and higher voltage accelerate the degradation percentage of ILs. Raiguel and coworkers investigated the chemical stability of ILs in alkaline solution in detail.155 It has been reported that the nature of the cation plays a major role in the stability of ILs in alkaline conditions.155 Phosphonium-based ILs display higher thermal stabilities with lower viscosities compared to analogous ammonium-based ILs. While the chemical stability of phosphonium ILs in alkaline conditions is less than ammonium salts. Nevertheless, imidazolium, pyridinium, and sulfonium cations can be attacked by alkaline agents more easily than quaternary ammonium and 1,2,3-triazolium cations, which offer resistance to basic conditions. Hence, caution must be observed when ILs with fluorine-based anions are used because of the possibility of the formation of HF, which is toxic and very corrosive.163
6.2. Fluorous solvents
FSs are exceptionally stable and can be used again and again without losing potency. In addition, their stability precludes the need for stabilizer additives or acid acceptance testing. Another advantage resulting from the stability of these industrial solvents is their broad compatibility with a wide variety of materials. Fluorinated solvents can be used safely with most plastics, elastomers, metals, and substrates. Their cleaning action is highly efficient, evaporating quickly and leaving very little residue.9,88
6.3. Deep eutectic solvents
DESs are reported to be non-volatile and high thermal stability solvents, which can easily dissolve the majority of organic and inorganic compounds. Providing that DESs tend to be decomposed before reaching a critical temperature, the range of operating temperatures is between the degradation temperature (Tdeg) and their melting point (Tm).164,165
For hydrophilic DESs, such as natural deep eutectic solvents (NADES), Craveiro et al. reported that most NADES present a single degradation peak at temperatures above ca. 120 °C (Tdeg) while the minimum melting point (Tm) recorded is around −9.7 °C in the case of ChCl:ca (1:1).166 They also reported that water has a significant influence on the complex and the properties of NADES, interfering with the liquidus and solidus lines in the eutectic phase diagram. Results also show that Tm might suffer a depression of 1 °C if approximately 4 wt% water was added to the solvents, while the opposite effect and an increase in the melting temperature were recorded at higher water contents.166
In the case of the hydrophobic DESs, the melting points of most reported solvents in this category were observed below 20 °C, which allows them to remain in the liquid phase as extraction media at room temperature. Generally, the degradation temperatures of hydrophobic DESs are relatively higher (can be >200 °C) in comparison to their hydrophilic counterparts, yet they are highly dependent on the nature of the DES constituents.167
7. Waste generation/avoidance, solvent load
Solvents constitute 70–80% of the process medium and thus contribute majorly to process waste. While recycling can help a lot, it cannot fully eliminate this fact, as losses and inefficiency are inevitable. Yet, on the positive side, solvents can help to decrease other sources of waste, e.g. that of side products or unreacted products, by assisting the reaction process.
7.1. Deep eutectic solvents
Micropollutants captured from aqueous streams are an example of the removal of waste as an environmental gain. Besides the ability to capture gases, researchers have studied using DESs for the removal of unwanted substances from the aqueous phase, in the context of wastewater treatment processes. Van Osch et al. reported that metal ions were removed from non-buffered water with hydrophobic DESs with over 99% removal of Co2+ ions.168 Florindo et al.169 investigated tetrabutylammonium chloride-based and menthol-based DESs to remove micropollutants, i.e. pesticides, from diluted water solution.
7.2. Supercritical carbon dioxide
ScCO2-based processes provide a range of benefits as well as offering routes to overcome some limitations of conventional processes.149 One of the benefits of supercritical carbon dioxide is avoiding the use of toxic solvents and waste treatment, which lead to environmental hazard and high cost. Overall, the operating cost and environmental emissions of ScCO2-based processes are much smaller than those of conventional processes.
7.3. Thermomorphic solvents
Studies evaluating waste generation or the E factor170 quantitatively are not available to date for TMS processes. However, as a simpler criterion, atom efficiency, is often high for typical reactions in TMSs, e.g., hydroamination,171 amino-telomerisation,172 or hydroesterification;173 meaning this is an intrinsic measure to reduce waste, given that the yield is high. In one study, a TMS-based biodiesel process was developed that minimises waste generation by a reduction in the number of production steps.174
Waste generation is deeply coupled with selectivity. The more resource material is converted in the right way, the better. Due to the use of homogeneous catalysis, TMS-based processes usually show high selectivity.56 This is usually ensured by the ligand used, but the solvents of a TMS can also be optimized to improve the reaction performance.175–177 In hydroformylation, chemoselectivity to the aldehyde must be considered, but also regioselectivity, which distinguishes between linear (n) and branched (iso) aldehydes. Yang et al. achieved remarkably high chemoselectivities of 98%, but these were accompanied by a low n/iso regioselectivity of 52:48. Even increasing the self-prepared TMPGP ligand did not significantly improve the n/iso ratio.75 Using BiPhePhos as a ligand in lab-scale batch experiments, Brunsch et al. reported higher regioselectivities of typically 99:1 with chemoselectivity to the aldehyde of up to 90%,73 which can be classified as high.178 It should be noted that most of the by-product is olefin isomer that can be recycled into the reactor as a reactant. This recycling, consisting mainly of the alkane solvent, iso-, and n-olefins, was put into practice in mini-plant experiments.80 After a model-based reactor optimization using the elementary process function (EPF) concept,179–181 two TMS reactor networks were commissioned. A helically-coiled tube reactor with a subsequent CSTR and decanter provided 70% selectivity to the linear aldehyde, while a cyclically operated semi-batch reactor with a CSTR achieved up to 90%.77,78 This example of the hydroformylation of long-chain olefins underlines the potential of TMSs to enable highly selective chemical conversion.
The solvent load is another reason for waste. At first glance, the solvent load of a TMS is high. However, TMSs integrate reaction and separation, and therefore the solvent system includes media for reaction and liquid–liquid extraction. For the hydroformylation of 1-dodecene, the TMS composition was studied in detail in batch experiments.73,74 It turned out that there is a trade-off between maximising the number of reactants and maximising the recovery of the catalyst. A TMS mixture of 16/42/42 wt% (1-dodecene, DMF, decane) was recommended, which was adapted in mini-plant experiments,77,78,108 while for kinetic investigations a composition of 20/32/48 wt% was favourable in terms of analytics.182 Due to this high solvent load, efforts have been made to develop “integrated” TMSs in which reactants take over the role of solvents.183,184
7.4. Fluorous solvents
Since an FS is often used as a co-solvent to substitute the organic solvent in order to create the biphasic system, only a small amount of FS is required at the reaction stage to maintain the advantages of the heterogeneous system. More FS is required at the separation stage to allow sufficient removal of catalyst and enable the purification of the products. Due to their extremely high stability, FSs can be easily recovered and reused in several cycles that prevent the generation of unexpected waste while eliminating the formation of other toxic compounds.
8. Toxicity and biodegradability
Reactants are generally toxic; to humans, the soil, the aqueous environment (rivers, oceans), and the atmosphere. This occurs by releasing emissions and other harmful substances to the ecosphere; as well as the response of the ecosphere against those toxic compounds. Thus, the effects of a solvent can vary if one considers human toxicity potential or aquatic toxicity potential. As aforementioned, the solvent has its own toxicity, but also influences the toxicity of the reaction medium as a whole: for example, by increasing the yield and thus reducing waste products.
8.1. Ionic liquids
Although ILs have been known as green solvents, this classification relies on some simple physical assignments, such as the negligible vapor pressure and low flammability of ILs. Yet, since this does not address holistic sustainability, it does not mean that all ILs are non-toxic and biodegradable.8 Up to now several kinds of research have been developed to investigate the toxicity and degradation criteria for ILs with a focus on EC50, LD50, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), theoretical carbon dioxide (ThCO2), and theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD), and even hepatic effects.30,154,185–188 Ecotoxicity inspection can be categorised into several biomodels: animals and mammalian cell lines (rat), algae, crustaceans, fungi, and bacteria, in which the toxicity results are relevant to the kind of biomodel.189,190 Based on the EC50 (mg L−1) for Selenastrum capricornutum, the toxicities of some ILs like [C12MIM][Cl], [Chol][PF6], and [TMSiMmim]Br are much greater than for conventional solvents, for example methanol, acetonitrile or even toluene, while [bmpyr][TfMs], [bmpyr]Cl, [HOPMIM][FCH2COO] and [HOPMIM][glycolate] show less toxicity than the conventional organic solvents of chloroform and toluene.191 The acute toxicity of EC50 (mg L−1) for [C3mim][NTf2] to Daphnia magna is favorably compared with the toxicity of conventional solvents, such as dichloromethane, methanol, acetonitrile, aniline, ammonia, chlorine, and phenol.192,193
Generally, the toxicity and biodegradability of ILs refer to their overall chemical structure; meaning the type of cation used, as well as the type of anion causing corresponding cation–anion interactions, and the length of alkyl chains. Strategies to decrease the toxicity of ILs and promote their biodegradability have been developed, using morpholinium and cholinium-based cations, sulfonates, and organic acid-based anions, introducing polar groups such as hydroxyl, or nitrile ether or ester groups.30,194 However, the toxicity of ILs is increased when employing phosphonium cations within long hydrophobic alkyl chains.30
8.2. Deep eutectic solvents
DESs are commonly made from quaternary ammonium salts, which are known to be biodegradable and have relatively low toxicity.195 Many reports claim that DESs are non-toxic, environmentally-friendly, and biodegradable solvents.196,197 This was further confirmed by Hayyan et al.198 who showed no toxic effect of the studied DESs when exposed to bacterial and eukaryotic cells. Macário et al.199 demonstrated that choline chloride and tetramethylammonium chloride-based DESs have good biocompatibility with human skin cells. Radošević et al.200 provide evidence that three tested choline chloride-based DESs are readily biodegradable due to their high level of mineralisation of 62–87%. However and as a critical note, Hayyan et al.198 state that some DESs shows higher cytotoxicity levels compared to their individual components. It also has to be admitted that the bandwidth of investigations is not sufficient for the vast number of potential DESs; meaning we know just the tip of the iceberg and there might be a bias to presenting positive results.
8.3. Supercritical carbon dioxide
Many supercritical fluids are considered non-carcinogenic, nontoxic, non-mutagenic, and non-flammable solvents.201 Honestly, supercritical CO2, while being widely used, still exhibits a level of toxicity related to the concentration and time of exposure,202 especially due to being an asphyxiant at high dosage.203 The use of supercritical CO2 to extract antioxidants from rosemary caused human toxicity approximately twice as high as that of a process combining pressurised hot water extraction and powder formation online.204 It should be noted that supercritical solvents other than supercritical CO2 are in use, such as supercritical methanol,205 supercritical benzene,206 and supercritical toluene,207 and complete sustainability assessments are missing.
8.4. Thermomorphic solvents
The toxicity of TMSs depends on the solvents used, as a TMS is a mixture. Gaide et al. developed a “narrow TMS” (the reaction conditions are not yet single-phasic, but the reaction performance does not improve on temperature increase) consisting of water and 1-butanol for the hydroformylation of bio-based methyl 10-undecenoate using sulfoxantphos as a catalyst ligand. The system was experimentally studied in batch recycling experiments and in a continuous process with stable operation.208 This green TMS was developed based on the knowledge of chemical experts, and a systematic green TMS design was introduced by combining in-silico solvent screening using COSMO-RS and estimation of EHS properties using quantitative structure–property relations.209 It was shown that two novel TMS mixtures using dimethyl succinate and tetrahydropyranone can be used for the hydroformylation of long-chain olefins, replacing the developmentally toxic solvent DMF. The approach was refined in terms of thermodynamics and EHS properties, leading to diethyl sulfoxide and other promising polar green TMS solvents.210 Based on these screening results, Keßler et al. formulated a model-based process optimization approach and a computer-aided solvent and process design for the generation of green TMSs and showed that they can compete with a conventional DMF-based TMS, even in terms of total annualized costs.211,212
8.5. Fluorous solvents
Many fluorinated compounds are nontoxic, and there are abundant biomedical applications of fluorinated compounds as blood substitutes, imaging agents for ultrasound and magnetic resonance, and many applications in drug delivery on the horizon.213 Although FSs have been widely used in industry for several decades, there were not many studies investigating their negative impact on health, safety and the environment until the start of the century when their widespread and advertised impacts came to notice.130 Fluorocarbons are not flammable by themselves, and their incineration requires the input of energy and may also lead to dangerous acidic by-products that must be further treated.214 The release of perfluorocarbon formulations to the environment is of concern because of their high global warming potential and long atmospheric lifetimes, and as they do not biodegrade.
Although there is still concern about the safety of FSs, it is obvious that such solvents and their derivatives will continue to be popularly used in both academia and industry.213
9. Holistic environmental impact assessment
Environmental friendliness, as guided by life cycle assessment, is a complex, weighted multi-criteria decision-making process. Thus, apart from single answers to one LCA or other environmental impact category, one needs to have a holistic view comprising several impact categories. The literature is scarce here, and that is why we add our own technical study in section 11.
9.1. Supercritical carbon dioxide
The entire environmental impacts of applications of supercritical solvents are well documented by evaluating the energy requirements, consumption of material, and emissions of products. Sérgio Morais et al.215 investigated the life cycle assessment (LCA) of a supercritical methanol process using propane as co-solvent for biodiesel production, which showed that the supercritical methanol process reduces abiotic resource depletion by 313%, acidification by 754%, global warming by 496% and marine aquatic ecotoxicity by 793% compared to the conventional process. Furthermore, all categories of environmental impact in supercritical CO2 processes, such as acidification, global warming, and ozone layer depletion, can be reduced by from 40% to 60% compared to those of the pressurised hot water extraction process.204
Recently, an LCA was performed to evaluate the impacts of dry TiO2 nanoparticle production, and it aimed to provide a holistic view.216 The results shown in Fig. 4 indicated that supercritical fluid flow synthesis has lower environmental and human health impacts, with impact reductions in all categories ranging from 17% to 99%.
 Fig. 4  Normalised, deterministic (nonprobabilistic) environmental and human health impacts.26 
More recently, Liu et al.101 carried out an LCA and energy assessment for an intensification of recycling carbon fiber reinforced polymer waste using supercritical n-butanol. They found that the environmental impact of the supercritical n-butanol method is lower than that of the steam thermolysis method. In particular, 69% of acidification potential, 68% of human health potential, 62% of freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity potential, and 71% of marine aquatic ecotoxicity potential can be saved.
10. Costs
While this review is on environmental friendliness, it is also about sustainability, and cost accounting is part of it. The literature is scarce here, and we would like to limit our consideration to one class of green solvent, as given in the following.
10.1. Thermomorphic solvents
There are a couple of studies discussing the costs of a TMS-based process by applying mathematical process optimisation. In all of these, the hydroformylation of long-chain olefins is investigated. Steimel et al. formulated an early-stage process design under the consideration of uncertainties and different flowsheet configurations.217,218 Minimum, best-case costs of 3.1€ per kg tridecanal were reported.217 Hentschel et al. designed an optimal reactor embedded in the overall process for the same product and calculated the total costs to be 3.9$ per kg.219 Since the catalytic species, consisting of rhodium and BiPhePhos, are particularly expensive,220 a detailed optimisation study using multistage extraction was performed, resulting in costs of 3.8$ per kg tridecanal using five extraction stages.109 Finally, alternative, green solvents in a TMS were evaluated on the process level for the hydroformylation of decene to undecanal. Significantly lower costs of 0.2$ per kg undecanal were found.221 However, it must be considered that a direct comparison of these studies may be biased to some degree for many reasons, e.g., different models used, flowsheets applied, and price levels assumed.
11. Benchmarking of designer solvents for a model chemical process
11.1. The model process of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran synthesis
In this section, the above-mentioned green solvents are assessed and compared with conventional solvents using the example of the synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran. This process has the assets which are needed for this kind of comparison – being itself ‘green’ (biomass), eminent in relevance (aiming at a future platform chemical), challenging conversion, and with sufficient data for all the solvents given in this review.222 Many processes carried out in biorefineries aim for the optimal use of biomass, but traditionally use non-green solvents.222 One prominent example of such biomass processes is the synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran (DHMF) from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF). The latter has previously been obtained by dehydration of biomass-derived carbohydrates, such as glucose,223 fructose,224,225 sucrose,226 cellobiose,227,228 inulin,229,230 starch,231 or cellulose.232,233 HMF is considered to be a new biomass-derived platform used in the chemical industry as building blocks from renewable resources.234 DHMF has many applications in the production of ethers,235 ketones,236 polymers,237 resins,238 and artificial fibers.239 Nevertheless, in order to control side compounds derived from parallel competitive reactions, chemocatalytic hydrogenation pathways have been developed in recent years.240 Besides traditional conventional hydrogenation; transfer hydrogenation, electrocatalytic hydrogenation, photocatalytic hydrogenation, disproportionation reactions, and biocatalytic hydrogenation pathways have been described with the aim of increasing both yield and selectivity.
11.2. 2,5-Dihydroxymethylfuran synthesis using conventional solvents
In the conventional hydrogenation toward DHMF, H2 is the key to both process technology, since yields are highly connected to H2 solubility in solvents, and environmental friendliness, due to the difficult recycling of H2.240 In addition, the high costs of the respective catalysts as well as their relatively short lifetimes, make these procedures difficult to scale up. On the positive side, high conversions and yields can be achieved using different types of solvents depending on the catalyst, as summarised in Table 1. Other strategies are based on transfer hydrogenation, which allow high yields to be obtained, depending on the catalyst and the solvent. Table 2 shows that all yields obtained are above 80%. In this case, the solvent can easily be separated and reused, which means a safer and cheaper procedure, since the solvent also acts as an H donor.
Table 1 Solvents used and process performance in conventional hydrogenation of 5HMF to 2,5DHMF




 

n

HMF (%)
DHMF (%)
Ref.





n is number of publications.




Water
9
99
91

241–247



Toluene
1
99
99

248



1-Butanol
6
98
86

249–251



Ethanol
7
87
69

252–254



Tetrahydrofuran
2
84
72

255 and 256


Methanol
2
95
90

235 and 257


1,4-Dioxane
1
100
99

258





Table 2 Solvents used and process performance in transfer hydrogenation of 5HMF to 2,5DHMF




 

n values
HMF (%)
DHMF (%)
Ref.





n is number of publications.




Formic acid in tetrahydrofuran
5
100
99

259



Ethanol
1
94
84

260



Isopropanol
8
96
88

261–267



2-Butanol
1
98
90

268



Methanol
1
100
100

268



1,4-Butanediol
1
94
93

269



Benzyl alcohol
1
91
87

270





Other synthesis approaches are based on electrocatalytic hydrogenation.271 In this case, despite having advantageous process conditions, such as operation at room temperature and atmospheric pressure with water as the solvent,272,273 and achieving 85% selectivity (with an Ag electrode), the high dependence of expensive electrodes and electrolytes as well as high electricity demands, make the procedure difficult to scale-up. This scaling-up issue is also reported for the photocatalytic hydrogenation of HMF, where Guo et al.274 reported 6.5% yield of DHMF using an Xe lamp which activated a Pt-based photocatalyst using trimethylamine as an electron donor in water.
Alternative pathways include biocatalysis. In this context, Wohlgemuth et al.,275 Woodley et al.,276 and McKenna et al.277 used microorganisms to perform this reaction. In this case, despite the high selectivity and mild reaction conditions in an environmentally-friendly environment, as well as the high efficiency, the high costs and the fragility of the enzymes and the microorganisms due to HMF toxicity, make the application of these methodologies difficult. Yet, He et al.278 achieved promising results with E. coli CCZU-K14 cells, which obtained a 70% yield of DHMF.
11.3. Benchmarking of ionic liquids versus water for 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran synthesis
First, we would like to compare a designer solvent versus water; the latter being nature's ‘green solvent’ for its biocatalytic processes. As a designer solvent, we take ionic liquids as the most prominent and most widely studied example. Thereafter, we would like to compare the different designer solvents themselves.
One of the above-mentioned approaches for the synthesis of DMHF from HMF is deprotonation reactions, which are based mainly on the Cannizzaro reaction. In the case of HMF, due to the chemical nature of the reaction, the reaction is limited to 50% yield of DMHF and 50% 5-hydroxymethylfuranoic acid (HMFA). Therefore, the yields were calculated according to this maximum. Kang et al. used the IL 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([EMIm]TFSI) (Fig. 5), which could be recycled.238 Subbiah et al. used water, which was not recycled279 (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 5  Synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran using [EMIm]TFSI as solvent, as described by Kang et al.238 
 Fig. 6  Synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran as described by Subbiah et al.279 
In order to benchmark the use of an IL and water, an assessment in terms of solvent application (performance, loads and process improvements), ecological payback, hazards and biodegradability was performed, which is summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparative summary between the use of water or [EMIm]TFSI as solvents




Type of assessment
Variable under assessment
Using water
Using IL




Process performance
Equivalent solvent ratio (solvent load)
1.1
2


Residence time (h)
18
1


DHMF yield (%)
86
100


HMFA (%)
87
84


Primary solvent recovery (%)
0
100


Process circularity
Recycling fraction
0.85
0.99


Fraction to be composted
0.14
0.01


kg waste generated per kg of product
12
18


Material circularity indicator
0.84
0.99


Process green metrics

E-Factor
0.3
0.1


Process mass intensity (kg kg−1)
12.54
1.05


Mass productivity (%)
88
95


Waste water intensity (kg kg−1)
11.4
0


Health
Acute toxicity
0
0.6


Irritation
0
0.85


Chronic toxicity
0
0.7


Environment
Persistency
0
1


Water hazard
0
0.6





Table 3 shows improvements in terms of yield, residence time and solvent recovery, as well as in circularity and green chemistry metrics when ILs are used. Moreover, health and environmental benefits are gained. As the most relevant result, the ability of the ILs to be recycled boosts the material circular indicator (MCI) to 0.99. In contrast, the use of water instead of ILs penalises the green metrics of the process, especially concerning the waste water intensity (WWI) and process mass intensity (PMI), meaning that the use of an IL leads to a compact solvent load.
However, the process using ILs requires DCM and an additional extraction step using ethyl acetate, as shown in Fig. 7. Despite the fact that ethyl acetate can be completely recovered, the energy for its distillation increases the negative impacts in an LCA comparison, as shown in Fig. 7. This drawback may be lessened assuming less solvent consumption with ethyl acetate (Fig. 7 – grey) and also DCM (Fig. 7 – brown). As an example, the use of e.g. 30 ml of ethyl acetate and 2 ml of DCM might be enough to achieve extraction of a small quantity of product (0.0607 g of DHMF), and would improve the LCA metrics. This shows the relevance of process optimisation not only in terms of process conditions, but also with regard to the use of resources.
 Fig. 7  Midpoint life cycle impact assessment for HMFA and DHMF syntheses – ReCiPe 2016. Characterization results for Subbiah et al.'s279 approach were normalized to 1 g to compare them with the incremental results for Kang et al.'s238 approach. 
11.4. Benchmarking of green solvents for the synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran
Here, we would like to compare the different green solvents themselves. Therefore, the goal of this study is an assessment of the impacts on sustainability metrics of using different green solvents for the synthesis of 1 g of DHMF as a functional unit.
Following the approach proposed by Kang et al. (2012),238 the same process performance was used to model successive virtual processes using fluorous, thermomorphic (TMS), supercritical CO2 (scCO2) and deep eutectic solvents (DES); see Fig. 8. For this purpose, parameters such as the reaction yield were considered to be the same in all scenarios. Nevertheless, the process conditions were adapted according to the solvent, e.g. pressure and temperature conditions in scCO2 or heating/cooling operations in thermomorphic solvents. To avoid the high impacts of using 300 ml of ethyl acetate as an extractant, when a subsequent product extraction was needed, which would hide the relative contributions of the designer solvents, the virtual processes were modelled by assuming ×10 less amount of this solvent (30 ml). The overall comparative results are shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Comparative LCA impacts of the same process using different green solvents and changing the conditions according to the solvent demands (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2 and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvents). 
The scope of the analysis was from cradle-to-date under the cut-off approach system model based on mass allocation. The manufacturing of the manual or computer support tools, machinery, or equipment was not included. All the process flows were referred to global datasets from ecoinvent v3.7. For compounds that were not available in the database, such as choline chloride (used in a DES combined with ethylene glycol280), their inventories were modelled by assuming a 90% yield for the corresponding most common precursors, and general assumptions were made regarding facilities and transportation and energy consumption.281–283
One critical stage of the process is the last purification step. In the case of scCO2, no extraction step is required (CO2 is simply released as a gas) saving materials and energy. On the other hand, this benefit is counterbalanced by the need to work under supercritical (pressure and temperature) conditions. For the modelled processes, the necessary energy for heating, stirring and solvent recovery was estimated thermodynamically and 60% efficiency of the heating device was assumed. A solvent recovery rate of 90% was assumed. Emissions to air during the synthesis processes (0.2% volatile input materials) and air and water (river) emissions after wastewater treatment were considered.
As shown in Fig. 8, the process using fluorous solvents has the highest impact in the global warming category, basically due to the fraction of volatile emissions of hexadecafluoroheptane. Among the other environmental impact categories, the processes using TMSs show better performance than the processes using ILs, fluorous solvents and DESs because TMSs can avoid the use of DCM during the extraction step after synthesis. The impact categories with important contributions from the emissions of the synthesis processes are most relevant, such as in the water and human toxicity categories, or emissions related to the use of DCM, ethyl acetate and non-reacted HMF. This is because the potential impacts of the designer solvents under assessment are partially hidden by the emission of extraction solvents needed.
In terms of energy expenses, Fig. 9 shows that in the case of scCO2 more than 70% of the energy demanded by the process is used for keeping the supercritical conditions. Yet, in the case of solvents that demand an extraction, the energy required for distillation alone adds up to around 75% using ILs, fluorous solvents and DESs while being around 95% in the case of TMSs. Thus, it can be concluded that the energy to keep supercritical conditions can be lower than that required for subsequent extractions. In terms of circularity, the MCI decreases to 0.4 mainly because recycling of CO2 is lacking, rendering this process rather linear. Moreover, the possibility of skipping the purification stage allows for more than 90% reduction of direct waste production (not considering that CO2 is thrown into the atmosphere). The ecological payback of the energy and waste savings are the CO2 emissions, as shown in Fig. 9 regarding global warning, ozone formation and, especially, terrestrial and water ecotoxicities.
 Fig. 9  Simulation of energy demand distribution using different solvents for the same process (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2, DES to deep eutectic solvents and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvents). 
In the case of the use of fluorous solvents, the need to include product extraction affects this case negatively in the same way as ILs. For this study, hexadecafluoroheptane was considered because of its environmental and physico-chemical properties. The LCA results are similar to ILs or even worse if the extraction were simulated using methanol or ethanol, as the vaporization enthalpies are 2.5 and 3 times higher than that for ethyl acetate,284 demanding more energy in the distillation step. In this context, an LCA assessment using ILs and fluorous solvents would be similar in terms of advantages (process improvement with milder conditions, high recyclability and high MCI), but also in terms of disadvantages, since both processes demand product extraction with the high aqueous toxicity of the compounds used as solvents. In addition, fluorous solvents may also have environmental, health, and safety (EHS) constraints, as shown in Table 4. Fig. 10 also shows the comparative sustainability metrics of using the different types of solvents. Furthermore, both fluorous and thermomorphic solvents ease separations, so the number of cycles demanded for a complete product extraction would be lower (fluorous) or even not needed (thermomorphic solvents). This point would allow for a reduction in process steps and solvent spending per cycle, which would positively impact the assessment.
 Fig. 10  Simulated EHS impacts regarding material demands of using different solvents for the same process (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2, DES to deep eutectic solvents and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvent). 
Table 4 Comparative toxicity evaluation between the ionic liquid used by Kang et al.238 and some common fluorous solvents (source: Chemwatch.285 Values considered from 0 – lowest to 4 – highest)




Category
Compound
Overall
Flammability
Toxicity
Body contact
Reactivity
Chronic




ILs
[EMIm]TFSI
2
1
1
2
1
0


 


Fluorous
Perfluorotriethylamine
2
1
1
2
1
0


Octafluorocyclopentene
4
0
4
2
1
2


Hexafluorobenzene
3
3
0
2
1
0


Octafluorotoluene
3
3
2
2
1
0


Hexadecafluoroheptane
1
1
1
1
1
0


Perfluoro-1,3-dimethylcyclohexane
2
0
1
2
1
0


Perfluoro-2-butyltetrahydrofuran
2
1
2
2
1
0


Perfluorotributylamine
2
0
1
2
1
0


Octadecafluorooctane
2
0
1
2
1
0


Perfluoro-2-methylpentane
2
0
1
2
1
0


Hexafluoroisopropyl methyl ether
2
1
2
2
1
0




The main advantage of a thermomorphic solvent is that a further separation step (and the subsequent additional solvent extraction) is not required, since a TMS mixture allows separation just by changing the operating conditions (yet still requiring energy for cooling down to separate, as mentioned previously). Nevertheless, many thermomorphic mixtures use hazardous chemicals such as acetaldehyde and N,N-dimethylformamide.286 In this study, the use of thermomorphic solvents can skip the use of DCM. Yet, the payback is the energy needed for cooling or heating the reaction mixture. In order to give an environmentally friendly alternative, a mixture previously used for hydrogenation reactions by Huang et al.287 was herewith used for simulation. This solvent mixture was composed of poly(ethylene glycol) 4000, toluene, and n-heptane used in this case in a ratio of 2:3:1, which gave a homogeneous mixture at 60 °C. According to the results shown in Fig. 10, this energy demand is lower than that for distilling DCM, which allows thermomorphic solvents to obtain reasonably better overall results.

Table 5 summarises how solvent selection impacts a hypothetical process in terms of sustainability. The key advantages rely on the reduction in water expenses. Yet, this improvement also has an ecological payback and imposes consequences on the recycling ability, especially concerning an increase in the number of process steps, the energy consumption distribution, and solvent loads due to extraction cycles. The fact that most of these green solvents are recyclable enables a reduction in waste generation and environmental emissions.
Table 5 Summary of solvent impacts regarding process improvement and ecological payback when assessing simulations performed in cradle-to-grave fashion




Green solvent
Application performance
Ecological payback
Toxicity




Ionic liquids (ILs)
✓Suitable to improve process, increasing yield with shorter residence times
✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy and time expenses
✗Low toxicity


✓Allows recycling, increasing MCI
✗Low extraction efficiency: higher extraction solvent demands
✗Water toxicity


✗Low extraction efficiency. Many cycles are needed






Supercritical CO2 (scCO2)
✓No extraction needed
✗No recycling: higher CO2 emissions and footprint
✗High carbon footprint


✗Need to keep supercritical conditions
✗Energy demands for keeping supercritical conditions
✗Water toxicity


✗Not compatible with recycling: processes mainly linear


✗Safety breathing risks


Deep eutectic solvents (DESs)
✓Similar performance to ILs
✓Some of them are obtained from natural sources
✓Non-toxic or very low toxicity


✓Higher solubility: very compatible with all polarities
✓Quite environmentally friendly




✗Need for an extraction step
✓Some of them are biodegradable: low waste generation






✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy and time expenses




Fluorous
✓Suitable for process improvement
✗Most of them have an environmental footprint
✗Medium toxicity


✓High recycling capacity: higher circularity
✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy, and time expenses
✗Water toxicity


✓High extraction efficiency (few cycles needed)


✗Human toxicity


✗Need for extraction step






Thermomorphic solvents (TMSs)
✓Easy separation
✓Some mixtures are rather environmentally friendly
✗Medium toxicity


✓No separation step needed
✗Energy demands for changing operating conditions
✗Water toxicity


✗Need for changing process conditions








12. Conclusions
The solvent is possibly the most underestimated component in the process mixture of a chemical reaction. Its function in the past has mainly been seen to fill the reaction space in order to allow operations of chemical engineering such as mixing, heating, and separation. A solvent has to dissolve reactants, often at a high or maximal concentration, and thus solubility is a major goal. Solvents have to be cheap and typically accessible in large amounts. In view of increasing environmental awareness, the recyclability of solvents has become increasingly important. In the last decade, we have seen a trend towards using ‘green solvents’, such as acetone, esters (ethyl acetate), alcohols, and water. Solvent maps were made with traffic-light assignments, meaning green (wanted), orange (not the best but no better alternative now), and red (to be banned).
With the aim of designing an ‘ideal solvent’ from first principles according to the above goals, entirely new types of solvents have entered the portfolio of chemists. They have been termed “designer or master solvents”. They offer a very different set of functions in terms of environmental profile, safety, functionality, and process integration. Moreover, they can, for example, promote reactions by making reactants or catalysts more reactive, or making them last longer (catalyst stability). The solvents themselves can even act as reactants as shown by the class of reactive ionic liquids. The use of disruptive process intensification technologies, such as microfluidics, having set a new standard in the quality of unit operations, has increased the demand for the new class of master solvents. Evidently, a vast number of reports are available on microflow technologies using ionic liquids.
Designer solvents were termed “green” from the moment they were first mentioned, and from then onwards many accolades have been given to their environmental friendliness. This has often been made from a chemist's point of view, focussing on their physico-chemical properties, such as the zero vapour pressure of ionic liquids. In the last few years, the point of view of a process and sustainability chemist has been added, and this has revealed gaps in that kind of assignment, e.g. the absence of mature technical solutions for the recycling of ionic liquids; at least at the time the reports were made.
This is where this review comes in. We have provided a critical review of the sustainability assessment of green solvents, reviewing modern life cycle and circularity assessments published in the literature. We show that some classes, e.g. ionic liquids and carbon dioxide, are quite well documented, yet still leaving notable gaps in relevant sustainability assessments. The class of thermomorphic solvents has been well and comprehensively documented for the purpose of its focused use, centering on homogeneous catalysis. Thermomorphic solvents could be used much beyond this and are simply not as ‘popular’ as other master solvents. Other green solvent classes need more environmental documentation. We have tried to deepen these impressions from the literature review by a somewhat more quantitative assessment. In Table 6 we quantify the degree of investigations, as taken from this overview, by weighting their number and breadth, classifying them as 0 (none, rare), 1 (medium), and 2 (strong). We admit that our overview is limited to the literature we covered and not made by a real statistical survey of the whole literature; yet this holds for almost all reviews, which still draw conclusions. Therefore, we aim to make careful conclusions in the following.
Table 6 Weighting of the literature considered in this review by number and breadth of information concerning sustainability; classified as 0 (none, rare), 1 (medium), and 2 (strong)




 
ILs
DESs
ScCO2
Fluorous
Thermo-morphic
Total




Energy efficiency
2
1
1
1
1

6



Global warming
1
1
0
1
1

4



Recyclability
2
1
1
1
2

7



Stability
2
0
0
1
0

3



Waste generation/avoidance
0
1
1
1
2

5



Toxicity and biodegradability
2
1
1
1
1

6



Holistic environmental impact assessment
0
0
2
0
0

2



Costs
0
0
0
0
1

1



Total

9


5


6


6


8








Table 6 confirms the impression that master solvents have not been investigated throughout concerning sustainability at the highest detail. For several solvents, some of the sustainability investigations in Table 6 have not been done (0 score), leaving a gap. In particular, Table 6 confirms that ILs have been thoroughly investigated, while being widely used. Thermomorphic solvents, despite being restricted to homogeneous catalysis applications, are actually well documented for sustainability; opening the door to wider applications. Supercritical carbon dioxide has often been used in the literature, yet in this study we see that the sustainability documentation does not reach the degree of comprehensiveness which ILs have; yet admittedly providing some holistic sustainability assessments. Fluorous solvents today fill only an application niche, and thus have not experienced advanced sustainability documentation. The same goes for deep eutectic solvents, but they are still a new solvent class.
Seeing Table 6 from the perspective of sustainability parameters, recyclability is particularly well documented, and to a somewhat lower extent energy efficiency, global warming potential, waste generation/avoidance, and toxicity/biodegradability. Stability issues have been largely addressed for ILs, and not or only rarely for the other solvents. A holistic sustainability assessment and cost analysis are only rarely available.
Apart from commenting on the state of sustainability assessment for master solvents, this review presents a direct benchmarking of green solvents, which has, to the best of our knowledge, not been given in the literature. This comparison has been done with an example of a relevant and future-pointing chemical process, converting biomass to chemicals.
13. Outlook
To sum up, this perspective paper takes the process chemist's point of view, and provides a critical assessment of green solvents, showing up their potential in process sustainability and ‘hotspots’ to consider improving that further (to render those solvents useful in industry). The aim is to expand the dominant chemist's view beyond reaction in a glass flask toward factory-gate processing with industrial motivation. The next step would be a cradle-to-cradle analysis, leaving the border of the factory gate and covering the whole life cycle.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Volker Hessel and Nam Nghiep Tran acknowledge the Start-Up Grant provided by the University of Adelaide.
References
A. Gałuszka, Z. Migaszewski and J. Namieśnik, The 12 principles of green analytical chemistry and the SIGNIFICANCE mnemonic of green analytical practices, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2013, 50, 78–84 CrossRef .
P. Morseletto, Targets for a circular economy, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 153, 104553 CrossRef .
J. Jortner, Theoretical studies of excess electron states in liquids, Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., Ber., 1971, 75(7), 696–714 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lozano, 
            et al., Active biopolymers in green non-conventional media: a sustainable tool for developing clean chemical processes, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(98), 17361–17374 RSC .
C. Capello, U. Fischer and K. Hungerbühler, What is a green solvent? A comprehensive framework for the environmental assessment of solvents, Green Chem., 2007, 9(9), 927–934 RSC .
B. Schuur, 
            et al., Green solvents for sustainable separation processes, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2019, 18, 57–65 CrossRef .
E. Carasek, 
            et al., Sustainable green solvents for microextraction techniques: Recent developments and applications, J. Chromatogr., A, 2021, 461944 CrossRef CAS .

          P. T. Anastas, P. Wasserscheid and A. Stark, Green solvents: ionic liquids, John Wiley & Sons,  2013 Search PubMed .

          P. T. Anastas, Green chemistry as applied to solvents, ACS Publications,  2002 Search PubMed .
K. Jähnisch, 
            et al., Chemistry in microstructured reactors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43(4), 406–446 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Hessel, H. Löwe and F. Schönfeld, Micromixers—a review on passive and active mixing principles, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60(8–9), 2479–2501 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Ohno, Electrochemical aspects of ionic liquids, John Wiley & Sons,  2005 Search PubMed .

          A. Mohammad, Green solvents I: properties and applications in chemistry, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012, vol. 1 Search PubMed .

          H. El. M. Saleh and M. Koller, Introductory chapter: principles of green chemistry, in Green Chemistry, IntechOpen,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Shahiduzzaman, 
            et al., Ionic Liquid-Assisted MAPbI3 Nanoparticle-Seeded Growth for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(18), 21194–21206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yasin, 
            et al., Effects of ionic liquid on cellulosic nanofiller filled natural rubber bionanocomposites, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 591, 409–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Gouveia, 
            et al., CO2/H2 separation through poly (ionic liquid)–ionic liquid membranes: The effect of multicomponent gas mixtures, temperature and gas feed pressure, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 259, 118113 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. O'Harra, 
            et al., Designing Ionic Liquid-Derived Polymer Composites from Poly (Ionic Liquid)–Ionene Semi-interpenetrating Networks, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3(4), 1995–2004 CrossRef .
M. Razi Asrami, 
            et al., Mass Transfer Characterization of Ionic Liquid Solvents for Extracting Phenol from Aqueous Phase in a Microscale Coiled Flow Inverter, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59(37), 16427–16436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saien and M. Razi Asrami, Comparative studies on the performance of ionic liquid and conventional solvent drops in extraction of phenol from water, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2021, 166, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
B. Daryayehsalameh, M. Nabavi and B. Vaferi, Modeling of CO2 capture ability of [Bmim][BF4] ionic liquid using connectionist smart paradigms, Environ. Technol. Innov., 2021, 22, 101484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Domi, 
            et al., Lithiation/Delithiation Properties of Lithium Silicide Electrodes in Ionic-Liquid Electrolytes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(3), 3816–3824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, 
            et al., Ionic liquid reducing energy loss and stabilizing CsPbI2Br solar cells, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105631 CrossRef CAS .
B.-J. Yao, 
            et al., Sulfonic Acid and Ionic Liquid Functionalized Covalent Organic Framework for Efficient Catalysis of the Biginelli Reaction, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86(3), 3024–3032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Torres, 
            et al., Coatable and Resistance-Proof Ionic Liquid for Pathogen Eradication, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(1), 966–978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Razi Asrami and J. Saien, Salting-out effect on extraction of phenol from aqueous solutions by [Hmim][NTf2] ionic liquid: experimental
investigations and modeling, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 204, 175–184 CrossRef .
M. R. Asrami, 
            et al., Solvent Extraction of Metals: Role of Ionic Liquids and Microfluidics, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 118289 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Seddon, A taste of the future, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2(6), 363–365 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Heckenbach, 
            et al., Meta-analysis of ionic liquid literature and toxicology, Chemosphere, 2016, 150, 266–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Costa, 
            et al., Environmental impact of ionic liquids: recent advances in (eco) toxicology and (bio) degradability, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(11), 2321–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sivapragasam, M. Moniruzzaman and M. Goto, Recent advances in exploiting ionic liquids for biomolecules: Solubility, stability and applications, Biotechnol. J., 2016, 11(8), 1000–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Gutowski, Industrial uses and applications of ionic liquids, Phys. Sci. Rev., 2018, 3, 1–10 CrossRef .
A. J. Greer, J. Jacquemin and C. Hardacre, Industrial Applications of Ionic Liquids, Molecules, 2020, 25(21), 5207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. B. Shiflett, Commercial applications of ionic liquids, Springer,  2020, vol. 605 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, 
            et al., Novel solvent properties of choline chloride/urea mixtures, Chem. Commun., 2003,(1), 70–71 RSC .
S. E. Hooshmand, 
            et al., Deep eutectic solvents: cutting-edge applications in cross-coupling reactions, Green Chem., 2020, 22(12), 3668–3692 RSC .

          D. A. Alonso, et al., Deep eutectic solvents: the organic reaction medium of the century,  2016 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Choi, 
            et al., Are Natural Deep Eutectic Solvents the Missing Link in Understanding Cellular Metabolism and Physiology?, Plant Physiol., 2011, 156(4), 1701–1705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, 
            et al., Natural deep eutectic solvents as new potential media for green technology, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 766, 61–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Biocompatible Deep Eutectic Solvents Based on Choline Chloride: Characterization and Application to the Extraction of Rutin from Sophora japonica, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3(11), 2746–2755 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faggian, 
            et al., Natural Deep Eutectic Solvents (NADES) as a Tool for Bioavailability Improvement: Pharmacokinetics of Rutin Dissolved in Proline/Glycine after Oral Administration in Rats: Possible Application in Nutraceuticals, Molecules, 2016, 21(11), 1531 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wen, 
            et al., Assessing the toxicity and biodegradability of deep eutectic solvents, Chemosphere, 2015, 132, 63–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cicco, 
            et al., Advances in deep eutectic solvents and water: applications in metal-and biocatalyzed processes, in the synthesis of APIs, and other biologically active compounds, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2021, 19(12), 2558–2577 RSC .

          H. V. Chavda, D. R. Patel, M. Patel and M. Patel, Supercritical fluid: green solvent for tomorrow,  2007, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/26576797_Supercritical_Fluid_Green_Solvent_For_Tomorrow.
Ž. Knez, E. Markočič, M. Leitgeb, M. Primožič, M. K. Hrnčič and M. Škerget, Industrial applications of supercritical fluids: A review, Energy, 2014, 77, 235–243 CrossRef .
C. Crampon, O. Boutin and E. Badens, Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction of molecules of interest from microalgae and seaweeds, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 8941–8953 CrossRef CAS .
D. Roy, M. F. Wahab, M. Talebi and D. W. Armstrong, Replacing methanol with azeotropic ethanol as the co-solvent for improved chiral separations with supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC), Green Chem., 2020, 22, 1249–1257 RSC .
S. Wang and F. Kienzle, The syntheses of pharmaceutical intermediates in supercritical fluids, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 4487–4490 CrossRef CAS .
S.-D. Yeo and E. Kiran, Formation of polymer particles with supercritical fluids: A review, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2005, 34, 287–308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuda, Recent progress in biocatalysis using supercritical carbon dioxide, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2013, 115, 233–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Obaidat, B. M. Tashtoush, M. F. Bayan, R. T. Al Bustami and M. Alnaief, Drying Using Supercritical Fluid Technology as a Potential Method for Preparation of Chitosan Aerogel Microparticles, AAPS PharmSciTech, 2015, 16, 1235–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Manjare and K. Dhingra, Supercritical fluids in separation and purification: A review, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 463–484 Search PubMed .
X. L. Cao, Z. H. Rao and S. M. Liao, Laminar convective heat transfer of supercritical CO2 in horizontal miniature circular and triangular tubes, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2011, 31, 2374–2384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marre, Y. Roig and C. Aymonier, Supercritical microfluidics: Opportunities in flow-through chemistry and materials science, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2012, 66, 251–264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behr, G. Henze and R. Schomäcker, Thermoregulated Liquid/Liquid Catalyst Separation and Recycling, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 1485–1495 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Behr and P. Neubert, Applied homogeneous catalysis, Wiley-VCH-Verl, Weinheim,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bergbreiter, Y.-S. Liu and P. L. Osburn, Thermomorphic Rhodium(I) and Palladium(0) Catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 4250–4251 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Shende, V. B. Saptal and B. M. Bhanage, Recent Advances Utilized in the Recycling of Homogeneous Catalysis, Chem. Rec., 2019, 2022–2043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bianga, 
            et al., Thermomorphic Multiphase Systems: Switchable Solvent Mixtures for the Recovery of Homogeneous Catalysts in Batch and Flow Processes, Chemistry, 2019, 11586–11608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rösler, 
            et al., Toward Water-Based Recycling Techniques: Methodologies for Homogeneous Catalyst Recycling in Liquid/Liquid Multiphase Media and Their Implementation in Continuous Processes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 2421–2436 CrossRef .
O. Longeras, 
            et al., Deep Eutectic Solvent with Thermo-Switchable Hydrophobicity, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 12516–12520 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiong, 
            et al., Temperature-switchable deep eutectic solvents for selective separation of aromatic amino acids in water, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 118479 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, 
            et al., Temperature-responsive deep eutectic solvents as green and recyclable media for the efficient extraction of polysaccharides from Ganoderma lucidum, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 123047 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terhorst, 
            et al., Facile catalyst recycling by thermomorphic behaviour avoiding organic solvents: a reactive ionic liquid in the homogeneous Pd-catalysed telomerisation of the renewable β-myrcene, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 1827–1834 RSC .
L.-E. Meyer, J. von Langermann and U. Kragl, Recent developments in biocatalysis in multiphasic ionic liquid reaction systems, Biophys. Rev., 2018, 901–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Mai and Y.-M. Koo, Enzymatic hydrolysis of penicillin and in situ product separation in thermally induced reversible phase-separation of ionic liquids/water mixture, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2014, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, 
            et al., Temperature-Responsive Ionic Liquids: Fundamental Behaviors and Catalytic Applications, Chem. Rev., 2017, 6881–6928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. T. Horváth, 
            et al., Molecular Engineering in Homogeneous Catalysis: One-Phase Catalysis Coupled with Biphase Catalyst Separation. The Fluorous-Soluble HRh(CO)P[CH2CH2(CF2)5CF3]33 Hydroformylation System, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 3133–3143 CrossRef .

          P. Kirsch, Modern Fluoroorganic Chemistry, Wiley,  2004 Search PubMed .
T. Gaide, 
            et al., Overcoming Phase-Transfer Limitations in the Conversion of Lipophilic Oleo Compounds in Aqueous Media-A Thermomorphic Approach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 2924–2928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Papadopoulos, 
            et al., Phase-Change Solvents and Processes for Postcombustion CO2 Capture: A Detailed Review, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 5088–5111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Phase change solvents for post-combustion CO2 capture: Principle, advances, and challenges, Appl. Energy, 2019, 876–897 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Brunsch and A. Behr, Temperature-controlled catalyst recycling in homogeneous transition-metal catalysis: minimization of catalyst leaching, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 1586–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Schäfer, 
            et al., Hydroformylation of 1-Dodecene in the Thermomorphic Solvent System Dimethylformamide/Decane. Phase Behavior–Reaction Performance–Catalyst Recycling, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 10296–10306 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., A new thermoregulated PEG biphasic system and its application for hydroformylation of 1-dodecene, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 288–292 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gaide, 
            et al., Isomerization/hydroformylation tandem reaction of a decene isomeric mixture with subsequent catalyst recycling in thermomorphic solvent systems, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jokiel, 
            et al., Helically coiled segmented flow tubular reactor for the hydroformylation of long-chain olefins in a thermomorphic multiphase system, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 120060 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jokiel, 
            et al., Miniplant-Scale Evaluation of a Semibatch-Continuous Tandem Reactor System for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Olefins, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 2471–2480 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Dreimann, 
            et al., Merging Thermomorphic Solvent Systems and Organic Solvent Nanofiltration for Hybrid Catalyst Recovery in a Hydroformylation Process, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Dreimann, 
            et al., Increasing selectivity of the hydroformylation in a miniplant: Catalyst, solvent, and olefin recycle in two loops, AIChE J., 2016, 4377–4383 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behr and M. Urschey, Palladium-catalyzed telomerization of butadiene with ethylene glycol in liquid single phase and biphasic systems: control of selectivity and catalyst recycling, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 101–113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, 
            et al., Olefin metathesis transformations in thermomorphic multicomponent solvent systems, Catal. Commun., 2015, 31–34 CrossRef .
S. Schlüter, 
            et al., Continuous co-product separation by organic solvent nanofiltration for the hydroaminomethylation in a thermomorphic multiphase system, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 128219 CrossRef .
J. Bianga, 
            et al., Tandem Catalytic Amine Synthesis from Alkenes in Continuous Flow Enabled by Integrated Catalyst Recycling, ACS Catal., 2020, 6463–6472 CrossRef CAS .
L.-E. Meyer, 
            et al., Development of Ionic Liquid-Water-Based Thermomorphic Solvent (TMS)-Systems for Biocatalytic Reactions, Biotechnol. J., 2019, e1900215 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Behr, L. Johnen and B. Daniel, A liquid immobilisation concept for enzymes by thermomorphic solvent systems, Green Chem., 2011, 3168 RSC .

          I. T. Horváth, Fluorous chemistry, Springer Science & Business Media,  2011, vol. 308 Search PubMed .

          C. Samorì, Use of solvents and environmental friendly materials for applications in Green Chemistry,  2010 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Gladysz, D. P. Curran and I. T. Horváth, Handbook of fluorous chemistry, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
B. Wu, 
            et al., Ionic liquid versus traditional volatile organic solvent in the natural gas dehydration process: A comparison from a life cycle perspective, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(23), 19194–19201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kazemi, M. I. M. Nor and W. H. Teoh, Thermodynamic and economic investigation of an ionic liquid as a new proposed geothermal fluid in different organic Rankine cycles for energy production, Energy, 2020, 193, 116722 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oko, 
            et al., Process analysis and economic evaluation of mixed aqueous ionic liquid and monoethanolamine (MEA) solvent for CO2 capture from a coke oven plant, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2018, 8(4), 686–700 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, 
            et al., Deciphering the Sustainability of an Ionic Liquid-Based BTX Harvesting Process from Energetic, Environmental, and Economic Perspectives, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(2), 863–873 CrossRef CAS .

          G. W. Meindersma, et al., Extractive distillation with ionic liquids: Pilot plant experiments and conceptual process design, in Ionic Liquids for Better Separation Processes, Springer,  2016, pp. 11–38 Search PubMed .
E. Graczová, 
            et al., Methyl acetate–methanol mixture separation by extractive distillation: Economic aspects, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2018, 12(4), 670–682 CrossRef .
G. Li, 
            et al., Extractive distillation using ionic liquids-based mixed solvents combined with dividing wall column, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 269, 118713 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Barcelos, 
            et al., High-Efficiency Conversion of Ionic Liquid-Pretreated Woody Biomass to Ethanol at the Pilot Scale, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(11), 4042–4053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Procentese, 
            et al., Low-energy biomass pretreatment with deep eutectic solvents for bio-butanol production, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 243, 464–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haghbakhsh and S. Raeissi, Deep eutectic solvents for CO2 capture from natural gas by energy and exergy analyses, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(6), 103411 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. Zhong, 
            et al., Phenol-based ternary deep eutectic solvents for highly efficient and reversible absorption of NH3, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(3), 3258–3266 CrossRef .
W. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu, L. Li, H. Cheng and Z. Liu, Life cycle assessment and energy intensity of CFRP recycling using supercritical N-butanol, J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manage., 2021, 23, 1303–1319 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Allen and S. K. Muse, Energy Analysis of Butanol Extraction Using Supercritical Carbon Dioxide, Major Qualifying Project, Worcester Polytechnic Institute,  2017 .
G. A. Tompsett, 
            et al., Extraction rate and energy efficiency of supercritical carbon dioxide recovery of higher alcohols from dilute aqueous solution, Energy Technol., 2018, 6(4), 683–693 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Gronnow, 
            et al., Energy efficiency in chemical reactions: a comparative study of different reaction techniques, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2005, 9(4), 516–518 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Behr and A. J. Vorholt, Homogeneous Catalysis with Renewables, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, vol. 39 Search PubMed .
B. Hentschel, 
            et al., Model-Based Identification and Experimental Validation of the Optimal Reaction Route for the Hydroformylation of 1-Dodecene, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 1755–1765 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kiedorf, 
            et al., Kinetics of 1-dodecene hydroformylation in a thermomorphic solvent system using a rhodium-biphephos catalyst, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 31–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dreimann, 
            et al., Highly integrated reactor–separator systems for the recycling of homogeneous catalysts, Chem. Eng. Process., 2016, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
K. McBride, N. M. Kaiser and K. Sundmacher, Integrated reaction–extraction process for the hydroformylation of long-chain alkenes with a homogeneous catalyst, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2017, 212–223 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sahebjamnia, A. M. Fathollahi-Fard and M. Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, Sustainable tire closed-loop supply chain network design: Hybrid metaheuristic algorithms for large-scale networks, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 196, 273–296 CrossRef .
S. Zeng, 
            et al., Ionic-liquid-based CO2 capture systems: structure, interaction and process, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(14), 9625–9673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Lu, 
            et al., CO2 capture by ionic liquid membrane absorption for reduction of emissions of greenhouse gas, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2019, 17(2), 1031–1038 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., A novel process design for CO2 capture and H2S removal from the syngas using ionic liquid, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 213, 480–490 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Nguyen and E. Zondervan, Ionic liquid as a selective capture method of CO2 from different sources: comparison with MEA, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(4), 4845–4853 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Lepre, 
            et al., Ionic liquids can enable the recycling of fluorinated greenhouse gases, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(19), 16900–16906 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Pereiro, 
            et al., Gas permeation properties of fluorinated ionic liquids, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52(14), 4994–5001 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Jung, 
            et al., Solubility of carbon dioxide in imidazolium-based ionic liquids with a methanesulfonate anion, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2012, 57(12), 3321–3329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarmad, 
            et al., Screening of deep eutectic solvents (DESs) as green CO2 sorbents: from solubility to viscosity, New J. Chem., 2017, 41(1), 290–301 RSC .
B. Liu, 
            et al., Characterization of amide–thiocyanates eutectic ionic liquids and their application in SO2 absorption, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(7), 2470–2476 RSC .
Y. Sun, 
            et al., Highly efficient nitric oxide absorption by environmentally friendly deep eutectic solvents based on 1,3-Dimethylthiourea, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31(11), 12439–12445 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wazeer, M. K. Hadj-Kali and I. M. Al-Nashef, Utilization of Deep Eutectic Solvents to Reduce the Release of Hazardous Gases to the Atmosphere: A Critical Review, Molecules, 2021, 26(1), 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jiang, 
            et al., Novel deep eutectic solvents for highly efficient and reversible absorption of SO2 by preorganization strategy, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(9), 8347–8357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, 
            et al., Highly Efficient Absorption of NO by Amine-Based Functional Deep Eutectic Solvents, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34(1), 690–697 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, S. Zhang and D.-E. Jiang, Efficient Absorption of SO2 by Deep Eutectic Solvents Formed by Biobased Aprotic Organic Compound Succinonitrile and 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium Chloride, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(10), 9086–9091 CrossRef CAS .

          K. McBride, et al., Computer Aided Design of Green Thermomorphic Solvent Systems for Homogeneous Catalyst Recovery, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 1783–1788 Search PubMed .
S. Linke, K. McBride and K. Sundmacher, Systematic Green Solvent Selection for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Alkenes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 10795–10811 CAS .
T. Keßler, 
            et al., Integrated Computer-Aided Molecular and Process Design: Green Solvents for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Olefines, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 249, 117243 CrossRef .
R. Rajni, Use of non-conventional reaction media-a green approach, Res. J. Chem. Sci., 2015, 2231, 606X Search PubMed .
M. Pagliaro and R. Ciriminna, New fluorinated functional materials, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15(47), 4981–4991 RSC .

          M. P. Marques, et al., Green solvents for biocatalysis, in Green Solvents I, Springer,  2012, pp. 121–146 Search PubMed .
N. L. Mai, K. Ahn and Y.-M. Koo, Methods for recovery of ionic liquids—a review, Process Biochem., 2014, 49(5), 872–881 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, 
            et al., Oxidized template-synthesized mesoporous carbon with pH-dependent adsorption activity: A promising adsorbent for removal of hydrophilic ionic liquid, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 821–829 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakashima, 
            et al., Enzyme encapsulation in microparticles composed of polymerized ionic liquids for highly active and reusable biocatalysts, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7(11), 2353–2358 RSC .
K. Haerens, 
            et al., Challenges for recycling ionic liquids by using pressure driven membrane processes, Green Chem., 2010, 12(12), 2182–2188 RSC .
J. Zhou, 
            et al., Recovery and purification of ionic liquids from solutions: a review, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(57), 32832–32864 RSC .
Y. Zhou, 
            et al., Extraction of metal ions with task specific ionic liquids: influence of a coordinating anion, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2015, 50(1), 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Platzer, 
            et al., Task-specific thioglycolate ionic liquids for heavy metal extraction: synthesis, extraction efficacies and recycling properties, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 324, 241–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Martinis, 
            et al., Sensitive determination of cadmium in water samples by room temperature ionic liquid-based preconcentration and electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 628(1), 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhiman and B. Gupta, Recovery of pure germanium oxide from Zener diodes using a recyclable ionic liquid Cyphos IL 104, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 276, 111218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Nakasu, 
            et al., Interplay of acid–base ratio and recycling on the pretreatment performance of the protic ionic liquid monoethanolammonium acetate, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(21), 7952–7961 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kumar, B. S. Parikh and M. Pravakar, Natural deep eutectic solvent mediated pretreatment of rice straw: bioanalytical characterization of lignin extract and enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated biomass residue, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23(10), 9265–9275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Di Gioia, 
            et al., Biorenewable Deep Eutectic Solvent for Selective and Scalable Conversion of Furfural into Cyclopentenone Derivatives, Molecules, 2018, 23(8), 1891 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, C. Li and M. Bao, Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) as powerful and recyclable catalysts and solvents for the synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones/thiones, Green Process. Synth., 2019, 8(1), 568–576 CAS .
S. Khandelwal, Y. K. Tailor and M. Kumar, Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) as eco-friendly and sustainable solvent/catalyst systems in organic transformations, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 215, 345–386 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Singh, H. R. Lobo and G. S. Shankarling, Choline chloride based eutectic solvents: Magical catalytic system for carbon–carbon bond formation in the rapid synthesis of β-hydroxy functionalized derivatives, Catal. Commun., 2012, 24, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vagnoni, C. Samori and P. Galletti, Choline-based eutectic mixtures as catalysts for effective synthesis of cyclic carbonates from epoxides and CO2, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 42, 101302 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Shen, 
            et al., Facile fractionation of lignocelluloses by biomass-derived deep eutectic solvent (DES) pretreatment for cellulose enzymatic hydrolysis and lignin valorization, Green Chem., 2019, 21(2), 275–283 RSC .
E. S. Morais, 
            et al., Deep Eutectic Solvent Aqueous Solutions as Efficient Media for the Solubilization of Hardwood Xylans, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11(4), 753–762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Khaw, M. O. Parat, P. N. Shaw and J. R. Falconer, Solvent supercritical fluid technologies to extract bioactive compounds from natural sources: A review, Molecules, 2017, 22(7), 1186 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tsang, G. Philippot, C. Aymonier and G. Sonnemann, Anticipatory life-cycle assessment of supercritical fluid synthesis of barium strontium titanate nanoparticles, Green Chem., 2016, 18(18), 4924–4933 RSC .
A. Behr and C. Fängewisch, Temperature-Dependent Multicomponent Solvent Systems – An Alternative Concept for Recycling Homogeneous Catalysts, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2002, 143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gaide, 
            et al., Hydroesterification of methyl 10-undecenoate in thermomorphic multicomponent solvent systems—Process development for the synthesis of sustainable polymer precursors, Chem. Eng. Process., 2016, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Fluorous synthesis of heterocyclic systems, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(5), 2531–2556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amde, J.-F. Liu and L. Pang, Environmental application, fate, effects, and concerns of ionic liquids: a review, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(21), 12611–12627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Raiguel, W. Dehaen and K. Binnemans, Stability of ionic liquids in Brønsted-basic media, Green Chem., 2020, 22(16), 5225–5252 RSC .
Y. Cao and T. Mu, Comprehensive investigation on the thermal stability of 66 ionic liquids by thermogravimetric analysis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(20), 8651–8664 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Lohmoh, 
            et al., Electrochemical stability on 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis (trifluoromethyl sulfonyl) imide ionic liquid for dye sensitized solar cell application, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 313, 113594 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maton, N. De Vos and C. V. Stevens, Ionic liquid thermal stabilities: decomposition mechanisms and analysis tools, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(13), 5963–5977 RSC .
J. G. Huddleston, 
            et al., Characterization and comparison of hydrophilic and hydrophobic room temperature ionic liquids incorporating the imidazolium cation, Green Chem., 2001, 3(4), 156–164 RSC .
A. Xu and F. Wang, Carboxylate ionic liquid solvent system from 2006 to 2020: Thermal properties and application in cellulose processing, Green Chem., 2020, 7622–7664 RSC .
R. A. Patil, 
            et al., Dicationic ionic liquid thermal decomposition pathways, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410(19), 4645–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, 
            et al., Ether-functionalized trialkylimidazolium ionic liquids: Synthesis, characterization, and properties, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51(34), 11011–11020 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, 
            et al., Are ionic liquids chemically stable?, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(10), 7113–7131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Fuad, M. M. Nadzir and A. Harun, Hydrophilic natural deep eutectic solvent: A review on physicochemical properties and extractability of bioactive compounds, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 116923 CrossRef .
W. Tang, Y. An and K. H. Row, Emerging applications of (micro) extraction phase from hydrophilic to hydrophobic deep eutectic solvents: opportunities and trends, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2021, 116187 CrossRef CAS .
R. Craveiro, 
            et al., Properties and thermal behavior of natural deep eutectic solvents, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 215, 534–540 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. G. P. van Osch, 
            et al., The curious case of hydrophobic deep eutectic solvents: A story on the discovery, design, and applications, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(29), 10591–10612 CAS .
D. J. G. P. van Osch, 
            et al., Removal of alkali and transition metal ions from water with hydrophobic deep eutectic solvents, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(80), 11987–11990 RSC .
C. Florindo, L. C. Branco and I. M. Marrucho, Development of hydrophobic deep eutectic solvents for extraction of pesticides from aqueous environments, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2017, 448, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sheldon, The E factor: fifteen years on, Green Chem., 2007, 9(2), 1273–1283 RSC .
A. Behr, L. Johnen and N. Rentmeister, Novel Palladium-Catalysed Hydroamination of Myrcene and Catalyst Separation by Thermomorphic Solvent Systems, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352(11–12), 2062–2072 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terhorst, A. Kampwerth, A. Marschand, D. Vogt, A. J. Vorholt and T. Seidensticker, Facile catalyst recycling by thermomorphic behaviour avoiding organic solvents: a reactive ionic liquid in the homogeneous Pd-catalysed telomerisation of the renewable β-myrcene, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10(6), 1827–1834 RSC .
A. Behr, A. Vorholt and N. Rentmeister, Recyclable homogeneous catalyst for the hydroesterification of methyl oleate in thermomorphic solvent systems, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2013, 99, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hongfa, P. Samunual, S. Sachdev and C. Lim, Thermomorphic Biphasic System—A Greener Alternative Route to the Synthesis of Biodiesel, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 879–882 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huxoll, 
            et al., Solvent Selection in Homogeneous Catalysis—Optimization of Kinetics and Reaction Performance, ACS Catal., 2021, 590–594 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, N.Ş Tüzün and M. Stein, Computational investigation of the control of the thermodynamics and microkinetics of the reductive amination reaction by solvent coordination and a co-catalyst, RSC Adv., 2018, 36662–36674 RSC .
F. Jameel and M. Stein, Solvent effects in hydroformylation of long-chain olefins, Mol. Catal., 2021, 111429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behr, 
            et al., Highly selective tandem isomerization–hydroformylation reaction of trans-4-octene to n-nonanal with rhodium-BIPHEPHOS catalysis, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 179–184 CrossRef CAS .
H. Freund and K. Sundmacher, Towards a methodology for the systematic analysis and design of efficient chemical processes, Chem. Eng. Process., 2008, 2051–2060 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Kaiser, 
            et al., Optimal Reactor Design via Flux Profile Analysis for an Integrated Hydroformylation Process, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 11507–11518 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. G. Rätze, 
            et al., Cyclic operation of a semi-batch reactor for the hydroformylation of long-chain olefins and integration in a continuous production process, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 120453 CrossRef .
J. Markert, 
            et al., Analysis of the reaction network for the Rh-catalyzed hydroformylation of 1-dodecene in a thermomorphic multicomponent solvent system, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behr, A. Kleyensteiber and M. Becker, A novel approach to selecting thermomorphic multicomponent solvent systems (TMS) for hydroaminomethylation reactions, Chem. Eng. Process., 2013, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behr, 
            et al., Advances in thermomorphic liquid/liquid recycling of homogeneous transition metal catalysts, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, 
            et al., The acute toxic effects of imidazolium-based ionic liquids with different alkyl-chain lengths and anions on zebrafish (Danio rerio), Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2017, 140, 235–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Abramenko, 
            et al., A review of recent advances towards the development of QSAR models for toxicity assessment of ionic liquids, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Egorova and V. P. Ananikov, Fundamental importance of ionic interactions in the liquid phase: A review of recent studies of ionic liquids in biomedical and pharmaceutical applications, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 272, 271–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ostadjoo, 
            et al., Scaling-up ionic liquid-based technologies: How much do we care about their toxicity? Prima facie information on 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, Toxicol. Sci., 2018, 161(2), 249–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Petkovic, 
            et al., Ionic liquids: a pathway to environmental acceptability, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(3), 1383–1403 RSC .
D. Errazquin, 
            et al., Ecotoxicity interspecies study of ionic liquids based on phosphonium and ammonium cations, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 1–11 Search PubMed .
B. Pawłowska, A. Telesiński and R. Biczak, Phytotoxicity of ionic liquids, Chemosphere, 2019, 237, 124436 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Ventura, 
            et al., Assessing the toxicity on [C3mim][Tf2N] to aquatic organisms of different trophic levels, Aquat. Toxicol., 2010, 96(4), 290–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, H. Luo and S. Dai, Ionic liquids-based extraction: a promising strategy for the advanced nuclear fuel cycle, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112(4), 2100–2128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. T. Pham, C.-W. Cho and Y.-S. Yun, Environmental fate and toxicity of ionic liquids: a review, Water Res., 2010, 44(2), 352–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, 
            et al., Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs): a review on occurrence, fate and toxicity in the environment, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 518–519, 352–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-R. Jhong, 
            et al., A novel deep eutectic solvent-based ionic liquid used as electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11(1), 209–211 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott, 
            et al., Deep Eutectic Solvents Formed between Choline Chloride and Carboxylic Acids: Versatile Alternatives to Ionic Liquids, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(29), 9142–9147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hayyan, 
            et al., Are deep eutectic solvents benign or toxic?, Chemosphere, 2013, 90(7), 2193–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. E. Macário, 
            et al., Cytotoxicity profiling of deep eutectic solvents to human skin cells, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 3932 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Radošević, 
            et al., Evaluation of toxicity and biodegradability of choline chloride based deep eutectic solvents, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2015, 112, 46–53 CrossRef PubMed .
Ž. Knez, M. Pantić, D. Cör, Z. Novak and M. K. Hrnčič, Are supercritical fluids solvents for the future?, Chem. Eng. Process., 2019, 141, 107532 CrossRef .
P. Harper, J. Wilday and M. Bilio, Assessment of the major hazard potential of carbon dioxide (CO2), Health and Safety Executive, 2011, 1–28 Search PubMed .

          B. Knutson, The Use of a Supercritical Carbon Dioxide-Based Solvent as a Cost Effective and Environmentally Sound Alternative to Current Photoresist Stripping Solvents, Master of Science Thesis, University of Wisconsin-Stout Menomonie,  2002 .
M. Castro-Puyana, J. A. Mendiola, I. Rodríguez-Meizoso, C. Turner and E. Ibáñez, Comparative Life Cycle Assessment Study of Green Extraction Processes to Obtain Antioxidants from Rosemary Leaves, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2009, 72, 13–17 Search PubMed .
P. H. Galebach, J. K. Soeherman, A. M. Wittrig, M. P. Lanci and G. W. Huber, Huber, Supercritical methanol depolymerization and hydrodeoxygenation of maple wood and biomass-derived oxygenates into renewable alcohols in a continuous flow reactor, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(18), 15361–15372 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Polikhronidi, R. G. Batyrova, J. W. Magee and I. M. Abdulagatov, Isochoric heat capacity of near- and supercritical benzene and derived thermodynamic properties, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 313, 113204 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lee, F. V. Mikulec and B. A. Korgel, Carbon Nanotube Synthesis in Supercritical Toluene, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4951–4957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gaide, J. M. Dreimann, A. Behr and A. J. Vorholt, Overcoming Phase-Transfer Limitations in the Conversion of Lipophilic Oleo Compounds in Aqueous Media—A Thermomorphic Approach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(8), 2924–2928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. McBride, S. Linke, S. Xu and K. Sundmacher, Computer aided design of green thermomorphic solvent systems for homogeneous catalyst recovery, in Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, Elsevier,  2018, vol. 44, pp. 1783–1788 Search PubMed .
S. Linke, K. McBride and K. Sundmacher, Systematic green solvent selection for the hydroformylation of long-chain alkenes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(29), 10795–10811 CAS .
T. Keßler, C. Kunde, S. Linke, K. McBride, K. Sundmacher and A. Kienle, Systematic Selection of Green Solvents and Process Optimization for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Olefines, Processes, 2019, 7(12), 882 CrossRef .
T. Keßler, C. Kunde, S. Linke, K. Sundmacher and A. Kienle, Integrated Computer-Aided Molecular and Process Design: Green Solvents for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Olefines, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 117243 Search PubMed .
K. L. O'Neal, 
            et al.,
Fluorous media for extraction and transport, J. Chromatogr., A, 2010, 1217(16), 2287–2295 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Clark and S. J. Tavener, Alternative solvents: shades of green, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11(1), 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morais, T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins, G. A. Pinto and C. A. Costa, Simulation and life cycle assessment of process design alternatives for biodiesel production from waste vegetable oils, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18(13), 1251–1259 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Tsang, G. Philippot, C. Aymonier and G. Sonnemann, Supercritical Fluid Flow Synthesis to Support Sustainable Production of Engineered Nanomaterials: Case Study of Titanium Dioxide, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5142–5151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steimel, 
            et al., A framework for the modeling and optimization of process superstructures under uncertainty, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 225–237 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steimel and S. Engell, Optimization-based support for process design under uncertainty: A case study, AIChE J., 2016, 3404–3419 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hentschel, 
            et al., Simultaneous design of the optimal reaction and process concept for multiphase systems, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 69–87 CrossRef CAS .
K. McBride and K. Sundmacher, Data Driven Conceptual Process Design for the Hydroformylation of 1-Dodecene in a Thermomorphic Solvent System, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 6761–6771 CrossRef CAS .
T. Keßler, 
            et al., Systematic Selection of Green Solvents and Process Optimization for the Hydroformylation of Long-Chain Olefines, Processes, 2019, 882 CrossRef .
A. Farrán, 
            et al., Green solvents in carbohydrate chemistry: from raw materials to fine chemicals, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(14), 6811–6853 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Maleic acid and aluminum chloride catalyzed conversion of glucose to 5-(hydroxymethyl) furfural and levulinic acid in aqueous media, Green Chem., 2016, 18(19), 5219–5229 RSC .
Z. Hu, 
            et al., Direct synthesis of hierarchically porous metal–organic frameworks with high stability and strong Brønsted acidity: the decisive role of hafnium in efficient and selective fructose dehydration, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(8), 2659–2667 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Graphene oxide catalyzed dehydration of fructose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural with isopropanol as cosolvent, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6(3), 728–732 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Kreissl, 
            et al., Niobium oxides: correlation of acidity with structure and catalytic performance in sucrose conversion to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, J. Catal., 2016, 338, 329–339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, 
            et al., Zeolite-promoted transformation of glucose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural in ionic liquid, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 244, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, 
            et al., Catalytic conversion of carbohydrates into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural over cellulose-derived carbonaceous catalyst in ionic liquid, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 148, 501–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, Z. K. Zhao and Q. Wang, Catalytic conversion of inulin and fructose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural by lignosulfonic acid in ionic liquids, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5(5), 901–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, 
            et al., One–pot conversion of inulin to furan derivatives catalyzed by sulfated TiO2/mordenite solid acid, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4(12), 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iris, 
            et al., Catalytic valorization of starch-rich food waste into hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF): controlling relative kinetics for high productivity, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 237, 222–230 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-D. Nguyen, 
            et al., Magnetic poly (vinylsulfonic-co-divinylbenzene) catalysts for direct conversion of cellulose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using ionic liquids, Mater. Trans., 2015, MA201539 Search PubMed .
B. Yuan, 
            et al., Green hydrolysis of corncob cellulose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using hydrophobic imidazole ionic liquids with a recyclable, magnetic metalloporphyrin catalyst, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 330, 109–119 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Sutton, 
            et al., The hydrodeoxygenation of bioderived furans into alkanes, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5(5), 428–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, 
            et al., Catalytic synthesis of 2,5-bis-methoxymethylfuran: A promising cetane number improver for diesel, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 481, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gelmini, 
            et al., Oxidant free one-pot transformation of bio-based 2,5-bis-hydroxymethylfuran into α-6-hydroxy-6-methyl-4-enyl-2H-pyran-3-one in water, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
I. Delidovich, 
            et al., Alternative
monomers based on lignocellulose and their use for polymer production, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(3), 1540–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-S. Kang, B. Kim and Y. G. Kim, Efficient preparation of DHMF and HMFA from biomass-derived HMF via a Cannizzaro reaction in ionic liquids, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2012, 18(1), 174–177 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Gandini, Polymers and oligomers containing furan rings,  1990 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, 
            et al., Catalytic advances in the production and application of biomass-derived 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(4), 2959–2980 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lima, D. Chadwick and K. Hellgardt, Towards sustainable hydrogenation of 5-(hydroxymethyl) furfural: a two-stage continuous process in aqueous media over RANEY® catalysts, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(50), 31401–31407 RSC .
J. Ohyama, 
            et al., Selective hydrogenation of 2-hydroxymethyl-5-furfural to 2,5-bis (hydroxymethyl) furan over gold sub-nano clusters, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(4), 1033–1036 RSC .
J. Ohyama, 
            et al., Effect of FeOx modification of Al2O3 on its supported Au catalyst for hydrogenation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(28), 15129–15136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cai, 
            et al., Biomass into chemicals: One-pot production of furan-based diols from carbohydrates via tandem reactions, Catal. Today, 2014, 234, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chatterjee, T. Ishizaka and H. Kawanami, Selective hydrogenation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2,5-bis-(hydroxymethyl) furan using Pt/MCM-41 in an aqueous medium: a simple approach, Green Chem., 2014, 16(11), 4734–4739 RSC .
J. Chen, 
            et al., Immobilized Ru clusters in nanosized mesoporous zirconium silica for the aqueous hydrogenation of furan derivatives at room temperature, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5(10), 2822–2826 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. de Beeck, 
            et al., Direct catalytic conversion of cellulose to liquid straight-chain alkanes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(1), 230–240 RSC .
T. Pasini, 
            et al., Substrate and product role in the Shvo's catalyzed selective hydrogenation of the platform bio-based chemical 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43(26), 10224–10234 RSC .
L. Yu, 
            et al., Robust and recyclable nonprecious bimetallic nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes for the hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7(11), 1701–1707 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alamillo, 
            et al., The selective hydrogenation of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using heterogeneous catalysts, Green Chem., 2012, 14(5), 1413–1419 RSC .
J. Han, 
            et al., Heterogeneous zirconia-supported ruthenium catalyst for highly selective hydrogenation of 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furaldehyde to 2,5-bis (hydroxymethyl) furans in various n-alcohol solvents, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(96), 93394–93397 RSC .
G. Bottari, 
            et al., Copper–Zinc Alloy Nanopowder: A Robust Precious–Metal–Free Catalyst for the Conversion of 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8(8), 1323–1327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, 
            et al., Carbon-coated Cu-Co bimetallic nanoparticles as selective and recyclable catalysts for production of biofuel 2,5-dimethylfuran, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Kumalaputri, 
            et al., Tunable and selective conversion of 5-HMF to 2,5-Furandimethanol and 2,5-Dimethylfuran over copper–doped porous metal oxides, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7(8), 2266–2275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Srivastava, G. Jadeja and J. Parikh, Synergism studies on alumina-supported copper-nickel catalysts towards furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural hydrogenation, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2017, 426, 244–256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Audemar, 
            et al., Combination of Pd/C and Amberlyst-15 in a single reactor for the acid/hydrogenating catalytic conversion of carbohydrates to 5-hydroxy-2,5-hexanedione, Green Chem., 2014, 16(9), 4110–4114 RSC .
S. Yao, 
            et al., One-step conversion of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 1,2,6-hexanetriol over Ni–Co–Al mixed oxide catalysts under mild conditions, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2(2), 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, 
            et al., Efficient synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran and 2,5-dimethylfuran from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using mineral-derived Cu catalysts as versatile catalysts, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5(8), 4208–4217 RSC .
T. Thananatthanachon and T. B. Rauchfuss, Efficient route to hydroxymethylfurans from sugars via transfer hydrogenation, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3(10), 1139–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hao, 
            et al., Catalytic transfer hydrogenation of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethyl furfural
to the building block 2,5-bishydroxymethyl furan, Green Chem., 2016, 18(4), 1080–1088 RSC .
T. Wang, 
            et al., Catalytic transfer hydrogenation of biobased HMF to 2,5-bis-(hydroxymethyl) furan over Ru/Co3O4, Catalysts, 2017, 7(3), 92 CrossRef .
C.-H. Hao, 
            et al., Visible-light-driven selective photocatalytic hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde over Au/SiC catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(30), 9361–9364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Wang, 
            et al., Co3O4 Nanoparticles Supported on Mesoporous Carbon for Selective Transfer Hydrogenation of α, β–Unsaturated Aldehydes, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128(37), 11267–11271 CrossRef .
F. Wang and Z. Zhang, Catalytic transfer hydrogenation of furfural into furfuryl alcohol over magnetic γ-Fe2O3@HAP catalyst, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(1), 942–947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, 
            et al., Porous zirconium–furandicarboxylate microspheres for efficient redox conversion of biofuranics, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(8), 1761–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, 
            et al., Orderly layered Zr-benzylphosphonate nanohybrids for efficient acid/base-mediated bifunctional/cascade catalysis, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(4), 681–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, 
            et al., Acid–base bifunctional zirconium N-alkyltriphosphate nanohybrid for hydrogen transfer of biomass-derived carboxides, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(11), 7722–7727 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, 
            et al., Selective transformation of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural into 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran via catalytic transfer hydrogenation over magnetic zirconium hydroxides, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 35(1), 99–109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aellig, 
            et al., Combined 1,4-butanediol lactonization and transfer hydrogenation/hydrogenolysis of furfural-derivatives under continuous flow conditions, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4(8), 2326–2331 RSC .
Z. Gao, 
            et al., Promotional Role of Surface Defects on Carbon–Supported Ruthenium–Based Catalysts in the Transfer Hydrogenation of Furfural, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8(24), 3769–3779 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Roylance, T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Efficient and selective electrochemical and photoelectrochemical reduction of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2,5-bis (hydroxymethyl) furan using water as the hydrogen source, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(3), 1840–1847 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, A. P. Borole and S. G. Pavlostathis, Biotransformation of furanic and phenolic compounds with hydrogen gas production in a microbial electrolysis cell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(22), 13667–13675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, 
            et al., Effective Production of 2,5-Dimethylfuran from Biomass–derived 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural on ZrO2-doped Graphite Electrode, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2(3), 1237–1240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo and J. Chen, Photo-induced reduction of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using graphitic carbon nitride supported metal catalysts, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(104), 101968–101973 RSC .
R. Wohlgemuth, Biocatalysis—key to sustainable industrial chemistry, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21(6), 713–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Woodley, New opportunities for biocatalysis: making pharmaceutical processes greener, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26(6), 321–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. McKenna, 
            et al., Enzyme cascade reactions: synthesis of furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) and carboxylic acids using oxidases in tandem, Green Chem., 2015, 17(6), 3271–3275 RSC .
Y.-C. He, 
            et al., Biological synthesis of 2,5-bis (hydroxymethyl) furan from biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural by E. coli CCZU-K14 whole cells, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 247, 1215–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Subbiah, 
            et al., Direct transformation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to the building blocks 2,5-dihydroxymethylfurfural (DHMF) and 5-hydroxymethyl furanoic acid (HMFA) via Cannizzaro reaction, Green Chem., 2013, 15(10), 2849–2853 RSC .
T. Wang, 
            et al., Synthesis of renewable monomer 2,5-bishydroxymethylfuran from highly concentrated 5-hydroxymethylfurfural in deep eutectic solvents, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2020, 81, 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grimaldi, 
            et al., Life cycle assessment and cost evaluation of emerging technologies at early stages: The case of continuous flow synthesis of Rufinamide, J. Adv. Manuf. Process., 2020, 2(2), e10043 CAS .
O. M. Morales-Gonzalez, M. Escribà-Gelonch and V. Hessel, Life cycle assessment of vitamin D 3 synthesis: from batch to photo-high p, T, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2019, 24(12), 2111–2127 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hischier, 
            et al., Establishing life cycle inventories of chemicals based on differing data availability (9 pp), Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2005, 10(1), 59–67 CrossRef CAS .

          E. ToolBox, Fluids - Latent Heat of Evaporation,  2021 [cited 2021 05/10]; available from: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/fluids-evaporation-latent-heat-d_147.html Search PubMed .

          Chemwatch, Chemwatch - Global Leader in Chemicals Mangement,  2021 [cited 2021 05/10]; available from: https://www.chemwatch.net/ Search PubMed .
K. McBride, 
            et al., Thermomorphic solvent selection for homogeneous catalyst recovery based on COSMO-RS, Chem. Eng. Process., 2016, 99, 97–106 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Huang, 
            et al., PEG-stabilized palladium nanoparticles: An efficient and recyclable catalyst for the selective hydrogenation of 1,5-cyclooctadiene in thermoregulated PEG biphase system, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2008, 19(1), 102–104 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Application of a fluorous biphasic system in catalytic reactions.88	 

 	Fig. 2  Life cycle of an ideal green solvent.	 

 	Fig. 3  Process performance analysis of different configurations: (a) TAC; (b) CO2 emissions.96	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalised, deterministic (nonprobabilistic) environmental and human health impacts.26	 


Water	9	99	91	
241–247

Toluene	1	99	99	
248

1-Butanol	6	98	86	
249–251

Ethanol	7	87	69	
252–254

Tetrahydrofuran	2	84	72	
255 and 256
Methanol	2	95	90	
235 and 257
1,4-Dioxane	1	100	99	
258



Formic acid in tetrahydrofuran	5	100	99	
259

Ethanol	1	94	84	
260

Isopropanol	8	96	88	
261–267

2-Butanol	1	98	90	
268

Methanol	1	100	100	
268

1,4-Butanediol	1	94	93	
269

Benzyl alcohol	1	91	87	
270


 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran using [EMIm]TFSI as solvent, as described by Kang et al.238	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran as described by Subbiah et al.279	 

Process performance	Equivalent solvent ratio (solvent load)	1.1	2
Residence time (h)	18	1
DHMF yield (%)	86	100
HMFA (%)	87	84
Primary solvent recovery (%)	0	100
Process circularity	Recycling fraction	0.85	0.99
Fraction to be composted	0.14	0.01
kg waste generated per kg of product	12	18
Material circularity indicator	0.84	0.99
Process green metrics	
E-Factor	0.3	0.1
Process mass intensity (kg kg−1)	12.54	1.05
Mass productivity (%)	88	95
Waste water intensity (kg kg−1)	11.4	0
Health	Acute toxicity	0	0.6
Irritation	0	0.85
Chronic toxicity	0	0.7
Environment	Persistency	0	1
Water hazard	0	0.6

 	Fig. 7  Midpoint life cycle impact assessment for HMFA and DHMF syntheses – ReCiPe 2016. Characterization results for Subbiah et al.'s279 approach were normalized to 1 g to compare them with the incremental results for Kang et al.'s238 approach.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparative LCA impacts of the same process using different green solvents and changing the conditions according to the solvent demands (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2 and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvents).	 

 	Fig. 9  Simulation of energy demand distribution using different solvents for the same process (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2, DES to deep eutectic solvents and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvents).	 

 	Fig. 10  Simulated EHS impacts regarding material demands of using different solvents for the same process (scCO2 refers to the use of supercritical CO2, DES to deep eutectic solvents and TMS refers to thermomorphic solvent).	 

ILs	[EMIm]TFSI	2	1	1	2	1	0
 
Fluorous	Perfluorotriethylamine	2	1	1	2	1	0
Octafluorocyclopentene	4	0	4	2	1	2
Hexafluorobenzene	3	3	0	2	1	0
Octafluorotoluene	3	3	2	2	1	0
Hexadecafluoroheptane	1	1	1	1	1	0
Perfluoro-1,3-dimethylcyclohexane	2	0	1	2	1	0
Perfluoro-2-butyltetrahydrofuran	2	1	2	2	1	0
Perfluorotributylamine	2	0	1	2	1	0
Octadecafluorooctane	2	0	1	2	1	0
Perfluoro-2-methylpentane	2	0	1	2	1	0
Hexafluoroisopropyl methyl ether	2	1	2	2	1	0

Ionic liquids (ILs)	✓Suitable to improve process, increasing yield with shorter residence times	✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy and time expenses	✗Low toxicity
✓Allows recycling, increasing MCI	✗Low extraction efficiency: higher extraction solvent demands	✗Water toxicity
✗Low extraction efficiency. Many cycles are needed	
	

Supercritical CO2 (scCO2)	✓No extraction needed	✗No recycling: higher CO2 emissions and footprint	✗High carbon footprint
✗Need to keep supercritical conditions	✗Energy demands for keeping supercritical conditions	✗Water toxicity
✗Not compatible with recycling: processes mainly linear	
	✗Safety breathing risks
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs)	✓Similar performance to ILs	✓Some of them are obtained from natural sources	✓Non-toxic or very low toxicity
✓Higher solubility: very compatible with all polarities	✓Quite environmentally friendly	

✗Need for an extraction step	✓Some of them are biodegradable: low waste generation	


	✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy and time expenses	

Fluorous	✓Suitable for process improvement	✗Most of them have an environmental footprint	✗Medium toxicity
✓High recycling capacity: higher circularity	✗The extraction step demands more materials, energy, and time expenses	✗Water toxicity
✓High extraction efficiency (few cycles needed)	
	✗Human toxicity
✗Need for extraction step	
	

Thermomorphic solvents (TMSs)	✓Easy separation	✓Some mixtures are rather environmentally friendly	✗Medium toxicity
✓No separation step needed	✗Energy demands for changing operating conditions	✗Water toxicity
✗Need for changing process conditions	
	


Energy efficiency	2	1	1	1	1	
6

Global warming	1	1	0	1	1	
4

Recyclability	2	1	1	1	2	
7

Stability	2	0	0	1	0	
3

Waste generation/avoidance	0	1	1	1	2	
5

Toxicity and biodegradability	2	1	1	1	1	
6

Holistic environmental impact assessment	0	0	2	0	0	
2

Costs	0	0	0	0	1	
1

Total	
9
	
5
	
6
	
6
	
8
	


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
