Electron spin resonance  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1PC90002A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1PC90002A
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2011, 107, 47-87Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectron spin resonance

        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Rhodes
          
        
      
Fresh-Lands Environmental Actions, 88 Star Road, Caversham, Berkshire RG4 5BE, United Kingdom. E-mail: cjrhodes@fresh-lands.com
First published on 18th April 2011AbstractThe technique variously known as Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) or Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) continues to find important applications mainly in the Biomedical, Materials and Environmental Sciences. Among the advances which feature information gleaned through its agency, are studies of enzymes and membranes, conductive polymers and novel materials, fuel cells, antioxidants, environmental samples, catalysts and photocatalysts, spin-trapping agents, spin-probes and spin-labels. High-field methods are particularly useful in obtaining improved resolution of overlapping signals and the interpretation of many systems had benefited from the use of Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations.
1. Introduction
The present review follows my last of three years ago on this subject1 and aims to give a representative account of progress made both in the devising of novel ESR/EPR equipment and techniques and in finding applications for the method overall. In compiling the information for a survey of scientific developments made with the aid of ESR, which I have made at various points during the past 20 years, I have found generally that the papers tend to sift themselves under particular broad headings, which at one time were focussed mostly in chemistry. While I was immersed in ESR research, the steady shift in focus toward the biological sciences and indeed materials science seemed almost imperceptible, but by now appears fully manifest and the vast majority of papers published in the field of ESR report the use of the method to solve problems in connection with the biological and environmental (Life) sciences and in studying potentially useful new materials. On looking through the Chemical Abstracts Selects series on Electron Spin Resonance, principally for the past three years, there appear fairly few papers dealing fundamentally with organic radicals, though there are some fundamental studies of triplet state species, and the organic emphasis is more in devising and employing spin-probes with which to probe details of the microenvironment, such as polarity, H-bonding, molecular confinement and modelling biological phenomena, in which the probe molecule is encapsulated in a molecular pocket e.g. a cyclodextrin. Medium effects in ionic liquids also feature. Studies of materials are more widely manifest too, for example conducting polymers, catalysts and catalytic systems, and diverse applications including studies of coal and oil/gas-bearing rocks. There are applications too in archaeology and in radiation dosimetry. In the field of fuel-cells, specifically the PEM (proton-exchange membrane) type, ESR provides a useful method with which to determine the degree of robustness of the membrane under the operating conditions of the cell. Studies continue of enzyme (or model) active centres, and the determination of inter spin–spin distances in suitably spin-labelled proteins etc. using pulsed ESR methods. Spin-trapping prevails as the principal means to detect the formation of reactive radicals in a diverse range of systems, normally by ESR but also using mass-spectrometry as a means for obtaining a greater overall molecular picture of what kind of radical has indeed been trapped. In part through the agency of spin-trapping, there are many studies of antioxidant and pro-oxidant activity in natural systems, which may be placed in the context of human health and toxicology. In other investigations, particularly of magnetic and optically active materials, ESR is increasingly employed merely as one member of a family of spectroscopic techniques that are brought to bear in the identification of often complex structures and properties. As a largely semantic matter, rests the issue of whether the method should be called ESR or EPR. Traditionally, organic chemists and applied scientists (archaeologists, medical workers etc.) have referred to Electron Spin Resonance (ESR)—as indeed is the tradition of the Royal Society of Chemistry in the title of reviews on the topics in this series of Annual Reports on the Progress of Chemistry. However, the consensus of wisdom is that it should be Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR), but both terms and abbreviations are used throughout the literature. Therefore, to do justice to the primary literature, I shall use whichever term (ESR or EPR) the authors chose in their particular paper that I am reviewing. In truth, EPR is the more accurate designation, since the energy-transitions occur between different states of the overall paramagnetism of molecules, rather than purely those of the electron spin alone, but for reasons of history and convention, ESR is likely to be with us for the foreseeable future.
2. Technical and theoretical aspects
Among the more important aims in technical developments of ESR instrumentation are those to provide methods for medical diagnoses. In vivo ESR/EPR,2 as this field is broadly dubbed, including experiments made on animals more often than on humans, has shown particular promise in the measurement of oxygen in living tissue, by means of embedded and stable paramagnetic markers, e.g., those derived from stable carbon particles (coal, India-ink in tattoos), and also nitroxides and lithium phthalocyanine. A leading group in this area is that of Swartz, based at the Dartmouth Medical College, which has contributed a review on the use of ESR to measure radical species in vivo, to determine environmental and biophysical parameters in cells and tissues, and to signify metabolic processes. This is a critical account, in which the authors have used their judgement in an attempt to decide on which of these kinds of measurements will prove most useful in studies of living animals and humans. It is anticipated that considerable improvements are to be anticipated by the near availability of more sophisticated technology but that the most probable direct clinical applications are for oximetry and radiation dosimetry.3 The issue of ESR oximetry in biological and model biological samples has also been reviewed. It is well-known that lines in CW-ESR spectra are broadened by Heisenberg exchange when paramagnetic probe-molecules undergo collisions with molecular oxygen and that this may be used to measure oxygen-tensions in an entire range of biological specimens. In the review4 is described the principles behind the experiment itself, both using spin-labels and for oxygen-sensitive paramagnetic particles as probes, e.g. coals, India ink and lithium phthalocyanine. Particular applications detailed include cell respiration, membrane permeability and in vivo measurements of isolated animal organs.4 Complexities to this method are sometimes encountered, however, and a simple measurement of a peak-to-peak linewidth is not necessarily accurate when the microenvironment is heterogeneous, since the spectrum is composite and can be severely biased toward narrow components. A post-processing procedure is suggested,5 that can recover the linewidth histogram for a meaningful estimate of the mean and median pO2 values. Although the information obtained is less comprehensive than that possible from EPR spectral-spatial imaging, the substantially shorter acquisition times may provide an advantage in screening clinical samples.5 Images may also be obtained [in analogy with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at NMR frequencies] using ESR methods, but in contrast to NMR where the magnetically responsive spinning particle (nucleus) is present implicitly, a paramagnetic spin-probe must first be introduced to the subject for ESR imaging. The topic has been reviewed, with particular emphasis on low-frequency spectrometer design, spin-probe development, data acquisition and image-construction for spatial and spectral-spatial imaging and a consideration of the kinds of biological measurements that can indeed be made using such techniques.6 A mobile and low-cost apparatus for dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) hyperpolarization based on a Halbach magnet is described and its performance is demonstrated at room temperature for three different radical species dissolved in a glycerol–water mixture. DNP enhancement factors for a triarylmethyl-based radical, TEMPOL and a polyelectrolyte spin-labelled with nitroxide radicals are measured as a function of the microwave power, and the extrapolated maximum enhancement factors are compared. 1H DNP enhancement factors up to −50 were observed with the projection of a maximum enhancement factor of −80.7 The challenges of performing pulsed-EPR imaging at low frequencies (300 MHz) are enumerated. A complete description is given of the 300 MHz coil-resonator and data-acquisition arrangement in the author's home-system is given along with the mathematical/computational methods which they use to perform the image reconstruction. Three-dimensional images of mice were made using pulsed FID detection of T2* for triarylmethyl radicals that had been injected into the animals. A technique actually developed for solid-state NMR, known as single-point imaging, was shown to provide spatial images free of artefacts.8 Novel EPR resonators based on ceramic materials have been reported with a high dielectric permittivity (ε = 160). The ceramic is described as a titanate of complex oxides of rare-earth and alkaline metals, which has a perovskite type structure. The resonators have a very high quality factor (Q = 103), which increases the sensitivity of an EPR spectrometer by up to a factor of 170. Further advantages of these devices are that they are cheaper and easier to make than conventional resonators; and that they may be used over a greater range of temperatures. The resonators were tested for X-band EPR using cylindrical (TE011) and rectangular (TE102) cavities, both at 300 and 77 K. It is concluded that the exact enhancement of the EPR signal depends on the dielectric constant of the material, the precise geometry of the resonator and the sample dimension. An unusual resonant mode was found in the dielectric resonator-metallic cavity structure, where the directions of the microwave magnetic fields of the coupled resonators are opposite and the resonant frequency is higher than that of the empty metallic cavity.9 Recent developments are discussed in using rapid-flow EPR as a means to monitor sub-millisecond protein folding. Site-directed spin-labelling and the kinetic folding of cyctochrome is considered specifically. The design of dielectric resonator-based flow and stopped-flow is considered, in particular an application of stopped-flow EPR to measure the folding of wild-type yeast iso-1-cyctochrome c. The first rapid-flow results are presented from a variable-velocity liquid flow sub-millisecond apparatus which is based on a mini ball mixer integrated with a dielectric resonator: these show sub-millisecond pre-folding or compacting of iso-1-cytochrome c, spin-labelled at its naturally present Cys102 unit.10 As a consequence of its stability, the fluorinated radical perfluoro-2,4-dimethyl-3-isopropyl-3-pentyl (PFR-2) might be considered as a candidate as an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) imaging agent. To put this to the test, an in vivo EPR imaging system operating at 700 MHz and equipped with a bridged loop-gap resonator (inner diameter, 41 mm; axial length, 10 mm) was used. A solution of the PFR-2 solution was prepared in a perfluorocarbon (because the pure material is insoluble in an aqueous medium) and this was introduced to cylindrical sample tubes with various inner diameters, which were placed together in a larger cylindrical sample tube filled with a physiological saline solution, which was used as a phantom. From the image of the phantom, the spatial resolution was estimated to be about 3 mm. EPR images of mice that had received an injection of the PFR-2 solution via the intraperitoneal route indicated that PFR-2 remained in the peritoneal cavity for as long as 2 days after the injection, suggesting that it is indeed possible to perform EPR imaging of experimental animals using PFR-2 as a persistent biological imaging agent.11 Nitroxides have also been employed as imaging agents in mice. Nitroxides have shorter T2's than trityl radicals, which until now prevented their detection in vivo using a time-domain Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectrometer at 300 MHz, because their phase memory times were shorter than the spectrometer recovery times. In the present work, a time-domain EPR spectrometer has been developed in which spectrometer recovery times are improved. The longest T2 was measured for deuterated 15N-Tempone (15N-PDT). A biphasic behavior was obtained from the signal intensity profile as a function of concentration of nitroxide, but when the nitroxide concentration increased above 1.5 mM, a loss of signal intensity occurred due to spin–spin broadening. Solutions of 15NPDT were prepared, as equilibrated with 0%, 5%, 10%, and 21% oxygen and measured using the single point imaging (SPI) modality. It was shown that the intensity if the image depended on the oxygen concentration, since this influences the T2 of the spin-probe, and the capability to image a cell-permeable nitroxide in anaesthetized mice using pulsed EPR in the SPI modality is demonstrated for the first time.12 Lipophilic, labile alkanoyloxymethyl esters of nitroxides have the ability to cross the blood-brain barrier, where they undergo hydrolysis, and the corresponding anionic nitroxide is intracellularly entrapped at levels sufficient to permit O2 measurements by EPR-imaging. Since the usefulness of nitroxides as EPR imaging agents depends critically on their ability to accumulate in the brain to high levels, a systematic investigation was made of the relationship between the structure of the alkanoyl moiety and the ability of the corresponding labile ester to deliver nitroxide to intracellular regions. It is found that extending the length of the alkanoyl chain enhances the degree of access, while branching of the chain results in a dramatic reduction in intracellular loading. Using
this information, a strategy is potentiated for improving the delivery of nitroxide imaging agents across the blood-brain barrier in vivo.13 Using a strongly saturating continuous wave (CW) pump microwave source and a nonsaturating observing source, Electron Electron Double Resonance (ELDOR) can be used in a field swept display to monitor saturation-transfer mechanisms such as Heisenberg Exchange, nitrogen nuclear relaxation, and rotational diffusion. 2-dimensional pulsed ELDOR techniques known as DEER or PELDOR with two separate microwave frequencies or a similar “2+1” technique which employs a single frequency have been devised with which to probe dipolar interactions up to distance of 8 nm, while spin-echo ELDOR techniques have been implemented for the investigation of slow motions in a wide range of biological situations. All combinations of pump and probe frequencies with nanosecond time resolution are possible for two-dimensional Fourier transform techniques and hence all microscopic orientations of a system may be measured.14
A detailed evaluation is presented of the performance of density functional theory (DFT) in addition to complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF)-based methods (CASSCF and second-order N-electron valence state perturbation theory, NEVPT2) to predict the zero-field splitting (zfs) parameters for a series of coordination complexes containing the Mn(III) cation. To comprehend the physical origin of the zfs parameters, measured experimentally, a series of mononuclear Mn(III) complexes was chosen for which the structures have been resolved by X-ray diffraction and the zfs parameters determined from high-field EPR measurements. The best predictions have been obtained with B3LYP, followed by the nonhybrid BP86 functional, which in turn yields better results than the meta-hybrid GGA functional TPSSh. It was found that the coupled perturbed SOC approach CP is more successful than the Pederson-Khanna method for the estimation of the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) part of the zfs, while the restricted open-shell Kohn-Sham (ROKS) approach led to a slightly better agreement with the experiment than the unrestricted KS (UKS) approach, to compute the spin–spin (SS) interaction. The ab initio state-averaged CASSCF (SA-CASSCF) method with a minimal active space and the most recent implementation, which treats the SOC and SS contributions equally, provides the best predictions for the zfs. It is found that the major contribution to the axial zfs parameter (D) originates from the SOC interaction but that the SS part is nonetheless between 10 and 20% of D. The various excited triplet ligand field states account for roughly half of the value of D, which is in contrast to well accepted and widely used ligand field models. Even though it includes dynamic correlation contributions to the transition energies, the NEVPT2 approach does not provide particular improvements in the results, because the excitation energies of the Mn(III) d–d transitions are already fairly accurately represented at the SA-CASSCF level.15 DFT methods were also used (at the B3LYP/6-31G* level) to investigate the conformation of the propagating radical-chain in methacrylate polymerisation, which occurs by rotation around the Cα–Cβ bond. A higher order parameterization (B3LYP/TZVP//B3LYP/6-31G*) was employed to obtain accurate values of the isotropic hyperfine coupling constants (hfccs). In the initial stages of the polymerization a 13-line pattern was observed in the ESR spectrum, which was simulated on the basis of the most stable conformation alone, assuming it to correspond to a freely rotating radical in a fluid medium. At high degrees of polymerisation, a 9-line spectrum was recorded and this was interpreted in terms of highly rotationally-hindered rotational conformers frozen in the very viscous medium. The latter spectrum was well reproduced in terms of a model which considers the sum of the individual spectra of the conformations spread around the most probable conformation. Each of these individual contributing spectra was obtained on the basis of the computed hfccs for the given conformations and weighted by the relative Boltzmann population for each, according to the DFT analysis. Reassuringly, the calculated hfccs agreed excellently with those predicted by the far Heller-McConnell relationship, which validates the DFT methodology for calculations of this kind by a simple and well-accepted model.16
3. Biological systems
Studies of the active-site “units” of enzymes or models for them remain a significant province in biological-ESR. Green algae are of increasing interest17 as potential sources of biofuels (in particular liquid fuels), as efforts begin to find alternatives to petroleum-derived fuels in the anticipation of peak-oil18—the point at which world oil-production will reach a maximum and thereafter fall, thus undermining an oil-dependent civilization, as we consummately are. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a single celled green alga about 10 micrometres in diameter that swims with two flagella. They have a cell wall made of hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins, a large cup-shaped chloroplast, a large pyrenoid, and an “eyespot” that senses light. Although widely distributed worldwide in soil and fresh water, C. reinhardtii is primarily used as a model organism in biology in a wide range of subfields. When illuminated, C. reinhardtii can grow in media lacking carbon and energy sources, and can also grow in the dark when supplied with these. C. reinhardtii is also of interest in the biofuel field, as a source of hydrogen.19 Nonetheless, there remains considerable doubt that a “hydrogen economy” will prevail in the immediate future or indeed ever.1 The major obstacles to such an entire transformation from an oil-based to a hydrogen-based transportation infrastructure are that firstly the hydrogen has to be “made” since it is not a fuel but an energy carrier. Most of the world's hydrogen is manufactured by catalytically steam-reforming natural gas,20 which results in an overall emission of CO2, and thus a “green” source must be found, e.g. electrolysis of water using renewable electricity, e.g. from wind-power. The engineering feat required to inaugurate sufficient generating capacity by this means, however, is stupendous, and would take decades even were the manufacturing capacity for it already in existence. There is a further issue, namely of the availability of manufacturing raw materials, namely metals: there is insufficient platinum available1 to fabricate the PEM fuel-cells that would be required to “burn” enough hydrogen to propel more than a small fraction of the equivalent of 600 million vehicles as are currently on the world's highways, and indeed there is the currently vexed matter of Rare Earth (RE) metals, particularly neodymium needed for high-torque electric motors/dynamos, such as are used in wind-turbines, most of which are exported from China.21 However, Chinese home-demand for REs is enormous given the thirst for all kinds of energy (including wind-power and other kinds of renewable energy) to underpin the relentless industrial growth of a nation that is predicted to overtake the United States as the world economic superpower by the end of this decade. In consequence, China has announced it will restrict its exports of REs onto the world markets, in order to meet its own agendas, which casts doubt on the growth of renewable energy in the world overall.21 Hydrogenase expression in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii can be artificially induced by anaerobic adaptation or is present naturally under conditions of sulphur deprivation. Sulphur-deprived algal cultures show considerably higher expression rates of the [FeFe]-hydrogenase (HydA1), in comparison with anaerobic adaptation, and develop a higher in vitro hydrogenase activity by a factor of 25. Based on this principle a novel purification protocol has been established for the isolation of HydA1 which furthermore can be applied to other green algae. From 8 litres of C reinhardtii culture, 0.52 mg HydA1 was isolated with a specific activity of 741 mu mol H-2 min−1 mg−1. Comparable quantities were also purified from Chlorococcum submarinum and Chlamydomonas moewusii. Thus, sufficiently large amounts of protein were recovered that a spectroscopic characterization of the active site of these smallest [FeFe]-hydrogenases could be made for the first time. Characteristic axial EPR signals from the CO inhibited forms were recorded that are typical for the H-ox-CO state of the active site from [FeFe]-hydrogenases. There are nonetheless deviations in the g-tensor components which indicate distinct differences in the electronic structure between the various kinds of hydrogenase. With the samples maintained at cryogenic temperatures, light-induced changes were promoted in the EPR spectra that are envisaged as a photo-dissociation of the inhibiting CO ligand.22 γ-irradiation of frozen solutions of Fe(II) haemoproteins at 77 K was found to produce both EPR-active singly reduced and oxidized haem centres which remain trapped in the conformation of their Fe(II) precursors. The reduction products of pentacoordinate (S = 2) Fe(II) globins, peroxidases and cytochrome P450cam show EPR and ENDOR spectra that are characteristic of 3d7 Fe(I) species. Additionally, cryo-reduced Fe(II) α-chains of haemoglobin and myoglobin exhibit an S = 3/2 spin state which arises from antiferromagnetic coupling between a porphyrin radical anion and pentacoordinate (S = 2) Fe(II). The spectra of cryo-reduced forms of Fe(II) haemoglobin α-chains and deoxymyoglobin demonstrate that the Fe(II) precursors adopt multiple conformational geometries. Reduction of hexacoordinate Fe(II) cytochrome c and cytochrome b5 along with carboxy complexes of deoxyglobins results only in Fe(II) porphyrin π-anion radical species. Low-valent haemoprotein intermediates produced by cryo-reduction are found to undergo conversion to the Fe(II) states at temperatures above 200 K. Cryo-generated Fe(III) cytochrome c and cytochrome b5 have similar spectra to these for the resting Fe(III) states, whereas the spectra of the products of cryo-oxidation of pentacoordinate Fe(II) globins and peroxidases are different. Both cryo-oxidized and reduced centres provide very sensitive EPR/ENDOR structural probes of the EPR-silent Fe(II) state.23a A more comprehensive study was also published by this group, using EPR/ENDOR methods, which identified the proton-coupled electron transfer and protonation status of Ferryl Haemes, peroxidises and myoglobin. Specifically considered is the identification of iron-oxo species formed by electron-transfer and the implications of this for the structure of the original haem.23b On the basis of ESR and other measurements, it is proposed that there is a widespread distribution in pathogenic bacteria of di-iron proteins that are able to repair oxidative and nitrosative damage to iron-sulphur centres. The name “repair of iron centres (RIC) proteins” is proposed for this new protein family.24 The particulate, membrane-bound methane hydroxylase (pMMOH) was isolated from methane-oxidizing cells of Methylococcus capsulatus (strain M). On sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), pMMOH displays three fractions: at 47 (alpha), 27 (beta), and 25 kDa (gamma). The ESR spectrum of pMMOH incubated with hydrogen peroxide (final concentration 20 mM) at 4 °C showed, along with the copper signal of type 11 with g = 2.05, signals of cytochrome with g = 3.0 and of high-spin ferrihaeme with g = 6.00. After incubation at −30 °C, additional signals with g = 8.5 and g = 13.5 were observed. These signals are due to an intermediate of the pMMOH active site, which arises from the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with pMMOH at −30 °C. This intermediate is a high-spin dimer [Fe(III)–Fe(IV)] with S = 9/2 and a varying type of rhombic distortion (hence the same essential species gives rise to both signals). It is thought that the signal with g = 8.5 also arises from the same dimer [Fe(III)–Fe(IV)], but with S = 7/2.25 In another study, two 2[4Fe4S] ferredoxins were characterized from Clostridium acetobutylicum using EPR.26 A review discusses the advantages of pulsed and high-frequency EPR methods for the structure analysis of nitric oxide-ligated ferric and ferrous haeme-proteins.27 Correlations have been demonstrated between the haem ruffling out-of-plane (OOP) deformation and the 13C and 1H NMR hyperfine shifts of haem resonances, aided by DFT calculations. The degree of ruffling in the haem cofactor of Hydrogenobacter thermophilus cytochrome C-552 has been modified by a single amino acid mutation in the second coordination sphere of the cofactor, in which the 13C and 1H resonances were assigned using one- and two-dimensional NMR measurements and assisted by selective 13C-enrichment of the haem. DFT was used to predict the NMR hyperfine shifts and EPR g-tensor at several points along the ruffling deformation coordinate, for which good agreement was obtained with the experimental values. As the degree of ruffling increases, the haem methyl 1H resonances move upfield while
the haem methyl and meso 13C resonances move downfield, as is a consequence of altered overlap of the Fe 3d and porphyrin π-orbitals, which destabilizes all three occupied Fe 3d-based molecular orbitals and decreases the positive and negative spin density on the β-pyrrole and meso carbons, respectively.28 A transient tyrosyl-like radical showing a narrow doublet EPR feature at X-band arises during catalase turnover by Mycobacterium tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase (KatG). When the KatG was labelled with beta-methylene-deuterated tyrosine, the doublet feature was observed to collapse to a singlet, while for the enzyme with tyrosine, labelled at the 3,5-positions, the EPR signal was unaffected. Other than the replacement Tyr229Phe, all other single-tyrosine mutants of KatG showed the same narrow doublet EPR signal along with similar catalase activity to that of the wild-type enzyme. The results substantiate that the catalytically active radical is associated with Tyr229, in which the 3′ and 5′ protons are substituted, in consequence of cross-links with neighbouring Met255 and Trp107 side chains in the post-translationally modified enzyme with a distal-side Met255-Tyr229-Trp107 adduct.29 Use of S-band EPR (2–4 GHz) was found to provide better resolution over X-band in spectra of Cu2+ in proteins. Specific examples include particulate methane monooxyganase, Cu-substituted prions, azurin, laccase, mixed valance dinuclear copper sites in nitrous oxide reductase and Cytochrome c oxidase and from Cu in clusters.30 Multi-reference Ab initio calculations have been presented to estimate g-tensor components for trinuclear copper clusters in multicopper oxidases. By decomposing the calculated g-tensors into terms arising from interactions of the ground state and excited states, the origin of the zero-field splitting is established. The predictions are found to depend strongly on small differences in energy that are hard to compute accurately by any quantum mechanical method, reinforcing the point that such calculations of exchange-coupled systems remain a challenge.31 PELDOR (pulsed electron double resonance) measurements have been reported on a nitroxide-labelled Cu2+− porphyrin. In addition to distance information, the X-band PELDOR time traces reveal a composition of orientational selectivity, conformational flexibility, exchange coupling, and spin density distribution, which can be decomposed using experiments with different frequency offsets and simulations. The simulations are based on known experimental and spin Hamiltonian parameters and a geometric model used for structurally similar bis-nitroxides, along with spin density parameters obtained from DFT calculations. In consequence of the large copper hyperfine coupling, it is found that orientation selection with respect to dipolar angles is only weakly resolvable at X-band frequencies. Contrastingly, the PELDOR time-traces reveal a much faster oscillation damping than that observed for structurally similar bis-nitroxides, which is explained essentially in terms of a small distribution in electron-exchange couplings J. Allowing for the effects of orientation selectivity, distribution in J, and spin density distribution, a narrow distance distribution is finally arrived at, which results entirely from the flexibility of the structure, and is in agreement with distributions obtained from known bis-nitroxides of similar structure.32 There are several papers published on the general theme of photosynthetic proteins. As noted for the case of haem-proteins,23a,b the degree or absence of protonation may influence the efficacy and nature of electron-transfer processes, and it is exactly this matter of protonation-status that has been investigated for the S2 state of Photosystem II, specifically to answer the question of whether Mn-bound substrate water in this protein is protonated or not.33 Time-resolved membrane-inlet mass spectrometry measurements indicate that both substrate water molecules are bound to the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) in the S2 and S3 states34 but the following uncertainties prevail: (1) if they are both Mn-bound, (2) if they are terminal or bridging ligands, and (3) in what protonation state they are bound in the different oxidation states Si (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) of the OEC. Using 17O hyperfine sublevel correlation (HYSCORE) spectroscopy it was recently demonstrated35 that in the S2 state there is only one (type of) Mn-bound oxygen that is water exchangeable, leading to the tentative assignment of this oxygen atom as being from one substrate ‘water’ molecule. Given that the 17O nucleus displayed a hyperfine interaction of about 10 MHz with the electron spin of the Mn4OxCa cluster, a likely ascription is that it is bound as a Mn–O–Mn bridging moiety. The conclusions from a series of measurements made using pulse EPR, 1H/2H Mims ENDOR and 2H-HYSCORE spectroscopies together with 1H/2H-isotopic exchange-labelling are that this oxygen atom is fully deprotonated.33 Photosystem I (PS I) mutants derived from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, having point mutations to the axial ligands of A0A (M688NPsaA) and A0B (M668NPsaB) were studied using high-frequency W-band EPR. It was found that the EPR observables of PS I from the M668NPsaB mutant were almost identical with that of the wild type (WT), and clearly distinct from the M688NPsaA mutant. The P700˙+ decay kinetics in the M688NPsaA mutant are significantly slower than in the WT or the M668NPsaB mutant. The estimated distance of 26.0 ± 0.3 Å obtained from measurements of the out-of-phase electron–electron dipolar electron spin echo envelope modulation of the M668NPsaB mutant, agrees well with the separation of 25.8 Å for the P700˙+A1A˙− radical pair measured by X-ray crystallography. Two populations are measured in the M688NPsaA mutant giving estimated distances of 26.0 ± 0.3 and 25.0 ± 0.3 Å in a ratio of 0.7/0.3, which accords well with the 25.8 Å distance for the P700˙+A1A˙− radical pair and the 24.6 Å distance for the P700˙+A1B˙− radical pair determined from the X-ray crystal structure. The data confirm that electron transport in cyanobacterial PS I is asymmetrical at 100 K, with the majority of electron transfer taking place through the A-branch of cofactors.36 The formation of neutral carotenoid radicals in Photosystem II has been demonstrated on the basis of ENDOR and visible/near IR spectroscopic measurements of β-carotene adsorbed in the hexagonal pores of the molecular sieve Cu(II)-MCM-41. β-carotene radical cations were produced in humid air under the influence of ambient fluorescent light. An absorption peak at 750 nm was assigned to neutral radicals formed by proton-loss from the 4(4′) position from β-carotene radical cations in the molecular sieve and was also identified in PS II following illumination with visible light at 20 K. Further structural considerations suggest an electron-transfer pathway from a β-carotene molecule with an adjacent proton-acceptor to P680˙+.37 In another study, it is shown that peroxynitrite inhibits electron-transport on the acceptor-site of higher plant PS II. It is known that peroxynitrite attenuates oxygen-evolution in PS II membranes in a dose-dependent manner. It is concluded from ESR measurements that peroxynitrite impairs PS II electron-transport in the QAFe2+ niche.38 The formation of the Co(II)-substrate radical-pair catalytic intermediate in coenzyme B12 (adenosylcobalamin)-dependent ethanolamine ammonia-lyase (EAL) from Salmonella typhimurium has been studied by using time-resolved CW-EPR in a cryosolvent system. The 41% v/v DMSO/water cryosolvent allows mixing of holoenzyme and substrate, (S)-2-aminopropanol, at 230 K under conditions of kinetic arrest. By stepping the temperature from 230 to 234–248 K the cleavage of the cobalt-carbon bond is initiated and the mono-exponential generation (rate constant, kobs = τ−1obs) of the EPR-detected Co(II)-substrate radical pair state. Since the EPR spectrum acquisition time is ≪τobs, continuous acquisition of spectra is possible throughout the period of the reaction. Since the kobs values and Co(II)-substrate radical pair amplitudes are found to be independent of substrate concentration at each temperature, the reaction must occur from the enzyme-coenzyme-substrate ternary complex. All indications are that the Co(II)-substrate radical pair and ternary complex are essentially at equilibrium, and so the reaction is treated as a relaxation to equilibrium, using a linear two-step, three-state mechanism. Van't Hoff analysis
yields ΔH13 = 10.8 ± 0.8 kcal/mol and ΔS13 = 45 ± 3 cal/mol/K for the transition from the ternary complex to the Co(II)-substrate radical pair state. The free energy difference, ΔG13, is zero to within one standard deviation through the temperature range 234–248 K and by extrapolation, a value of ΔG13 of −2.6 ± 1.2 kcal/mol at 298 K is estimated. The estimated EAL protein-associated contribution to the free energy difference is ΔGEAL = −24 kcal/mol at 240 K, and ΔHEAL = −13 kcal/mol and ΔSEAL = 38 cal/mol/K, showing that both enthalpy and entropy changes are required by the EAL protein to overcome the large, energetically demanding cobalt–carbon bond dissociation energy, which poises the reaction in the forward direction of Co–C bond cleavage and thus Co(II)-substrate radical pair formation.39 The vanadyl hyperfine couplings of VO2+-ATP and VO2+-ADP complexes in the presence of the nitrogenase Fe protein from Klebsiella pneumonia were reported previously,40 from which it was demonstrated that different VO2+-nucleotide coordination environments coexist and are distinguishable by EPR. It a follow-up study by the same workers,41 orientation-selective CW-ENDOR spectra were obtained in the low-radio-frequency range in order to identify superhyperfine interactions with nuclei other than protons. The superhyperfine coupling is determined to be about 25 MHz from 31P, which is consistent with an interaction of the metal-centre with a phosphorus-atom from one or more directly equatorially coordinated nucleotide phosphate groups. Relatively weak 31P couplings were also determined to be present with ATP (at all pH's) and are thought to originate from an interaction of the (V) metal with a phosphate group of the nucleoside triphosphate and are attributed to a phosphorus atom with axial characteristics. A further group of resonances, centred upon the nuclear Zeeman frequency of 23Na, was detected, suggesting that a monovalent Na+ cation is closely associated with the divalent metal-nucleotide binding site.41 Galactose-oxidase is a metalloenzyme containing a novel metallo-radical complex consisting of a mononuclear Cu cation associated with a protein free-radical which is localised on an intrinsic redox cofactor, 3′-(S-cysteinyl)tyrosine (Cys-Tyr), which is formed by a post-translational covalent coupling of tyrosine and cysteine in a self-processing reaction. A full characterisation was made of this radical and its isotopic versions (2H, 13C, 17O) including a 33S labelled thioether linkage to evaluate the effect of that linkage on the function of the Cys-Tyr cofactor.42 Using pulse EPR, direct evidence has been presented for a hydrogen-bond to bound dioxygen in a myoglobin/haemoglobin model system and in cobalt myoglobin.43 The term “membrane fluidity” is a general concept which describes broadly the motion of molecules in the restrictive environment of a (usually cellular) membrane. A review is given of this as probed by ESR, emphasising particularly such contributions as rotational and translational diffusion rates, order parameters and related phenomena. Limitations of the fluid mosaic model are discussed along with more recent developments including evidence for compartmentalization of biomembranes by the cell cytoskeleton.44 The lipid-domains in reconstituted porcine lens-membranes were investigated before and after the addition of cholesterol using EPR spin-labeling methods. On the basis of normal EPR spectra and saturation-recovery curves it is concluded that the spin labels are present in a single homogenous environment in membranes before the addition of cholesterol. After the addition of cholesterol (cholesterol/phospholipid molar ratio: 1.55–1.80), two domains were discriminated by an oxygen transport method using a cholesterol analogue spin label. The two domains were assigned to a bulk phospholipid–cholesterol bilayer and to a cholesterol crystalline domain. The phospholipid analogue spin labels are unable to partition into the pure cholesterol crystalline domain, and hence they reflect properties of the phospholipid–cholesterol domain outside of the pure cholesterol crystalline domain. The essential aim of this work is to evaluate the major factors responsible for resistance to oxygen transport across the lens lipid membrane, with special attention being paid to the cholesterol crystalline domain.45 A review has been published on the measurement of distances in the range 15–50 A between paramagnetic centres in molecules using pulsed-EPR methods.46 Another group have published an article that demonstrates that it is possible to determine distances in the range 20–70 A from a heterogeneous mixture of double spin-labelled DNA duplexes. A “distance ruler” has been devised based on the attachment of nitroxide spin-labels at 2′-amino-modified nucleosides.47 Site-directed spin-labelling has demonstrated that a critical event that occurs during photoactivation of rhodopsin is a rigid-body movement of transmembrane helix 6 (TM6) at the cytoplasmic surface of the molecule. A detailed analysis of distance-changes between pairs of nitroxide side-chains was enabled using double electron–electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy.48 Evidence from pulse-ESR is presented that membrane-bound α-synuclein, which is associated with Parkinson's Disease, forms an extended helix. In this study the protein is bound to small unilamellar phospholipid vesicles, rodlike SDS micelles or lipid bicelles. By measuring distances up to 75 A, between introduced pairs of spin-labels, separations close to those expected for a single continuous helix are obtained in all cases. For example, 75 A between sites 24 and 72; 55 A between sites 24 and 61 and 20 A between sites 35 and 50.49 From another study is reported a measurement of distance distributions using DEER/ESR for end-labelled curved bispeptide oligomers.50 A lipophylic spin-probe, 1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpiperidin-4-yl 1-adamantylacetate was used in a study of chloroplasts and different kinds of subchloroplast fragments. Distinct differences were found between the two categories, in terms of the spin-probe binding and also in the apparent mobility of the probe molecules, as reflected by rotational correlation times and the activation enthalpies and entropies that were deduced for them.51 A measurement was undertaken of erythrocyte membrane fluidity using 5-doxylstearic acid (5-DS) and 16-doxylstearic acid (16-DS), in healthy controls and in patients suffering from type 2 diabetes and stroke in an attempt to assess any association between age-related disorders and membrane fluidity. The results indicated a lower degree of membrane fluidity using 16-DS but not using 5-DS in diabetic and stroke patients compared with the controls.52 The determination of the structural topology and helical tilt of an antimicrobial peptide, magainin 2, has been determined using aligned spin-label ESR spectroscopy. This success may inaugurate many potential investigations using EPR to probe antimicrobial peptide topologies at increased sensitivity and may be used to determine the functional mechanisms involved for a wide-range of integral membrane proteins.53 The rate of oxygen consumption in tumours affects the local oxygen concentration and response of tumours to radiation therapy (the effectiveness is increased when the oxygen concentration is high, the so called “oxygen effect”). To whit, an EPR method has been introduced for the non-invasive measurement of tissue oxygen consumption, and based on the measurement of pO2 during a carbogen challenge. The following sequence was used: basal value during breathing air, saturation of tissue with oxygen by carbogen breathing, switch back to air breathing, on the assumption that the kinetics for the return to the basal value after oxygen saturation would be governed mainly by the tissue oxygen consumption. In summary the method works very effectively.54 Another group have investigated the biocompatibility of an implantable probe such as lithium octabutoxyphthalocyanine (LiNc–BuO) to be used for the repeated determination of tissue oxygen levels. When the LiNc–BuO particles were embedded in an oxygen-permeable and bioinert polymer, polydimethylsiloxane, it was found that as implanted in the gastrocnemium muscle, the probe was fit for purpose without incident over an extended period.55 An integrated approach involving spin-labelled proteins measured by ESR and protein conformation measured by Raman spectroscopy, has been applied to the determination of the interaction between proteins and nanoparticles at the molecular level, as an aid to predicting the toxicity of NPs, which is a subject of current concern amid the expansion in application of nano-devices, which are naturally based around NPs.56 The binding of metal ions to the prion protein (believed to be an essential
aspect of its structure and function) was investigated using EPR, as a means to determine changes in the local coordination environment of the metal and details of metal-binding affinity, stoichiometry and the symmetry and nature of the ligating atoms. In this system, EPR can also identify the formation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species and peptide-derived radicals. Protein-membrane dynamics may also be monitored using site-directed spin-labelling.57 Some potential sources of misinterpretation have been identified in using a glutathione-S-transferase fusion protein system with site-directed spin-labelling, in which the label does not remain faithfully attached to the designated residue of the complex because it is extracted by dialysis-resistant glutathione molecules. However, having identified this artifact, spectral subtraction is shown to provide a clear interpretation of protein–protein interactions from bona fide data.58 The Fenton reaction was used to produce defined oxidized phospholipid molecules in phospholipid bilayers. The product proved to consist of a plethora of oxidatively modified lecithins, which was unsuitable for a detailed study of the effects brought about in the bilayer or as the source of defined oxidized phospholipid molecules. In particular, 2-(omega-carboxyacyl)- and 2-(n-hydroperoxyacyl)-lecithins, can be more conveniently prepared using chemical synthesis or enzymatic methods rather than by chemical or physical oxidation. The effect of those molecules and of commercially available 12-hydroxy-stearic and dodecanedioic acid was studied in planar supported phospholipid bilayers (SPBs) with EPR using 2-(5-doxylstearoyl)-lecithin as the spin probe. The loss of anisotropy, reflective of bilayer disordering, was measured as a function of the molar percentage of oxidized lipid. It was found that the majority of oxidized lipid molecules examined were able to induce bilayer disordering, while hydroperoxyl group-bearing acyl chains appeared to be much less so effective. It is concluded that the use of defined oxidized phospholipid molecular species for membrane oxidative stress guarantees a more reliable and detailed response than using different oxidized phospholipids on phospholipid bilayer structures, as are formed during the batch-oxidation of phospholipids.59 A detailed study has been reported on the mechanisms of direct radiation damage to DNA, based on an analysis of the yields of damage to the DNA-bases, to deoxyribose and of trapped radicals in d(GCACGCGTGC)2, prepared as dry films and as dry powders.60 A study has been made on the safe disposal of chrome buffing dust (CBD) generated in the leather industry, in which the high concentration of trivalent chromium along with organic/inorganic compounds causes severe groundwater contamination on land co-disposal and chronic air pollution during thermal incineration. CBD was subjected to starved air incineration (SAI) at 800 °C in a thermal incinerator to optimize the oxygen required to completely incinerate the organic compounds and simultaneously to prevent the conversion of Cr3+ to Cr6+. The final residue was immobilized in blocks of Portland cement. The stabilization of Cr3+ in the cement gel matrix was confirmed using Scanning Electron Microscopy SEM, EPR and X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD). Leachability studies through Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) on solidified blocks were carried out to determine the degree of leaching of chromium and organic compounds under standard conditions.61 An allylic ketyl radical has been identified in chlostridum amino-acid fermentation.62 Finally, I mention a comparative ESR study of blood and tissue nitric oxide concentrations during renal ischaemia-repurfusion injury, detected by ESR as the DETC2–Fe3+–NO complex.63
4. Radical-trapping
4.1 Spin-trapping
A combined application of conventional spin-trapping with separation of the mixture for analysis by ESR (LC/ESR) and mass spectrometry (LC/MS) has been reported. There is accumulating evidence from animal and in vitro cell-studies to the effect that eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) can inhibit the process of carcinogenesis. One of the many proposed mechanisms to which EPA's anti-cancer activity has been attributed is free-radical mediated peroxidation; however, EPA-derived radicals had not been detected directly in any study to date. Using a combination of LC/ESR and LC/MS with [4-pyridyl 1-oxide]-N-tert-butyl nitrone as the spin-trapping agent, carbon-centred radicals were identified that are as expected for lipoxygenase-catalysed EPA peroxidation. Among the many EPA-derived radicals detected, the principal species were those resulting from scission of 5-, 15- and 18-EPA-alkoxyl radicals. Furthermore, each radical was quantified each radical adduct in all its redox forms, including an ESR-active form and two ESR-silent forms, using an internal LC/MS standard. The comprehensive information thus derived is considered to provide a basis for ongoing work aimed to define the biological effects of radicals generated from EPA peroxidation.64 Two intermediates have been identified in the autoxidation of NO˙∶ONOO˙, which was detected by EPR in the gas-phase at 295 K and atmospheric pressure, and ONOONO, a red substance produced at 113 K in a solid matrix of 2-methylbutane. ONOONO is unstable above the melting point of 2-methylbutane (113 K) whereupon it is rapidly converted to O2NNO2. On the assumption of a quasi-stationary mechanism, a rate constant for the rate-determining formation of ONOO˙ is estimated to be 80 s−1, while the dissociation rate constant of ONOO˙ is 6.5 × 103 s−1. The formation of ONOONO occurs with a rate constant of 1.9 × 106 s−1. An estimate of the equilibrium constant for the formation of ONOO˙ from NO˙ and O2 (KONOO˙) is 1.2 × 10−2, and therefore, ΔG = +11.0 kJ mol−1. In water, the Gibbs free-energy change is close to zero. The presence of ONOO˙ at steady-state concentrations in the presence of excess O2 may be important for reactions in the atmosphere, and moreover for reactions in aerosols and biological environments, because the rate constant for formation in solution is higher than that in the gas phase, leading hence to a longer half-life for ONOO˙.65 The nucleophilic addition of the potent oxidant and nucleophile, ONOO−, to methylglyoxal is known to give rise to an acetyl radical intermediate and formate and acetate anions as ultimate products of the reaction. EPR/spin-trapping experiments with 2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane(MNP) revealed a concentration-dependent formation of an adduct that can be attributed to 2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane-CH3CO˙ (aN) = 0.83 mT). Spin trapping with 3,5-dibromo-4-nitrosobenzene sulfonate (DBNBS) gave a signal that could be assigned to a methyl radical adduct [aN = 1.41 mT; aH = 1.35 mT; aH(m) = 0.08 mT]. The MNP-CH3CO˙ adduct could also be observed when ONOO− was substituted by H2O2, although the yields were significantly decreased. When L-lysine was added to the mixture trapping of acetyl radicals occurred with the formation of N-acetyl-L-lysine, and it is suggested that in the presence of methylglyoxal, ONOO−/H2O2 is imparted with the capability to acetylate proteins in post-translational processes.66 An ESR study has been made of spin-trapping superoxide radical anions with a novel spin-trap, 2-(diphenylphosphinoyl)-2-methyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-pyrrole-N-Oxide (Diphenyl-PMPO). The trap has some advantages over more conventional spin traps in terms of stability and reactivity, and hence it was applied to a determination of superoxide scavenging activity (SOSA) of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and of various known antioxidants, e.g. green tea, oolong tea and red wine. It was shown that Diphenyl-PMPO was the superior agent for conducting SOSA assays as compared with DMPO.67 The superoxide radical anion has been generated electrochemically in DMSO solution, and spin-trapped using DMPO under cyclic voltammetry conditions, once the reduction potential for dioxygen has been reached. The hyperfine coupling constants are in accord with those reported in the literature for the DMPO-OOH adduct: aN = 1.285 mT; aβH = 1.042 mT; aγH = 0.142 mT.68 A review has been made of the spin-trapping of oxygen-radicals in chemical and biological systems. The performance of different spin-traps for qualitative analysis of radical-generating systems are compared, along with their ability to detect previously unobserved radicals. Stressed too are the difficulties involved in the detection of oxygen-centered radicals in chemical and biological systems and the rationale for using EPR/spin-trapping in quantitative studies of reactive radicals. Various experimental aspects of EPR experiments related to efficient trapping of free radicals in biochemical systems are also discussed. Interestingly, it is demonstrated using the spin-trap DEPMPO, that the Fenton reaction, along with various biological systems generate a H˙ atom, which was a previously unknown process.69 A newly developed flow-injection system arrangement has been developed with which to undertake quantitative spin-trapping experiments, specifically the measurement of the second-order rate constants for the reaction of the hydroxyl radical with selected radical-scavengers, glycine, mannitol and 4-hydroxycoumaric acid. The rate constants obtained are in satisfactory accord with those measured using pulse-radiolysis.70 It has recently been demonstrated that (bi)sulfite reacts with 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) via a nonradical, nucleophilic reaction, and it is proposed that the radical adduct (DMPO/˙SO3−) detected in biological systems is an artifact and not the result of spin trapping of the genuine sulfur trioxide anion radical (˙SO3−). To explore this hypothesis, the one-electron oxidation of (bi)sulfite catalyzed by horseradish peroxidase/H2O2 has been reinvestigated by ESR/spin trapping with DMPO and additional oxygen uptake studies to explore the radical reaction mechanism further. Support for the radical pathway via ˙SO3− (DMPO/˙SO3− radical adduct observed by ESR) was obtained from the stoichiometry between the amount of molecular oxygen consumed and the amount of (bi)sulfite oxidized to sulfate (SO42−). When DMPO was incubated with (bi)sulfite, the consumption of oxygen was entirely inhibited, owing to the efficiency of DMPO trapping. In the absence of DMPO, the initial rate of oxygen and H2O2 consumption was determined to be half of the initial rate of DMPO/˙SO3− radical adduct formation as determined by ESR, demonstrating that DMPO forms the radical adduct by trapping the ˙SO3− exclusively.71 Nitrone spin traps are commonly used as spin-traps in a range of chemical and biological systems, and have also proved their worth as therapeutic agents in the treatment of radical-mediated diseases. An ideal such material would incorporate a high reactivity toward superoxide radical anions (O2˙−) to give a superoxide adduct with greater persistence, an enhanced bioavailability, and a selective targeting. A nitrone spin-trap has been developed that is tethered via amide bonds to a P-cyclodextrin (P-CD) and a dodecyl chain. It was anticipated that the P-cyclodextrin would lead to increased reactivity toward (O2˙−), yielding a relatively persistent (O2˙−)-adduct while the lipophilic chain would direct the material toward membranous targets. The results from both experiment and computation show that both constitutional and stereochemical isomerism affects the orientations of aminoxyl-NO and/or hydroperoxyl groups relative to the beta-CD annulus for optimal H-bonding and stability.72 A new cyclic nitrone spin trap, [4-(3′.3′-dibutyl-2′-oxy-3′H-isoindol-5′-yloxy)butyl]triphenylphosphonium bromide (MitoSpin), bearing a lipophilic cation has been prepared via a novel Parham-type lithiation-cyclization of an isocyanate to give the isoindolinone core. It was found that MitoSpin accumulates in a membrane-potential dependent way in energized mitochondria and oxidation of it could potentially be used to determine oxidative stress mediated by reactive oxygen species generated in mitochondria.73 For the purpose of predicting the susceptibility of lipid moieties to radical attack, three homologous series of lipophilic spin traps, DMPO analogs 2-alkanoyl-2-methyl-1-pyrroline N-oxides, PBN derivatives 4-alkoxyphenyl N-tert-butylnitrones, and 4-alkoxyphenyl N-admantylnitrones were synthesised. The intercalation depth of these spin traps within the liposomal bilayer was obtained from NMR measurements, which correlates the chemical shift with the micropolarity (measured in ET(30) units) experienced by the pivotal nitronyl carbon. Hydroxyl and α-hydroxyalkyl radicals were generated in the extra-liposomal aqueous phase and the lowest depth at which a radical could be spin trapped was determined. The ESR data indicate that these radicals can exit the aqueous phase, can penetrate the lipid bilayer past the head groups (ET(30) = 63 kcal/mol) and the glycerol ester function (ET(30) = 52 kcal/mol), and on down to an ET(30) polarity of at least 44 kcal/mol.74
4.2 Radical scavenging and antioxidants
Under this heading is a general discussion of antioxidants, or materials believed to act thus, but including results where “antioxidants” exhibit “pro-oxidant” behaviour under certain circumstances. For example, it has been shown that the presence of exogenous ascorbate enhances the formation of H2O2 production, mediated by iris melanin, thus contributing a potential pro-oxidant effect.75 Ascorbate is, however, a complex substance, and can function as both antioxidant or pro-oxidant, depending on its concentration and the presence of free iron.76 In another report, it is described how proanthocyanin may promote free radical scavenging activity in muscle tissues and plasma.77 The anti-oxidant behaviour of L-ascorbic acid was investigated as isolated in the confined medium produced by a sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate (aerosol-OT, AOT) self-assembled reverse micelle. Using 1H–1H NOESY (proton-proton 2D nuclear overhauser enhancement correlation spectroscopy) NMR spectroscopy, the ascorbic acid was found to be located at the AOT-interface. This contrasts earlier studies where the ascorbate was assumed to be located in the water pool of these microemulsions. The reaction of ascorbic acid with oxygen was investigated using EPR spectroscopy. The oxidation of ascorbic acid by aqueous V(V) was investigated in reverse micelles, and only mild changes in the kinetic parameters were observed compared to those in water. The inhibition of ascorbate oxidation is due to solvation stabilization of ascorbic acid in microemulsion media, and since ascorbate is a valuable marker of oxidative stress, it is concluded that compartmentization can modify the reactivity/stabilization of the ascorbate radical and that this could be an important factor in biological systems.78 A kinetic analysis has been reported of the scavenging of superoxide radical anions and of hydroxyl radicals by platinum nanoparticles. The superoxide was generated using a hypoxanthine-xanthine oxidase system and hydroxyl radicals via both a Fenton system and a UV/H2O2 system. According to ESR/spin trapping experiments, Pt particles of 2 nm diameter are able to scavenge both O2˙− and ˙OH radicals. The rate constants for the O2˙− scavenging reaction is 5.03 × 107 M−1 s−1.79 Since exposure to ambient particulate matter (PM) is associated with respiratory disease and lung-cancer, the oxidant generation and toxicity of size-fractionated particles in human lung endothelial cells was investigated. Significant correlations were found between the oxidant-generating capacity and all toxicological endpoints investigated, which shows that measurement of the oxidant potential by ESR/spin trapping provides a sensitive means to evaluate the toxicity potential of PM.80 Treatment of human-hamster hybrid cells with diesel particulate extracts and UVA-radiation was found to induce significant cytotoxic and genotoxic damage. In contrast, treatment with either the extract or UVA alone caused no significant damage. The combination of particulate extract and UVA was found to generate significant amounts of 1O2 (singlet oxygen) in the cells and it is concluded there is a causation in which the toxic and genotoxic agent is singlet oxygen, the formation of which is activated by UVA.81 In the now infamous Carotene and Retinol Efficiency Trial (CARET),82 administration of β-carotene (BC) to heavy smokers was found to increase the risk of lung cancer (by 20%), to the extent that the trial was halted ahead of schedule. The result went unexplained since it was anticipated that BC would act as a free radical scavenger (antioxidant) against cigarette-smoke derived radicals. These radicals can directly or indirectly damage DNA, leading to the formation of pro-mutagenic DNA lesions. Since it has been suggested that high concentrations of BC could result in pro-oxidant effects, an investigation was undertaken to evaluate if high but physiologically feasible concentrations of BC might alter (i) the formation of radicals in vitro according to ESR measurements, (ii) the levels of 8-oxo-dG and M(1)dG in vitro in lung epithelial cells after incubation with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and the smoke-derived carcinogen benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) and (iii) the levels of 8-oxo-dG and M(1)dG in vivo in ferrets' lung after chronic exposure to B[a]P. BC was found to increase in vitro hydroxyl radical formation via the Fenton reaction but to inhibit the formation of carbon-centered radicals. Similarly, BC was able to enhance 8-oxo-dG in vitro in lung epithelial cells. On the other hand, BC significantly inhibited M(1)dG formation in lung epithelial cells, especially after induction of M(1)dG by H2O2 or B[a]P. In conclusion, the matter is complex since it appears that the fate of BC being a pro- or anti-oxidant depends mainly on the type of radical that is formed.83 The issue was addressed by other workers, who have viewed the apparently unpredictable nature of BC in terms of reactions of BC-derived peroxyl radicals. The decay of tert-butylperoxyl radicals in the presence of BC was studied at ambient temperature in non-polar solvents using ESR, for which the primary reaction in the absence of oxygen is interpreted as a spin-trapping effect in which a peroxyl radical adds to a BC molecule, to produce a labile intermediate free radical, which disappears by recombination with a second tert-butylperoxyl radical. Thus BC is converted to a diamagnetic compound containing two peroxy bonds. In the presence of chelating transition metals with unpaired d-electrons as electron donors the peroxy group of the oxidized beta-carotene can undergo homolytic fission to form a pair of alkoxyl free radicals. The presence of vitamin E completely inhibits the primary attack of tert-butylperoxyl radicals on BC and the presence of oxygen has no significant effect on this reaction. Spin-trapping of peroxyl radicals by the double bond of vitamin A leads to its oxidation, when vitamin E is absent. Transition metal ions such as Co, Cr, Fe, and Mn, known to be present in the aerosol of cigarette smoke, homolyse the peroxyl bonds of peroxidised beta-carotene, which results in cell damage. It may be this that is partly responsible for the enhanced cancer risk observed when the diet of heavy smokers was supplemented with BC.84 Prooxidant activity (DNA damage) has been demonstrated in a series of naphthoquinone derivatives according to the nature and position of substituents that are present.85 Water-soluble derivatives of the fullerene, C60, have been prepared either as a highly hydroxyl substituted version [C60(OH)32·8H2O] or a C60/γ-dextrin (1∶2 mol/mol) clathrate, and assessed for their antioxidant activities using ESR (spin-trapping hydroxyl radicals with DMPO) and β-carotene bleaching. The results indicate that the fullerenes are able to scavenge ˙OH radicals and that they have a pronounced antioxidant action in aqueous solutions containing linoleic acid which is abundantly contained in the cell membrane along with other unsaturated lipids. It is thought that such water-soluble fullerene derivatives may be able to protect cell membranes against oxidative stress from ˙OH radicals.86 Evidence is presented that the superoxide radical anion is able to protect liposome-contained cytochrome c against oxidative damage promoted by peroxynitrite and free radicals.87 A new method has been developed for analyzing time-resolved spectra showing the progress of the reaction TOH + R˙ → TO˙+RH, where TOH is α-tocopherol and R˙ is a stable free radical. The resulting absorption coefficients of TO˙ in dichloromethane and hexane disagree severely with some recent values derived from stopped-flow spectrophotometric measurements. The discrepancy is explained in terms of a lack of proper accounting for the dead time of the apparatus; when multiplied by a factor of two, the stopped-flow data all mostly in the range ε = (7.5±0.5) × 103 M−1 cm−1 in accord both with the results of this study and results obtained in 1969. The determination of absorption coefficients from electrochemical studies is hampered by the incomplete conversion of the parent compound (TOH) to the radical cation, but this is circumvented by combining results from EPR and optical spectroscopy. The absorption coefficients of TOH˙+ and TOAC˙+ (α-tocopherol acetate) are determined in this manner, respectively as, 1.6 × 104 and 1.3 × 104 M−1 cm−1.88 Since it is thought that oxidised low density lipoprotein (LDL) may be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, an investigation was made into the mechanisms underlying the antioxidant/pro-oxidant behavior of dehydroascorbate (the oxidation product of ascorbic acid) toward LDL incubated with Cu2+ ions. The results show that the pro-oxidant activity of dehydroascorbate
is critically dependent on the presence of lipid hydroperoxides, which accumulate during the early stages of oxidation. Using EPR, it is demonstrated that the presence of dehydroascorbate enhances the generation of alkoxyl radicals during the interaction of copper ions with a model and representative compound, tert-butylhydroperoxide. A prominent doublet signal was detected, which is ascribed to the presence of both the erythroascorbate and ascorbate free radicals, measured under rapid-flow conditions. It is therefore proposed that the pro-oxidant activity of dehydroascorbate toward LDL is a consequence of its established spontaneous interconversion to erythroascorbate and ascorbate, which reduce Cu2+ to Cu+ and thereby promote the decomposition of lipid hydroperoxides. To explain, in contrast, the antioxidant activity in LDL that is essentially free of lipid hydroperoxides, several mechanisms are ventured to account for the antioxidant behavior of dehydroascorbate, including copper chelation and Cu+ oxidation.89 The compounds 6-Deoxy-6-{4-[N-(2-aminoethyl) propaneamide] imidazolyl} cyclohepta amylose (CDcarc) and 6-{3-amine-N-[2-(imidazol-4-yl) ethyl]propaneamide}-6-deoxycyclohepta amylose (CDcrac) were synthesized in an attempt to obtain copper(II) complexes that would function as superoxide radical anion scavengers. The materials were studied by means of UV-Vis, ESR, CD, ESI-MS methods in solution as a function of pH. The antioxidant activity was assayed against superoxide generated enzymatically and compared with that obtained from a copper(II) complex with underivatized carcinine. The hydroxyl radical scavenging ability of these new ligands was also examined.90 A comparative study is reported of the radical scavenging properties of 5-methylpyrrolidinone chitosan (MPC), a substituted hydrophilic polymer bearing free –OH and –NH2 groups, and dibutyryl chitin (DBC) a novel lipophilic O- and N-persubstituted chitin. Radicals were generated photochemically from PTOC (pyridine-2-thione-N-oxycarbonyl) and studied by ESR. Product studies were also undertaken using NMR to determine the fate of the radicals generated inside the polysaccharides. It is found that hydrophilic chitosans and persubstituted chitins display a remarkable radical blocking activity, despite the expectation that the nature of the process should be quite different between MPC and DBC. The explanation is that the DBC substrate hosts the radicals in a protected and weakly reactive environment whereas the hydrophilic chitosan substrates encourage a more rapid annealing of the radicals. MPC takes part directly in radical reactions with the probable consequent fragmentation of the polymer chain.91 The antioxidant activities of trans-resveratrol (trans-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene) and its more ubiquitous glycosilate derivative trans-piceid (trans-5,4′dihydroxystilbene-3-O-beta-D-glucopyranoside), have been compared from their inhibition of the peroxidation of linoleic acid (LA) and radical scavenging ability toward different free radicals (such as DPPH) and radical initiators. It has been found that the antioxidant capacity for the two compounds is similar while their protective effect against lipid-peroxidation is slower but more prolonged than for BHT (2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol) and α-tocopherol (vitamin E, vit. E). DSC profiles for phosphatidylcholine liposomes of various chain lengths, along with EPR measurements of spin labelled liposomes, indicated that the susceptible (H-atom abstractable) hydroxyl group in the two compounds is located in the lipid region of the bilayer close to the double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids, a feature that renders these stilbene derivatives particularly suitable for protection and control of membrane lipid peroxidation.92 It is shown that LDL (low density lipoproteins) isolated from plasma-loaded red wine procyanidins are able to resist lipid peroxidation and tocopherol depletion, seeming to support the hypothesis that there is a synergistic interaction between dietary phenols and LDL.93 It has been found that the inhibiting effects of (−)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) on lipid peroxidation induced by tritiated water was decreased at concentrations above 5.0 × 10−5 M. An explanation for this effect has been offered on the basis of results from fluorescence analysis and ESR, in terms of the interaction between lipid membranes and EGCG. It was found that EGCG induced aggregation of liposomes via its interaction with membranes at concentrations above 5.0 × 10−5 M, and that above 1.0 × 10−3 M EGCG actually caused a breach of the membranes. Hence the inhibiting effect of EGCG can be explained by the amount of EGCG adsorbed on the membranes, with the ultimate disruption of the membrane structure when it was absorbed on the membranes in large amounts.94 Antioxidant and radical-scavenging activities of different types of Slovak honey have been reported.95 The antioxidant properties of liqueurs measured using ESR with DPPH as the scavenged radical have been investigated.96 A comparison has been made of the antioxidant behavior of Slovakian and Austrian wines. The antioxidant properties of 86 wine samples (35 white and 17 red from Slovakia, and 12 white and 22 red from the Burgenland region) were investigated using the DPPH radical and 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt radical cation (ABTS˙+) as oxidants. On average, the red wines showed a greater than tenfold greater antioxidant activity towards ABTS˙+ than the white wines did, which accorded with a similar ratio for the total content of phenolic compounds. The correlation between the antioxidant activities determined by DPPH and ABTS˙+ and the concentration of phenolics was found to be linear.97 Pallidol is a naturally occurring resveratrol dimer from red wine with both antioxidant and antifungal activities. On the basis of an ESR/spin trapping study strong quenching effects on singlet oxygen were determined at very low concentrations of pallidol, while its scavenging activity toward hydroxyl radicals or superoxide anion was negligible. An extremely high rate constant ka = 1.71 × 1010 was determined for the reaction between pallidol and singlet oxygen, demonstrating it to be a potent and selective singlet oxygen quencher in aqueous systems and it is suggested that the material may provide a pharmacological agent under physiological conditions, and contribute to the beneficial health effects of red wine.98 A Q-band ESR study of free radical formation in potato leaves exposed to different levels of ozone (O3) in open-top chambers (OTC) was reported, together with a quantitative analysis of the relationship between ESR signal intensity and the area of damaged potato leaf. The major advantage of using Q-band is that there is no overlap between Mn(II) and organic radical signals, which permits quantitative determination of the latter. A direct relationship is demonstrated between visible ozone-induced symptoms and the concentration of permanent free radicals, according to ESR analysis, in potato leaves.99
5. Organic radicals
The first observation by ESR of a free radical species (triphenylmethyl) in subcritical water has been reported. The radical was generated directly from triphenylmethanol in the absence of an initiator in both subcritical and supercritical water, and was identified directly by ESR in subcritical water under high-temperature, high-pressure conditions, and by scavenging the radical with H-atom donors in supercritical water.100 The structure and dynamics of an inclusion complex of p-hexanoylcalix[4]arene (C6OH) with 4-methoxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl (MT) has been investigated. Single crystal XRD experiments show that MT is entrapped along with ethanol (solvent) molecules in a capsular type crystalline lattice of the host C6OH material. ESR measurements were performed at 9.2 GHz/0.33 T (X-band) and at 360 GHz/14 T. In order to avoid ESR line broadening resulting from electron dipole–dipole interaction between nitroxides occupying neighbouring capsules in the crystal lattice, the nitroxide-containing capsules were spin-insulated from each other by capsules containing diamagnetic dibenzylketone (DBK) molecules. Due to the extremely high g-tensor resolution of ESR at 360 GHz, it was possible to distinguish between encapsulated nitroxide molecules H-bonded to the N–O group by an ethanol molecule occupying the same capsule and nitroxides in which this interaction was absent, by differential shifts of the corresponding gxx component. It was shown that encapsulated MT in SLNs were inaccessible to reducing agents such as sodium ascorbate.101 Stability constants, rates of association and dissociation, and thermodynamic activation parameters for the formation of inclusion complexes between the radical guest, N-benzyl-tert-butyl-d9-nitroxide and β- or 2,6-O-dimethyl-β-cyclodextrin (CDs), have been determined by EPR spectroscopy in water in the presence of 14 different alcohols, which differ in molecular size and lipophilicity. Addition of all kinds of alcohol tends to destabilize the paramagnetic complex. The binding behavior of the CDs was best interpreted as the formation of a binary complex, alcohol:CD in competition with the complex, nitroxide:CD, detected by EPR. Stability constants of complexes between CD and the various alcohols were determined.102 The ternary inclusion complexes of two spin-labeled pyrrolidine-and piperidine-containing indole derivatives and two hydrocarbons, benzene and cyclohexane, with γ- and β-cyclodextrins (CD) (altogether eight complexes) were prepared and studied by ESR in the solid phase over a broad temperature range. For most ternary complexes, the hydrophobicity of the NO group environment is much higher than for binary complexes devoid of hydrocarbons. The rotational mobility of both spin-labeled indoles in the ternary complexes of γ-CD is much greater than in binary complexes of γ-CD, which is caused by a change in the stoichiometry. The structures and energies of all complexes were calculated for different modes of inclusion of guest molecules using the PM3 method with the standard set of parameters. The results demonstrate the possibility that the introduction of a second guest molecule into the CD cavity may effect a substantial modification of the molecular dynamics and hydrophobicity of the environment of “functional” guest molecules.103 TOAC (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-amino-4-carboxylic acid) is a nitroxyl amino acid that can be incorporated in the backbone of peptides. DOXYL (4,4-dimethyl-oxazolidine-1-oxyl) is a nitroxyl ring that can be attached rigidly at specific C-atom positions in the acyl chains of phospholipids. The polarity dependence of the isotropic 14N-hyperfine couplings and g-values were determined in a wide range of protic and aprotic media, for a TOAC-containing dipeptide (Fmoc-TOAC-Aib-OMe) and for a DOXYL-containing fatty acid (12-DOXYL-stearic acid). A polarity profile was established from the correlation between datasets for TOAC and DOXYL nitroxides in the various solvents for isotropic hyperfine couplings of TOAC in a transmembrane peptide, this providing a calibration to determine the location of TOAC at selected residue positions in a transmembrane or surface-active peptide. A similar calibration procedure is found applicable too using isotropic 14N couplings and g-values for the pyrroline methanethiosulphonate nitroxide and applied extensively in site-directed spin-labelling studies of membrane proteins.104 A solid TEMPO spin-labeled silica was made from 2-chloro-3,5-dinitro-N-(4-(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-piperidine-1-oxyl)-benzamide) and aminopropyl-silica gel, which even after several months exhibited the same properties as it did immediately following synthesis. EPR spectra of the material were measured, and rotational correlation times were calculated as a function of solvent polarity and temperature. It was observed that polar solvents induce a fast motion of the spin-label, as characterized by a sharp three-line TEMPO radical spectrum. A strong spin–spin interaction was seen in the dry solid material, but which is disrupted by different (liquid) solvents, and also by absorption of different solids such as cyclodextrins, dendrimers or polyethyleneglycols.1051H NMR and EPR spectroscopy confirmed that a15N-labeled nitroxide was trapped within an octa acid nanocapsule. A paramagnetic interaction between the 15N-labeled trapped nitroxide and a 14N-labeled free nitroxide in the external aqueous solution was observed by EPR. The observation of a spin–spin interaction, through the walls of the nanocapsule is evidenced by the simultaneous line-broadening of both the 15N-labeled and 14N-labeled nitroxide signals. Direct information on the motion and the polarity of both the incarcerated paramagnetic nitroxide and the nitroxides in the external bulk aqueous phase is provided from computer simulations of the spectra.106 The sensitivity of nitroxide spin-label EPR to the polarity of aprotic environments arises from the reaction field produced by polarisation of the surrounding dielectric by the nitroxide electric dipole moment. The performances of three different reaction fields, proposed as improvements to the original Onsager model are compared for representative spin-label nitroxides in a range of apolar and dipolar aprotic solvents. Explicit allowance is made for the polarisability of the nitroxide, which effectively renormalises the reaction field but has been neglected in previous analyses. It is found that a model which incorporates an exponential dependence of the dielectric permittivity on the inverse radial distance from the nitroxide, gives the best description of the solvent dependence of the isotropic 14N-hyperfine couplings. It is proposed that not only can calibration of environmental polarity using homogeneous solvents be obtained using these findings, but also that polarity scales and polarity profiles (e.g., in membranes) might be transferred between different nitroxide spin labels (e.g., those of the TEMPO and DOXYL variety).107 A class of enzyme reduction-resistant nitroxyl spin-probes with spirocyclohexyl rings has been presented.108 A characterization of the external surface of MFI (ZSM-5) type zeolites has been reported using benzyl radicals formed by the photolysis of adsorbed dibenzyl ketone derivatives, in the presence of spectator molecules.109 The synthesis is reported of 4-trimethylammonio-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yloxyl with various counter anions, intended for the investigation of ionic liquids. It is thought that these might be particularly suitable if the anions present in the ionic liquid match those associated with the spin-probe.110 A more comprehensive study of this class of compounds was also reported.111 Reduction of isocyanates by metallic sodium at room temperature was shown to lead to the formation of alkyl isocyanurate radical anions, whose ESR spectra show only coupling to two equivalent 14N nuclei. Reduction of 13C-enriched ethyl isocyanate shows that the unpaired electron is localized in the π-system of a single CO group of the isocyanate ring. There is a linewidth alternation in the spectra which indicates that certainly two stable conformers are undergoing fast-exchange.112 A neutral imino-semiquinone radical has been identified as 4,6-di-tert-butyl-2-tert-butylimino-semiquinone, formed by a comproportionation of the parent aminophenol and iminoquinone. The species is sufficiently stable to be characterized by X-ray diffraction in the solid state and by EPR and UV-vis in solution. It is thought that this open-shell system is so stable because of the basicity of the tert-butylimino group and the presence of an intramolecular H-bond.113 A stable corannulene derived radical with a curved π-electron system has been synthesized and its x-ray crystal structure obtained. An unbalanced electron-spin on the three-dimensional π-surface of the corannulene moiety shows an appreciable intermolecular exchange interaction and a curved aromaticity.114 The electron self-exchange kinetics of the cyclooctatetraene/cyclooctatetraene radical anion couple have been
reported. In acetonitrile, the values khom(298 K) = (5 ± 3) × 105 M−1 s−1 and khet(295 K) = 8 × 10−3 cm s−1 are found, whereas slightly faster rates are obtained in dimethylformamide, namely, khom(298 K) = (1.6 ± 0.6) × 106 M−1 s−1 and khet(295 K) = 2 × 10−2 cm s−1. The slowness of both electron-transfer reactions is caused by the high inner-sphere reorganization energy incurred in the mandatory conformational change that takes place upon going from the tub-like COT molecule to the planar COT-anion. The rates are readily interpreted in terms of Marcus theory, including an additional medium inner-sphere mode which is responsible for the flattening of COT.115 A spin-probe study has been made of whether the ESR changes that occur at the freezing-point of water reflect local or global phenomena. Essentially, at the freezing-point, the narrow triplet spectrum collapses into a single broad line. There is also a profound concentration-dependence on the derived melting point which is anomalously low when a millimolar solution of TEMPOL is cooled slowly from room temperature. It is concluded that an explanation is that the probe and water become localized most likely at the interstices of ice-grains in an ice matrix. Hence it is local phenomena that are being sensed.116 A review has been published of inertial rotation and matrix interactions and their influence on the EPR spectra of methyl radicals isolated in “inert” cryogenic matrices such as Ne, Ar, Kr, H2, N2 and CO.117 A study has been made using ESR of the rotation of methyl radicals in solid CO, CO2, and N2 matrices.118 The rotational effects of the CH3 and CF3 groups on the electronic structure and nuclear hyperfine coupling constants (HFCCs) in dimethylnitroxide (DMNO˙) and ditrifluoromethynitroxide (TFMNO˙) have been investigated using the UB1LYP hybrid density functional method. The 1H and 19F coupling constants of both substituents were found to obey the McConnell relation during rotation. The two CH3 groups of the DMNO˙ t do not gear with each other, and the rotation of the first CH3 group induces only a small rocking effect (ca. 7°) in the second group. In contrast, in TFMNO˙, the fluorine atoms from the two different CF3 groups are sufficiently close for steric repulsion between them to force them to act as two interlocking gears, where one drives the other, and hence in this synchrony, both CF3 groups undergo full rotation. Stable configurations at specific CF3 group orientations have a large overlap with the NO π-electron cloud because the lobes of the hybridized pσ(F2), pσ(F3), pσ(F5), and pσ(F6) orbitals along the F–C bonds have cylindrical symmetry and are of the correct symmetry for hyperconjugation to occur. The calculated TFMNO˙ C1–N and C2–N bond orders range from 0.91 to 0.95 as the CF3 groups are rotated and so it may be concluded that the C–N bonds are essentially single bonds. In conjunction with the low rotational energy barrier of approximately 50 cm−1, this explains why the EPR intensities of the 19F-hyperfine splittings, in the range of 163–297 K, are characteristic of six equivalent rapidly rotating fluorine atoms. The TFMNO˙ NO vibrations induce additional s character at the 14N nucleus, which increases the magnitude of the 14N HFCC and decreases the 19F HFCCs. As the temperature increases and because of mixing of the first excited out-of-plane vibrational state with the ground state, the NO vibrational amplitudes also increase which raises the 14N HFCC and decreases the 19F HFCCs, which is what is observed experimentally.119 Thermodynamic activation parameters have been determined for hindered rotation of the CF3 group in the 4-nitrophenyl trifluoromethyl sulphone radical anion in DMF.120 Using DFT methods, an explicit modelling study has been undertaken of solvent effects on the electronic and structural characteristics of 4-amino-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-piperidine-N-oxyl. Microscopic variations in the H-bonding network cause relatively large changes in the 14N splitting constant and calculations of the spin densities allowed the computation of a parameter Q = 36.2 G (coupling for unit spin-density at the N-atom) which can be used to give “smoothed” values for coupling constants which are sensitive to the polarity of the environment but which remain tolerant to microscopic fluctuations in the H-bonded network.121 The formation of a C60–F radical adduct has been reported, resulting from the addition of photochemically generated F-atoms to C60 isolated in solid argon. Highly resolved anisotropic EPR spectra of the FC60˙ were obtained in the temperature interval 15–25 K, and are characterized by low anisotropy of the g-tensor and by an axially symmetric 19F hyperfine tensor. The isotropic 19F HFC constant Aiso is 202.8 MHz and the anisotropic hyperfine coupling is 51.8 MHz. Specific features of the spin density distribution in the radical are discussed on the basis of quantum calculations.122 Other radicals have been described, formed by the addition of carbon- and silicon-centred radicals to organometallic derivatives of fullerenes.123 A study has been described of the vitrification, relaxation and free-volume in a binary liquid mixture of glycerol/water using a spin-probe. The concentration-dependence of the glass transition temperature demonstrates a molecular level cooperativity in the system, and a dramatic change in the mesoscopic structure of the system at the critical concentration of 40 mol% is substantiated by an estimation of the effective volume of the spin-probe in a region of temperature in which the probe reorientation is coupled strongly to the system dynamics.124 TEMPO-based spin-probes and β-cyclodextrin form 1∶2 guest–host complexes in viscous aqueous glycerol solutions at low temperatures, in which the mobility of the probe is far greater than in the glassy bulk solution. Because the tumbling rates are similar in viscous guest–host complexes and in solvent-free complexes, it is proposed that the complexation effectively shields the nitroxide function from the solvent molecules.125 Pseudorotation has been measured in radical cations of decalin molecules of low-symmetry, for which calculational results are in reasonable agreement with ESR measurements.126
6. Biradicals, triplets and higher spin-multiplicities
A cucurbituril (Fig. 1) is a macrocyclic molecule consisting of several glycoluril [C4H2N4O2] repeat units, each joined to the next one by two methylene [–CH2–] bridges to form a closed band. The oxygen atoms are located along the edges of the band and are tilted inwards, forming a partly enclosed cavity. The name is derived from the resemblance of this molecule to a pumpkin of the family of Cucurbitaceae. Cucurbiturils are commonly written as cucurbit[n]uril, where n is the number of repeat units. A common abbreviation is CB[n]. These compounds are of particular interest because they are capable of binding other molecules within their cavities. The cavity of cucurbit[6]uril has nanoscale dimensions with an approximate vertical of 9.1 Å, outer diameter 5.8 Å and inner diameter 3.9 Å.127 Cucurbiturils were first synthesized in 1905 by Behrend, by condensing glycoluril with formaldehyde,128 but their structure was not elucidated until 1981.129 To date cucurbiturils composed of 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 repeat units have all been isolated,129 which have internal cavity volumes of 82, 164, 279, 479, and 870 Å3 respectively. A cucurbituril composed of 9 repeat units has yet to be isolated. Other common molecular capsules that share a similar molecular shape with cucurbiturils include cyclodextrins and calixarenes. The materials may have implication in drug-delivery systems.127 The supramolecular complexation of cucurbiturils with paramagnetic nitroxide spin probes was examined by a combination of 1H NMR, single crystal X-ray diffraction, computation and EPR experiments. Both cucurbit[7]uril (CB7) and cucurbit[S]uril (CB8) form a 1∶1 complex with 4-(N,N,N-trimethylammonium)-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-N-oxyl bromide (CAT 1). The EPR spectrum of the CAT1@CB7 complex consisted of three lines, suggesting that CAT 1 is associated with host CB7 in such a manner that the nitroxide moiety is in contact with water. In the case of CB8 as the host, in addition to the expected three-line spectrum, an additional seven-line spectrum was recorded, the intensity of which was dependent on the concentration of the complex and added NaCl to the aqueous solution. The coupling constant for the seven-line spectrum for 14N-substituted CAT 1 is 5 G, and that for the four-line spectrum for 15N-substituted CAT 1 is 7.15 G. The observed spectra for both 14N- and 15N-substituted CAT1@CB8 could only be reproduced on the assumption of a spin exchange between three nitroxide radicals. It is envisaged that three CAT1 molecules included within CB8 interact in such a way that there is an association of three supramolecules of CAT1@CB8 (i.e., [CAT1@CB8]3) in a triangular geometry that leads to spin exchange between the three radical centres. It appears from studies of thirteen other related systems that this is a general phenomenon.130 Biradicals were prepared with 14N-nitroxyl and 15N-nitroxyl groups at both ends of a molecule for use as a molecular ruler of protein structure, and potentially as a device for quantum computing, with defined separations between the two paramagnetic moieties. As expected, different ESR spectra are obtained depending on the proximity of the 15NO and 14NO groups, as a result of electron spin dipole–dipole interactions between them. An indication of isotopic nuclear effects in the dipole–dipole interactions is present. It is further concluded that quantum entanglement effects occur through the dipolar interactions via which quantum computing devices might function in the liquid state.131 Time-resolved EPR spectra of two singly spin-labelled and two doubly spin-labelled C60 derivatives in frozen solution were recorded with pulsed laser excitation and a time resolution of 100 ns. Both quartet and quintet excited states were detected arising from electron spin coupling of the triplet excited fullerene moiety with the unpaired spin/spins of the nitroxide groups. In both classes of singly and doubly labelled derivatives, although the overall molecular structures are very similar, spectral differences were found, in consequence of substantial differences in the exchange coupling energy.132 Various kinds of stable 1,3-diphosphacyclobutane-2,4-diyls, sterically protected by bulky Mes* (2,4,6-tri-t-butylphenyl) groups, were prepared from Mes*-phosphaethyne. The structures are described as ground-state singlet biradicals.133 The difluorophosphoryl nitrene F2P(O)N (X3 A″) was generated on ArF excimer laser irradiation at 193 nm of F2P(O)N3 in a solid argon matrix at 16 K, and characterized on the basis of its IR, UV/Vis, and EPR spectra. DFT and CBS-QB3 calculations were also performed for this species. On irradiation with visible light of wavelength 420 nm at 16 K F2P(O)N was found to react with N2 causing the regeneration of some of the primary azide. A Curtius-type rearrangement of F2P(O)N (X3 A″) was induced by irradiation with UV light of 255 nm wavelength, but rather than a 1,3-fluorine shift, nitrogen migration was observed to give F2PON, and this is proposed as the first step in the photoisomerization of F2P(O)N into F2PNO (difluoronitrosophosphine).134 Septet 3,5-difluoropyridyl-2,4,6-dinitrene along with quintet 2-azido-3,5-difluoropyridyl-4,6-dinitrene, quintet 4-azido-3,5-difluoropyridyl-2,6-dinitrene, triplet 2,6-diazido-3,5-difluoropyridyl-4-nitrene, and triplet 2,4-diazido-3,5-difluoropyridyl-6-nitrene were observed following photolysis of 2,4,6-triazido-3,5-difluoropyridine in a solid argon matrix at 4 K. The fine-structure parameters of the nitrenes were determined to a high degree of accuracy using computer simulations of their EPR powder spectra.135 The objective of one study is to investigate whether trityl biradicals could lead to more efficient dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) for low gamma nuclear spins at low temperature (approximate to 1 K) than a trityl monoradical. Electron-electron distances in trityl biradicals were obtained via dipolar couplings determined by EPR at X-band and W-band that are in good accord with the calculated molecular structures. The materials were explored as dynamic nuclear polarization agents in 13C NMR spectra of [1-13C]pyruvic acid. Both the biradical species and the monoradical show an approximate doubling of the polarization when the magnetic field is increased from 3.35 T to 4.64 T.136 The approximation of a relationship between the zero field splitting (ZFS) D-parameter and the distance between two separated electron spins, on the basis of the point-dipole approximation, is central to distance determination in molecules using ESR as a molecular ruler. To explore the validity of this precept, a detailed EPR and X-ray crystallography study along with theoretical calculations was undertaken for the model compound, 2,2′,5,5′-tetra(tert-butyl)-4,4′-bis(ethoxy-carbonyl)-3,3′-bipyrrolyl-1,1′-dioxyl. Significantly, a discrepancy of 40% was found in the radical-radical distance determined using the point-dipole approximation compared with that derived from the X-ray analysis for this molecule. Explicit quantum chemical calculation of the D-value on the basis of B3LYP density functional calculations leads to excellent quantitative agreement with the measured D-value. Since the accepted approach works well for two additional systems, a detailed analysis was performed which includes both the distance dependence of the D-parameter and the through-bond and through-space spin–spin interaction. It is concluded that even quite minor degrees of spin delocalization can cause significant deviations from pure point-dipole behaviour, with the result that the EPR derived distances can depart from the N–O mid-point distance by as much as several angstroms. When the linker-groups are unsaturated, the distance dependence of D does not follow the inverse cube dependence upon which the point-dipole model rests, while, for the more common nonaromatic nitroxide rings connected by saturated linkers, the point-dipole approximation works well.137 Spectroscopic data for triplet isotopomers H–C–C–C–H, H–C–13C–C–H, and H–C–C–13C–H of propynylidene accord with theoretical predictions for a symmetric structure in which the terminal carbons are equivalent (C2 or C2v) but are inconsistent with a planar (Cs) structure in which they are not. The 13C isotope shifts in their IR spectra and EPR-determined 13C hyperfine coupling constants agree well with theoretical estimates for a C2 structure. The 13C hyperfine coupling constants provide a separate measure of the bond angles in the molecule. The influence of molecular motion in modulating the ZFS parameters is indicated by the isotope-dependence of the zero-field splitting parameters, and provides
an explanation for the anomalously low E value, which had previously been interpreted in terms of an axially symmetric (D∞h) structure.138 The triplet carbenes tert-butylpentadiynylidene (t-BuC5H) and dimethylpentadiynylidene (MeC5Me) were produced photochemically from their corresponding diazo-precursors and studied in cryogenic matrices (N2 or Ar) at 10 K. The infrared, electronic absorption, and EPR spectra of these species exhibit numerous similarities to the spectra of pentadiynylidene (HC5H) and methylpentadiynylidene (MeC5H). EPR spectra yield typical ZFS parameters for axially symmetric triplet carbenes (t-BuC5H: |D/hc| = 0.61 cm−1, |E/hc| ca. 0 cm−1; MeC5Me: |D/hc| = 0.62 cm−1, ca. 0 cm−1). When an O2-doped matrix was used, carbonyl oxides derived predominantly from attack at C3 were formed, while both t-BuC5H and MeC5Me rearrange photochemically upon UV irradiation.139 By photolysis of the diazidopyridines, 4-amino-2,6-diazido-3,5-dichloropyridine and 6-amino2,4-diazido-1,3,5-triazine, triplet–triplet nitrene pairs were produced, yielding ESR spectra characteristic of the quintet spin state. The high-spin state (S = 2) results from the exchange interaction between two triplet molecules with the zero-field splitting parameters |D| = 1.0280 cm−1 and |E| = 0.0038 cm−1 and the angle between two C–N nitrene bonds θ = 133°. This angle is close to θ = 136.2° between the C–N bonds of two adjacent molecules in the X-ray crystal structure of the parent compound. When the crystalline diazidotriazine, whose molecules lie in the parallel planes, was photolysed no evidence was found for the formation of triplet-triplet nitrene pairs.140 The temperature dependences of the magnetic susceptibility of polyaniline solutions and powders synthesized by oxidative polymerization indicate the presence of a triplet state. The susceptibility of the fragments obeyed the Bleaney-Bowers equation and can be presented as the sum of the temperature-independent susceptibility and a Curie law susceptibility. A similar analysis can be applied to other conducting polymers.141 After irradiation of 6,9-Di(tert-butyl)-1-methyltetrazolo[1,5-a]perimidine in a butyronitrile matrix at 77 K with 351 nm light and in Ar and Xe matrixes at 4.6 K using 345 nm light, showed a six-line, high-field ESR signal (Δms = ±1), centred at 3350 G in butyronitrile, along with a half-field transition signal (Δms = ±2), which is characteristic for triplet states. Simulation of the observed EPR spectra gave ZFS that are consistent with the diradical 5,8-di(tert-butyl)-2-(N-methylimino)perimidine-1,3-diyl.142
 Fig. 1  Computer models of Cucurbiturils, Q5, Q6, and Q7. Top row is the view into the cavity and the bottom is the side view. Credit M.K. Stone. http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/d/d8/Models_of_cucurbiturils.jpg. 
7. Catalysts and catalytic media
A review has been published entitled, “Electron paramagnetic resonance: a powerful tool for monitoring working catalysts.” As is described, the method may be applied to the online monitoring of catalytic reactions on the basis of paramagnetic centers formed within the catalyst or free radicals formed as intermediates. EPR finds application for monitoring the synthesis and equilibration of solid catalysts and also their role in gas- and liquid-phase reactions, e.g. vanadia-containing oxides and FeMFI zeolites. The use of spin probes and spin traps for detecting hydrocarbon radicals in photocatalysis is illustrated. The potential advantage of making simultaneous EPR measurements with Raman and UV/vis is illustrated and discussion is given of limitations and future potential of the method in the field of catalysis.143 Reactions of Al2O3-supported TEMPO with NO and H2 and of SiO2/Al2O3-supported H4PVMo11O40 with methanol and formaldehyde were studied up to 400 °C using a homemade heatable probe-head equipped with a flow reactor. The TEMPO radicals were immobilized on the support in positions which impose a different reactivity to NO and H2, as may be due to a differential accessibility, which changes during thermal treatment. Mo5+ is formed above 180 °C, In addition to VO2+, depending on the O2 content of the feed, which is easily resolved at Q-band but not at X-band.144 Highly photoactive, tetrahedral Ti4+ sites can be created in mixed-phase TiO2 nanocomposites, and which are shown to be an intermediate formed during the thermally driven phase-transformation from anatase to rutile.145 Nitrogen-doped TiO2 is a novel photocatalyst which can promote the decomposition of organic pollutants using visible light, and contains a number of different paramagnetic centers, such as NO and NO2 radicals and other species, that interact strongly with the TiO2 structure and are related to specific properties of the solid. In one paper, attention is focused on molecular species generated during the sol-gel synthesis process and segregated in cavities of the TiO2 structure.146 A review has been published of highly efficient titanium oxide-based photocatalysts with potential applications for the photo-degradation of organic pollutants, specifically methyl orange. Focus is given to the preparation and characterization of TiO2 photocatalysts prepared by transitional metal doping and noble metal deposition, and particularly a combination of the two methods. Fe3+ doped together with Au deposition on TiO2 shows an excellent photocatalytic activity to degrade methyl orange (MO) under both UV and visible light illumination at wavelengths >420 nm. EPR demonstrates that Fe3+ substitutes for Ti4+ in the TiO2 lattice, and XRD shows that Au exists as Au(0) on the catalyst surface. A mechanism is proposed to account for the synergistic influence of Fe3+ and Au in enhancing the photocatalytic activity of the catalyst.147 Photoirradiation of TiO2 nanoparticles with visible light in the presence of water-soluble, natural polysaccharide, arabinogalactan-complexes of β-carotene leads to a greater yield of hydroxyl (˙OH) radicals than in the absence of the complex. Methyl and methoxyl radicals are formed when ˙OH radicals react with DMSO and are trapped using PBN. Carotenoid-arabinogalactan complexes exhibit an enhanced quantum yield of free radicals and stability toward photodegradation over pure carotenoids, and the greater photocatalytic efficiency for carotenoid complexes is a consequence directly of the decrease in the rate constant for the back electron transfer to the carotenoid radical cation. Applications are stressed for TiO2, in which these results might prove important, particularly in photodynamic therapy and in the design of artificial light-harvesting, photoredox, and catalytic devices.148 A multifrequency (9–95 GHz) EPR study has been reported for TiO2 nanocrystals (NCs) capped by organic moieties prepared by both a nonhydrolytic and a hydrolytic procedure, respectively with a spherical or rodlike shape. The behavior of the electrons promoted in the conduction band by UV irradiation and of the holes in the valence band has been monitored by means of EPR-detectable paramagnetic species so generated. The presence of paramagnetic species on the surfaces of TiO2 NCs was used to account for the catalytic performance of these nanostructured materials which are highly catalytically efficient. An observed carbon-centred radical is proposed to be responsible for the higher catalytic activity of organic capped nanosized catalysts, and indeed, by irradiation, the intensity of this signal with respect to the bulk Ti3+ signal is larger in the NCs prepared with a hydrolytic procedure, which are the more catalytically-active.149 In the photooxidation of cyclohexane in mixtures with CH2Cl2 over TiO2, singlet oxygen, 1O2, formation was determined by the specific 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone EPR assay. The yields of 1O2 correlate with the amount of cyclohexanol detected in the mixtures, which provides convincing evidence that cyclohexanol is formed through the recombination of cyclohexylperoxyl radicals. Chloride yields were also determined and provide direct evidence for the active participation of dichloromethane in the photocatalytic system. A mechanism is proposed.150 The role of dissolved oxygen in the photocatalytic degradation of phenol was investigated using polymer [poly-(fluorene-co-thiophene) with a thiophene content of 30% (dubbed PFT30)] sensitized TiO2 (PFT30/TiO2) with visible light irradiation. The photoluminescent (PL) quantum yield of PFT30/TiO2 was about 30% that of PFT30/Al2O3, which shows that electron transfer occurs between the polymer and TiO2. That the reaction was practically quenched when the solution was saturated with N2 shows the key role of O2. When NaN3was present, which is an efficient quencher of singlet oxygen (1O2), a 40% reduction in the degree of degradation of phenol occurred. A roughly 60% decrease in the phenol photodegradation ratio, was observed when alcohols were added to the medium, accounted for in terms of the scavenging of hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), the presence of which was confirmed by ESR/spin trapping, and that these are the major reactive species present in aqueous solution. In the absence of water, singlet oxygen (1O2) was the predominant species. It is clear that oxygen and reactive intermediates derived from it are critical in the photocatalytic degradation of phenol.151 The encapsulation of microperoxidases (NAPs) into molecular sieves of defined pore size, e.g. the mesoporous silica MCM-41 with 3 nm diameter channels, is a nanotechnological attempt to mimic the enzymatic activity of haemoproteins. Ferric microperoxidase-11 (MP-11) was entrapped in MCM-41, to provide a catalyst (Fe(III)MP11MCM41) with both the properties of catalase and monooxygenase. In a similar manner to catalase, Fe(III)MP11MCM41 was specific for hydrogen peroxide, leading to a high-valence oxidized intermediate, Compound II. In the presence of phenol (a reducing agent) a complete peroxidase cycle was confirmed by UV-visible spectrometry and EPR. Analysis of the reaction mixture by (HPLC/MS) showed that the product of phenol oxidation was 2,4-dihydroxyphenol, and hence in addition to catalase activity, the catalyst MP11 MCM41 also displayed monooxygenase properties. The latter feature is due to the fact that the MP-11 haem iron is able to promote homolytic cleavage of H2O2 with the generation of hydroxyl radicals.152 Aqueous solutions of di-tert-butyl nitroxide (DTBN) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-ol flowing in a quartz column of 0.81 mm packed with well-dried MCM-41 were studied by ESR. In both cases, a very broad signal which accounts for >98% of the total is ascribed to spin-probe molecules that are located in the MCM-41 nanochannel, along with a minor sharp signal from probe molecules that occupy the bulk space between the MCM-41 particles. Although the spin probes are located deep in the cylindrical (3 nm diameter channel) nanospace of MCM-41, they are transported downstream fairly rapidly. It is concluded that the aqueous solution is transported through the nanochannel of MCM-41 relatively slowly but nonetheless more quickly than is predicted from conventional flow-considerations. With solutions of the same spin probes at high concentration in ethanol solution, the ESR spectra also show different spectral forms in the two spaces but the profiles are less distinct. Since the translational diffusion of the individual molecules is quenched in the nanochannel, both the solute and solvent molecules must move collectively through the nanochannel. It is proposed that this method with which to study the fluid flow in nanospaces may be called “spin probe nano flowmetry”.153 In another study by this group, highly concentrated solutions of DTBN were condensed on several
silica materials, such as MCM-41, two types of SBA-15, and fumed silica. At very low levels of doping only the ESR spectrum of an immobilized nitroxide radical is observed, but as more of the solution is adsorbed, the spectrum sharpens until a well-resolved three-line spectrum is observed, when sufficient of the solution has been added as is estimated to cover the surface with a monomolecular layer. Hence, the DTBN molecule can tumbling rapidly on/in this solvent layer. As yet more solution is added, the ESR spectrum changes differently and characteristically from system to system: thus, the line-width increases in a practically linear fashion for the SBA-15 and fumed silica systems. However, in the case of MCM-41 it remains nearly constant until the quantity of solution added is greater than the total capacity of a nanochannel. The increase in line-width as more solution is added is small for the SBA-15 system but large for the fumed silica system. An interpretation is offered in terms of the structural geometry of these silica materials and with a condensation model for the alcohols on these surfaces. Furthermore, a model of the collective probe/solvent molecular flow of the alcohol solutions through the nanochannel of MCM-41 is derived.154 Silver containing zeolite catalysts were prepared by cation exchange in aqueous solution of Ag+ for Na+ in an LTA zeolite. Following oxidation and hydrogen reduction a well-defined paramagnetic cluster consisting of six equivalent silver nuclei was obtained, according to ESR results which show that all silver atoms are nearly equivalent in the reduced Ag6+ clusters. When NO gas was introduced at room temperature, an instant loss of the cluster signal was observed, and in its place was a new feature with a 14N coupling from the adsorbed NO, and another from a single Ag atom which presumably has coordinated the NO moiety. The experimental isotropic 14N hyperfine coupling of 11.0 G is too large to be detected by HYSCORE, however a small 14N-hyperfine interaction is observed, which is ascribed to a second nitrogen atom, bound in the vicinity of the silver cluster. NO is converted slowly into NO2 in the presence of O2, which undergoes detectable molecular dynamics. Below 50 K, the rotation is axially symmetric about the molecular y axis of the adsorbed NO2, but the motion becomes almost isotropic above 50 K. Activation energies for the rotational motion are obtained from the calculated rotational correlation times assuming an Arrhenius dependence.155 Radicals trapped in γ-irradiated molecular sieves containing methanol and ethylene were identified by EPR spectroscopy. It was found that the radical, Ag˙CH2OH+, with a single-electron bond between the Ag and C atoms is formed by attack of the hydroxymethyl radical, ˙CH2OH, on the Ag+ cation. In the zeolite Ag-SAPO-11/C2H4 at 77 K, spectra from Ag(0) atoms and C2H5˙ radicals were recorded. When the sample was annealed at 230 K an anisotropic sextet signal grew-in at the expense of these initial signals. A DFT calculation was undertaken which predicted a geometry for the complex in which two C2H4 ligands adopted an eclipsed conformation on either side of the Ag atom, resulting in the majority of the spin density being localised in ethylene orbitals, the silver atom occupying a nodal position.156 DFT calculations were further applied to provide structural models for Ag˙CH2OH+ complexes characterized by EPR in zeolite matrices, from previous studies. The magnetic (hyperfine and g-tensor) parameters were found to depend on the local structure of the zeolite but were also dependent on the computational method used. From an analysis of the spin distribution, the one-electron silver–carbon bonding deduced from experimental data, was accorded, with the unpaired electron delocalized between the sliver and carbon atoms. It is proposed that these results may provide a deeper understanding of the electronic and catalytic properties of zeolites containing silver atoms and clusters.157 The formation of radicals by the reaction between CO2 molecules and an MgO surface precovered with K atoms has been investigated using DFT calculations and EPR. The characteristic 4-line EPR signal from isolated K atoms is lost, and a new paramagnetic species is observed attributed to CO2˙−. DFT cluster model calculations indicate that the electron transfer from the adsorbed K atom to the CO2 molecule is spontaneous, leading to K+/CO2˙− surface complexes. The electronic properties and spin distribution in these complexes are the same as measured in the gas-phase for M+/ CO2˙− molecules (where M = Li, Na, K) molecules, but on the ionic surface there is an additional stabilization. There is some discussion given of which sites on the MgO surface are most favourable for the formation of these complexes.158 Monooxygen radicals O˙− feature in reactions on solid oxide surfaces, including lithium-promoted MgO, e.g. in the partial oxidation of methane which generates and involves the coupling of methyl radicals in the gas-phase.159 A detailed study is presented of O˙− radicals adsorbed on a FeZSM-5 surface (denoted O˙−α) and their reaction with O2 in an isotopic exchange measured in the temperature interval 198–513 K. Two exchange mechanisms were identified, R0 and R1, promoted by O˙−. The R1 mechanism (with an activation energy of 15 kJ mol−1) was shown to be dominant in the high-temperature region. This can be expressed thus:18O2 + 16O−α ⇄ [O−3]α ⇄ 16O18O + 18O−αThe R0 exchange (with an activation energy of 0.8 kJ mol−1) is a new reaction pathway that operates under cryogenic temperatures and only redistributes the isotopes among O2 molecules, having no influence on the isotopic composition of the 16O−α species. This exchange mechanism is not clear but the reaction definitely does not involve O−α. The tentative suggestion is that the reaction occurs via an intermediate complex O−5 formed by the interaction of O2 molecule with an O−3 anion: The breaking and redistribution of those relatively strong bonds at cryogenic temperatures with an activation energy of practically zero is intriguing and seeks further study.160
8. Materials
The term “quantum dot” (QD) was coined by Mark Reed at Yale University. A quantum dot161 is a semiconductor whose excitons are confined in all three spatial dimensions. Accordingly, they have properties that are intermediate to those of bulk semiconductors and those of discrete molecules. They were discovered by Louis E. Brus, who was then at Bell Labs. QDs are nanocrystalline materials (or materials that contain nanocrystals) in which the dimension of the crystal is smaller (in all directions) than the Bohr exciton radius of the exciton pair (M+…e−). This causes the energy levels to become quantised (quantum confinement), as in individual molecules, rather than coalescing into the “band structure” of bulk semiconductors. Traditional (bulk) semiconductors lack versatility, since their band-gap and hence optical and electronic properties cannot be easily changed, if at all. By tuning the size of the QD particle, the band-gap can be tailored for specific applications. The gap enlarges as the crystalline dimension decreases, so that the fluorescence wavelength shortens; and conversely, as the crystal becomes bigger, the wavelength increases, so the fluorescence shifts toward the red end of the visible spectrum (Fig. 2). QDs range in size from 2–10 nanometers (10–50 atoms) in diameter and contain as few as 100 to 100000 atoms. Nearly 3 million quantum dots could be lined up end to end and fit within the width of a human thumb. There are several ways to confine excitons in semiconductors, resulting in different methods to produce quantum dots. In general, quantum wires, wells and dots are grown by advanced epitaxial techniques in nanocrystals produced by chemical methods or by ion implantation, or in nanodevices made by state-of-the-art lithographic techniques. There are also colloidal methods to produce many different QD semiconductors, including cadmium selenide, cadmium sulphide, indium arsenide, and indium phosphide. There are various important applications for QDs, as in highly-efficient solar cells and some adaptations for ultra-fast quantum computing.161 The following papers are chosen as representative of studies of materials and systems for potential QD devices using ESR. A C3-symmetric structure for a trinuclear copper complex based on the tritopic bridging ligand 2,4,6-triacetylphlorogucinol and the capping ligand 2-[bis-(2-hydroxyethyl) amino] ethylamine is preserved in the solid state structure of the compound which crystallizes in the space group R3c with a threefold rotation axis passing through the center of the molecule. Magnetic susceptibility measurements indicate weak ferromagnetic interactions mediated by a spin-polarization mechanism, which is predicted by DFT calculations using the broken symmetry approach at the B3LYP/def2-TZVP level. Extended characterization by ESR spectroscopy both in X- and W-band confirm an exchange-coupled system with axial symmetry with g⊥ = 2.0633(4), g∥ = 2.2303(4) and an effective axial hyperfine constant A∥ = 64 G.162 The fluorescence of QD particles is quenched efficiently by low concentrations of nitroxides bearing amine or carboxylic acid substituents. The association constants and fluorescence quenching of CdSe QDs with these nitroxides were measured using EPR and fluorescence spectroscopy. In the aprotic solvent toluene, the EPR spectra are shown to be exquisitely sensitive to intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bonding involving the functionalized nitroxides. The quenching of the QD luminescence is found to be nonlinear, and to depend strongly on the distance between the nitroxide and the QD. When the surface-bound nitroxides are converted to hydroxylamines or trapped by carbon radicals to form alkoxyamines the fluorescence is recovered. According to EPR, photoreduction of the nitroxide occurs in toluene solution upon photoexcitation at 365 nm, while no photoreduction occurs in benzene solution, which suggests that the photoreduction process observed in toluene is independent of the quenching mechanism.163 SiGe structures with different QD sizes were prepared by varying growth temperature and spacing between the QD layers. At X-band, two ESR signals with g factors around 1.9992 and 1.9994 are observed with the magnetic field oriented in the direction of crystal growth. The signals were observed to shift and broaden with the magnetic field applied in the in-plane direction. The relative intensity of the two peaks could be altered by illumination with sub- band-gap light and hence the two peaks are explained in terms of s- and p-like states of electrons confined in the strained Si component around nanostructures of SiGe.164 Since the degrees of freedom for electron and nuclear spins are relatively isolated from their surroundings and can be coherently manipulated, e.g., through pulsed EPR and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), such spins are promising candidates as quantum bits (qubits) for quantum computing. Defects and impurities in crystals based around carbon and silicon have been suggested as qubits, and very long relaxation rates have been observed for them. Multifrequency pulsed EPR/ENDOR has been used in the investigation of such systems. When the external magnetic field strength is high, large electron spin polarizations are obtained at liquid helium temperatures, presenting phenomena that may relate to quantum computing. For example, both the electron spin and hyperfine-coupled nuclear spins may be initialized in well-defined states by combining millimeter and radio-frequency radiation. The T2 relaxation times are also lengthened since decoherence from dipolar interactions are eliminated and new mechanisms are followed for the coherent electrical readout of electron spins. As examples, Si∶P, SiC∶N and nitrogen-related centers in diamond are given.165 The endohedral fullerenes N@C60 and P@C60 have long electron-spin relaxation times and are good candidates for the implementation of qubits in an electron spin quantum computer. The ability to rotate the spin direction through an arbitrary angle is a central feature. This nutation behavior was studied using pulsed EPR and it is demonstrated that, even at room temperature, about 50 Rabi oscillations (about 100 qubit operations) can be performed without refocusing the spin system. A particular property of the group V endohedral fullerenes is the electron spin state S = 3/2, which complicates the nutation behavior. At very low temperatures, the zero-field splitting gives rise to different nutation frequencies for the (1/2,−1/2) transition and the (+/−3/2, +/−1/2) transitions.166 A number of papers have appeared dealing with the stability of polymer membranes, principally for use in PEM fuel cells. The comparative robustness of Nation, stabilized Nation (StNafion), and 3M and Aquivion membranes toward attack by the hydroxyl radical, HO˙ was assessed using aqueous dispersions of the polymers at 300 K. Two types of adducts were detected in all dispersions: DMPO/OH and DMPO/CCR, a spin-adduct of polymer-derived carbon-centered radicals (CCRs). The results indicated that StNafion was more robust than Nation, while the 3 M and Aquivion polymers were significantly the most stable. It would appear that the absence of the ether group and of the tertiary carbon in the side chain is the cause of the greater stability of these ionomers. A Competition Kinetics approach was used to determine the reaction rate constant of Ce(III) with HO˙ radicals to yield k = 2.8 × 108 M−1 s−1, which agrees excellently with that 3 × 108 M−1 s−1 given in the literature.167 A fuel-cell (FC) running in the cavity of an ESR spectrometer was used to monitor the formation of HO˙ and HOO˙ radicals, H˙ and D˙ atoms, and radical fragments derived from the Nafion membrane, using DMPO as a spin-trap. Measurements were made with H2 or D2 at the anode and O2 at the cathode. The FC was operated at 300 K with a membrane-electrode assembly (MEA) based on Nafion 117 with a Pt catalyst, using closed and open circuit voltage conditions, CCV and OCV, respectively. Both anode and cathode chemistry was investigated. The DMPO/OH adduct was detected only at the cathode for CCV operation, implying that ˙OH radicals were produced from H2O2 formed electrochemically via the two-electron reduction of oxygen. The DMPO/OOH adduct, which was detected in this study for the first time in a FC, appeared at both the cathode and the anode for OCV operation, and at the cathode after an operating time of >2 h. A mechanism is proposed in which HOO˙ radicals are generated electrochemically at the cathode (HO˙ +H2O2 → H2O + HOO˙) and at the anode from hydrogen atoms and crossover oxygen (H˙ + O2 → HOO˙). DMPO adducts of H˙ atoms and D˙ atoms were detected at the anode and cathode sides, for CCV and OCV operation. The detection of H˙ and D˙ atoms is significant in that these species are sufficiently reactive to abstract F-atoms from the tertiary carbon in the polymer membrane chain, leading to chain fragmentation, rather in the manner that
ionizing radiation “unzips” the C–C backbone of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) by forming initial carbon-centred radicals. CCR adducts were detected at the cathode after CCV FC operation; while weak signals from CCR adducts were also detected at the anode. Since the only component in the FC that could provide CCRs is the Nafion membrane, their presence indicates membrane fragmentation. In conclusion, the operation of a FC has been shown to include such processes as gas-crossover, surface-reactions at the catalyst, and it is conceivable that reactive H˙ or D˙ atoms attack the membrane. Since the latter not occur in ex situ laboratory experiments it appears that different mechanisms may pertain in the real in situ case.168 A study has been made by another group using EPR to monitor radical-induced degradation of partially fluorinated aromatic model compounds for fuel cell membranes.169 A detailed investigation has been reported of the microscopic viscosity, ordering and polarity in Nafion membranes containing methanol-water mixtures, using Tempone as a spin-probe.170 A related issue to the use of fuel cells, particularly of the PEM type intended for hydrogen as the “fuel”, is the storage of hydrogen itself for which various materials have been explored including zeolites, but without success in meeting the stringent requirements of either volumetric or weight density in respect to the volume or mass of the fuel-tank. For commercial applications, an acceptable energy density for a hydrogen storage tank is deemed to be that it can efficiently hold an amount of hydrogen equal to 6.5 wt% of the weight of the tank and 62 kg H2/m3 in terms of volume. However, although investigations of hydrogen storage methods have been carried out for over 30 years, there has been no single one devolved which fulfils these demanding criteria. Some approaches meet the weight target, but occupy unsatisfactorily large volumes (e.g. tanks of compressed hydrogen gas) yet others achieve the volume target but not the weight ratio (e.g. metal hydride absorbents).20 A solid consisting of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) encapsulated by thin Pd layers onto a Pd substrate has been investigated as a novel material for hydrogen storage which shows a synergetic effect from a combination of the adsorptive affinities for hydrogen of Pd and the SWCNTs. A high effective H2 pressure is provided from the highly H-loaded massive Pd substrate into a small fraction of deposited SWCNT which allowed the attainment of a net capacity of 8–12 wt%. H2. ESR measurements established that the Pd–Cx-complexes which formed at the openings of the SWCNTs can be considered as adsorption sites for H2, providing both a high gravimetric capacity (H/C > 1) and low hydrogen binding energy in the Pd encapsulated SWCNT, thus the gas can be released for application, e.g. to a fuel cell.171 A new chainlike (C60–Fe–C60–Fe)n complex has been prepared, the structure of which has been proposed based on 13C solid-state NMR, ESR, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, energy-dispersive spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction. The material has been shown to possess unique binding sites for H2 molecules on the basis of temperature-programmed desorption. The adsorption sites have greater binding energies than for hydrogen physisorbed on planar graphite, but significantly weaker than a chemical C–H bond. Volumetric measurements at 77 K and 2 bar show a hydrogen adsorption capacity of 0.5 wt% which again is well below the practical requirements for a hydrogen-storage material. N2 and H2 adsorption isotherms measured at 75 K show a much greater effective surface area for H2 over N2 for this complex, indicating a “hidden” surface area for H2 adsorption.172 Conductive polymers also feature as materials for which ESR methods provide useful information. A review has been published on high-field ESR spectroscopy of conductive polymers. Among the topics surveyed are: magnetic parameters of charge carriers in conductive polymers, relaxation and dynamics in slightly doped conductive polymers, charge-transfer in highly doped conductive polymers, high-field Saturation-transfer ESR in the study of conductive polymers, high-field spin probe studies of conductive polymers.173 Ultrathin-film polymeric transistors with controlled in-plane chain orientation have been made using Langmuir-Blodgett methods in which liquid crystal molecules are spread along with regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene). For molecular thicknesses of 1 to 5, the conductivities parallel to the chain direction reached 0.001–0.01 cm2/V s. ESR signals from the field-induced polarons exhibited clear in-plane anisotropies due to unpaired π-electrons, while the spectral anisotropy along with the optical dichroism permit the elucidation of detailed molecular orientations in the channel of these devices.174 Saturation transfer electron paramagnetic resonance (ST-EPR) at 5 T/140 GHz was used to study of super-slow librational macromolecular dynamics in various conducting polymers. The increase in the electron precession frequency at such a high magnetic field allows the spin relaxation and dynamics to be determined separately from their influence on the ST-EPR spectra. The spectral resolution of the method and its sensitivity to the anisotropic macromolecular motion in conducting polymers is improved considerably over what is possible at X-band, thus increasing the timescale over which correlation times may be measured and so extending the slow-motion limit for ST-EPR by at least two orders of magnitude.175
 Fig. 2  Shift in fluorescence wavelength according to size of quantum dot particle. Far red: 8.3 nm. Far blue: 2 nm. As the crystal size increases, the wavelength increases casing a shift toward the red end of the visible spectrum © Quantum Dot Corporation (2003). http://www.nanotech-now.com/images/QDot-nanocrystal.jpg. 
9. Environmental applications
A traditional and popular lime tile using for decorating houses in Japan, “Limix”, was coated with a titania sol and used to photochemically decompose formaldehyde, to address the problem of “sick-building syndrome”. The photocatalytic activities of five types of lime tile material both with titania sol coating and without it were examined in a flow-type photoreactor based on the JIS (Japanese Industrial Standard). ESR was further employed to explore the potential photocatalytic mechanism in the coated tile. It was discovered that a higher efficiency was achieved when the lime tile was combined with a commercially available zeolite in comparison with the lime tile coated with an immobilized titania photocatalyst. The EPR spectrum indicates that oxygen centered radicals and surface trapped holes are formed in the titania sol, but this is entirely different from the spectra observed in pure anatase and Degussa P25 titania, implying that the photocatalytic mechanisms are different.176 The main waste material from biodiesel production is glycerol, raw fractions of which obtained from different kinds of transesterified oil, were investigated for their antioxidant and anticorrosive properties using respectively EPR and the Herbert method. It was found that those fractions rich in glycerol exhibited strong radical scavenging properties, in comparison with biodiesel and the pure oil. Interestingly, it was those fractions which displayed the greatest radical scavenging abilities that also showed the highest anticorrosive behaviour. It is proposed that the glycerol fractions may have applications as lubricants, hence the raw glycerol might be used in the absence of costly and lengthy purification procedures.177 DFT calculations have been used to calculate pKa value and g-tensor components for semiquinone radicals as a mimic for the kind of radicals present in humic acids. The results accord with the notion that naturally occurring stable semiquinone radicals (native form) are trapped in the humic acid macromolecule matrices which precludes their direct involvement in the acid-base equilibrium with short-lived radicals (transient form). The differences calculated for g-values for protonated and deprotonated model radicals are similar to those observed for humic acids, which permits an identification of the stable radicals as protonated semiquinones, and the short-lived radicals as deprotonated radicals.178 EPR spectra of crude petroleum contain an intense single line which is thought to arise from the superposition of signals from different radical species with very similar g-values, and moreover, the mobility of free radicals in crude oil is restricted by its high viscosity. Hence a low-viscosity oil was studied [marine diesel (bunker)] by X-band EPR spectroscopy in the temperature interval 170 to 400 K. Despite the viscosity at room temperature (2.5 × 10−3 kg/m s) and the tumbling correlation time for free radicals of about 10−7 s suggesting a high mobility of free radicals in marine diesel, the EPR spectra still showed poor resolution up to 373 K. However, above 373 K, resolved lines were recorded: a superposition of a septet-quartet, a sextet-quartet and a quintet-quartet group of lines which were attributed to phenalenyl radicals and their derivatives. It is concluded that below 373 K, these radicals were present as diamagnetic dimmers and hence undetectable to EPR.179 In contrast with the isotropic X-band spectra, W-band spectra of diesel were found to show poorer signal-to-noise ratios and anisotropy in the A- and g-parameters.180 A line-shape analysis has been made in EPR spectra of coals and published in Russian.181 EPR has also been used to characterize oil shale residue and rejects, calschist, shale file and retorted shale from the Irati formation in Brazil.182 An EPR investigation has been reported of rocks of a geological section taken of wells from Near-Caspian oil deposits as an indication for oil or gas-yielding rocks, also published in Russian but mentioned now in view of the potential importance of the subject.183 A TiO2–Ag doped slurry has been synthesized for concrete impregnation, to furnish a material with photocatalytic properties, e.g. for self-cleaning to prevent the build-up of organic debris on buildings. Ti and Ag centres were characterized by EPR, and also the activity of the material in generating ˙OH radicals in model situations.184 An ESR-based method for the quantitative/qualitative determination of the purity of cane sugar has been proposed. The sucrose radical is produced when sugar is pulverized, the concentration of which increases as the particle size decreases. It is found that the ESR peak area for the radical increases linearly with the sucrose content of the material (refined sugar, plantation white sugar, soft brown sugar and raw sugar were used as samples).185 The surface chemistry of activated carbons used as sorbents in a variety of applications has been studied using a combination of methods, including ESR.186 An ESR-based characterization of kaolin which is used in large quantities in the paper industry as a filler and coating material has been reported. For this application a high brightness grade of kaolin is required as depends greatly on its iron-mineral content, which can be assessed using ESR.187 Acyl and alkylaminocarbonyl radicals have been detected in cigarette smoke, which casts doubt and new light on the accepted mechanism of radical formation when cigarettes are smoked.188 A review has been published on applications of ESR in nutraceutical and food research, in particular to determine the free radical scavenging capacity, oxidative stability evaluation and Cu2+ chelating capacity of foodstuffs. The potential of the ESR spin-label oximetry technique (Section 2) in the determination of lipid peroxidation and oxygen diffusion–concentration products in liposomes, oxygen transport and depletion, along with membrane structure and dynamic properties is described. The use of ESR in determining whether foods including meat, fruits, vegetables, spices, cereal grains, and oil seeds had been irradiated was surveyed. In a final section an account was given of the use of ESR to investigate microstructural changes, phase transitions and viscosity changes during food formulation, processing, and storage, along with the potential of the method to investigate the radio-stability of food components.189
References
C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem. Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2008, 104, 81 RSC .
H. M. Swartz, 
            et al.
          , NMR Biomed., 2004, 17, 335 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Swartz and N. Khan, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 23(Biomedical EPR Part A), 197 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Subczynski and H. M. Swartz, Magn. Reson., 2005, 23(Biomedical EPR Part A), 229 Search PubMed .
R. Ahmad, D. S. Vikram, L. C. Potter and P. Kuppusamy, J. Magn. Reson., 2008, 192, 269 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Williams and H. J. Halpern, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 23(Biomedical EPR Part A), 283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Muennemann, C. Bauer, J. Schmiedeskamp, H. W. Spiess, W. G. Schreiber and D. Hinderberger, App. Magn. Reson., 2008, 34, 321 CrossRef .
S. Subramanian and M. C. Krishna, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 23(Biomedical EPR Part A), 321 CrossRef CAS .
I. Golovina, I. Geifman and A. Belous, J. Magn. Reson., 2008, 195, 52 CrossRef CAS .

          V. M. Grigoryants, A. V. and C. P. Scholes, in Methods in Protein Structure and Stability Analysis, ed. V. N. Uversky and E. A. Permyakov, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2007, p. 47 Search PubMed .
H. Yokoyama, T. Ono and T. Yoshimura, App. Magn. Reson., 2007, 32, 283 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hyodo, S. Matsumoto, N. Devasahayam, C. Dharmaraj, S. Subramanian, J. B. Mitchell and M. C. Krishna, J. Magn. Reson., 2009, 197, 181 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Burks, J. Ni, S. Muralidharan, A. Coop, J. P. Y. Kao and G. M. Rosen, Bioconjugate Chemistry, 2008, 19, 2071 .
L. Kispert, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 24(Biomedical EPR, Part B), 165 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duboc, D. Ganyushin, K. Sivalingam, M. N. Collomb and F. Neese, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 10750 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hermosilla, P. Calle, Paloma, C. Sieiro, N. Garcia, P. Tiemblo and J. Guzman, Chem. Phys., 2007, 340, 237 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Science Progress, 2009, 92, 39 Search PubMed .
C. J. Rhodes, Science Progress, 2008, 91, 317 Search PubMed .
H. Aoyama, T. Kuroiwa and S. Nakamura, Eur. J. Phycol., 2009, 44, 497 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem. Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2007, 103, 287 RSC .

          C.J. Rhodes, http://blogs.forbes.com/energysource/2010/12/06/shortage-of-rare-earth-metals-exacerbated-by-smuggling/.
C. Kamp, A. Silakov, M. Winkler, E. J. Reijerse, W. Lubitz and T. Happe, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta-Bioenergetics, 2008, 177, 410 Search PubMed .

  (a) R. Davydov and B. M. Hoffman, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 13, 357 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Davydov, R. L. Osborne, S. H. Kim, J. dawson and B. M. Hoffman, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 5147 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Overton, M. C. Justino, Y. Li, J. M. Baptista, A. M. P. Melo, J. A. Cole and L. M. Saraiva, J. Bacteriol., 2008, 190, 2004 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Tumanova, I. A. Tukhvatullin, D. Sh. Burbaev, R. I. Gvozdev and K. K. Andersson, Russ. J. Bioorg. Chem., 2008, 34, 177 Search PubMed .
O. Guerrini, B. Burlat, C. Leger, B. Guigliarelli, S. Bruno, P. Soucaille and L. Girbal, Current Microbiology, 2008, 56, 261 CrossRef CAS .
S. van Doorslaer and F. Desmet, Methods in Enzymology, 2008, 437(Globins and Other Nitric Oxide-Reactive Proteins, Part B), 237 .
M. D. Liptak, X. Wen and K. L. Bren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9753 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. Suarez, A. Khajo, S. Yu, L. Metlitsky and R. S. Magliozzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8268 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Antholine, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 23(Biomedical EPR Part A), 417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vancoille, J. Chalupsky, U. Ryde, E. Solomon, K. Pierloot and F. Neese, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 7692 CrossRef .
B. E. Bode, J. Plackmeyer, T. F. Prisner and O. Schiemann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 5064 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Su and J. Messinger, App.Magn. Reson., 2009, 37, 123 CAS .
G. Hendry and T. Wydrzynski, Biochemistry, 2002, 41, 13328 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Su, W. Lubitz and J. Messinger, J. Am Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 786 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savitsky, O. Gopta, M. Mamedov, J. Golbeck, A. Tikhonov, K. Mobius and A. Semenov, App. Magn. Reson., 2009, 37, 85 CAS .
Y. Gao, K. E. Shinopoulos, C. A. Tracewell, A. L. Focsan, G. W. Brudbig and L. D. Kispert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 9901 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gonzalez-Perez, C. Quijano, N. Romero, T. B. Melo, R. Radi and J. B. Areliano, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2008, 473, 25 CAS .
M. Wang and K. Warncke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Petersen, K. Fisher and D. J. Lowe, Biochemistry, 2002, 41, 13253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Petersen, K. Fisher and D. J. Lowe, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 13, 623 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Lee, M. M. Whitaker and J. W. Whitaker, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 6637 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dube, B. Kasumaj, C. Calle, M. Saito and G. Jeschke, Angewandte Chemie, International Edition, 2008, 47, 2600 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Dzikovski and J. Freed, Wiley Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology, ed. T. P. Begley, Wiley, Hoboken N.J.,  2000, vol. 2, p. 728 Search PubMed .
M. Raguz, J. Widomska, J. Dillon, E. R. Gaillard and W. K. Subczynski, Biochim. Biophys. Acta-Biomembranes, 2008, 1778, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Eaton and G. R. Eaton, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2005, 24(Biomedical EPR Part B), 223 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ward, D. J. Keeble, H. El-Mkami and D. G. Norman, ChemBioChem., 2007, 8, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
C. Altenbach, A. K. Kusnetzow, O. P. Ernst, K. P. Hofmann and W. L. Hubbell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2008, 105, 7439 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Georgieva, T. F. Ramlall, P. P. Borbat and J. H. Freed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12856 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Bird, S. Pornsuwan, S. Saxena and C. E. Schafmeister, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1857 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kochubey, A. I. Vovk, O. Yu. Bondarenko, V. V. Shevchenko, R. V. Bugas, A. K. Melnyk and V. Yu. Tanchuck, Biochemistry (Moscow), 2007, 73, 558 CrossRef .
S. J. Emam, A. R. Nikzamir, M. Nakhjavani and A. R. Esteghamati, Int. J. Endocrinol. Metab., 2008, 6, 20 Search PubMed .
D. J. Mayo, J. J. Inbaraj, N. Subbaraman, S. M. Grosser, C. A. Chan and G. A. Lorigan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9656 CrossRef CAS .
C. Diepart, B. F. Jordan and B. Gallez, Radiat. Res., 2009, 172, 230 .
G. Meenakshisundaram, E. Eteshola, R. P. Pandian, A. Bratasz, K. Selvendiran, S. C. Lee, M. C. Krishna, H. M. Swartz and P. Kuppusamy, Biomedical Microdevices, 2009, 11, 817 CrossRef CAS .
F. Turci, E. Ghibaudi, M. Colona, B. Boscolo, I. Fenoglio and B. Fubini, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8336 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Drew and K. J. Barnham, Methods in Molecular Biology, 2008, 459(Prion Protein Protocols), 173 Search PubMed .
C. Antonio and W.-M. L. Fung, Anal. Biochem., 2008, 37, 160 CrossRef .
F. M. Megli and L. Russo, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 2008, 1778, 143 CAS .
S. G. Swarts, D. C. Gilbert, K. K. Sharma, Y. Razskazovskiy, S. Purkayastha, K. A. Naumenko and W. A. Bernhard, Radiat. Res., 2007, 168, 367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Swamalatha, T. Srinivasulu, M. Srimurali and G. Sekaran, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 150, 290 CrossRef .
J. Kim, D. J. Darley, W. Buckel and A. J. Pierik, Nature, 2008, 453, 239 CrossRef .
J. Ben, P. C. W. Fung, C. Chang, G. X. Shen, G. Lu, F. H. Y. Chan, K. J. Liu and J. Shen, Appl.Magn. Reson., 2007, 32, 243 CrossRef .
Z. Shan, Q. Yu, P. Purwaha, B. Guo and S. Y. Qian, Free Rad. Res., 2009, 43, 13 CrossRef CAS .
B. Galliker, R. Kissner, T. Nauser and W. H. Koppenol, Chemistry-A European Journal, 2009, 15, 6161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Massari, R. T. okikawa, L. Zanolli, M. F. M. Tavares, N. A. Assuncao and E. J. H. Bechara, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2010, 23, 1762 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimamura, Y. Fujimura and H. Ukeda, Anal.Sci., 2007, 23, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pieta, A. Petr, W. Kutner and L. Dunsch, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3412 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bacic, I. Spasojevic, B. Secerov and M. Mojovic, Spectrochim. Acta Part A-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectrsocopy, 2008, 69, 1354 Search PubMed .
R. Komatsu-Watanabe, Y. Sakurai, C. Morimoto, S. Sakamoto, K. Kanoari and K. Tajima, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ranguelova and R. P. Mason, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 2009, 47, 128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y. Liu, A. Rockenbauer, J. L. Zweier, G. Durand and F. A. Villamena, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 5369 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quin, J. Trnka, A. Hay, M. P. Murphy and R. C. Hartley, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 8154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gamliel, M. Afri and A. A. Frimer, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 2008, 44, 1394 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Wiegus and T. Sarna, Photochem. Photobiol., 2008, 84, 683 CrossRef .

Toxicology of the Human Environment—the critical role of free radicals, ed. C. J. Rhodes, Taylor and Francis, London,  2000 Search PubMed .
K. Masuda, T. Hori, K. Tanabe, Y. Kano, A. Hirayama and S. Nagase, App. Physiol., Nutrition and Metab., 2007, 32, 1097 Search PubMed .
D. C. Crans, B. Baruah, S. E. GaidamauskaS, B. G. Lemons, B. B. Lorenz and M. D. Johnson, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2008, 102, 1334 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hamasaki, T. Kashiwagi, T. Imada, N. Nakamichi, S. Aramaki, K. Toh, S. Morisawa, H. Shimakoshi, Y. Hisaeda and S. Shirahata, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7354 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wessels, W. Birmili, C. Albrecht, B. Hellack, E. Jermann, G. Wick, R. M. Harrison and R. P. F. Schins, Env. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bao, A. Xu, L. Tong, S. Chen, L. Zhu, Y. Zhao, G. Zhao, E. Jiang, J. Wang and L. Wu, Env. Health Perspect., 2009, 117, 436 CAS .
G. S. Omenn, G. Goodman, M. Thornquist, J. Grizzle, L. Rosenstock, S. Barnhart, J. Balmes, M. G. Cherniack, M. R. Cullen and A. Glass, 
            et al.
          , Cancer Res., 1994, 54(7 Suppl), 2038s CAS .
Y. G. J. van Helden, J. Keijer, S. G. Heil, C. Pico, A. Palou, P. Oliver, A. Munnia, J. J. Briede, N. L. Franssen-van Hal, F. J. van Schooten and R. W. L. Godschalk, Carcinogenesis, 2009, 30, 2070 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tkac and G. Scott, Chemical Papers-Chemicke Zvesti, 2006, 60, 179 Search PubMed .
K. Murakami, M. Haneda, S. Iwata and M. Yoshino, Toxicol in vitro, 2010, 24, 905 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kato, H. Aoshima, Y. Saitoh and M. Miwa, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2009, 19, 5293 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mano, M. Barros, P. A. Faria, T. Prieto, F. H. Dyazy, O. R. Nascimento, I. L. Nantes and E. J. H. Bechara, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 2009, 47, 841 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Naqvi, H. Li, T. B. Melo and R. D. Webster, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 10795 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. M. Horsley, M. J. Burkitt, C. M. Jones, R. A. Patterson, A. Rebecca, L. K. Harris, N. J. Moss, J. D. del Rio and D. S. Leake, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2007, 465, 303 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Bonomo, P. Raffaele, F. D'Alessandro, G. Grasso, G. Impellizzeri, G. Pappalardo, E. Rizzarelli and G. Tabbi, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 1705 CrossRef CAS .
E. Castagnino, M. F. Ottaviani, M. Cangiotti, M. Morelli, L. Casettari and R. A. A. Muzzarelli, Carbohydrate Polymers, 2008, 74, 640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fabris, F. Momo, G. Ravagnan and R. Stevanato, Biophys. Chem., 2008, 135, 76 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Lourenco, B. Gago, R. M. Barbosa, V. de Freitas and J. Laranjinha, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 3798 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kubbta, H. Haga, Y. Oya and K. Okuno, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 275, 483 CrossRef .
M. Zalibera, A. Stasko, A. Slebodova, V. Janocovicova, T. Cermakova and V. Brezova, Food Chem., 2008, 110, 512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stasko, V. Brezova, S. Biskupic and P. Rapta, J. Food. Nutrit. Res., 2007, 46, 145 Search PubMed .
A. Stasko, V. Brezova, M. Mazur, M. Certik, M. Kalinak and G. Gescheidt, LWT-Food Science and Technology, 2008, 41, 2126 Search PubMed .
S. He, L.-Y. Jiang, B. Wu, Y.-J. Pan and C.-R. Sun, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm., 2009, 379, 283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asensi-Fabado, J. L. Carrasco-Rodriguez, C. L. Gomez-Garcia and S. Del Valle-Tascon, Free Rad. Res., 2008, 42, 105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobiro, M. Matsura, H. Kojima and K. Nakahara, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 807 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Polovyanenko, E. G. Bagryanskaya, A. Schnegg, K. Moebius, A. W. Coleman, G. S. Ananchenko, K. A. Udachin and J. A. Ripmeester, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5299 RSC .
P. Franchi, G. F. Pedulli and M. Lucarini, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Livshits, I. V. Demisheva, B. G. Dzikovskii, V. G. Avakyan and M. V. Alfimov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2006, 55, 2161 Search PubMed .
D. Marsh and C. Toniolo, J. Magn. Reson., 2008, 190, 211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tudose, T. Constantinescu, A. T. Balaban and P. Ionita, App. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 1904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y.-C. Chen, N. Jayaraj, S. Jockusch, M. F. Ottaviani, V. Ramamurthy and N. J. Turro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7206 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marsh, J. Magn. Reson., 2008, 190, 60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okazaki, M. A. Mannan, K. Sawai, T. Masumizu, Y. Miura and K. Takeshita, Free Rad. Res., 2007, 41, 1069 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moscatelli, Z. Liu, X. Lei, J. Dyer, L. Abrama, M. F. Ottaviani and N. J. Turro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11344 CrossRef CAS .
V. Strehmel, H. Rexhausen and P. Strauch, Tet. Lett., 2008, 49, 3264 Search PubMed .
V. Strehmel, H. Rexhausen, P. Strauch, E. Goernitz and B. Strehmel, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 1294 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Peters, J. R. Klen and N. C. Smart, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 4521 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Carter, A. Sia, M. J. Shaw and A. F. Heyduk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5838 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Morita, A. Ueda, S. Nishida, K. Fukui, T. Ise, D. Shiomi, K. Sato, T. Takui and K. Nakasuji, Angew. Chem., Int. Edn., 2008, 47, 2035 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grampp, B. Grossmann, J. Heinze, S. Landgraf and K. Rasmussen, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 854 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Banerjee and S.V. Bhat, arXiv.org, e-print Archive, Condensed Matter 26 Oct 2008, 1. http://aps.arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0810/0810.4682.pdf.
N. P. Benetis and Y. Dmitriev, J. Phys.: Condensed Matter, 2009, 21, 103201/1 CAS .
T. Kiljunen, E. Popov, H. Kunttu and J. Eloranta, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 4770 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Mattar and J. Sanford, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11435 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Shundrin and E. A. Polenov, J. Struct. Chem., 2009, 50, 251 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Ikryannikova, L. Yu. Ustynyuk and A. N. Tikhonov, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2010, 48, 337 CAS .
E. Ya. Misochko, A. V. Akimov, V. A. Belov and D. A. Tyurin, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2007, 56, 438 Search PubMed .

          B. L. Tumanskii, M. V. Tsikalova, R. Gasanov, A. V. Usatov, E. V. Martynova, A. R. Sabirov, I. V. Stankevich and Y. u. N. Novikov, in Fullerene Research Advances, ed. C. N. Kramer, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Hauppauge, N.Y.,  2007, p. 117 Search PubMed .
D. Banerjee and S. V. Bhat, J. Non-Cystalline Solids, 2009, 355, 2433 Search PubMed .
G. Ionita and V. Chechik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 6956 RSC .
I. V. Beregovaya, L. N. Shchegoleva and V. I. Borovkov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lagona, P. Mukhopadhyay, S. Chakrabarti and L. Isaacs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4844 CrossRef CAS .
R. Behrend, E. Meyer and F. Rusche, Justus Liebig's Annalen der Chemie, 1905, 339, 1 Search PubMed .
W. A. Freeman, W. L. Mock and N.-Y. Shih, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 7367 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jayaraj, M. Porel, M. F. Ottaviani, M. V. S. N. Maddipatla, A. Modelli, J. P. Da Silva, B. R. Bhogala, B. Captain, S. Jockusch, N. J. Turro and V. Ramamurthy, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13820 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kameya, H. Nakamura, M. Ukai and Y. Shimoyama, Spectrochim. Acta Part A-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 2008, 69, 1367 Search PubMed .
L. Franco, M. Mazzoni, C. Corvaja, V. P. Gubskaya, L. Sh. Berezhnaya and I. A. Nuretdinov, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2006, 30, 577 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshifuji, A. J. Arduengo and S. Ito, Phosphorus, Silicon and the Related Elements, 2008, 183, 335 Search PubMed .
X. Zeng, H. Beckers, H. Willner, P. Neuhaus, D. Grote and W. Sander, Chemistry-A European Journal, 2009, 15, 13466 CAS .
S. V. Chapyshev, D. Grote, C. Finke and W. Sander, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 7045 CrossRef CAS .
S. Macholl, H. Johannesson and J. H. Ardenkjaer-Larsen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 5804 RSC .
C. Riplinger, J. P. Y. Kao, G. M. Rosen, V. Kathirvelu, G. R. Eaton, S. S. Eaton, A. Kutateladze and F. Neese, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10092 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Seburg, E. V. Patterson and R. J. McMahon, J. Am. Chem.Soc., 2009, 131, 9442 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Thomas, N. P. Bowling, N. J. Burrmann and R. J. McMahon, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 6372 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Chapyshev, V. F. Lavitskii, A. V. Akimov, F. Ya. Misochko, A. V. Shastin, D. V. Korchagin, G. V. Shilov and S. M. Aldoshin, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2008, 57, 524 Search PubMed .
A. V. Kulikov, A. S. Komissarova, M. N. Shishlov and L. S. Fokeeva, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2008, 57, 324 Search PubMed .
H. Quast, W. Nuedling, G. Klemm, A. Kirschfeld, P. Neuhaus, W. Sander, D. A. Hrovat and W. T. Borden, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 4956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brueckner, Advances in Catalysis, 2007, 51, 265 .
R. Stoesser, U. Marx, W. Herrmann, J. K. Jabor and A. Brueckner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9873 CrossRef .
G. Li, N. M. Dimitrijevic, L. Chen, J. M. Nichols, T. Rajh and K. A. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5402 CrossRef CAS .
S. Livraghi, M. C. Paganini, M. Chiesa and E. Giamello, Research on Chemical Intermediates, 2007, 33, 739 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Cong and M. Anpo, Topics in Catalysis, 2008, 47, 122 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Polyakov, T. V. Leshina, E. S. Meteleva, A. V. Dushkin, T. A. Konovalova and L. D. Kispert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fittipaldi, M. L. Curri, R. Comparelli, M. Striccoli, A. Agostiano, N. Grassi, C. Sangregorio and D. Gatteschi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6221 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Brusa, Y. Di Iorio, M. S. Churio and M. A. Grela, J. Mol. Catal.-Chemical, 2007, 268, 29 Search PubMed .
D.-D. Zhang, R. Qiu, L. Song, E. Brewer, Y.-Q. Mo and X.-F. Huang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 163, 843 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Araujo, T. Prieto, F. M. Prado, F. J. Trindade, J. L. C. Nunes, J. G. dos Santos, P. Di Masco, F. J. Castro, G. J. T. Fernandes, Glauber J. F. Valter Jr., A. S. Araujo, M. J. Politi, S. Brochsztain, O. R. Nascimento, I. L. Nantes and J. Nanoscience, Nanotechnology, 2007, 7, 3643 CAS .
M. Okazaki, P. Jin, K. Ohta and K. Toriyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11086 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okazaki, S. Seelan and K. Toriyama, App. Magn. Reson., 2009, 35, 363 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baldansuren, R.-A. Eichel and E. Roduner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 6664 RSC .

          M. Danilczuk, D. Pogocki, J. Turek, J. Sadlo and J. Michalik, in Zeolites and Related Materials: Trends, targets and Challenges, Proceedings of the 4th International Feza Conference, ed. A. Gedeon, P. Massiani and F. Babonnea, Book Series: Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Part 2,  2008, vol. 174, p. 933 Search PubMed .
M. Danilczuk, D. Pogocki and A. Lund, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 469, 152 .
G. Preda, G. Pacchioni, M. Chiesa and E. Giamello, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 8156 RSC .
T. Ito, J. Wang, C. H. Lin and J. H. Lunsford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5062 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Parfenov, E. V. Starokon, S. V. Semikolenov and G. I. Panov, J. Catal., 2009, 263, 173 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Sci. Prog., 2010, 93, 37 Search PubMed .
E. T. Spielberg, M. Fittipaldi, D. Geibig, D. Gatteschi and W. Plass, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2010, 363, 4269 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tansakul, E. Lilie, E. D. Walter, R. F. Rivera, A. Wolcott, J. Z. Zhang, G. L. Millhauser and R. Braslau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7793 CrossRef .
F. Lipps, F. Pezzoli, M. Stoffel, C. Deneke, J. Thomas, A. Rastelli, V. Kataev, O. G. Schmidt and B. Buechner, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 125312 CrossRef .
J. van Tol, G. W. Morley, S. Takahashi, D. R. McCamey, C. Boehme and M. E. Zvanut, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2009, 36, 259 CrossRef .
C. Meyer, W. Harneit, B. Naydenov, K. Lips and A. Weidinger, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2004, 27, 123 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danilczuk, A. J. Perkowski and S. Schlick, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danilczuk, F. D. Coms and S. Schlick, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 8031 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schoenberger, J. Kerres, H. Dilger and E. Roduner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 5782 RSC .
J. S. Lawton, E. S. Smotkin and D. E. Budil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8549 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Lipson, B. F. Lyakhov, E. I. Saunin, N. L. Solodkova and A. Yu. Tsivadze, Diamond and Related Materials, 2009, 18, 984 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Whitney, A. C. Dillon, C. Curtis, C. Engtrakul, K. O'Neill, M. Davis, L. Simpson, K. Jones, Y.-F. Zhao, Y.-H. Kim, S.-B. Zhang, P. Parilla, V. Fthenakis, A. Dillon and N. Savage, Life-Cycle Analysis for New Energy Conversion and Storage Systems, Book Series: Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings,  2008, vol. 1041, p. 107 Search PubMed .

          V. I. Krinichnyi, in Advanced ESR Methods in Polymer Research, ed. S. Shulamith, Wiley, N.Y.,  2006, p. 307 Search PubMed .
S. Watanabe, H. Tanaka, S. Kuroda, A. Toda, S. Nagano, T. Seki, A. Kimoto and J. Abe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 173302 CrossRef .
V. I. Krinichnyi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9746 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Liu, K. Nakano, E. Obuchi, T. Oike, N. Yukihira, Nobuyoshi, D. C. Hurum and K. A. Gray, J. Advanced Oxidation Technologies, 2007, 10, 11 Search PubMed .
M. Jerzykiewicz, I. Cwielag and W. Jerzykiewicz, J. Chem. Tech. Biotech., 2009, 84, 1196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Witwicki, A. R. Jaszewski, J. Jezierska, J. Jerzykiewicz and A. Jezierski, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 462, 300 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Piccinato, C. L. B. Guedes and E. Di Mauro, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2009, 35, 379 CrossRef CAS .
E. Di Mauro, C. L. B. Guedes and M. T. Piccinato, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2007, 32, 303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munkhtsetseg, N. A. Poklonskii, A. V. Khomich, N. I. Gorbachuk and N. M. Lapchuk, Vestnik, Belorusskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta, Seriya 1: Fizika, Matematika, Informatika, 2007,(3), 49 Search PubMed .
S. L. Cogo, A. M. Brinatti, S. C. Saab, M. L. Simoes, L. Martin-Neto, J. A. Rosa and Y. P. Mascarenhas, Brazilian-Journal of Physics, 2009, 39, 31 Search PubMed .
R. Nasirov, Bayandamalary Kazakstan Respublikasy Ulttyk Gylym Akademiyasynyn, 2007,(4), 57 Search PubMed .
B. Tryba, M. Gzerwinska and A. W. Morawski, RILEM Proceedings, PRO 2007, 2007, 55(Photocatalysis, Environment and Construction Materials), 235 Search PubMed .
K. Thamaphat, P. Limsuwan and S. Meejoo, Chinese Physics Letters, 2007, 24, 3524 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Bandos and C. O. Ania, Interface Science and Technology, 2006, 7(Activated Carbon Surfaces in Environmental Remediation), 159 Search PubMed .
R. B. Scorzelli, L. C. Bertolino, A. B. Luz, M. Duttine and F. A. N. G. Silva, Clay Minerals, 2008, 43, 129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartalis, Y.-L. Zhao, J. W. Flora, J. B. Paine and J. B. Wooten, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 631 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and Z. Cheng, Molecular Nutrition and Food Research, 2008, 52, 62 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Computer models of Cucurbiturils, Q5, Q6, and Q7. Top row is the view into the cavity and the bottom is the side view. Credit M.K. Stone. http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/d/d8/Models_of_cucurbiturils.jpg.	 
18O2 + 16O−α ⇄ [O−3]α ⇄ 16O18O + 18O−α

 	Fig. 2  Shift in fluorescence wavelength according to size of quantum dot particle. Far red: 8.3 nm. Far blue: 2 nm. As the crystal size increases, the wavelength increases casing a shift toward the red end of the visible spectrum © Quantum Dot Corporation (2003). http://www.nanotech-now.com/images/QDot-nanocrystal.jpg.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
