Black perspectives for a green future: hydrothermal carbons for environment protection and energy storage  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21166A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21166A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6796-6822Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsBlack perspectives for a green future: hydrothermal carbons for environment protection and energy storage

        
          
            Maria-Magdalena 
            Titirici
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Robin. J. 
            White
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Camillo 
            Falco
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Marta 
            Sevilla
          
          
        
      b
aColloid Chemistry, Max-Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces, Am Muhlenberg 1, 14476, Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: magdalena.titirici@mpikg.mpg.de
bInstituto Nacional del Carbón, P. O. Box 73, 33080, Oviedo, Spain
Received 
      19th January 2012
    , Accepted 29th February 2012First published on 1st March 2012AbstractThis perspective review paper provides an overview on recently developed carbon material technology synthesised from the hydrothermal carbonisation (HTC) approach, with a particular focus on the carbon formation mechanism, perspectives on large scale production, nanostructuring, functionalisation and applications. Perceptions on how this technology will be developed especially with regard to application fields where the use of HTC-derived materials could be extended will also be introduced and discussed.Maria-Magdalena TitiriciMagdalena Titirici obtained her PhD at the University of Dortmund, Germany under the supervision of Dr Börje Sellergreen working in the field of “Molecularly Imprinted Polymers”. Since 2006 she is leading the group “Sustainable Materials for Energy Storage” at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany within the “Colloid Chemistry Department” directed by Prof. Markus Antonietti. Her research interests include porous materials, hydrothermal carbonization, innovative utilization of biomass, biofuels, thermoresponsive polymers, and molecularly imprinted polymers and their applications as separation media, adsorption and gas storage, in electrochemistry (secondary batteries and supercapacitors) and heterogeneous catalysis.Robin. J. WhiteRobin White obtained his PhD at the Green Chemistry Centre of Excellence (York, UK), under the supervision of Prof. James Clark. He is currently a post-doctoral researcher at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany), working with Dr Maria-Magdalena Titirici and Prof. Markus Antonietti. His research interests focus on the development of novel sugar biomass derived porous carbons including ordered mesoporous materials, aerogels, hollow nanospheres, and naturally inspired systems, for applications as separation media, in electrochemistry and heterogeneous catalysis.Camillo FalcoCamillo Falco received a Master of Engineering in Chemical Engineering & Technology from Imperial College London. He completed his master thesis project at KTH Stockholm on the design of a household/industrial waste gasification plant. Since October 2009, he has been a PhD student at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids & Interfaces in the Sustainable Carbon Materials group. His research activities have focused on the exploitation of lignocellulosic biomass and microalgae for the production of nanostructured carbon materials for energy applications, such as gas and energy storage.Marta SevillaMarta Sevilla acquired her PhD from the University of Oviedo in 2008 working on the development of novel carbon materials for energy storage and energy production. Afterwards, she spent two years in the University of Nottingham, where she focused her research interests on the design and synthesis of porous materials for hydrogen storage. In 2011, after spending 6 months in Dr Titirici's group, she moved back to the National Institute of Coal in Spain, where she is working currently on the development of high-performance carbon materials for gas and energy storage, as well as catalysis.

Broader context
The world's appetite for energy is producing growing quantities of CO2, a pollutant that contributes to the warming of the planet and which currently cannot be removed or stored in any significant way. Other natural reserves are also being devoured at alarming rates and current assessments suggest that we will need to identify alternative sources in the near future. With the aid of materials chemistry it should be possible to create a world in which energy use needs not be limited and where usable energy can be produced and stored wherever it is needed, where we can minimize and remediate emissions as new consumer products are created, whilst healing the planet and preventing further disruptive and harmful depletion of valuable mineral assets. In achieving these aims, the creation of new and very importantly greener industries and new sustainable pathways are crucial. In all of the aforementioned applications, new materials based on carbon, ideally produced via inexpensive, low energy consumption methods, using renewable resources as precursors, with flexible morphologies, pore structures and functionalities, are increasingly viewed as ideal candidates to fulfil these goals. The resulting materials should be a feasible solution for the efficient storage of energy and gases. At the end of life, such materials ideally must act to improve soil quality and to act as potential CO2 storage sinks.

1. Introduction
The world's growing population could soon require more energy than it is possible to supply from conventional means—especially as living standards improve globally. It is estimated that by 2030 at least half as much energy gain as is currently used will be required.1 Such an increase in energy generation must not be accompanied by an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Therefore natural and renewable forms of energy must be considered over the classical fossil fuel sources which are severely diminishing. In this respect, materials chemists will be required to develop new technologies and materials which are more efficient for the required applications and which should minimize long- and short-term impacts on the environment. However, in order to transform such a vision into reality, chemists need to find valuable solutions to produce materials able to solve these problems. Furthermore, these materials need to be relatively simple to synthesise, as cost effective as possible and ideally based on renewable resources. These high-performance materials should have specific characteristics and be designed for performing specific functions, such as electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in fuel cells or host materials for hydrogen storage.
As mentioned earlier, carbon materials are ideal candidates for performing many of these functions. Carbon can be found in a wide variety of allotropes, from crystalline (diamond and graphite) to amorphous (carbon black, activated carbon, glassy carbon, etc.). In the past decade, the nanostructured forms of crystalline carbon (fullerenes,2 carbon nanotubes,3 and graphene4) have received the most attention due to remarkable and unusual physicochemical properties. However, the main disadvantage of using these crystalline nanocarbons for energy and environmental related application is their high production costs. This is related on one hand to the rather expensive fossil based precursors and the metal catalysts often employed, as well as to the complicated apparatus used for their production which typically involve high processing temperatures.
Although the cost of single- and multiwalled carbon nanotubes has significantly reduced in recent years, they are still very expensive compared to other forms of carbon like activated carbons (200–300 € per kg for metric ton quantities, the prices increasing with the degree of purity). On the other hand, the large scale production of graphene-based technologies is still in a very incipient phase. Due to these severe drawbacks, carbon materials derived from renewable resources (e.g. biomass) will play a very powerful role in this direction in the near future. So far, excluding activated carbons,5 relatively little research has been conducted on the synthesis and characterisation of the structure of carbon materials based on natural resources. This is surprising, given that carbon material synthesis has been performed since the beginning of civilization on the basis of biomass (through coal formation) with petrochemical age being a more recent phenomenon. Therefore, an approach towards advanced carbon synthesis based on renewable resources, mimicking the natural process of coal formation, would be a significant operation, as the final products would represent a significant proportion of modern materials.
With regard to biomass, it is highly available and accessible across planet Earth, whilst being recyclable. Biomass is currently being transformed into biofuels (bioethanol6 and biodiesel7,8) as a replacement of the fossil based fuels, or as demonstrated increasingly more prevalently, it can also be converted into highly valuable “green” carbon. Conversion of biomass into such green carbon by processes other than classical pyrolysis is crucial, since it allows fine tuning of the carbon chemical structure and morphology in order to meet desired applications. This is where the unconventional technique of HTC is of significant research and commercial interest. However, the reader has to be aware from this point on that the materials obtained via the hydrothermal carbonization are different from the classical carbon materials due to their special features as it will be clarified in this review.
In HTC, pure carbohydrates as well as raw lignocellulosic biomass (e.g. agricultural wastes) are converted into valuable carbon materials using mild processing temperatures (<200 °C) and water as the carbonisation medium, under self-generated pressures.9 Even though this methodology was developed almost 100 years ago, its full potential as a synthetic route for carbon materials having important application in several crucial fields of the 21st century, such as catalysis, energy storage, CO2 sequestration, water purification, and agriculture, has been revealed only in the past few years.10 This paper will offer an overview on the recently developed carbon material technology synthesised via the HTC approach, including discussion regarding the formation mechanism, perspectives on large scale production, nanostructuring, functionalisation and applications. Perceptions on how this technology will develop and especially in which fields the use of HTCs could be extended will be provided throughout the manuscript.
2. Formation mechanism and final chemical structure of HTC materials
Before going into the formation mechanism of HTC materials and the characterisation of its chemical structure, some important advantages of this unconventional carbonisation technique should be summarised:
(1) Carbonisation temperatures are low—typically in the range 130–250 °C.
(2) Carbonisation takes place in water under self-generated pressures thus avoiding precursors drying costs.11
(3) Typically spherical micro-sized particles are generally obtained.12
(4) Controlled porosity can be easily introduced using nanocasting procedures,13 natural templates,14,15 or activation procedures/thermal treatments.16
(5) Carbonaceous materials can be combined with other components, e.g., inorganic nanoparticles to form composites with special physicochemical properties.17
(6) The resulting carbon particles have (polar) oxygenated groups residing at the surface which can be in turn used in post-functionalisation strategies.18
(7) The surface chemistry and electronic properties can be easily controlled via additional thermal treatment, while the morphology and porosity are maintained.
(8) The synthesis can be described as “carbon negative”, meaning that it has the potential to bind the CO2 fixed by the original plant precursor.12
2.1 Carbohydrate-derived HTC materials
The elaboration of a general reaction mechanism for the transformation of carbohydrates as well as raw biomass into HTC is crucial since only a complete understanding of the chemical transformations occurring during the HTC process will allow control over morphology, porosity and functionality. Due to the complex composition of lignocellulosic biomass, simple carbohydrates (e.g.D-glucose) have been employed as model precursors in order to study their transformation mechanism into HTC material.
The decomposition of sugars under sub-critical aqueous conditions takes place via dehydration and retro-aldol condensation.19 At lower temperatures (T < 300 °C), dehydration is favoured.20 Hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) and furfural are well known dehydration products of sugars.21 Furfural is generated from pentoses (e.g.D-xylose), whereas hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) is generated from hexose dehydration (e.g.D-fructose and D-glucose). D-Glucose is the most abundant sugar unit in biomass and the major product of the acid hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass.20 Therefore, D-glucose has been the most used precursor to produce HTC thus far. Under acidic hydrolytic conditions, the hydrothermal process allows effective conversion of D-glucose to HMF supported by the Lobry de Bruyn–Alberta van Ekstein rearrangement (BER) which implies that D-glucose isomerizes to D-fructose and then undergoes dehydration to HMF.22 Since HMF is one of the most promising platform chemicals on the way to substitute petrochemicals by renewable compounds, a great deal of research has been dedicated to the effective production of this highly utile reactive furan derivative.23 Thus, the main challenge is to find the optimal dehydration catalyst and the fast extraction of HMF from the aqueous synthesis medium. With increasing residence time, the HMF that forms successively decomposes into levulinic acid (LA) and formic acid (FA) on one hand and into polymeric carbonaceous material on the other hand.24 While most researchers are trying to avoid such resinification or hydrothermal carbonisation of HMF, Titirici and others rediscovered these processes for the production of green and valuable carbon and carbon hybrid materials.25 Depending on the applied conditions (i.e. the degree of carbonisation), the products are called humins,26 hydrothermal carbons27 or hydrochars.28 As mentioned above, carbonaceous materials prepared at 130–220 °C are called hydrothermal carbons (HTCs). HTC materials derived from pure hexoses present very similar morphologies (i.e. micrometre sized spheroids) as for their decomposition product HMF (Fig. 1a–c). The hydrothermal conversion of pentoses (e.g. xylose, Fig. 1d), as well as their decomposition product furfural, leads to separated carbon spheres with diameters between 100 and 500 nm (Fig. 1e). Sucrose is a disaccharide formed from D-glucose and D-fructose, bonded at the C1 on the glucosyl subunit and C2 on the fructosyl subunit. The resulting HTC material is composed of spherical particles whose size varies between 700 nm and 2 μm (Fig. 1f). During the HTC treatment, sucrose is hydrolysed into D-glucose and D-fructose. The latter undergoes dehydration much faster than the former, with D-fructose dehydrating directly towards HMF, whilst the D-glucose kinetics are slower, firstly isomerising to D-fructose followed by the subsequent HMF route. Due to this difference in the kinetic of nucleation and growth, the polydispersity is higher in the case of disaccharides and for easily hydrolysable polysaccharides, such as the two polyglucopyranoses found in starch, namely amylopectin and amylose.12
 Fig. 1  SEM micrographs of HTC materials obtained at 180 °C from: (a) glucose; (b) fructose; (c) hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF); (d) xylose; (e) furfural; and (f) sucrose. 
Two main structural models are available so far in the literature regarding the carbohydrate derived HTCs. The first one, proposed by Sevilla et al., is based on FT-IR, Raman and XPS spectroscopy and considers the carbonaceous scaffold as a polyaromatic lignin-type network decorated with chemical functions.29 The second model, proposed by Baccile and Titirici, is based on advanced solid state 13C NMR experiments and highlights the importance of furans rather than arene rings in the carbonaceous scaffold.30 For HTC-derived carbonaceous materials, solid state NMR provides a better (bulk) spectral resolution with respect to FT-IR or XPS, which are otherwise important for surface characterisation. However, the possibility of using selective pulse sequences in 13C NMR leads to the identification of separate chemical species without ambiguity. In addition, the poor spectral resolution of FT-IR and XPS does not allow a reliable quantification of the carbon species while 13C NMR should be able to provide much better results from this point of view. Based on the 13C NMR studies complemented by GC-MS, a formation mechanism and a final structure for the monosaccharide derived HTC at 180 °C were proposed. D-Glucose was selected as a model carbon source and HTC samples enriched with the 13C isotope were prepared. Solid state.13C NMR was then employed to investigate the chemical bonding motifs and local structure of the hydrothermally treated materials. Several standard MAS NMR techniques (i.e. Singe Pulse (SP), Cross-Polarization (CP), Inversion Recovery Cross-Polarization (IRCP)), which are mainly employed in the study of carbon structures, were used to identify the amount and type of sp2 and sp3 carbon sites. In addition, bond filtering techniques based on J-coupling (i.e. Insensitive Nuclei Enhanced by Polarization Transfer (INEPT)) provided a clear-cut distinction between protonated and quaternary carbons. Finally, the connectivity between carbon species was identified using a 2D 13C–13C correlation experiment based on double-quantum excitation of through-space dipolar-coupled nuclei. It was found that about 60% of the carbon atoms bonded to cross-linked furan-based structural moieties are directly linked either via the R-carbon or via sp2- or sp3-type carbon groups, where cross-linking can occur. Additional cross-linking sites are located at the carbons of the furan ring (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Conversion of cellulose into HTC: (A) via HMF resulting in a furan-rich aromatic network and (B) direct aromatization. 
As introduced earlier, HTC material is formed after the dehydration of hexoses to HMF and pentoses to furfural. Once these intermediates are formed, a very complex chemical cascade occurs involving a simultaneous combination of ring opening reactions to produce diketones followed by aldol-type condensations with furanics, whilst Diels–Alder reactions may lead to more aromatised structures, with concurrent polycondensation reactions. In summary, a set of dehydration, polymerisation (condensation and addition) and aromatisation reactions occur leading to the observed final chemical structure of HTC, a condensed furanic system bridged by aliphatic regions and terminal hydroxyl and carbonyl functional groups (Fig. 2). Following the initial “polymerization” of HMF or furfural, nucleation takes place followed by particle growth as HMF derived monomers are incorporated, leading to spherical carbonaceous particles (Fig. 1). 13C solid-state NMR spectroscopic analysis indicated that local structures of these two families of carbonaceous materials derived from hexoses and pentoses differ with regard to the aromatised structuring motif. The pentose-derived material presents more condensed structures. We believe this is due to the lack of one additional carbon bridged to a hydroxyl group. The use of easily hydrolysable polycarbohydrates does not significantly alter the outcome of the HTC reaction, and remarkable similarities between the products of homologous series do occur, both with respect to morphology and local structural connectivity.12
2.2 Lignocellulosic biomass-derived HTC material
Lignocellulosic biomass represents the most abundant renewable resource on Earth. Such biomass is extremely complex being composed of three main components: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. The relative proportion of cellulose varies according to the biomass origin, with values between 20% and 45% typically found for agricultural wastes.31 Chemically, cellulose is a linear and syndiotactic polymer of β-D-glucose.32 The anhydroglucose units (AGUs) are bonded to each other through a glycosidic linkage at positions 1 and 4 and the number of repeating AGUs defines the degree of polymerisation (DP) of cellulose on which its solubility depends. A relatively dense network of intermolecular H bonds is established in polymers with more than 30 AGUs. Consequently, these macromolecules have high resistance against chemical and biological transformations and are insoluble in most of the common solvents. Hemicellulose, the second biomass component, contains many different sugar monomers, has a random structure, is amorphous and easily hydrolysable. Unlike the polysaccharides cellulose and hemicellulose, lignin is far more complex in nature, being a 3D cross-linked biopolymer composed of phenyl propane units and presenting hydrophobic properties. Lignin is concentrated between the outer layers of the biomass fibres leading to structural rigidity and holding the polysaccharide fibres together. The decomposition and degradation of lignin and hemicelluloses are much easier than for cellulose.33,34 Based on this different reactivity it is feasible to separate cellulose and hemicelluloses from lignin, especially using alkaline treatments.35
Titirici et al. have recently embarked on a project to examine the hydrothermal conversion of microcrystalline cellulose as well as of real lignocellulosic biomass (i.e. rye straw) and compare the chemical structure of cellulose and rye straw HTC carbons to those derived from D-glucose.3613C solid state NMR analysis demonstrated in the case of D-glucose that changing the HTC processing temperature allowed a certain degree of control over both the particle diameter and particle size distribution. The final carbon chemical structure can be switched from a carbonaceous polyfuran rich in oxygen containing functional groups to a carbon network of increasingly extended aromatic domains (Fig. 2). Conversely, in the case of cellulose and generally of lignocellulosic biomass, a fundamental difference in the HTC mechanism is observed. The polyfuranic intermediate, which is characteristic for D-glucose-derived HTC materials at either low processing temperatures or short reaction times, cannot be observed in cellulose-derived HTC carbons. In contrast, the biomass-derived HTC materials show a well-developed aromatic nature, formed already during the early stages of HTC reaction. Thus, under mild hydrothermal operating conditions (i.e. T = 180–250 °C), cellulose reacts according to a reaction scheme that can be associated with a more classical pyrolysis process, even if the exact chemical paths are not yet clear (Fig. 2, Route B). This study also showed how lignin is only marginally altered by HTC processing and how its presence influences the final material structuring. Therefore, converting cellulose and lignocellulosic biomass into HTC carbon material with the same chemical structure and morphology as that observed for the classical model D-glucose remains a very challenging task.
2.3 The future of biomass-derived HTC material?
There is a raising interest in the up-scaling of the HTC process for conversion of biomass. However, the production of HTC from “real” biomass on a large industrial scale is very challenging. The first prerequisite is that the composition of the biomass precursor is known. As previously described, only the carbohydrate fraction will be successfully transformed into HTC, whereas the other components, depending on their nature, will either co-react during the HTC process (e.g. proteins and amino acids), be hydrolysed into side products (e.g. organic molecules) or remain unaffected (e.g. lignins and inorganics). In addition, the successful transformation of biomass into carbonaceous material will also depend on the applied HTC temperature and pressure, residence time and presence of catalyst(s).
Berge et al. have analysed the employment of different feedstock types including from paper, food, mixed municipal solid waste and anaerobic digestion waste as HTC precursors,37 specifically to (1) evaluate the environmental implications associated with the carbonisation of representative municipal waste streams (i.e. municipal solid waste and human liquid wastes), including the gas and liquid products; (2) evaluate the physical, chemical, and thermal properties of the hydrochar; and (3) determine carbonisation energetics associated with each waste stream chosen for evaluation. This study indicated that the HTC conversion of real waste and an associated pathway are difficult to construct because of the numerous intermediates detected in the gas and liquid phases. The liquid intermediates, however, represent a significant fraction of products (i.e. 20–37% of initial carbon content) and likely have an important impact on process energetics. Moreover, when HTC is applied to real waste, the HTC temperature needs to be increased (e.g. T > 200 °C). At higher processing temperatures, gasification will become a competitive process and the HTC solid yield will decrease. Analysis of the liquid and gas phases resulting from the HTC process indicates that CO2 is the dominant gaseous product, representing ca. 8% of the starting feedstock mass when treated at T = 255 °C.37,38 In order to achieve both maximum biomass recovery and energy densification of the char, a multi-step process involving different temperature regimes may be required. The successful recovery of sugars (and other water-soluble organics) could also improve the overall economics of this process. The residence time should be as long as possible in order to reduce organic losses in waste waters.
Another important parameter which needs to be considered and optimised during the HTC process, especially when up-scaling is considered, is the use of catalysts. It should be mentioned that an acidic pH is always necessary in order to promote the hydrolysis of cellulose and further dehydration of sugars to HMF. When strong basic conditions are applied, this will promote the depolymerisation of lignin. This step can be advantageous since it might constitute an initial step for the separation of lignin from cellulose.39 Otherwise, a mixture of organic acids (e.g. formic acid and lactic acid) is normally directly formed under hydrothermal alkaline conditions with no HTC resulting under such conditions.40
The HTC process can be described as an autocatalytic process. During the hydrothermal treatment, besides the decomposition of sugars to HMF or furfural, small organic acids are also formed (e.g. levulinic acid). The formation of organic acids self-catalyses the process, promoting the necessary dehydration reactions. However, in certain cases, especially for lignocellulosic biomass as well as organic municipal waste, due to the strong resistance to hydrolysis, it is desirable to work in the presence of the right catalysts which can promote an efficient reaction path via hydrolysis–dehydration. However there is still much research effort required to discover novel and efficient catalysts for efficient biomass conversion. In this respect, solid acid catalysts such as biomass-derived carbons (e.g. carbon–SO3H) shaped as membranes or monoliths are of particular attention since they can be easily recovered and reused at the end of each step and, in addition, will prevent corrosion which normally occurs in the presence of homogeneous liquid catalysts, and ultimately can be prepared successfully from biomass, representing a holistic approach to biomass conversion.15,41 Employing an appropriate catalyst will in turn allow reaction temperatures and residence times to be reduced.
Furthermore, using an efficient catalyst could promote the production of important hybrid or nanostructured materials directly from biomass. An example is rice husk, known to contain up to 50 wt% SiO2 which, under the right catalytic conditions, might be transformed into interesting nanostructured silica–carbon nanocomposites on a large scale.42
The design of a HTC reactor which could operate in a continuous process for conversion of tons of biomass per day is the most important requirement for a successful large scale application. However, this is a field where the authors of this paper cannot give any input as sophisticated engineering skills and joint multidisciplinary efforts are required for such a construction. According to our knowledge, at least in Europe there are several small emerging companies involved in such operations.43 The question which automatically arises in this context is: why is there such an interest in the large (Mt) production of HTC? On one hand, the resulting char has coal-like properties and is expected to exhibit favourable behaviour with respect to combustion, gasification, and other thermal conversion processes for decentralized applications. The energy content of HTC chars has been measured to be between 25 and 35 MJ kg−1, which is about 40% higher than that of the starting biomass precursor.38 HTC material has also been evaluated in terms of energy densification and energy yield. The energy densification is the energy content of the char divided by the energy content of the feedstock, while the energy yield is defined as the char mass yield multiplied by the energy densification. Please see ref. 38 for more details. The energy densification was found to increase with the reaction temperature. Similarly (but to a lower extent), the energy densification increased with an increasing hold time at T = 255 °C. The total energy yield of the HTC char did not vary greatly over the sets of experiments conducted, ranging from 70 to 77%. Consistent with previous reports, the highest energy yield was observed at the lowest process temperature ratio, as confirmed also by our own experiments.36 Besides being fast and simple, HTC also inherently requires wet starting products/biomass, as effective dehydration occurs only in the presence of water, thus removing the associated costs of precursor's drying. In addition, the final carbon can be easily filtered off the reaction solution. This way, complicated drying schemes and costly isolation procedures can conceptually be avoided.
Perhaps the most appealing large scale application of HTC process is, as suggested by Seifritz in a pioneering dissertation in 1993,44 the fact that anthropogenic CO2 emissions could be mitigated by converting biomass into charcoal. Thus, converting fast growing biomass (e.g. switch grass) into HTC, the CO2 bound in the parent biomass will be no longer liberated via the photosynthesis process or atmospheric decomposition of the biomass residue, but bound to the final solid carbonaceous structure. This represents an efficient way of taking the CO2 out of the carbon cycle and thus a solution for reducing the already alarming amounts of CO2 present in the atmosphere, known to be responsible for the climate change. So ideally, low-tech biomass processing to hydrophilic porous carbon structures might therefore represent an efficient carbon sink that can be technologically accessed to handle significant parts of the CO2 problem. The remaining question, however, is what can be done with such large amounts of HTC generated from a potential large scale process? The concept of biochar as an approach to carbon sequestration, as well as increasing soil fertility, raising agricultural productivity and reducing pressure on forests, is receiving increasing attention over the past few years.45 Several papers have been already published where the tremendous potential of HTC as a CO2 negative solution for soil improvement is discussed.11,46,47 However, before such a practical exercise of adding Mt of HTC to soil, the effects of HTC on earth cycles around the globe and especially on various crop productions need to be carefully investigated, particularly with regard to its toxicology. Studies investigating the effect of HTC addition to soils are already underway and will be discussed later in Section 7.1. However, a complete understanding of the effect of HTC addition on soil and plant growth potentially expands on a hundred year's time frame and importantly needs to be performed in various ecosystem types around the world.
3. Porous HTC materials
One limitation of the HTC materials discussed above is that they possess limited porosity and surface area. For enhanced performance in catalytic or energetic applications, such textural nanoscale porosity is highly desirable, facilitating high mass transfer fluxes and high active loading for example. The easiest possibility to increase the surface area of HTC by two orders of magnitude is thermal treatment under an inert atmosphere, where small organic molecules are removed to generate microporosity, thus reaching a specific surface comparable to conventional carbon materials. In this case, thermally treated HTC material typically presents ultramicroporous domains (i.e. pore diameters < 0.5 nm), and thus N2 sorption analysis is no longer suitable. The diffusion of N2 molecules is hindered in such small pores (at 77 K) so that N2 cannot enter into the pores in a reasonable measurement time. CO2 should be used instead to probe the pore size and pore volume of HTC carbons. CO2 adsorption isotherms and pore size distribution of D-glucose-derived HTC made at T = 180 °C and thermally treated at T > 500 °C present very similar sorption behaviour and capacities to materials prepared from other carbohydrate precursors (Fig. 3c and 3d).
 Fig. 3  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms for glucose-derived HTC followed by thermal treatment at various temperatures; (b) pore size distributions of the glucose-HTC materials calcined at different temperatures determined using CO2 adsorption, (c) CO2 adsorption isotherms for HTC materials from glucose, sucrose, starch and xylose after additional thermal treatment at 950 °C; and (d) pore size distributions obtained using CO2 adsorption of the HTC materials from glucose, sucrose, starch and xylose after additional thermal treatment at 950 °C. 
Besides microporosity creation, the thermal treatment also removes the polar oxygenated groups from the surface, increasing the electronic conductivity of the resulting materials, beneficial for electrochemical applications.
3.1 Chemical activation
One of the most common and used methodologies to introduce (micro) porosity into carbons is via physical and chemical activation.48 The relationship between the chemical structure of HTC carbons and their KOH chemical activation was recently investigated by Titirici49 and Sevilla.50 In the study by Sevilla, Fuertes and Mokaya, hydrothermally carbonised organic materials (i.e. furfural, glucose, starch, cellulose and eucalyptus sawdust) were used as precursors to produce high-surface area carbons. The synthesis methodology comprised two steps: (i) HTC of organic materials at T = 230 °C for D-glucose and starch and T = 250 °C for cellulose, eucalyptus sawdust and furfural and (ii) chemical activation with KOH. In this way, activated carbon materials (AC) with a high surface area (up to 2700 m2 g−1) and narrow micropore size distributions in the supermicropore range (0.7–2 nm) are produced. The textural properties of the activated carbon products can be easily tuned by modifying the activating conditions (i.e. the activation temperature and KOH amount).50
Titirici et al. showed that, besides the activation temperature and the amount of KOH, another important parameter for controlling the pore properties of HTC-derived activated carbons is the initial HTC processing temperature.49 HTC carbons were initially obtained from D-glucose at different HTC processing temperatures (samples are denoted as x–y, where x is the initial of the carbon precursor and y the HTC temperature) and then activated under the same processing conditions (KOH ratio = 3, activation temperature = 750 °C). The first effect of chemical activation on HTC carbons is a complete loss of the initial spherical morphology and the formation of bulk-like carbon structures with rough surfaces due to the presence of micropores. N2 sorption isotherms of the resulting ACs are characterised by a type I reversible sorption profile (Fig. 4a). G-240 °C had the largest N2 uptake arising from higher porosity development than in the case of G-180 °C and G-280 °C. Furthermore, interestingly the G-280 °C N2 isotherm shows a much sharper knee at low relative pressure than G-180 °C and G-240 °C. This suggests that the pore size distribution of this former sample is much narrower than for the two latter ones. Therefore, it could be deduced that G-180 °C and G-240 °C have a higher tendency to develop larger pores during chemical activation than G-280 °C. This was confirmed by the QSDFT pore size distributions (PSDs; Fig. 4b). The amount of mesopores present in G-280 °C, as already mentioned, was negligible. G-180 °C and G-240 °C are instead characterised by a large fraction of mesopores with the latter sample exhibiting the highest amount.
 Fig. 4  (a) N2 adsorption isotherms, and (b) N2 adsorption QSDFT pore size distribution of ACs (G-180 °C, G-240 °C, and G-280 °C). 
CO2 sorption analysis was conducted to assess the narrow microporosity in the samples (Table 1). It can be seen that G-280 °C has the largest volume of narrow micropores, followed by G-240 °C and then G-180 °C. These results suggest that G-280 °C generates predominantly narrow micropores and a discrete PSD. On the other hand, G-180 °C and especially G-240 °C have the tendency to generate ACs with a broader PSD. This was also confirmed by the NLDFT PSDs derived from the CO2 isotherms (Fig. 3b). Even in the lower micropore range (pore diameter < 1.0 nm), the PSD of G-280 °C is shifted towards smaller pore dimensions than in the case of G-180 °C and G-240 °C.
Table 1 Textural characteristics of G-180 °C, G-240 °C, G-280 °C




Sample

S
N2-BET (m2/g)

V
N2
a (cm3/g)

V
N2-DR
b (cm3/g)

V
CO2-DR
b (cm3/g)





a Calculated from the isotherm at P/P0 ≈ 0.99.
b Determined using the Dubinin–Raduskevich equation, applied to the N2 or CO2 isotherm.





G-180
1859
0.94
0.69
0.31


G-240
2264
1.21
0.84
0.35


G-280
1610
0.73
0.66
0.41




The porosity analysis overview for the chemical activation of cellulose- and rye straw-derived HTC material shows trends very similar to the ones observed for D-glucose. The highest porosity development is observed for the sample synthesised at T = 240 °C, as indicated by the higher surface area and total pore volume values. The samples made at T = 200 °C and 240 °C show very similar pore volume distribution across the three different porosity ranges. On the other hand, the samples synthesised at T = 280 °C are characterised by the lowest surface area and total pore indicating a lower extent of activation. Overall, this analysis highlights that the HTC temperature deeply affects the resulting porous properties of the derived ACs. HTC carbons synthesised at higher temperatures (e.g. T = 280 °C) generate ACs with a lower porosity development and narrower PSDs whilst those produced at T = 180–240 °C, upon KOH activation, develop a much larger porosity characterised by a greater mesopore fraction. These trends can be explained by taking into account the dependence of the chemical nature of HTC carbons upon the synthesis temperature: higher temperatures generate HTC carbons with a higher degree of aromatisation resulting in enhanced chemical stability and structural order. As observed for the hydroxide activation of several coals, both features are detrimental to the reactivity of the carbon substrate leading to a reduced porosity development.
Additionally, the effect of KOH ratio on the developed porous properties of HTCs was also investigated. Low KOH ratio values (i.e. 2:1) produce a lower extent of activation and favour the formation of microporous carbons with a narrow PSD, which agrees well with the results of Sevilla et al.50 Using higher amounts of KOH leads to higher porosity development, as indicated by larger surface area and total pore volume values. However, their increase is partially the result of pore widening, since the pore volume distribution is clearly more shifted towards the supermicropore and mesopore ranges. These observations are in agreement with the trends generally observed during KOH activation of petroleum-derived carbonaceous substrates,51 confirming the similar reactivity of HTC carbons during chemical activation and their resultant high suitability as AC precursors.
3.2 Nanocasting, soft-templating and the use of natural gelators
Apart from the very well known process of chemical activation,51 there are a multitude of reported approaches for the introduction of porosity into carbon materials.52 In hard templating, a pre-formed porous solid is infiltrated with the carbon precursor and the carbonisation occurs inside the pores, followed by the removal of the original scaffold, yielding a carbon porous replica. This technique has been intensively used for the replication of ordered silica materials (e.g. SBA-15)53 into the corresponding ordered porous materials, CMK-3 and CMK-5.54,55 More recently, a soft templating approach was developed by Zhao et al.56 and Dai and Liang,57 demonstrating a direct route to ordered carbons via organic–organic block copolymer self-assembly (e.g. Pluronic® F127) and suitable aromatic carbon precursor (e.g. phloroglucinol or resorcinol/formaldehyde).
One of the main limitations regarding the chemistry of these reported carbons is the relatively chemically condensed pore walls/surfaces, as a reflection of the precursor systems used, which inhibits facile post-chemical modification and limits scope for electronic and functionality moderation. Therefore it would be advantageous from a sustainable and economic footing, if renewable precursors could be employed in a simple, scalable (potentially carbon neutral) process (i.e. HTC) in the direct synthesis of such ordered porous carbonaceous materials. This has been demonstrated by combining the HTC of D-glucose with hard templates for the production of mesoporous spheres,58 ordered carbon materials (HTC-CMK-3,-5),59 tubular carbon18 and hollow carbon spheres60 (Fig. 5). However, the hard templating technique using silica is tedious and multistep due to problematic infiltration procedures, as well as template removal, which normally involves harsh and non-environmentally friendly conditions. Soft templating has also been successfully implemented in HTC. Thus, the use of Pluronic® amphiphilic block copolymers as structure-directing agents and D-fructose as a carbon source enabled the production of HTC materials with well defined ordered micro- or mesoporous domains (Fig. 5).13
 Fig. 5  Porous HTCs: (a) mesoporous HTC microspheres obtained by replication of silica using glucose (taken with permission from M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1010); (b) ordered mesoporous HTC obtained by replication of SBA-15 using furfural (taken with permission from M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3412); (c) HTC tubular carbons obtained using a macroporous alumina membrane as template and furfural as a carbon source (taken with permission from S. Kubo, I. Tan, R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6590); (d) HTC hollow spheres obtained using latex nanoparticles as sacrificial templates and glucose as a carbon source (taken with permission from R. J. White, K. Tauer, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 2011, 132, 17360); (e and f) micro-mesoporous ordered HTC particles obtained in the presence of amphiphilic block copolymers as soft templates and fructose as a carbon source (taken with permission from S. Kubo, R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 23, 4882); (g) nitrogen doped porous carbon obtained using shrimp/lobster food wastes after hydrothermal carbonization and removal of CaCO3(eventually taken with permission from M. Soorholtz, R. J. White, M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti, R. Palkovits and F. Schüth, Chem. Commun., 2011, submitted); and (h) porous nitrogen doped carbon aerogel obtained using the natural interactions between carbohydrates and gelating proteins (i.e. ovalbumin) (taken with permission from R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2428). 
4. Functionalisation of HTC materials
Another very important prerequisite for the successful performance of HTC in various applications, as will be outlined in the last section of this review, is material functionality. Two main possibilities of functionalising HTC materials exist: in situ one-step (bulk/surface) functionalisation or post-modification strategies.
4.1 Post-modification
Typical materials produced from HTC present polar oxygenated surface groups such as –OH, –CO and –COOH. The flexibility of HTC materials is that such groups can be either used for further functionalisation or they can be removed by heat treatment depending on the desired application. The hydroxyl or carboxylic groups located on the surface of HTC materials can be chemically transformed into amino groups employing reagents such as 3-chloropropylamine59 or tris(2-aminoethyl)amine.61 Such amino-modified materials have been successfully used to surface graft various organic polymers (e.g. thermoresponsive polymers such as poly(N-isopropylacrylamine)).18 The resulting thermoresponsive carbon materials, where the surface can be changed from hydrophilic (below its lower critical solution temperature LCST = 32 °C) to hydrophobic (>32 °C), represent a very powerful class of materials and can be potentially used as temperature-driven chromatographic separation phases,62 or in selective adsorption, as well as platforms for drug delivery. The possibility of straightforward functionalisation in a fashion similar to the analogous surface presented by silica, using either small organic molecules or organic polymers, will open up new perspectives for the application of such type of materials as stationary phases in chromatographic separations.
Besides amines, acidic groups can be post-introduced on the surface of such carbons. Sevilla et al. demonstrated the successful functionalisation of HTC materials with sulfonic acid groups and their use as acid catalysts for the production of biofuels.63 Shoujian Li and coworkers reported that a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups (OFGs) could be additionally created on the surface of HTC material by simple thermal treatment at low temperature (i.e. 300 °C) under air.64 Furthermore, surface character (e.g. polarity) and functional group type can be tuned by employing simple post-carbonisation under an inert atmosphere. By heat treatment at T = 350 °C, –OH groups disappear and the surface groups such as “–CO” and –C(O)OH become more dominant. Additional treatment at T = 500 °C eliminates some “carbonyl” features, while most of the carboxylic groups remain.18 Further treatment at higher temperatures (i.e. T > 550 °C) eliminates the majority of the residual oxygenated groups and converts the carbon structure into a turbostratic-like disordered carbon structure with an increasingly more classical aromatic character and hydrophobic properties. This represents one of the main advantages of HTC, the tunability of its surface properties with simple temperature treatment, which is otherwise difficult to be achieved in classical carbons.
4.2 “In situ” functionalization
HTC materials can also be functionalised in a one step process. Similarly to classical sol–gel technology, this implies the use of precursors or co-reactants containing the desired functionality. Carboxylic- or imidazole-containing HTC materials have been produced by conducting the HTC of D-glucose in the presence of small amounts of vinylic monomers (e.g. acrylic acid or vinyl imidazole). The resulting materials were then utilised for either water purification65 or heterogeneous base catalysis66 [see Sections 7.2.1 and 7.3 for further discussion]. In this approach, organic monomers can be partially replaced by the controlled dehydration products of carbohydrates, which can be then copolymerized or can undergo cycloaddition reaction with functional co-monomers to give a new type of hybrid between carbon and polymer latex. These latexes consist mainly of renewable raw materials, having a low cost base and potentially expand heterophase polymerization processes to carbonaceous materials. This synthetic strategy can be extended to various compositions of different water soluble organic monomers, yielding materials that combine the surface properties of the polymers with the structural, mechanical, thermal, and electric properties of the carbon framework. Interestingly, the morphology of such materials changes from smooth spheres to raspberry-like macroporous particles (Fig. 6a). As discussed in the first subsection related to the transformation mechanism, in the early stages of HTC small nuclei are formed. As an example, acrylic acid reacts via cycloaddition with the decomposition monomers of D-glucose and stabilises these small initial particles, which assemble later into micrometre-spheres formed out of small interconnected particles.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM micrograph of the carboxylic rich HTC using glucose and acrylic acid; (b) SEM of HTC obtained using glucosamine as a precursor; (c) SEM of HTC obtained using chitosan as a precursor; (d) TEM of nitrogen doped carbon using shrimp waste as a precursor (taken with permission from R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645); (e) TEM of nitrogen doped carbon using lobster waste as a precursor; and (f) SEM of the carbon nanoparticles obtained using glucose in the presence of ovalbumin (taken with permission from N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 246). 
Another example of the in situ functionalisation approach is represented by production of nitrogen-doped carbon materials. They can be produced either using amino-containing carbohydrates for example chitosan or glucosamine,67 or by the addition of nitrogen-containing molecules such as proteins,15,68 or amino acids.69 Thus, Titirici et al. have demonstrated that it is possible to synthesise nitrogen-doped HTC materials via the hydrothermal treatment of amino containing carbohydrates at T = 180 °C (Fig. 6b and c). Besides being green, cheap and sustainable, this process has the advantage of introducing nitrogen dopants into the carbonaceous scaffold, which are known to be very favourable for catalysis, adsorption and energy storage devices or in surface modification strategies. Temperature treatments showed that all the materials retain the nitrogen content almost unchanged up to T = 750 °C. This is due to the fact that, upon hydrothermal treatment, D-glucosamine decomposes into HMF and ammonia, which may then undergo a Maillard-like reaction, followed by cycloaddition forming an extended nitrogen-containing aromatic network containing pyrrole and pyridinic-type nitrogen functionalities. In contrast to the hydrothermal carbons obtained from pure carbohydrates, these types of N-doped HTC materials have an increased level of aromatic character already present after synthesis at T = 180 °C. This is one of the most important benefits of nitrogen containing monomers. A similar situation occurs upon employing pure carbohydrates hydrothermally treated in the presence of amino acids. Detailed investigations of the reaction mechanism and final chemical structure of the nitrogen-doped hydrothermal carbons using 13C and 15N solid state NMR studies were carried out using 15N-glycine and 13C-glucose both as spin-1/2 nitrogen and carbon sources.69 The combination of one-dimensional (CP and IRCP) and two-dimensional (SQ-DQ 13C and double CP 13C (1H 15N)) experiments helped elucidate the carbon-to-carbon and carbon-to-nitrogen bonding motifs. Through this analysis several possible structures including pyrrole motifs connected to furans were proposed.
Prawn and lobster shells, an abundant marine chitin (poly-β(1/4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine) biomass source and high volume food waste, have been also successfully converted into nitrogen-doped carbon in a simple three step route to yield a highly textured, high surface area and high pore volume material. The preformed natural inorganic (CaCO3)/organic (chitin) shell composite provides the precursor structure, which is simply converted via hydrothermal carbonisation to yield nitrogen-rich carbon material templated by the mineral scaffold. The resulting carbonaceous composite may be purified of the inorganic component by washing with acetic acid, leading to enhanced mesoporous properties. This approach renders materials with interesting nanoscale morphology and an accessible interconnected pore structure, presenting desirable characteristics directly applicable in future technological applications (Fig. 6d and e).14
Another interesting methodology for in situ functionalization of HTC is represented by the hydrothermal treatment of D-glucose in the presence of the glycoprotein, ovalbumin. The protein plays here a double role: on one hand, it reacts with D-glucose via Maillard-like reaction pathways (generating nitrogen-doped co-carbonisation partners) and, secondly, it gels and thus stabilizes the growing HTC structure leading to rather unusual coral-like porous structures. Depending on the reaction time and drying methodology either small carbon nanoparticles70 (Fig. 6f) or porous monolithic gels15 (Fig. 5e) can be obtained. The intelligent application of a secondary biomass precursor (e.g. protein) as a nitrogen donor and highly effective surface stabilizing agent represents a novel, template free approach to the facile synthesis of a new generation of tuneable porous carbons. Materials exhibit a high specific surface area composed of large continuous mesopores, combined with an excellent meso- and macroporous transport architecture, structuring not easily accessible by other synthetic approaches. Such pore structuring potentially circumvents the “plumbing” problems associated with more regular mesoporous solids prepared by templating. Carbonisation temperature provides also in this case a control vector over surface chemistry/carbon aromatization/nitrogen condensation and, by implication, surface polarity.
5. HTC nanocomposites
Controlled synthesis of carbonaceous nanocomposites has become a hot research area, due in part to their combined, improved hybrid properties with high potential values in many fields. As in the case of functionalisation, two main methodologies can be distinguished for the production of HTC naonocomposites: post-modification and in situ synthesis. The post-modification method implies coating of preformed nanostructures or decorating of nanostructures by HTC-derived carbon. Furthermore, carbonaceous materials can act as sacrificial templates or support shells for the synthesis of hollow and complex nanostructures, as well as the free-standing membranes.
5.1 Coating of preformed nanostructures
One important advantage of the HTC process is that it can be rationally used to coat carbonaceous shells on the surface of pre-formed nanostructures such as inorganic, organic, and polymer nanostructures. The coating process is greatly dependent on the surface properties of such nanostructures (e.g. surface charge and hydrophilic/hydrophobic character). These carbonaceous shells not only act as a protective layer on the surface of such nanostructures but also bring unique chemical or physical properties. The final nanocomposites have been shown to be utile in many application fields, including catalysis, fuel cells, drug delivery, and bio-imaging.71 A particularly elegant example in this context is the synthesis of uniform Te@carbonaceous composite nanocables using pre-formed Te nanowires with diameters of several nanometres and lengths of up to several micrometres (Fig. 7a and b).72 Te nanowires not only restrain the usual homogeneous nucleation of carbonaceous spheres, but also promote the deposition of carbonaceous shell on the Te nanowire backbone. The diameter of the final nanocables could be easily adjusted by changing the hydrothermal carbonisation time, or the ratio of tellurium to D-glucose.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) SEM and TEM images of Te@carbonaceous composite nanocables (reproduced with permission from H. S. Qian, S. H. Yu, L. B. Luo, J. Y. Gong, L. F. Fei and X. M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2102); (c) TEM images of carbon-coated Fe3O4 nanospindles (reproduced with permission from W. M. Zhang, X. L. Wu, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941); (d) TEM images of carbon-decorated FePt nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from N. Caiulo, C. H. Yu, K. M. K. Yu, C. C. H. Lo, W. Oduro, B. Thiebaut, P. Bishop and S. C. Tsang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1392); (e and f) TEM images of carbon-coated Si nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.M. Titirici, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645); and (g and h) SEM and TEM images of tin-nanoparticles encapsulated in elastic hollow carbon spheres (reproduced with permission from W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160). 
Similarly, silica/carbon-encapsulated core–shell sphere composites have been synthesised by using silica spheres (of a predetermined diameter) as the template and D-glucose as a carbon source.73 The as-synthesized SiO2@C nanocomposites were then in turn used as the precursor for the synthesis of SiO2@C@SiO2 composites, SiO2@SiO2 materials with vacant regions between shells, noble metal nanoparticles loaded SiO2@C composites, and hollow carbonaceous capsules. In the same regard, carbon-coated Fe3O4 nanospindles were synthesized and employed as a superior anode material for lithium-ion batteries. These spindles were found to have high coulombic efficiency in the first cycle, high reversible capacity, enhanced cycling performance, and high rate capability compared with bare hematite spindles and commercial magnetite particles (Fig. 7c).74 The improved performance was mainly attributed to the uniform and continuous carbon coating layers, which increased electrode conductivity, forming and stabilising a uniform, thin, solid electrolyte interphase film on the surface. Similarly, carbon-coated Si nanocomposites produced via HTC have displayed significantly improved lithium-storage performance as a result of a passivated layer of SiOx and carbon (Fig. 7e and f).75
A carbonaceous shell has been used as a powerful tool for the smart design synthesis process forming more complex nanocomposites. For instance, the synthesis of the coaxial SnO2@carbon hollow nanospheres by removing silica from the original SiO2@SnO2@carbon structures has been reported.76 The as-synthesized nanocomposites were demonstrated to be high-energy anode materials for the lithium-ion battery, with exceptional cycle life for at least several hundred cycles and rate capability. Furthermore, similar complex nanostructures of Sn nanoparticles encapsulated in elastic hollow carbon spheres (TNHCs) have been successfully synthesised (Fig. 7g and h).77 SiO2 spheres were used as the core for the deposition of SnO2 shell via the hydrolysis of Na2SnO3. After etching the core of SiO2 with sodium hydroxide solution, SnO2 hollow spheres coated with a carbonaceous shell were produced. Finally, after heat treatment at 700 °C for 4 h under N2 atmosphere, the complex TNHC hybrid materials were synthesized. This hybrid material was found to be a promising anode material for high-performance lithium-ion batteries with high specific capacity, high volume capacity and good cycle performance.
5.2 Loading inorganic nanostructures onto HTC materials
One important advantage offered by HTC materials over more conventional solids is, as introduced earlier, the rich functionalised surfaces offered by these sustainable materials. These surface functional groups have shown reactivity towards various inorganic precursors. For example, based on the redox reaction, they could in situ reduce and stabilize noble-metal ions forming very fine noble metal nanostructures, such as Ag, Au, Pt, and Pd.78 The obtained noble metal nanostructures have uniform sizes and can be easily modified with biomolecules or drugs.79 White, Titirici and Palkovitz reported the loading of Pt nanoparticles onto nitrogen doped carbon materials.80 The resulting composites were used as efficient catalysts for the oxidation of methane to methanol with performance superior to the standard dichlorobipyrimidyl platinum(II) complex reported by Periana and coworkers.81
Another concept is the so-called “golden fleece” nanocomposites. Such composites are composed of uniform carbonaceous nanofibers loaded with noble-metal nanoparticles with different diameters and distributions depending on the noble metal (Fig. 8).78b Carbonaceous nanofibers produced by the HTC process have rich surface functional groups that can in situ reduce noble-metal ions into noble-metal nanoparticles, as demonstrated previously for Pd, Pt, and Au. These nanocomposites have shown high permeation and stability, high surface area, and chemical reactivity, making them ideal candidates for use in heterogeneous catalysis. Furthermore, the surface reactivity of carbonaceous nanospheres, synthesised by the HTC process, has been successfully loaded with Ag and Pd nanoparticles without the use of other reducing/stabilising agents.78a
 Fig. 8  TEM images of noble metal nanoparticles loaded on the surfaces of carbonaceous nanofibers. (a and b) Pd nanoparticles with an average diameter of 6 nm; (c and d) Pt nanoparticles with an average diameter of 7 nm; and (e and f) Au nanoparticles ranging from 7 to 15 nm in diameter. (Reproduced with permission from H. S. Qian, M. Antonietti and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 637.) 
Another possible application for the reactivity of carbonaceous materials is the self-assembly process, based on the electrostatic attraction of surface charge. Nanoparticles with different surface charge can be easily self-assembled on the surface of carbonaceous materials. For example, citrate-stabilized Au nanoparticles have been assembled on the surface of carbonaceous spheres to fabricate a core–shell hybrid material.79b The resulting nanocomposites have shown satisfactory chemical stability and good biocompatibility, and are expected to be promising templates for biomolecular immobilisation and biosensor fabrication.
5.3 
          In situ synthesis of HTC nanocomposites
When noble metal ions are added directly to the HTC recipe, novel carbonaceous-encapsulated core–shell nanocomposites are accessible produced via a simple one step approach.82 The size of the resulting composites is controllable via selection of the appropriate reagent ratio and reaction conditions. The advantages of this one step HTC approach include: (i) the carbonisation process and the reduction and growth of noble metal ions proceed simultaneously; (ii) the noble metal ions can catalyse the carbonisation process and (iii) it is one-step process which can potentially be up-scaled.

Via this synthetic strategy, Ag-carbonaceous nanocable composites were successfully produced.83 These nanocables, with lengths up to 10 μm and diameters of ∼200 to 500 nm, contain pentagon-shaped Ag cores, which tend to branch or fuse with one another. In the same context, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) assisted synthesis of coaxial nanocables has also been reported.84 In this approach, flexible Ag@cross-linked PVA coaxial nanocables have been fabricated by the HTC process (Fig. 9a–c).84a Furthermore, D-glucose, β-cyclodextrin, starch, and maltose can also take part in this PVA-assisted synthesis process, forming flexible Ag@carbon and Cu@carbon composite submicron sized cables (Fig. 9d–f).84b,e This PVA-assisted process can be extended to the synthesis of Cu@cross-linked PVA coaxial microcables.84c,d Unique necklace-like Cu@cross-linked PVA coaxial microcables with strict wire-bead forms have also been successfully synthesised (Fig. 9g–i).84c
 Fig. 9  (a–c) SEM and TEM images of flexible silver@cross-linked PVA coaxial nanocables (reproduced with permission from L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and T. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2822). (d–f) SEM and TEM images of flexible silver@carbon-rich composite submicrocables (reproduced with permission from L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and J. Y. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2006, 793). (g–i) SEM and TEM images of unique necklace-like Cu@cross-linked PVA coaxial microcables with strict wire-bead (reproduced with permission from Y. J. Zhan and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5650). 
Pd@C core–shell nanoparticles were also synthesised by this one-step HTC approach,85 generating catalytic materials with high selectivity in the partial hydrogenation of hydroxyl aromatic derivatives (Fig. 10a). In a similar fashion, titanium isopropoxide was added to the HTC conversion of D-glucose to synthesise mesoporous TiO2/carbon composites (Fig. 10b). Such composites exhibited strong photocatalytic activity under visible light, which was not observed for the pure TiO2 materials.86In situ coating of inorganic nanoparticles with a thin layer of conductive carbon was also successfully accomplished for LiFePO4 (LFPs) mesocrystals via this in situ HTC process (Fig. 10c). In this example, the formation of the inorganic mesocrystals and the carbonisation process took place simultaneously. In order to achieve uniform coatings, the carbon precursor concentration had to be maintained at low levels in comparison to the inorganic precursors. The resulting HTC coated LFP mesocrystals showed improved performance as compared with their non-carbon-coated counterparts when used as positive electrodes in Li ion batteries.87
 Fig. 10  
In situ HTC composites: (a) Pd/HTC core/shell particles (taken with permission from P. Makowski, R. D. Cakan, M. Antonietti, F. Goettmann and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Commun., 2008, 999); (b) TiO2/HTC composite (taken with permission from L. Zhao, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3317); and (c) SnO2 mesoporous spheres obtained after removal of HTC from the resulting composite (taken with permission from R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227). (d) LFP/HTC composite. 
It is also possible via this HTC coating approach to synthesise carbonaceous nanocomposites with more complex structures and specific properties provided that the desired nanostructures are already pre-formed.88 For instance, core–shell Pt@C nanoparticles can be successfully embedded into the porous channels of mesoporous silica (SBA-15).88a Further treatment of the resulting composite at high temperature and the subsequent removal of the inorganic SBA-15 yielded a final complex nanocomposite presenting high catalytic activity and methanol-tolerant behaviour in the oxygen electroreduction in direct methanol fuel cells. Furthermore, a one-step HTC process followed by removal of the carbon component led to the successfully synthesised hollow core–shell mesospheres with aggregated crystalline SnO2 nanoparticles88b and mesoporous SnO2 microspheres featuring nanoparticles assembly (Fig. 10d). Both of these SnO2 nanocomposites were shown to possess high lithium ion storage capacity.
6. The future of porous functional HTC and nanocomposites
So far, most research regarding the production of porous HTC materials has been conducted using pure carbohydrates as the carbon precursor. In the future, the production of porous materials and nanocomposites directly from raw biomass waste precursors will play an important role. Except for chemical activation new methodologies need to be discovered in order to directly introduce microporosity in heteroatom (e.g. N, S, or B) doped carbons. Heteroatom doping is of interest as it can lead to very interesting and altered physicochemical properties in the resulting carbon important in pseudocapacitance in supercapacitors,89 or increased catalytic properties for the oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange fuel cells.90 Typically, upon chemical activation or further heat treatment, the chemical environment of these heteroatoms is altered and their amount significantly reduced. Ideally, an HTC material prepared at low temperature, with high heteroatom content and controlled micro/mesoporosity, is desired. In this context, micropores can be created by employing different “molecular templates” possessing specific non-covalent interactions with the growing HTC material and could be easily removed afterwards, leading to pores similar in size, shape and functionality with the molecular template. Thus, the pore size can be tuned directly by using various sizes of molecules capable of induced non-covalent interactions as, for example, in molecularly imprinted technology.91
Regarding the nitrogen-doped porous carbon materials, algae could constitute an important precursor in the future. Algae are a renewable resource present in large amounts all around the world. However this biomass is not lignocellulosic in composition but is composed of proteins, lipids, non-cellulosic carbohydrates, and nucleic acids and therefore it is not suitable as a source of carbon. Nevertheless, when used in combination with lignocellulosic biomass, it could represent an important source of functionalisation and nanostructuring potentially via carbohydrate–protein interactions as previously reported.14 Another example of potential gelators for the HTC process is borates (e.g. boric acid/borax) which are well-known for their strong interaction with vicinal-dihydroxy compounds (e.g.D-glucose).92 We expect that this will lead to similar HTC hierarchically porous monoliths with the advantage of potential in situ boron doping. Through the simultaneous use of proteins and borax as pore and functionalisation directing agents, monolithic porous structures containing both B and N dopants are expected to be obtained.
In the context of carbon structure doping, sulfur is also of significant interest. Sulfur shares the chalcogen group with oxygen, and sulfur containing functional groups are expected to be an important way to mediate carbon chemistry. Sulfur containing carbons will be prepared in a sustainable fashion from cellulose/biomass in the presence of amino acids such as cysteine or derivatives. Sulfur will be presumably bound to the carbon framework as sulfide, sulfoxide, and sulfone groups, conveying important novel properties to the resulting materials, particularly of interest for electrochemical applications.
Furthermore, combined soft-templating/HTC approaches previously reported13 could be extended to biomass precursors which should interact with natural surfactants.93,94 In the literature there are limited examples of using natural surfactants as structure directing agents in silica,95–97 and none so far in carbon. For example, amino acid based surfactants such as sodium lauroyl sarcosinates and sodium cocoyl glutamates are commercially produced and important ingredients in the medical industry. Indeed, these surfactants are regarded as having very low toxicity, antimicrobial activity, are not irritating to skin, and are highly biodegradable in natural environments.98 Based on these considerations, the preparation of ordered porous materials with controlled pore size and geometries should be considered. An increased control and reproducibility over the porosity of the final products could be achieved using well defined bio-inspired inorganic templates such as CaCO3 nanoparticles,99 hydroxyapatite nanoparticles,92 or porous CaPO4 scaffolds,100 which can be incorporated/infiltrated into the resulting carbonaceous network leading to HTC/inorganic composites. Simple removal of the nanoparticles or porous scaffolds using ecologically friendly reagents (e.g. acetic acid) will subsequently lead to the production of porous HTC materials.
Naturally there are a lot of hybrid biomass precursors consisting of lignocellulose as well as inorganic components. One very well known example is rice husks,101 or sugar cane.102 Such types of precursor could form porous materials once the inorganic component is successfully removed. Furthermore, using such biomass and additional hard or soft natural templates could lead to the production of hierarchically porous biomass-derived materials. Besides tuning the porosity and functionality of HTC materials, morphological control is crucial especially for particular applications such as in separation media (e.g. stationary phases or membranes). Therefore we believe that the production of monolithic HTC materials with hierarchical porosity will be very important in the future for applications aiming both at chromatographic separations as well at solid based catalysts or other types of adsorbent media. With regard to HTC carbon nanocomposites, it would be desirable that entirely biomass-derived precursors, existing preferably as hybrid organic–inorganic materials, are employed. Furthermore, the combination of heteroatom doped carbons with active inorganic components should bring further improvements in fields such as batteries, fuel cells or supercapacitors.
7. Applications of HTC materials
The most appealing feature of HTC is the fact that it represents an easy, green and kg-scalable process allowing the production of various carbon and hybrid nanostructures with practical applications on a price base which is comparatively lower than corresponding petrochemical processes. Even though relatively in their infancy, HTC materials have already found numerous applications including soil enrichment, catalysis, water purification, energy storage, and CO2 sequestration. In the following paragraphs, examples where HTC based materials have proved to be not only sustainable, but to possess extraordinary properties which in some cases surpass those of current “golden standards” will be introduced and discussed.
7.1 Agricultural applications: biochar
Distinguished from charcoal but similar in its chemical structure, biochar is produced for soil improvement, to filter and retain nutrients from percolating soil water, and to provide carbon storage. The advantage of converting biomass into biochar via the HTC process is that it can transform wet input material into carbonaceous solids at relatively high yields without the need for an energy-intensive drying step before or during the process. This opens up the feedstock choice to a variety of non-traditional sources: wet animal manures, human waste, sewage sludge, municipal solid waste, as well as aquaculture and algal residues. These feedstocks represent large, continuously generated, renewable streams that require some degree of management, treatment and/or processing to ensure protection to the environment.
In order to predict the behaviour of different biochars in soil it is very important to understand the final chemical structure of the employed biomass-derived carbon. Normally, pyrolysis is the classical way to produce biochar from biomass. Therefore, several groups have compared the chemical and physical properties of the materials obtained using the same precursor by pyrolysis or HTC: swine manure,103 corn stover,104 or carbohydrates and cellulose in general.105 Steinbeiss and Antonietti investigated the behaviour of biochars in arable and forest soil in a greenhouse experiment in order to prove that these amendments can increase carbon storage in soils.106 Two qualities of biochar were produced by HTC from 13C labelled D-glucose and yeast (5% N), respectively and the respiratory losses of soil and biochar carbon were quantified. The mean residence times of the biochars were calculated using the isotopic label. Extraction of phospholipid fatty acids from soil at the beginning and after 4 months of incubation was used to quantify changes in microbial biomass and to identify microbial groups utilizing the biochars. Mean residence times varied between 4 and 29 years, depending on soil type and quality of biochar. Yeast-derived biochar promoted fungi in the soil, while D-glucose-derived biochar was utilised by Gram-negative bacteria. The results suggest that residence times of biochar in soils can be manipulated with the aim to “design” the best possible biochar for a given soil type.
Rillig and Titirici tested the impact of beet root chips-derived HTC material on plant growth or on root associated symbionts such as arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi.107 Several studies were carried out and it was found that increasing concentrations of HTC material could be deleterious for plant growth of Taraxacum, starting at 10 vol% additions. Conversely, root colonization of the fungal symbiont was stimulated at an addition of 20 vol%. Soil pH changes occurring during the study could be traced to microbial reduction reactions, and these led to a pH increase of the medium despite the quite acidic nature of the HTC material itself. The results suggest that HTC materials should be carefully tested and optimised to reduce negative effects on plant growth before applications in the field are undertaken, particularly at high addition rates.
7.2 Adsorption

7.2.1 Liquid phase. 
Adsorption is by far the most frequent application of activated carbons. Contrary to activated carbons, hydrothermal carbons produced at T = 180 °C do not have any microporosity unless further thermally treated or chemically activated. This is counterbalanced by the high number of oxygenated groups located at their surface which can promote adsorption. Furthermore, these functionalities can be easily tuned by further surface modifications as described earlier. As mentioned in Section 4.2, the addition of small amounts of vinyl organic monomers into the HTC of D-glucose leads to the production of carbon materials rich in carboxyl functionalities.65 Acrylic acid plays a double role in this process: on one hand, it donates the functionality and, on the other hand, it reacts with the compounds formed in the previous step of HTC via cycloaddition reactions stabilising the small droplets and leading to assembly into macroporous materials. The synthesised materials were investigated in adsorption experiments for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. The adsorption capacity was as high as 351.4 mg per g for Pb(II) and 88.8 mg per g for Cd(II), which is well beyond ordinary sorption capacities, proving the efficiency of the materials to bind and buffer ions, or more specifically to remove heavy metal pollutants. The possibility of water purification/remediation achieved with HTC materials with an overall low cost base is definitely an attractive alternative, especially for the developing world.
Another interesting example of adsorbents for water treatment is the production of biochar from lignocellulosic biomass using the HTC technology.108 Most precisely, biochar was produced here from switchgrass at T = 300 °C in subcritical water and characterised using XRD, FT-IR spectroscopy, SEM, and thermogravimetric analysis. The physiochemical properties indicated that biochar could serve as an excellent adsorbent to remove uranium from groundwater. A batch adsorption experiment at the natural pH of biochar indicated an H-type isotherm. The adsorption data were fitted using a Langmuir isotherm model and the sorption capacity was estimated to be ca. 2.12 mg of U g−1 of biochar. The adsorption process was highly dependent on the pH of the system. An increase towards neutral pH resulted in the maximum adsorption of ca. 4 mg U g−1. These results indicated that biochar could be used as an effective adsorbent for U(VI), as a reactive barrier medium. Another study compared two types of biochars prepared from hydrothermal liquefaction of pinewood and rice husk for lead removal from aqueous solution. The results indicated that the investigated biochars were quite effective for lead removal with capacities of 4.25 and 2.40 mg per g for HTC pine wood and HTC rice husk, respectively. The adsorption equilibrium was achieved in ca. 5 h, whilst higher temperatures favoured the removal capacity implying that the adsorption was an endothermic process.109 Xing et al. also compared pyrolysis and HTC biochars for the adsorption of bisphenol A, 17a-ethinyl estradiol, and phenanthrene from water.110 The thermal biochars were produced from feedstocks of poultry litter and wheat straw, respectively, through pyrolysis at T = 400 °C. The HTC biochars were prepared from poultry litter and swine solids at T = 300 °C. XRD and solid state NMR spectroscopy results suggested that HTC biochars consisted of more amorphous aliphatic-C, possibly being responsible for their high sorption capacity of phenol. This study demonstrated that hydrothermal biochars could absorb a wider spectrum of both polar and non-polar organic contaminants than thermally produced biochars, suggesting that the investigated HTC biochar is a potential sorbent for agricultural and environmental applications.


7.2.2 Gas adsorption. 
7.2.2.1 CO2 capture on HTC carbons. 
The mitigation of CO2 emissions is a crucial issue as this gas is the main anthropogenic contributor to climate change. Among the possible strategies for CO2 abatement, capture and storage have attracted keen interest. In this context, the CO2 capture performance of HTC-based activated carbons was recently investigated by Sevilla and Fuertes.111 CO2 adsorbents of porous carbons obtained by chemical activation of several HTC materials prepared from starch, cellulose and eucalyptus sawdust were investigated. The HTC was carried out at temperatures in the T = 230–250 °C range. The chemical activation was performed with KOH at temperatures in the T = 600–800 °C range, exhibiting SBET between 1260 m2 g−1 and 2850 m2 g−1, mainly associated with microporosity. The CO2 adsorption uptake for the prepared HTC-based activated carbons at a pressure of 1 bar and three adsorption temperatures (0 °C, 25 °C and 50 °C) was investigated (Table 2). It can be seen that the CO2 capture capacities of the HTC-based porous carbons prepared from starch, cellulose or eucalyptus sawdust are quite substantial and similar (ca. 5.5–5.8 mmol (CO2) per g; 243–256 mg (CO2) per g). This result is coherent with the fact that the pore characteristics of these materials are practically analogous.
Table 2 CO2 capture capacities of the porous carbons at different adsorption temperatures and 1 atm (adapted from ref. 111 with permission)




HTC precursor
Chemical activation
CO2 uptake, mmol g−1 (mg g−1)



T (°C)
KOH/HTC
0 °C
25 °C
50 °C




Starch
700
4
5.6 (247)
3.5 (152)
2.2 (196)


Cellulose
700
4
5.8 (256)
3.5 (155)
1.8 (79)


Eucalyptus sawdust
600
4
5.2 (230)
2.9 (128)
—


700
4
5.5 (243)
2.9 (128)
1.8 (79)


800
4
5.2 (227)
3.0 (130)
—


600
2
6.1 (270)
4.8 (212)
3.6 (158)


650
2
6.0 (262)
4.7 (206)
3.3 (145)


700
2
6.6 (288)
4.3 (190)
2.6 (116)


800
2
5.8 (255)
3.9 (170)
3.1 (136)




For practical applications, in addition to a high CO2 adsorption capacity, sorbents need to show fast adsorption kinetics, a high selectivity towards CO2 and easy regeneration. Sevilla and Fuertes showed that the CO2 adsorption is very fast, around 95% of CO2 uptake occurring over 2 min. By contrast, N2 adsorption is slower, around 60 min being needed for the maximum adsorption uptake to take place. Then, the [CO2/N2] selectivity measured under equilibrium conditions was 5.4. With respect to sorbent regeneration, for the HTC-based carbons >95% of CO2 was desorbed within 3 min under these conditions.
Another interesting approach in relation to the use of the HTC materials for the CO2 capture is based on their functionalization with amine groups which exhibit a high affinity to CO2. In this respect, Titirici et al. reported CO2 capture by means of an amine-rich HTC product.61 This material was prepared by a two-step process: (a) HTC of D-glucose in the presence of small amounts of acrylic acid and (b) functionalisation of carboxylic-rich HTC products with triethylamine. This aminated HTC material possessed high CO2 capture capacities (up to 4.3 mmol CO2·per g at −20 °C). More importantly, these materials exhibit a very high [CO2/N2] selectivity at low (−20 °C) and high (70 °C) temperatures, up to 110 at 70 °C.
7.2.2.2 Methane storage on HTC carbons. 
Falco and Titirici in collaboration with Lozano-Castello at the University of Alicante examined the methane storage properties of two activated carbons derived from the hydrothermal carbonisation of D-glucose (G) and rye straw (RS) at T = 240 °C, using KOH at 700 °C (Table 3).49 Both G-240 and RS-240 showed CH4 uptakes comparable with the top performing materials in methane storage applications (e.g. MOFs). These excellent preliminary results could be further improved by tailoring the PSD of the ACs to the optimum pore width value for methane adsorption (ca. 0.8–1.1 nm).112 Such specific material pore size features could be achieved by tuning the KOH activation process parameters and the chemical structure of the parent HTC carbon, as previously shown (i.e. changing HTC temperature).
Table 3 CH4 uptake of different adsorbents at 298 K and 30 bar (if not differently stated in brackets)




Adsorbent type
CH4 uptake (mmol/g)




G-240 and RS-240
9.0 and 9.1


Commercially available ACs
3.0–10.6 (35 bar)


Coal precursor derived ACs
4.0–9.8


Petroleum pitch based carbon fiber derived ACs
2.0–8.7


Microporous Organic Polymers (MOPs)
4.3–5.5 (36 bar)


Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs)
6.5–10.3 (36 bar)




7.2.2.3 Hydrogen storage on HTC carbons. 
Hydrogen storage is currently one of the main obstacles hindering the commercial use of hydrogen in fuel cell systems. Among the large variety of materials investigated as carriers for hydrogen storage, porous carbons have generated a great attention. Porous carbons with very large surface areas (>2000 m2 g−1) and micropores with diameters centred at 1 nm have been demonstrated to exhibit a large capacity for hydrogen.113 Recently, Sevilla et al. reported the use as H2 adsorbents of porous carbons produced by chemical activation (KOH) of HTC materials obtained by hydrothermal carbonisation of glucose, starch, furfural, cellulose and sawdust (Table 4).50 Independent of precursor type, all the HTC-derived activated samples exhibit similar textural properties: (i) large surface areas, ca. 2200 m2 g−1, (ii) pore volume of ∼1 cm3 g−1 and (iii) a porosity made up mainly by micropores (<2 nm). Their hydrogen storage capacity is ∼2.5 wt% at 1 bar and in the 5.3–5.6 wt% range at 20 bar. These hydrogen uptakes are in most cases superior to those obtained for other activated carbons with large surface area under similar conditions.
Table 4 Hydrogen uptake capacity and textural properties of chemically activated carbons produced from HTC materials (adapted from ref. 50 with permission)




Precursora
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Micropore volume (cm3 g−1)
H2 uptake (wt%)b





a The HTC products were obtained at a temperature of 230 °C (D-glucose and starch) and 250 °C (furfural, cellulose and eucalyptus sawdust—wood). For the chemical activation of HTC materials a temperature of 700 °C and a KOH/HTC mass ratio of 4 were used.
b Hydrogen uptake capacity measured at −196 °C and 20 bar. In parenthesis, the hydrogen uptake capacity measured at −196 °C and 1 bar is given.





Furfural
2180
1.03
0.94
5.4 (2.5)


Glucose
2120
1.00
0.91
5.3 (2.4)


Starch
2190
1.01
0.92
5.4 (2.4)


Cellulose
2370
1.08
0.96
5.6 (2.5)


Wood
2250
1.03
0.91
5.6 (2.5)





7.3 Heterogeneous catalysis
As already described in the nanocomposite section, Titirici et al. have demonstrated previously the possibility of directly loading the HTC sphere with various nanoparticles in one step reaction.114 The Pd nanoparticles/HTC spheres proved to be useful catalysts for a broad range of reactions related to hydrogenation of hydroxy aromatic derivatives (Fig. 10a). The most important example was the selective hydrogenation of phenol to cyclohexanone, a reaction which is otherwise very difficult to achieve. The increased selectivity towards cyclohexanone as compared to cyclohexanol was attributed to the hydrophilic properties of HTC where once cyclohexanone is formed, being hydrophobic, it is repelled away from the hydrophilic reactive pocket.115 Catalytic nanoparticles can also be post-loaded onto the carbon support. Pt nanoparticles/HTC spheres were used for methanol and ethanol electro-oxidation in alkaline media. Experimental results demonstrate that, in comparison with the carbon black or hydrothermally synthesized carbon nanosphere support, the carbon-nanosphere-supported Pt electrocatalyst showed an enhanced efficiency for both methanol and ethanol electro-oxidation in terms of electrode conductivity, electrochemically active surface, oxidation peak current density and onset potential.116
The catalytic activity of Pt–Ru alloy nanoparticles supported on HTC material for dry methane reforming and for the partial oxidation of methane has also been studied.117 Upon removal of the carbon support by calcination under air, a mixture of Pt0 and Ru oxide was obtained and their catalytic performance investigated for the same reactions. For dry methane reforming the initial activity in both samples was high but the catalysts were readily deactivated in time. Regarding the partial oxidation of methane, the Pt–Ru alloy supported on HTC material showed a lower initial activity but a better catalytic stability than its oxidized analog, suggesting that HTC-supported Pt–Ru alloys could be employed as potential catalysts in hydrocarbon catalytic oxidations.
A facile and efficient one pot route for the fabrication of FexOy@C spheres embedded with highly dispersed iron oxide nanoparticles by HTC of D-glucose solution containing iron nitrate at a mild temperature has been also reported.118 Catalytic testing revealed the remarkable stability and selectivity of the reduced FexOy@C spheres in the Fisher–Tropsch reaction, exemplifying the confinement effect of the carbonaceous matter on the embedded nanoparticles imparted by the unique microstructure. The surrounding carbonaceous matter facilitated the formation of iron carbides during H2 activation, which is beneficial for the formation of C5+ hydrocarbons, and restricted the aggregation of the iron carbide nanoparticles during the activation and reaction processes.
Highly active carbonaceous nanofibers (CNFs) were prepared through a template-directed HTC process and used as versatile nanoscale scaffolds for constructing macroscopic multifunctional membranes.119 The broad applicability of the CNF scaffold was demonstrated by preparing a variety of CNF-based composite nanofibers including CNFs–Fe3O4, CNFs–TiO2, CNFs–Ag, and CNFs–Au through various chemical routes (Fig. 11). Importantly, all of them inherit unique dimensionality (high aspect ratio) and mechanical properties (flexibility) of the original CNF scaffolds and thus can be assembled into macroscopic free-standing membranes through a simple casting process. The wide application potentials of these multifunctional composite membranes in magnetic actuation, antibiofouling filtration, and continuous-flow catalysis were also proven.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustrations showing the broad versatility of the CNF scaffolds for constructing free-standing multifunctional membranes, including (a) CNFs-Fe3O4, (b) CNFs-TiO2, (c) CNFs-Ag, and (d) CNFs-Au (taken with permission from W.-J. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, Y.-N. Ma, X. Cao, Q.-F. Guan, W.-P. Xu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8148). 
Nitrogen doped carbon supports are particularly suitable candidates in the context of heterogeneous catalysis, providing suitable binding sites for a range of catalytic complexes, allowing the possibility to heterogenise any number of well known homogeneous catalysts. In this context, nitrogen-doped carbons obtained from the HTC of seafood waste (e.g. lobster shells) and highly porous monoliths derived from the HTC conversion of D-glucose/ovalbumin were successfully loaded with Pt2+ and successfully tested as solid catalysts in the direct oxidation of methane in fuming sulfuric acid.80 Remarkably, catalytic performance superior to the homogeneous golden standard Periana system—based on molecular dichlorobipyrimidyl platinum(II) complex.120 Promisingly the synthesised catalysts could be recycled over several runs without any significant loss in activity. The remarkable catalytic performance together with further targeted material development will facilitate new strategies in process development to design viable methane utilization.
In all the examples presented thus far, HTC plays the role of support for the nanosized catalytically active inorganic species. However, the carbon materials themselves can present intrinsic catalytic properties which will be provided by the various chemical functionalities. Thus, imidazole containing porous HTC materials was prepared by Titirici et al. combining the “hard templating” methodology with the “in situ” functionalisation with small amounts of acrylic monomers as previously described. The resulting materials could be further functionalised to present surface imidazolium bromides and be used efficient for various basic catalytic reactions such as transesterification and Knoevenagel and Aldol reactions.66
As alluded to earlier, one of the main advantages of HTC over other more classical materials is the facile tunability of surface character. Thus, this can be tuned from basic to highly acidic. In this respect, Sevilla et al. reported a route that involves the sulfonation of carbonaceous microspheres obtained by the HTC of D-glucose. This synthetic strategy circumvents gas-phase pyrolysis, thereby avoiding the emission of harmful gases, and yields a solid acid comprising spherical particles of uniform, micrometre-regime size. These materials proved to be efficient catalysts towards the esterification of oleic acid with ethanol, a typical reaction in the synthesis of biodiesel. Moreover, the reaction rates and the intrinsic catalytic activity of the sulfonated microspheres showed better catalytic properties than other commercial solid acids, such as Amberlyst-15.63 Other authors have demonstrated that the functionalisation of HTC with acidic groups for catalysing various esterification reactions can also take place in a one step reaction via HTC of furaldehyde and hydroxyethylsulfonic acid aqueous solution at T = 180 °C for 4 h.121 The carbon exhibited high acidity and comparable activities with respect to homogeneous sulfuric acid for the investigated, traditional acid-catalysed reactions.
7.4 Magnetic HTCs
Carbonaceous surfactants have been prepared via the HTC approach that were used as shells for the coating of ferromagnetic Fe3O4 nanospheres with a uniform size distribution.122 Under controlled experimental conditions, it was demonstrated that D-glucose could be employed as the carbon source in the preparation of continuous 1-D carbon nanoparticle chains with magnetic nanosphere inclusions (Fig. 12a and b). The salient feature of the reported method was the assembly of magnetic nanospheres under HTC conditions in the absence of external fields. The magnetic behaviour of Fe3O4/C nanochains, which is of importance for practical applications, was investigated as compared to that of pure Fe3O4 nanospheres. The hysteresis loop of the Fe3O4/C nanochains exhibited magnetisation lower than that of the Fe3O4 nanospheres (92.8 emu g−1), and this was believed to be due to the amorphous carbon shell at the chainlike interface providing a smaller magnetic torque per unit mass (Fig. 12c). The magnetic separability of the synthesised magnetic chains was tested in water by placing a magnet near the glass bottle; the black chains were attracted toward the magnet within 20 s, clearly demonstrating the magnetic properties of the Fe3O4/C nanochains, and the easy and efficient way to separate the Fe3O4/C nanochains from a given reaction system.
 Fig. 12  SEM image (a) and TEM micrographs (b) of Fe3O4/C composites; (c) hysteresis curve and the magnetic separability of the Fe3O4/C nanochains at room temperature (taken with permission from H. Duan, Z. Zhang, S. Li and Y. Lin, Langmuir, 2010, 26(9), 6676). 
Another example of self-assembly is the formation of porous Fe3O4/carbon core/shell nanorods fabricated via a three-step process. α-Fe2O3 nanorods were first obtained, and α-Fe2O3/carbon core/shell nanorods were subsequently fabricated using D-glucose as the carbon source in a HTC approach, in which the carbon coating thickness was ca. 3.5 nm. Fe3O4/carbon core/shell nanorods were synthesised after an annealing treatment of the product under an Ar/H2 flow. After the H2 deoxidation process, the Fe3O4 core became porous while the thickness of the carbon shell decreased to ca. 2.5 nm and the degree of graphitization enhanced. The interesting core/shell nanostructures were found to be ferromagnetic at room temperature, with a maximum reflection loss of ca. −27.9 dB at 14.96 GHz for the composite with a thickness of 2.0 mm, and the absorption bandwidth (with the reflection loss) at <−18 dB was up to 10.5 GHz for the absorber with a thickness of 2–5 mm. The excellent electromagnetic wave absorption properties of the porous Fe3O4/carbon core/shell nanorods were attributed to effective complementarities between the dielectric loss and the magnetic loss.123
Rare-earth-doped gadolinium oxide (Gd2O3) hollow nanospheres have been successfully prepared on a large scale via a template-directed method using HTC spheres as sacrificial templates as previously reported by Titirici et al.114 By doping the rare-earth ions (Yb/Er) into the Gd2O3 host matrix, these nanoparticles emitted bright multicoloured up-conversion emissions that can be fine-tuned from green to red by adjusting the co-doped Yb/Er ratio under 980 nm NIR laser excitation. It was also shown that these Gd2O3 nanospheres brightened the T1-weighted images and enhanced the r1 relaxivity of water protons, which are suggested as the potential applications of such materials as T1 contrast agents in magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Moreover, these hollow spheres can be used as drug delivery host carriers, and drug storage/release properties were investigated using ibuprofen as a model drug. As a result, the so-prepared nanoscaled Gd2O3 hollow spheres bearing up-conversion luminescence, MR imaging, and drug delivery capabilities could be potentially employed for simultaneous MR/fluorescent imaging and therapeutic applications.124
7.5 Photocatalysis
TiO2, as an inexpensive, non-toxic, and highly efficient photocatalyst, has been extensively studied and applied for degradation of organic pollutants, air purification, sterilisation, and demister. Generally, TiO2, with a band gap of 3.2 eV, can only be excited by a small UV fraction of solar light, which accounts for only 3–5% of the solar energy. In the past decade, much research effort has focused on extending the photoresponse of the TiO2 to the visible region. Among these attempts, TiO2 doping, either with main group elements or transition metals, has been the most important approach for improving the photocatalytic performance of the catalyst. In this regard, HTC has been used to produce carbon doped TiO2 with visible light activity (Fig. 10b).86 It was shown that the surface of nanometre sized carbon materials can also show collective polarization modes and therefore, these optical absorption transitions are feasible to sensitize TiO2 which then acts as a novel “dyade”-type structure, with an improved TiO2 hole reactivity, while the electron is taken up by the carbon component. This results in an improved photocatalytic activity over the complete spectral range. In order to avoid carbon doping directly into bulk TiO2 lattice, the hybrid C@TiO2 is synthesised at low temperature under solvothermal conditions by a one-step carbonisation of furfural in the presence of Ti-isopropoxide, allowing for the formation and co-assembly of carbon and TiO2 into an interpenetrating C@TiO2 nanoarchitecture containing 12.6% carbon. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy demonstrated that C@TiO2 material can absorb significantly more light in the 420–800 nm range as compared with pure TiO2. Therefore solvothermally prepared C@TiO2 exhibited a very high photocatalytic activity for degradation of methyl orange under visible light. Furthermore, the C@TiO2 hybrid was able to generate significant photocurrents under both UV and visible-light irradiation. A typical n-type photocurrent was generated with UV (λ > 320 nm), while under visible-light irradiation the material exhibits both n-type and p-type currents. This was explained by the fact that UV-absorption also activates pure TiO2 bands, while the ambipolar, biphasic nature of C@TiO2 is activated under visible light. This allows both electrons and holes to contribute to the charge transport, which is crucial for photo-electrochemical applications. Other reports indicate that similar catalysts prepared under the same conditions also have high activity under visible light for the degradation of Acid Orange 7 and 2,4-dichlorophenol. In these reports it was also assumed that two kinds of sensitisation processes, carbon sensitisation and dye sensitisation, are responsible for the visible light induced photocatalysis of C@TiO2.125
7.6 Energy storage
HTC offers viable solutions as it can convert biomass, a renewable and highly available resource, into interesting carbon materials which can be used for energy storage obtained from non-conventional sources. Hydrothermal carbons and their nanocomposites have been so far intensively used as electrodes in Li+ or Na+ ion batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells.

7.6.1 Li/Na ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries play a vital role as the prominent power sources for cell phones, laptop computers, digital cameras, power tools, electrical assist bicycles, and many consumer products, and are already well established and commercially available. Carbon is the most used negative electrode material in Li-ion batteries. In this regard, HTC materials have also been employed as electrodes in Li-ion batteries. The first study performed by Huang et al. demonstrated that the reversible lithium insertion/extraction capacity of this kind of material is much higher than the theoretical capacity of graphitised carbonaceous materials.126 However, such HTC materials had no significant porosity and only very small amounts of nanopores with diameters <1 nm. Titirici et al. have investigated the performance of HTC materials as anodes in Li+ as well as Na+ ion batteries.60 However, the morphology was different from the hard HTC spheres used by Huang et al., namely hollow HTC nanospheres. The reversible capacity at a 1 C rate for the hollow carbon nanospheres could reach up to 370 mA h g−1, which is slightly higher than graphite when employed as anode material in Li ion batteries (Fig. 13a). The capacity loss in the initial cycles stems from the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) film stabilisation and irreversible lithium ion insertion. While previous reports suggest that non-graphitic carbons show a continuous and progressive decay in capacity during cycling, here the investigated hollow carbon nanospheres presented excellent cycling performance at 1 C rate. After 200 discharge/charge cycles, a reversible capacity as high as 310 mA h g−1 was retained, and the coulombic efficiency approached almost 100%.
 Fig. 13  (a) Cycle performance of hollow carbon nanospheres cycled at a rate of 1 C in Li ion batteries, (b) rate performance of hollow carbon nanospheres at variant rates in Li ion batteries (eventually taken with permission from R. J. White, K. Tang, M.-M. Titirici, L. Fu and J. Maier, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 400), (c) cycle performance of hollow carbon nanospheres as anodes in Na ion Batteries, and (d) rate performance of hollow carbon nanospheres (HCS) and carbon spheres (CS) at variant rates as anodes in Na ion batteries (eventually taken with permission from L. Fu, K. Tang, R. J. White, L. Yu, M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, submitted). 
However, the real advantage of such hollow carbon spheres, besides the high cyclability, is the outstanding rate capabilities (Fig. 13b). A specific charge capacity of 200 mA h g−1 is reached at 5 C, and when the current density is increased by from 1 C to 20 C, the capacity retention of hollow carbon spheres can approach 50%. Even at the very high rate of 50 C (18.6 A g−1), a capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 is still maintained. This value is much higher than traditional graphite electrode (almost negligible at such a high rate). To the best of our knowledge, it is almost the best rate performance ever measured on carbonaceous material. What should also be mentioned is that the rate performance is much higher than that of disordered carbon obtained from a similar precursor without template, indicating that the hollow nanosphere morphology plays a vital role for the excellent electrochemical performance.
At the present time, lithium resources are confirmed to be unevenly distributed, located primarily in South America. The cost of lithium-based raw materials has roughly doubled from the first practical application in 1991 to now, and it may drastically increase when the demand for lithium increases as a result of commercialisation of large-scale lithium-ion batteries in the future. However, sodium resources are nearly inexhaustible and unlimited around the world. Furthermore, the electrochemical equivalent and standard potential of sodium are the most advantageous for aprotic battery applications, after lithium. In this regard, Titirici et al. have recently demonstrated for the first time that HTC materials, more precisely hollow spheres, can play a very important role as anode materials in Na ion batteries.127 The advantage of the high rate capability of the hollow spheres over the standard hard HTC spheres obtained from the same precursor was also demonstrated. The first discharge/charge cycle delivered specific capacities of 537 and 223 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 50 mA g−1. The reversible capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 is significant, and only few reports achieved capacities more than 200 mA h g−1 for sodium anode materials although at much lower current densities. The cycling stability during sodium insertion/extraction in the hollow carbon nanospheres was also investigated at a current density of 50 mA g−1 for the first 10 cycles and then 100 mA h g−1 for subsequent cycles (Fig. 13c). The capacity loss in the initial cycles stems from SEI film stabilisation and irreversible Na+ insertion. After 100 cycles, a reversible capacity of ca. 160 mA h g−1 is maintained. The coulombic efficiency approaches around 94% after several cycles. Such a good cycle performance of >100 cycles has been seldom achieved in previous reports for sodium ion battery anode materials. Remarkably, the reversible capacities are retained at 168, 142, 120, 100 and 75 mA h g−1 at current densities of 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 5.0 A g−1, respectively. Even at a very high current density of 10 A g−1, a capacity of ∼50 mA h g−1 is still maintained, demonstrating the excellent rate performance of the hollow carbon nanosphere-based electrode. To the best of our knowledge, the presented results indicate the best rate performance ever measured for sodium ion battery anode materials (Fig. 13d).
Besides the use of pure HTC materials as electrodes in Li-ion batteries, great importance has been given to the utilisation of HTC/inorganic composites as electrode materials. It is already known that certain elements such as Si and Sn can form promising alloys with Li. Since approximately 4.4 Li atoms can be alloyed with one single Si or Sn atom, it is obvious that the capacity of such materials when used as negative electrodes in Li ion batteries will be greatly improved (i.e. Li4.4Si ≈ 4200 mA h g−1 compared to 372 mA h g−1 for LiC6 in graphite). However, such alloying reactions are normally associated with severe volume changes during Li insertion/de-insertion leading to very fast decay in capacity with cycling. Another associated problem is their low conductivity.
In order to overcome such problems, Titirici et al. successfully in situ coated commercially available silicon nanoparticles with a thin layer (25 wt%-10 nm) of HTC material via the conversion of D-glucose (Fig. 7e and f).75 The resulting composite was further carbonised to increase the conductivity of the carbon layer resulting in a Si/SiOx/C composite with a markedly improved cyclability compared with the pure Si. Especially when working in the presence of a vinylene carbonate additive in the electrolyte, an excellent cycling performance was achieved. The reversible capacity was as high as 1100 mA h g−1 at a current density of 150 mA g−1, with no further decay of capacity even after 60 cycles. A large irreversible capacity was observed in the first discharge and charge processes; however, after the initial cycles, the coulombic efficiency was >99%. The irreversible capacity in the first initial cycles is an expected phenomenon in the Si-based electrodes in lithium batteries. The initial irreversible capacity loss was believed to originate from the reduction of the electrolyte, resulting in the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the surface of the active particles and/or from irreversible lithium insertion into nanocomposites. This might be overcome by pre-forming an artificial SEI layer (through chemical modification) on the active particles and/or pre-lithiating the active particles.
Similarly, pre-formed SnO2 nanoparticles were incorporated inside HTC spheres derived from the conversion of D-glucose. The resulting composites were carbonised and utilised as a Li ion battery electrode, or the carbon can then be subsequently removed. Here HTC acts as an assembly medium of the initial nanoparticles into mesoporous SnO2 nanospheres leading to a better packing density and superior Li insertion properties.17 Cao et al. have also reported on the preparation of multilayered nanocrystalline SnO2 hollow spheres via a chemically induced self-assembly approach performed under hydrothermal conditions.114 First, a multilayered, spherical SnO2–C composite is produced through a condensation polymerisation and carbonisation of sucrose accompanied by hydrolysis of SnCl4 during the hydrothermal reaction. Then, HS–SnO2 was obtained by removal of carbon. The as-prepared HS–SnO2 exhibited good electrochemical performance as the anode material in lithium ion batteries.128
Besides negative electrodes in Li-ion batteries, the development of improved cathode materials is recognised as even more challenging. In this respect, olivine LiFePO4 is considered one of the most promising cathode materials for Li-ion batteries. Titirici et al. developed a simple one-step, template-free, low-temperature solvothermal method for the synthesis of urchin-like hierarchical mesocrystals of pristine LiFePO4, as well as carbon-coated LiFePO4 composites. Each urchin-like mesocrystal consists of LiFePO4 sheets self-assembled via a dipolar field in spheres during a solvothermal process under the influence of Cl− anions (Fig. 9d). The obtained primary sheets of LiFePO4 are single crystalline in nature and can be coated in situ with an amorphous nitrogen-doped carbonaceous layer several nanometres in thickness. To increase the conductivity of the carbon coating, the materials are subjected to further temperature treatment (T = 700 °C) under an inert atmosphere. The lithium storage performance of the pure LiFePO4 is compared with that of its carbon-coated counterparts, proving to be superior.129


7.6.2 Supercapacitors. 
Electrochemical capacitors, referred to more commonly as supercapacitors, are of great interest as high power electrochemical energy storage devices due to their combined high power density with long cycle life and wide operational temperature range, properties that are currently unattainable in Li-ion batteries. However, the energy density achieved by commercial products (ca. 5 W h kg−1) limits their use to few seconds of charge/discharge, hampering their utilisation in energy harvesting applications. Therefore, efforts are focused now on increasing the energy density of supercapacitors. Based on the charge storage mechanism, electrochemical capacitors can be divided into: (i) electrochemical double layer capacitors, where the energy storage is based on the electrostatic adsorption of electrolyte ions on the surface area of electrically conductive porous electrodes and (ii) pseudo-capacitors, where the energy is stored through redox reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface.130
HTC carbons are oxygen-rich by nature, with the oxygen content being tuned through the operating conditions (e.g. temperature, time, precursor and concentration). What is more, by selecting appropriately the initial carbon precursor, operating conditions or additional additives, other functionalities can be introduced in the final carbonaceous materials. Unfortunately (as described in Section 3), HTC materials generally possess limited developed porosity, whilst their heat-treatment at elevated temperatures lead typically to only a moderate increase in surface area, which hampers their application in surface area sensitive applications, such as supercapacitors. However, this limitation has been circumvented recently by the chemical activation of HTC carbons, as thoroughly described in Section 3.1.
Wei et al. analyzed the supercapacitor performance in an organic electrolyte (1 M TEABF4 in acetonitrile) of HTC cellulose (C), starch (S) and sawdust (W) activated at 700 and 800 °C with a KOH/sample weight ratio = 4.131 The carbon materials possessed BET surface areas in the ∼2100 to 3000 m2 g−1 range and pore volumes up to ∼1.4 cm3 g−1, with a relatively narrow pore size distribution in the supermicropore range, with virtually no pores >3 nm. The performance of those materials was spectacular, recording the highest capacitance ever reported for porous carbons in a symmetric two-electrode configuration using such electrolytes (i.e. 236 F g−1 (100 F cm−3) at 1 mV s−1) (Fig. 14a). It exceeded the specific capacitance of commercial activated carbons optimized for EDLC applications. Among the tested carbons, the samples activated at the highest temperature (T = 800 °C) possessed the largest volume of small mesopores in the range 2–3 nm and presented the better capacitance retention at high sweep rates in the CV measurements or higher current densities in the charging/discharging tests (Fig. 14b). This combination of very high specific and volumetric capacitance and good rate capability of the hydrothermally synthesized porous carbons is unmatched by state-of-the art activated carbons, carbon nanotubes, carbon onions and graphene.
 Fig. 14  Electrochemical characterization of activated carbons derived from hydrothermally synthesized carbon materials in 1 M TEABF4 solution in acetonitrile at room temperature: (a) cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of the activated carbon obtained from sawdust at 800 °C with KOH/sample = 4 (AC-W800) and (b) capacitance retention with current density in comparison with that of commercially available YP-17D activated carbon (extracted from L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 356, with permission). 
Wang et al. have also applied chemical activation to hydrothermal carbons, in this case using phosphoric acid as an activating agent and rice husk as a carbon precursor.132 The authors varied the activation temperature between 300 and 700 °C and the weight ratio of phosphoric acid to hydrothermal carbon between 1 and 6. In this way, the obtained porous materials ranged from supermicroporous to mesoporous, with BET surface areas in the ∼700 to 2700 m2 g−1 range and pore volumes up to ∼2 cm3 g−1. The specific capacitance of these activated carbons reached 130 F g−1 (measured at 2 mV s−1) in an aqueous solution of KOH 6 M, a value below that measured for activated carbons with similar surface areas but with narrower PSD in the micro-supermicropore range (235–286 F g−1). This is due to the fact that, as shown by Chmiola et al., a good matching between the electrode pore size and the dimensions of the electrolyte ions is critical for an optimal performance of supercapacitors.133
On the other hand, Zhao et al. have analysed the capacitance behaviour of nitrogen-containing hydrothermal carbons activated with KOH (weight ratio of KOH to hydrothermal carbons = 1 to 4, and T = 600 °C).16 Although KOH was used as an activation agent, a high degree of activation was not achieved (surface area <600 m2 g−1), which may be due to the low temperature used for the activation (T = 600 °C). This was applied in order not to lose the structurally bound nitrogen at high temperatures of chemical activation. Despite the low surface area, the materials exhibited excellent electrochemical performance in KOH 6 M and H2SO4 1 M, achieving specific capacitances up to 220 and 300 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 in the basic and acidic electrolyte respectively. This superior capacitance was believed to be due to the combination of EDLC capacitance and pseudocapacitance arising from redox reactions of the nitrogen functionalities. It is worth noticing that the chemical activation process leads to a reduction in the material nitrogen content, this reduction being larger with the hardening of the activation conditions (i.e. increase of the amount of KOH used). Nevertheless, the values of capacitance achieved with these materials are comparable to activated carbons reported in the literature with a much higher surface area (>3000 m2 g−1),134 and higher than that of a high surface area and high nitrogen-content carbon derived from polyacrylonitrile (160 F g−1).135 Additionally, good capacitance retention at high current density (4 A g−1) was observed, demonstrating good conductivity and rapid charge propagation in both acid and base electrolytes.
Recently Zhu et al. prepared electrodes for supercapacitors from hydrothermally carbonized fungi (HTC at 120 °C for 6 h).136 The product resulting from the HTC process was characterised by small particles (50–200 nm) fused together to give rise to sheets or tubular networks, the oxygen content being 13.4% (50% decrease from raw fungi). The value of the surface area was typical for hydrothermal carbons, ∼14 m2 g−1. With the aim of creating porosity, as well as improving the electronic conductivity, the hydrothermal carbon was pyrolysed at 700 °C for 3 h. As a result, the oxygen content decreased to 5%, but the surface area increased to 80 m2 g−1. Surprisingly, even though the oxygen content is not high and the surface area is comparatively low, the material stored up to 196 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, a value comparable to high surface area carbons like Maxsorb, or highly doped carbons like that obtained from seaweed. However, with the increase of the scan rate, the decrease of the capacitance was quite high (∼40% decrease at 50 mV s−1). The authors explained the large specific capacitance of that material on the basis of its small particle size, which reduces the ion and electron transport path and increases the material usage, as pseudocapacitors store charges in the first few nanometres below the surface.


7.6.3 Fuel cells. 
The idea for the electrochemical conversion of the potential energy of coal into electrical energy originates from the late 19th century, when W. Jacques introduced the principle of the non-combustive, electrochemical oxidation of carbonaceous matter by air.137 Carbon fuel cells are conceptually the most effective way of converting the chemical energy of carbon into electrical energy, especially compared to classical combustion processes. Paraknowitsch et al. used carbon colloids as a fuel, prepared by HTC.138 To evaluate the potential of HTC material as a fuel, the oxidation properties of this carbon source compared to fossil coals are extremely important and were investigated in the reported study. Different samples of lignite and anthracite were applied as reference materials, using a simple Fe3+-oxidation assay. The experiments revealed a significantly better capability of HTC material derived from D-glucose to be oxidized: it greatly exceeded anthracite in its oxidation rate, but also showed better oxidation properties than lignite. Finally, using carbon colloids derived from biomass-derived HTC materials yielded an indirect carbon fuel cell with an overall zero-emission balance concerning the greenhouse gas CO2.
Sevilla et al. used an electrocatalyst supported on graphitic nanostructures obtained from hydrothermal carbon using a two-step process in which the synthesised HTC material was impregnated with nickel nitrate and subjected to a heat-treatment at T = 900 °C.139 As a result, highly crystalline, high surface area carbon nanocoils were formed. Afterwards, Sevilla et al. deposited Pt/Ru nanoparticles139 or Pt nanoparticles140 over the graphitic carbon nanocoils and analysed their behaviour, comparing it with that of a carbon support widely used as an electrocatalyst support (i.e. Vulcan). For both Pt/Ru and Pt nanoparticles, the electrocatalysts prepared with the carbon nanocoils exhibited a higher activity than that of Vulcan, which is a consequence of the fact that nanocoils combine good electrical conductivity and accessible surface that allows the diffusion resistances of reactants/products to be minimised.

7.7 Biological applications
Recently, researchers have begun to explore the bioapplications of HTC carbon materials, including the fields of bioimaging and drug delivery. Yu et al. synthesised green-luminescent monodisperse Ag@phenol PFR core–shell spheres in a facile one-step method.141 By changing the concentration or the molar ratio of the starting materials, different architectures with tuneable size could be obtained, such as monocore–shell, multicore–shell, and eccentric core–shell. These nanospheres give strong green emission under excitation at λ = 340 nm. Fluorescent imaging showed that the particles could be internalised into living human lung-cancer cells and exhibited almost no cytotoxic effects on the cells. Kundu et al. reported that the intrinsically fluorescent surface functional carbon nanoparticles derived from the hydrothermal treatment of D-glucose could deliver a membrane impermeable molecule into the mammalian cell nuclei and further modulate gene expression in vivo.142 The confocal laser scanning microscopy monitoring demonstrated the presence of CSPs inside the nucleus within 3 h, with a further increasing amount over longer exposure times. Fluorescent images and Raman spectrum also showed that the CSPs could cross the blood–brain barrier (a separation of circulating blood and cerebrospinal fluid) and penetrate into the brain. Thus, the CSPs are potential carriers to deliver drugs against brain tumours. The in vivo experiment further confirmed that the CSPs are non-toxic to animals and can be consumed over several days. CSPs were capable of delivering a membrane impermeable molecule, N-(4-chloro-3-trifluoromethylphenyl)-2-ethoxybenzamide, the only histone acetyltransferase activator, into the cell nuclei.
7.8 Perspectives on HTC applications
As demonstrated by the numerous examples discussed in this article, HTC based materials have already been successfully used in many practical applications in a variety of fields ranging from adsorption to energy storage and nanomedicine. So far, mainly pure carbohydrates have been employed as precursors for the synthesis of such highly functional materials. Whilst still comparatively inexpensive and sustainable, the production of such high performance materials will be even more valuable if entirely based on (waste) biomass. Furthermore, we predict that heteroatom-doped carbon materials will continue to play an important role especially in fields such as adsorption, soil improvement or energy storage.143 Nitrogen-doped carbons have already proven their importance in chemo-selective adsorption,144 while some sulfur-doped carbons showed beneficial effects on the selective adsorption of waste materials,145 as well as on the desulfurization of crude oil.146 Energy storage is a field where many applications of HTC-derived materials will still be possible. Firstly, nitrogen- as well as sulfur-doped carbons prepared from real wastes still have to prove their superior properties in both supercapacitors (via pseudocapacitance effects) as well as PEMFC, where it has been already shown that heteroatom-doped carbons can exhibit increased catalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction without the requirement for additional Pt.147 Heteroatom-doped carbons in combination with various active inorganic nanoparticles will become of increasing importance as the benefits of such hybrid dyade systems became increasingly evident.
In the field of secondary batteries, Li-ion batteries will continue to dominate the market in the future. However, as previously mentioned, manufacturers could run into difficulties regarding the constantly increasing price of lithium and its uneven distribution in the world. Therefore, it is anticipated that Na ion batteries will start to receive increasing attention in the future. Since graphite is not a good stage intercalation material for Na+,148 amorphous hard carbons represent an ideal choice. The success of HTC as a negative electrode in Na-ion batteries has already been proved.149 However, performance might be further improved by introducing tailored porosity or even by using heteroatom-doped carbons where it is expected that the C–C atomic distances will be further enlarged to accommodate more Na ions. Furthermore, in a very recent paper by Ceder et al. regarding challenges in Na-ion batteries, the possibility of forming Na alloys with Sn and Si is theoretically considered.150 Although Na-ion negative electrodes based on alloying reactions will always be inferior to Li in terms of volumetric energy density, it is predicted that they will perform better than the hard carbons alone. This is a completely unknown field and new strategies for Na-based energy storage technologies need to be discovered to take full advantage of the higher availability of Na.
Even though alkali ion batteries will still play a very important role, high energy density is required in the longer term in markets, such as electric vehicles and the storage of electricity from renewable sources. In this regard conventional Li-ion batteries will never be able to provide such densities. There are a few alternatives such as Li–sulfur batteries (as well as Li–air batteries), which could theoretically deliver the transformation in performance required in the long term. The reactions at the cathode in Li–S cells involve the reversible reduction of S, and are fundamentally different from those in Li-ion cells. The theoretical value for Li–S is 2567 W h kg−1, as compared with today's Li-ion battery of 387 W h kg−1. In the discharge of the Li–S cell, the sulfur at the cathode is reduced and combines with Li+ to ultimately form Li2S (2Li+ + 2e− + S ↔ Li2S). The reaction is reversed on charge. Unfortunately, inefficiency in cycling and capacity fading occurs in Li–S batteries due to the formation of polysulfides which are soluble in the electrolytes and diffuse back to the positive electrode where they are re-oxidized. This parasitic process takes place repeatedly, creating an internal “shuttle” phenomenon. Capacity fading is caused by the accumulation of net amount of the insoluble Li2S and Li2S2 on the Li anode, which, in turn, seriously lowers its rechargability. Therefore, it is very challenging to achieve good cycling performances in Li–S batteries. Currently, research on improving the electrolyte to prevent polysulfides solubilisation, the use of Li+ conductive solid electrolytes to isolate the anode from the cathode to prevent self-discharge, or improvement of innovative cathode architectures is underway. In most of the cases, novel carbon architectures which can be infiltrated with sulfur are the choice, leading to an improved cycleability.151 So far, HTC materials have not yet been applied as a sulfur support and used as cathodes in Li–S batteries but it is the authors belief that such applications will be soon developed.
Besides energy storage, catalytic applications will continue to play an important role for HTC materials. In particular, heteroatom-doped carbon materials will continue to exhibit surprising catalytic activities for a series of reactions. Especially in the field of biofuels production using the catalytic liquefaction of biomass,8 the HTC carbons with basic or acid character could play a particular role for various catalytic reactions when used as solid catalysts. Therefore it would be of great advantage to use biomass-derived carbons to catalyse the production of chemicals or biofuels out of biomass itself, providing a complete synergistic and holistic approach which could easily be integrated into future biorefinery schemes.
Another field where low cost porous HTC derived materials could be of great importance is chromatographic separations. Firstly the HTC materials can be shaped either as porous monoliths or porous spheres. Secondly they posses surface functional groups as the silica based stationary phases. This offers them flexibility for various applications in either Hydrophilic Interactions Liquid Chromatography (HILIC),152 or Reversed Phase Liquid Chromatography (RPLC).153 Thirdly when post-carbonised at higher temperatures the carbons will become increasingly condensed, aromatised and hydrophobic, leading to stationary phase-like properties more commonly associated with porous graphitic carbon columns (PGCs),154 as commercialized by Thermo Fisher at high prices (1500–2000 € per column). The advantage of the HTC approach is the ability to moderate “π” stacking/delocalisation characteristics via carbonisation temperature selection—a material feature believed to determine the retention strength of such polar analytes. Such stationary phases are known for the efficient separations of polar analytes, including sugars and phenols. Obviously it will be extremely interesting to produce biomass derived stationary phases for separations of biomass components such as sugars or even the phenol derivatives obtained upon the de-polymerization of lignin. The feasibility of this concept has been already demonstrated in an elegant paper published by White et al.155 using alginic acid-derived carbon stationary phases.
Whilst the renaissance of HTC technology is now effectively into its 10th year and many further developments and applications are to be still discovered, the authors hope to have provided a suitable introduction to the reader to the extremely broad scope and applicability of these exciting biomass-derived materials.
8. Conclusions
In summary, carbons and carbonaceous materials synthesised by HTC from carbohydrates, organic molecules, and biomass have been discussed. The different experimental conditions and reaction mechanisms between pure carbohydrates and lignocellulosic biomass, as well as the dependence of the resulting chemical structure on the HTC temperature, have been considered. The introduction of porosity into such HTC materials using a variety of techniques, from chemical activation to nanocasting and gelation agents which can interact with the HTC precursors, has also been introduced. One important advantage of HTC materials is the remaining polar functionalities, which make the surface in principle relatively straightforward to functionalise either via post or in situ modification. Furthermore, the surface character can be easily tuned either by changing the HTC temperature or by post-carbonisation under an inert atmosphere, depending on the desired end application.
These carbonaceous materials can also be used to form nanocomposites with other materials and further serve as building blocks of hierarchical structures. Importantly, the as-synthesised carbon materials have already shown very broad practical applications in a variety of areas, such as environmental, catalytic, electronic and biological applications. It is believed that the HTC process will play an increasingly important role in the fabrication of nanostructured carbon materials in the future. Heteroatoms (especially nitrogen) can be successfully incorporated within the framework of these materials and their chemical environment can also be controlled with the post-annealing temperature. Such dopants confer very special electronic as well as catalytic properties to the HTC carbons.
Although the HTC process has achieved great success in rather short time, there still remain some challenges and questions that should draw scientific attention: can we find a proper catalyst to lower even more the reaction temperature, or shorten the reaction time? How to digest real waste biomass by the HTC to produce functional carbonaceous materials and nanocomposites with practical application? Solving these challenges and problems in the future will further facilitate and strengthen the capability for rational design of a variety of carbon materials and extended practical applications.
References
G. Resch, A. Held, T. Faber, C. Panzer, F. Toro and R. Haas, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4048–4056 CrossRef .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Bacaoui, A. Dahbi, A. Yaacoubi, C. Bennouna, F. J. Maldonado-Hodar, J. Rivera-Utrilla, F. Carrasco-Marin and C. Moreno-Castilla, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 3844–3849 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. T. Williams and A. R. Reed, Biomass Bioenergy, 2006, 30, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biomass Bioenergy, 2004, 26, 361–375 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. Stichnothe and A. Azapagic, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2009, 53, 624–630 CrossRef .
I. S. Stamenkovic, I. B. Bankovic-Ilic, O. S. Stamenkovic, V. B. Veljkovic and D. U. Skala, Hem. Ind., 2009, 63, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz and J. A. Dumesic, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 4, 83–99 CAS .
M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103–116 RSC .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Libra, K. S. Ro, C. Kammann, A. Funke, N. D. Berge, Y. Neubauer, M.-M. Titirici, C. Fühner, O. Bens, J. Kern and K.-H. Emmerich, Biofuels, 2011, 2(1), 89–124 CrossRef .
M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and N. Baccile, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1204–1212 RSC .
S. Kubo, R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4882–4885 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645–8650 RSC .
R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2428–2434 RSC .
L. Zhao, L.-Z. Fan, M.-Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227–1229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubo, I. Tan, R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Asghari and H. Yoshida, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 7703 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, X. Lou and H. Wu, Energy Fuels, 2007, 22, 46–60 CrossRef .
J. N. Chheda, Y. Roman-Leshkov and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 342–350 RSC .
X. Qi, M. Watanabe, T. M. Aida and R. L. Smith, Jr, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 2244–2249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Román-Leshkov, J. N. Chheda and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2006, 312, 1933–1937 CrossRef .
F. S. Asghari and H. Yoshida, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 7703–7710 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) O. Sackur, Z. Elektrochem. Angew. Phys. Chem., 1914, 20, 260 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. H. Yu, X. J. Cui, L. L. Li, K. Li, B. Yu, M. Antonietti and H. Cölfen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1636–1640 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Cui, M. Antonietti and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2006, 2, 756–759 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 787–789 RSC ; 
  (e) M. M. Titirici, A. Thomas, S.-H. Yu, J.-O. Müller and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4205–4212 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. R. Patil and C. R. F. Lund, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4745 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and N. Baccile, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1204–1212 RSC .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2281–2289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4195–4203 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, G. Laurent, F. Babonneau, F. Fayon, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9644–9654 CAS .
P. Kumar, D. M. Barrett, M. J. Delwiche and P. Stroeve, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 3713–3729 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H.-P. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 3422–3458 CrossRef .
M. P. Pandey and C. S. Kim, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2011, 34(1), 29–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Sun, X. B. Lu, S. T. Zhang, R. Zhang and X. Y. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 2936–2294 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Willauer, J. G. Huddleston, M. Li and R. D. Rogers, J. Chromatogr., B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci., 2000, 743(1–2), 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Falco, N. Baccile and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2011, 13(11), 3273–3281 RSC .
N. D. Berge, K. S. Ro, J.-D. Mao, J. R. V. Flora, M. A. Chappell and S. Bae, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5696–5703 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hoekman, A. Broch and C. Robbins, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 1802–1810 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kang, X. L. Li, J. Fan and J. Chang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 11288–11296 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            J. Yun, G. Li, H. Enomoto and F. Jin, in Water Dynamics,  2007, vol. 898, pp. 143–146 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            M. Cuixiang, J. Fangming, C. Jianglin and W. Bing, 2010 4th International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering (iCBBE 2010).
V. Budarin, R. Luque, D. J. Macquarrie and J. H. Clark, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6914–6919 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, F. Babonneau, B. Thomas and T. Coradin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8537–8559 RSC .

          http://www.cs-carbonsolutions.de/
        ; 
          http://www.terranova-energy.com/index.php
        ; 
          http://www.ava-co2.com/web/pages/de/home.php
        ; 
          http://www.revatec.de/, www.biokol.eu
        .
W. Seifritz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1993, 18(5), 405 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Y. Chan, L. Van Zwieten, I. Meszaros, A. Downie and S. Joseph, Aust. J. Soil Res., 2007, 45, 629–634 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Kuzyakov, I. Subbotina, H. Chen, I. Bogomolova and X. Xu, Soil Biol. Biochem., 2009, 41, 210–219 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. D. Warnock, J. Lehmann, T. W. Kuyper and M. C. Rillig, Plant Soil, 2007, 300, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, J. A. Macia-Agullo and A. B. Fuertes, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 3152–3159 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 787–789 RSC .
O. Ioannidou and A. Zabaniotou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 1966–2005 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Falco, M. M. Titirici and D. Lozano-Castello, unpublished results.
M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1400–1410 CAS .

          A. Linares-Solano, D. Lozano-Castello, M. A. Lillo-Rodenas and D. Cazorla-Amoros, in Chemistry and Physics of Carbon, CRC Press-Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton,  2008, vol. 30, pp. 1–62 Search PubMed .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Zhao, J. L. Feng, Q. S. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, R. Ryoo, M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4640–4646 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Lu, W. C. Li, W. Schmidt, W. Kiefer and F. Schuth, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2939–2948 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Meng, D. Gu, Y. Yan, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13508–13509 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5316–5317 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1010–1018 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3412–3418 RSC .
R. J. White, K. Tauer, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 132, 17360–17363 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, Z. Bacsik, N. Hedin, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tan, F. Roohi and M.-M. Titirici, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4, 34–43 RSC .
J. A. Macia-Agullo, M. Sevilla, M. A. Diez and A. B. Fuertes, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1352–1354 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Chen, L. Ma, S. Li, J. Geng, Q. Song, J. Liu, C. Wang, H. Wang, J. Li, Z. Qin and S. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 257, 8686–8691 Search PubMed.
R. Demir-Cakan, N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 484–490 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, P. Makowski, M. Antonietti, F. Goettmann and M.-M. Titirici, Catal. Today, 2010, 150, 115–118 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, N. Baccile, S. Gross, Z. Yuanjian, W. Wei, S. Yuhan, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3778–3787 CrossRef .
N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 246–253 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, G. Laurent, C. Coelho, F. Babonneau, L. Zhao and M.-M. Titirici, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8976–8982 CAS .
N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 246–253 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Yu, B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Liu and X. W. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5414 Search PubMed .
H. S. Qian, S. H. Yu, L. B. Luo, J. Y. Gong, L. F. Fei and X. M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2102–2108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, Y. L. Min and S. H. Yu, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5024–5028 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, X. L. Wu, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941–3946 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M. M. Titirici, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. M. Li and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2536–2541 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 597–601 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. S. Qian, M. Antonietti and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 637–643 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. C. Tang, S. Vongehr and X. K. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 977–982 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. Z. Zhu and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3166–3171 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. R. Selvi, D. Jagadeesan, B. S. Suma, G. Nagashankar, M. Arif, K. Balasubramanyam, M. Eswaramoorthy and T. K. Kundu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3182–3188 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. J. Cui, C. Liu, J. M. Shen, D. Gao, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2197–2204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soorholtz, R. J. White, M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti, R. Palkovits and F. Schüth, Chem. Commun, 2011 Search PubMed  , in preparation.

  (a) R. A. Periana, D. J. Taube, S. Gamble, H. Taube, T. Satoh and H. Fujii, Science, 1998, 280, 560–564 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Wolf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3351–3353 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) 
            B. L. Conley, W. J. Tenn, K. J. H. Young, S. Ganesh, S. Meier, V. Ziatdinov, O. Mironov, J. Oxgaard, J. Gonzales, W. A. Goddard and R. A. Periana, Methane Functionalization, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2006 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) R. A. Periana, G. Bhalla, W. J. Tenn, K. J. H. Young, X. Y. Liu, O. Mironov, C. J. Jones and V. R. Ziatdinov, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 220, 7–25 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2626–2630 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. C. Song, Y. Zhao, Y. F. Zheng, E. Yang, J. Fu and Y. He, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1823–1826 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. Z. Wang, S. L. Xiong, L. Y. Chen, B. J. Xi, H. Y. Zhou and Z. D. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2422–2426 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z. Fang, K. B. Tang, S. J. Lei and T. W. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3008–3011 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. C. Yu, X. L. Hu, Q. Li and L. Z. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2704–2706 RSC ; 
  (f) W. Z. Wang, S. Qiu, B. J. Xi, L. Y. Chen, S. L. Xiong and Z. D. Zhang, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 834–840 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. L. Hu, J. C. Yu and J. M. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5830–5834 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) G. Y. Chen, B. Deng, G. B. Cai, W. F. Dong, W. X. Zhang and A. W. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2137–2143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) W. Z. Wang, L. Sun, Z. Fang, L. Y. Chen and Z. D. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2117–2123 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) B. Deng, A. W. Xu, G. Y. Chen, R. Q. Song and L. P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11711–11716 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu, X. J. Cui, L. L. Li, K. Li, B. Yu, M. Antonietti and H. Colfen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1636–1640 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and T. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2822–2823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and J. Y. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2006, 793–795 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. J. Zhan and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5650–5651 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Y. Gong, L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and L. F. Fei, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 101–105 RSC ; 
  (e) J. Y. Gong, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian, L. B. Luo and T. W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2490–2496 CrossRef CAS .
P. Makowski, R. D. Cakan, M. Antonietti, F. Goettmann and M. M. Titirici, Chem. Commun., 2008, 999–1001 RSC .
L. Zhao, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3317–3321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Popovic, R. Demir-Cakan, J. Tornow, M. Morcrette, D. S. Su, R. Schloegl, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Small, 2011, 7, 1127–1135 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. H. Wen, J. Liu and J. H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 743–747 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Deng and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1841–1846 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Demir-Cakan, Y. S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M. M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227–1229 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, V. Birss and J. Wojtowicz, J. Power Sources, 1997, 66, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 CAS .

  (a) G. Wulff, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1–27 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Mosbach and O. Ramstrom, Bio. Tech., 1996, 14, 163–170 CAS .
V. M. Rusu, C. H. Ng, M. Wilke, B. Tiersch, P. Fratzl and M. G. Peter, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 5414–5426 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, J. Reboul, B. Blanc, B. Coq, P. Lacroix-Desmazes, M. In and C. Gerardin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8433–8437 CrossRef CAS .
B. Thomas, N. Baccile, S. Masse, C. Rondel, I. Alric, R. Valentin, Z. Mouloungui, F. Babonneau and T. Coradin, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 58, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rondel, I. Alric, Z. Mouloungui, J. F. Blanco and F. Silvestre, J. Surfactants Deterg., 2009, 12, 269–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kato, T. Shigeno, T. Kimura and K. Kuroda, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6416–6421 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1159–1160 RSC .
T. R. Pauly, V. Petkov, Y. Liu, S. J. L. Billinge and T. J. Pinnavaia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 97–110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Won, H. S. Jang, D. W. Chung and L. A. Stanciu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7728–7733 RSC .
K. S. Chow and E. Khor, Biomacromolecules, 2000, 1, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Umeda and K. Kondoh, Ind. Crops Prod., 2010, 32, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Le Blond, C. J. Horwell, B. J. Williamson and C. Oppenheimer, J. Environ. Monit., 2010, 12, 1459–1470 RSC .
X. Cao, K. S. Ro, M. Chappell, Y. Li and J. Mao, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Fuertes, M. C. Arbestain, M. Sevilla, J. A. Macia-Agullo, S. Fiol, R. Lopez, R. J. Smernik, W. P. Aitkenhead, F. Arce and F. Macias, Aust. J. Soil Res., 2010, 48, 618–626 CrossRef CAS .
F. Perez Caballero, C. Falco, F. Babonneau, C. Gervais, M.-M. Titirici, G. Laurent and N. Baccile, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14460–14471 CrossRef .
S. Steinbeiss, G. Gleixner and M. Antonietti, Soil Biol. Biochem., 2009, 41, 1301–1310 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Rillig, M. Wagner, M. Salem, P. M. Antunes, C. George, H.-G. Ramke, M.-M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Appl. Soil Ecol., 2010, 45, 238–242 CrossRef .
V. A. Loganathan, S. Kumar, R. B. Gupta and M. O. Barnett, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 2504–2512 CrossRef .
F.-S. Zhang and Z. G. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 167, 933–939 CrossRef .
K. Ro, K. Sun, M. Guo, J. Novak, H. Mashayekhi and B. Xing, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 5757–5763 CrossRef .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1765–1771 CAS .
M. S. Balathanigaimani, J. W. Lee, H. C. Kang, W. G. Shim, C. Kim and H. Moon, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2007, 52, 66 CrossRef .
A. Taralp, T. N. Veziroglu and Y. Yürüm, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 3784–3798 CrossRef .
M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3808–3812 CrossRef CAS .
P. Makowski, R. D. Cakan, M. Antonietti, F. Goettmann and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Commun., 2008, 999–1001 RSC .
C. H. Xue Wang, Y. Xiong, H. Liu, G. Du and X. He, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1904–1908 CrossRef .
J. Matos, M. Rosales, R. Demir-Cakan and M. M. Titirici, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 386, 140–146 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, G. Yu, Y. Pei, S. Xie, S. Yan, M. Qiao, K. Fan, B. Zong and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 132, 935–937 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, Y.-N. Ma, X. Cao, Q.-F. Guan, W.-P. Xu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8148–8161 CrossRef .
D. J. Taube, R. A. Periana, S. Gamble, H. Taube, T. Satoh and H. Fujii, Science, 1998, 280, 560–564 CrossRef .
X. Liang, M. Zeng and C. Qi, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1844–1848 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, Z. Zhang, S. Li and Y. Lin, Langmuir, 2010, 26(9), 6676–6680 CrossRef .
G. Xiao, Y.-J. Chen, T.-S. Wang, Q.-Y. Ouyang, L.-H. Qi, Y. Ma, P. Gao, M.-S. Cao, C.-L. Zhu and H.-B. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13603–13608 Search PubMed .
G. Tian, Z. Gu, X. Liu, L. Zhou, W. Yin, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. Ren, G. Xing, S. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23790–23796 CAS .
F. Chen, J. Zhong and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 933–939 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Wang, L. Chen and X. Huang, Carbon, 2001, 39, 2211–2214 CrossRef .
L. Fu, K. Tang, R. J. White, L. Yu, M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201100691 .
J. F. Qian, H. X. Yang, Z. X. Chen, X. P. Ai and Y. L. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14067–14071 Search PubMed .
R. Demir-Cakan, J. Popovic, J. Tornow, M. Morcrette, D. S. Su, M. Antonietti, R. Schlögl and M.-M. Titirici, Small, 2011, 8, 1127–1135 Search PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 356–361 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, L. Wang, B. Zou, C. Rong, X. Ma, Y. Qu, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1947–1950 CrossRef .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kierzek, E. Raymundo-Piñero, J. Machnikowski and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2498–2507 CrossRef .
E. Frackowiak, G. Lota, J. Machnikowski, C. Vix-Guterl and F. Béguin, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2209–2214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Zhu, F. Yang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2745–2748 CrossRef .

          W. Jacques, US pat. 555511,  1896.
J. P. Paraknowitsch, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1170–1172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, G. Lota and A. B. Fuertes, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 546–551 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, C. Sanchís, T. Valdés-Solís, E. Morallón and A. B. Fuertes, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2234–2238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Gong, S. R. Guo, P. Jiang, M. Wu, Y. Lu and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 872 CrossRef .
B. R. Selvi, D. Jagadeesan, B. S. Suma, G. Nagashankar, M. Arif, M. Eswaramoorthy, K. Balasubramanyam and T. K. Kundu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3182–3188 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Atkinson, J. D. Fitzgerald and N. A. Hipps, Plant Soil, 2010, 337, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Camarero, Biopolymers, 2008, 90, 450–458 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Peterson, C. Petit, J. Mahle and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1779–1787 CrossRef .
M. Khine, M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 139–147 CrossRef .
W. Yang, T.-P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sangster, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2007, 28, 571–579 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tang, L. Fu, R. J. White, L. Yu, M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011 Search PubMed  , ASAP.
V. L. Chevrier and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1011–A1014 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nature, 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Verhage, E. Wikberg, C. Viklund and K. Irgum, J. Sep. Sci., 2009, 32, 2008–2016 CrossRef .
T. Issaeva, A. Kourganov and K. Unger, J. Chromatogr., A, 1999, 846, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Knox, B. Kaur and G. R. Millward, J. Chromatogr., A, 1986, 352, 3 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, C. Antonio, V. L. Budarin, E. Bergstrom, J. T. Oates and J. H. Clark, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1834–1841 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Maria-Magdalena Titirici	Magdalena Titirici obtained her PhD at the University of Dortmund, Germany under the supervision of Dr Börje Sellergreen working in the field of “Molecularly Imprinted Polymers”. Since 2006 she is leading the group “Sustainable Materials for Energy Storage” at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany within the “Colloid Chemistry Department” directed by Prof. Markus Antonietti. Her research interests include porous materials, hydrothermal carbonization, innovative utilization of biomass, biofuels, thermoresponsive polymers, and molecularly imprinted polymers and their applications as separation media, adsorption and gas storage, in electrochemistry (secondary batteries and supercapacitors) and heterogeneous catalysis.
Robin. J. White	Robin White obtained his PhD at the Green Chemistry Centre of Excellence (York, UK), under the supervision of Prof. James Clark. He is currently a post-doctoral researcher at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany), working with Dr Maria-Magdalena Titirici and Prof. Markus Antonietti. His research interests focus on the development of novel sugar biomass derived porous carbons including ordered mesoporous materials, aerogels, hollow nanospheres, and naturally inspired systems, for applications as separation media, in electrochemistry and heterogeneous catalysis.
Camillo Falco	Camillo Falco received a Master of Engineering in Chemical Engineering & Technology from Imperial College London. He completed his master thesis project at KTH Stockholm on the design of a household/industrial waste gasification plant. Since October 2009, he has been a PhD student at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids & Interfaces in the Sustainable Carbon Materials group. His research activities have focused on the exploitation of lignocellulosic biomass and microalgae for the production of nanostructured carbon materials for energy applications, such as gas and energy storage.
Marta Sevilla	Marta Sevilla acquired her PhD from the University of Oviedo in 2008 working on the development of novel carbon materials for energy storage and energy production. Afterwards, she spent two years in the University of Nottingham, where she focused her research interests on the design and synthesis of porous materials for hydrogen storage. In 2011, after spending 6 months in Dr Titirici's group, she moved back to the National Institute of Coal in Spain, where she is working currently on the development of high-performance carbon materials for gas and energy storage, as well as catalysis.

Broader context
The world's appetite for energy is producing growing quantities of CO2, a pollutant that contributes to the warming of the planet and which currently cannot be removed or stored in any significant way. Other natural reserves are also being devoured at alarming rates and current assessments suggest that we will need to identify alternative sources in the near future. With the aid of materials chemistry it should be possible to create a world in which energy use needs not be limited and where usable energy can be produced and stored wherever it is needed, where we can minimize and remediate emissions as new consumer products are created, whilst healing the planet and preventing further disruptive and harmful depletion of valuable mineral assets. In achieving these aims, the creation of new and very importantly greener industries and new sustainable pathways are crucial. In all of the aforementioned applications, new materials based on carbon, ideally produced via inexpensive, low energy consumption methods, using renewable resources as precursors, with flexible morphologies, pore structures and functionalities, are increasingly viewed as ideal candidates to fulfil these goals. The resulting materials should be a feasible solution for the efficient storage of energy and gases. At the end of life, such materials ideally must act to improve soil quality and to act as potential CO2 storage sinks.


 	Fig. 1  SEM micrographs of HTC materials obtained at 180 °C from: (a) glucose; (b) fructose; (c) hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF); (d) xylose; (e) furfural; and (f) sucrose.	 

 	Fig. 2  Conversion of cellulose into HTC: (A) via HMF resulting in a furan-rich aromatic network and (B) direct aromatization.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms for glucose-derived HTC followed by thermal treatment at various temperatures; (b) pore size distributions of the glucose-HTC materials calcined at different temperatures determined using CO2 adsorption, (c) CO2 adsorption isotherms for HTC materials from glucose, sucrose, starch and xylose after additional thermal treatment at 950 °C; and (d) pore size distributions obtained using CO2 adsorption of the HTC materials from glucose, sucrose, starch and xylose after additional thermal treatment at 950 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) N2 adsorption isotherms, and (b) N2 adsorption QSDFT pore size distribution of ACs (G-180 °C, G-240 °C, and G-280 °C).	 


G-180	1859	0.94	0.69	0.31
G-240	2264	1.21	0.84	0.35
G-280	1610	0.73	0.66	0.41

 	Fig. 5  Porous HTCs: (a) mesoporous HTC microspheres obtained by replication of silica using glucose (taken with permission from M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1010); (b) ordered mesoporous HTC obtained by replication of SBA-15 using furfural (taken with permission from M.-M. Titirici, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3412); (c) HTC tubular carbons obtained using a macroporous alumina membrane as template and furfural as a carbon source (taken with permission from S. Kubo, I. Tan, R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6590); (d) HTC hollow spheres obtained using latex nanoparticles as sacrificial templates and glucose as a carbon source (taken with permission from R. J. White, K. Tauer, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 2011, 132, 17360); (e and f) micro-mesoporous ordered HTC particles obtained in the presence of amphiphilic block copolymers as soft templates and fructose as a carbon source (taken with permission from S. Kubo, R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 23, 4882); (g) nitrogen doped porous carbon obtained using shrimp/lobster food wastes after hydrothermal carbonization and removal of CaCO3(eventually taken with permission from M. Soorholtz, R. J. White, M. M. Titirici, M. Antonietti, R. Palkovits and F. Schüth, Chem. Commun., 2011, submitted); and (h) porous nitrogen doped carbon aerogel obtained using the natural interactions between carbohydrates and gelating proteins (i.e. ovalbumin) (taken with permission from R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2428).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM micrograph of the carboxylic rich HTC using glucose and acrylic acid; (b) SEM of HTC obtained using glucosamine as a precursor; (c) SEM of HTC obtained using chitosan as a precursor; (d) TEM of nitrogen doped carbon using shrimp waste as a precursor (taken with permission from R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645); (e) TEM of nitrogen doped carbon using lobster waste as a precursor; and (f) SEM of the carbon nanoparticles obtained using glucose in the presence of ovalbumin (taken with permission from N. Baccile, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 246).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) SEM and TEM images of Te@carbonaceous composite nanocables (reproduced with permission from H. S. Qian, S. H. Yu, L. B. Luo, J. Y. Gong, L. F. Fei and X. M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2102); (c) TEM images of carbon-coated Fe3O4 nanospindles (reproduced with permission from W. M. Zhang, X. L. Wu, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941); (d) TEM images of carbon-decorated FePt nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from N. Caiulo, C. H. Yu, K. M. K. Yu, C. C. H. Lo, W. Oduro, B. Thiebaut, P. Bishop and S. C. Tsang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1392); (e and f) TEM images of carbon-coated Si nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.M. Titirici, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645); and (g and h) SEM and TEM images of tin-nanoparticles encapsulated in elastic hollow carbon spheres (reproduced with permission from W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160).	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of noble metal nanoparticles loaded on the surfaces of carbonaceous nanofibers. (a and b) Pd nanoparticles with an average diameter of 6 nm; (c and d) Pt nanoparticles with an average diameter of 7 nm; and (e and f) Au nanoparticles ranging from 7 to 15 nm in diameter. (Reproduced with permission from H. S. Qian, M. Antonietti and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 637.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–c) SEM and TEM images of flexible silver@cross-linked PVA coaxial nanocables (reproduced with permission from L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and T. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2822). (d–f) SEM and TEM images of flexible silver@carbon-rich composite submicrocables (reproduced with permission from L. B. Luo, S. H. Yu, H. S. Qian and J. Y. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2006, 793). (g–i) SEM and TEM images of unique necklace-like Cu@cross-linked PVA coaxial microcables with strict wire-bead (reproduced with permission from Y. J. Zhan and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5650).	 

 	Fig. 10  
In situ HTC composites: (a) Pd/HTC core/shell particles (taken with permission from P. Makowski, R. D. Cakan, M. Antonietti, F. Goettmann and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Commun., 2008, 999); (b) TiO2/HTC composite (taken with permission from L. Zhao, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3317); and (c) SnO2 mesoporous spheres obtained after removal of HTC from the resulting composite (taken with permission from R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227). (d) LFP/HTC composite.	 


Starch	700	4	5.6 (247)	3.5 (152)	2.2 (196)
Cellulose	700	4	5.8 (256)	3.5 (155)	1.8 (79)
Eucalyptus sawdust	600	4	5.2 (230)	2.9 (128)	—
700	4	5.5 (243)	2.9 (128)	1.8 (79)
800	4	5.2 (227)	3.0 (130)	—
600	2	6.1 (270)	4.8 (212)	3.6 (158)
650	2	6.0 (262)	4.7 (206)	3.3 (145)
700	2	6.6 (288)	4.3 (190)	2.6 (116)
800	2	5.8 (255)	3.9 (170)	3.1 (136)

G-240 and RS-240	9.0 and 9.1
Commercially available ACs	3.0–10.6 (35 bar)
Coal precursor derived ACs	4.0–9.8
Petroleum pitch based carbon fiber derived ACs	2.0–8.7
Microporous Organic Polymers (MOPs)	4.3–5.5 (36 bar)
Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs)	6.5–10.3 (36 bar)


Furfural	2180	1.03	0.94	5.4 (2.5)
Glucose	2120	1.00	0.91	5.3 (2.4)
Starch	2190	1.01	0.92	5.4 (2.4)
Cellulose	2370	1.08	0.96	5.6 (2.5)
Wood	2250	1.03	0.91	5.6 (2.5)

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustrations showing the broad versatility of the CNF scaffolds for constructing free-standing multifunctional membranes, including (a) CNFs-Fe3O4, (b) CNFs-TiO2, (c) CNFs-Ag, and (d) CNFs-Au (taken with permission from W.-J. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, Y.-N. Ma, X. Cao, Q.-F. Guan, W.-P. Xu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8148).	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM image (a) and TEM micrographs (b) of Fe3O4/C composites; (c) hysteresis curve and the magnetic separability of the Fe3O4/C nanochains at room temperature (taken with permission from H. Duan, Z. Zhang, S. Li and Y. Lin, Langmuir, 2010, 26(9), 6676).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Cycle performance of hollow carbon nanospheres cycled at a rate of 1 C in Li ion batteries, (b) rate performance of hollow carbon nanospheres at variant rates in Li ion batteries (eventually taken with permission from R. J. White, K. Tang, M.-M. Titirici, L. Fu and J. Maier, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 400), (c) cycle performance of hollow carbon nanospheres as anodes in Na ion Batteries, and (d) rate performance of hollow carbon nanospheres (HCS) and carbon spheres (CS) at variant rates as anodes in Na ion batteries (eventually taken with permission from L. Fu, K. Tang, R. J. White, L. Yu, M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, submitted).	 

 	Fig. 14  Electrochemical characterization of activated carbons derived from hydrothermally synthesized carbon materials in 1 M TEABF4 solution in acetonitrile at room temperature: (a) cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of the activated carbon obtained from sawdust at 800 °C with KOH/sample = 4 (AC-W800) and (b) capacitance retention with current density in comparison with that of commercially available YP-17D activated carbon (extracted from L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 356, with permission).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
