Scalable manufacturing of a durable, tailorable, and recyclable multifunctional woven thermoelectric textile system   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE01031G View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE01031G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article Scalable manufacturing of a durable, tailorable, and recyclable multifunctional woven thermoelectric textile system†
Yuanyuan Jinga, 
Jun Luoa, 
Xue Hana, 
Jiawei Yangb, 
Qiulin Liub, 
Yuanyuan Zhenga, 
Xinyi Chena, 
Fuli Huanga, 
Jiawen Chena, 
Qinliang Zhuanga, 
Yanan Shenc, 
Haisheng Chencd, 
Huaizhou Zhao*be, 
G. Jeffrey Snyderf, 
Guodong Li*be, 
Ting Zhang*cd and 
Kun Zhang*a
aKey Laboratory of Textile Science & Technology (Ministry of Education), College of Textiles, Donghua University, Shanghai, China. E-mail: kun.zhang@dhu.edu.cn
bBeijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: gdli@iphy.ac.cn
cInstitute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangting@iet.cn
dNanjing Institute of Future Energy System, Nanjing 211135, China
eSongshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China
fDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
Received 
1st April 2023
, Accepted 13th June 2023First published on 13th June 2023AbstractPersonal thermoregulation and waste-heat harvesting by wearable thermoelectric devices can play important roles in reducing energy consumption toward ultimate carbon neutralization. However, despite the progress achieved so far, it remains challenging to mass manufacture truly wearable thermoelectric devices with good wearability, comfortability, and high performance in solid-state cooling and power generation. Herein, we report a scalable yet facile strategy to manufacture a large-area (1550 cm2), durable, washable, skin-conformable, and thus truly wearable thermoelectric textile (TET) by directly weaving inorganic TE pillars into woven textile. By the systematic thermal and electrical design of TET, it demonstrated a rapid and stable body surface cooling effect of ∼11.8 K and cooling capacity of ∼553.7 W m−2 under a breezy ambience of ∼34 °C, and could be sustainably powered by solar irradiance toward zero-net energy consumption. Also, it could generate a power density of 6.13 W m−2 at a temperature difference of 25 K and stably power a cell phone at a self-built temperature difference of ∼15 K in a wearing scenario, outperforming the current state-of-the-art wearable TE devices and others.

Broader context
In recent decades, personal thermoregulation and sustainable-powering wearable electronics have gained more importance, with an aim for reducing personal energy consumption ultimately toward carbon neutralization. Wearable thermoelectric devices that can noiselessly and continuously convert ubiquitous heat into electricity show great promise to achieve high on-body cooling and power-generation performances. However, the current state-of-the-art devices have limited skin conformability, comfortability, and mechanical stability, which are usually mutually restrained, and still suffer from complex fabrication processes with limited size, low cooling effects in hot ambient environments, and limited power generation. They can barely be considered wearable as normal clothes because TE garments or fabrics require indispensable thermal comfortability, durability, and three-dimensional conformability to fit the dynamic curved surfaces of the human body. More importantly, the rational thermal design of the device configuration as well as the necessary scalable and standard industrial manufacturing methodology have not been achieved yet, which has been overlooked to date. In this work, we report a scalable, potentially commercializable strategy to manufacture large-area, mechanically conformable, breathable, washable, and thus truly wearable thermoelectric textiles by directly weaving inorganic semiconductors-based TE pillars into woven textile at scale, which demonstrated high power generation and a cooling effect. This work may pave a way to address the current challenges of thermoelectric textiles for their practical applications.

Introduction
It is vital to actively stabilize the human body temperature to prevent people from hyperthermia/hypothermia and reduce unnecessary energy consumption.1–6 Personal thermoregulation can provide people with a thermally comfortable microclimate by on-body cooling/heating. Localized thermoregulation of the human body by 2 K could save ∼20% energy consumption from ventilation and air conditioning systems.1,2,7 Traditional warm fabrics that function through thermal insulation or electric heating can provide a warm condition for human beings.3,4 However, it is rather challenging to achieve a high cooling effect (>10 K) in functional textiles to stabilize the human skin temperature at a comfortable level (∼32–34 °C) in hot weather (>35 °C). Passive cooling technologies, such as electrostatic actuation,8,9 infrared (IR) radiation,10–14 thermal storage by phase-change materials (PCMs),15,16 and heat conduction by high-thermal-conductivity materials,17 have shown high potential for body thermoregulation, but they still struggle to maintain a normal body temperature in realistic hot weather. This is because the typical metabolic rate of the human body ranges from ∼70 W m−2 for sedentary activities to ∼440 W m−2 for strenuous exercises.18 To maintain the human body in a comfortable condition with no obvious temperature fluctuation and sweating, the required cooling capacity should be 200–400 W m−2 and even higher under sun irradiation in hot weather, which is hardly achievable for passive cooling technologies (<200 W m−2) in on-body applications.13 On the other hand, centralized active cooling systems, such as mechanical cooling (air or liquid flow), with a high cooling efficiency in terms of cooling capacity and coefficient of performance (COP) tend to be bulky, heavy, noisy, and non-wearable,19 and usually require high electrical energy consumption (∼103 W) because they are not directed to the point of need and cannot be made wearable for body microclimate control.
In contrast, wearable thermoelectric devices (WTEDs) without mechanical parts can silently pump heat from one side to the other via the Peltier effect. However, the current manually assembled state-of-the-art WTEDs are limited by their skin conformability and poor mechanical stability,20,21 and also suffer from complex fabrication processes with limited scalability (<100 cm2), and a low cooling effect (<10 K) and power generation (<1 W m−2),22 which make it hard for them to be considered as wearable as common clothes.23 More importantly, the rational design of the device configuration regarding thermal and electrical matching has been rarely investigated, yet is essential to achieve high performance.24 Furthermore, the manufacturing of thermoelectric textiles (TETs) at a large scale via industrial textile processes, such as fiber spinning and fabric weaving processes, should be the ultimate target for on-body thermoelectric applications25,26 but limited progress has been demonstrated in this regard to date. Overall, it still remains a grand challenge to manufacture truly wearable TE textiles (TETs) with a large but tailorable size and good skin conformability (flexibility and twistability) to dynamic curved body surfaces, thermal comfortability (air and moisture permeability), and durability (mechanical stability and washability) to enable them to possess competitive TE cooling (>10 K) and power generation performances for realistic wearing scenarios.
Herein, inspired by ancient mail armor that assembled stiff units in a flexible assembly, we developed a methodology to directly weave TE pillars into double-layered woven fabric toward the scalable manufacture of a truly wearable high-performance TET (1550 cm2, Fig. 1). Compared with those traditional handmade wearable TEGs, this strategy avoiding complex materials synthesis can compete with other (more complicated) strategies for fabricating TETs in terms of the scalability, conformability, wearability, and mechanical stability.22,27–30 Moreover, the thermal and electrical resistance matching of the TET with the human body and environment could be achieved through optimized structural configuration and a novel designed wearable miniaturized heat sinks array. The wearable miniaturized heat sinks array works with the TET through thermally integrating with the individual TE pillars to realize a truly wearable TET system with high thermoelectric efficiency. The TET system showed exceptional skin conformability with a three-dimensional deformation capability and cooling effect of ∼11.8 K with a specific cooling capacity of ∼553.7 W m−2 at a breezy ambient temperature of 34 °C as powered by solar energy. It also demonstrated a power density of 6.13 W m−2 at a temperature difference ΔT of 25 K and could stably power electronic devices, including a cell phone, at a self-built ΔT of ∼15 K.
 Fig. 1  Design and fabrication process of the TET system. (a) Schematic of the manufacturing process of the TET system. The insets in step 5 show the electrically in-series connections between the p-type and n-type TE pillars by tin-plated copper wires in the textile layers. (b) and (c) Optical images of the fabricated TET with a size of 10 cm × 30 cm and (d–f) illustration of the flexibility, including twisting and bending in both directions. (g) Optical images of a finished TET (1 m × 15.5 cm). (h) Optical images of a garment made with the TET. 
Design of the TET system
Thermal and electrical matching at the device level is of key importance to design high-performance TETs.31 For a given type of TE pillars, the cooling and power generation performance of TETs in on-body applications are dominated by the synergetic influence of the structural configuration and heat transfer among the skin–device–environment interfaces. In detail, the cooling performance, including the cooling capacity and COP, can be optimized by decreasing the internal electrical resistance as well as increasing the internal thermal resistance of the whole system while lowering the interfacial thermal resistance of the skin–device–environment.22 On the other hand, the thermoelectric power generation is also dependent on the thermal and electrical matching between the skin–device–environment to enlarge the self-built ΔT and thus the output voltage/power, requiring a minimized internal electrical resistance but maximized thermal resistance, because the external thermal resistance will be much higher than that of the TET.
Hence, prior to the manufacture, we designed the structural configuration of the TET for optimal thermal and electrical transport with the assistance of finite element analysis (FEA, Notes S1–S3, Fig. S1–S6, ESI†) by considering the geometry and spatial density of the TE pillars, the fabric structure, and the heat sink, as well as by performing numerical calculations (Note S4, ESI†) to understand the thermal and electrical resistance matching of the TET unit for achieving a high solid-state cooling effect and thermoelectric power generation. We finally selected the FEA-optimized geometry of 2.5 mm × 2.5 mm × 5 mm for the TE pillars and 4 mm × 4 mm × 6 mm × 0.4 mm (fin thickness dfin) for the heat sink. We chose a plain-woven fabric with a warp density of 15.4/cm as the textile matrix because it is easier to use in manufacturing and more compact for efficient heat dissipation. It showed an optimal cooling effect of ∼4.2 K (Fig. S1b, ESI†) and COP of ∼1 (Fig. S1c, ESI†) for the TET unit without a heat sink but reaching ∼12 K with the integration of a heat sink (Fig. S4, ESI†) under a quasi-steady ambient temperature of 26 °C. The output power density was optimized to ∼0.2 W m−2 under a self-built ΔT of ∼3 K (Fig. S1d, ESI†).
The optimized performances were correlated with the thermal resistance matching between the TET and external conditions. As is known, the thermal resistance offered by air is ∼103 cm2 K W−1, while the thermal resistance of the human body in sedentary activities is ∼102 cm2 K W−1; for instance, the body chest possesses a thermal resistance of 130–200 cm2 K W−1. Ideally, the thermal resistance of the TET should match both, while it is impossible for the TET to possess comparable thermal resistance to that of air. The practical strategy is therefore to maximize it to match that of the human body, which can be realized by adjusting the structural configuration of the TET. Regarding the thermal resistance matching at the hot side, a feasible method is to improve the thermal dissipation at the hot side of the TET using a heat sink toward a nominally reduced thermal resistance from air. The FEA simulations suggest that the FEA-optimized effective thermal resistance of the TET unit without a heat sink was ∼71.4 cm2 K W−1 (Note S3, ESI†) for a cooling effect of ∼4.2 K on the human body. The integration of a heat sink on the TET unit could significantly increase the maximum cooling effect to ∼8.6 K on the human body because it could dramatically reduce the contact thermal resistance between the TET and air, which was only one-eighth of that of the TET without a heat sink, suggesting the significance of the heat sink on the TET for matching the thermal resistance between the TET and the external environment.
On the other hand, we numerically analyzed the thermal resistance conditions of the TET with various external thermal environments, including the human body and air. As analyzed in Note S4 (ESI†), the thermal resistance matching, which is dependent on the thermal conditions of the human body and air, could affect both the thermoelectric cooling and power generation. Based on the numerical calculations, we expected that the thermal resistance of the TET under working conditions without heat sinks should be ∼106.5 cm2 K W−1 for active cooling as the simulated temperature difference Th–Tc was 14 K and Tc was ∼31.1 °C, and ∼117.6 cm2 K W−1 for thermoelectric power generation as the air temperature Tair was 26 °C. These results agree well with those based on FEA simulations.
Based on all the above FEA and numerical analyses, we could expect that a TET possessing a large enough thermal resistance, which would be larger than 117.6 cm2 K W−1 in this case, or more efficient heat dissipation via the heat sink, would produce high thermoelectric cooling and power generation performances.
Manufacture of the TET system
Fig. 1a presents a schematic of the manufacturing process of our TET, and more details can be found in Materials and Methods section as well as in the ESI† (Fig. S9). Ancient mail armor is a typical example of converting rigid components into a wearable system. As inspired, we directly wove rigid tin-coated TE pillars (p-type and n-type Bi2Te3-based pillars) with optimized dimensions into a double woven fabric at scale on a semi-automatic weaving loom, where TE pillars glued on weft were directly woven and fixed into fabric pockets with a proper lateral density (∼2 pairs per cm2) and electrically interconnected in series via tin-plated copper wires as weft yarns under further soldering (Fig. S9b–k, movie S1, ESI†). In detail, elastomer yarns were used as warps in the fabric to provide good flexibility. Both tin-plated copper wires and thermally conductive SoftcoolTM Extreme filaments (75D) as weft were woven as the top and bottom surfaces of fabric pockets for good thermal transport. Extra float tin-plated copper wires were directly cut off after soldering, resulting in in-series electrically connected p-type and n-type TE pillars in the TET (see the insets of Fig. 1a at the bottom right corners, and Fig. S9g and k, ESI†). The TET could be as wide as ∼30 cm (Fig. 1b), which could be an arbitrary length in the meter scale. The TET demonstrated excellent flexibility and conformability under complex three-dimensional deformations, including bending and twisting (Fig. 1d–f). The total electrical resistance of the TETs was ∼4.4 Ohm for a small TET (15 cm × 9 cm) and ∼12.0 Ohm for a larger one (30 cm × 10 cm, Fig. 1), sharing comparable contact resistivity (∼356 μΩ cm2, Fig. S10 and Table S2, ESI†) to that of traditional WTEDs (101–103 μΩ cm2).27 To further demonstrate the scalability of TET manufacturing, we wove a large piece of TET with a length of 1 meter (Fig. 1g), which was able to cover most of the upper body skin (Fig. 1h).
In addition, the miniaturized heatsink based on 6063 Al alloy was machined with computerized numerical control (CNC) and wire electric discharge machining (EDM) processes (Fig. S11, ESI†). The heat sinks were then thermally soldered on individual TE pillars by using thermally conductive varnish glue to form an on-fabric heatsink array for both skin conformability and a high cooling capability of the TET system (Fig. 1a, step 6).
Mechanical stability
The TET possessed excellent flexibility, durability, and thus mechanical robustness because its electrical resistance showed negligible change under different deformations in real time (Fig. 2). The TET maintained high electrical stability under different bending radii (Fig. 2a and Fig. S12, ESI†) and cyclic bending (Fig. 2b), twisting (Fig. 2c), tensile stressing (Fig. 2d and Fig. S13, ESI†), washing (Fig. 2e and Fig. S14, ESI†), and long-term duration (Fig. 2g) and high thermal cyclability under 8000 cycles of cooling operation (Fig. 2f). At the same time, it showed good air permeability (Fig. 2h) and moisture permeability (>2500 g m−2 d−1, Fig. 2i), comparable to these of cotton fabric. Especially, the minimum bending radius could be as small as ∼1 mm (Fig. S12, ESI†), comparable to the state-of-the-art polymer-based ones. We further investigated the stress and strain distributions among the TET unit with FEA (Fig. S15 and Table S3, ESI†) during bending to understand the mechanical stability of the TET system. We found that the stress on the TE pillars was negligible and that on their interfaces between fabric layers was relatively small, indicating the TET could easily maintain excellent stability under deformation. The strain distribution shared a similar trend, whereby the fabric layers bore the majority of the strain deformation. Due to the robust mechanical stability, the TET could be repeatedly washed in a drum washing machine (SIEMENS, IQ300) just like normal clothes (washing cycles of 20) with negligible change of the internal electrical resistance (Fig. 2e and Fig. S14, ESI†). Furthermore, the cooling effect and electrical resistance were very stable for up to 18 months (Fig. 2f). Moreover, the TET could be cut into arbitrary shapes (Fig. S16, ESI†) and could be fully recycled (Fig. S17 and Movie S2, ESI†). Additionally, we coated the TET with EcoflexTM and soaked it in saline (0.9 wt% NaCl) for 16 h, showing that its cooling effect was stable (Fig. S18, ESI†). All these results demonstrate that the TET with excellent mechanical stability and durability can be wore on human body with excellent skin conformability to fit the dynamic body surface curvature.
 Fig. 2  Mechanical stability of the TET. The internal electrical resistance changes of the TET under cyclic bending (a and b), twisting (c), tensile stressing (d), washing (e), and cooling (f). (g) Internal electrical resistance changes of the TET under long-term time duration exposed to ambient air (22–26 °C; RH, ∼30–50%). Note: R0 and R correspond to the internal electrical resistance of the TET before and after cyclic tests, respectively. The bending radius in (b) was ∼1 mm. The rolling speed of the drum washing machine was 800 rpm in (e). ΔT0 and ΔT correspond to the cooling effects of the TET before and after the cyclic tests, respectively. Air permeability (h) and moisture permeability (i) of the TET. 
Personal thermoregulation
As is known, it is crucial to maintain human body temperature at a safe and stable level (∼32–34 °C) at all times. In this part, we evaluated the personal thermoregulation performance of our TET system by characterizing its heating (Fig. 3a) and cooling (Fig. 3b and c) performances, separately. The heating and cooling measurements of TET were carried out (see the Methods section for details) by manipulating the direct current (DC) magnitude and direction to monitor the inner surface temperature change of the TET (15 cm × 9 cm). As DC was applied in one direction, the inner surface temperature of the TET was gradually heated by ∼20 K as the applied DC value was increased to 1.3 A (Fig. 3a), which was mainly ascribed to the heat transfer from the top to the bottom surface via the Peltier effect. In cold weather (∼5 °C, Fig. S19, ESI†), the TET can warm up the human body to a stable temperature at ∼33 °C. In addition, the CLO value of the TET was ∼0.56 clo, suggesting similar thermal insulation as Coreloft cotton fabrics can provide in cold weather. In hot weather (∼37 °C, Fig. 3b), switching DC to the opposite direction reduced the inner surface temperature, showing that Tc began to decrease dramatically in 60 sec as the DC value increased. With the help of the miniaturized heat sinks array on the hot side of the TET, the maximum cooling effect was ∼2.36 times (∼11.8 K, Fig. 3b and c) that of the bare TET without heat sinks (∼5.0 K, Fig. 3b and Fig. S21, ESI†). It should be mentioned that the uneven temperature distribution of the infrared image in Fig. 3c was caused by the uneven surface and tilted edge of the ultra-flexible TET during suspending. More importantly, this cooling effect can be maintained for an infinite time duration (Movie S3, ESI†) as long as the device is not damaged.
 Fig. 3  Personal thermoregulation performance of the TET system. (a) Heating effect of the TET with respect to the altered DC. (b) Cooling effects of the TET with and without the miniaturized heat sinks array with respect to the altered DC in a hot environment of ∼37 °C. Note: the measurement errors for both the heating and cooling performances were 3.1% and 3.63% (without heatsink) and 4.86% (with heatsink), respectively. (c) Corresponding IR image of the TET with miniaturized skive heat sink arrays displaying the inner surface temperature mapping at the optimized DC of 1.6 A. (d) Cross-section configuration of the TET unit showing the different components that contribute to the total thermal conductance in the TET upon a vertical temperature difference. (e) Schematic of the thermal and electrical circuit in the TET. Note: Rthermal represents the thermal resistance, where Rthermal-c1 and Rthermal-c2 are the contact thermal resistance at the hot side and cold side; Rthermal-TE, Rthermal-Cu wires, Rthermal-textile, and Rthermal-air are the thermal resistance of the TE pillars, tin-plated copper wires, textile layers, as well as trapped air between the top and bottom textile layers, respectively. Q represents the generated input heat, where QP,h and QP,c are the input heat generated by the Peltier effect at the hot side and cold side, QJ,h and QJ,c are the input heat generated by Joule heating at the hot side and cold side, r is the internal electrical resistance of the TET, and R is the external resistance. (f) Estimated and measured cooling capacity and COP of the TET with respect to the altered DC current at different cooling effects. (g and h) Comparison of the cooling effect (g) and specific cooling capacity (h) of our TET system with other types reported in the literature. Note: the flexible TE cooling devices include 3D textile-based and film-based WTEDs. 
As guided by the basic structure of the TET (Fig. 3d), we here drew thermal and electrical diagrams of our TET (Fig. 3e and Fig. S7a, ESI†) to understand the impact of thermal resistance on the cooling performance. In contrast to the simple electrical transport, the thermal resistance of the TET was complex, consisting of the thermal resistances of the TE pillars, textile, interfaces between the pillars and fabric as well as the trapped air, while the external thermal resistance was made up of the thermal resistances of the skin–TET–heat sink–environment interfaces. The rationally estimated thermal resistance of the TET using the intrinsic materials parameters was ∼253.0 cm2 K W−1 (Table S4, ESI†), which was sufficiently larger than the expected thermal resistance (117.6 cm2 K W−1) as analyzed (Note S4, ESI†). As shown in Fig. 3e, with the TET in the solid-state cooling mode, DC current (I) flows through the TE pillars. As a result, the TET will pump heat from one side (cold or skin side) of the TE pillars to the other side (hot or external side), forming a temperature difference ΔT in the thickness direction of the TET. As aforementioned, the integration of the miniaturized heat sinks array will facilitate the heat dissipation, leading to a much larger ΔT. Hence, the enhancement of the cooling effect could be ascribed to the facilitated external thermal transfer between the TET and the environment through the addition of the wearable heat sink array, sharing a similar trend to the simulation results (Fig. S6, ESI†). As the simulation results indicated (Note S3, ESI†), the miniaturized heatsink array significantly increased the heat flux on the hot side of the TET, which was 4.2 folds that of the bare TET without a heat sink.
We then evaluated the cooling capacity and COP of the TET system. Theoretically, the cooling capacity of a TET can be calculated by the equation:32 , where Qc is the cooling capacity, STET is the total Seebeck coefficient of the TET, Tc is the cold surface temperature, I is the input current, R0 is the internal electrical resistance of the TET, and k′ is the total thermal conductance of the TET system. The pumped heat from the cold side to the hot side per unit time is determined by QP = STETTcI. In addition, the built-in ΔT can also drive heat conduction from the hot side to the cold side, which is specified by the specific heat flow k′ΔT. Lastly, Joule heating originating from the internal electrical resistance (R0∼4.4 Ω) of the TET in this work was mainly generated from the TE segments, inter-electrodes, as well as contacts between the TE segments and inter-electrodes (Table S2, ESI†). This is transported equally to the hot and cold sides of the TET, thus the heat flow into the cold side is . In a steady state, all the heat absorption/generation and dissipation are balanced off at each joint of the thermal circuit.
Based on the above equation, the maximum specific cooling capacity Qc,max and COP at different ΔT values were calculated (Fig. 3f, see Tables S4–S6 for the detailed calculations, ESI†). The COP value occurred at ΔT = 1 K, but could be as high as 9.2. The maximum achievable ΔT of the TET was estimated to be as high as 27.8 K (Table S6, ESI†), which should be achievable with enhanced heat dissipation. As measured by Mini-PEM (Fig. S22, ESI†), the COP at ΔT∼5 K was measured to be ∼3.0 (Fig. 3f), which was comparable to the calculated value (∼2.2, Fig. 3f). Especially, it can be seen that Qc at ΔT∼11.8 K was ∼10.35 W. The specific cooling capacity Qc at the optimal DC of ∼1.6 A was ∼553.7 W m−2 for the largest cooling effect of ∼11.8 K under a practical scenario. Compared to flexible cooling porotypes reported in the literature, our TET outperformed all of them, demonstrating exceptional cooling performance and cooling capacity at a good flexibility of ∼1 mm−1 (Fig. 3g and h).13,27,28,33–45 Moreover, compared to other types of wearable cooling textiles, such as radiative cooling (<200 W m−2) and phase-change cooling (<100 W m−2), our TET showed much higher cooling performance in terms of the cooling power, cooling temperature, or cooling duty cycle (Table S7, ESI†).
The rapid heating and cooling capability of the TET suggests its promise in personal thermoregulation in practical wearing scenarios. Here, we demonstrated its practical applications by sequentially integrating the TET system onto a T-shirt to regulate the body skin temperature Tbody (Fig. 4). At an environmental temperature of ∼37 °C, the body temperature Tbody could be reduced from ∼38 °C to ∼29.1 °C by integrating the TET system on the T-shirt, leading to a cooling effect of 8.9 K (Fig. 4a). According to the thermal sensation theory,46 the thermal sensation index, which represents how local skin senses as its temperature changes in a given environmental condition, was calculated to be 1.87, suggesting a cool feeling for a human. This cooling effect could be maintained at a stable level under breezy air (∼3 m s−1, Fig. 4b). Fig. 4c shows the residual cooling effect on human skin after immediate removal of the TET (Fig. S23 and Movie S4, ESI†). With the increasing convection between the skin and ambient air, the thermoregulation performance of the TET could be further improved (Fig. S20a and b, ESI†) under body motion.
 Fig. 4  Personal thermoregulation applications of the TET. (a) Temperature change of the body surface during wearing the TET system on a T-shirt. (b) Body temperature change on the human body at Tair∼37 °C before and after the turning-on operation of the TET. The inset in (b) shows the optical image of attaching the TET on the T-shirt. (c) IR image of the body surface temperature after quickly removing the TET system, showing the large residual cooling effect. (d) Temperature fluctuation of human body skin under outdoor ambient temperature during summer daytime from 8:00 to 19:00. (e) Body temperature change at the hottest daytime before and after the turning-on operation of the TET. (f) Comparison of the generated solar power at local time with the consumed power for the TET. 
Furthermore, similar to passive cooling technologies that do not require an external energy supply, we showed that our TET also could realize zero-energy consumption by using solar power. For example, in outdoor summer daytime, Tbody was as hot as ∼38 °C under sun irradiation at the hottest daytime (15:00, 11th June, 2021, Shanghai, Sunny, Fig. 4d). When powered by a portable battery charged with a wearable solar panel (12 V/60 W, Fig. S24a, ESI†), the TET system on a T-shirt could stably reduce Tskin to ∼26.4 °C (Fig. 4e). Similarly, the thermal sensation index was calculated to be 3.01, suggesting a cold feeling for a human, but the temperature could be further tuned by altering the DC input to achieve a comfortable temperature for the human body. The maximum power consumption in the TET with the highest cooling effect of ∼11.8 K was only 11.26 W, which was much smaller than the solar power in realistic scenarios (Fig. 4f and Fig. S24b, ESI†), indicating its potential to directly power the TET. Moreover, the solar-charged portable battery (2600 mA h, Fig. S24c, ESI†) showed a shorter charging time than discharging time, confirming the promise of continuous powering the TET system for solid-state cooling on the human body for indoor and outdoor applications.
Power generation
In addition to solid-state cooling, the TET can generate continuous and stable electric power for electronics by using the ubiquitous temperature difference between the human body and the environment. We measured the output voltage and power density of the TET under a small temperature difference (Fig. 5a). The short-circuit current was negatively linear to the output voltage (Fig. 5a), reaching 150 mA at ΔT = 25 K. According to the power output equation P = U2Rex/(R0 + Rex)2, the maximum power density Pmax occurs as the internal electrical resistance R0 is equal to the external Rex. The maximum power density of the TET at ΔT = 25 K was as high as 6.13 W m−2 (Fig. 5a). A higher output voltage and power could be realized by fabricating TETs with a larger area (i.e., 1 m × 15.5 cm in Fig. 1g, ∼0.95 W @ ΔT = 25 K) or by using it under body motions (Fig. S20c and d, ESI†). Besides its excellent skin conformability and comfortability, the output power density of our TET outperformed all the WTEDs so far reported in the literature (Fig. 5b).22,29,47–54
 Fig. 5  Thermoelectric power generation and applications of the TET. (a) Generated current and power density with respect to the voltage density at different ΔT values. (b) Comparison of the thermoelectric power density of the TET in our work with those reported in the literature, including organic-based and inorganic-based WTEDs. (c) Open-circuit voltages of the TET worn on the forearm at various environmental conditions. (d) Current and power generation of the TET worn on the forearm with respect to the generated voltage on human skin at various environmental conditions. (e) Boosted voltage and corresponding current of the TET at ΔT∼15 K after conversion with a synchronous voltage booster (DC1053A-E). (f) Demonstration of the TET powering a cell phone on human skin with the assistance of a voltage booster. 
For practical on-body applications, we directly tested wearing the TET (30 cm ×10 cm) on a human forearm. The maximum output voltage of the TET was ∼0.74 V and ∼1 V at self-built ΔT∼11 K and ∼15 K at quasi-ambience temperatures of 1 °C and −3 °C and human skin temperatures of 27.5 °C and 26.8 °C, respectively (Fig. 5c). It should be noted that such lower skin temperatures may make users feel uncomfortable, however, the TET can be integrated with the garment or the area of the TET can be increased to generate a comparable power output at higher ambient temperature during practical wearing conditions. The typical current and power generation of the TET as a function of the generated voltage on human skin at various ambient conditions are given in Fig. 5d. At ΔT∼15 K, which was the maximum temperature difference that the TET could reach, the TET system could generate a power of ∼22.1 mW on human skin, which was much lower than that in Fig. 5a. It was because some part of the TET was on the top of forearm while the dry ice for generating the cold environment was under the forearm during the demonstration, thus the ΔT of some of the TE pillars were actually lower than 15 K (Movie S5, ESI†). With the assistance of voltage boosters, this decreased to ∼21.0 mW (DC1053A-E, Fig. 5e), which enabled us to stably power several portable low-power electronics (Fig. S25, ESI†) for healthcare and environmental monitoring applications. More interestingly, we successfully used the voltage-boosted power (∼4.54 V/∼4.0–4.62 mA) to charge a lithium-ion battery (600 mA h) in a cell phone (Fig. 5f and Movie S5, ESI†), suggesting it would take ∼5.4 days to fully charge the cell phone, which is the highest level among all textile shaped electric generators.55–58 As expected, a larger area of TET (∼0.8 m2) at ΔT ∼ 25 K can be fabricated to meet the requirement for charging high-power electronics, such as smart phones (5 W) with high-capacity batteries. These results confirm the continuous power supply of the TET in practical wearing scenarios.
Discussion
In summary, we presented a scalable yet facile strategy to design and fabricate a truly wearable thermoelectric textile augmented by a miniaturized heat sinks array. It demonstrated excellent durability, conformability, and thermoelectric multifunction for on-body application. The manufacturing process involved direct weaving inorganic TE pillars into woven fabric on an industrial textile machine. It demonstrated a high cooling effect and cooling capacity under hot ambience and a high thermoelectric power generation ability with practically small temperature difference. For realistic scenarios, the solar-powered TET could continuously and steadily cool the human body, achieving zero-net energy consumption for personal thermoregulation. On the other hand, our TET system on the human body could provide sufficient power for portable electronics, such as a cell phone.
Methods
Materials
Commercial Bi2Te3-based TE pillars (2.5 mm × 2.5 mm × 5 mm) were bought with optimized dimensions from Changsha Kunyong Materials Corp. Ltd. SoftcoolTM Extreme filaments (75 D) were kindly provided by Lerune Technology Corp. Ltd.
FEA simulation of the TET
We constructed all the TET models and miniaturized heat sinks using SolidWorks (Version 2016). All the meshing and simulation processes were done in ANSYS Workbench (Version 18.0).
Manufacturing process of the TET
The fabric design and actual weaving processes of the TET are illustrated in Fig. S9 (ESI†), including the draft plan, denting plan, and lifting plan. We wove double-layer woven fabric on a semi-automatic rapier loom (Jiangyin Tongyuan Textile Machinery Co., Ltd, SGA598) at scale. During weaving, elastomer yarns were used as the warp to provide flexibility to the tube channels.
Washing process of the TET
The TET was washed in a household drum washing machine (SIEMENS, IQ300). The washing time was set to 30 min, including the washing and drying process. The temperature of water was ∼20 °C.
Air and moisture permeability tests of the TET
We measured three samples of TET and cotton fabrics for accurate comparison. The air permeability of the TET was characterized by an automatic permeability instrument (YG461G) according to GB/T5453-1997. The test pressure was 100 Pa. The moisture permeability of the TET was tested by a moisture permeability analyzer instrument (FX3180-CM15) according to GB/T12704.1-2009. The test temperature and moisture were 38.8 °C and 90%, respectively.
Thermal resistance and CLO tests of the TET
The thermal resistance and CLO value of the TET were characterized using a thermal resistance measurement system (YG606E) according to GB/T11048-2008. The test temperature was 25 °C. The warm-up time and measuring time were 600 s and 3600 s, respectively.
Characterizations of the personal thermoregulation performance of the TET system
For assessing the solid-state heating and cooling effects, we conducted measurements on a home-made characterization system by manipulating the direct current (DC) magnitudes and directions through a DC source meter (Keithley 2400) to monitor the inner surface (skin-side) temperature change of the TET using a thermal infrared camera (Fotric 226).
Especially, for solid-state cooling, the inner surface temperature of the TET decreased almost linearly as the DC increased due to the Peltier effect and then reached the minimum cooling effect. Further increasing the DC value could deteriorate the cooling effect due to Joule heating and thermal transport from the hot side to the cold side of the TET.
The COP of the TET was measured with a Mini-PEM system (ADVANCE RIKO, Japan), where the cooling capacity and COP were determined by the following formulas:32    where COP is defined as the heat absorbed at the cold junction divided by the input power (P).
The temperature difference was generated by putting the TET sample between two Peltier tiles, in which one was heated and the other one was cooled. The output power was calculated using the equation P = U2Rex/(R0 + Rex)2, where U is the open circuit voltage, and R and Rex are the internal electrical resistance of the TET and applied external resistance. Rex was altered with a variable resistor.
Practical applications of the TET system for solid-state cooling
A smaller piece of TET (15 cm × 9 cm) was large enough to conduct the solid-state cooling applications during wearing tests on the human body. The TET with miniaturized heatsinks array was placed on a T-shirt. The measured initial skin temperature (Tbody) was used as the reference temperature in the different demonstrations. Since the cold side of the TET system was exposed to the human body surface, we used a thermocouple to monitor the surface temperature (Tc) change. The solid-state cooling effect (ΔT) in practical applications was defined as the temperature difference between Tbody and Tc.
The thermal sensation estimation was carried out by applying the thermal sensation model developed by Zhang et al., in which the local thermal sensation index (TSI) can be calculated by the following equation:  where C1 is a location-dependent coefficient, which was selected as 0.35 for the human chest; Tc is the cooled surface temperature of the human body by the TET; and Tset is the local skin temperature when the sensation of that body part feels neutral or when the local sensation is zero. When the TSI value is more negative, the human body feels much colder.
Practical applications of the TET system for powering electronics
A piece of TET with the size of 30 cm × 10 cm was used to directly power portable electronics in the practical application tests. A cell phone (4G Suopin, 3.7 V) was powered by a voltage booster (DC1053A-E, Fig. 5d) and a supercapacitor array (5.5 V, 0.1 F) connected to the TET at a self-built temperature difference (ΔT ∼ 14.4 K) (Fig. S26, Movie S6, ESI†).
Author contributions
K. Z. conceived the idea. K. Z. and Y. J. designed the experiments. K. Z., G. L. and T. Z. supervised the project. Y. J., K. Z. and F. H. designed and fabricated TETs, Y. J. and K. Z. performed all numerical and FEA simulations. Y. J., K. Z., J. Y., Q. L. and G. L. performed the cooling capacity and COP measurements and simulations. Y. J., J. L. and X. H. conducted thermoelectric properties measurements of TETs. J. L., Y. J., X. H., F. H. and J. C. conducted the demonstrations of practical applications. T. Z., H. Z., Y. S., H. C. and G. J. S. provided valuable suggestions during the whole project. Y. J., X. H., K. Z. and J. L. drew figures and made supporting movies. All authors prepared the initial manuscript, discussed the results and contributed to review the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
AcknowledgementsK. Z. acknowledges the funding supports from the Fundamental Research Fund for the Central Universities (2232022G-01), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51973034), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (23ZR1402500) and the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2017QNRC001). The authors are also grateful for the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52172259, 52172249). T. Z. thanks to the financial support from the Special Funding of Carbon Peak and Neutrality Science and Technology Innovation Project of Jiangsu Province (BE2022011), and the Funding of Innovation Academy for Light-duty Gas Turbine, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CXYJJ21-ZD-02). G. L. acknowledges the funding support of Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission, Administrative Commission of Zhongguancun Science Park (No. 22D40121).
ReferencesY. K. Axelrod and M. N. Diringer, Neurol. Clin., 2008, 26, 585–603 CrossRef PubMed .T. Hoyt, E. Arens and H. Zhang, Build. Environ., 2015, 88, 89–96 CrossRef .P.-C. Hsu, X. Liu, C. Liu, X. Xie, H. R. Lee, A. J. Welch, T. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 365–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wang, C. Gao, K. Kuklane and I. Holmér, Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon., 2010, 16, 387–404 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Wang, L. Yang, X. L. Shi, X. Shi, L. Chen, M. S. Dargusch, J. Zou and Z. G. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807916 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Du, J. Xu, B. Paul and P. Eklund, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 366–388 CrossRef .G. J. Snyder, S. LeBlanc, D. Crane, H. Pangborn, C. E. Forest, A. Rattner, L. Borgsmiller and S. Priya, Joule, 2021, 5, 748–751 CrossRef CAS .R. Ma, Z. Zhang, K. Tong, D. Huber, R. Kornbluh, Y. S. Ju and Q. Pei, Science, 2017, 357, 1130–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Meng, Z. Zhang, H. Wu, R. Wu, J. Wu, H. Wang and Q. Pei, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 996–1002 CrossRef .S. Zeng, S. Pian, M. Su, Z. Wang, M. Wu, X. Liu, M. Chen, Y. Xiang, J. Wu and M. Zhang, Science, 2021, 373, 692–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zhu, W. Li, Q. Zhang, D. Li, X. Liu, Y. Wang, N. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li and X. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1342–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. A. Zhang, S. Yu, B. Xu, M. Li, Z. Peng, Y. Wang, S. Deng, X. Wu, Z. Wu and M. Ouyang, Science, 2019, 363, 619–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Cai, A. Y. Song, W. Li, P. C. Hsu, D. Lin, P. B. Catrysse, Y. Liu, Y. Peng, J. Chen and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802152 CrossRef PubMed .P.-C. Hsu, A. Y. Song, P. B. Catrysse, C. Liu, Y. Peng, J. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Science, 2016, 353, 1019–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Gao, K. Kuklane and I. Holmér, Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., 2011, 111, 1207–1216 CrossRef PubMed .H. Shim, E. McCullough and B. Jones, Text. Res. J., 2001, 71, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Li, K. Fu, J. Dai, E. M. Hitz, H. Xie, B. Liu and J. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11513–11520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Leonov and R. Vullers, J. Electron.
Mater., 2009, 38, 1491–1498 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhao, C. Gao, F. Wang, K. Kuklane, I. Holmér and J. Li, Int. J. Ind. Ergon., 2013, 43, 232–237 CrossRef .T. Guo, B. Shang, B. Duan and X. Luo, J. Therm. Biol., 2015, 49, 47–54 CrossRef PubMed .D. Zhao, X. Lu, T. Fan, Y. S. Wu, L. Lou, Q. Wang, J. Fan and R. Yang, Appl. Energy, 2018, 218, 282–291 CrossRef .J. A. Lee, A. E. Aliev, J. S. Bykova, M. J. de Andrade, D. Kim, H. J. Sim, X. Lepró, A. A. Zakhidov, J. B. Lee and G. M. Spinks, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5038–5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z.-H. Zheng, X.-L. Shi, D.-W. Ao, W.-D. Liu, M. Li, L.-Z. Kou, Y.-X. Chen, F. Li, M. Wei and G.-X. Liang, Nat. Sustainability, 2022, 6, 180–191 CrossRef .K. Nan, S. D. Kang, K. Li, K. J. Yu, F. Zhu, J. Wang, A. C. Dunn, C. Zhou, Z. Xie and M. T. Agne, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Ding, K. H. Chan, Y. Zhou, X. Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, T. Li and G. W. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Y. a K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 44704–44712 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Zheng, X. Han, J. Yang, Y. Jing, X. Chen, Q. Li, T. Zhang, G. Li, H. Zhu, H. Zhao, G. J. Snyder and K. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2374–2385 RSC .T. Zhang, K. Li, J. Zhang, M. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Ma, N. Zhang and L. Wei, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .S. Qu, Y. Chen, W. Shi, M. Wang, Q. Yao and L. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 667, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yang, S. Yang, P. Qiu, L. Peng, T.-R. Wei, Z. Zhang, X. Shi and L. Chen, Science, 2022, 377, 854–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. L. Baranowski, G. Jeffrey Snyder and E. S. Toberer, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 204904 CrossRef .G. Li, J. Garcia Fernandez, D. A. Lara Ramos, V. Barati, N. Pérez, I. Soldatov, H. Reith, G. Schierning and K. Nielsch, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .S. Hong, Y. Gu, J. K. Seo, J. Wang, P. Liu, Y. S. Meng, S. Xu and R. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw0536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Choi, C. Dun, C. Forsythe, M. P. Gordon and J. J. Urban, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15696–15703 RSC .Y. Zhang, J. Gao, S. Zhu, J. Li, H. Lai, Y. Peng and L. Miao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 15317–15323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xu, B. Wu, Y. Guo, C. Hou, Y. Li, H. Wang and Q. Zhang, Available at SSRN 4235081, 2022.L. Zhang, X. Han, M. Du, Y. Shi and K. Zhang, Compos. Commun., 2021, 26, 100793 CrossRef .S. Xu, M. Li, Y. Dai, M. Hong, Q. Sun, W. Lyu, T. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zou, Z. G. Chen and M. Dargusch, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2204508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Kishore, A. Nozariasbmarz, B. Poudel, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1765 CrossRef PubMed .C. Gao, K. Kuklane, F. Wang and I. Holmér, Indoor Air, 2012, 22, 523–530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Zheng, Y. Ke and H. Wang, Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon., 2022, 28, 118–128 CrossRef PubMed .J. Smolander, K. Kuklane, D. Gavhed, H. Nilsson and I. Holmér, Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon., 2004, 10, 111–117 CrossRef PubMed .C. Gao, K. Kuklane and I. Holmér, Ergonomics, 2010, 53, 716–723 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, S. N. David, D. Zhao, R. Lou, G. Tan, R. Yang and X. Yin, Science, 2017, 355, 1062–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, Z. Lin, B. Zhu, Z. Li, J. Li, B. Li, S. Fan, J. Xie and J. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 153–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhang, Human thermal sensation and comfort in transient and non-uniform thermal environments,  2003 Search PubMed .Q. Wu and J. Hu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 045037 CrossRef .A. Lund, Y. Tian, S. Darabi and C. Müller, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228836 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu, H. Zhang, C. Mao and C. M. Li, Appl. Energy, 2016, 164, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Kim, J. H. We and B. J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1959–1965 RSC .M.-K. Kim, M.-S. Kim, S. Lee, C. Kim and Y.-J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 105002 CrossRef .M. Ito, T. Koizumi, H. Kojima, T. Saito and M. Nakamura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12068–12072 RSC .Y. Du, K. Cai, S. Chen, H. Wang, S. Z. Shen, R. Donelson and T. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Cao, M. J. Tudor, R. N. Torah and S. P. Beeby, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2016, 63, 4024–4030 CAS .Q. Xu, B. Deng, L. Zhang, S. Lin, Z. Han, Q. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Zhu, F. Jiang, Q. Li, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Chen and W. Liu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 100780 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang, H. Zou, R. Liu, C. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16238 Search PubMed .Y. Zhou, X. Liu, B. Jia, T. Ding, D. Mao, T. Wang, G. W. Ho and J. He, Sci. Adv., 2023, 9, eadf5701 CrossRef PubMed .T. Ding, Y. Zhou, X. Q. Wang, C. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Lu, J. He and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102219 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee01031gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
In recent decades, personal thermoregulation and sustainable-powering wearable electronics have gained more importance, with an aim for reducing personal energy consumption ultimately toward carbon neutralization. Wearable thermoelectric devices that can noiselessly and continuously convert ubiquitous heat into electricity show great promise to achieve high on-body cooling and power-generation performances. However, the current state-of-the-art devices have limited skin conformability, comfortability, and mechanical stability, which are usually mutually restrained, and still suffer from complex fabrication processes with limited size, low cooling effects in hot ambient environments, and limited power generation. They can barely be considered wearable as normal clothes because TE garments or fabrics require indispensable thermal comfortability, durability, and three-dimensional conformability to fit the dynamic curved surfaces of the human body. More importantly, the rational thermal design of the device configuration as well as the necessary scalable and standard industrial manufacturing methodology have not been achieved yet, which has been overlooked to date. In this work, we report a scalable, potentially commercializable strategy to manufacture large-area, mechanically conformable, breathable, washable, and thus truly wearable thermoelectric textiles by directly weaving inorganic semiconductors-based TE pillars into woven textile at scale, which demonstrated high power generation and a cooling effect. This work may pave a way to address the current challenges of thermoelectric textiles for their practical applications.


 	Fig. 1  Design and fabrication process of the TET system. (a) Schematic of the manufacturing process of the TET system. The insets in step 5 show the electrically in-series connections between the p-type and n-type TE pillars by tin-plated copper wires in the textile layers. (b) and (c) Optical images of the fabricated TET with a size of 10 cm × 30 cm and (d–f) illustration of the flexibility, including twisting and bending in both directions. (g) Optical images of a finished TET (1 m × 15.5 cm). (h) Optical images of a garment made with the TET.	 

 	Fig. 2  Mechanical stability of the TET. The internal electrical resistance changes of the TET under cyclic bending (a and b), twisting (c), tensile stressing (d), washing (e), and cooling (f). (g) Internal electrical resistance changes of the TET under long-term time duration exposed to ambient air (22–26 °C; RH, ∼30–50%). Note: R0 and R correspond to the internal electrical resistance of the TET before and after cyclic tests, respectively. The bending radius in (b) was ∼1 mm. The rolling speed of the drum washing machine was 800 rpm in (e). ΔT0 and ΔT correspond to the cooling effects of the TET before and after the cyclic tests, respectively. Air permeability (h) and moisture permeability (i) of the TET.	 

 	Fig. 3  Personal thermoregulation performance of the TET system. (a) Heating effect of the TET with respect to the altered DC. (b) Cooling effects of the TET with and without the miniaturized heat sinks array with respect to the altered DC in a hot environment of ∼37 °C. Note: the measurement errors for both the heating and cooling performances were 3.1% and 3.63% (without heatsink) and 4.86% (with heatsink), respectively. (c) Corresponding IR image of the TET with miniaturized skive heat sink arrays displaying the inner surface temperature mapping at the optimized DC of 1.6 A. (d) Cross-section configuration of the TET unit showing the different components that contribute to the total thermal conductance in the TET upon a vertical temperature difference. (e) Schematic of the thermal and electrical circuit in the TET. Note: Rthermal represents the thermal resistance, where Rthermal-c1 and Rthermal-c2 are the contact thermal resistance at the hot side and cold side; Rthermal-TE, Rthermal-Cu wires, Rthermal-textile, and Rthermal-air are the thermal resistance of the TE pillars, tin-plated copper wires, textile layers, as well as trapped air between the top and bottom textile layers, respectively. Q represents the generated input heat, where QP,h and QP,c are the input heat generated by the Peltier effect at the hot side and cold side, QJ,h and QJ,c are the input heat generated by Joule heating at the hot side and cold side, r is the internal electrical resistance of the TET, and R is the external resistance. (f) Estimated and measured cooling capacity and COP of the TET with respect to the altered DC current at different cooling effects. (g and h) Comparison of the cooling effect (g) and specific cooling capacity (h) of our TET system with other types reported in the literature. Note: the flexible TE cooling devices include 3D textile-based and film-based WTEDs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Personal thermoregulation applications of the TET. (a) Temperature change of the body surface during wearing the TET system on a T-shirt. (b) Body temperature change on the human body at Tair∼37 °C before and after the turning-on operation of the TET. The inset in (b) shows the optical image of attaching the TET on the T-shirt. (c) IR image of the body surface temperature after quickly removing the TET system, showing the large residual cooling effect. (d) Temperature fluctuation of human body skin under outdoor ambient temperature during summer daytime from 8:00 to 19:00. (e) Body temperature change at the hottest daytime before and after the turning-on operation of the TET. (f) Comparison of the generated solar power at local time with the consumed power for the TET.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermoelectric power generation and applications of the TET. (a) Generated current and power density with respect to the voltage density at different ΔT values. (b) Comparison of the thermoelectric power density of the TET in our work with those reported in the literature, including organic-based and inorganic-based WTEDs. (c) Open-circuit voltages of the TET worn on the forearm at various environmental conditions. (d) Current and power generation of the TET worn on the forearm with respect to the generated voltage on human skin at various environmental conditions. (e) Boosted voltage and corresponding current of the TET at ΔT∼15 K after conversion with a synchronous voltage booster (DC1053A-E). (f) Demonstration of the TET powering a cell phone on human skin with the assistance of a voltage booster.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee01031g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
