Turning into the blue: materials for enhancing TiO 2 photocatalysis by up-conversion photonics   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA44342F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA44342F
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 23028-23034Turning into the blue: materials for enhancing TiO2 photocatalysis by up-conversion photonics†J. Méndez-Ramos*a, P. Acosta-Moraa, J. C. Ruiz-Moralesb, T. Hernándezc, M. E. Borgesc and P. EsparzabaDepartamento de Física Fundamental y Experimental, Electrónica y Sistemas, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. E-mail: jmendezr@ull.es;  Web: http://www.names-ull.es Fax: +34 922318228;   Tel: +34 922318304bDepartamento de Química Inorgánica, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. E-mail: jcruiz@ull.es;  Fax: +34 922318461;   Tel: +34 922318974cDepartamento de Ingeniería Química, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. E-mail: pesparza@ull.es;   Tel: +34 922318059Received 14th August 2013, Accepted 12th September 2013First published on 16th September 2013AbstractWe have explored the emerging and ground-breaking photonics approach to enhance the photocatalytic activity of one of the main semiconductor electrodes used in water-splitting reactions, titanium dioxide (TiO2): the blue shifting of the incident radiation by means of a highly efficient up-conversion by a rare-earth (RE) doped luminescent material to assist in the harvesting of long wavelengths in unused portions of infrared light. We present an up to 20% improvement of the photocatalytic action of the commercial benchmark TiO2 efficient photocatalyst in the decomposition of methylene blue in water under Xe-lamp irradiation, and also an outstanding enhancement by a factor of about 2.5 of the photolytic degradation rate of this pollutant. Our results prove that the ultraviolet (UV) radiation that reaches the TiO2 particles is increased by the addition of the RE-doped powder material into a slurry-type photo-reactor, boosting both the photocatalytic and photolytic degradation rates. Thus, we show the feasibility of handling and transforming the incoming infrared radiation, bridging the UV gap of the photocatalytic semiconductor. Let us turn the infrared into the blue; there is plenty of energy at the bottom.IntroductionBio-inspiration from nature's photosynthetic leaves leads the way to face the terawatt carbon-neutral challenge of the ever increasing demand of energy. In this sense, the famous Italian photochemist, Giacomo Ciamician, envisaged in his forewarning paper1 in Science in 1912 that “human industry will master the photochemical process that hitherto has been the guarded secret of the plants, and this issue should not be postponed to distant times, for nature is not in a hurry and mankind is!” This secret is hidden in tiny little engines known as chloroplasts, which are able to absorb the energy from the sun’s rays and store it. Photolysis, as the upfront step of photosynthesis, rearranges the low energy bonds in water into the high energy bonds in hydrogen and oxygen, as described by Daniel G. Nocera also in Science2 on his very promising artificial leaf paper.3 The resulting hydrogen can be stored or it can provide power in highly efficient fuel cells4,5 producing water as the final by-product. This system comprises a solar and water-driven sustainable closed circle as envisaged for a personalised energy global model,2,6 taking into account the urgency of the problem: the unprecedented melting of Greenland's ice sheet surface in July 2012 proved the threat of global warming and that mankind is indeed in a hurry, melt happens.Fujishima and Honda demonstrated in their pioneering work7 in 1972 that water could be split into oxygen and hydrogen if the energy of light was used effectively in a photo-electrochemical cell (UV-blue photons for wavelengths shorter than 415 nm to bridge the band-gap of the TiO2 electrode), which we believe was the first step towards artificial photosynthesis.During the last 40 years, noteworthy efforts in semiconductor engineering have been developed in order to red shift the absorption of the semiconductor electrodes to harvest the full spectrum of light, exhibiting photo-electrochemical water-splitting under visible light irradiation,8–11and extending the absorption energy gap to the red end of the spectrum.However, we emphasize here a ground-breaking solely photonics approach to enhance the photocatalytic activity: a blue shift by up-conversion luminescent materials with the ability to transform unused red and near-infrared radiation into available UV-Vis light. These materials have recently become the focus of studies to satisfy the large band-gap requirements of semiconductor electrodes.12–15 This up-conversion photonics approach has already been extensively developed to increase the efficiency in photovoltaic solar cells by the spectral shift of the sun’s irradiation,16–19 and also to increase the production in agriculture by improving the sunlight conversion efficiency of the photosynthetic process.20 Thus, Li et al.12 explored a novel near infrared photocatalyst by combining a low energy band-gap semiconductor CdS with an up-conversion material aimed at degrading Rhodamine B and methylene blue. Wang et al.21 investigated the degradation of ethyl violet dyestuff using visible light in the presence of an ordinary rutile TiO2 catalyst doped with rare-earth (RE) up-conversion luminescent agents, in addition to the visible light photocatalytic activities of RE-doped TiO2 nanocrystals reported by Feng et al.,22 and more recently by Obregón and Colón.23 Moreover, the effect of the up-conversion agents on the improvement of hematite's (α-Fe2O3) solar water-splitting efficiency has been also lately evidenced.24 Therefore, RE-doped materials appear as one of the most promising candidates to assist the long wavelength light harvesting of solar irradiation, extending the photocatalytic response of large band gap materials, like TiO2, used as water-splitting semiconductor electrodes.In the present work, we show a more suitable candidate towards this goal, and thus make a significant contribution by means of highly efficient UV-Vis up-conversion emissions in a Yb3+–Er3+–Tm3+ co-doped ZrF4–BaF2–LaF3–AlF3–NaF (ZBLAN) fluoride glass under near-infrared excitation at 980 nm. Transforming the incoming infrared into blue radiation provides extra photons for absorption by the large band-gap semiconductor electrodes used in the water-splitting devices, as clearly demonstrated here by the achievement of an improvement of up to 20%, of the methylene blue degradation in a TiO2-driven slurry type heterogeneous photocatalysis reactor, and also by an outstanding enhancement by a factor of about 2.5 of the photolytic degradation rate of this pollutant, both by the addition of a RE-doped ZBLAN powder.ExperimentalSample preparation and characterizationInitial metal fluorides (purity > 99.99%), including ZrF4, BaF2, LaF3, AlF3, NaF, YbF3, ErF3 and TmF3 were used without further purification. The glassy matrix used in this study was synthesized with the following composition (in molar percentage): 51.7ZrF4–20.7BaF2–4.5LaF3–3.4AlF3–19.7NaF. In this heavy RE-doped sample, LaF3 was completely substituted by YbF3, ErF3 and TmF3 to obtain Yb3+–Er3+–Tm3+ co-doped ZBLAN with 3.5 mol% Yb3+, 0.5 mol% Er3+ and 0.5 mol% Tm3+. The glass was prepared as follows: appropriate amounts of the metal fluorides (10 g) were ground in a mortar. The mixed powder was melted in a platinum crucible at 850 °C for 1 h using a resistance furnace inside a fluoride glovebox under a controlled atmosphere. The doped melt was then quenched in a preheated aluminum mold and subsequently annealed at 250 °C for 8 h to release the thermal stresses produced during the quenching process. The optical absorption spectrum of the ZBLAN sample was measured by an ultraviolet-visible-infrared (UV-Vis-IR) Perkin-Elmer Lambda 9 spectrophotometer with a resolution of 0.5 nm. Upconversion measurements were carried out with a continuous wave infrared laser diode at 980 nm with a power up of 300 mW, collimated using a 4× micro-objective, with a focal length of 4.51 mm and 0.55 of numerical aperture, which allowed us to obtain a power density of about 20 W cm−2 at the sample’s surface. Detection was carried out with a 0.25 m monochromator equipped with a photomultiplier.Photocatalysis experimentsFor the photocatalytic activity tests, the performance of the commercial benchmark TiO2 Degussa P25 was evaluated by its ability to remove methylene blue (MB) from an aqueous solution (a typical textile dye used as a model contaminant in water). The photocatalytic oxidation reaction was carried out in a stirred photoreactor with a capacity of 650 mL with a Xe-lamp (Hamamatsu L2274, 150 W) placed inside the photoreactor as the main visible irradiation source or a pure UV Hg-lamp (Heraeus TQ-150, 150 W), for comparison. In this reactor, the temperature was kept constant at 20 °C, the aqueous solution of MB (50 mg L−1, initial concentration) and 0.5 g L−1 of the photocatalyst as a suspension was introduced in the reactor and aliquots were taken at different times for 1 h (experimental time) in order to follow the temporal evolution of the MB concentration. The photocatalytic activity of the catalyst was evaluated and compared upon irradiation with Xe-lamp light in separate experiments: first with only the TiO2 Degussa P25 catalyst, and then with a small quantity (about 0.17 g) of the RE-doped ZBLAN material previously ground in a ball-mill and added to the solution of the slurry-type photo-reactor.Results and discussionsTo illustrate this blue shift up-conversion approach assisted by RE ions for the harvest of long wavelength infrared radiation, we present in Fig. 1 the standard incident solar irradiance spectrum AM 1.5G (which represents the overall yearly average for mid-latitudes used in the solar industry for testing terrestrial solar panels), along with the main absorption bands of selected RE-doping species in the red and near-infrared range, in particular for the Er3+, Tm3+ and Yb3+ ions. The position of the band-gap for two photo-catalytic semiconductor materials used in water-splitting, TiO2 and Fe2O3, are also depicted. The RE ions act as light harvesters collecting the maximum number of photons of the red and near-infrared sun’s spectrum’s long tail, there is plenty of energy at the bottom! Then, after efficient energy transfer processes, high intense UV and blue up-conversion emissions are obtained, increasing in this way the UV-radiation that reaches the large band-gap TiO2 photocatalyst. It should be noted that these high energetic UV-blue up-conversion emissions open the way to optimize single photon processes to split water without any external bias, employing very wide band-gap semiconductor materials like TiO2 (ref. 7) which unfortunately absorb only the UV part of the incident terrestrial solar spectrum. Fig. 1  Solar irradiation standard spectrum (AM 1.5G) along with the main absorption bands of rare-earth (RE) ions (Er3+, Tm3+ and Yb3+) and with the position of the band-gaps for several photocatalytic semiconductor materials, such as TiO2 and Fe2O3. The RE species act as light harvesters collecting as much sun light as possible from the red and NIR sun’s spectrum’s long tail. Then, after suitable energy transfer processes, high intense UV and blue up-conversion emissions are obtained, turning the sun light blue. The UV-Vis-NIR optical absorption of our Yb3+–Er3+–Tm3+ triply doped ZBLAN glass (see Fig. S1 in ESI†) is dominated by the large infrared absorption cross-section of the Yb3+ ions (actually, it is the largest absorption cross-section RE element) at around 980 nm. Yb3+ is resonant with many inexpensive laser diodes and acts as an efficient sensitizing infrared antenna for the activation of the luminescence of the Er3+ and Tm3+ ions by subsequent energy transfer processes (see Fig. S2 in ESI†). A very bright UV-Vis up-conversion luminescence spectrum under the near infrared diode laser excitation at 980 nm is presented in Fig. 2. As pointed out above, the 980 nm pump mainly excites the Yb3+ ions, and then, energy transfer processes from Yb3+ to the Er3+ and Tm3+ ions take place giving rise to the observed visible emissions through well-known reported up-conversion mechanisms25–28 comprising red, green and blue (RGB) emission peaks, centred at around 660–700, 520–550, 475 nm respectively and assigned to the transitions of the emitting Er3+ and Tm3+ ions (see the energy levels in Fig. S2 in the ESI†). Even more important are the outstanding UV and blue Er3+ and Tm3+ emissions peaks, in the range from 270 to 415 nm, which are quite comparable to the green and red ones (and barely reported in the literature) as it can be seen from the comparison of the y-axis relative scales between the different ranges from the left and the right sides of Fig. 2. It can be clearly seen how these up-conversion emissions bridge the gap for the most important semiconductor electrodes used in water-splitting, TiO2 and Fe2O3, as depicted in Fig. 2. Fig. 2  UV-Vis up-conversion luminescence spectrum of the ZrF4–BaF2–LaF3–AlF3–NaF glass triply doped with 3.5Yb3+, 0.5Er3+ and 0.5Tm3+ ions (in mol%) under 980 nm excitation at 300 mW, for interest in sustainable H2 generation by water-splitting. The position of the band-gap for two photocatalytic semiconductor materials, TiO2 and Fe2O3, is also depicted. The different y-axis scales allow for comparison of the relative intensities between the UV-blue and green-red up-conversion emission bands. To support this photonics approach, the photocatalytic activity of a well-known commercial benchmark catalyst (TiO2 Degussa P25) was evaluated by its capacity to remove methylene blue (MB) from an aqueous solution.29 The results were compared upon irradiation with Xe-lamp light in separate experiments: first only with the TiO2 Degussa P25 catalyst and then adding into the slurry solution a small quantity (about 0.17 g) of the RE-doped ZBLAN material, previously ground by ball-milling, to prove the improvement in the decomposition of MB due to infrared-to-UV up-conversion wavelength shifting processes. Fig. 3 shows a schematic representation of our slurry-type device for the MB photocatalytic degradation experiments. Moreover, the IR pump radiation is more efficiently absorbed by the Yb3+ ions in a turbid medium such as the here employed slurry-type solution of TiO2 particles and RE-doped ZBLAN powder, due to the deeper penetration length of the infrared radiation.30 This larger absorption length of the IR light has attracted a lot of interest in medicine and biological applications since it makes it possible to treat deeper diseased tissues in vivo.30 This compensates for the inferior IR-to-UV up-conversion efficiency with respect to the visible-to-UV one, which requires deeper penetration.30 The upper right inset in Fig. 3 presents a TEM image showing isolated regular TiO2 Degussa P25 crystallites. The average crystallite size of anatase and rutile in this Degussa P25 titania was estimated to be around 21 and 32 nm, respectively, by means of the Scherrer equation. Moreover, the BET specific area and total pore area of the TiO2 Degussa P25 were estimated to be 51 and 64 m2 g−1 respectively, as reported by us in previous work.29 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the slurry-type heterogeneous photocatalysis reactor for methylene blue degradation. The TiO2 photocatalytic semiconductor particles are surrounded by RE-doped ZBLAN powder. The superior penetration depth for the IR pump radiation, which is absorbed and subsequently upconverted by the RE-doped particles, is also represented. The upper right inset shows a TEM image of the TiO2 Degussa P25 photocatalyst as regular isolated crystallites.29 Fig. 4 summarizes the results of the photocatalysis under Xe-lamp light radiation. As it can be clearly seen, MB removal reaches values of 49% and 63% after 30 and 50 min of Xe-lamp irradiation due to TiO2 Degussa P25 activity. These records are increased up to 57 and 76% after the same irradiation time after adding the RE-doped ZBLAN powder to the slurry-type photo-reactor. This represents a relative improvement of 16% and 20% of the photocatalytic activity, respectively, due solely to up-conversion effects,31 proving that the UV-radiation that reaches the TiO2 particles has been increased by the addition of the RE-doped material. The data regarding the adsorption of methylene blue on the catalyst (TiO2 + RE-doped ZBLAN) evaluated in the dark without light irradiation, are also included in the figure. Fig. 4  Temporal evolution of the methylene blue (MB) degradation rate in the (upper curves) TiO2-driven photocatalysis and the (lower curves) photolysis experiments under Xe-lamp and UV light irradiation. Both MB photocatalytic and photolytic removal rates under Xe-lamp irradiation are noticeably improved by adding the RE-doped ZBLAN agent to the slurry-type photo-reactor, approaching the behavior obtained under intense UV Hg-lamp irradiation, also depicted for comparison. The adsorption of the pollutant evaluated without light irradiation is also included. It should be also remarked that even in the case of the photolysis experiments (blank tests in the absence of photocatalyst), the blue wavelength shift due to up-conversion photon processes by means of the RE-doped ZBLAN agent, produces an outstanding increment by a factor of about 2.5 of the degradation rate, from the 3% achieved under the Xe-lamp to the up-conversion powered 7% rate after 50 min of irradiation time, as seen in Fig. 4. This is the first case, to our knowledge, presenting laboratory data that reveal how up-conversion powered photonics effects, driven by RE-doped luminescent agents, increase both the photocatalytic and photolytic degradation rates. Finally, for comparison, the degradation rate results obtained under pure intense UV radiation coming from an Hg-lamp are also presented in Fig. 4 again for both the photocatalysis and photolysis experiments.The substantially larger value of the degradation rate under UV light, compared to that obtained under Xe-lamp radiation, proves that our RE-doped ZBLAN powder is literally converting the infrared radiation reaching the TiO2 semiconductor particles into blue light, providing extra UV photons to bridge the large band-gap and consequently enhancing the photocatalytic activity.The high quantum yield of up-conversion luminescence of this RE-doped ZBLAN fluoride glass has been calculated by comparing the ratio of the total energy flux in the up-conversion emission bands32,33 in the 275–850 nm range, to the resonant and infrared emissions located at 980 and 1500 nm, respectively. In this calculation, the number of photons emitted in each band corresponding to 2-, 3- and 4-photon up-conversion processes has been multiplied by a factor of 2, 3 and 4 respectively to appreciate the fact that the absorption of multiple infrared photons is involved in these processes. The number of infrared photons involved, and therefore the multiplication by the indicated factors, has already been reported previously by the authors for similar Er3+ and Tm3+-doped luminescent materials, see ref. 26–28. Thus, the overall up-conversion efficiency was estimated to be around 46%, which represents the fraction of all NIR photons absorbed by the material that contributes to the up-conversion emissions, i.e., this value illustrates the number of upconverted photons with respect to the total number of photons emitted from the sample32,33 (see the full spectrum used for the up-conversion efficiency calculation in Fig. S3 in ESI†). As an added value to the present research, it must be mentioned that the use of heavy rare-earth elements (HREE), such as Yb3+, Er3+ and Tm3+, can provide an important benefit in equilibrating the market demand in the so-called balance problem.34,35 The idea is to avoid surpluses of certain metals that would result in imbalances of the markets because of the different RE abundance ratios. This balance problem pushes the industry to find new applications for less commonly used HREE that are obtained in excess in manufacturing processes, and therefore lowering the price of any REE as the production costs are shared by all the elements.35In 2009, B.D. James et al.36 presented to the US Department of Energy a technoeconomic analysis of the photo-electrochemical production of hydrogen, in which photolysis reactors consisting of shallow water beds with a system of photo-active particles in slurry solutions were planned. Moreover, recently appearing in the literature as a joint letter,37 Faunce, Hill and Nocera, among others, pointed at artificial photosynthesis as a frontier technology for energy sustainability.37 They envisaged, as a global scenario, the use of light capture facilities situated in coastal metropolitan areas where seawater could be used as a source of hydrogen to feed fuel cells.6,37,38Therefore, the design of photolysis slurry-type reactors integrating RE-doped up-conversion materials, which provide a spectral shift of the incoming infrared irradiation and thus an enhanced photocatalytic activity as proved in the present work, would represent a step forward in the proposed shallow water pools for the future renewable energy model based on water and sun as the overall driving forces. For the eventual semi-industrial exploitation aimed at the sustainable production of hydrogen by means of solar seawater-splitting, we envisioned the use of an existing infrastructure of traditional solar salt flats available in the sunny Canary Islands (see Fig. 5), which receive relatively higher levels of solar irradiation throughout the year than the European continent.39 The Canary Islands' global surface irradiance mean fields present values peaking at around 6.0 kW h per m2 per day (kilowatt-hours per square meter per day), in contrast to the corresponding values of around 3.2 kW h per m2 per day in central Europe, as seen in the inset maps39 in Fig. 5, with monthly average values taken by EUMETSAT. These accessible shoreline infrastructures would constitute a shallow seawater pool system operating as slurry-type photo-reactors, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The envisaged use of this existing solar capture infrastructure makes the Canary Islands’ territory an ideal platform for testing sustainable renewable energies. Fig. 5  Envisaged semi-industrial exploitation for the sustainable production of hydrogen by means of solar seawater-splitting using an existing infrastructure of traditional solar salt flats available in the Canary Islands. Global surface irradiance mean field maps39 taken by EUMETSAT are also included. ConclusionsHere, we show the feasibility of handling and transforming the incoming infrared radiation of a Xe-lamp by bridging the UV gap of photocatalytic semiconductors. In that respect, we report an up to 20% improvement of the photocatalytic action of a commercial benchmark TiO2 photocatalyst (TiO2 Degussa P25) in the decomposition of methylene blue in water under Xe-lamp irradiation, and also an outstanding enhancement by a factor of about 2.5 of the photolytic degradation rate of this pollutant. Therefore, our results prove that the UV-radiation that reaches the TiO2 particles has been increased by the addition of a RE-doped material powder into the slurry-type photo-reactor, boosting both the photocatalytic and photolytic degradation rates. In that respect, as far as we know, the presented laboratory data constitute one of the first reports on how RE-driven up-conversion powered photonics effects increase both the photocatalytic and photolytic degradation rates. Finally, we have also envisaged the eventual semi-industrial application for sustainable hydrogen production by means of solar seawater-splitting, by using an existing infrastructure of traditional solar salt flats as a system of shallow seawater pools operating like sun-driven slurry-type photo-reactors, available in the sunny Canary Islands, an ideal host region for the development of this type of test aimed at sustainable renewable energy.AcknowledgementsThis research was partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under the project MAT2010-18743. We would also like to thank M. Sierra and A. Redondas from the Spanish Meteorological Agency (AEMET) for valuable discussions about global solar irradiance data in the Canary Islands and Prof. V.D. Rodríguez for providing the spectroscopy laboratory facilities. JMR thanks the valuable collaboration of Prof. Angela Seddon and Dr David Furniss of the Novel Photonic Glasses Research Group at the University of Nottingham (UK) during his visits to melt the rare-earth doped ZBLAN glasses.Notes and referencesG. Ciamician, The photochemistry of the future, Science, 1912, 36, 385 CAS .M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, In situ formation of an oxygen-evolving catalyst in neutral water containing phosphate and Co2+, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. G. Nocera, The Artificial Leaf, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Ruiz-Morales, J. Canales-Vázquez, C. Savaniu, D. Marrero-López, W. Zhou and J. T. S. Irvine, Disruption of extended defects in solid oxide fuel cell anodes for methane oxidation, Nature, 2006, 439, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Ruiz-Morales, D. Marrero-López, M. Gálvez-Sánchez, J. Canales-Vázquez, C. Savaniu and S. N. Savvin, Engineering of materials for solid oxide fuel cells and other energy and environmental applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1670 CAS .Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Artificial photosynthesis for solar water-splitting, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor Electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, L. Ma, T. He, C. F. Ng, S. Wang, H. Sun and H. J. Fan, TiO2/(CdS, CdSe, CdSeS) Nanorod Heterostructures and Photoelectrochemical Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11956 CAS .G. Liu, L. C. Yin, J. Wang, P. Niu, C. Zhen, Y. Xie and H. M. Cheng, A red anatase TiO2 photocatalyst for solar energy conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9603 CAS .X. Xu, C. Randorn, P. Efstathiou and J. T. S. Irvine, A red metallic oxide photocatalyst, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, High-Efficiency Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production Using Multijunction Amorphous Silicon Photoelectrodes, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, F. Wang, J. Zhu and J. C. Yu, NaYF4:Yb, Tm/CdS composite as a novel near-infrared-driven photocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Li, S. Liui, H. Zhang, E. Wang, L. Song and P. Wang, Ultraviolet up-conversion luminescence in Y2O3:Yb3+, Tm3+ nanocrystals and its application in photocatalysis, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2882 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, Y. Lin, T. J. Mullen, W. Lin, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan, T. E. Pattern, D. Wang and G. Liu, Improving Hematite's Solar Water Splitting Efficiency by Incorporating Rare-Earth Upconversion Nanomaterials, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3188 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Khnayzer, J. Blumhoff, J. A. Harrington, A. Haefele, F. Deng and F. N. Castellano, Upconversion-powered photoelectrochemistry, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 209 RSC .B. S. Richards, Enhancing the performance of silicon solar cells via the application of passive luminescence conversion layers, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Trupke, A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, P. W. Würfel and M. A. Green, Efficiency enhancement of solar cells by luminescent up-conversion of sunlight, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Huang, S. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Enhancing solar cell efficiency: the search for luminescent materials as spectral converters, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173 RSC .V. K. Tikhomirov, V. D. Rodríguez, J. Méndez-Ramos, J. del-Castillo, D. Kirilenko, G. Van Tendeloo and V. V. Moshchalkov, Optimizing Er/Yb ratio and content in Er–Yb co-doped glass-ceramics for enhancement of the up and down-conversion luminescence, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Lian, C. Rong, D. Yin and S. Liu, Enhancing Solar Energy Conversion Efficiency: A Tunable Dual-Excitation Dual-Emission Phosphors and Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6928 Search PubMed .J. Wang, G. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhao, F. Wen, Z. Pan, Y. Li, P. Zhang and P. Kang, Investigation on photocatalytic degradation of ethyl violet dyestuff using visible light in the presence of ordinary rutile TiO2 catalyst doped with up-conversion luminescence agent, Water Res., 2006, 40, 2143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Feng, S. Liu, Z. Xiu, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Chen, P. Wang and X. Yu, Visible Light Photocatalytic Activities of TiO2 Nanocrystals Doped with Upconversion Luminescence Agent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13692 CAS .S. Obregón and G. Colón, Evidence of up-conversion luminescence contribution to the improved photoactivity of erbium doped TiO2 systems, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7865 RSC .M. Zhang, Y. Lin, T. J. Mullen, W. Lin, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan, T. E. Pattern, D. Wang and G. Liu, Improving Hematite's Solar Water Splitting Efficiency by Incorporating Rare-Earth Upconversion Nanomaterials, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3188 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang and J. Ohwaki, New transparent vitroceramics codoped with Er3+ and Yb3+ for efficient frequency up-conversion, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 3268 CrossRef CAS .J. Méndez-Ramos, V. Lavín, I. R. Martín, U. R. Rodríguez-Mendoza, J. A. González-Almeida, V. D. Rodríguez, A. D. Lozano-Gorrín and P. Núñez, Optical properties of Er3+ ions in transparent glass ceramics, J. Alloys Compd., 2001, 323–324, 753 CrossRef .J. Méndez-Ramos, A. C. Yanes, A. Santana-Alonso, J. del-Castillo and V. D. Rodríguez, Color tuneability in sol–gel nano-glass-ceramics comprising Yb3+–Er3+–Tm3+ co-doped NaYF4 nanocrystals, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 1273 CrossRef PubMed .A. C. Yanes, A. Santana-Alonso, J. Méndez-Ramos, J. del-Castillo and V. D. Rodríguez, Novel sol–gel nano-glass-ceramics comprising Ln3+-doped YF3 nanocrystals: structure and high efficient UV up-conversion, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3136 CrossRef CAS .P. Esparza, T. Hernández, M. E. Borges, M. C. Álvarez-Galván, J. C. Ruiz-Morales and J. L. G. Fierro, TiO2 modifications by hydrothermal treatment and doping to improve its photocatalytic behaviour under visible light, Catal. Today, 2013, 210, 135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Vogel and V. Venugopalan, Mechanisms of pulsed laser ablation of biological tissues, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 577 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, In vivo photodynamic therapy using up-conversion nanoparticles as remote-controlled nanotransducers, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580 CrossRef PubMed .L. T. Su, S. K. Karuturi, J. Luo, L. Liu, X. Liu, J. Guo, T. C. Sum, R. Deng, H. J. Fan, X. Liu and A. I. Y. Tok, Photon Upconversion in Hetero-nanostructured Photoanodes for Enhanced Near-Infrared Light Harvesting, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. F. Suyver, J. Grimm, M. K. van Veen, D. Biner, K. W. Krämer and H. U. Güdel, Upconversion spectroscopy and properties of NaYF4 doped with Er3+, Tm3+ and/or Yb3+, J. Lumin., 2006, 117, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. D. Rodríguez, V. K. Tikhomirov, J. Méndez-Ramos, J. del-Castillo and C. Görller-Walrand, Measurement of quantum yield of up-conversion luminescence in Er3+-doped nano-glass-ceramics, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2072 CrossRef PubMed .K. Binnemans, P. Tom Jones, K. Van Acker and J. Eyckmans, Oral talk presented in 8th International Conference on f-elements (ICFE-8), Udine, Italy,  26–31 August 2012 Search PubMed .P. Falconnet, The economics of rare earths, J. Less-Common Met., 1985, 111, 9 CrossRef .B. D. James, G. N. Baum, J. Perez and K. N. Baum, Technoeconomic Analysis of Photoelectrochemical (PEC) Hydrogen Production, U.S. Department of Energy, Final Report,  2009 Search PubMed .T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. deGroot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Wang and R. Amal, Artificial photosynthesis as a frontier technology for energy sustainability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074 Search PubMed .K. Maeda and K. Domen, Photocatalytic Water Splitting: Recent Progress and Future Challenges, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Sancho, J. Riesco, C. Jiménez., M. C. Sánchez de Cos, J. Montero and M. López, Solar Radiation Atlas for Spain based on Surface Irradiance Data from EUMETSAT Climate Monitoring-SAF, Communication presented at 2012 EUMETSAT Meteorological Satellite Conference, Sopot, Poland,  3–7 September 2012 Search PubMed .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S4. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra44342fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Solar irradiation standard spectrum (AM 1.5G) along with the main absorption bands of rare-earth (RE) ions (Er3+, Tm3+ and Yb3+) and with the position of the band-gaps for several photocatalytic semiconductor materials, such as TiO2 and Fe2O3. The RE species act as light harvesters collecting as much sun light as possible from the red and NIR sun’s spectrum’s long tail. Then, after suitable energy transfer processes, high intense UV and blue up-conversion emissions are obtained, turning the sun light blue.	 

 	Fig. 2  UV-Vis up-conversion luminescence spectrum of the ZrF4–BaF2–LaF3–AlF3–NaF glass triply doped with 3.5Yb3+, 0.5Er3+ and 0.5Tm3+ ions (in mol%) under 980 nm excitation at 300 mW, for interest in sustainable H2 generation by water-splitting. The position of the band-gap for two photocatalytic semiconductor materials, TiO2 and Fe2O3, is also depicted. The different y-axis scales allow for comparison of the relative intensities between the UV-blue and green-red up-conversion emission bands.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the slurry-type heterogeneous photocatalysis reactor for methylene blue degradation. The TiO2 photocatalytic semiconductor particles are surrounded by RE-doped ZBLAN powder. The superior penetration depth for the IR pump radiation, which is absorbed and subsequently upconverted by the RE-doped particles, is also represented. The upper right inset shows a TEM image of the TiO2 Degussa P25 photocatalyst as regular isolated crystallites.29	 

 	Fig. 4  Temporal evolution of the methylene blue (MB) degradation rate in the (upper curves) TiO2-driven photocatalysis and the (lower curves) photolysis experiments under Xe-lamp and UV light irradiation. Both MB photocatalytic and photolytic removal rates under Xe-lamp irradiation are noticeably improved by adding the RE-doped ZBLAN agent to the slurry-type photo-reactor, approaching the behavior obtained under intense UV Hg-lamp irradiation, also depicted for comparison. The adsorption of the pollutant evaluated without light irradiation is also included.	 

 	Fig. 5  Envisaged semi-industrial exploitation for the sustainable production of hydrogen by means of solar seawater-splitting using an existing infrastructure of traditional solar salt flats available in the Canary Islands. Global surface irradiance mean field maps39 taken by EUMETSAT are also included.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S4. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra44342f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
