Light management in plastic–paper hybrid substrate towards high-performance optoelectronics   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01011C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01011C
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2278-2285Light management in plastic–paper hybrid substrate towards high-performance optoelectronics†

        
          
            Yonggang 
            Yao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jinsong 
            Tao‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Zou‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Bilun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tian 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sha 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun Kelvin 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Doug 
            Henderson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emily 
            Hitz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Junbiao 
            Peng
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Liangbing 
            Hu
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland College Park, College Park, Maryland, 20742 USA. E-mail: binghu@umd.edu
bState Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, and State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, and Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640 China. E-mail: psjbpeng@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      6th April 2016
    , Accepted 23rd May 2016First published on 23rd May 2016AbstractOptoelectronic devices are ubiquitously built on substrates. To increase the efficiencies of light coupling into and out of optoelectronic devices, such as thin film solar cells and flexible lighting, a substrate with high transmittance and high haze is desired. Unfortunately, optical transmittance and optical haze are usually contrasting to each other in common substrates: plastic is highly transparent but with a low optical haze, whereas paper has a high optical haze but a low total transmittance. Herein, we combine these two materials through a simple templated infiltration approach to achieve a new type of substrate, plastic–paper, which has a high optical transmittance (>85%) and high transmittance haze (>90%) in a broadband wavelength. The plastic–paper has an ultra-flat surface, is mechanically flexible, durable in different solvents and compatible with standard processing in semiconductors, which are shown by organic light emitting diodes (OLED) fabricated directly onto the plastic–paper substrate. Plastic–paper leads to improved light coupling into and out of optoelectronic devices and demonstrates an improvement in efficiency for both OLED and typical GaAs solar cells. The fabrication method is also fully scalable with roll-to-roll production. The newly developed low-cost, high-performance transparent and hazy substrate is attractive for a range of optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
Plastic is widely used for printing and information media due to its excellent optical transmittance, clarity, flexibility and mechanical strength, whereas paper substrates with micro-sized fibers have been used for 2000 years. In this study, we integrated plastic into mesoporous paper to achieve a new type of substrate: plastic–paper. This hybrid substrate combines the advantages of both substrates and leads to unique optical properties: high optical transmittance and simultaneously high optical haze. This novel and unique combination of optical properties results in dramatic light coupling in a broad wavelength range and broad angle for improved power conversion efficiencies of optoelectronic devices. This novel transparent plastic–paper can be fabricated via the roll-to-roll fabrication method and can be applied to a range of optoelectronic applications.

Introduction
Flexible electronics are becoming increasingly popular as compared to silicon-based technologies because of their flexibility, lightweight and scalable roll-to-roll manufacturing.1–6 Substrates play a key role in enabling the success of flexible electronics, and they act as a mechanical support and sometimes functional components for devices built on them.7–13 For flexible optoelectronics, such as organic-light-emitting-diodes (OLED) and solar cells, the optical properties of the substrates are critical as light needs to be coupled into or out of the device through transparent substrates.9,10,14–16 Plastics are the most used flexible substrates and they have a high transmittance of up to 90%.9,17–19 However, plastic substrates only transmit light and have limited capability in light management, resulting in only about 20% of light coming out of the OLED after multiple reflections and scatterings at interfaces, even though the internal quantum efficiency approaches 100%.9 Similarly, for solar cells, more than 30% of incident light is lost to air–semiconductor interfaces.12 Therefore, the greatest potential for the improvement of power conversion efficiency lies in the enhancement of light coupling through the substrate.9,12,16,18
Different light outcoupling designs and additional light management layers have been studied for OLED on plastic or glass substrates without the light coupling capability such as glass with a high refractive index to eliminate light scattering at emitter/glass interfaces,9,20 an additional half sphere lens to minimize light scattering at glass/air interfaces,9 and an additional outcoupling polymer layer17 with dispersed SiO2 microparticles.18 Similar antireflection coatings have been developed for solar cell applications by thin film interference and metal/dielectric plasmonic nanostructures.12,21–24 However, all these processes introduce additional fabrication steps (film deposition and subwavelength structures) and increase costs, and the enhancement is generally wavelength and angle dependent.
Alternatively, researchers have found that transparent substrates with built-in high transmission haze can effectively enable light coupling into or out of the device through the substrate and show broadband and angle insensitive responses.4,12,14,25 For example, Ag nanowires embedded in plastics can act as a transparent electrode with certain degree of haze.26–31 Paper has intrinsically high haze due to randomly mixed cellulose fibers that can largely scatter light, however paper scatters light heavily due to its porous structure and light scattering at numerous fiber/air interfaces. Finely tailoring the size32–34 and shape4,35–37 of cellulose fibers by chemical and mechanical treatments can result in different optical properties with high transparency and tunable haze,25,32–36,38–41 which allow broad angle absorption and broad angle scattering with more light absorbed or emitted, especially at high angles. However, the fabrication processes for tailoring cellulose fibers and removing solvents in papermaking are time and energy intensive, and produce large amounts of wastewater containing toxic chemicals, while the haze properties in these nano-papers are limited.14,36,39,42 Besides, nano-papers based on pure cellulose fibers are prone to water and vapor permeation as well as solvent disintegration, which make them unsuitable for direct device fabrication as well as long time operation. To avoid the fabrication inefficiency and limited haze caused by nanofibers in nano-paper, a transparent substrate based on regular paper with high transmission haze can be a solution. Opaque paper can be directly turned into a transparent substrate via polymer impregnation.32,43–46 However, studies on plastic–fiber composites have focused on mechanical improvement in fiber reinforced plastic composites and on achieving higher transparency in plastic–nanofiber composites. The unique high transmission haze caused by randomly distributed fibers in the nonwoven paper backbone is unknown.
Therefore, for flexible optoelectronic devices, the ideal substrate should have (1) high transparency and high haze for improved efficiency through light transmission and coupling in the substrate, and (2) a flat surface with good mechanical and chemical stability that are compatible with various devices fabrication processes, and (3) production in an inexpensive, scalable manner. Herein, we report a novel plastic–paper structure, wherein polymers are well infiltrated in mesoporous paper made of micro-sized cellulose fibers and form a super flat surface layer by template transferring. This hybrid substrate combines the advantages of both substrates and leads to unique optical properties: a high optical haze (up to 90%) comparable to a paper substrate and high total transmittance (up to 85%) comparable to plastic. The newly developed substrate has bendability like paper, but unlike paper, is highly resistance to water and many solvents. Its unique optical haze and transmittance lead to an extraordinary performance when used in organic light emitting diodes and thin film solar cells: a 35–40% increase in current efficiency for OLED and 15% energy conversion efficiency increase for thin film solar cells compared with that of glass substrates. The plastic–paper is fabricated from the backbone of regular paper via a simple, scalable polymer infiltration. Its excellent performance and low-cost, scalable manufacturing make the plastic–paper extremely attractive for a range of flexible optoelectronics beyond solar cells and OLED lighting.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the schematic structure change from paper to plastic–paper by templated polymer infiltration. As shown in the schematic, paper is composed of cellulose microfibers with micro-sized pores, which lead to a rough surface (micrometer roughness) and strong light scattering at numerous fiber–air interfaces, and this results in the high opacity of paper (transmittance <40%) and high haze (>90%). On the other hand, plastic has excellent optical transmittance (∼90%) but low haze (<5%) due to its homogeneous structure. Herein, we combine the two materials through a simple templated infiltration approach to achieve a new type of substrate, plastic–paper, which has a high optical transmittance (>85%) and a high transmittance haze (>90%). By templated polymer infiltration, the micro-sized air pores inside the paper were filled with a polymer having a similar refractive index and super flat surface layers were formed by transferring from the templates, which led to a minimized surface and interface scattering with high optical transparency for the plastic–paper. Moreover, the plastic–paper still has numerous interfaces between polymer and cellulose microfibers, which lead to small angle scattering inside the plastic–paper, resulting in a high transmission haze.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic showing the combination of plastic and paper to form a plastic–paper substrate via templated polymer infiltration. (b) Images of a plastic–paper by PDMS templated epoxy-resin infiltration into porous paper. The letters behind the plastic–paper displays different readability, which is due to the high transparency and high haze of the plastic–paper. 
In our study, regular roll paper was used as the paper substrate. The mesoporous, fibrous structure of the paper substrate allows fast polymer infiltration to form the plastic–paper hybrid substrate. Transparent thermal setting epoxy resin was used as the infiltration polymer because it has a refractive index of 1.522, which is similar to that of cellulose, 1.544,47 thus ensuring less scattering at the interfaces. Moreover, epoxy resin has low viscosity and superior mobility before curing and can infiltrate micro-sized cavities easily, while it shows good mechanical properties and excellent solvent stability after curing, which can protection cellulose paper from easily fracturing or disintegrated by solvents during device fabrication.6,9,13,18 Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) was used as a flat template for templated infiltration to ensure super flat surface transferring. Note that PDMS neither reacts with nor sticks to epoxy resin and is well studied for surface feature transfer.48Fig. 1b shows images of the plastic–paper made from a roll paper by the templated infiltration of epoxy resin. The clear letters at the lower part (plastic–paper attached to the background) indicate high transparency while the fuzzy letters at the upper part (plastic–paper away from the background) indicate high haze.
Apart from unique optical properties, the plastic–paper hybrid substrate benefits from excellent mechanical and permeation ability from the templated infiltration, and has a super flat surface and shows improved mechanical strength, excellent folding tolerance and solvent stability compared to the original paper, and also benefits from the excellent encapsulation of epoxy resin. The materials and manufacturing infrastructures for plastic–paper are readily available in the industry, which makes the newly developed plastic–paper attractive as a high performance and low-cost substrate for optoelectronics.
The templated infiltration was carried out by the infiltration of epoxy resin (20 wt% paper) on both sides of roll paper and sandwiched between two flat PDMS films for curing under pressure. The PDMS film (transferred from silicon wafer/corning glass) allows super flat surface transferring and easy release from the epoxy resin after it is fully cured. Fig. 2a and b show the top view of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of roll paper and plastic–paper. Roll paper shows micro-sized cellulose fibers squeezed into a flat shape and intertwined together to form paper with micrometer surface roughness. After the templated infiltration of epoxy resin, the plastic–paper shows a super smooth surface without clear features, as shown in Fig. 2b. The porous and rough surface was replaced a dense and flat surface resin layer. Fig. 2c and d show the cross-section SEM images of roll paper and plastic–paper. The cross-section of roll paper shows a loosely packed structure with micro-sized fibers and pores, whereas the plastic–paper shows a densely packed structure with the epoxy resin well infiltrated into the paper. Moreover, a thin surface (<10 μm) was formed on both sides by templated curing, which ensures the flatness of plastic–paper for device fabrication. To further characterize the surface smoothness, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to examine an area of the plastic–paper of 1.6 μm × 1.6 μm, which showed a local surface roughness of approximately 3 nm (Fig. 2e). The super flat surface benefits from the PDMS template during the curing of epoxy resin.
 Fig. 2  SEM top view of regular paper (a) and plastic–paper (b). SEM cross section view of paper (c) and plastic–paper (d). (e) AFM characterization of plastic–paper, showing a ∼3 nm surface roughness. 
The mesoporous structure with a rough surface leads to strong light scattering at fiber/air interfaces and results in the high opacity of paper. Furthermore, porous paper has poor mechanical properties and poor solvent stability due to its loosely packed structure. Its high opacity, porous structure, and rough surface make paper unsuitable as a flexible substrate for devices to be built on. After templated infiltration, the small surface roughness of the hybrid substrate is critical to minimize light scattering at the surface for high transparency and also to ensure successful micro-devices fabrication on the surface. High stability in many solvents and the ultra low water and vapor permeation rate of epoxy resin47,49 was also maintained in the plastic–paper substrate.
The optical properties of plastic, paper, and transparent plastic–paper were comparably studied and they showed drastically different optical performances that can be used for different purposes. The total transmittance of polyethylene terephthalate (PET), roll paper and plastic–paper were measured using an integrated sphere. As shown in Fig. 3a, PET has the highest optical transmittance of ∼90%, and plastic–paper is comparable with a total transmittance of ∼85–90% from 400 nm to 1100 nm (broadband), whereas the paper substrate has the lowest optical transmittance of less than 40%. The broadband, high transmittance of plastic–paper is the direct result of its flat surface and increased packing density after polymer infiltration into the porous paper (density between 7 mg cm−2 and 9.5 mg cm−2).
 Fig. 3  (a) Total transmittance of plastic (PET), roll paper and plastic paper measured by an integrated sphere. (b) Transmittance haze of PET plastic, paper and plastic–paper. Inset shows the visual effect of light scattering effects of plastic–paper. (c) Angular distribution of transmitted light on different substrates. Note that the Y-axis is on the logarithmic scale. (d) Figure of merit for different substrates with regard to total transmittance and transmission haze. Plastic–paper has the optimized combination of high transmittance (similar to plastic) and high transmission haze (similar to paper). 
Optical haze is used to describe light scattering ability and was measured for these substrates, as shown in Fig. 3b. PET shows an ultra low transmission haze below 5%, whereas both paper and plastic–paper show high haze above ∼90% from 400 nm to 1100 nm (broadband), namely, most of the light was reflected and scattered when it passed through paper and plastic–paper. The light scattering effect, or haze effect, is visually displayed in the inset of Fig. 3b. When a green laser went through, the plastic–paper showed a high intensity and highly scattered light pattern on the wall, which indicate both good light transmittance, as well as high haze. The high haze of plastic–paper comes from the significant scattering at the epoxy resin–cellulose interface and mesoporous structure in the primary cellulose fibers. The angle dependence of haze for plastic–paper was also characterized by the angular distribution of laser transmittance through different substrates, as shown in Fig. 3c. Plastic PET has a very narrow-angle distribution and the transmitted light for plastic was focused within an angle less than 2° (estimated as 5% of peak intensity), whereas paper and plastic–paper had similarly broad angle distributions (60°–80°), and the transmitted light intensity for plastic–paper is one order higher than that of paper in a broad angle range.
However, such optical behavior is impossible for traditional substrates such as paper, plastic and glass. A traditional approach for light management is to start with transparent and clear substrates and add another layer of coating or create other features to add optical haze.12 Often, light management through traditional approaches needs additional fabrication steps and the enhancement is not broadband. The plastic–paper developed in this study shows the combined advantages of plastic and paper, as shown in Fig. 3d, to achieve built-in high haze and high transmittance in a broad wavelength range and broad angle for the improved efficiency of optoelectronics devices such as solar cells and LED lighting.
In addition to its outstanding optical properties, the plastic–paper also shows improved mechanical properties and excellent solvent stability, which are critical for direct device fabrication. Fig. 4a shows stress–strain curves for the substrates of paper, plastic–paper, and epoxy resin film. For paper, epoxy resin and plastic–paper, the ultimate strength and storage modulus of plastic–paper is highest due to the composite effect wherein the epoxy resin can hold the porous fiber together, while the fiber structure can reinforce the polymer matrix. Fig. 4b shows the folding endurance of roll paper and plastic–paper. The sample strip was pulled with a constant force (14.7 N) and folded to 135° repeatedly until it was broken. Compared with roll paper, the plastic–paper shows 10 times increased folding endurance capacity both in the longitudinal direction (length direction of roll paper) and transverse direction (width direction of roll paper), which can be explained by its densely packed structure with enhanced mechanical properties due to the addition of epoxy resin. The increased mechanical properties, especially tear folding capacity, enable the usage of plastic–paper as an enduring transparent substrate under constant bending or flexible applications.
 Fig. 4  (a) Mechanical stress–stain curves for paper, plastic–paper, and epoxy resin film. (b) Folding capacity measurement of roll paper and plastic–paper in the longitudinal direction (length direction of roll paper) and transverse direction (width direction of roll paper). (c) Stability test of paper and plastic–paper in water for 3 weeks. The entire cellulose paper disintegrates while the plastic–paper is stable and can maintain its shape. (d) Stability test of plastic–paper in solvents used in semiconductor fabrication processes including photoresist 1813, developer IMBK:IPA (3:1) and acetone for one day. 
Solvents stability is an important concern during the device fabrication process. Unlike paper substrates, which are not stable in solvents (especially water) and change shapes after experiencing wet–dry cycles, plastic–paper is highly stable in solvents widely used in semiconductor processing. After a three-week-long water stability test, regular roll paper had completely disintegrated into cellulose microfibers, while the plastic–paper maintained its shape without any noticeable changes (Fig. 4c). The epoxy resin itself is highly water resistant and it crosslinks the cellulose microfibers together to prevent disintegration.49 When soaked in solvents (including water) and taken out to dry, regular paper tends to swell and then dry with many wrinkles, which is a major challenge for micro-device fabrication. The plastic–paper does not experience this problem and has good shape retention. We also confirmed the stability of plastic–paper in chemicals and solvents required for standard lithography and device fabrication such as photoresist (1813), developer (IMBK:IPA = 3:1), and acetone for at least 1 day (Fig. 4d). The plastic–paper showed great shape retention and excellent stability in these chemicals and solvents and therefore can be directly used as a flexible substrate for many devices requiring lithography and patterning processes containing different solvents. The water and vapor permeation rate (WVPR) is critical for devices containing sensitive components such as conductive and semi-conductive polymers. Epoxy resin is well-known for its ultra-low WVPR, which is often used for device encapsulation.49 By templated infiltration, the air permeation rate of roll paper dropped from 2380 mL min−1 to below the detection limit after epoxy infiltration. Although the dense epoxy surface layer is thin (∼10 μm), the plastic–paper substrate shows an average WVPR of 5.8 g m−2 day−1, which is at the same level of typical plastics (PET 5–20 g m−2 day−1 and PEN 2–5 g m−2 day−1).50–52 All the synergistic improvements in surface structure, mechanical properties, solvents stabilities and air permeation rate after epoxy infiltration make plastic–paper a qualified substrate for device fabrication.
To demonstrate the process compatibility and the enhanced light coupling of transparent plastic–paper in optoelectronics, a 3 mm × 3 mm green OLED was fabricated directly on the plastic–paper.13,18,53 OLED technology requires a substrate of the highest standard due to multiple layer fabrication processes, as well as the demanding requirement of device encapsulation. Standard photolithography was used to pattern the substrate and the multilayer OLED structure is shown in Fig. 5a, wherein indium tin oxide (ITO) is the anode; F4-TCNQ, tetrafluoro-tetracyanoquino dimethane, doped into N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-benzidine (MeO-TPD) is the hole injection layer; NPB, N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine, is the hole transport layer; TCTA, 4,4′,4′′-tri(9-carbazoyl) triphenylamine, is the exciton/electron blocking layer; Ir(ppy)3, tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium(III), is a green emitter; Bepp2, bis[2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-pyridine] beryllium, is a green emitter host and electronic transport layer; LiF is the electron injection layer and Al is the cathode.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the OLED device structure built on a plastic–paper substrate. (b) A flexible OLED unit built on plastic–paper lit under a bending state. (c) Current and light output efficiency as a function of OLED operation voltage for the OLED built on plastic–paper which has a higher efficiency than that built on a glass substrate. (d) Current and voltage profile of a GaAs solar cell with a plastic–paper lamination on top to show the efficiency increase by plastic–paper lamination. (e) Schematic showing efficient light coupling (for solar cells) with transparent and haze plastic–paper. 
The device shows excellent operational performance even under a bent state, as shown in Fig. 5b. The current–voltage profile and the luminescence profile of the OLED built on a plastic–paper substrate are shown in Fig. 5c. Compared with OLED cells fabricated on glass and plastic (polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)) substrates, cells with the same structure built on plastic–paper shows an improved current efficiency of up to 35–50% and a 5–20% improvement in luminescent efficacy. A detailed comparison of the OLEDs on glass and plastic–paper substrates is summarized in Table 1 and detailed data is in the Supplement Material.
Table 1 OLED performance on plastic–paper compared with OLEDs built on plastic (PEN) and glass substrates, wherein the transparency and haze in plastic–paper lead to a much-improved device performance. V: voltage, CE: current efficiency; PE: power efficiency or luminescence efficacy




Device
1 (cd m−2)
100 (cd m−2)
1000 (cd m−2)



V
on (V)
CE (cd A−1)
PE (lm W−1)

V
on (V)
CE (cd A−1)
PE (lm W−1)




OLED on plastic (PEN)
2.8
63.7
62.7
3.8
61.4
52.3


OLED on plastic–paper
3.2
90
74.3
4.8
91
59.8


Efficiency increase


41.3%
18.5%


48.85%
14.34%


OLED on glass
2.8
66.6
69.7
3.8
65
56.8


OLED on plastic–paper
3.2
90
74.3
4.8
91
59.8


Efficiency increase


35.1%
6.6%


40%
5.3%




The application of transparent and haze paper can be extended to other optoelectronic devices for improved efficiency, such as solar cells and photo-electrochemical water splitting when light coupling is critical.6,12,54,55 By simply laminating a plastic–paper on top of GaAs solar cells, the power conversion efficiency is improved by up to 15%. The dark current density increases from 12.7 mA cm−2 to 14.4 mA cm−2 upon the application of a plastic–paper (Fig. 5d) due to high haze effect of plastic–paper, as well as index matching. As shown in Fig. 5e, the refractive index of transparent substrates is between air and GaAs or silicon semiconductor solar cells and therefore the reflection at the air/semiconductor interface can be reduced due to index matching (∼5% improvement).12 Compared with glass or plastic substrates, which have high transparency but ultra-low haze, plastic–paper will largely improve the light absorption by broad angle absorption and also increase the coupling length in solar cells due to broad angle scattering. The broad angle absorption and scattering come from the high haze effect of plastic–paper which is angle insensitive for light transmission. The improved light absorption and coupling lead to increase solar cell efficiency when light is incident from a large angle and remove the need for solar tracker. Similarly, for OLED lighting devices with reverse light pathways, more light can be coupled out through plastic–paper due to the high haze effect with broad angle transmission ability.
The transparent plastic–paper has excellent optical properties and is fully compatible with optoelectronic device fabrication with enhanced performance due to improved light management. Using the simple templated infiltration method, we have developed a meter long transparent plastic–paper (Fig. 6a). The newly-developed substrate can also be fabricated via a scalable fabrication process in the well-developed paper industry. In the existing roll-to-roll paper fabrication line, polymer infiltration and drying can be easily incorporated, as shown in Fig. 6b. The roll-to-roll processable transparent plastic–paper with unique optical properties can be integrated into a range of low-cost optoelectronics with a much-improved performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Meter long transparent plastic–paper developed in our lab. (b) Schematic showing the potential roll-to-roll fabrication of transparent plastic paper based on the processes reported in this study. The commercial cellulose paper runs into a polymer bath with a design concentration. The extra amount of polymer is removed by coating blades before the substrate is dried in a furnace using the well-developed roll-to-roll process. 
Conclusion
For the first time, we utilize an extremely simple method to dramatically improve the optical transmittance of regular paper while keeping its high optical haze. The resulting transparent plastic–paper has the advantages of plastic and paper: high transmittance, high haze, smooth surface, overall enhancement of mechanical performance, and solvent stability. In addition, the plastic–paper is fully compatible with lithography based optoelectronic device fabrication. Bendable OLED devices with an enhanced lighting efficiency compared with standard substrate were demonstrated, due to the improved light coupling. We have also demonstrated scalable transparent plastic that is potentially roll-to-roll compatible. The newly develop transparent plastic–paper is extremely attractive for a range of energy efficient optoelectronics applications, such as OLED and solar cells, wherein traditional paper or plastic alone cannot meet the requirement.
Experimental section
Plastic–paper fabrication
Regular roll paper (Boardwalk B1540900 Butcher Paper, 15′′ × 900 ft, White Roll) was coated by epoxy resin (AeroMarine 300/21 epoxy resin). In the infiltration process, base (#300) and curing (#21) polymers were mixed together with a volume ratio of 2:1 and degassed under vacuum for 5 minutes. Then, the epoxy resin (20 wt% roll paper) was uniformly applied to each side of the roll paper. A PDMS (Sylgard 184) template was used as a flat template for epoxy curing. The PDMS was poured onto a high-quality glass (Corning) and cured at 150 °C for 20 min with superior surface flatness. The roll paper with epoxy resin (20 wt%) on each side was sandwiched between two PDMS templates and flattened by a glass rod. Then, the paper in between PDMS was naturally dried in air for 1 day under pressure.
Characterization
SEM measurement was carried out on a Hitachi SU-70 SEM with a voltage of 10 kV. AFM measurements were performed on a Digital Instruments Multimode AFM in tapping mode. Optical transmittance and haze were measured on a LAMBDA 1050 UV/Vis/NIR Spectrophotometer with an integrated sphere. Angular light scattering was measured on a lab setup with a green laser as the source and a motor for angle rotation. Strain–stress curves were obtained on a Tinius Olsen H25KT while the foldability test was conducted on an MIT/U21B with a folding angle of 135 degrees at 175 folds per minute. The air permeation rate was measured on an L&W 166 with a measurement size of 50 cm2. Solar cell efficiency was measured on a Newport Model 91159 full spectrum solar simulator.
Fabrication of OLED on plastic–paper
(1) A 200 × 200 mm2 plastic–paper substrate with a thickness of 120 μm was attached to the same size glass carrier (conventional alkali-free glass, 0.7 mm thick) as a mechanical support during the device fabrication process. (2) 100 nm ITO film was deposited on plastic–paper substrates by radio frequency magnetron sputtering with a power density of 6.2 W cm−2. The measured sheet resistance of the ITO films was approximately 40 Ω sq−1. (3) The ITO film was patterned using the conventional photolithography process. (4) The configuration of the Green OLEDs is shown in Fig. 5a. All layers were thermally deposited without breaking the vacuum at a base pressure of 2 × 10−7 Torr. The deposition rates of both host and guest were controlled by their corresponding independent quartz crystal oscillators. (5) Devices were encapsulated immediately after preparation under a nitrogen atmosphere using SiNx (300 nm) thin films, which were fabricated using PECVD. The fabrication parameters for OLEDs on glass and plastic substrates are similar to those of OLED on plastic–paper.
Characterization of OLED on plastic–paper
The electroluminescence (EL) spectra of the devices were obtained on a Konica Minolta CS2000 spectra system. The emission area of the devices was 3 × 3 mm2 as defined by the overlapping area of the anode and cathode. Luminance–current density (J) and voltage (V) were recorded simultaneously using a computer controlled source meter (Keithley 2400) and a multimeter (Keithley 2000) with a calibrated silicon photodiode.
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by the 3 M non-tenured faculty program and the National Science Foundation #1362256. We would like to thank Dr Zhiqiang Fang for folding resistance measurement, Dr Yuhuang Wang and Mr Brendan Meany for UV-Vis spectrum measurements, and Dr Jeremy Munday and Mr Joe Murphy for angular light scattering measurements. The Maryland Nanocenter and its NispLab are also greatly acknowledged. Dr Jianhua Zou and Dr Junbiao Peng would like to thank 973 chief project (No. 2015CB655000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61574061 and 61574062), Science and Technology Project of Guangdong Province (No. 2014B090915004, 2014B090916002 and 2015B090914003). Dr Tao acknowledges the funding of the State Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, South China University of Technology (Grant No. 201233 and 2014C17), and the funding of the Guangdong Province Industrial Science and technology projects (Grant No. 2013B010406003).
References

          W. S. Wong and A. Salleo, Flexible Electronics: Materials and Applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Jin, J. Lee, S. Jeong, S. Yang, J.-H. Ko, H.-G. Im, S.-W. Baek, J.-Y. Lee and B.-S. Bae, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1811 CAS .
G. Zheng, Y. Cui, E. Karabulut, L. Wågberg, H. Zhu and L. Hu, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 320 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, N. Butchosa and Q. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jung, T.-H. Chang, H. Zhang, C. Yao, Q. Zheng, V. W. Yang, H. Mi, M. Kim, S. J. Cho, D.-W. Park, H. Jiang, J. Lee, Y. Qiu, W. Zhou, Z. Cai, S. Gong and Z. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7170 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hu, G. Zheng, J. Yao, N. Liu, B. Weil, M. Eskilsson, E. Karabulut, Z. Ruan, S. Fan, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee, L. Wågberg and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 513 CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T.-S. Kim and J.-Y. Lee, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Oida, G. S. Tulevski, S.-J. Han, J. B. Hannon, D. K. Sadana and T.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2294 Search PubMed .
W. Bao, Z. Fang, J. Wan, J. Dai, H. Zhu, X. Han, X. Yang, C. Preston and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ha, Z. Fang, L. Hu and J. N. Munday, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 13011804 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu, Z. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Li, N. J. Weadock, Z. Fang, J. Huang and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2105 CAS .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, Y. Yuan, D. Ha, S. Zhu, C. Preston, Q. Chen, Y. Li, X. Han, S. Lee, G. Chen, T. Li, J. Munday, J. Huang and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koga, M. Nogi, N. Komoda, T. T. Nge, T. Sugahara and K. Suganuma, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e93 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, A. Raman, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2725 CAS .
E. Najafabadi, K. A. Knauer, W. Haske, C. Fuentes-Hernandez and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 023304 CrossRef .
B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Xu, H. Tao, D. Gao, J. Zou, L. Lan, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9836 RSC .
T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Gaertner, H. Greiner, in Organic Optoelectronics and Photonics III, ed. P. L. Heremans, M. Muccini and E. A. Meulenkamp,  2008, vol. 6999, p. 69992T Search PubMed.
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. H. Yu, W. Lin, Y. H. Chen and C. Y. Chang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 5 Search PubMed .
P. Spinelli, M. A. Verschuuren and A. Polman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Z. Fang, Z. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, F. Shen, C. Preston, W. Wu, P. Peng, N. Jang, Q. Yu, Z. Yu and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Yu, W. Hu, C. H. Chang, Q. Chen and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, L. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, R. Wang, Y. Lu and Q. Pei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1298 RSC .
Z. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Kim and J. J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1010 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yano, J. Sugiyama, A. N. Nakagaito, M. Nogi, T. Matsuura, M. Hikita and K. Handa, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nogi, N. Komoda, K. Otsuka and K. Suganuma, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4395 RSC .
J. Zhong, H. Zhu, Q. Zhong, J. Dai, W. Li, S.-H. Jang, Y. Yao, D. Henderson, Q. Hu, L. Hu and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Isogai, T. Saito and H. Fukuzumi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 71 RSC .
H. Sehaqui, A. Liu, Q. Zhou and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Butchosa, C. Brown, P. T. Larsson, L. a. Berglund, V. Bulone and Q. Zhou, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 3404 RSC .
F. Ansari, A. Sjöstedt, P. T. Larsson, L. A. Berglund and L. Wågberg, Composites, Part A, 2015, 74, 60 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, W. Bao, C. Preston, Z. Liu and J. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3313 CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Fang, C. Preston, Y. Li and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 269 CAS .
M. Nogi, S. Iwamoto, A. N. Nakagaito and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1595 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, C. Preston, X. Han, Y. Li, S. Lee, X. Chai, G. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6191 RSC .
S. Liu, D. Tao, T. Yu, H. Shu, R. Liu and X. Liu, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 907 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nogi, S. Ifuku, K. Abe, K. Handa, A. N. Nakagaito and H. Yano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 2004 CrossRef .
C. Tang and H. Liu, Composites, Part A, 2008, 39, 1638 CrossRef .
M. Nogi and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1849 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Brandrup, E. H. Immergut, E. A. Grulke, A. Abe and D. R. Bloch, Polymer Handbook, Wiley, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 153 CrossRef CAS .
B. Choi, S. Woo and J. Kim, Imeko, 2012, 3 Search PubMed .
J. Fahlteich, M. Fahland, W. Schönberger and N. Schiller, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 3075 CrossRef CAS .
A. Erlat, B. Henry, C. Grovenor, A. Briggs, R. Chater and Y. Tsukahara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 883 CrossRef CAS .

          L. K. Massey, Permeability Properties of Plastics and Elastomers: A Guide to Packaging and Barrier Materials, William Andrew,  2003 Search PubMed .
H. Xu, D. Luo, M. Xu, J. Zou, H. Tao, L. Wang and J. Peng, SID Int. Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2014, 45, 260 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 235 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01011c‡ Equally contributed.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Plastic is widely used for printing and information media due to its excellent optical transmittance, clarity, flexibility and mechanical strength, whereas paper substrates with micro-sized fibers have been used for 2000 years. In this study, we integrated plastic into mesoporous paper to achieve a new type of substrate: plastic–paper. This hybrid substrate combines the advantages of both substrates and leads to unique optical properties: high optical transmittance and simultaneously high optical haze. This novel and unique combination of optical properties results in dramatic light coupling in a broad wavelength range and broad angle for improved power conversion efficiencies of optoelectronic devices. This novel transparent plastic–paper can be fabricated via the roll-to-roll fabrication method and can be applied to a range of optoelectronic applications.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic showing the combination of plastic and paper to form a plastic–paper substrate via templated polymer infiltration. (b) Images of a plastic–paper by PDMS templated epoxy-resin infiltration into porous paper. The letters behind the plastic–paper displays different readability, which is due to the high transparency and high haze of the plastic–paper.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM top view of regular paper (a) and plastic–paper (b). SEM cross section view of paper (c) and plastic–paper (d). (e) AFM characterization of plastic–paper, showing a ∼3 nm surface roughness.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Total transmittance of plastic (PET), roll paper and plastic paper measured by an integrated sphere. (b) Transmittance haze of PET plastic, paper and plastic–paper. Inset shows the visual effect of light scattering effects of plastic–paper. (c) Angular distribution of transmitted light on different substrates. Note that the Y-axis is on the logarithmic scale. (d) Figure of merit for different substrates with regard to total transmittance and transmission haze. Plastic–paper has the optimized combination of high transmittance (similar to plastic) and high transmission haze (similar to paper).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Mechanical stress–stain curves for paper, plastic–paper, and epoxy resin film. (b) Folding capacity measurement of roll paper and plastic–paper in the longitudinal direction (length direction of roll paper) and transverse direction (width direction of roll paper). (c) Stability test of paper and plastic–paper in water for 3 weeks. The entire cellulose paper disintegrates while the plastic–paper is stable and can maintain its shape. (d) Stability test of plastic–paper in solvents used in semiconductor fabrication processes including photoresist 1813, developer IMBK:IPA (3:1) and acetone for one day.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the OLED device structure built on a plastic–paper substrate. (b) A flexible OLED unit built on plastic–paper lit under a bending state. (c) Current and light output efficiency as a function of OLED operation voltage for the OLED built on plastic–paper which has a higher efficiency than that built on a glass substrate. (d) Current and voltage profile of a GaAs solar cell with a plastic–paper lamination on top to show the efficiency increase by plastic–paper lamination. (e) Schematic showing efficient light coupling (for solar cells) with transparent and haze plastic–paper.	 


OLED on plastic (PEN)	2.8	63.7	62.7	3.8	61.4	52.3
OLED on plastic–paper	3.2	90	74.3	4.8	91	59.8
Efficiency increase	
	41.3%	18.5%	
	48.85%	14.34%
OLED on glass	2.8	66.6	69.7	3.8	65	56.8
OLED on plastic–paper	3.2	90	74.3	4.8	91	59.8
Efficiency increase	
	35.1%	6.6%	
	40%	5.3%

 	Fig. 6  (a) Meter long transparent plastic–paper developed in our lab. (b) Schematic showing the potential roll-to-roll fabrication of transparent plastic paper based on the processes reported in this study. The commercial cellulose paper runs into a polymer bath with a design concentration. The extra amount of polymer is removed by coating blades before the substrate is dried in a furnace using the well-developed roll-to-roll process.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01011c
‡ Equally contributed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
