Acyclic diene  metathesis : a versatile tool for the construction of defined polymer architectures  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B924852H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B924852H
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1404-1445Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsAcyclic diene metathesis: a versatile tool for the construction of defined polymer architectures

        
          
            Hatice 
            Mutlu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lucas Montero 
            de Espinosa
          
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Michael A. R. 
            Meier
          
          
        
      *a
aUniversity of Potsdam, Institute of Chemistry, Laboratory of Sustainable Organic Synthesis, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476 Golm, Germany. E-mail: michael.meier@uni-potsdam.de
bUniversity of Applied Sciences Emden-Leer, Emden, Germany
cMax-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Department of Colloid Chemistry, Research Campus Golm, Potsdam, Germany
Received 
      21st May 2010
    First published on 13th October 2010AbstractTwo decades have passed since the metathesis polymerisation of α,ω-dienes was successfully demonstrated by the group of Wagener and the term acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET) polymerisation was coined. Since then, the advances of metathesis chemistry have allowed to expand the scope of this versatile polymerisation reaction that nowadays finds applications in different fields, such as polymer, material, or medicinal chemistry. This critical review provides an insight into the historical aspects of ADMET and a detailed overview of the work done to date applying this versatile polymerisation reaction (221 references).Hatice MutluHatice Mutlu (left), born in 1981 in Kardzhali, Bulgaria, received her BS in Chemistry in 2005 from Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey. She continued her education in polymer chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Selim Küsefoğlu at Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, and received a MS in Chemistry in 2008. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD studies at the University of Potsdam (Potsdam, Germany), in the group of Prof. Michael A. R. Meier, and is working on research focused on the synthesis of novel monomers and polymers from plant oil renewable resources via olefin metathesis and thiol-ene chemistry.Lucas Montero de Espinosa (right) was born in 1982 in Madrid, Spain. He obtained his Chemistry degree from Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM, Spain) in 2005. He received his PhD in 2009 from Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV, Tarragona, Spain) after his research on thermosetting and flame retardant polymers from plant oil resources with V. Cadiz and J. C. Ronda. Since then, he is performing a postdoctoral stay in the group of Prof. Michael A. R. Meier (University of Potsdam, Germany) holding a postdoctoral Max Plank fellowship from the Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany).Michael A. R. Meier (middle) was born in Ingolstadt (Germany) in 1975. He graduated in chemistry from the University of Regensburg (Germany) in 2002. In July 2006, he finished his PhD at the Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands. In October 2006 he was appointed principal investigator of the junior research group Renewable Raw Materials at the University of Applied Sciences in Emden, Germany. Since June 2009 he is Junior Professor for Sustainable Organic Synthesis at the University of Potsdam, Germany. Recently, he was awarded with the H. P. Kaufmann Prize of the German Society for Fat Science and the 2010 European Young Lipid Scientist Award of the European Federation for the Science and Technology of Lipids.
1. Introduction
The history of olefin metathesis, from the initial reports on double-bond scrambling reactions back in the mid-1950s,1 to the present situation, has shown a constant development, nowadays placing this carbon–carbon bond forming reaction among the most powerful methods for synthetic chemists.2 The first investigations on olefin metathesis were conducted in the early 1960s by researchers at Du Pont, Standard Oil and Philips Petroleum.3 However, it was not until 1967 that Calderon and coworkers recognized that both ring-opening polymerisation of unsaturated alicyclic compounds and the disproportionation of acyclic olefins were the same reaction and coined the term “olefin metathesis” (from Greek, changing or exchanging positions).4 The mechanism of olefin metathesis remained unknown until 1971, when Chauvin and Hérisson proposed the formation of a metal alkylidene and a metallacyclobutane as intermediates of the olefin metathesis reaction (Fig. 1).5
 Fig. 1  Olefin metathesis mechanism proposed by Chauvin and Herisson.5 
The proposed mechanism introduced new essential ideas for the development of new catalysts. It was suggested that metal alkylidene complexes could catalyse olefin metathesis, an idea that was later confirmed by the work of Schrock using molybdenum and tungsten alkylidene complexes (Fig. 2).6–8 A further breakthrough was reported in 1992 with the synthesis of the first well-defined ruthenium alkylidene metathesis catalyst by Grubbs.9 The metathesis activity and functional group tolerance displayed by this catalyst was a big step forward regarding the general applicability of this reaction and was followed by the development of the highly active Grubbs 1st generation catalyst (C3, Fig. 2).10 Later, the introduction of N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) as ligands provided a second generation of ruthenium alkylidene catalysts of improved stability and metathesis activity in the presence of a wide variety of functional groups (Fig. 2).11,12
 Fig. 2  Metathesis catalysts. C1, Schrock's molybdenum alkylidene; C2, Schrock's tungsten alkylidene; C3, Grubbs 1st generation; C4, Grubbs 2nd generation; C5, Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation.6–8,11,12 
The chemical transformations possible via olefin metathesis, as depicted in Fig. 3, include ring-opening metathesis (ROM), ring-closing metathesis (RCM), ring-opening metathesis polymerisation (ROMP), acyclic diene metathesis polymerisation (ADMET), cross-metathesis (CM), self-metathesis (SM), and others. These reactions have enabled the synthesis of an impressively wide range of unsaturated molecules, which were challenging or even impossible to prepare by any other means. Within this critical review, the historical and mechanistic aspects of ADMET are discussed and a thorough overview of the possibilities and limitations of this important synthetic method are described.
 Fig. 3  Most frequently studied metathesis reactions: Self-metathesis (SM), cross-metathesis (CM), acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET), ring-opening metathesis polymerisation (ROMP), ring-opening metathesis (ROM), ring-closing metathesis (RCM). 
1.1 Background
As for all metathesis reactions, the development of ADMET polymerisations have been closely linked to the discovery and optimisation of metathesis catalysts of improved activity, selectivity and stability. The first metathesis reactions applied to α,ω-dienes were reported in the early 1970s using combinations of nitrosyl molybdenum and tungsten compounds with organoaluminium halides as catalytic systems.13 However, only low yields of oligomers could be obtained in the reactions of 1,5-hexadiene and 1,7-octadiene. Further studies in the late 1980s demonstrated that these Lewis acid based catalysts promoted competing reactions, such as the alkylation of the olefin by the cocatalyst and the acid-catalysed vinyl addition of one olefin to another.14 Subsequently, Schrock and coworkers developed a series of highly reactive neutral molybdenum (C1)6 and tungsten (C2)7 metathesis catalysts. The use of these Lewis acid free catalysts by Wagener's group led to the first quantitative metathesis polymerisation15 and copolymerisation16 of 1,5-hexadiene and 1,9-decadiene. These studies resulted in the first examples of high molecular weight polymers (12 kDa with 0.2–0.4 mol% catalyst) obtained by ADMET and were the beginning for a widespread use of this synthetic technique to produce polymers with a large variety of structures for different applications.17 The catalytic system WCl6/SnMe4/PrOAc was also described to polymerise 1,5-hexadiene to Mn ∼ 3 kDa, whereby the use of a Lewis base like propyl acetate was the key to reduce the acid-catalysed side reactions.18 However, when compared to the ADMET as catalysed by Schrock metal alkylidenes, this catalytic system yielded lower molecular weights. Moreover, it required higher temperatures, longer reaction times, and higher catalyst loadings. Other classic catalytic systems, namely WCl4(O-2,6-C6H3Ph2)2, W(O)Cl2(O-2,6-C6H3Br2)2, and WCl4(O-2,6-C6H3Br2)2 were also applied by Wagener and coworkers using Bu3SnH, Me4Sn, and Bu4Sn as cocatalytic agents. These catalytic systems allowed obtaining polyoctenylene and polyheptenylene under bulk polymerisation conditions with Mn over 6 kDa at temperatures above 85 °C.19
The further development of the ADMET polymerisations then depended on the availability of metathesis catalysts being compatible with different functional groups. The single-site tungsten and molybdenum metathesis catalysts discovered by Schrock, for instance, presented an unprecedented activity towards olefin metathesis. However, the reactivity of these early transition metal based catalysts towards other functional groups such as alcohols, ketones, esters or aldehydes clearly limited the application of these catalysts.20 Moreover, the high oxophilicity of the metal centres makes these catalysts extremely sensitive to oxygen and moisture.20 Based on the experience in metathesis chemistry using different catalysts, Grubbs observed that the reactivity of transition metal-based metathesis catalysts towards olefins increases as the metal centre is varied from group 4 to group 8 in the periodic table.21 According to this, by using a transition metal such as ruthenium, which reacts preferentially with carbon–carbon double bonds over most other species, metathesis catalysts of improved functional group tolerance were prepared that offered a yet unknown combination of olefin metathesis activity and functional group tolerance.22 The use of RuCl3(hydrate) for the ROMP of norbonene derivatives was already reported in the 1960s and developed as an industrial process in 1976.23 In 1992, Grubbs and coworkers synthesised the first well-defined metathesis-active ruthenium alkylidene complex, which enabled the effective ROMP of norbornene in the presence or absence of water or methanol.9 This catalyst was the first example of a family of L2X2RuCHR complexes, (PCy3)2Cl2RuCHPh (C3), the so called Grubbs 1st generation catalyst, being one of the best known and nowadays most widely applied catalyst of this series. This catalyst enabled the ADMET polymerisation of 1,9-decadiene24 to high molecular weight polymer (20 kDa with 0.25 mol% catalyst) and demonstrated a good tolerance to ether24 and alcohol-containing25 α,ω-dienes.
The introduction of N-heterocyclic carbenes as ligands11 resulted in important improvements of the catalytic performance of Ru-alkylidene complexes. By substituting one phosphine ligand with a N-heterocyclic carbene, the functional group tolerance was further improved and at the same time the metathesis activity was increased giving rise to a new generation of Ru-alkylidene metathesis catalysts.12 The activity of these catalysts in ADMET polymerisation has been widely demonstrated in a large number of publications that are reviewed herein, the Grubbs 2nd generation (C4)12 and Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation (C5)26 catalysts being the most often applied catalysts.
1.2 The ADMET reaction
Acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET) polymerisation is a step-growth polymerisation driven by the release of a condensate, usually ethylene. ADMET is typically performed on α,ω-dienes to produce well-defined and strictly linear polymers with unsaturated polyethylene backbones, as shown in Fig. 4.27 Like all traditional condensation polymerisations, ADMET polymerisation can only afford high molecular weights at high monomer conversion.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of an ADMET polymerisation of α,ω-dienes. 
The mechanism of the ADMET polymerisation cycle is well established (Fig. 5).17 The olefin coordinates to the metal centre followed by formation of a metallacyclobutane intermediate (1). At this point, the productive cleavage of 1 leads to the formation of the metathesis active alkylidene complex (2). Subsequent reaction with the double bond of a diene produces the metallacyclobutane ring (3), which subsequently leads to polymer formation. The cycle proceeds with coordination of another diene or growing polymer, followed by productive cleavage, and release of ethylene. Since all the species involved in this catalytic cycle are in equilibrium, in order to shift it towards polymer formation, ethylene is usually removed from the reaction mixture by applying vacuum or by using a constant flow of an inert gas, such as nitrogen or argon.
 Fig. 5  Generally accepted mechanism of ADMET polymerisation.17 
Regarding other experimental issues, ADMET polymerisations, just like any other step-growth polymerisation, are preferably performed in bulk to avoid the formation of cyclic oligomers. However, as the polymerisation proceeds and high molecular weights are achieved, the viscosity increases impeding stirring and making an efficient ethylene removal difficult. For this reason, depending on the monomer properties, the use of solvents can be necessary to reach high conversions. In these cases, non-volatile solvents such as toluene or o-xylene are preferred. Already the first reports on ADMET highlighted the mild reaction conditions required to polymerise non-functionalised α,ω-dienes as a main advantage of this technique. Nowadays, the availability of robust and versatile metathesis catalysts permits the ADMET polymerisation of a wide variety of functionalised α,ω-dienes at low temperatures.
2. Functional group tolerance of ADMET catalysts and side reactions
It is essential to the success of ADMET polymerisations to prevent side reactions. This can be realised by choosing a suitable catalyst and suitable reaction conditions. Each type of catalyst system has strengths and weaknesses, thus the choice particularly depends on the functional groups of the diene to be polymerised and other factors like the melting point or solubility of the monomers. For instance, increasing the steric hindrance of the olefins leads to decreased metathesis rates.28 Sterically hindered and electronically deactivated substrates are often rather difficult to polymerise with C4, however the activity of C5 has often surpassed that of Schrock type Mo based metathesis catalyst.29,30 This clearly indicates that the functional group tolerance is partly dependent on the central metal, while it can be improved by ligand design.31
Tungsten carbenes can react with a variety of functional groups inhibiting the metathesis of the alkylidene complex.7 Most notably, these carbene complexes react with aldehydes, ketones, and even esters in a Wittig fashion to give tungsten–oxo complexes and olefins.7 Besides this, C2 is more reactive at lower temperatures (below 55 °C) towards internal olefins than external olefins in comparison to C1, leading to an increased amount of trans metathesis products, resulting from reaction of an active end of polymer chain with an internal olefin of another polymer chain (an example of so-called secondary metathesis reactions).7,32,33
The molybdenum catalyst C1 on the other hand is more reactive towards internal double bonds and more tolerant to functional groups in comparison to the tungsten carbene.33 Thus, this complex allowed the synthesis of ADMET polymers containing esters, carbonates, ethers, sulfones, aromatic amines, boronates, dichlorosilanes, siloxanes, acetals, and conjugated carbon–carbon double bonds.34–42 Furthermore, for conversion of terminal olefins and for reactions requiring low temperatures, C1 is more suitable in comparison to C2.33 However, this catalyst is intolerant to aldehydes and ketones showing similar side reactions as discussed for C2.43
As already indicated above, the key to improved functional group tolerance in olefin metathesis was the development of catalysts that react preferentially with olefins in the presence of heteroatomic functionalities. Being less oxophilic, well defined ruthenium catalyst systems developed by Grubbs and coworkers have thus been used to polymerise monomers containing ketones,44 alcohols,22 esters,45,46 ethers,47 silyl chlorides, siloxanes,48 amides,49–51 and carboxylic acids.46 Additionally, these complexes allowed solution ADMET polymerisation of amino acid containing monomers.52
ADMET does not always produce defined polymeric architectures when olefin isomerisation competes with metathesis chemistry, an issue that has been related to catalyst chemistry. As a result, double bond isomerisation side-reactions have been the subject of extensive research. Double bonds can migrate (isomerise) along the polymer backbone and/or in the monomer during olefin metathesis and, as a result, the repeat unit structure of the produced polymer can become irregular with respect to carbon chain length and double bond position.
Many heterogenous and homogenous organometallic complexes were reported to promote the olefin isomerisation.53,54 Although the exact mechanism for the ruthenium catalysed olefin metathesis was not established, two major mechanisms were proposed for transition metal catalysed isomerisation of olefins.54 As one of the two prevalent pathways, the π-allyl mechanism (intramolecular 1,3-hydrogen shift) is less common (Fig. 6a). The key step in this pathway is supposed to be the oxidative addition of an activated allylic carbon–hydrogen bond of the olefin substrate to a transition metal complex (in this case Ru based metal complex in Fig. 6a) with the formation of a π-allyl metal hydride intermediate. By reductive elimination of the olefin from this intermediate, the isomerisation would be observed if the hydrogen shifts to the α-carbon instead of returning to the γ-carbon (in the case of terminal alkene, as depicted in Fig. 6a). The other established pathway for olefin isomerisation is the metal hydride addition/β elimination mechanism (alkyl mechanism or 1,2-hydrogen shift) (Fig. 6b).54 In this mechanism, free olefin coordinates to a kinetically stable metal hydride species to give a π-complex. Subsequent insertion (hydrometalation) into the metal–hydride bond yields a σ-alkyl complex. Formation of the secondary metal alkyl followed by β-elimination yields isomerised olefins and regenerates the initial metal hydride by dissociation of the isomerised alkene. Considering the research performed upon the mechanistic investigations of olefin metathesis, it could be concluded that the π-allyl metal hydride mechanism is more likely mechanism for the ruthenium catalysed metathesis.
 Fig. 6  Two possible mechanistic pathways of metal catalysed olefin isomerisation.54 
Twenty years ago, some reports assumed that isomerisation might result during the purification of the final metathesis product by distillation.55 Fürstner and coworkers isolated a Ru dihydride complex, RuCl2(PCy3)2(H)2, that they proposed to be responsible for the isomerisation, presumably through a hydride mechanism.56 Furthermore, Sutton et al. suggested that impurities in the metathesis catalyst lead to the isomerisation.57 Recent studies proved that Ru-hydride species, either formed in situ from the decomposition of the Ru-metathesis catalyst or present as impurities in the original catalyst, are responsible for the isomerisation process.54 For instance, mechanistic investigations of the thermal decomposition of the second generation catalyst from Grubbs clearly showed that heating the catalyst results in the formation of a binuclear ruthenium hydride complex, which is most likely responsible for the isomerisation.58
A model study applying GC as a detection method was conducted by Wagener and coworkers to compare the extent to which olefin isomerisation occurred during olefin metathesis of simple olefins with C1, C3 and C4.59 The results confirmed that, in contrast to C1 and C3, C4 promotes extensive isomerisation during metathesis of both internal and terminal olefins at temperatures of 50–60 °C. Moreover, this study revealed that the extent of isomerisation can be reduced by lowering the reaction temperature. In a similar study they investigated the metathesis versus isomerisation activity of ruthenium catalysts ((IPrH2)(PCy3)(Cl)2RuCHPh) and (H2IPr)(Cl)2RuCH(o-iPrOC6H4)) using the model substrate 1-octene.60 The results demonstrated that both complexes isomerised the olefinic bonds in the reactant as well as in the metathesis products in high yields, thus generating macromolecules containing less well-defined polymer structures. Additional evidence for the high tendency of both catalysts to isomerise internal olefins was found in the melting behaviour of the materials produced when using them to polymerise 1,9-decadiene. Moreover, the matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation (MALDI) analysis of amino acid derived ADMET polymers clearly confirmed the presence of isomerisation side reactions, which competed with the polymerisation when C4 was employed (50 °C).61 Unfortunately, only oligomers were investigated within this study. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies (one dimensional 1H and 13C, and two dimensional correlation spectroscopy (COSY) and heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence (HMQC)) on the ADMET polymerization of thermotropic liquid crystalline polymers using 2-tert-butyl-1,4-phenyl bis(4-pentenyloxybenzoate) allowed the determination of the polymerisation/isomerisation selectivity of the catalysts C3, C4 and Nolan's catalyst (C6 in Fig. 7) under different reaction conditions.62 By comparing the peak area associated with the isomerised structure to that associated with polymerisation in COSY spectra, the isomerisation/polymerisation ratio of each catalyst could be calculated. It was observed that, among the catalysts, C4 was responsible for significant isomerisation, which was consistent with the earlier observations.59 Furthermore, kinetic studies shed light on the cause of isomerisation, revealing that C4 promoted isomerisation in its nondegraded form, while the degradation product of C3 was the primary reason for late-stage isomerisation reactions. On the other hand, for C6, both the catalyst and its degradation product were responsible for the isomerisation.
 Fig. 7  Nolan's catalyst.62 
Furthermore, a deuterium labelling NMR study performed by Courchey et al. revealed that a metal hydride addition-elimination mechanism was responsible for the observed isomerisation reactions.63 During the last decade, several strategies have been reported that can reduce the amount of olefin isomerisation side reactions. For instance, phenylphosphoric acid64 and benzoquinones65 have been reported to efficiently suppress olefin isomerisation side reactions during metathesis reactions. Moreover, tin and iron halogenides have been reported to not only enhance the metathesis activity of Grubbs type catalysts, but also to reduce or even completely suppress the isomerisation side reactions.66 In order to be able to quantify the actual amount of isomerisation during ADMET polymerisations, a strategy to analyse the monomer repeat units after ADMET polymerisation by GC-MS was recently developed.67 This strategy consisted of the synthesis of polyesters via ADMET and their subsequent transesterification with methanol to yield diesters representing the polymer repeat unit structure. GC-MS analysis of the transesterification mixture was used as a method for the quantification of the extent of isomerisation. When standard ADMET polymerisation conditions were used (1 mol% catalyst, 60–100 °C), high amounts of olefin isomerisation were detected for C4, whereas C3 showed only very little isomerisation. These studies also clearly showed that higher temperatures increased the amount of isomerisation for C4. In order to better understand the behaviour of several second generation metathesis catalysts under ADMET conditions, their isomerisation tendencies were subsequently studied (Fig. 8).68
 Fig. 8  2nd generation metathesis catalysts studied for their isomerisation tendency during ADMET polymerisations.68 
When the catalysts C4, C5 and C7 (Zhan catalyst, Fig. 8) were investigated at 80 °C, they all showed high degrees of isomerisation. In the worst case of C5, a degree of isomerisation of 91% was observed, meaning that only 9% of all repeating units actually consisted of the desired building block. The addition of 1,4-benzoquinone provided the best results in terms of reducing the isomerisation reactions when added prior to catalyst addition, indicating that catalyst decomposition begins as soon as the catalyst is added to the reaction mixture at high reaction temperatures. Interestingly, C5 and C7 provided much lower degrees of isomerisation if benzoquinone was added to the polymerisation system, whereas this effect was less pronounced with C4. The effects of nitrogen purging and higher temperatures in the presence of benzoquinone were also investigated revealing that with nitrogen purging the degree of isomerisation remained similar with C5 and was even decreased with C7. Considering the temperature effect, C5 provided a higher molecular weight and similar degree of isomerisation in comparison to C7. Thus, these studies do not only allow the quantification of side reactions, but led to polymerisations procedures using second generation catalysts that allow the preparation of well defined polymers with very little isomerisation.
3. Defined architectures via ADMET
The discovery and use of both the Schrock and Grubbs metathesis catalysts opened the way for the synthesis of various polymer architectures and functionalities via ADMET. Consequently, a broad range of novel polymers with designed architectures can be prepared that are difficult or impossible to synthesise via other routes. A variety of telechelic polymers has been prepared, both directly and by the ADMET depolymerisation of unsaturated polymers, and some of these were used for the synthesis of segmented and ABA-type block copolymers. Furthermore ADMET offered synthetic routes to perfectly linear polyethylene and variety of alkyl branched and functionalised polyethylenes that have precisely placed pendant groups along the hydrocarbon backbone. Graft copolymers with “perfect comb” structure—polymers with monodisperse pendant chains—are also accessible through ADMET polymerisation. Many representative examples of these diverse materials with defined architectures are surveyed below.
3.1 Preparation of telechelics and block copolymers via ADMET depolymerisation and polymerisation
A polymer can be considered to be telechelic if it contains functional end groups (such as vinyl, hydroxyl, carboxyl, amine, ester groups, or other moieties) that enable selective further reactions.69 Various well defined high molecular weight macromolecular architectures with enhanced thermal and mechanical properties can be obtained from telechelics, since they can be applied as cross-linkers, chain extenders, and precursors for graft polymers and block copolymers. A very important requirement of telechelic polymers is their perfect end-group functionality (number of functional end groups per chain). Depending on the functionality, telechelics are classified as mono-, di-, tri-, and multifunctional telechelics. When the telechelics are bifunctional (for instance, α,ω-divinyl end groups) they can participate in polymerisation and such telechelics are considered as macromolecular monomers (macromonomers or macromers). Preparing telechelics with perfect difunctionality (f = 2.0) has been a challenge for years. Different methods, including step growth, anionic, cationic, free radical procedures, ROMP, and ADMET depolymerisation and polymerisation methods have been used in the synthesis of telechelic oligomers.69
The metathesis depolymerisation via ADMET using different ratios of monoalkenes as depolymerising agents has been extensively used for the synthesis of oligomers and telechelics from polydienes and polyalkenamers.7,70–72 Depolymerisation of cis- and trans-1,4-polybutadiene produces deca-3,7-diene with more than 90% yield using a 200-fold excess of hex-3-ene as depolymerisation agent and WCl6/Et4Sn/Et2O as catalytic system.73,74, Marmo and Wagener72 applied ADMET depolymerisation to synthesise exact mass telechelic oligomers using C1 in the presence of ethylene, allylchlorodimethylsilane or allyltrimethylsilane as monofunctional olefins. While depolymerisation in the presence of ethylene and C1 resulted in a mixture of different telechelic oligomers, applying allylchlorodimethylsilane led to the synthesis of telechelic dimers. Other groups such as esters, silylethers, and imides were also successfully incorporated to poly(1,4-butadiene) telechelics through ADMET depolymerisation with C1.71 For diol functionalised telechelic polymers, a protecting group had to be applied (t-butyldimethylsiloxy) in order to prevent the degradation of C1 during the depolymerisation. Moreover, imide-functionalised telechelics synthesis was only successful when one methylene spacer was placed between the nitrogen atom and the CC double bond.
Similarly, Wagener and coworkers have shown that ADMET depolymerisation works for several unsaturated hydrocarbon polymers (polyoctenamer, polybutadiene, polyisoprene, polynorbornene and commercial block copolymer Kraton:polystyrene/polybutadiene diblock copolymer).75 For instance, high molecular weight functionalised furan-based polymers, prepared via aqueous ROMP of 7-oxanoboranes, were depolymerised via ADMET using C2.76 To ensure the synthesis of smaller telechelics, 1,1,8,8-tetramethyl-2,7-disilaoct-4-ene was applied as chain-transfer agent. It was observed that the extent of depolymerisation varied with the functional group on the side chain of ROMP polymer. Furan-dimethylacetylenedocarboxylate-based ROMP polymers, for instance, had a decreased efficiency during the depolymerisation.
All aforementioned depolymerisation reactions were performed in dilute solution yielding ring structures as a primarily products or telechelics under more concentrated conditions and when monoolefin chain-stoppers were present. Considering this, Watson and Wagener applied the solvent free depolymerisation of poly(1,4-butadiene) using C3.77 The experiments reported illustrate that monoolefin addition is not needed to produce lower molecular weight linear telechelics. Preliminary results within this work indicated that the molecular weight reduction of poly(1,4-butadiene) was due to the incorporation of the initiator residue as chain-end (Fig. 9). It was proposed that C3 reacted with the olefinic backbone resulting in chain scission, producing two new chains with β-styryl and Ru-carbene termini and consequent migration of the reactive Ru-carbene from chain to chain produced two new chains with the most probable distribution (polydispersity index (PDI) = 2) and altered molecular weight with each metathesis step. However, investigating different experiments with variable catalyst concentration revealed that the catalyst alone was not the sole source of chain limitation, since the average molecular weight was not proportional to the concentration of the amount of catalyst. Indeed, the final experiments explored that the alternate source was the 1,2-repeating units presented within commercial poly(1,4-butadienes). The 1,2-linkages act as “intramolecular chain-stoppers” through ring-closing metathesis, which then act as a chain-stopper by cross-metathesis of the polymer backbone with the vinyl group.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the metathesis catalyst acting as a chain-transfer agent during the depolymerisation of polybutadiene. 
Tamura et al. demonstrated the ADMET copolymerisation of 1,9-decadiene with ester containing monoolefins with various numbers of methylene spacers between the olefin and the ester using C3 (Fig. 10).78 Telechelic polymers with Mw of 8 kDa were synthesised in bulk at 90 °C with a monomer/catalyst ratio of 400/1. Furthermore, it was observed that a “negative neighbouring group effect” (NNGE) (Fig. 11),34,47 a deactivation of the catalyst due to coordination of heteroatoms with the catalyst, was the reason for the variation of the molecular weights of the telechelic polymers. Finally, the deprotection of the terminal ester groups led to alcohol terminated telechelic polymers.
 Fig. 10  ADMET polymerisation of 1,9-decadiene with 4-pentenyl n-butarate as a chain-stopper.78 
 Fig. 11  “Negative neighbouring group effect” during ADMET polymerisation.34,47 
Similarly, 1,9-decadiene was polymerised with an epoxy functionalised monoolefin and C3 at 90 °C for 96 h.79 A mole ratio of monomer/catalyst = 200/1 was used leading to an epoxy functionalised telechelic polymer with molecular weight of 7,5 kDa. Furthermore, the reactivity of the telechelic as a prepolymer for the preparation of segmented block-copolymers was examined. For instance, the telechelics were chain-extended with toluene diisocyanate, tributyl phosphate, and lithium bromide in toluene to afford the copolymers depicted in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Copolymer synthesis starting from ADMET derived telechelic prepolymers.79 
Another example of functional group terminated telechelics was reported by Brzezinska and Wagener.48 4-Pentenylchlorodimethylsilane was polymerised with 1,9-decadiene using either C1 or C3 to afford telechelic oligomers with Mn values between 1–10 kDa, whereby the molecular weights were dictated by the initial ratio of the monomer to the chain-stopper. These oligomers underwent a condensation reaction with hydroxy terminated poly(dimethylsiloxane) macromonomers, producing ABA-type block copolymers.
Recently, Schwendeman et al. presented a work entailing the synthesis of several difunctional amorphous hydrophobic telechelic diols via ADMET polymerisation in the presence of C3 and C4 (Fig. 13).80
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of telechelic diols via ADMET polymerisation/depolymerisation method.80 
Three chain-transfer reagents, each with a different number of methylene spacers between the olefin and alcohol precursor functional group, were used to end-cap the polymer chains. All three chain-transfer reagents resulted in difunctional telechelic diols, but use of the shortest led to relatively poor molecular weight control, whereas use of the longest led to a semicrystalline material since the longer spacer was not likely to form an eight-membered ring chelate with the catalyst (compare Fig. 11). The best results were obtained when a chain-transfer reagent with three methylene spacers was used in combination with the polymerisation/depolymerisation production method in the presence of C3. The resulting telechelic diol was completely amorphous with a Tg of −56 °C. Additionally, a simple two-step procedure was developed that was more efficient than the successful polymerisation-depolymerisation method. Direct ADMET polymerisation of the 6,6-dimethylundeca-1,10-diene (Fig. 13) in the presence of a longer and less volatile chain-transfer reagent with a benzyl ether-protecting group, was followed by a one-pot hydrogenation-deprotection step. However, this method was suitable only with the longest chain-transfer reagent, since the boiling point of this chain-transfer agent was only sufficiently high (140–141.5 °C at 0.1 mmHg) for use in the direct polymerisation method without prior dimerisation.
3.2 LLDPEs via ADMET polymerisation
One of the most attractive advantages of ADMET polymerisation is the possibility of synthesising graft-polymers with precise spacing between branching points. In this way, by controlling the microstructure composition of polymers, it is possible to modify and understand their physical properties. Since 199781 Wagener and coworkers have systematically studied the effect of both the position and nature of the branch group in branched polyethylene (PE). PE is the most used plastic with an approximate worldwide production of 80 million tons.82 Of this amount, 22 million tons are linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE), which are linear ethylene/α-olefins copolymers containing randomly placed short chain branches of varying size depending on the α-olefin used. These materials exhibit an excellent combination of processability and good mechanical performance caused by their low densities and relative homogeneous linear backbones. Commercial LLDPE is prepared by chain-growth polymerisation using Ziegler–Natta or metallocene chemistry.83 However, apart from the random placement of the branches due to polymerisation statistics, these methods incorporate structural defects via head-to-head or tail-to-tail monomer coupling, and inevitable chain-transfer or chain-walking produces structures with alkyl branches of varying lengths randomly spaced along the main chain. The synthesis of PE through ADMET polymerisation, first reported by Wagener's group,81 avoids the random nature of branching in PE. The ADMET polymerisation of symmetric α,ω-dienes containing alkyl pendant groups followed by exhaustive hydrogenation affords what they called “precision-branched polyethylene” (Fig. 14), where both the identity of the branch and its position along the chain are precisely known. This approach has allowed for the systematic determination of the effect of branch placement and branch identity on the crystalline structure, morphology, and thermodynamics of crystallisation processes in branched PE.
 Fig. 14  General ADMET approach to precisely substituted polyethylene. 
As starting point, and with the aim of modelling ethylene/propylene (EP) copolymers, Wagener et al. examined the effect of introducing precisely placed methyl branches on every 9th, 11th, 15th, 19th, and 21st carbon along the PE backbone via ADMET polymerisation (Fig. 15).84 These polymerisations were run at 40–50 °C. C1 and C3 were used in loadings ranging from 0.2–0.5 mol% to obtain Mn up to 78 kDa when C3 was employed. It was shown that, as the methylene spacing between branch points increased, the melting point and heat of fusion also increased. The β relaxation for polyethylene, however, was independent of the branching frequency. The effect of increasing the branch frequency was later explored with the synthesis of sequenced EP copolymers with methyl branches spaced by 4 and 6 methylene units.85 Both ADMET PEs exhibited amorphous character under dynamic scanning calorimetry conditions at 10 °C/min. However, annealing experiments carried out at low temperatures on the EP copolymer with 6 methylenes between the methyl branches revealed ill-defined endothermic thermal responses for that indicate the presence of disordered, metastable crystalline regions.
 Fig. 15  Polyethylene containing precisely placed methyl branches prepared via ADMET.84,85 
This work was extended with the synthesis of model random polyethylene materials with varying contents of propylene.86 For this purpose, different methyl branched α,ω-dienes were copolymerised with an unbranched α,ω-diene and the resulting unsaturated polymers were subsequently hydrogenated (Fig. 16). The use of different monomer ratios afforded a set of polyethylene copolymers with varying degrees of methyl branching. These random polyethylene copolymers showed the ability to change conformation in crystal packing/arrangement, depending on propylene content. Upon incorporation of approximately 10 mol% propylene, a switch from an orthorhombic to a hexagonal crystal arrangement was observed by IR spectroscopy and wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD). Furthermore, the melting behaviour of these copolymers with randomly placed methyl branches clearly differed from the precisely methyl branched polyethylenes. While the randomly branched copolymers exhibited very broad melting transitions, the precision-branched polyethylenes presented a higher packaging ability, showing sharp, well defined melting transitions.
 Fig. 16  Polyethylene containing randomly placed methyl branches obtained via ADMET.86 
ADMET methyl branched PEs lack tacticity control at the stereogenic center possessing the branch, a phenomenon that can affect crystallinity and thermal behaviour. By placing gem-dimethyl groups (ethylene/isobutylene copolymer model) this complication was avoided (Fig. 17),87 and a comparison between methyl and gem-dimethyl branched PE was performed to explore the effect of tacticity on the crystallisation behaviour. When the gem-dimethyl defects were placed at a frequency of 9 carbons along the polymer backbone, completely amorphous PE was obtained (contrary to methyl branched PE). However, when the distance between defects was increased to 15 and 21 carbons, semicrystalline PE were obtained indicating that the steric bulk and frequency of the branches are far more important than stereoregularity when the branches are sufficiently spaced.
 Fig. 17  Polyethylene containing precisely placed gem-dimethyl branches via obtained ADMET.87 
Along the same lines of research, the synthesis of precision ethyl-branched PE was reported (Fig. 18).88 The masked alkyl branch obtained in this way yielded, after exhaustive hydrogenation, the desired ethyl branch. Moreover, 13C NMR and DSC analysis of the resulting polymers confirmed that the trisubstituted olefin was not active during the ADMET reaction. C3 was chosen for the ADMET polymerisation of these monomers since in the presence of this catalyst isomerisation of the internal double bond is avoided. These model ethylene/1-butene (EB) copolymers were observed to favour ethyl branch inclusion, producing a similar crystal structure as obtained for the precisely methyl branched ADMET polymers. This behaviour, however, was dependent on the ethyl branching content. For a content of 111 ethyl branches/(1000 carbons), the steric demands of the ethyl branch preclude its taking part in the crystallisation process giving an amorphous polymer. However, narrow monomodal melting profiles could be obtained for contents between 50–60 ethyl branches/(1000 carbons). The inclusion of the ethyl branches within the crystal lattice was ascribed to the presence of kink defects, which are interstitial sites situated along the polymers chains being able to accommodate ethyl branches.
 Fig. 18  Polyethylene containing precisely placed ethyl branches obtained via ADMET.88 
Subsequent research was focused on the introduction of branching groups of increasing size. Ethylene/1-hexene (EH) copolymers were modelled by synthesizing ADMET PE with both precisely (each 9th, 15th, or 21st carbon) and randomly placed butyl branches (Fig. 19).89 It could be determined that an increase in 1-hexene content resulted in a pronounced lowering on the enthalpy of melting and peak melting transition of these materials. The space between butyl branches was then increased to 39 carbons in order to mimic more realistically industrial PE.90 This ADMET PE presented an increased melting temperature (Tm = 75 °C) and its wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns suggested the presence of an orthorhombic crystal lattice, similarly to industrial PE.
 Fig. 19  Polyethylene containing precisely or randomly placed butyl branches obtained via ADMET.89 
Commercial ethylene/1-octene (EO) copolymers constitute an approximate 25% of the LLDPE market. Models for these chain-addition copolymers were also synthesised by ADMET polymerisation of symmetrically hexyl-substituted monomers and subsequent hydrogenation.91 These precision EO copolymers, containing a hexyl group on each and every 9th, 15th, or 21st carbon, revealed well-defined thermal profiles not previously seen in EO copolymers produced by chain addition with homogeneous metallocene or constrained geometry catalysts (CGC) systems. The thermal behaviour of these hexyl-branched ADMET PEs was similar to that of the methyl-branched ADMET PE, indicating a possible involvement of the side chains in the crystallizing structures. Moreover, these copolymers exhibited distorted methylene sequences with high concentrations of kink, gauche, and double gauche defects, which could be able to accommodate branches of this size within the crystal structure.
Recently, and as an extension of these investigations, Wagener et al. reported on the study of ADMET PE with 11 different branches of increasing size, each placed on every 21st carbon for comparative purposes.92 This systematic study allowed them to accurately establish the effect of the branch nature on the crystalline structure of precision branched PE (Table 1). Smaller branches (methyl and ethyl) were included in the polymer's unit cell, decreasing the ADMET PE melting point progressively. However, as the branch size increased to propyl and larger, a significant change in polymer morphology was observed. The side chains were excluded from the unit cell, resulting in similar melting points and degrees of crystallinity, even for the bulky adamantyl group.
Table 1 Molecular weights and thermal data for precisely sequenced PE copolymers synthesised via ADMET92




Branch identity on every 21st carbon

T

m
/°C (peak)
Δhm/J g−1

M

w
 × 103 (PDI)b


Unsaturateda
Saturateda





a Weight-average molecular weight data obtained by GPC in THF (40 °C) relative to polystyrene standards (g/mol).
b PDI, polydispersity index (Mw/Mn).





Methyl
63
104
20.2(1.7)
20.2 (1.7)


Ethyl
24
65
50.2 (1.9)
50.7 (1.9)


Propyl
12
60
41.2 (1.7)
41.4 (1.7)


Butyl
12
57
41.5 (1.8)
40.3 (1.7)


Pentyl
14
58
45.1 (1.8)
45.8 (1.8)


Hexyl
12
49
44.6 (1.8)
46.1 (1.7)


Isopropyl
11
37
45.5 (1.7)
46.0 (1.7)



sec-Butyl
9
43
43.0 (1.6)
42.6 (1.9)



tert-Butyl
13
50
30.6 (1.7)
32.1 (1.7)


Cyclohexyl
9
37
32.5 (1.6)
33.6 (1.6)


Adamantyl
−8 and 17
2 and 8
64.7 (1.7)
70.8 (1.3)




Through these studies, it can be concluded that ADMET polymerisation enables, by simple choice of the monomer or comonomer, the manipulation of the primary structure of PE materials to afford a wide range of properties, from semicrystalline to amorphous. These studies thus significantly improved the knowledge about commercially available PEs, which would have been difficult to realize without ADMET. It is clear that both defect placement and identity have a definitive effect on the overall properties of the resulting polymers. In addition, relative to irregularly sequenced systems, precise models can endure a much higher defect concentration without destroying the ability of the chains to pack into lamellae.93 Moreover, the sharpness of the melting transitions of this family of branched ADMET PE is directly linked to the precision of the chain segment lengths.94
3.3 Ethylene copolymers through ADMET polymerisation
The development of model LLDPEs resulted in a deeper fundamental understanding of the microstructure/properties relationship of commercial PEs. In addition to this application, ADMET polymerisation has also been used for the synthesis of a number of polymers with commercially relevant polar substituents. Ethylene/polar vinyl copolymers are an important class of materials that combine the properties of high density polyethylene (HDPE), including high tensile strength, stiffness, and low-temperature impact strength with the benefits of polar functionalities. The introduction of such substituents via ADMET has been used to provide models for the evaluation of the effect of both functionality and its precise placement on the polyethylene backbone.
Wagener and coworkers have provided several examples of model polyethylene copolymers via ADMET polymerisation. Among them, a precision poly(ethylene)/poly(vinyl alcohol)25 copolymer could be synthesised through the design of an alcohol-containing symmetrical α,ω-diene and its subsequent polymerisation and hydrogenation (Fig. 20a). The same approach was used for the synthesis of ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) copolymers.95 EVA copolymers are produced commercially by high-pressure free radical processes; however, as a result of the nature of this polymerisation technique, the resulting polymer microstructures are ill-defined with uncontrolled branching and broad polydispersities due to chain-transfer reactions. EVA copolymers with precisely spaced ethylene run lengths were thus prepared via ADMET polymerisation (Fig. 20b) with the aim of modelling the behaviour of commercial EVAs in the absence of structural defects. As for commercial EVAs, the Tm of these polymers decreased linearly as the vinyl acetate (VA) content increased. However, the model polymers showed lower values and a more pronounced effect of VA content on the Tm.
 Fig. 20  Polyethylene containing precisely placed (a) hydroxyl or (b) acetate pendant groups obtained via ADMET.25,95 
The scope of this methodology was further broadened with the synthesis of copolymers of ethylene, such as styrene, vinyl chloride as well as different acrylates (Fig. 21).46 This study, together with previous results, showed the possibility of varying the Tm of polyethylene over a range of nearly 150 °C by introducing regularly spaced functional groups. The bulkiness of the pendant group was found to be a determinant factor in the crystallisation behaviour of these polymers. While the chloro-substituted polymer presented a Tm of 77 °C, the introduction of phenyl pendant groups caused the suppression of crystallisation. However, the comparison of the polymers containing chloro (Tm 77 °C) and methyl (Tm 57 °C) pendant groups, of similar size, showed that bulkiness was not the most important factor.
 Fig. 21  Polyethylene containing precisely placed phenyl, ester or chloro pendant groups obtained via ADMET.46 
One of the more representative examples of the utility of ADMET in obtaining PE copolymers is the synthesis of ethylene/vinyl ether (EVE) copolymers.96 The large reactivity differences that exist between ethylene and vinyl ethers make the synthesis of the corresponding copolymers very challenging through chain polymerisation techniques. However, Wagener and coworkers circumvented this problem using the sequence of ADMET polymerisation and exhaustive hydrogenation of α,ω-dienes containing ether pendant groups.97 They reported the synthesis of a family of perfectly linear copolymers of ethylene with methyl and ethyl vinyl ether (Fig. 22), providing the first study on the structure-property relationship for EVE copolymers containing no branching defects. All but one of the studied copolymers exhibited semicrystalline morphologies and showed a linear dependence of the Tm with the ethylene run length. Furthermore, the results suggested that the level of ether incorporation and the size of the ether pendant group may determine the chain packing and thus, the crystalline symmetry of the studied EVE copolymers.
 Fig. 22  Polyethylene containing precisely placed methoxy or ethoxy pendant groups obtained via ADMET.97 
The synthesis of ethylene copolymers can be limited by the presence of certain functional groups poisoning the catalytic system. To circumvent this problem, the protection of the functional group present in the α,ω-diene prior to ADMET polymerisation may be necessary. For example, Wagener et al. could obtain high molecular weight precision ethylene-co-acrylic acid (EAA) copolymers by transforming the pendant acid group of a series of α,ω-dienes into 1-ethoxyethyl esters (Fig. 23).98 After metathesis polymerisation, the hydrogenation and deprotection of the carboxylic acid were performed in one step using Wilkinson's catalyst under hydrogen pressure. These EAA copolymers displayed dimerisation of the carboxylic acid groups regardless of the acid content creating a dynamic physical cross-link. The highly functionalised copolymers with ethylene run lengths of 8 and 14 were shown to be fully amorphous, due to the high density of hydrogen-bonded acid dimers, which impeded crystallisation. However, when the ethylene units between acid groups was increased to 20, the dimerised acid units did not distort significantly the orthorhombic crystalline lattice and the copolymer displayed a semicrystalline behaviour with the acid-rich layers situated perpendicular to the polymer chains.
 Fig. 23  Polyethylene containing precisely placed carboxylic acid pendant groups obtained via ADMET.98 
As mentioned above, ADMET polymerisation enables not only the synthesis of perfectly branched linear PE, but also permits the synthesis of PE with randomly placed branching groups, which serve as improved models for commercially available functional polyethylenes. Wagener, Baugh, and coworkers prepared a series of ADMET polyethylene analogues containing randomly placed alcohol and acetate substituents in an effort to obtain suitable HDPE-like random functional PE models (Fig. 24).99 The polymers containing acetate pendant groups displayed a decrease in both the melting temperature and the heat of fusion as the comonomer content was increased. On the other hand, the alcohol-substituted polymers showed little variation of the thermal properties with the comonomer content and exhibited higher melting temperatures. These results were consistent with the work done previously on the effect of functional substituents on commercial PE prepared by free radical methods.
 Fig. 24  Polyethylene containing randomly placed hydroxyl or acetate pendant groups obtained via ADMET.99 
Recently, the introduction of precisely spaced sulfonic acid ethyl esters into linear PE, either directly attached to the backbone or spaced by an aromatic ring, has been reported.100 These polymers were synthesised following a simple alkylation/ADMET polymerisation strategy followed by exhaustive hydrogenation with Wilkinson's catalyst (Fig. 25). The crystallisation behaviour of the copolymers was dictated by the presence of a spacer. While the PE containing directly attached sulfonic acid ethyl esters showed a sharp melting transition at 29 °C, the introduction of an aromatic ring spacer yielded fully amorphous polymers.
 Fig. 25  Polyethylene containing precisely placed sulfonic acid ethyl ester or phosphonic acid pendant groups obtained via ADMET.100–102 
Another recent example of the introduction of polar functionalities into linear PE consists of the introduction of phosphonic acid groups.101 In order to avoid poisoning of the catalyst by these acidic groups, ADMET polymerisation was performed on a symmetrical α,ω-diene containing the phosphonic acid moiety in the ethyl ester protected form. The unsaturated functionalised PE was hydrogenated with Wilkinson's catalyst and quantitative deprotection gave precision poly(ethylene-co-vinylphosphonic acid) (Fig. 25). This material was shown to be extremely tough, likely due to highly effective interchain interaction between phosphonic acid groups. Moreover, it exhibited low solubility in typical organic solvents and solvent mixtures due the effect of spacing between functionalities on their crystallisation behaviour. The polymers possessing a methylene run length of 14 units were amorphous in accordance to the phosphonic acid groups being unable to cocrystallise with short polyethylene segments. However, the polymers with functionalities spaced 20 methylenes were able to crystallise showing PE endotherms strongly dependent on annealing. In these cases, increasing the phosphonic acid content with geminal groups or linking them through a benzyl group did not impeded crystallisation.
Following this work, linear PE containing either single, geminal, or phosphonic acid groups linked through a benzyl attachment were synthesised (Fig. 25).102 The nature of the substituents and the methylene run lengths between them was shown to affect the thermal properties of the polymers before and after deprotection of the phosphonic acid functionality. All studied polymers showed increasing char formation with increasing functionality when analysed by TGA. Furthermore, DSC analysis showed a strong effect of the methylene.
The incorporation of halogens into PE influences many key polymer properties, including the thermal properties, solvent resistance, barrier properties, gas permeability, adhesion, flammability and toughness. Ethylene/vinyl halide (EVH) copolymers also constitute an important class of industrial polymers. For instance, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is still the third most widely produced plastic after PE and polypropylene (PP). Halogenated polyolefins can be prepared by radical copolymerisation of ethylene and vinyl halides, which requires high pressure and produces LDPEs with a high degree of imperfections or by halogenation of polyolefins, which generally gives a nonuniform distribution of halogen atoms. On the other hand, ADMET polymerisation offers an attractive route to perfectly linear random and precision polyvinyl halides (PVHs) through monomer design. In a series of articles, Wagener, Alamo, and coworkers reported the synthesis of precision ethylene/vinyl fluoride (EVF),103 ethylene/vinyl chloride (EVC),104 and ethylene/vinyl bromide (EVB)105 copolymers via ADMET (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Polyethylene containing precisely placed halogen pendant groups obtained via ADMET.103–105 
In order to study the effect of the ethylene run length between halogen atoms on the thermal properties and crystallisation behaviour of the EVH copolymers, the halogen atoms were placed once more on each and every 9th, 15th and 21th carbon atom of the polymer backbone. For the three precision systems studied, sharp melting endotherms were obtained, which indicates that F, Cl, and Br atoms are accommodated within the crystal lattice regardless the space between halogen atoms. However, since the halogen atoms are incorporated as defects to the polymer backbone, an increase in the halogen content was accompanied by a decrease in the Tm. Moreover, by comparing the crystallisation behaviour of three EVH containing F, Cl, and Br on each and every 19th carbon atom, it was observed that while inclusion of the F atom in the crystal lattice did not distort the PE orthorhombic packing, the accommodation of the bulkier Cl106 and Br atoms changed the crystal symmetry to a triclinic system.107 These studies were extended with the synthesis of perfectly linear random EVH polymers, which represent more realistic models for chain addition EVH polymers produced by free radical techniques.108 For this purpose, α,ω-dienes containing F, Cl, or Br were copolymerised with 1,9-decadiene to obtain EVH copolymers with a random distribution of each halogen atom along the polymer backbone (Fig. 27). As for the precision analogues, the Tm of these random EVH copolymers decreased as the halogen content increased. However, opposite to the polymers with precisely placed halogen atoms that crystallised as homopolymers, these random copolymers appeared to crystallise through a different mechanism based on the selection of long crystallisable sequences. As a result, broad melting transitions were obtained for the EVC and ECB copolymers. This effect was less pronounced for the EVF copolymer due to the ability of the small F atoms to enter the crystal lattice with minimum disruption.
 Fig. 27  Polyethylene containing randomly placed halogen pendant groups obtained via ADMET.108 
The versatility of ADMET to produce polymers with controlled structure has also been demonstrated with the synthesis of “perfect comb” graft copolymer structures. Work done in Wagener's group has been directed to the introduction of perfectly spaced poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) branches into PE backbones.109 Their approach to these structures was based on the design and ADMET polymerisation of α,ω-dienes bearing PEG chains, which enabled the synthesis of a variety of PEs with properties strongly influenced by the nature of the polyether branches (Fig. 28). Concerning the ADMET reaction, short chain polyether graft macromonomers were easily polymerised in the presence of Grubbs 1st generation catalyst. However, ADMET of long chain polyether graft macromonomers was more difficult, probably due to catalyst complexation by the PEG chain. The effect of introducing either a short or a long polyether chain compared to the hydroxyl branched polymer was a marked decrease in the Tg, which dropped from −32 °C to −90 and −68 °C, respectively.
 Fig. 28  Polyethylene containing perfectly spaced PEG branches obtained via ADMET.109 
The nature of the graft end group was also shown to play an important role on the morphology of the resulting branched polymers:110 replacing the hydroxyl end group with the bulky trityl protecting group disrupted crystallinity and increased the glass transition temperature (Fig. 29). Moreover, the results indicated that the PE backbone crystallised excluding the PEG grafts, and that the polyether content also determined the crystallisation behaviour of these polymers. Low PEG contents resulted in a semicrystalline material composed of PE crystalline regions dispersed in a matrix of amorphous PEG and PE phases. When the polyether content was increased the amorphous content increased, resulting in a completely amorphous material for the higher PEG content.
 Fig. 29  Polyethylene containing perfectly spaced end-group protected PEG branches ADMET via ADMET and subsequent deprotection.110 
To better understand the role of the hydrophilic polyether branch on the thermal properties and crystallisation behaviour of these polymers, subsequent investigations consisted of a systematic variation of four structural parameters: the size of the hydrophilic pendant group, the connection of the pendant group to the backbone, the distance between the pendant moieties along the backbone, and the saturation of the polyolefin backbone (Fig. 30a).111 The results of this study showed that the PEG branches induced folds in the backbone, resulting in small paraffin-like crystallites composed of the methylene sequences between branches (Fig. 30b). Furthermore, it was demonstrated how the properties of the final materials could be tuned through slight variations of the structure. In this way, the presence of unsaturations in the backbone inhibited the ability of these polymers to crystallise. Moreover, the manner in which the PEG branch was connected to the backbone altered the crystallinity by introducing steric and electronic changes. However, contrary to the results obtained for other branched ADMET PEs discussed above, the size of the PEG branch did not affect the crystallisation behaviour of these polymers significantly.
 Fig. 30  (a) Different ADMET derived polyethylenes containing perfectly spaced hydrophilic PEG branches and (b) chain folding and crystallisation of the ADMET derived amphiphiles.111 
As already commented, the identity of the end group of the pendant PEG chain ultimately determines the thermal and crystallisation behaviour of this family of amphiphilic PE. In order to better understand this behaviour, a series of copolymers with PE backbones and AB amphiphilic grafts were reported in which the only varying factor was the nature of the pendant PEG end group (Fig. 31).112 The modification of this group gave rise to completely different morphologies for these materials. The presence of a pyrene moiety as graft end group caused the exclusion of the pendant branch from the crystallising polyolefin backbone and when it was changed to an n-hexyl chain, the branches and the backbone crystallised separately, forming two different crystalline regions. Furthermore, extending this aliphatic end group to a n-tetradecyl chain resulted in the inclusion of the branch within the crystal. The authors highlighted the convenience of this approach to intentionally exclude a pendant group from the crystallised PE backbone, and to induce it to self-interact. The discussed properties and deep understanding of these materials could make such architectures useful for applications in membrane technology or for polymer electrolytes.
 Fig. 31  Different ADMET derived polyethylenes containing perfectly spaced hydrophilic PEG branches with pyrene, n-hexyl or n-tetradecyl end groups.112 
Graft copolymers have also been prepared combining ADMET with atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP). O'Donnell and Wagener used the ATRP macromonomer method to prepare polystyrene graft copolymers, which were then subjected to ADMET polymerisation (Fig. 32). The introduction of 1,9-decadiene as comonomer was found to be necessary in order to obtain molecular weights over 7 kDa.113 This approach enabled the synthesis of graft copolymers in which graft nature, length and placement were know with absolute certainty.
 Fig. 32  Macromonomer approach to graft copolymers using ATRP and ADMET polymerisations.113 
Selectivity in metathesis can be achieved through choice of the olefinic partners and variation of the reaction conditions.114 Taking advantage of the different reaction rates of terminal dienes and diacrylates, Demel et al.115 developed a method to synthesise alternating copolymers, which was termed alternating diene metathesis polycondensation or ALTMET. NMR experiments showed that when a mixture of a terminal diene and a diacrylate was treated with C4, the fast and reversible ADMET polymerisation of the terminal diene took place, followed by irreversible insertion of the diacrylates. Acrylates are classified as type II olefins that homodimerise much slower than terminal olefins (Type I olefins).114 In this way, highly selective CM can be achieved using these two types of metathesis partners. Moreover, the resulting substituted acrylates do not participate in secondary metathesis reactions. The reaction of a variety of terminal dienes and diacrylates gave alternating AB copolymers with alternation degrees between 90–99%, showing the high control over macromolecular architecture available with this technique (Fig. 33). Furthermore, ALTMET could be used for the synthesis of liquid crystalline copolymers containing strictly alternating mesogens with a linear rod-like core (calamitic) or a bent-shape core (banana-shaped).
 Fig. 33  Proposed mechanism for ALTMET polymerisation.115 
3.4 LCPs
Liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs) are macromolecular systems that exhibit liquid-like fluidity and crystal-like molecular order. They can be classified in: main chain liquid crystal polymer (MCLCP), side chain liquid crystal polymer (SCLCP), and the combination of them.116 In MCLCPs the rod-like or disk-like mesogenic groups are directly inserted in the main chain beside other monomers or the MCLCP is just build up out of mesogenic groups. In SCLCPs the mesogenic group is connected via a spacer (e.g. methylene units) to the main chain thus this causes more flexibility of the mesogenic groups.
Main-chain and side-group liquid crystal polymers offer a large diversity of mesophase structures and transitions, and the physical properties associated with them. ADMET offers the possibility of synthesising both side chain and main-chain liquid crystalline polymers. Zin and coworkers117 applied ADMET polymerisations for the synthesis of a series of liquid crystalline polyesters of different types (MCLCPs based on homopolymer of monomer (a) in Fig. 34, and combination of MCLCP and SCLCP by copolymerizing the monomers (a) and (b) in Fig. 34). The monomers utilized in this investigation were dienes containing a built-in aromatic type mesogenic unit or an aromatic ester type mesogen, each of them bearing a cholesterol pendant group attached through an oxydodecyloxy or a monomesogenic terephthalate ester spacer.
 Fig. 34  Chemical structure of the dienes used for the synthesis of homopolymer with MCLCP properties, and copolymer with combination of MCLCP and SCLCP properties.117 
Reasonably high molecular weight polymers, corresponding to an average number of 5 to 134 repeat units, with trans contents ranging from 80 to 83% were prepared at a low temperature under very mild conditions using C3 as a catalyst. Polymers were investigated by DSC and observed to exhibit at least one additional endothermic peak after the melting transition, indicating their thermotropic nature. The same group reported on the synthesis and characterisation of all-hydrocarbon MCLCPs, and their hydrogenated derivatives based on 4,4′-bis(α,ω-alkenyl)-1,1′-biphenyl derivatives.118 Monomers with different α,ω-alkenyl chain lengths were used to prepare the corresponding homopolymers. All polymers showed semicrystalline behaviour, as demonstrated by WAXD measurements. DSC thermograms were presented, but LC properties were found to be difficult to determine due to the concomitant thermally-induced cross-linking of the unsaturated polymers upon melting.
The preparation of thermotropic LCPs using C3, C4 or C6 (Fig. 35) was also reported.62 Depending on the catalyst and conditions employed, polymers with Mn ranging from 2800 to 15400 Da were obtained. DSC, polarised optical microscopy (POM), and WAXD studies showed that all polymers displayed a simple nematic glass—nematic liquid—isotropic liquid phase sequence on heating. These polymers did not show any melting or crystallisation transitions due to the presence of the bulky tert-butyl group, a fact that facilitated polymerisation by avoiding the precipitation of the oligomers during the synthesis. Furthermore, the effect of the catalyst choice on the resulting TLCP chain microstructure was determined, which was a product of the different olefin isomerisation activity of each catalyst. Moreover, the trans/cis ratio produced by each catalyst also affected the microstructure of the polymers, and it was observed that the highest trans content together with the highest clearing transition was given by 6.
 Fig. 35  Synthesis of thermotropic LCPs via ADMET polymerization.62 
Galli et al. proposed the synthesis of novel ADMET derived liquid crystalline polymers containing banana mesogens differently located within the macromolecular structure.119 Monomers with different terminal alkenyl chains (Fig. 36a) were polymerised by ADMET in the presence of C4 (monomer/catalyst] = 100/1 initial ratio) to give the corresponding polymers with release of ethylene. Furthermore, the possibility of combining a banana unit (Fig. 36a) and a calamitic unit (Fig. 36b) along the main chain in the synthesis of liquid crystal polymers consisting of a regular alternation of 96% of was reported within this work.
 Fig. 36  The structures of banana diene monomer (a) and calamitic dienes (b) used in the synthesis of liquid crystalline homopolymers and alternating copolymers via ADMET.119 
It was observed that the introduction of banana mesogens into polymers resulted in self-assembled materials in which the molecular dipole correlations are maximized thus leading to highly polar structures. Moreover, the configuration of the resulting olefin double bond in the polymer chain was only trans, within the NMR detection limits. Polarising optical microscopy observations confirmed the occurrence of liquid crystalline phases.
Grubbs and coworkers reported the synthesis of oligomeric ferroelectric liquid crystals (FLCs) via ADMET.120 FLCs are liquids possessing a thermodynamically stable smectic phase that has a permanent polarisation without the need for an electric field. In this approach to FLCs, they focused on the preparation of main-chain FLC polymeric structures through the ADMET polymerisation of a series of mesogens with α,ω-diene-like structures. In the presence of ruthenium alkylidene complex C8, ADMET polymerisation took place directly from the smectic A* liquid crystal phase of the monomer to the smectic C* phase of the oligomer (Fig. 37a). The end group analysis by 1H NMR revealed molecular weights ca. 6000 g/mol (degree of polymerisation (DP) ∼ 10) for these oligomers, which showed excellent FLC properties in the context of FLCPs for nonlinear optics NLO applications, as indicated by the values of ferroelectric polarization and smectic C* tilt angle obtained as a function of temperature.
 Fig. 37  Synthesis of LCPs via ADMET of α,ω-unsaturated mesogens.120,121 
Walba et al.121 reported the synthesis of a main-chain chiral smectic LC polymers through ADMET polymerisation of an α,ω-unsaturated mesogen (Fig. 37b). The new materials exhibited layer shrinkage at the SmA*–SmC* transition and possessed a large electroclinic effect in the SmA* phase close to the SmC* transition.
The ability of LC polymers to undergo dimensional changes as a response to an external stimuli was recently explored by Choi et al.122 They synthesised a photochromic LC polymer showing reversible photo-activated 3D bending/unbending behaviour in response to UV-vis light irradiation. This material was synthesised by ADMET polymerisation of an α,ω-diene containing a photochromic diazobenzene moiety, capable of undergo a reversible trans-cis isomerisation transition under light irradiation,123 and a phenol benzoate nematic core (Fig. 38). The linear nature of this polymer made it possible to process the polymer into a fibre or a film actuator by melt spinning or by solution casting, respectively. Both the fibre and film showed mechanical bending when exposed to UV radiation and, interestingly, in the case of the film it was possible to control the direction of bending simply by varying the direction of polarized light to 0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°. Moreover, it was possible to restore the film to its original position by irradiating it with visible light (>520 nm). As expressed by the authors, this material could be suited for developing wireless remote-controlled 3D actuators.
 Fig. 38  Synthesis of a photochromic LC polymer via ADMET.122 
3.5 Advanced architectures and applications
ADMET polymerisation has also found application in the preparation of polymer electrolytes, a class of materials that have attracted much attention due to their expected ability to combine the processability and physical properties of thermoplastics with the high ionic conductivities needed for the development of lithium ion batteries among other applications. It is known that the higher conductivities are achieved with materials having low Tg, and for this reason, polymer electrolytes based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO, Tg = −65 °C), which effectively complex alkali metal ions,124 are the most widely studied; however, PEO and PEO/Li complexes readily crystallise forming a poorly conducting crystalline phase. Using the potential of ADMET to synthesise defined structures, Quiao et al.125 reported the synthesis of a set of (AB)n block copolymers in which polyethylene segments where alternated with relatively short PEO chains (Fig. 39). As a result, the regularity of the PEO backbone was disrupted and crystallisation inhibited, and upon addition of LiClO4, the Tg of the salt complexes steadily decreased yielding completely amorphous materials for O/Li ratios below 32. At high PEO content (50%), the salt complexes of these polymers showed good conductivities ranging from 1 to 2 × 10−5 S/cm at 20 °C and to 1–5 × 10−4 S/cm at 100 °C.
 Fig. 39  Preparation of polyelectrolytes from polyethylene/PEO block copolymers synthesised via ADMET.125 
Ionic polyolefins containing imidazol functionalities, either in the main chain or as pendant group, have recently been synthesised through ADMET of ionic liquid (IL) dienes.126 The presence of traces of alkyl imidazoles, coming from monomer syntheses, was found to poison the catalyst yielding only oligomers.127 Addition of 10% of phosphoric acid to the ADMET reactions effectively restored the catalyst activity by protonation of the inhibitor, and shifted the reactions to polymer formation (Fig. 40).128 Although the ionic monomers used were liquids, as polymerisation progressed the viscosity rapidly increased due to interchain interactions between ionic moieties. For this reason, a small scale high vacuum mechanical stirring apparatus was designed that maximized the rate of ethylene removal under vacuum. While the in-chain ionic polymer behaved as an amorphous thermoplastic elastomer (Tg −3 °C), the pendant polymer was semicrystalline (Tg 5 °C, Tm 65 °C). The low solubility displayed by these polymers precluded GPC analysis; however, analysis of the end-group signals in 1H NMR indicated the formation of high molecular weight polymers.
 Fig. 40  Synthesis of ionic polyolefins through ADMET polymerisation of imidazolium based ionic liquid α,ω-dienes.126 
Recently, ADMET polymerisation in the presence of C3 has also been applied in polymer prodrug synthesis. A polymer prodrug is a low molecular weight pharmaceutical immobilized on a polymeric carrier that in itself has no biological activity.129 The synthesis of PE based polymeric prodrugs using ADMET afforded controlled polymer architectures with drug branches placed every 21st carbon along a PE backbone.130 Two non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen or naproxen) were attached at the end of the branches through a hydrolysable ester linkage. These hydrolysable branches were linked to the diene monomer either directly or through a spacer. Tetraethylene glycol and decanediol were used as potentially useful spacers with the ability to impart hydrophilic or hydrophobic environments between the drug and polymer backbone. It was shown that tailoring the type of spacer and hydrolysable linker to a particular drug enabled the preparation of a new class of PE with potential application as new drug delivery materials. The new class polymer prodrugs were tested concerning their release properties. All ibuprofen based prodrug polymers hydrolysed to release between 15 and 40% of the total drug content within 33 h, depending on the pH. Since all the polymers tested released roughly the same amount of drug, no concrete conclusion was reported on the effect of the spacer on the hydrolysis rate.
ADMET has also been demonstrated to be a powerful tool for the synthesis of protein delivery vehicles. Using this polymerisation method, Khaja et al. prepared acid-degradable microparticles based on polyacetals and polyketals.131 These two classes of polymers have considerable potential as drug carriers since their degradation products are alcohols and aldehyde/ketones and thus, inflammation problems derived from acidic degradation products are avoided. The functional group tolerance of ADMET polymerisation offers an excellent alternative to common polyacetal and polyketal synthetic methods. In this work, a polyacetal composed of an anthracene acetal (Fig. 41) was found to efficiently encapsulate the therapeutic protein catalase into microparticles of an average size of 1.76 ± 0.48 μm. The encapsulation efficiency was 30% as calculated by UV absorbance, meaning a content of 30 μg of protein per milligram of polymer. Furthermore, cell culture experiments revealed that these microparticles significantly improved the ability of catalase to scavenge hydrogen peroxide generated by macrophages, which play an important role on chronic inflammatory diseases.
 Fig. 41  Synthesis of an antracene based polyacetal with protein delivery properties.131 
A supramolecular graft copolymer containing a quadruple hydrogen bond motif in the main chain and with number average degree of polymerisation of approximately 11 has been prepared by ADMET of an α,ω-diene 2,7-bis(10-undecenoylamino)-1,8-naphthyridine (Fig. 42).132 The supramolecular protection strategy was applied in order to prevent naphthyridine coordination to the applied ruthenium catalysts and ease the detection of the supramolecular graft copolymers with size-exclusion chromatography (SEC).
 Fig. 42  ADMET polymerisation of an α,ω-diene bearing a Napy unit to obtain a strictly linear polymer with a donor–acceptor-acceptor-donor quadruple hydrogen bonding motif in the main chain.132 
Aiming to mimic the ability of the skeletal muscle protein titin, which possesses a remarkable combination of strength, toughness, and elasticity, Kushner et al. showed recently the synthesis of a biomimetic modular polymer.133 For this purpose, they prepared an α,ω-diene having the quadruple hydrogen bonding 2-ureido-4[1H]-pyrimidone (UPy) moiety, which would act as the modular domain forming a mimic of the Ig domains in titin due to its reversible hydrogen-bonding capability. To evaluate the effect of this capability, a second monomer was prepared in which an ortho-nitrobenzyl (NBn) protecting group was introduced to block H-bonding and avoid dimer formation. Reaction of these monomers in presence of C4 afforded polymers with moderate molecular weights (Mn = 18 kDa, Fig. 43). The stress-strain curves for polymers X and Y showed that while polymer Y was brittle (max. strain 7%), polymer X presented a large deformation with maximum strain over 100%. Moreover, they could observe that this plastic deformation was not permanent and polymer X could gradually recover with time or upon heat treatment, suggesting an interesting “self-healing” property. Furthermore, an interesting shape-memory behaviour was also observed. The mechanical properties exhibited by polymer X where found to mimic successfully the adaptive behaviour of titin.
 Fig. 43  Synthesis of a titin-mimicking modular polymer and a control polymer without H-bonding capacity.133 
4. Hyperbranched polymers
Hyperbranched (hb) polymers are highly branched dendritic polymers with the potential of branching in each repeating unit.134 They are usually prepared in a one-pot synthesis in contrast to perfectly branched and monodisperse dendrimers, which are prepared through challenging step-wise procedures. The lack of control on molar mass and branching during the synthesis of hb polymers however leads to less defined macromolecular architectures. Nevertheless, due to their common branched architecture, hb polymers possess properties similar to those of monodisperse dendrimers, such as improved solubility, low solution viscosity (compared to linear systems of same molecular weights) or modified melt rheology, apart from the multiple applications derived from their high level of terminal group functionality.135 The number of existing methodologies for the synthesis of hb polymers is vast;136 however, it was not until recently that Grubbs and coworkers applied for the first time the chemistry of metathesis to the synthesis of this class of branched polymers.137 Their approach to hb polymers consisted of the ADMET polymerisation of AB2 type monomers composed of one terminal olefin and two terminal acrylates (Fig. 44). Cross-metathesis of electron rich olefins and electron deficient olefins can be conducted in a very selective manner in presence of C4 (similarly to the above discussed ALTMET), and thus, the ADMET polymerisation of these AB2 monomers leads to formation of hb structures. The polymerisation process was followed by 1H-NMR spectroscopy revealing a complete disappearance of the terminal olefins and reaction of half of the terminal acrylate groups. Moreover, the Mark-Houwink shape parameters α ([η] = KMα) obtained for the resulting polymers were <0.5, indicative of spherical shapes in solution.
 Fig. 44  Monomers used for the synthesis of hyperbranched polymers via ADMET polymerisation.137 
The large number of end groups present in hb polymers, and their location (basically at the periphery), strongly determine the properties of these branched molecules. The solubility, thermal properties and crystallinity of hb polymers are influenced by the nature of the end functional groups.138 For this reason, the development of methods to introduce chain end functionalities and the study of their effect on the properties of hb polymers is of great interest. To extend their study on the synthesis of hb polymers via ADMET polymerisation, a recent publication from the Grubbs group dealt with the end group functionalisation of these hb polymers by a second cross-metathesis of the peripheral acrylates with a modified pyrene (Fig. 45).139
 Fig. 45  Hyperbranched polymer derived via ADMET and their post-polymerisation functionalization with pyrene.139 
A similar approach was used by Ding et al. in the synthesis of hb azo-polymers, a class of materials that find application in optical devices due to their nonlinear optical properties and photoresponsive trans–cis isomerisation.140 These hb polymers were synthesised by ADMET polymerisation of an AB2 monomer containing an azo-moiety, a terminal olefin, and two terminal acrylates (Fig. 46). The degrees of branching (DB, Frechet method141) were found between 0.45–0.57 as calculated from 1H-NMR data, and photochemical conversion from cis to trans configuration could be detected by UV-vis spectroscopy.
 Fig. 46  Synthesis of a hyperbranched azo-polymers via ADMET.140 
Apart from the AB2 approach to ADMET hb polymers, the synthesis of branched structures from an A3 monomer was described by Fokou and Meier.142 The acyclic triene metathesis (ATMET) of a triglyceride containing three terminal double bonds was performed in presence of different amounts of methyl acrylate as chain-stopper (CS) (Fig. 47). In this way, the molecular weight of the resulting branched macromolecules could be controlled and cross-linking was completely avoided. The analysis of the 1H-NMR spectra permitted to estimate the DP of these branched macromolecules. For instance, for a starting monomer:CS ratio of 1:2, the calculated DP was 15 with 17 acrylate groups in the periphery. Moreover, 1H-NMR analysis also showed the formation of macrocycles within the structure of these polymers. This polymerisation method offers a straightforward one pot procedure for the synthesis of branched macromolecules, having the added possibility of varying the end group functionality and degree of polymerisation by simple choice of the type and amount of chain-stopper.
 Fig. 47  Synthesis of branched macromolecules via ATMET with a chain-stopper.142 
This strategy was subsequently directly applied to high oleic sunflower oil to yield highly branched polymers from natural plant oils.143 The ATMET of high oleic sunflower oil in presence of methyl acrylate was performed using C5, yielding branched structures ranging from dimers to polymers depending on the plant oil/CS ratio employed. Analysis of the ATMET products with ESI-MS confirmed their branched and highly functionalised structures, which makes them attractive reactive products easily accessible from a renewable resource.
5. Conjugated polymers
Conjugated polymers such as poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s (PPVs), polyacetylenes, polythiophenes, and polyfluorenes containing alternating conjugated segments and heteroatoms in the main chain are of considerable interest for a variety of applications (Fig. 48).144–149 Polymers having a conjugated backbone are expected to show unique properties, such as electrical conductivity, paramagnetism, migration and transfer of energy, colour, chemical reactivity, and complex formation ability.
 Fig. 48  Conjugated polymers containing alternating conjugated segments and heteroatoms in the main chain. 
Each class of conjugated polymer has its own synthetic methodology, which is characterized by its versatility in modifying the molecular structure of the material and its compatibility with various functional groups. However, many of these methods introduce structural defects into the polymers.150–154
Advantages such as the absence of problematic end groups, a typical trans-configuration of the metathetically generated double bonds, and the absence of branching within the polymer structure, make ADMET very suitable for the synthesis of PPVs, the most widely studied class of conjugated polymers. The ADMET synthesis of PPVs with C1 was presented by Wolf and Wagener,155 and it was observed that the resulting polymers were defect-free materials possessing high trans contents. Thus, the photoluminescence efficiency of these ADMET polymers was higher than that of the materials prepared by conventional procedures. Using 2,5-diheptyl-1,4-divinylbenzene as monomer, soluble products with chain lengths up to 12 repeat units were synthesised,156,157, whereas oligomers up to three or four repeating units were obtained from 2,5-dialkoxy-1,4-divinylbenzenes. These vinyl-terminated oligomers lacked thermal stability and could not be used directly for any application. Thus, in order to synthesise thermally stable oligomers, the vinyl end groups were further functionalised through CM with trans-3-hexene.158 MALDI TOF was used to verify the monodispersity of each oligomer, ensuring that chemical separation was suitable for isolating single oligomers. The isolated series enabled to investigate the properties of the oligomers with regard to the conjugation length. Furthermore, the isolated lower oligomers (trimers) were further telomerised using C1 and C4. The authors observed that while C4 seemed to be of practical use only for the selective dimerisation of lower oligomers, the active C1 complex was suited for yielding trans configured higher oligomers (nonamers) with no “side reactions” with the internal vinylene units.159
In order to obtain PPVs with higher molecular weights, Nomura et al.160 tested C4 and C5 catalysts together with C1 (Fig. 49). However this approach critically relied on the thermal removal of ethylene by repeated cooling the reaction mixture to −30 °C every 60 min, followed by evacuation (to remove ethylene generated from the reaction medium) and reheating to the ADMET reaction temperature.
 Fig. 49  ADMET polymerisation of 2,5-dialkyl-1,4-divinylbenzenes.160 
Weychardt and Plenio et al.161 developed a reaction protocol that allowed the efficient ADMET polymerisation of 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-2,5-divinylbenzene and 9,9-di(2-ethylhexyl)uorenyl-2,7-vinylene (Fig. 50 (a) and (b), respectively) in high boiling solvents (such as 1,2-dichlorobenzene, 3,4-dichlorotoluene, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, and 4-chloroanisol) with continuous removal of ethene under 20 mbar dynamic vacuum using equally efficient C4 and Grela-type catalysts. Additionally, the synthesis of mixed fluorine-ferrocene polymers via the copolymerisation of a ferrocene derivative with monomer b was reported, obtaining a polymer with Mn = 25 kDa. The incorporation of ferrocene units into the polymer led to a drastic decrease of the fluorescence intensity of mixed fluorene-ferrocene polymers and disfavored the close association of arenes inducing better solubility for the mixed fluorene-ferrocene polymer in comparison to the polyfluorene ADMET polymer. The poor solubility of poly(9,9-di(2-ethylhexyl)uorenyl-2,7-vinylene) was attributed to the efficient packing of the fluorene units.
 Fig. 50  1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-2,5-divinylbenzene and 9,9-di(2-ethylhexyl)uorenyl-2,7-vinylene, suitable monomers for the synthesis of conjugated polymers via ADMET.161 
On the basis of these results, Yamamoto et al.162 performed ADMET polymerisations of a carbazolevinylene (CV) based monomer and three alkyl derivatives of 2,7-divinyl-9,9-dialkylfluorenes (FV) (n-hexyl, n-octyl and 2′-ethylhexyl, respectively) in the presence of C4, C5 and C9 (Grubbs 3rd generation catalyst) (Fig. 51 represents ). The aim of this work was to explore the effects of Ru-catalysts and alkyl side chains (C9 position) on the UV-Vis and the fluorescence spectra of the resulting conjugated polymers. The 1H NMR spectra of the thus derived polymers clearly revealed a high trans selectivity and efficiency for C4, whereas GPC results showed that C9 was inefficient for the ADMET polymerisation of the above mentioned FV monomers, even at high reaction temperatures (90 °C). The latter observation is likely due to a favoured formation of the pyridine-coordinated polymerisation retarding species. No significant differences in the UV-vis and the fluorescent spectra (absorption maxima) were observed as an effect of changing the alkyl side chain substituent in the C9 position. Replacement of fluorene to carbazole did not give any significant differences in the UV-vis and the fluorescence spectra. These results emphasised the advantages of this method (halogen- and salt-free process) to prepare “defect-free” polymers with high regularity.
 Fig. 51  Grubbs 3rd generation catalyst.162 
Moreover, alkyloxy substituted divinylbenzenes were used for the synthesis of soluble dialkyloxy phenylenevinylene (PV) oligomers via ADMET in the presence of C1.163 In alkyloxy substituted DVB, usually a stabilization of the catalytic intermediates (Fig. 52) through the alkyloxy oxygen atoms takes place. To overcome this problem in the polymerisation reaction, high reaction temperatures were required in order to obtain high yields. In addition, the dialkyloxy PV oligomers were more sensitive to oxygen, having a stronger tendency to undergo cross-linking reactions in comparison to the dialkylsubstituted or unsubstituted PV oligomers.
 Fig. 52  Stabilization of the olefin metathesis catalytic intermediate via oxygen-Mo donor bond.163 
Prepolymerisation of 1,4-dipropoxy-2,5-divinylbenzene in the melt by ADMET with C4, followed by continued polymerisation in solid state was applied for the synthesis of PPV oligomers (Fig. 53).164 Since divinylbenzene molecules are prone to cross-linking via radical polymerisation, a radical inhibitor (BHT) was used, but only oligomer formation was observed both in melt and solid state reactions. Most importantly, it was demonstrated that it was possible for rigid-rod polymers to undergo solid state polymerisation in the same manner that was conducted for flexible polymers in industry.
 Fig. 53  Melt prepolymerisation of 1,4-dipropoxy-2,5-divinylbenzene, followed by a solid state ADMET polymerisation.164 
Furthermore, ADMET polymerisation of 1,4-dipropoxy-2,5-divinylbenzene in aqueous emulsion was reported to afford conjugated polymer nanoparticles.165 For the polymerisation of 1,4-dipropoxy-2,5-divinylbenzene in aqueous emulsion, concentrated toluene solutions of the catalyst precursor (C4 or C5) and of the monomer, were mixed with an aqueous cationic surfactant solution (dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride) and miniemulsified by high shear generated by ultrasound. Low polymer yields and molecular weights, compared to the polycondensations in nonaqueous systems under similar conditions, were first obtained, but increasing the reaction time favoured higher molecular weights and polymer yields, indicating that the catalyst remained active for prolonged periods of time (168 h).
Conjugated block copolymers are of considerable interest as these polymers can self-assemble into a variety of morphologies.166–168 Schlick et al. reported the synthesis of polyphenylenevinylenes containing m-linked phenylene groups in order to reduce the length of conjugation. Thus, via tailoring the conjugation length they varied the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of the polymer and observed the influence of conjugation length on the photo- and electroluminescence properties. Various substituted and unsubstituted divinylbenzenes and 4,4-divinylbiphenyl were synthesised as monomers and subsequently polymerised via ADMET in the presence of a fluorinated Schrock-type catalyst. Comonomers such as exo,exo-norbornene-2,3-dioldiacetate or alkyloxy-substitited phenylenes were introduced to improve the poor solubility of neat PPVs. The UV-Vis absorption and the photoluminescence bands showed a dependence on the ratio of the m-divinylic over the p-divinylic comonomer and therefore on the length of the conjugated segments.
In analogy to 1,4-divinylbenzene and its derivatives, divinylazulene derivatives were polymerised via ADMET to yield novel low-band gap polyconjugated organic materials, oligo(azulene-1,3-diyl-vinylenes).169 Besides the synthesis, the optical properties of the synthesised oligomers (monomer, dimer, and trimer) were investigated. The “long-wave” (Vis-NIR) absorption was practically independent of DP, observing the same shape and position for the peaks of the monomer, dimer, and trimer, respectively. On the other hand, the UV-Vis peaks showed strong dependence on the DP, and a strong red shift with increasing chain length, partly shifting into the visible region.
ADMET was also successfully applied for the synthesis of well defined polyacetylene-like polymers using 2,4-hexadiene and 2,4,6-octatriene as monomers in the presence of C1.42 Although only oligomers of about 6–10 repeat units were synthesised, the method provided a useful procedure for the synthesis of components for natural products and polyacetylene oligomers, which could be further copolymerised.
Like the other conjugated polymers, poly(2,5-thienylenevinylenes) (PTVs) have generated a great deal of interest due to their environmental and thermal stability, high conductivity upon doping, high field-effect charge mobility, and low band gaps.170 Despite the many examples of poly(arylenevinylene)s prepared by ADMET polymerisation, the only attempt to prepare the parent alkyl-substituted PTV, was reported by Tsuie et al. in 1999.171 Polymers with an average of 10 repeating units and limited solubility were synthesised with C1. Recently, Qin and Hillmyer172 prepared 2,5-divinyl-3-hexylthiophene, a compound similar to that reported by Tsuie et al. and observed that actually this compound became an insoluble red gel after storage under air at room temperature. Free-radical induced polymerisation side reactions and cross-linking were assumed as reasons for this observation. To eliminate these undesired side reactions, replacing the vinyl groups in the dienes with propenyl groups, thus synthesizing the more stable monomer 2,5-dipropenyl-3-hexylthiophene was considered as solution.172 Conducting the ADMET polymerisation using C4 in refluxing 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene at elevated temperature and under dynamic vacuum to remove the 2-butene by-product, led to polymers with apparent molecular weight as high as 19 kDa (Fig. 54). This semicrystalline poly(3-hexyl-2,5-thienylenevinylene) (P3HTV) with a low band gap of 1.65 eV was incorporated into bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cell as an electron donor material.173 Different BHJ solar cells were constructed with P3HTV films blended with varying weight fractions of methanofullerene [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). The best performance of polymer solar cell was observed at 40–50% P3HTV blends, at power conversion efficiencies of 0.80–0.92.
 Fig. 54  ADMET polymerisation of 2,5-dipropenyl-3-hexylthiophene using C4 conducted in bulk under dynamic vacuum.172 
Mukherjee and Peetz174 emphasised that silylene- and siloxane-functional conjugated polymers and macrocycles could be accessed via ADMET condensation of silylene- and siloxane-containing bis-styryl monomers. It was observed that the organic conjugated segment formed was stilbene with all-trans-configured vinylene bonds. The flexible siloxane linkage resulted exclusively in dimeric macrocycles under the reaction conditions investigated, while the silylene linkage led to linear polycondensates with molecular weights Mn between 2 and 6 kDa and PDIs of 1.4–1.7, as determined by GPC. Photophysical characterisation of the products showed the participation of Si in the conjugation, in both siloxanes and silylenes.
6. Cross-linked polymers
It has already been shown how ADMET polymerisation can be used as an efficient tool for the synthesis of linear polymers bearing a wide variety of functionalities along the backbone. These highly functionalised polymers can also be envisioned as multifunctionalised macromonomers, which, in presence of cross-linking agents or due to their inherent reactivity, can lead to formation of cross-linked networks. This approach offers a straightforward and highly versatile route to designed cross-linked polymers through monomer selection. Furthermore, the functional group tolerance displayed by the available metathesis catalysts allows the introduction of many different cross-linkable groups, thus affording materials with a wide range of properties. However, only a few reports on the synthesis of cross-linked polymers via ADMET have been published to date.
The Wagener group has contributed to this topic with the development of silicon based thermosetting polymers, a class of materials that usually display interesting electronic, optical, and thermal properties, in addition to their applications as ceramic precursors.175 Their work focused on the synthesis of carbosilane and carbosiloxane based homopolymers and copolymers with latent sites of reactivity, which were obtained in a straightforward manner via synthesis of α,ω-dienes containing such functionalities and subsequent polymerisation via ADMET. In a first example,176 the resulting linear polymers could be cross-linked due to the presence of methoxy-silane functional groups, the latent sites of reactivity, which, although inert to metathesis conversions, were easily cross-linked with moisture (Fig. 55). The content of these latent groups was changed by using different comonomer molar ratios, enabling the control of the elasticity of the final cross-linked polymers, which were shown to be extremely tough and flexible.
 Fig. 55  ADMET derived carbosilane/carbosiloxane copolymers and their cross-linking in presence of moisture.176 
In a follow-up study, this concept was extended by including “chain-end” cross-links in addition to the internal latent ones (Fig. 56a).177 The incorporation of “chain-end” cross-links limited the formation of dangling chains, thus improving the mechanical performance of the cross-linked materials. In addition, to obtain better elongation performance, the run length of the soft phase was increased by introducing an oxyethylene based diene as comonomer (Fig. 56b). This modification led to a pronounced increase in elongation-to-break, from less than 80% to 400%.
 Fig. 56  (a) Incorporation of “chain-end” cross-links to moisture-triggered cross-linked ADMET derived carbosilane/carbosiloxane copolymers and (b) introduction of an oxyethylene-based soft phase.177 
The good properties displayed by these silicon based cross-linked polymers upon introduction of polyoxyethylene sequences triggered a systematic study178 in which a family of oligo(oxyethylene)/carbosilane copolymers, bearing methoxy–silane latent groups, were prepared via ADMET copolymerisation of three different classes of dienes and a chain-stopper (Fig. 57). Further cross-linking by exposure to moisture gave a series of 50 thermosets with different compositions defining their thermal and mechanical behaviour. Varying the length of the oxyethylene sections and the number of methylene groups between them allowed to design the final thermosets to be within a range of fully amorphous to semicrystalline and from purely elastic to a plastic behaviour. Recently, as an extension of this work, the polyoxyethylene sequences were substituted by carbosiloxane/hydrocarbon soft phases containing up to 6 silicon-oxygen linkages separated by hydrocarbon run lengths of either 10 or 14 carbons (Fig. 57).179 The mechanical characterisation of the thermosets obtained revealed both elastic (elongations up to 100%) and plastic (breaking strengths up to 0.5 MPa) behaviours depending on the molar ratio of carbosiloxane/hydrocarbon comonomer and the carbosilane comonomer. The incorporation of the flexible siloxane linkages led to an enhancement of the flexibility of these materials, which presented Tg values ranging from −104 to −97 °C. Although these materials presented an improvement in the physical properties (compared to the systems without chain end cross-links), this improvement was not as pronounced as in the polyoxyethylene based materials.
 Fig. 57  Monomers and chain-stopper used for the synthesis of carbosilane, carbosiloxane and polyether based cross-linked polymers.178,179 
A similar concept was used by Interrante and coworkers,180 who synthesised a series of carbosilane polymers with disilacyclobutane (DSCB) rings in the main-chain structure via ADMET (Fig. 58a). These rings, unaffected by ADMET conditions, were further used as cross-linking sites by thermal activated ring opening at ca. 250 °C. The hydrogenated versions of these cured materials showed high thermal stability under N2 with no weight loss until 470–480 °C. The same authors have recently reported the synthesis of a blue photoluminescent polycarbosilane via ADMET polymerisation (Fig. 58b),181 in which the DSCB rings were alternated with trans-stilbene units. Spin-coated polymer films could be thermally or photochemically cross-linked to yield tough, insoluble films, which showed no significant decrease in photoluminescence intensity relative to that of the initial polymer film prior to cross-linking.
 Fig. 58  Synthesis of cyclolinear carbosilane polymers via ADMET and their subsequent thermal cross-linking.180,181 
The introduction of DSCB rings, but as chain-end groups, was later reported by Delgado et al.182 Telechelic carbosiloxane and oligo(oxyethylene) polymers were thus prepared by ADMET polymerisation using silacyclobutane as chain-stopper (Fig. 59). The DSCB groups acted as chain-end cross-linkers by controlled thermal treatment between 162 and 210 °C. Due to the intrinsic hydrophobic nature of this kind of polymers, the thermally triggered cross-linking reaction is advantageous over the hydrolytically driven cross-linking described above.
 Fig. 59  Synthesis of telechelic ADMET elastomers containing silacyclobutane end groups and thermal cross-linking.182 
Recently, a different approach to cross-linked ADMET polymers was published.183 In this work, a glycerol derived diene and a 9,10-Dihydro-9-oxa-10-phosphaphenanthrene-10-oxide (DOPO) based diene were copolymerised via ADMET in different molar ratios to obtain a family of linear polyester-polyols (Fig. 60). Acrylation of the pendant hydroxyl groups of these polymers, followed by radical polymerisation, afforded highly cross-linked thermosetting materials with good flame retardant properties.
 Fig. 60  Synthesis of phosphorous containing polyesters with pendant hydroxyl groups via ADMET and their subsequent acrylation and radical cross-linking.183 
7. Metal containing polymers
The diversity in structure and properties found in metal-containing polymers has constantly aided the search for materials that respond to external stimuli. Metal-containing polymers find applications as polyelectrolytes, photomasks, sensors and actuators, stimuli responsive materials, pre-ceramic materials, and many others. Many publications have emphasised the utility of ADMET for synthesising inorganic/organic hybrid polymers containing main group elements such as polycarbosilanes,31,180,181,184–187 poly(carbosiloxane)s,188 polycarbogermanes,189–191 polycarbostannanes,190,192 polyferrocenes,193,194 and transition metal-containing polymers.195–197 Furthermore, organic polymers with pendant cyclophosphazene rings can be addressed as an example of the latter category of hybrid materials.198
The first linear unsaturated polycarbosilanes synthesised using ADMET involved a polydimethylcarbosilane backbone.31 Within this work, it was discovered that methylene spacer groups are necessary between the silicon atom and the double bond moiety in order to observe productive ADMET polymerisation. It was reported that the divinyl substituted silanes did not condense in the presence of C2, probably due to unfavourable steric interactions. Besides this, it was observed that the predominant configuration of the double bond in the resulting polymers from ADMET polymerisation in the presence of [(CF3)2CH3CO]2(N-2,6-C6H3-i-Pr2)WCHC(CH3)2CH3 was trans (80%) (Fig. 61).
 Fig. 61  Poly[carbo(dimethyl)silanes] with high average trans content (80%) prepared via ADMET.31 
Unsaturated carbosilane polymers containing a common backbone substituted with different alkoxysilane pendant groups (methoxy, ethoxy, trifluoroethoxy, and phenoxy) have been synthesised under ADMET conditions utilizing C4 with catalyst/monomer ratios of 1/200 or 1/400.186 Variation of the pendant group alone imparted vastly different properties to the resulting polymer. The molecular weight determination of the three polymers containing silicon-alkoxide bonds could not be performed using GPC, since cross-linking was observed. In contrast, when a phenoxy-substituted monomer was polymerised, noticeable differences in chemical reactivity and thermal behaviour were observed compared to the other polycarbosilanes. The Tg of the phenoxy substituted polymer was −29 °C, a positive shift of 34 to 55 degrees when compared to the polymers mentioned above. Studies involving diene monomers that contain highly reactive silacyclobutane using ADMET polymerisation in the presence of the C1, C3 and C4 catalysts were also conducted successfully.6,22,186 Recently, the synthesis via ADMET of unsaturated polymers containing organosilicon moieties has been carried out in the presence of an alternative catalyst, which is easier and less expensive to prepare than the already available well-defined catalysts. Prior to this study, it was noted that a WCl6-e−Al–CH2Cl2 system, which was electrochemically reduced, catalyses the olefin metathesis with good activity and selectivity.199–202 The synthesised polymers showed Mn values in the range of 4 kDa to 30 kDa depending on the substituent (Fig. 62). The NMR results indicated the appearance of double bonds with a moderate trans content (66%).202
 Fig. 62  ADMET polymerisation of silicon-containing dienes using an electrochemically generated tungsten-based active species.202 
Wolfe et al. demonstrated the feasibility of synthesising high molecular weight poly[bis(4-pentenyl)di-n-butylstannane] as well as linear and cyclic oligomers of poly[bis(3-butenyl)di-n-butylstannane] via ADMET in the presence of C1 (Fig. 63).192
 Fig. 63  Polymerisation of bis(4-pentenyl)di-n-butylstannane using a well-defined metathesis catalyst C1.192 
Polycarbogermanes have been synthesised via ADMET chemistry catalysed by 0.4 mol% C1 or C3 catalyst.189 The studies performed by Gomez and Wagener demonstrated that high molecular weight (up to 18 kDa) unsaturated, viscous liquid polymers containing up to 34 wt% metal were obtained in a clean metathesis polycondensation process (Fig. 64). Thermal analysis revealed that polymers were completely amorphous, possessing a Tg about −90 °C, and stable up to 250 °C. Moreover, polygermanes were prepared via ADMET in the presence of an electrochemically reduced tungsten-based catalyst.190 This catalyst system is distinguished from molybdenum and tungsten alkylidenes for being less sensitive to atmospheric oxygen and moisture. Additionally, ring closing metathesis reactions have not been observed using electrochemically generated tungsten active species, thus favouring the formation of higher molecular weight polymers.
 Fig. 64  The synthesis of unsaturated polycarbogermanes via ADMET.189 
The significant progress in the development of olefin metathesis catalysts seen in the last few years prompted researchers to study ADMET polymerisation of various divinylarenes, including ferrocene-containing monomers.193 The metathesis of 1,1′-divinylferrocene using C1 gave oligomers with an average of four repeating units, and a trans/cis ratio of 2.5. It was observed that the reactivity was limited by the purity of the monomer and the thermal stability of the catalyst, but not by the sensitivity of the catalyst towards the ferrocene functionality.
The use of ADMET for the synthesis of transition metal containing polymers was also explored.195 Specifically, comparison of molecular weight and monomer conversion for polymerisations of the diene containing Mo monomer (a) in Fig. 65 under various experimental parameters including temperature, catalyst loading, and solvent was performed. Polymers with moderate degrees of polymerisation were afforded in the presence of 5 mol% of C4 in toluene. It was observed that higher reaction temperatures dissociated the phosphine from the monomer and caused a thermally induced isomerisation of the transition metal complex from cis to trans geometry. As another example for transition metal complexes, the metal–metal bonded dimers [(η5-C5H5)Mo(CO)2(Ph2P(CH2)nCHCH2)]2 (n = 6 or 8) (Fig. 65(b)) were prepared and evaluated as monomers for ADMET polymerisation.196 Polymerisation of these complexes was attempted in presence of C1, C3, and C4 with catalyst loadings of up to 10%. However no polymerisation took place. It was suggested that no reaction occurred because of the sterically demanding nature of monomer (b) in Fig. 65. Presumably six CH2 units did not provide sufficient separation between the double bond and the sterically crowded metal centre. The metal–metal bonded dimer with alkene-functionalised cyclopentadienyl ligands, [(η5-C5H4(CH2)8CHCH2) Mo(CO)3]2 (Fig. 65 (c)), was also evaluated for polymerisation using the ADMET method.197 Catalysts C1, C3, and C4 were again employed for the polymerisation of this complex and each one showed moderate activity yielding ADMET oligomers, likely due to their low solubility in the reaction media. Schrock's catalyst (C1) under concentrated solvent conditions was the most active of the three, resulting in polymers with Mn = 2300 and PDI = 4.3.197 The method was limited, due to the reduced solubility of the oligomers that form. Slightly higher molecular weight (Mn = 3400) was achieved by copolymerisation of monomer (c) in Fig. 65 with a liquid diene, 1,9-decadiene.
 Fig. 65  Functionalised metal–metal dimer molecules that can be used as monomers for ADMET polymerisation.195–197 
As already mentioned, Shultz et al.197 have reported the use of ADMET polymerisation for the synthesis of an oligomer containing main-chain Mo–Mo bonds (Fig. 66). This material was shown to be photoreactive and irradiation with λ > 520 nm in presence of CCl4 resulted in net cleavage of the main-chain Mo–Mo bonds, which was followed by trapping of the Mo radicals with CCl4.
 Fig. 66  ADMET polymerisation, photocleavage of the main chain Mo–Mo bonds, and trapping of the radicals formed with CCl4.197 
Allcock and colleagues used ROMP203 and ADMET198 to incorporate cyclic phosphazene compounds into polymer systems in order to synthesise fire-retardant materials. Using ROMP, norbornene based organic polymers with pendant cyclophosphazene rings were synthesised. The ADMET approach involved the synthesis of cyclophosphazene trimers (Fig. 67) with two unsaturated alkoxy substituents. The remaining four substituents of the phosphazene ring were varied to include phenoxy, benzyloxyphenoxy, methoxyethoxyethoxy, and dimethylamino groups. The α,ω-dienes were then polymerised by treatment with C3 to yield polymers with high loadings of phosphorous and nitrogen and a DP of 40 to 50.198 The variation of the methylene spacers and the organic side groups on the phosphazene rings enabled to examine the effects of the negative neighbouring effect (compare Fig. 11) and steric factors. The glass transition temperatures of the polymers ranged from 30 to 70 °C depending on the nature of the monomers. Moreover, the phosphazenes were copolymerised with 1,9-decadiene to vary the phosphazene content.
 Fig. 67  Four different small molecule cyclic phosphazene trimers bearing different organic groups.198 
8. Polymers from renewable resources
Renewable feedstocks have been widely employed in the preparation of macromolecules.204 The use of renewable raw materials for the development of new polymers is not only advantageous from an environmental point of view, but also because polymers prepared from renewables can benefit from properties such as biocompatibility or biodegradability. Thus, carbohydrates,205 vegetable oils,206 terpenes, and other renewable resources204 were already shown to be suitable feedstocks for polymer synthesis. Although the direct application of ADMET on natural compounds is only possible in a few cases, i.e. plant oils, a wide variety of α,ω-diene monomers can be prepared by modification of naturally occurring molecules. This section discusses several examples published on the synthesis of polymers from renewable resources having in common ADMET as polymerisation method.
Metathesis of plant oils and fatty acid derivatives has received particular attention as a way for preparing oils with improved drying properties.207 Traditionally, the metathesis catalytic system WCl6–(CH3)4Sn208 has been employed. However, it presents a poor stability towards moisture and oxygen and high catalyst loads together with solvents like chlorobenzene are usually required. Taking advantage of the improved metathesis performance of C3, Larock and coworkers209 applied the ADMET polymerisation to a variety of plant oils with the objective of optimizing the reaction conditions. In this way, alcohol-insoluble materials with yields between 40–60% were obtained. A deeper study of the products of the ADMET polymerisation of plant oils was performed later in which glyceryl trioleate was polymerised in the presence of C3 to produce, trimer, tetramer, pentamer as well as monocyclic oligomers.210 The ADMET polymerisation of soybean oil was also performed leading to a variety of materials, from sticky oils to rubbers. As already mentioned above (see section 4), when the ATMET of a model triglyceride containing terminal double bonds was performed in presence of methyl acrylate as chain-stopper, cross-linking was avoided and highly branched polymers could be obtained.142 This strategy was also applied to the direct polymerisation of high oleic sunflower oil, confirming this one step procedure as an efficient route to highly branched macromolecules from natural plant oils.143
The synthesis of a series of unsaturated polyesters based on ω-unsaturated fatty acid esters from oleochemical resources via ADMET was reported in 2001 by Warwel et al.211 Different α,ω-dienes were prepared by transesterification of methyl esters of 9-decenoic acid, 13-tetradecenoic acid, and 10-undecenoic acid with diols of varying alkyl chain lengths (Fig. 68). 9-decenoic and 13-tetradecenoic acids can be obtained from oleic and erucic acid respectively by metathesis with ethylene,212 and 10-undecenoic acid is obtained from pyrolysis of castor oil.213 A screening of ten homogeneous and heterogeneous metathesis catalysts showed the optimum results for the heterogeneous system B2O3–Re2O7/Al2O3–SiO2 + SnBu4, reaching high molecular weights up to 99 kDa.
 Fig. 68  Synthesis of unsaturated polyesters based on ω-unsaturated fatty acid esters.211 
The incorporation of amino acids to polymer structures is of interest not only because of their inherent biological compatibility and degradability, but also because of the chiral properties they can provide to polymers. Polymers possessing amino acid units either in the backbone or as pendant groups where synthesised by ADMET polymerisation by Wagener's group (Fig. 69).49
 Fig. 69  Synthesis of polymers containing amino acid units either in the backbone or as pendant groups.49 
The branched polymers, which were obtained with molecular weights between 21 and 31 kDa in the presence of C4, were shown to be strong film-forming materials with Tm as high as 135 °C despite their unsaturated polyolefin backbone. Concerning the linear amino acid containing polymers, the number of methylene units between the carbonyl and the terminal olefins was shown to influence the performance of the catalyst (C4). ADMET polymerisation of the monomer containing an L-leucinol moiety with three methylene units between the carbonyl and the olefin sites afforded a low Mn material (4.7 kDa), whereas an increased ethylene run length of eight in the L-valinol and L-leucinol based dienes resulted in Mns up to 27 and 33 kDa, respectively. Continuation of this work was the synthesis of amino acid and peptide-branched polyolefins in which the functionality was attached through the C-terminus214 or through the N-terminus52 (Fig. 70), presenting the potential of having either the N-terminus or the C-terminus available for further transformations. It was shown that the monomers having the amino acids/peptides attached through the N-terminus of the amino acid polymerised more readily than monomers with amino acids/peptides attached through the C-terminus. The thermal characterisation revealed that the semicrystalline behaviour found for most of these polymers were due to the amino acid moiety and not to the polymer backbone.
 Fig. 70  Synthesis of branched polymers containing amino acid or peptide branches with free N- or C-terminus via ADMET.52,214 
Recently, a study on the crystallinity of a family of PEs containing the amino acid lysine on each 21st carbon has been carried out.215 These amino acid modified polyolefins showed an unusual crystallinity despite the atactic position of the lysine moieties. As mentioned above, the crystallisation of these polymers could be associated to the protected amino acid branch, and not to the polymer's backbone, as evidenced by several observations. First, the fact that the amino acid branches are bulky enough to prevent crystallisation and thus, any crystallinity should be derived from the presence of the branch itself. Second, the crystalline behaviour of the polymers resembles that of the monomers, suggesting preservation of the crystalline packing after polymerisation; and third, removal of the Fmoc protecting group of one of the polymers rendered it completely amorphous.
Another example of amino acid derived ADMET polymers, described by Terada et al.,216 was the preparation of diketopiperazine based polymers. Diketopiperazines (DKP) are cyclic amino acid dimers containing two s-cis secondary amide groups, which can establish hydrogen bonds horizontally along the ring plane. Four L-Glutamic acid diketopiperazine ω-alkenyl esters were synthesised and polymerised to molecular weights between 4 and 15 kDa in the presence of C4 and C5 (Fig. 71). However, due to the already mentioned NNGE (compare Fig. 11), ADMET polymerisations were unsuccessful for the monomer with only one methylene as spacer between the terminal olefin and the ester group. The resulting polymers exhibited melting transitions as high as 159 °C. Moreover, it could be shown that the crystallisation process was assisted by formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds between the amide groups of the DKP moieties.
 Fig. 71  ADMET polymerisation of L-Glutamic acid diketopiperazine ω-alkenyl esters.216 
Chiral polymers containing D-chiro-inositol units were prepared by Bui and Hudlicky.217 In this work, α,ω-dienes derived from a biocatalytically synthesised diene diol were polymerised via ADMET (Fig. 72), reaching molecular weights of up to 20 kDa when using C4, as determined by light scattering analysis. As proposed by the authors, the cross-linking of these polymers would lead to materials suitable for chiral separation and catalyst development.
 Fig. 72  Synthesis of polymers containing D-chiro-inositol units via ADMET.217 
ADMET polymerisation was used by Gautrot and Zhu for the synthesis of bile acid-based oligomeric GPC standards.218 Bile acid-based polymers are promising materials for biomedical applications;219 however, the determination of their molar mass is difficult due to the lack of suitable standards for GPC. ADMET polymerisation of a bile acid-based α,ω-diene in presence of C3 and different amounts of a chain-stopper (Fig. 73) afforded oligomers of different size that were isolated by column chromatography. The analysis of these oligomers by GPC (against polystyrene standards), MALDI-TOF, and 1H NMR showed that a correction factor between 0.50 and 0.60 should be used when analysing bile acid-based polymers in GPC against polystyrene standards (THF at 33 °C).
 Fig. 73  Synthesis of bile acid-based oligomeric GPC standards via ADMET.218 
Recently, Meier et al. investigated the synthesis and ADMET polymerisation of plant oil based α,ω-dienes. Using 10-undecenoic acid, a castor oil derived platform chemical, as the motif containing the terminal olefin, a variety of α,ω-dienes can be prepared and subjected to ADMET polymerisation to obtain different polymeric structures. In a first example, high molecular weight unsaturated polyesters were synthesised by polymerisation of a 100% renewable monomer in presence of C4 and C5 (Fig. 74).220 The introduction of methyl 10-undecenoate resulted in an efficient end-capping, enabling the control of the molecular weight and the synthesis of telechelics. Moreover, by using oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate as chain-stopper, amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers could be obtained in a one-step one-pot procedure.
 Fig. 74  From a 10-undecenoic acid based α,ω-diene to unsaturated polyesters, telechelics, block copolymers and flame retardant polymers.220,221 
The same monomer was used later on in the synthesis of phosphorous containing random copolymers (Fig. 74).221 In this study, a DOPO based α,ω-diene containing two 10-undecenoic acid moieties was used as comonomer. Furthermore, the systematic variation of the comonomer's content allowed establishing the correlation between the phosphorous content and the thermal and flame retardant properties of the polymers.
This study was extended by substituting the phosphorous-free α,ω-diene by a glycerol and 10-undecenoic acid based monomer.183 In this way, linear polyesters containing pendant hydroxyl groups were obtained that were used for the preparation of flame retardant cross-linked polymers (Fig. 60).
Another example of the utility of ADMET to produce fully renewable polymers, was the polymerisation in presence of C3 and C4 of an α,ω-diene obtained from isosorbide and 10-undecenoic acid to obtain fatty acid/carbohydrate based degradable polyesters.67 Moreover, a monomer prepared from 10-undecenoic acid and 1,3-propanediol, which can be obtained from glycerol via fermentation, has been recently used in the synthesis of degradable polyesters using C3, C5, and C7.68
The preparation of polyamides via ADMET was attempted with the synthesis of a family of α,ω-dienes containing amide functionalities.51 These monomers were prepared by catalytic amidation of 10-undecenoic acid with different aliphatic diamines, and polymerised in presence of C4 and C5 (Fig. 75). However, the high melting points and the poor solubility displayed by these monomers in all common solvents led to low molecular weights ca. 6 kDa (Mn average), even at catalyst loads between 5–10%. In this case, the successful strategy to synthesise the same polyamides X,20 consisted in the self-metathesis of methyl 10-undecenoate, followed by catalytic amidation with 1,5,7-triazabicyclo[4.4.0]dec-1-ene (TBD). This new catalytic amidation polymerisation produced molecular weights up to 15 kDa.
 Fig. 75  Synthesis via ADMET of unsaturated PA X,20 based on 10-undecenoic acid.51 
9. Conclusion and outlook
This critical review shows that, far from being exhausted, the ADMET polymerisation reaction undergoes a constant development, pushed by the development of metathesis catalysts of improved performance and the curiosity and the inventiveness of polymer scientists. These facts are reflected throughout this review on the wide spectrum of polymers synthesised with this technique, evidencing the high versatility of ADMET. Moreover, the deeper understanding achieved on the isomerisation side reactions associated with this chemistry will enable a high control over the polymer architectures prepared via ADMET. Thus, it is today possible to polymerise α,ω-dienes bearing almost any functional group to high molecular weight polymers via ADMET with a precision and control that was hard to imagine 10 years ago. However, the industrial applicability of ADMET is still limited due to the high price of the catalysts. Moreover, the development of highly efficient methods to remove the catalyst after polymerization, especially for medicinal applications, still needs to be addressed. Apart from new metathesis catalysts that will also help to further improve ADMET, the possibilities of ADMET are mainly limited by the creativeness of the polymer scientist. Basically, everything that can be done via classic polycondensation (e.g. polyester synthesis) chemistry should also be possible via ADMET. Additionally, ADMET derived polymers offer the possibility of post polymerisation functionalisation of the double bonds, which should open ways to tailored materials in the future. Moreover, the clever design of monomers and comonomers should allow the synthesis of defined polymer architectures, such as block copolymers or even star shaped architectures. Some first examples of these possibilities are already discussed within this review. To summarise, ADMET is already a versatile technique for the construction of (defined) polymer architectures today and researches will not stop to further improve this tool in the toolbox of polymer science.
Abbreviations


ADMET
acyclic diene metathesis

ALTMET
alternating diene metathesis

ATMET
acyclic triene metathesis

ATRP
atom transfer radical polymerisation

C1
Schrock’s molybdenum catalyst

C2
Schrock’s tungsten catalyst

C3
Grubbs 1st generation catalyst

C4
Grubbs 2nd generation catalyst

C5
Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation catalyst

C6
Nolan’s catalyst

C7
Zhan catalyst

C9
Grubbs 3rd generation catalyst

CGC
constrained geometry catalysts

CM
cross-metathesis

CS
chain-stopper

CV
carbazolevinylene

DB
degree of branching

DKP
diketopiperazines

DOPO
9,10-Dihydro-9-oxo-10-phosphaphenanthrene-10-oxide

DP
degree of polymerisation

DSCB
disilacyclobutane

EAA
ethylene-co-acrylic acid

EB
ethylene/1-butene

EH
ethylene/1-hexene

EO
ethylene/1-octene

EP
ethylene/propylene

EVA
ethylene-vinyl acetate

EVB
ethylene/vinyl bromide

EVC
ethylene/vinyl chloride

EVE
ethylene/vinyl ethers

EVF
ethylene/vinyl fluoride

EVH
ethylene/vinyl halide

FLCs
ferroelectric liquid crystals

FV
2,7-divinyl-9,9-dialkylfluorenes

hb
hyperbranched

HDPE
high density polyethylene

IL
ionic liquid

LCPs
liquid crystalline polymers

LLDPE
linear low density polyethylene

MCLCP
main chain liquid crystal polymer

NHCs

N-heterocyclic carbenes

NLO
nonlinear optics

NNGE
negative neighbouring group effect

P3HTV
poly(3-hexyl-2,5-thienylenevinylene)

PDI
polydispersity index

PE
polyethylene

PEG
poly(ethylene glycol)

PEO
poly(ethylene oxide)

POM
polarised optical microscopy

PP
polypropylene

PPVs
poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s

PTVs
poly(2,5-thienylenevinylene)s

PV
phenylenevinylene

PVC
polyvinyl chloride

RCM
ring-closing metathesis

ROM
ring opening metathesis

ROMP
ring opening metathesis polymerisation

SCLCP
side chain liquid crystal polymer

SEC
size-exclusion chromatography

SM
self-metathesis

Tg
glass transition temperature

Tm
melting point

VA
vinyl acetate

WAXD
wide-angle X-ray diffraction

WAXS
wide-angle X-ray scattering

References

          A. W. Anderson and N. G. Merckling, U.S. Patent,2721189,  1955 Search PubMed ; Chem. Abstr., 1956, 50, 3008;   H. S. Eleuterio, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 65, 55 Search PubMed .
A. Fürstner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3012 CrossRef CAS ; K. C. Nicolaou, P. G. Bulger and D. Sarlah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4490 CrossRef CAS .

          H. S. Eleuterio, German Pat., 1072811,  1960 Search PubMed ; W. L. Truett, D. R. Johnson, I. M. Robinson and B. P. Montague, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 2337 Search PubMed ; R. L. Banks and G. C. Bailey, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1964, 3, 170 CrossRef CAS .
N. Calderon, E. A. Ofstead and W. A. Judy, J. Polym. Sci., Part A-1, 1967, 5, 2209 CrossRef CAS ; N. Calderon, H. Y. Chen and K. W. Scott, Tetrahedron Lett., 1967, 8, 3327 CrossRef .
J.-L. Hérisson and Y. Chauvin, Makromol. Chem., 1971, 141, 161 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Schrock, J. S. Murdzek, G. C. Bazan, J. Robbins, M. DiMare and M. O'Regan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 3875 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Schaverien, J. C. Dewan and R. R. Schrock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 2771 CrossRef CAS ; R. R. Schrock, R. T. DePue, J. Feldman, C. J. Schaverien, J. C. Dewan and A. H. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 1423 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Schrock and A. H. Hoveyda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4592 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Nguyen, L. K. Johnson, R. H. Grubbs and J. W. Ziller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 3974 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schwab, M. B. France, J. W. Ziller and R. H. Grubbs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2039 CrossRef CAS ; P. Schwab, R. H. Grubbs and J. W. Ziller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 100 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weskamp, W. C. Schattenmann, M. Spiegler and W. A. Herrmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2490 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scholl, S. Ding, C. W. Lee and R. H. Grubbs, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 953 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Zuech, W. B. Hughes, D. H. Kubicek and E. T. Kittleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1970, 92, 528 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lindmark-Hamberg and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1987, 20, 2949 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, J. M. Boncella, J. G. Nel, R. P. Duttweiler and M. A. Hillmyer, Makromol. Chem., 1990, 191, 365 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, J. G. Nel, J. Konzelman and J. M. Boncella, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 5155 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, J. M. Boncella and J. G. Nel, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 2649 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Nubel, C. A. Lutman and H. B. Yokelson, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 7000 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Gómez and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1998, 199, 1581 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Armstrong, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1998, 371 RSC .
R. H. Grubbs, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 1994, 31, 1829 Search PubMed .
T. M. Trnka and R. H. Grubbs, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 18 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mutch, M. Leconte, F. Lefebvre and J.-M. Basset, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1998, 133, 191 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brzezinska, P. S. Wolfe, M. D. Watson and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1996, 197, 2065 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Valenti and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2764 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Garber, J. S. Kingsbury, B. L. Gray and A. H. Hoveyda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 8168 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Schwendeman, A. C. Church and K. B. Wagener, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2002, 344, 597 CrossRef CAS ; T. W. Baughman and K. B. Wagener, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2005, 176, 1 CAS .
M. Ulman and R. H. Grubbs, Organometallics, 1998, 17, 2484 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chatterjee, J. P. Morgan, M. Scholl and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3783 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Bielawski and R. H. Grubbs, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2903 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener and D. W. Smith Jr., Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 6073 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Schrock, R. T. DePue, J. Feldman, K. B. Yap, D. C. Yang, W. M. Davis, L. Park, M. DiMare, M. Schofield, J. Anhaus, E. Walborsky, E. Evitt, C. Krüger and P. Betz, Organometallics, 1990, 9, 2262 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Csányi and J. U. Zilles, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2002, 190, 85 CrossRef .
J. Patton, J. M. Boncella and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 3862 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Wolfe and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1998, 19, 305 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, K. Brzezinska, J. D. Anderson and S. Dilocker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1997, 35, 3441 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener and K. Brzezinska, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 5273 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener and J. T. Patton, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 249 CrossRef CAS .
D. Steiger, M. Ehrenstein, C. Weder and P. Smith, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 1254 CrossRef CAS .
D. Steiger, C. Weder and P. Smith, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Miao and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 7414 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tao and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 1281 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Schrock, J. S. Murdzek and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 3875 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, J. T. Patton, M. D. E. Forbes, T. L. Myers and H. D. Maynard, Polym. Int., 1993, 32, 411 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Watson and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3196 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Watson and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8963 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, K. Brzezinska, J. D. Anderson, T. R. Younkin, K. Steppe and W. DeBoer, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 7363 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Brzezinska, K. B. Wagener and G. T. Burns, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 849 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Hopkins, J. H. Pawlow, D. L. Koren, K. S. Deters, S. M. Solivan, J. A. Davis, F. J. Gomez and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 7920 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Hopkins, J. H. Pawlow, F. Tep and K. B. Wagener, Polym. Prep. (Am. Chem. Soc. Div. Polym. Sci.), 2002, 43, 281 Search PubMed .
H. Mutlu and M. A. R. Meier, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Hopkins and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1180 CrossRef CAS .

          R. H. Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of Transition Elements, Wiley, NY, 4th edn,  2005, pp. 239–241 Search PubMed .
B. Schmidt, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 1865 CrossRef CAS ; B. Schmidt, Chem. Commun., 2004, 742 RSC .
H. D. Maynard and R. H. Grubbs, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 4137 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fürstner, L. Ackermann, B. Gabor, R. Goddard, C. W. Lehmann, R. Mynott, F. Stelzer and O. R. Thiel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 3236 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Sutton, B. A. seigal, D. F. Finnegan and M. L. Snapper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13390 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hong, M. W. Day and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7414 CrossRef .
S. E. Lehman, Jr., J. E. Schwendeman, P. M. O'Donnell and K. B. Wagener, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 345, 190 CrossRef .
F. C. Courchay, J. C. Sworen and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8231 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Petkovska, T. E. Hopkins, D. H. Powell and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5878 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qin, B. J. Chakulski, I. A. Rousseau, J. Chen, X.-Q. Xie, P. Mather, G. S. Constable and E. B. Coughlin, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5239 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Courchay, J. C. Sworen, I. Ghiviriga, K. A. Abboud and K. B. Wagener, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 6074 CrossRef CAS .
P. Formentin, N. Gimeno, J. H. G. Steinke and R. Vilar, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 8235 CrossRef CAS ; N. Gimeno, P. Formentín, J. H. G. Steinke and R. Vilar, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 918 CrossRef .
S. H. Hong, D. P. Sanders, C. W. Lee and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17160 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Meyer, A. E. McConnell, G. S. Forman, C. L. Dwyer, M. M. Kirk, E. L. Ngidi, A. Blignaut, D. Saku and A. M. Z. Slawin, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2006, 359, 2910 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Fokou and M. A. R. Meier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1664 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Fokou and M. A. R. Meier, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 368 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Yagci, O. Nuyken and V.-M. Graubner, in Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology, ed. J. I. Kroschwitz, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 3rd edn,  2005, vol. 12, pp. 57–130 Search PubMed .
D. Reyx and I. Campistron, Makromol. Chem., 1986, 187, 2801 CrossRef .
J. C. Marmo and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Marmo and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 2137 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abendroth and E. Canji, Makromol. Chem., 1975, 176, 775 CrossRef CAS .
E. Canji and H. Perner, Makromol. Chem., 1978, 179, 567 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, R. D. Puts and D. W. Smith, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1991, 12, 419 CrossRef CAS .
T. Viswanathan, F. Gomez and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1994, 32, 2469 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Watson and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1494 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura, N. Maeda, R. Matsumoto, A. Nakayama, H. Hayashi, K. Ikushima and M. Kuraya, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 1999, A36, 1153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura and A. Nakayama, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 39, 745 Search PubMed .
J. E. Schwendeman and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1818 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Wagener, D. Valenti and S. F. Hahn, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 6688 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Brandsch and O. G. Piringer, in Plastic Packaging Interactions with Food and Pharmaceuticals, ed. Otto G. Piringer and A. L. Baner, Willey, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2008, ch. 2, p. 32 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Peacock, in Handbook of Polyethylene: Structures, Properties, and Applications, ed. Marcel Dekker, New York,  2000, p. 534 Search PubMed .
J. A. Smith, K. R. Brzezinska, D. J. Valenti and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3781 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Baughman, J. C. Sworen and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5028 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Sworen, J. A. Smith, K. B. Wagener, L. S. Baugh and S. P. Rucker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2228 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Schwendeman and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 1461 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Sworen, J. A. Smith, J. M. Berg and K. B. Wagener, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11238 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rojas and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1934 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zuluaga, B. Inci, Y. Nozue, S. Hosoda and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4953 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Sworen and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rojas, B. Inci, Y. Wei and K. B. Wagener, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17376 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rojas, E. B. Berda and K. B. Wagener, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2985 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, J. Sworen, M. Pyda, E. Nowak-Pyda, A. Habenschuss, K. B. Wagener and B. Wunderlich, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 204 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Watson and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 5411 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Baughman, E. van der Aa, S. E. Lehman and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 2550 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Baughman, E. van der Aa and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7015 CrossRef CAS .
T.
W. Baughman, C. D. Chan, K. I. Winey and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6564 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Lehman, Jr., K. B. Wagener, L. S. Baugh, S. P. Rucker, D. N. Schulz, M. Varma-Nair and E. Berluche, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 2643 CrossRef .
K. L. Opper and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 915 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Opper, B. Fassbender, G. Brunklaus, H. W. Spiess and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4407 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Opper, D. Markova, M. Klapper, K. Müllen and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3690 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, A. J. Nemeth, K. B. Wagener, K. Jeon, R. Smith, F. Nazirov, M. R. Bockstaller and R. G. Alamo, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, A. J. Nemeth, I. Ghiviriga, K. Jeon, R. G. Alamo and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6545 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, A. J. Nemeth, R. G. Alamo and K. B. Wagener, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 137 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Alamo, K. Jeon, R. L. Smith, E. Boz, K. B. Wagener and M. R. Bockstaller, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7141 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, K. B. Wagener, A. Ghosal, R. Fu and R. G. Alamo, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4437 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boz, I. Ghiviriga, A. J. Nemeth, K. Jeon, R. G. Alamo and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 25 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. O'Donnell, K. Brzezinska, D. Powell and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6845 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Berda, R. E. Lande and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8547 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Berda and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 1601 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Berda and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5116 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. O'Donnell and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2003, 41, 2816 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Chatterjee, T.-L. Choi, D. P. Sanders and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Demel, C. Slugovc, F. Stelzer, K. Fodor-Csorba and G. Galli, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2003, 24, 636 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Varshney, J. Macromol. Sci. Review Chem. Phys., 1986, C26, 551 Search PubMed .
S. H. Joo, Y. K. Yun, J. I. Jin, D. C. Kim and W. C. Zin, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 6704 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo and J. I. Jin, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 1335 CrossRef CAS .
G. Galli, S. Demel, C. Slugovc, F. Stelzer, W. Weissflog, S. Diele and K. Fodor-Csrorba, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2005, 439, 43 .
D. M. Walba, P. Keller, R. Shao, N. A. Clark, M. Hillmyer and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 2740 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Walba, H. Yang, R. K. Shoemaker, P. Keller, R. Shao, D. A. Coleman, C. D. Jones, M. Nakata and N. A. Clark, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4576 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Choi, K.-U. Jeong, L.-C. Chien and M.-H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7124 RSC .
D. Kungwatchakun and M. Irie, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1988, 9, 243 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Fenton, J. M. Parker and P. V. Wright, Polymer, 1973, 14, 589 CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Chen and G. L. Baker, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2542 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Aitken, M. Lee, M. T. Hunley, H. W. Gibson and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1699 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stark, M. Ajam, M. Green, H. G. Raubenheimer, A. Ranwell and B. Ondruschka, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 348, 1934 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. P'Pool and H. Schanz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pato, M. Azori and F. Tudos, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1982, 3, 643 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Leonard, D. Turek, K. B. Sloan and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 211, 154 .
S. D. Khaja, S. Lee and N. Murthy, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 1391 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkawa, G. B. W. L. Ligthart, R. P. Sijbesma and E. W. Meijer, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1453 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kushner, J. D. Vossler, G. A. Williams and Z. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8766 CrossRef CAS .
B. I. Voit and A. Lederer, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5924 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jikei and M. Kakimoto, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao and D. Yan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 183 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Gorodetskaya, T.-L. Choi and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12672 CrossRef CAS .
E. Malmström, M. Johansson and A. Hult, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1996, 197, 3199 CrossRef .
I. A. Gorodetskaya, A. A. Gorodetsky, E. V. Vinogradova and R. H. Grubbs, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2895 CrossRef .
L. Ding, L. Zhang, H. Han, W. Huang, C. Song, M. Xie and Y. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5036 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hawker, R. Lee and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 4583 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Fokou and M. A. R. Meier, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1620 CrossRef CAS .
U. Biermann, J. O. Metzger and M. A. R. Meier, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 854 CAS .
T. Kugler, M. Logdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 225 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. DosSantos, J. L. Bredas, M. Logdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. G. Naber, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom, G. H. Gelinck, A. W. Marsman, F. J. Touwslager, S. Setayesh and D. M. DeLeeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 243 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkotter, K. Mullen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, R. B. Nyberg and M. Jorgensen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang and J. Li, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 3946 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schwalm and M. Rehahn, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3921 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, D. Cheyns, T. Aernouts, F. Banishoeib, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande, J. Genoe, J. Poortmans and P. Heremasn, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mori, E. Takahisa, H. Kajiro and Y. Nishihara, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolf and K. B. Wagener, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc. Div. Polym. Chem.), 1991, 32, 535 CAS .
E. Thorn-Csányi and P. Kraxner, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1995, 16, 147 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thorn-Csányi and P. Kraxner, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1997, 198, 3827 CrossRef CAS .
R. Peetz, A. Strachota and E. Thorn-Csányi, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2003, 204, 1439 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thorn-Csányi and O. Herzog, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 213, 123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, Y. Miyamoto, H. Morimoto and Y. Geerts, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 6166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weychardt and H. Plenio, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yamamoto, R. Ito, Y. Geerts and K. Nomura, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5104 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thorn-Csanyi, P. Kraxner and A. Strachota, Macromol. Rapid. Commun., 1998, 19, 223 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Oakley and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pecher and S. Mecking, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7733 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Matsen and F. S. Bates, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 1091 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Matsen and R. B. Thompson, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 7139 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Klok and S. Lecommandoux, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Strachota, V. Cimrova and E. Thorn-Csányi, Macromol. Symp., 2008, 268, 66 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan and D. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 409 RSC .
B. Tsuie, K. B. Wagener and J. R. Reynolds, Polym. Prepr., 1999, 40, 709 .
Y. Qin and M. A. Hillmyer, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yong Kim, Y. Qin, D. M. Stevens, O. Ugurlu, V. Kalihari, M. Hillmyer and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10790 CrossRef .
N. Mukherjee and R. M. Peetz, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6677 CrossRef CAS .

          J. E. Mark, H. R. Allcock and R. West, in Inorganic Polymers, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,  1992 Search PubMed .
K. R. Brzezinska, R. Schitter and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2000, 38, 1544 CrossRef CAS .
P. Matloka, J. C. Sworen, F. Zuluaga and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 218 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Matloka, Z. Kean, M. Greenfield and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 3992 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Matloka, Z. Kean and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1866 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, J. P. Papandrea, T. Apple and L. V. Interrante, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5257 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Rathore and L. V. Interrante, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4614 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Delgado, F. Zuluaga, P. Matloka and K. B. Wagener, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 5180 CrossRef CAS .
L. Montero de Espinosa, M. A. R. Meier, J. C. Ronda, M. Galià and V. Cádiz, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1649 CrossRef .
D. W. Smith Jr. and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 3533 CrossRef CAS .
C. Church, J. H. Pawlow and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 5746 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Church, J. H. Pawlow and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2003, 204, 32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hyun, J. Han, C. Y. Ryu and L. V. Interrante, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8684 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Smith, Jr. and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 1633 CrossRef .
F. J. Gomez and K. B. Wagener, J. Organomet. Chem., 1999, 592, 271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karabulut, C. Aydogdu, B. Düz and Y. Imamoglu, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2006, 16, 115 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karabulut, C. Aydogdu, B. Düz and Y. Imamoglu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 254, 186 CrossRef .
P. S. Wolfe, F. J. Gomez and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 714 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Gamble, J. T. Patton and J. M. Boncella, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1993, 13, 109 .
H. Weychardt and H. Plenio, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Shultz, L. V. Zakharov and D. R. Tyler, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5555 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Shultz, O. R. Berryman, L. V. Zakharov and D. R. Tyler, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2008, 18, 149 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Shultz, J. M. Zemke and D. R. Tyler, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7644 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Allcock, E. C. Kellam and M. A. Hofmann, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5140 CrossRef CAS .
B. Düz, K. Pekmez, Y. Imamoglu, S. Süzer and A. Yıldız, J. Organometal. Chem., 2003, 77, 684 .
S. Karabulut, S. Cetinkaya, B. Düz and Y. Imamoglu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 18, 375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cetinkaya, S. Karabulut, B. Düz and Y. Imamoglu, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 19, 347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karabulut, C. Aydogdu, B. Düz and Y. Imamoglu, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2007, 17, 517 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Allcock, W. R. Laredo, C. R. deDenus and J. P. Taylor, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 7719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gandini, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9491 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ladmiral, E. Melia and D. M. Haddleton, Eur. Polym. J., 2004, 40, 431 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. R. Meier, J. O. Metzger and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1788 RSC .
A. Rybak, P. A. Fokou and M. A. R. Meier, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol., 2008, 110, 797 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. M. Nordin, B. M. Yamin, M. A. Yarmo and K. Pardan, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 65, 163 CrossRef CAS ; S. Z. Erhan, M. O. Bagby and T. C. Nelsen, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 1997, 74, 703 CAS ; E. S. Finkelshtein, V. I. Bykov and E. B. Portnykh, J. Mol. Catal., 1992, 76, 33 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Refvik, R. C. Larock and Q. Tian, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 1999, 76, 93 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tian and R. C. Larock, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 2002, 79, 479 CrossRef CAS .
S. Warwel, J. Tillack, C. Demes and M. Kunz, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2001, 202, 1114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Warwel, F. Brüse, C. Demes, M. Kunz and M. Rüschgen. Klaas, Chemosphere, 2001, 43, 39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mutlu and M. A. R. Meier, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol., 2010, 112, 10 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Hopkins and K. B. Wagener, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Leonard, T. E. Hopkins, K. Chaffin and K. B. Wagener, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 1485 CrossRef CAS .
K. Terada, E. B. Berda, K. B. Wagener, F. Sanda and T. Masuda, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6041 CrossRef CAS .
V. P Bui and T. Hudlicky, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 641 CrossRef .
J. E. Gautrot and X. X. Zhu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 581, 281 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Zhu and M. Nichifor, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 539 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rybak and M. A. R. Meier, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 542 CrossRef CAS .
L. Montero De Espinosa, J. C. Ronda, M. Galià, V. Cádiz and M. A. R. Meier, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 5760 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Hatice Mutlu	Hatice Mutlu (left), born in 1981 in Kardzhali, Bulgaria, received her BS in Chemistry in 2005 from Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey. She continued her education in polymer chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Selim Küsefoğlu at Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, and received a MS in Chemistry in 2008. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD studies at the University of Potsdam (Potsdam, Germany), in the group of Prof. Michael A. R. Meier, and is working on research focused on the synthesis of novel monomers and polymers from plant oil renewable resources via olefin metathesis and thiol-ene chemistry.
	Lucas Montero de Espinosa (right) was born in 1982 in Madrid, Spain. He obtained his Chemistry degree from Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM, Spain) in 2005. He received his PhD in 2009 from Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV, Tarragona, Spain) after his research on thermosetting and flame retardant polymers from plant oil resources with V. Cadiz and J. C. Ronda. Since then, he is performing a postdoctoral stay in the group of Prof. Michael A. R. Meier (University of Potsdam, Germany) holding a postdoctoral Max Plank fellowship from the Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany).
	Michael A. R. Meier (middle) was born in Ingolstadt (Germany) in 1975. He graduated in chemistry from the University of Regensburg (Germany) in 2002. In July 2006, he finished his PhD at the Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands. In October 2006 he was appointed principal investigator of the junior research group Renewable Raw Materials at the University of Applied Sciences in Emden, Germany. Since June 2009 he is Junior Professor for Sustainable Organic Synthesis at the University of Potsdam, Germany. Recently, he was awarded with the H. P. Kaufmann Prize of the German Society for Fat Science and the 2010 European Young Lipid Scientist Award of the European Federation for the Science and Technology of Lipids.

 	Fig. 1  Olefin metathesis mechanism proposed by Chauvin and Herisson.5	 

 	Fig. 2  Metathesis catalysts. C1, Schrock's molybdenum alkylidene; C2, Schrock's tungsten alkylidene; C3, Grubbs 1st generation; C4, Grubbs 2nd generation; C5, Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation.6–8,11,12	 

 	Fig. 3  Most frequently studied metathesis reactions: Self-metathesis (SM), cross-metathesis (CM), acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET), ring-opening metathesis polymerisation (ROMP), ring-opening metathesis (ROM), ring-closing metathesis (RCM).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of an ADMET polymerisation of α,ω-dienes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Generally accepted mechanism of ADMET polymerisation.17	 

 	Fig. 6  Two possible mechanistic pathways of metal catalysed olefin isomerisation.54	 

 	Fig. 7  Nolan's catalyst.62	 

 	Fig. 8  2nd generation metathesis catalysts studied for their isomerisation tendency during ADMET polymerisations.68	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the metathesis catalyst acting as a chain-transfer agent during the depolymerisation of polybutadiene.	 

 	Fig. 10  ADMET polymerisation of 1,9-decadiene with 4-pentenyl n-butarate as a chain-stopper.78	 

 	Fig. 11  “Negative neighbouring group effect” during ADMET polymerisation.34,47	 

 	Fig. 12  Copolymer synthesis starting from ADMET derived telechelic prepolymers.79	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of telechelic diols via ADMET polymerisation/depolymerisation method.80	 

 	Fig. 14  General ADMET approach to precisely substituted polyethylene.	 

 	Fig. 15  Polyethylene containing precisely placed methyl branches prepared via ADMET.84,85	 

 	Fig. 16  Polyethylene containing randomly placed methyl branches obtained via ADMET.86	 

 	Fig. 17  Polyethylene containing precisely placed gem-dimethyl branches via obtained ADMET.87	 

 	Fig. 18  Polyethylene containing precisely placed ethyl branches obtained via ADMET.88	 

 	Fig. 19  Polyethylene containing precisely or randomly placed butyl branches obtained via ADMET.89	 



Methyl	63	104	20.2(1.7)	20.2 (1.7)
Ethyl	24	65	50.2 (1.9)	50.7 (1.9)
Propyl	12	60	41.2 (1.7)	41.4 (1.7)
Butyl	12	57	41.5 (1.8)	40.3 (1.7)
Pentyl	14	58	45.1 (1.8)	45.8 (1.8)
Hexyl	12	49	44.6 (1.8)	46.1 (1.7)
Isopropyl	11	37	45.5 (1.7)	46.0 (1.7)

sec-Butyl	9	43	43.0 (1.6)	42.6 (1.9)

tert-Butyl	13	50	30.6 (1.7)	32.1 (1.7)
Cyclohexyl	9	37	32.5 (1.6)	33.6 (1.6)
Adamantyl	−8 and 17	2 and 8	64.7 (1.7)	70.8 (1.3)

 	Fig. 20  Polyethylene containing precisely placed (a) hydroxyl or (b) acetate pendant groups obtained via ADMET.25,95	 

 	Fig. 21  Polyethylene containing precisely placed phenyl, ester or chloro pendant groups obtained via ADMET.46	 

 	Fig. 22  Polyethylene containing precisely placed methoxy or ethoxy pendant groups obtained via ADMET.97	 

 	Fig. 23  Polyethylene containing precisely placed carboxylic acid pendant groups obtained via ADMET.98	 

 	Fig. 24  Polyethylene containing randomly placed hydroxyl or acetate pendant groups obtained via ADMET.99	 

 	Fig. 25  Polyethylene containing precisely placed sulfonic acid ethyl ester or phosphonic acid pendant groups obtained via ADMET.100–102	 

 	Fig. 26  Polyethylene containing precisely placed halogen pendant groups obtained via ADMET.103–105	 

 	Fig. 27  Polyethylene containing randomly placed halogen pendant groups obtained via ADMET.108	 

 	Fig. 28  Polyethylene containing perfectly spaced PEG branches obtained via ADMET.109	 

 	Fig. 29  Polyethylene containing perfectly spaced end-group protected PEG branches ADMET via ADMET and subsequent deprotection.110	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Different ADMET derived polyethylenes containing perfectly spaced hydrophilic PEG branches and (b) chain folding and crystallisation of the ADMET derived amphiphiles.111	 

 	Fig. 31  Different ADMET derived polyethylenes containing perfectly spaced hydrophilic PEG branches with pyrene, n-hexyl or n-tetradecyl end groups.112	 

 	Fig. 32  Macromonomer approach to graft copolymers using ATRP and ADMET polymerisations.113	 

 	Fig. 33  Proposed mechanism for ALTMET polymerisation.115	 

 	Fig. 34  Chemical structure of the dienes used for the synthesis of homopolymer with MCLCP properties, and copolymer with combination of MCLCP and SCLCP properties.117	 

 	Fig. 35  Synthesis of thermotropic LCPs via ADMET polymerization.62	 

 	Fig. 36  The structures of banana diene monomer (a) and calamitic dienes (b) used in the synthesis of liquid crystalline homopolymers and alternating copolymers via ADMET.119	 

 	Fig. 37  Synthesis of LCPs via ADMET of α,ω-unsaturated mesogens.120,121	 

 	Fig. 38  Synthesis of a photochromic LC polymer via ADMET.122	 

 	Fig. 39  Preparation of polyelectrolytes from polyethylene/PEO block copolymers synthesised via ADMET.125	 

 	Fig. 40  Synthesis of ionic polyolefins through ADMET polymerisation of imidazolium based ionic liquid α,ω-dienes.126	 

 	Fig. 41  Synthesis of an antracene based polyacetal with protein delivery properties.131	 

 	Fig. 42  ADMET polymerisation of an α,ω-diene bearing a Napy unit to obtain a strictly linear polymer with a donor–acceptor-acceptor-donor quadruple hydrogen bonding motif in the main chain.132	 

 	Fig. 43  Synthesis of a titin-mimicking modular polymer and a control polymer without H-bonding capacity.133	 

 	Fig. 44  Monomers used for the synthesis of hyperbranched polymers via ADMET polymerisation.137	 

 	Fig. 45  Hyperbranched polymer derived via ADMET and their post-polymerisation functionalization with pyrene.139	 

 	Fig. 46  Synthesis of a hyperbranched azo-polymers via ADMET.140	 

 	Fig. 47  Synthesis of branched macromolecules via ATMET with a chain-stopper.142	 

 	Fig. 48  Conjugated polymers containing alternating conjugated segments and heteroatoms in the main chain.	 

 	Fig. 49  ADMET polymerisation of 2,5-dialkyl-1,4-divinylbenzenes.160	 

 	Fig. 50  1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-2,5-divinylbenzene and 9,9-di(2-ethylhexyl)uorenyl-2,7-vinylene, suitable monomers for the synthesis of conjugated polymers via ADMET.161	 

 	Fig. 51  Grubbs 3rd generation catalyst.162	 

 	Fig. 52  Stabilization of the olefin metathesis catalytic intermediate via oxygen-Mo donor bond.163	 

 	Fig. 53  Melt prepolymerisation of 1,4-dipropoxy-2,5-divinylbenzene, followed by a solid state ADMET polymerisation.164	 

 	Fig. 54  ADMET polymerisation of 2,5-dipropenyl-3-hexylthiophene using C4 conducted in bulk under dynamic vacuum.172	 

 	Fig. 55  ADMET derived carbosilane/carbosiloxane copolymers and their cross-linking in presence of moisture.176	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) Incorporation of “chain-end” cross-links to moisture-triggered cross-linked ADMET derived carbosilane/carbosiloxane copolymers and (b) introduction of an oxyethylene-based soft phase.177	 

 	Fig. 57  Monomers and chain-stopper used for the synthesis of carbosilane, carbosiloxane and polyether based cross-linked polymers.178,179	 

 	Fig. 58  Synthesis of cyclolinear carbosilane polymers via ADMET and their subsequent thermal cross-linking.180,181	 

 	Fig. 59  Synthesis of telechelic ADMET elastomers containing silacyclobutane end groups and thermal cross-linking.182	 

 	Fig. 60  Synthesis of phosphorous containing polyesters with pendant hydroxyl groups via ADMET and their subsequent acrylation and radical cross-linking.183	 

 	Fig. 61  Poly[carbo(dimethyl)silanes] with high average trans content (80%) prepared via ADMET.31	 

 	Fig. 62  ADMET polymerisation of silicon-containing dienes using an electrochemically generated tungsten-based active species.202	 

 	Fig. 63  Polymerisation of bis(4-pentenyl)di-n-butylstannane using a well-defined metathesis catalyst C1.192	 

 	Fig. 64  The synthesis of unsaturated polycarbogermanes via ADMET.189	 

 	Fig. 65  Functionalised metal–metal dimer molecules that can be used as monomers for ADMET polymerisation.195–197	 

 	Fig. 66  ADMET polymerisation, photocleavage of the main chain Mo–Mo bonds, and trapping of the radicals formed with CCl4.197	 

 	Fig. 67  Four different small molecule cyclic phosphazene trimers bearing different organic groups.198	 

 	Fig. 68  Synthesis of unsaturated polyesters based on ω-unsaturated fatty acid esters.211	 

 	Fig. 69  Synthesis of polymers containing amino acid units either in the backbone or as pendant groups.49	 

 	Fig. 70  Synthesis of branched polymers containing amino acid or peptide branches with free N- or C-terminus via ADMET.52,214	 

 	Fig. 71  ADMET polymerisation of L-Glutamic acid diketopiperazine ω-alkenyl esters.216	 

 	Fig. 72  Synthesis of polymers containing D-chiro-inositol units via ADMET.217	 

 	Fig. 73  Synthesis of bile acid-based oligomeric GPC standards via ADMET.218	 

 	Fig. 74  From a 10-undecenoic acid based α,ω-diene to unsaturated polyesters, telechelics, block copolymers and flame retardant polymers.220,221	 

 	Fig. 75  Synthesis via ADMET of unsaturated PA X,20 based on 10-undecenoic acid.51	 

ADMET
	acyclic diene metathesis

ALTMET
	alternating diene metathesis

ATMET
	acyclic triene metathesis

ATRP
	atom transfer radical polymerisation

C1
	Schrock’s molybdenum catalyst

C2
	Schrock’s tungsten catalyst

C3
	Grubbs 1st generation catalyst

C4
	Grubbs 2nd generation catalyst

C5
	Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation catalyst

C6
	Nolan’s catalyst

C7
	Zhan catalyst

C9
	Grubbs 3rd generation catalyst

CGC
	constrained geometry catalysts

CM
	cross-metathesis

CS
	chain-stopper

CV
	carbazolevinylene

DB
	degree of branching

DKP
	diketopiperazines

DOPO
	9,10-Dihydro-9-oxo-10-phosphaphenanthrene-10-oxide

DP
	degree of polymerisation

DSCB
	disilacyclobutane

EAA
	ethylene-co-acrylic acid

EB
	ethylene/1-butene

EH
	ethylene/1-hexene

EO
	ethylene/1-octene

EP
	ethylene/propylene

EVA
	ethylene-vinyl acetate

EVB
	ethylene/vinyl bromide

EVC
	ethylene/vinyl chloride

EVE
	ethylene/vinyl ethers

EVF
	ethylene/vinyl fluoride

EVH
	ethylene/vinyl halide

FLCs
	ferroelectric liquid crystals

FV
	2,7-divinyl-9,9-dialkylfluorenes

hb
	hyperbranched

HDPE
	high density polyethylene

IL
	ionic liquid

LCPs
	liquid crystalline polymers

LLDPE
	linear low density polyethylene

MCLCP
	main chain liquid crystal polymer

NHCs
	
N-heterocyclic carbenes

NLO
	nonlinear optics

NNGE
	negative neighbouring group effect

P3HTV
	poly(3-hexyl-2,5-thienylenevinylene)

PDI
	polydispersity index

PE
	polyethylene

PEG
	poly(ethylene glycol)

PEO
	poly(ethylene oxide)

POM
	polarised optical microscopy

PP
	polypropylene

PPVs
	poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s

PTVs
	poly(2,5-thienylenevinylene)s

PV
	phenylenevinylene

PVC
	polyvinyl chloride

RCM
	ring-closing metathesis

ROM
	ring opening metathesis

ROMP
	ring opening metathesis polymerisation

SCLCP
	side chain liquid crystal polymer

SEC
	size-exclusion chromatography

SM
	self-metathesis

Tg
	glass transition temperature

Tm
	melting point

VA
	vinyl acetate

WAXD
	wide-angle X-ray diffraction

WAXS
	wide-angle X-ray scattering

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
