Recent advances in water / alcohol -soluble π-conjugated materials: new materials and growing applications in solar cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60200A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60200A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071-9104Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances in water/alcohol-soluble π-conjugated materials: new materials and growing applications in solar cells
Chunhui Duan

, 
Kai Zhang

, 
Chengmei Zhong

, 
Fei Huang

* and 
Yong Cao


Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: msfhuang@scut.edu.cn
Received 
15th June 2013
First published on 30th August 2013AbstractWater/alcohol-soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) and small molecules (WSCSs) are materials that can be processed from water or other polar solvents. They provide good opportunities to fabricate multilayer organic optoelectronic devices without interface mixing by solution processing, and exhibit a promising interface modification ability for metal or metal oxide electrodes to greatly enhance the device performance of solar cells. Moreover, owing to their intriguing processability, WSCPs and WSCSs have great potential for applying environmentally friendly processing technologies to fabricate solar cells. In this review, the authors give an overview of recent developments in WSCPs and WSCSs, including their molecular design, material synthesis, functional principles and application as interface modification layers and photoactive components in emerging photovoltaic technologies such as organic/polymer solar cells, organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells and dye-sensitised solar cells.Chunhui DuanChunhui Duan was born in 1986. He obtained his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2008, and he is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang at South China University of Technology. His research interests are conjugated functional materials for organic/polymer optoelectronics.Kai ZhangKai Zhang received his BS degree in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2010, and was recommended for admission to South China University of Technology in the same year. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang. His current research focuses on high efficiency polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells.Chengmei ZhongChengmei Zhong is a graduate student in Materials Science working in South China University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang since 2008. His research interests are the physics of optoelectronic devices and transient spectroscopy studies on organic semiconductors.Fei HuangFei Huang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Peking University in 2000 and gained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the South China University of Technology in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao. After postdoctoral work at University of Washington with Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen, he began his academic career in 2009 as a professor of South China University of Technology. His main interests are in the fields of organic functional materials and devices for opto-electronics.Yong CaoYong Cao, physical chemist, Professor of South China University of Technology since 1999. BS from Department of Chemistry, Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) University, PhD degree from Tokyo University, Japan. He was visiting senior researcher at University of California, Santa Barbara in 1988–1990 and senior scientist of UNIAX Corporation in 1990–1998. Current research interest: polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.
1. Introduction
π-Conjugated organic materials, which feature delocalised electrons along their π-conjugated backbones, have exhibited significant application potential and attracted great attention over the past decades.1,2 A large library of π-conjugated organic small molecules and conjugated polymers has been developed for their application in various optoelectronic devices (such as light-emitting diodes,3,4 solar cells,5–11 field effect transistors (FETs)12,13 and organic lasers14), chemo-/bio-sensors15–17 and cell imaging.17,18 Among these, water/alcohol-soluble conjugated polymers (WSCPs) have attracted increasing attention in recent years due to their excellent intrinsic optoelectronic properties and unique solubilities.16–22 In general, WSCPs are structurally composed of two key components: π-conjugated backbones and surfactant-like side groups (such as amino, dihydroxyethylamino, phosphate, carboxyl, quaternary ammonium, anionic carboxyl, sulfonic and zwitterionic groups). Whereas the π-conjugated backbones determine the intrinsic optoelectronic properties of WSCPs such as their absorption and emission spectra, band structures and charge transport characteristics, the surfactant-like side groups endow WSCPs with unique solubilities in highly polar solvents. Such structural traits and unique properties offer WSCPs a series of advantages and great application potential in organic optoelectronic devices. First, the extraordinary solubilities of WSCPs in highly polar solvents are desirable for fabricating multilayer devices without interface mixing through the deposition of different layers from orthogonal solvents.23,24 In addition, WSCPs show promise for applying environmentally friendly processing techniques to the industrial high-throughput manufacturing of optoelectronic devices.21,24 Moreover, the surfactant-like side groups have been found to endow WSCPs with extraordinary interface modification functions for optoelectronic devices and thereby enhance device performance.19,21,24,25 Lastly, the desired optoelectronic properties of WSCPs, such as absorption and emission spectra and charge transport ability, can be manipulated by tailoring their π-conjugated backbone structures. Although the initial research interest in WSCPs mainly focused on their application in highly selective and sensitive chemo-/bio-sensors,15 considerable efforts have also been devoted to the development of new WSCPs and exploiting their potential in optoelectronic device applications over the past decade.19,21,24
Extensive studies on WSCPs in emerging solar cell technologies have been conducted in recent years, and great advances have been achieved. Harvesting solar energy and converting it into electricity comprise one of the most promising approaches to solving current energy and environmental issues. Although silicon-based solar cells are the most mature photovoltaic technologies to date and have dominated the market for more than 10 years due to their stable and highly efficient output over a long period,26 high costs have seriously restricted their application in the civilian market. Owing to their great potential for low-cost, large-scale manufacturing and compatibility with flexible substrates, new photovoltaic techniques such as organic/polymer solar cells (OSCs),27,28 organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells (HSCs)29 and dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs)30 have attracted considerable attention from the academic and industrial communities. As shown in Fig. 1a, a conventional OSC or HSC applies a sandwich structure,28 where an active layer is sandwiched between a hole-collecting electrode (HCE) and electron-collecting electrode (ECE). In general, a p-type conjugated polymer or organic small molecule often serves as an electron donor,5–11,31,32 and an n-type material (such as a fullerene derivative) is usually used as an electron acceptor.33,34 A hole collection/transport layer (HCL) and an electron collection/transport layer (ECL) are usually incorporated between the active layer and a corresponding electrode to enhance carrier extraction.25,35–37 WSCPs have exhibited wide application in OSCs and HSCs, showing potential as photoactive components in environmentally friendly solvent-processed solar cells.38 More encouragingly, WSCPs have helped achieve state-of-the-art OSCs due to their excellent interface modification properties for ECEs.39 In fact, the interfacial modification of ECE via WSCPs is becoming a universal method for OSCs.25,39–55 Moreover, the use of WSCPs as buffer layers for HCEs has also attracted growing attention. The small molecular counterparts of WSCPs, i.e., water/alcohol-soluble conjugated small molecules (WSCSs), have also exhibited applicative potential as both photoactive components and interface modification materials in OSCs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Typical device configuration of OSCs and HSCs. (b) Typical device configuration of DSSCs. 
The DSSC, which was first invented by Grätzel et al. in 1991,30 is a different kind of low-cost photovoltaic device. It exhibits high light-to-electrical conversion efficiencies and great applicative potential. Over the past two decades, DSSCs have achieved energy conversion efficiencies of up to 12% for cells with a ruthenium-free donor–π-acceptor zinc porphyrin-derived sensitisers and cobalt polypyridyl-based redox electrolytes on nanocrystal TiO2 photoanodes.56 As presented in Fig. 1b, a typical DSSC comprises a transparent conducting oxide such as a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate, a mesoporous semiconducting metal oxide (predominately TiO2) film adsorbed with photosensitiser dyes, an electrolyte layer containing a redox couple and a counter electrode. Photosensitisers, which act as light-harvesting antennae and convert incident radiation into electric current, are among the essential components in DSSCs. Until now, research on metal-free photosensitisers has focused on organic small molecules.57–59 WSCPs, especially those featured in acidic solubilising groups such as carboxylic or alkyl sulfonic acids, have also received great attention as photosensitisers in DSSCs due to their relatively higher extinction coefficients and tunable optical band gap.
In addition, remarkable achievements have been made in the development of WSCPs through new synthesis methods/strategies and WSCPs with novel molecular structures in recent years. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce the latest progress in the field to the related communities. In this review, we concentrate our discussions on WSCPs and WSCSs in terms of the emerging photovoltaic technologies of OSCs, HSCs and DSSCs. We also introduce WSCPs that possess novel structures and are prepared by new synthesis methods.
2. Design and synthesis of new WSCPs
During the past few years, many new WSCPs have been designed and synthesised by researchers around the world in an effort to apply them to different areas (such as organic optoelectronic devices, chemo-/bio-sensors and biological imaging). As discussed previously, the two essential components of WSCPs are their conjugated backbones and surfactant-like pendant groups. The creation of new WSCPs has thereby mainly concentrated on two aspects:17,18,20,21 (i) tailoring conjugated backbones to tune the intrinsic optoelectronic properties of the resulting materials and (ii) introducing various side groups to obtain desirable self-assembly properties and unique functions for desired applications. For example, the Bazan group60 created two novel narrow-band-gap CPEs based on a poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-alkyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] donor/acceptor backbone very recently, which unexpectedly exhibited n-type transport in FETs, as opposed to the widely studied p-type transport in neutral systems with isoelectronic backbones. Further, considerable efforts have been put into developing new WSCPs with elaborate structures and examining new synthesis methods and strategies. Hence, this section highlights the latest progress in the synthetic chemistry of WSCPs, and presents several of the representative synthetic protocols that have created materials with novel structures or applied new synthesis methods/strategies.
All-conjugated block copolymers composed of two or more different conjugated blocks are important topics in the synthetic chemistry of conjugated polymers.61,62 These systems usually display a nanophase separation of two segments in both solution and the solid state. Further, they exhibit unique self-assembly behaviour such as their aggregation into low vesicular and lamellar nanostructures,63,64 leading to new properties and application potentials.63,65–67 The combination of WSCPs and all-conjugated block copolymers gives rise to advanced materials that contain one (or more) hydrophilic block. These materials may exhibit interesting self-assembly behaviour and unique properties when applied to organic optoelectronic devices. The successful creation of all-conjugated water/alcohol-soluble block copolymers (b-WSCPs) has relied on the advancements made in transition-metal-mediated coupling reactions. Scheme 1 shows several examples of b-WSCP synthesis. Tu et al.62 described the synthesis of the first b-WSCP (PF2/6-b-P3PHT) with a polyfluorene block and polythiophene block in 2007. The synthetic route for making PF2/6-b-P3PHT is depicted in Scheme 1a. The key point for the target copolymer PF2/6-b-P3PHT is the preparation of its precursor polymer PF2/6-b-P3BrHT, which was synthesised by a catalyst-transfer, Suzuki–Miyaura-type step-growth polycondensation from 7-bromo-9,9-dialkylfluorene-2-ylboronic acid ester using mono-end-capped poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as a macromolecular initiator. The precursor block copolymer was converted to target b-WSCP PF2/6-b-P3PHT by phosphorylation in a subsequent Arbuzov reaction. PF2/6-b-P3PHT exhibited different self-assembly behaviour in solutions when the polarity of the solvent mixtures was changed. Dynamic/static light scattering, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and optical spectroscopy revealed the formation of vesicular aggregates in dilute solution. Starting from the same precursor polymer, two all-conjugated block polyelectrolytes (PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT and PF2/6-b-P3PyTHT) were also accessed by ionising the alkylbromide pendant groups using trimethylamine or pyridine. The all-conjugated block polyelectrolytes were prone to self-assembly into two-dimensional layered aggregates. AFM studies have indicated that the conjugated diblock polyelectrolytes in methanol tend to form bilayer-based, micro-sized vesicles at low concentrations. A transition into lamellar aggregates has been observed at high diblock polyelectrolyte concentrations.68 Diblock polyelectrolytes have also demonstrated better adhesion to the active layer and good interface modification effects in OSCs,45 which is discussed in detail later.
 Scheme 1  Synthetic routes for the preparation of b-WSCPs (a) PF2/6-b-P3PHT, PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT and PF2/6-b-P3PyTHT, (b) PF6NBr-b-PF8 and (c) PF-PFPyBr-PF and PFPyBr-PF-PFPyBr. 
Gutacker et al.69 created a diblock conjugated copolymer composed of a neutral polydialkylfluorene segment and a cationic polyfluorene. As shown in Scheme 1b, the synthesis of target diblock all-conjugated polyelectrolyte PF6NBr-b-PF8 involved two steps: (i) generating nonionic diblock precursor copolymer PF6Br-b-PF8 via catalyst-transfer, Suzuki–Miyaura-type chain growth polycondensation, with the subsequent addition of the two AB-type monomers 7-bromo-9,9-dioctylfluorene-2-ylboronic acid ester and 7-bromo-9,9-di-(6-bromohexyl)fluorene-2-ylboronic acid ester using Hartwig's (t-Bu3P)Pd(C6H5)Br complex as the arylpalladium catalyst, and (ii) treating the precursor copolymer PF6Br-b-PF8 with trimethylamine in a quaternisation reaction. By optimising the reaction conditions, the polymerisation degrees of the two blocks of PF6Br and PF8 on nonionic precursor copolymer PF6Br-b-PF8 were controlled to the point where they were almost identical according to gel permeation chromatography (GPC) analysis. AFM imaging experiments have evidenced the formation of vesicles and spherical particles in methanol and tetrahydrofuran (THF). In methanol, the inner shell of the vesicle walls is composed of nonionic, hydrophobic PF8 segments, and the outer shell is generated by ionic, hydrophilic PF6NBr segments with rigid-rod diblock copolymer chains oriented perpendicularly to the plane of the vesicle walls. In THF, the aggregation behaviour of PF6NBr-b-PF8 is reversed.69 The structure models of the vesicles are depicted in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Graphical illustration of the vesicle structure formed by PF6NBr-b-PF8 from methanol and THF (orange: PF8 block; black: PF6NBr block). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Adopting a similar synthetic strategy to that of diblock all-conjugated polyelectrolyte PF6NBr-b-PF8, Ying et al.70 reported the synthesis of triblock all-conjugated fluorene-based polyelectrolytes (ABA-PyBr and BAB-PyBr) with neutral/ionic/neutral or ionic/neutral/ionic block architectures. They prepared all-conjugated triblock polyfluorene precursors with a controlled molecular weight and narrow polydispersity index (PDI) via a sequential monomer addition procedure involving a chain-growth mechanism through a Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. The precursors were then treated with pyridine in a quaternisation reaction to achieve triblock all-conjugated polyelectrolytes with neutral/ionic/neutral or ionic/neutral/ionic architectures. The synthetic routes are illustrated in Scheme 1c. Studies on Förster resonance energy transfer have suggested the formation of polymer chain aggregations even in dilute solutions, especially for the neutral/ionic/neutral-type triblock species in more polar media. In addition, both neutral/ionic/neutral and ionic/neutral/ionic triblock polyelectrolytes have performed efficiently as electron injection layers for alumina (Al) electrodes in PLEDs.70
Benefiting from transition-metal-mediated controlled polymerisation, Traina et al.71 accessed a new WSCP P8EOF-Si with a uniform molecular weight (in the absence of ionic groups) and a reactive end group capable of post-synthesis modification reactions. The P8EOF-Si synthesis procedure is presented in Scheme 2. The high-yielding polymerisation of 2-bromo-7-iodofluorene with octakis (ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether chains at the 9,9′-positions to afford P8EOF-Si was conducted using (dppe)Ni(Ph)Br (dppe = 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane) as an initiator in under 30 seconds. Quenching the polymerisation with [2-(trimethylsilyl)ethynyl]magnesium bromide afforded silylacetylene-terminated polymer P8EOF-Si with good solubility in methanol and water, a uniform molecular weight (number-average molecular weight (Mn) in the 26–30 kg mol−1 range) and a small PDI of 1.3–1.4. After deprotection, the terminated acetylene groups demonstrated protocols for the introduction of specific end group functionalities via ‘click’ chemistry.71
 Scheme 2  Synthetic route for the preparation of uniform WSCP P8EOF-Si by Ni-initiated polymerisation. 
In general, conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) are defined as polymers with conjugated main chains and ionic groups on their side chains. Swager's group72 created a class of novel CPEs (PPyClPh, PPyClPh-TFPh and PPyClPh-Th) with conjugated backbones composed of ionic segments, i.e., pyridinium–phenylene units. The molecular structures of these polymers are shown in Scheme 3a. In these polymers, the electron-deficient pyridinium rings were generated by an intramolecular cyclisation from neutral precursors. The ionic electron-deficient pyridinium rings provided the resulting polymers with good solubilities in highly polar solvents such as water and methanol, high electron affinities (3.90–4.14 eV) and high electrical conductivities. The FETs based on the polymers exhibited n-type behaviour with high electron mobility (0.24 cm2 V−1 s−1 at gate voltages of 5–15 V and 3.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at gate voltages of 15–20 V) for PPyClPh. The research group found PPyClPh to be an efficient photoluminescence quencher for poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene-vinylene) (MEH-PPV) even in a bilayer film, indicating an electron transfer from MEH-PPV to PPyClPh.72 The group also prepared novel donor–acceptor triblock copolymers (P3TH-b-PPymPh-b-P3HT) with regioregular P3HT as the terminal blocks and poly(pyridinium phenylene) as the acceptor block.73 As shown in Scheme 3b, access to the resulting triblock copolymer P3TH-b-PPymPh-b-P3HT was by a Yamamoto-type cross-coupling copolymerisation from a P3HT macroinitiator to generate precursor copolymers with a siloxyethyl-substituted poly(pyridylphenylene) mid-block, which were then converted into polyelectrolytes by intramolecular cyclisation. P3TH-b-PPymPh-b-P3HT displayed high electron affinities of 3.8–4.0 eV and an ionisation potential of 5.1 eV, which were characteristics of the respective blocks. In addition, the triblock copolymers comprising the p- and n-type blocks exhibited nanodomains ca. 20 nm in diameter, which matched the ideal exciton diffusion lengths and were hence desirable for the formation of a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) nanostructures in photovoltaic devices.73
 Scheme 3  (a) Molecular structures of n-type WSCPs PPyClPh, PPyClPh-TFPh and PPyClPh-Th. (b) Synthetic route for the preparation of triblock WSCP P3TH-b-PPymPh-b-P3HT. 
3. WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components in OSCs and HSCs
The outstanding intrinsic semiconducting characteristics and unique solubility of WSCPs and WSCSs guarantee their extensive application in OSCs. For example, their extraordinary solubility in water/alcohol allows the manufacturing of solar cells by environmentally friendly processing technologies, and is also beneficial for solution-depositing different layers of multilayer solar cells from orthogonal solvents. In this section, we introduce the application of WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components of OSCs and HSCs. It is also worth noting that in many instances, the ionic precursors, which are not semiconducting in nature, of conjugated polymers are used to fabricate solar cells by aqueous processing.38,74–83
3.1 WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components in OSCs
Although great device efficiency has been achieved for OSCs,39,51,84–92 the production of OSCs by current fabricating processes requires the consumption of a large body of toxic organic solvents such as chloroform, chlorobenzene and 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Meanwhile, much effort has been put into the study of the large-scale and/or environmentally friendly processing techniques used in the high-throughput manufacturing and widespread application of low-cost OSCs.93,94 WSCPs and WSCSs have thus attracted considerable attention. Early studies of WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components in OSCs focused on the fabrication and examination of devices through layer-by-layer (LBL) processing from CPEs, and how this approach could allow comprehensive access to multilayer heterostructures with large donor/acceptor interfacial areas.95–111 In spite of this, the electron-donating and electron-accepting layers in LBL devices were deposited alternately. The continuous pathways of transporting for respective charge carriers was hence completely interrupted, often leading to poor device performance. In recent years, considerable efforts have been put into new material exploration and establishing environmentally friendly device processing techniques for solar cells based on WSCPs and WSCSs. The molecular structures of the WSCPs and WSCSs used as photoactive components in OSCs are presented in Scheme 4.
 Scheme 4  Molecular structures of the WSCPs and WSCSs for use in OSCs. 
In 2007, Yang and co-workers112 reported a bilayer OSC with an indium tin oxide (ITO)/PTEBS-Na/C60/BCP/Al device structure, where BCP (2,7-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline) was used as an exciton blocking layer. The electron donor and hole transporter PTEBS-Na was spin-coated on top of ITO from an aqueous solution, and the electron acceptor and transporter were subsequently deposited by thermal evaporation. The as-fabricated solar cell exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.39% under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) illumination. It was found that an application of a positive electrical bias on the devices for a short time could increase the open-circuit voltage (Voc) by 15.5% and thereby slightly improve the device performance to 0.43%. This change was permanent and irreversible even when a negative bias was applied. This biased treatment-induced device performance improvement might have been either a collective effect of the microstructural change of the PTEBS-Na layer and PTEBS-Na/C60 interface induced by Joule heating and polarisation of the charge–ion pairs by the applied electric field, or the decreased electron–hole pair recombination resulting from the movement of counterions under the applied field.
Søndergaard et al.113 developed a set of new techniques that allowed for the aqueous processing of every OSC layer, and the processing steps are shown in Fig. 3. The specifically developed polymer P2OHTh and fullerene-based acceptor PC61BEO were spin-coated on top of a ZnO particles layer, which was also pre-deposited on top of ITO from an aqueous solution. A subsequent thermal cleavage that involved solubilising side chains on P2OHTh under 310 °C for approximately 10 seconds resulted in an insoluble active layer, allowing for the subsequent deposition of an aqueous dispersion of polyethylenedioxythiophene:poly(styrene sulfonate) PEDOT:PSS as the HCL without interface erosion. The device fabrication was completed by printing a silver paste as the ECE. This all-aqueous process-inverted OSC displayed a PCE of 0.6%, a Voc of 0.49, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 4.46 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 32%. Although the device's performance was not ideal, the work marked an essential step toward the environmentally friendly high throughput production of OSCs.113–117
 Fig. 3  Comparison of the processing procedures of OSCs using the standard laboratory procedure involving the use of toxic solvents and the slow metal evaporation deposition (top), and the all-water-processable method in which all of the steps are processed from an aqueous solution (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Worfolk et al.118 studied the usage of a series of carboxylated polythiophenes P3CATs with different alkyl chain lengths (propyl to hexyl), combined with (6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) to form a photoactive BHJ layer of OSCs. Although P3CATs are soluble in highly polar solvents and only sparingly soluble in chlorobenzene and dichlorobenzene, PC61BM exhibited adverse solubility. The deposition of the photoactive BHJ layer thus applied a solvent mixture of pyridine and chlorobenzene. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy confirmed the formation of hydrogen bonding between the carboxyl groups on P3CATs, leading to a large polymer crystallite size and contributing to a high hole mobility that aided the charge transport through the solar cell devices. The polymer with a pentyl spacer between the polythiophene backbone and carboxyl group demonstrated the best photovoltaic performance, achieving a PCE of 2.6% along with a Jsc of 6.26 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.56 V and an FF of 64%. The study also examined the mechanical properties of the BHJ films with nanoindentation, and the results indicated that P3CATs have good durability and flexibility. More interestingly, it was found that the overall mechanical properties of the photoactive layer were dominated by PC61BM rather than the polymers. This discovery provided a reference for the design of practical flexible solar cells. Thomas et al.119 successfully fabricated an inverted solar cell using C60 and P3CBT as the n-phase and p-phase, respectively. The device fabrication involved the generation of uniform C60 nanocolumns via glancing angle deposition (GLAD) and the incorporation of P3CBT into the BHJ layer by spin-coating from dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a solvent that did not affect the structure of the GLAD-produced C60 nanocolumns. As shown in Fig. 4, a C60 nanocolumn with an optimal diameter and intercolumn spacing to match the exciton diffusion length while concurrently increasing the hetero-interface area was obtained by controlling the GLAD deposition conditions. The inverted solar cells with these nanostructured C60/P3CBT photoactive layers delivered a fivefold increase in Jsc and a fourfold increase in PCE from 0.2% to 0.8% compared with a bilayer heterojunction device. The nanostructured solar cell also outperformed the BHJ control devices, which had PCEs of approximately 0.49%.
 Fig. 4  Schematic images of inverted solar cells with a photoactive layer of a nanostructured C60 column and a WSCP P3CBT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Vandenbergh et al.120 synthesised two poly(phenylene vinylene) (PPV) derivatives (BTEMP-PPV and MTEMP-PPV) with a branched oligo (ethylene glycol) substituent. The nonionic polar side chains on BTEMP-PPV and MTEMP-PPV rendered the PPV backbone soluble in alcohol and water, making the polymers suitable for environmentally friendly solvent-processed OSCs. Further, nonionic polar side chains were found to give the resulting conjugated polymers a large relative permittivity (εr), which doubled for MTEMP-PPV (εr = 6.4) in terms of poly(2-methoxyl-5-((3′,7′-dimethyloctyl)oxyl)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) (MDMO-PPV) (εr = 3.1). It is well known that a large εr is beneficial for enhancing hole–electron pair dissociation and decreasing the recombination loss of free charge carriers.121–123 These results suggest that the introduction of nonionic polar side chains onto the conjugated backbone may be a reliable strategy to access high-performing environmentally friendly processable photovoltaic materials.
Recently, Duan et al.124 developed an alcohol soluble narrow-band-gap conjugated polymer PCDTBT-N and an alcohol soluble C70 fullerene derivative (PC71BM-N), which were functionalized with amino groups. Despite positive expectations, the solar cells with a PCDTBT-N:PC71BM-N active layer showed no photovoltaic properties regardless of the processing conditions. It was found that a trace amount of amino group-containing material could seriously deteriorate the photovoltaic output of a control device based on PCDTBT:PC71BM. Further studies have disclosed that the amino groups acted as hole traps and can complex with the fullerene core, which disabled hole transport in the active layer and thereby led to “no-working” devices. Despite disappointing photovoltaic properties as the active layer, the amino group-containing materials PCDTBT-N and PC71BM-N functioned well as a buffer layer. Moreover, the hole trap nature of the amino groups themselves and the complexation of amine–fullerene implied new working mechanisms for the extensively studied water/alcohol soluble buffer layer, which is discussed later.
Apart from WSCPs, WSCSs have also been used in OSCs. Schumann et al.125 reported the use of a water-soluble copper phthalocyanine derivative TSCuPc as a donor phase and a C60 acceptor layer in a bilayer heterojunction solar cell with a device configuration of ITO/TSCuPc/C60/BCP/Al. The optimised device displayed a maximum PCE of 0.32% with a Voc of 0.52 V. Despite the moderate Voc value, it was disclosed that TSCuPc made little contribution to the photocurrent. The C60 acceptor layer was the main contributor, leading to a very low Jsc. More interestingly, the devices from the pH neutral solution afforded a generally poorer performance than the devices from the basic solution. Pramanik and co-workers126 developed a water-soluble pentacene derivative (PEDPAK) through a straightforward and scalable synthetic route. PEDPAK has an optical band gap (Eg) of approximately 1.95 eV, and is stable in both solutions and in the solid state. Stable printable inks based on PEDPAK can be prepared in various solvents and printed onto standard printer paper and flexible polyimide photopaper to form uniform films. The bilayer solar cells using PEDPAK as a donor and C60 as an acceptor with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEDPAK/C60/Al merely demonstrated a PCE of 0.084%.
Table 1 summarises the device parameters of the OSCs using WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components. It is clear that the device performances are not satisfactory. These performances must be improved to establish environmentally friendly, sustainable device fabrication techniques for the high throughput industrial manufacturing of OSCs. An in-depth understanding of the correlations between photoactive layer morphology and processing solvents and the influence of ionic or nonionic polar groups on exciton dissociation and charge carrier transporting is thereby required. Current efforts with regard to environmentally-friendly processed OSCs also indicated that the development of environmentally-friendly solvent processable photovoltaic materials is by no means just simply attaching highly polar groups onto classical conjugated platforms. Other polar groups rather than amino groups are required to be examined, and new concepts need also be developed. Recently, Kumar et al.127 reported the use of a zwitterionic CPE F(NSO3)2 as an interfacial layer between donor and acceptor polymers in a bi-layer system to introduce dipoles at the donor–acceptor interface of the OSCs. An increase in Jsc and FF were observed when a 2 nm thin layer was inserted. It was found that the absorption of light in the zwitterionic CPE interlayer contributed to the photocurrent. More importantly, time-resolved pump–push optical spectroscopy revealed that the interlayer effectively reduced the probability of electron–hole recombination and the formation of bound charge-pair states at the donor–acceptor interface, which correlated with the high dielectric constant of the zwitterionic CPE. Although the PCE value is not impressive, this work provides a feasible method to improve the performances of OSCs by utilizing the unique dielectric properties of water/alcohol-soluble conjugated materials.
Table 1 Device parameters of OSCs based on WSCPs or WSCSs




Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




ITO/PTEBS-Na/C60/BCP/Al
0.97
0.67
53
0.43
112


ITO/ZnO/active layer/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
4.46
0.49
32
0.6
113


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Al
6.26
0.56
64
2.6
118


ITO/Cs2CO3/P3CBT:C60/V2O5/Al
4.6
0.33
45
0.8
119


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MTEMP-PPV/C60/Al
0.256
0.428
36
0.04
120


ITO/TSCuPc/C60/BCP/Al
1.47
0.52
41
0.32
125


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEDPAK/C60/Al
0.125
0.53
32.2
0.084
126




3.2 WSCPs as photoactive components in HSCs
In addition to OSCs, HSCs have attracted much attention. Inorganic nanocrystals possess a series of advantages such as high electron mobility and tunable photoelectronic properties via size control, and make significant light-absorbing contributions. Moreover, inorganic nanocrystals can be dissolved in water or alcohol through suitable ligand modification. This has great potential for the fabrication of solar cells through environmentally friendly processing technology, using WSCPs and nanocrystals as photoactive components. The molecular structures of WSCPs as photoactive components for HSCs are shown in Scheme 5, and the photovoltaic parameters of the relevant HSCs are summarized in Table 2. Qiao et al.128 reported the characteristics of HSCs made from a water-soluble polythiophene PTEBS-Na (shown in Scheme 4) and TiO2 in a bilayer configuration. The fabrication of the solar cells involved a spin-coating procedure of TiO2 on top of FTO and subsequently depositing PTEBS-Na onto porous TiO2 nanocrystalline film via doctor blade processing. The inverted solar cell FTO/TiO2/PTEBS-Na/Au exhibited a Voc of 0.81 V, a Jsc of 0.35 mA cm−2, an FF of 40% and a PCE of 0.13%. Qiao et al.129,130 also fabricated PTEBS-Na:TiO2 and PTEBS-Na:single-wall carbon nanotube (CNT) BHJ-HSCs based on the same polymer PTEBS-Na. Nevertheless, their device performance was inferior to that of the PTEBS-Na:TiO2 bilayer cell. The poor device performance of the PTEBS-Na:TiO2 BHJ-HSCs was ascribed to the low viscosity and high surface tension of the aqueous solution, which failed to generate a homogeneous PTEBS-Na:TiO2 BHJ film on top of FTO. To overcome this, a TiO2 buffer layer was spin-coated onto the FTO surface to improve the interfacial contact and film morphology. Solar cell performance was effectively improved by this buffer layer, with doubled FF and quadrupled PCE values relative to those of the bare FTO device.131 Miller et al.132 fabricated discrete heterojunction solar cells using an acid oxidised multiwall carbon nanotubes (o-MWCNTs):PTEBS-Na composite donor layer and C60 acceptor layer. The donor layer was deposited from an aqueous solution by spin-coating, and the C60 acceptor layer was formed by vacuum evaporation. By incorporating o-MWCNTs within the donor layer, the FF of the solar cell had the potential to increase by approximately 20%, which resulted in a commensurate increase in PCE. The improvement in device performance was attributed to a reduction in cell series resistance due to improved hole transport in the donor layer. The best device showed a Voc of 0.62 V, a Jsc of 1.49 mA cm−2, an FF of 61% and a PCE of 0.56%.
 Scheme 5  Molecular structures of WSCPs for use in HSCs. 
Table 2 Device parameters of HSCs using WSCPs as photoactive components




Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




FTO/TiO2/PTEBS-Na/Au
0.35
0.81
40
0.13
128


ITO/(o-MWCNTs):PTEBS-Na/C60/Al
1.49
0.62
61
0.56
132


ITO/CdS:LM3/P3HT/Au
4.84
0.54
45
1.18
133


FTO/TiO2:P3PHT-K/Ag
0.543
0.78
48
0.2
136


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3PHT:a-dG/ZnO/Al
0.157
0.44
40
0.027
137




One of the main reasons for the low efficiency of HSCs is the surface energy mismatch between hydrophilic inorganic nanocrystals and hydrophobic organic photosensitisers. Lee et al.133 proposed a strategy to control the interfacial contact in HSCs involving in situ polymerisation and sequential hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity manipulation by counter ion exchange. As shown in Fig. 5, a CdS nanoparticles layer was first deposited onto an ITO electrode. Afterwards, 4-bromobutyric acid was absorbed on top of CdS nanoparticles, initiating the in situ polymerisation to generate a CPE LM3 layer. The generated LM3/CdS had a superhydrophilic surface with a water contact angle less than 5°. Through the anion exchange achieved by replacing the Br− counter ion with a perchlorate ion, the water contact angle of the LM3 was shifted to 100°, allowing for the layering of P3HT from chlorobenzene as an HCL. The deposition of the Au electrode by thermal evaporation completed the device fabrication. The inverted HSC delivered a PCE of 1.18% along with a Jsc of 4.84 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.54 V and an FF of 45%.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of in situ polymerisation and sequential hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity control to construct an HSC using CPE LM3 as a photosensitiser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2008 American Institute of Physics. 
Note that the HSCs often displayed a low photocurrent in contrast with the OSCs. Segal-Peretz et al.134 examined the origin of the photocurrent generation donor/acceptor interface based on CPE P3PBT-K and TiOx. The cubic-like mesostructured films of TiOx/P3PBT-K were prepared under the assistance of a nonionic surfactant structure-directing agent. The films were composed of sub-20 nm periodic interpenetrating continuous organic–inorganic networks with extremely high donor/acceptor interface areas. A strong correlation between the time-resolved microwave photoconductivity results and device performance indicated that the photoinduced carriers in the P3PBT-K/TiOx photovoltaic device mainly originated from exciton dissociation in the polymer bulk instead of at the donor/acceptor interface, followed by an electron transfer from the polymer to the metal oxide. Because the exciton dissociation process in the polymer bulk was inefficient, the photocurrent in the corresponding BHJs was small. The authors speculated that the poor charge generation at the heterojunction interface was probably caused by the poor electronic coupling between the organic donor and inorganic acceptor.135 The study indicated that improving electronic coupling between an organic donor and inorganic acceptor was an important issue for the design of highly efficient HSCs.
Baeten et al.136 reported the fabrication and characterisation of HSCs based on ZnO and TiO2 nanorod arrays and CPE P3PHT-K, in which both inorganic nanorod arrays were grown on top of FTO by hydrothermal treatment, and P3PHT-K was deposited by spin-coating or drop-casting from an aqueous solution. A PCE of 0.2% associated with a Jsc of 0.543 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.78 V and an FF of 48% was achieved for the TiO2 nanorod arrays with drop-cast P3PHT-K. Liu et al.137 prepared aqueous dispersible graphene (a-dG) sheets by reducing the graphite oxide nanosheets in water under the assistance of CPE P3PHT-K, and thereby fabricated an HSC using the a-dG sheets as the acceptor and P3PHT-K as the donor from an aqueous solution. The solar cell with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3PHT:a-dG/ZnO/Al device structure exhibited a Voc of 0.44 V, a Jsc of 0.157 mA cm−2, an FF of 40% and consequently PCE of 0.027%.
Apart from the direct use of CPEs as donors to fabricate HSCs from water or alcohol, the water-soluble precursors of conjugated polymers are also good candidates for preparing HSCs through environmentally friendly processing.38,74,75,77–80 Scheme 6 shows the synthetic routes of water/alcohol-soluble precursors for environmentally friendly processed HSCs. The photovoltaic parameters of the relevant HSCs are summarized in Table 3. For example, the PPV precursor has been examined extensively. Moreover, there are no ionic groups in the resultant blend films, as they are eliminated by annealing in the process of forming a conjugated structure. In 2008, Wang et al.74 prepared a PPV:TiO2 heterojunction composite from the blend of in situ sol–gel TiO2 and PPV precursor in an aqueous solution. The resulting photovoltaic cell displayed a low PCE of 0.018%. Dong et al.77 reported using a PPV precursor and anatase TiO2 nanocrystals instead of sol–gel TiO2 to fabricate all-water-solution-processed solar cells. Further, they used PPV rather than PEDOT:PSS as the HCL in the solar cell. The optimised HSC exhibited a PCE of 0.11%. In addition to TiO2, aqueous CdTe nanocrystals show promise for photovoltaic technology due to their high electron mobility and continuously tunable absorption across the solar spectrum. Yu et al.75 made great progress on water-processed HSCs using an aqueous solution PPV precursor and water-soluble CdTe nanocrystals. After subjecting an active layer to thermal annealing treatment at 320 °C for 60 minutes, the resulting solar cell with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:CdTe/ZnO/Al delivered a PCE of 2.14% with a remarkably high Jsc of 10.7 mA cm−2. Such a high current density was attributed to the high electron mobility of the CdTe nanocrystals and the nanoscale-phase-separated morphology of the PPV:CdTe blend. Moreover, it was disclosed that the solar cell performances depended highly on the compositional concentration, annealing temperature, annealing time, thickness of the active layer and diameter of the CdTe nanocrystals.80 Further, the same group fabricated a HSC with an n–i structure of CdTe/PPV:CdTe based on water soluble PPV precursor and CdTe, which exhibited enhanced Jsc. By using CdCl2 to improve the hydrophilicity of the annealed pre-deposited CdTe layer, the FF of n–i HSC of ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au was greatly enhanced and thereby resulted in a remarkable PCE of 4.76%.138 As mentioned previously, nanocrystals benefit from their tunable absorption spectra. The CdxHg1−xTe nanocrystals were used as an acceptor to extend the light-harvesting range of the resulting solar cells by simply changing the Cd/Hg ratio.78 By tuning the size of the CdxHg1−xTe nanocrystals, the absorption spectra of the resulting solar cells could cover the ultraviolet (UV) region to 1200 nm. The solar cells exhibited the highest PCE of 1.50%, with an impressive Jsc of 12.84 mA cm−2 after 60 min of thermal annealing at 300 °C.
 Scheme 6  Synthetic route of the preparation of PPV, PNV and PBTPV via water-soluble precursor approaches. 
Table 3 Device parameters of aqueous-processed HSCs based on water/alcohol-soluble precursors of conjugated polymers




Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:TiO2/Al
0.14
0.46
26
0.018
74


ITO/PPV/PPV:TiO2/LiF/Al
0.3
0.84
42
0.11
77


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:CdTe/ZnO/Al
10.70
0.50
40
2.14
75


ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au
16.08
0.591
50.1
4.76
138


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:CdxHg1–xTe/Al
12.84
0.34
34.3
1.50
78


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PNV:CdTe/Al
6.14
0.44
32
0.86
76


ITO/TiO2/PNV:CdTe/MoO3/Au
12.5
0.544
53.1
3.61
82


ITO/TiO2/PBTPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au
13.3
0.58
43.2
3.3
83




In addition to the PPV precursor, a poly(1,4-naphthalenevinylene) (PNV) precursor was used to fabricate HSCs through aqueous approaches. Fan et al.76 fabricated an HSC from water-soluble CdTe nanocrystals and PNV for the first time using the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PNV:CdTe/Al device structure, which exhibited a PCE of 0.86% along with a Jsc of 6.14 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.44 V and an FF of 32%. Although 1 hour of annealing at 250 °C is generally enough to convert a PNV precursor to PNV and remove the ligands on CdTe nanocrystals, it was found that further prolonging the annealing duration and enhancing the annealing temperature did not decrease the PCE, indicating that such water-processed HSCs have excellent thermal and morphological stabilities.81 By adopting an inverted device structure with the use of TiO2 and MoO3 as the ECL and HCL, respectively, the HSC of PNV:CdTe fabricated from an aqueous solution exhibited an unprecedentedly high PCE of 3.61%, associated with a high Jsc of 12.5 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.544 V and an FF of 53.1%.82 The conjugated polymer PBTPV containing thiophene rings was also designed for the water fabrication of HSCs by precursor approaches. The polymer PBTPV had a high hole-transport property with a carrier mobility of 5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 measured in an FET device. The HSC based on PBTPV and aqueous CdTe nanocrystals with an inverted device structure of ITO/TiO2/PBTPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au exhibited a PCE of up to 3.3%, associated with a Jsc of 13.3 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.58 V and an FF of 43.2%. Such good device performance was ascribed to the coordination interaction between the PBTPV and CdTe nanocrystals through the sulfur atoms on the thiophene rings.83
4. WSCPs and WSCSs as interface layers in OSCs
It is well known that interface engineering is extremely important in achieving state-of-the-art OSCs.25,35,36 WSCPs were first discovered to exhibit an excellent electron injection/transporting ability in PLEDs when an interfacial dipole was formed between the emitting layer and cathode.139–141 Further applications of WSCPs in organic FETs142,143 and organic photodetectors144 were subsequently reported. During the past few years, the application of WSCPs for ECE modification in OSCs has become a hot topic and proved to be a very effective way of improving OSC device performance. At the same time, a variety of new WSCPs and WSCSs have been exploited. Further, applications of WSCPs have been extended to HCE modification.
4.1 WSCPs and WSCSs as ECLs in OSCs
In principle, an ideal ECL should first minimise the barrier height in the organic/metal or organic/metal oxide interface to form an ohmic contact at the interface and thereby improve electron extraction and collection at the ECE. Second, an ECL should selectively transport an electron while simultaneously blocking the hole. A good ECL usually also modifies the surface properties or alters the film morphology,145–147 suppresses the diffusion and reaction between the electrode material and active layer material40,148 and modulates the optical field inside the active layer as an optical spacer.149,150 The most extensively used ECL materials currently include four major classes: alkali metal salts (such as LiF, CsF, Cs2CO3 and Li2CO3), low work function metals (such as Ba and Ca), n-type metal oxides (such as ZnO and TiOx) and organic interfacial materials. Compared with their inorganic counterparts, organic interfacial materials, especially WSCPs and WSCSs, have attracted growing attention and exhibited more potential due to their solution processability from environmentally friendly solvents, their tunable functions through facile modification of molecular structures and their excellent electrical and electronic properties.21,24
4.1.1 Neutral WSCPs as ECLs. Scheme 7 exhibits the molecular structures of the WSCPs that are used as ECLs in OSCs. The photovoltaic parameters of the relevant solar cells are summarized in Table 4. In 2004, Cao's group139–141,151 reported an amino-group-functionalised polyfluorene neutral WSCP PFN that possessed good solubility in alcohol and performed very well as an electron injection layer (EIL) in PLEDs. When this material was used as ECLs in OSCs, the device performance was significantly enhanced relative to that of devices without PFN ECLs for certain donor materials.152–154 Since then, PFN has become one of the most studied interfacial materials in the OSC field39,46,51,152–155 and inspired the development of many other novel WSCPs. He et al. studied the PCE enhancement in OSCs using PFN and a series of polyfluorene-based CPEs as model ECL materials.152 In their study, PFO-DBT35 or P3HT (shown in Scheme 8) were used as the donors and PC61BM was applied as the acceptor. PFN interestingly showed a different modification effect on different donor materials. An ∼40% increase in PCE from the control device (PCE = 1.46%) to the PFN-modified device (PCE = 1.99%) for the PFO-DBT35:PC61BM system was observed. However, there was only a moderate efficiency improvement in the P3HT:PC61BM system. Zhang et al.153 also observed the different modification effects of PFN. They applied PFN as the ECL on OSCs based on three different donor polymers (PF-DTBTA, PCz-DTBTA and PPh-DTBTA) (shown in Scheme 8). Studies have shown that while carbazole-based polymer PCz-DTBTA experiences an increase in PCE of over 80%, the other two polymers experience less of an increase in PCE. It has been speculated that the extraordinary enhancement in the PCz-DTBTA:PC61BM solar cell may be related to the additional N–N interactions between the carbazole segments and PFN. He et al. later applied PFN to PCDTBT:PC71BM and PTB7:PC71BM solar cells.46 The OSCs incorporating the PFN ECL showed simultaneous enhancement in Jsc, Voc and FF, which led to PCE increases of 6.79% and 8.37% for PCDTBT- and PTB7-based devices, respectively. We discuss the origins of the performance enhancements later. All of these results show that PFN is an excellent ECL material for OSCs with conventional device structures.
 Scheme 7  Molecular structures of neutral WSCPs as ECL materials. 
Table 4 Device parameters of OSCs with neutral WSCPs as ECLs




ECL
Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al
4.41
1.05
42.8
1.99
152


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
4.68
0.61
54.9
1.54
152


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PF-DTBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al
2.64
1.00
51.5
1.30
153


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PCz-DBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al
4.68
0.90
65.3
2.75
153


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PPh-DBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al
4.50
0.55
56.1
1.39
153


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PECz-DTQx:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.4
0.81
65.8
6.07
154


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al
12.7
0.90
59
6.79
46


PFN
ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al
15.75
0.756
70.15
8.37
46


PFN
ITO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
17.2
0.74
72
9.15
39


PFN-OX
ITO/PFN-OX/PBDT-TZNT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
11.71
0.92
65
7.11
164


PF-EP
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
10.28
0.64
66
4.33
40


PFCn6:K+
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:IC61BA/ECL/Ca/Al
11.65
0.89
72.6
7.50
50


PC-N
ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al
3.64
1.00
41
1.49
168


PC-NOH
ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al
4.00
1.02
41
1.67
168


PC-P
ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al
3.80
1.01
40
1.53
168


PC-P
ITO/ECL/PCDTBT12:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
10.68
0.97
58.3
6.04
169


PCP-NOH
ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
8.25
0.88
59.4
5.39
170


PCP-EP
ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
8.76
0.88
56.9
5.48
170


PF6N
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
6.87 (9.82)
0.93
61.13
5.58
174


PF6N25Py
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.3
0.90
56.0
5.7
194




 Scheme 8  Molecular structures of some active layer materials whose photovoltaic performances could be enhanced by the interface modification materials of WSCPs and/or WSCSs. 
Considering the potential commercial application of OSCs, device stability should be taken seriously. Compared with the OSCs with conventional device structures, inverted-structure devices usually demonstrate better long-term ambient stability.156,157 Moreover, inverted OSCs are naturally self-encapsulated because they use air-stable metals as their top electrode.158–161 Therefore, an inverted structure is more promising for OSCs compared with a conventional structure. A key component of an inverted OSC is the interlayer it uses to extract electrons from the active layer to the ITO electrode. It has been reported that a cross-linkable analogue of PFN can be used to modify ITO to enhance electron injection in PLEDs through the decrease of the ITO work function.162 The use of PFN as an ITO modifier to improve electron collecting in OSCs has also been reported. He et al.39 spin-coated a thin layer of PFN (5–20 nm) from its methanol solution on top of the pre-cleaned ITO substrate as the ECL and fabricated highly efficient inverted OSCs. Using experimental photocurrent measurements in combination with optical modelling based on a one-dimensional transfer matrix formalism, the authors demonstrated that an inverted structure can provide optimum photo harvesting from the solar radiation spectrum. As a result, a state-of-the-art OSC with a PCE of up to 9.2% was realised.39 Although this was an important achievement for the OSC field, PFN has a non-negligible solubility in the solvents used to dissolve the active layer of OSCs (e.g., chlorobenzene), which impairs the reproducibility of OSC devices and makes it challenging to further increase the efficiency of OSCs. Huang's group162,163 thereby developed cross-linkable amino-group-containing polymers such as PFN-OX (shown in Scheme 7). PFN-OX is different from PFN in that the former can be thermally cross-linked and becomes insoluble in the processing solvent of the active layer. In one study, inverted OSCs based on PFN-OX with newly designed medium-band-gap polymer PBDT-TZNT (shown in Scheme 8) and PC71BM as the active layer exhibited a PCE of 7.11%.164
As discussed previously, a slight enhancement in device performance of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cell was observed when PFN was used as the ECL,152 probably because PFN's methanol solution cannot effectively wet the hydrophobic surface of P3HT:PC61BM. However, Wang's group165–167 was the first to report that an apparent enhancement of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cell could be achieved using a phosphonate-functionalised polyfluorene as the ECL. Zhao et al.40 reported enhancements in the device performance of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cells by introducing a phosphonate-functionalised conjugated polymer PF-EP between the active layer and Al electrode. The PF-EP layer can be readily deposited on top of the P3HT:PC61BM film by spin-coating it from its ethanol solution, which does not destroy the underlying P3HT:PC61BM blend layer morphology. The group's results showed that PF-EP could effectively increase the shunt resistance (Rsh) and improve electron collection, as the PF-EP layer was able to restrain the penetration of Al atoms into the active layer that might have resulted in an increased leakage current and quenched the photo-generated excitons. Consequently, an optimised device with a PCE of up to 4.33% was achieved, and the control device showed a PCE of 1.98%. The enhanced performance of a P3HT-based OSC was also reported using metal ion intercalated crown ether (PFCn6:K+)-functionalised polyfluorene as the ECL,50 where regioregular P3HT and an indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA, shown in Scheme 8) were used as the active layer. By inserting a 5 nm PFCn6:K+ between the active layer and metal electrode, the PCE increased from 3.87% to 6.88% for the Al single layer electrode and from 5.78% to 7.5% for the Ca/Al bilayer electrode, a record efficiency for P3HT-based OSCs.
In recent years, a large number of reports have examined the application of WSCPs with various conjugated backbones. Several novel WSCPs have been developed from polycarbazole for OSC application. Chen's group168 synthesised a series of water/alcohol-soluble neutral poly(2,7-carbazole) polymers, including PC-N, PC-NOH and PC-P with amino-, diethanolamino- and phosphonate-functionalised side chains, respectively. The solubilities of these carbazole-based materials in alcohol are worse than those of PFN and PF-EP due to the lower concentration of polar side groups, but are still enough to obtain the thickness necessary for ECL deposition in OSCs. Preliminary studies of the influences of interlayer polymers on photovoltaic performance were performed with a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL (3 nm)/Al. The OSCs based on these interlayer materials were neither apparently different from each other (PCE = 1.49% for PC-N/Al, 1.67% for PC-NOH/Al, 1.53% for PC-P/Al) nor apparently different from the bare Al electrode device (PCE = 1.36%), probably due to the studies' selection of low-performance photoactive systems. Nevertheless, the polycarbazole-based WSCP-modified devices demonstrated higher Voc compared with a bare Al electrode device. Using a new low-band-gap polymer PCDTBT12 (shown in Scheme 8) as donor material, PC-P could boost the PCE of the inverted OSC of ITO/PC-P/PCDTBT12:PC71BM/MoO3/Al to 6.04%, associated with a high Voc of 0.97 V, a Jsc of 10.68 mA cm−2 and an FF of 58.3%. Such an enhanced performance was mainly contributed by the improvement in Voc and FF, as the control device with bare ITO as the ECE exhibited a PCE of only 2.62%, along with a small Voc of 0.59 V and a low FF of 46.4%.169 Two new carbazole and benzene derivatives, i.e., PCP-NOH and PCP-EP, which were functionalised with diethanolamino- and phosphonate-groups on their side chains, were subsequently used as the ECLs on top of ITO to construct inverted solar cells based on the PCDTBT:PC71BM system by the same research group.170 The work functions were shifted from −4.7 eV for the pristine ITO to −4.2 and −4.3 eV for the PCP-NOH- and PCP-EP-modified ITO, respectively. The control device without an ECL delivered a PCE of only 1.63% due to the low Voc and FF. After the incorporation of ITO modifiers, the PCE values were enhanced to 5.39% for the PCP-NOH/ITO device and 5.48% for the PCP-EP/ITO device.
Inganäs's group developed a new polymer PFPA-1 (shown in Scheme 7) that possessed an amino group on its side chain. Different from previously reviewed WSCPs that were deposited from polar solvents (e.g., methanol and ethanol), PFPA-1 was deposited from toluene. When TQ1 (shown in Scheme 8) and PC71BM were used as the active layers, the devices based on toluene-processed PFPA-1 ECL showed a PCE of 5.19%, and the control devices without PFPA-1 showed a PCE of only 3.65%.49 These results mean that amino-group-functionalised conjugated polymers have an excellent ECE modification ability that is independent of the processing solvents.
Non-conjugated water/alcohol-soluble polymers are a different class of the solution-processable ECL materials applied in both PLED and OSCs.148,171–173 Zhang et al.174 compared the differences in the interfacial properties of WSCPs (PF6NO and PF6N) and non-conjugated water/alcohol-soluble polymers (polyethylene oxide (PEO) and polyethylene imine (PEI)). The PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cells with the conjugated ECLs of PF6NO (shown in Scheme 9) and PF6N exhibited PCEs of 6.07% and 5.58%, respectively, and the devices using the non-conjugated ECLs of PEO and PEI achieved PCEs of only 4.95% and 5.19%, respectively. These results imply that a conjugated backbone may improve electron transport in an ECL, and is thereby indispensable in ECL material design. Moreover, conjugated interlayer materials also showed a better device performance than non-conjugated interlayer materials for the devices with an Au electrode, meaning that in addition to the highly polar side chain group, the semiconducting main chains of the conjugated interlayer materials contributed significantly to their excellent interfacial modification ability.
 Scheme 9  Molecular structures of CPEs that were applied as ECLs in OSCs. 

4.1.2 CPEs as ECLs. CPEs are polymers that contain π-conjugated backbones and functional groups that ionise in highly dielectric media. The incorporation of ionic side groups could increase the solubility of the resulting polymers in polar organic solvents and even water, therefore potentially providing more environmentally friendly manufacturing options. Compared with neutral WSCPs, CPEs have the advantage of true orthogonal solubility with common active layer materials (such as water and alcohol). Although neutral WSCPs are also soluble in highly polar solvents, they usually possess non-negligible solubility in non- or low-polarity solvents (such as toluene and chlorobenzene) unless they are cross-linked, which causes problems when fabricating multilayered OSCs. In contrast, CPEs do not encounter this issue, as they are totally insoluble in non- and low-polarity solvents. Moreover, ionic groups may also endow CPEs with strong interface-modification functions. CPEs have hence been extensively used in PLEDs,19,21 organic FETs,143 light-emitting transistors175,176 and bio- and chemo-sensors.15 When studies transferred CPEs into OSCs as the ECLs, they found that the CPEs performed as effectively as those of neutral WSCPs. The molecular structures of the studied CPE ECL materials for OSCs are presented in Scheme 9. The photovoltaic parameters of the relevant solar cells are summarized in Table 5. Na et al. were the first research group to demonstrate the usage of a polyfluorene-based CPE WPF-oxy-F as the ECL for a P3HT:PC61BM solar cell.41 Because the dipole that formed between the active layer and metal ECE decreased the metal work function, the Voc and FF were simultaneously improved and the PCE was thereby increased from 2.95% to 3.77%. The overall photovoltaic characteristic of the cell with the WPF-oxy-F was comparable with those of the cells with LiF or Ca as their ECLs. The same group has since conducted more detailed studies on the relationship between device performance and water-soluble polyfluorene derivatives with different internal dipoles. Oh et al. reported two similar CPEs, i.e., WPF-oxy-F and WPF-6-oxy-F, with the same backbone and pendant ionic groups but different oxide unit lengths on their side chains.42 The incorporation of WPF-6-oxy-F could effectively improve the electron collection of high-work-function metal-based OSCs. The P3HT:PC61BM solar cells using Ag, Au and Cu and incorporating WPF-6-oxy-F as the ECL exhibited Voc values of 0.64, 0.58 and 0.63 V, respectively, approaching that of the Al electrode device (0.64 V) and the generally reported value (∼0.65 V) of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cell. The PCEs of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cells based on Ag, Au and Cu electrodes were 3.69%, 2.60% and 3.36%, respectively, comparable with that of the Al electrode device (3.89%). WPF-oxy-F was interestingly less effective than WPF-6-oxy-F at improving the Voc and PCE of the P3HT:PC61BM solar cells. These performance differences were ascribed to the longer ethylene oxide units of WPF-6-oxy-F, which can induce a larger interfacial dipole compared with WPF-oxy-F. It is worth pointing out that the introduction of WPF-6-oxy-F into devices with Cu as the ECE dramatically enhanced the PCE from 0.8% to 3.36%. Apart from conventional OSCs, the research group also applied WPF-6-oxy-F in inverted OSCs with ITO43 or multilayer graphene (MLG)177 as the transparent electrode (Fig. 6) and a device configuration of ITO(MLG)/WPF-6-oxy-F/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/Al. WPF-6-oxy-F was spin-coated onto ITO or MLG from its methanol solution directly to promote electron collection from the active layer to the transparent electrode ITO or MLG, resulting in a significant improvement in PCE. Because most reported CPEs have concentrated on the cationic type, Shi et al. reported the use of polyfluorene-based anionic CPEs PFEOSO3Na as the ECL in P3HT:PC61BM cells.178 They found that a PCE of 4.51% was achieved due to the optimised interface morphology between hydrophilic PFEOSO3Na and hydrophobic P3HT/PC61BM by post-thermal annealing. In addition, a device with PFEOSO3Na performed better than its control device with PFOCSO3Na and poly[2,7-(9,9-bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl)fluorene)] as the ECL, indicating that the combined effect of the sulfonate sodium and oligo(ethylene oxide) side chains induces a larger interfacial dipole towards better electron extraction efficiency.
Table 5 Device parameters of OSCs with CPEs as ECLs




ECL
Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




WPF-oxy-F
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
9.86
0.63
60.7
3.77
41


WPF-6-oxy-F
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
10.08
0.64
60
3.89
42


WPF-6-oxy-F
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Ag
9.86
0.64
58
3.69
42


WPF-6-oxy-F
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Au
8.48
0.58
52
2.60
42


WPF-6-oxy-F
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Cu
8.72
0.63
61
3.36
42


WPF-6-oxy-F
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT/Ag
8.83
0.655
59
3.38 (aver.)
43


WPF-6-oxy-F
Glass/MLG/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT/Al
6.61
0.57
33
1.23
177


PFEOSO3Na
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
11.12
0.64
63
4.51
178


PSFNBr
ITO/PEDOT/PFOTBT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
9.36
1.04
47.93
4.23 (aver.)
179


P3TMAHT
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
10.8 ± 0.3
0.86 ± 0.01
66 ± 1
6.1 (aver.)
45


PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
10.6 ± 0.03
0.89 ± 0.01
67 ± 1
6.2 (aver.)
45


P3TMAHT
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
10.86
0.59
51.2
3.28
186


P3ImHT
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Ag
10.4
0.53
61
3.3
187


P3ImHT
ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
11.2
0.84
51
4.8
187


P3TMAHT
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.82
0.88
58
6.48
53


P3ImHT
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
12.05
0.87
59
6.69
53


PF6NO
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.6
0.91
66.2
6.9
194


PFNSO
ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al
16.38
0.73
73.1
8.74
52


PFNSO-TPA
ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al
17.07
0.71
62.1
7.51
52


PFNSO-BT
ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al
16.76
0.65
61.1
6.61
52


P3(TBP)PHT+Br−/PEDOT
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al
9.9
0.55
60
3.8
48


P3(TBP)PHT+/PEDOT−
ITO/ECL/PBDTTPD:PC71BM/V2O5/Al
11.2
0.91
55
5.6
48


PTCDI+:PEDOT:PSS−
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al
8.43
0.39
40
1.31
199


P3PHT/PEDOT
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al
7.02
0.50
43
1.58
44


PTMAHT:SDS
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
9.54
0.62
67.8
4.01
190


PFQ-Br
FTO/TiOx/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Au
8.85
0.58
70
3.55
200


PFN-Br
ITO/ZnO/ECL/PBDT-DTNT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
17.4
0.75
61
8.4
47


PFFN-Br
ITO/ZnO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
15.5
0.75
68.9
8.01
54


PTMAHT
ITO/ZnO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
15.3
0.74
67.5
7.64
54




 Fig. 6  (a) Schematics of an inverted OSC with the work-function-engineered MLG electrode. (b) Changes to the effective work functions (Δϕ) of an MLG film with interfacial dipole layers. (c) Energy-level diagram of the inverted-structure OSC with an MLG ECE. (d) J–V characteristics of the inverted-structure OSCs under illumination with and without the various interfacial layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. 
Apart from the CPEs with linear configurations, a three-dimensional CPE with fluorene as a backbone was also reported. Chen et al. inserted a three-dimensional main-chain CPE PSFNBr as the ECL. The PCE of the OSC based on PFOTBT:PC61BM improved to 4.67% by PSFNBr as a result of the simultaneous enhancements of Voc, Jsc and FF.179 The reference device with a linear main-chain CPE PSFNBr showed a lower PCE enhancement to 4.46%. However, why three-dimensional CPEs behave differently from linear CPEs remains unclear.
With their low-cost processability, high hole mobility and crystallinity, solution-processable polythiophenes, especially P3HT, have become model materials for OSCs since the 2000s.180–182 CPEs derived from polythiophenes have also been reported. Bazan et al. reported two cationic polythiophene derivatives, i.e., the homopolymer P3TMAHT (shown in Scheme 9) and the diblock conjugated copolymer PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT (shown in Scheme 2), for use as ECLs in OSCs.45 By incorporating an ultrathin CPE layer between the active layer and metal electrode, the PCEs of PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cells can be increased from 5% to 6.3% with homopolymer P3TMAHT and to 6.5% with diblock copolymer PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT. Measurements of the water contact angle images (shown in Fig. 7) showed that after being coated by the CPE layer, the hydrophobicity of the PCDTBT:PC71BM surface (contact angle θ ≈ 90°) was largely changed (θ ≈ 45° for P3TMAHT and θ < 30° for PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT), suggesting the accumulation of ionic components at the topmost organic surface. The solvent effects were also studied, as the solvents of CPE solutions have an important influence on the resulting devices.183 The methanol-treated devices interestingly showed significantly increased Voc and PCEs, but limited enhancements in Jsc. As a result, the authors surmised that the performance improvement after CPE deposition might have been a combinative effect of the residue methanol and CPE layer. The same authors later found that the solvent treatment had no effect on active layer surface topography, but rather swelled the active layer and changed the properties of the buried PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface.184 A subsequent study185 showed that the device performance improvements resulting from solvent treatment originate from an increase in the built-in voltage across the device due to the passivation of surface traps and a corresponding increase in surface charge density. Chen's group186 also notably reported the use of the same CPE P3TMAHT as the ECL for OSCs. When applied in a P3HT:PC61BM system, devices with a P3TMAHT/Al electrode performed comparably with LiF/Al ECE. In addition to the quaternary-ammonium-salt-functionalised polythiophene, imidazolinium-functionalised polythiophene-derived CPEs P3ImHT have reportedly been used as ECLs in OSCs,187 resulting in a PCE of 3.3% for a P3HT:PC61BM system and 4.8% for a PCDTBT:PC71BM system. It was found that UV illumination is necessary for both CPE and TiOx interlayers to achieve a high FF and efficiency. Kesters et al.53 compared the ECE modification abilities of P3TMAHT and P3ImHT. Based on a PCDTBT:PC71BM system, whereas a moderate device performance (PCE = 5.57%) was observed at a low molecular weight (Mn = 11.2 kDa) for P3ImHT, an excellent performance (PCE = 6.69%) was observed at a high molecular weight (Mn = 32.6 kDa) for P3ImHT, indicating that the property of the interlayer is dependent on the molecular weight. Moreover, a comparison between P3ImHT (Mn = 32.6 kDa) and P3TMAHT (Mn = 32.6 kDa) showed that P3ImHT has a slightly better interfacial property than P3TMAHT (PCE = 6.48%).
 Fig. 7  Photographs of water droplets on the surfaces of (a) PCDTBT:PC71BM, (b) PCDTBT:PC71BM after methanol spin-casting, (c) 0.01% P3TMAHT and (d) 0.02% PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT on PCDTBT:PC71BM substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Although CPEs have exhibited an excellent ECE modification ability, traditional CPEs have reportedly suffered from the migration of their mobile counterions under an external electric field, resulting in a delayed turn-on in PLEDs188,189 and even deteriorating the stability of PLEDs and OSCs.23,44,122,190 Zwitterionic CPEs with cations and anions that covalently bond together to eliminate mobile ions thereby have been developed as buffer layers in PLEDs and OSCs.52,191–197 Duan et al.52 designed and synthesised a series of zwitterionic CPEs (PFNSO-BT, PFNSO, PFNSO-TPA) that had identical sulfobetaine zwitterionic groups on their side chains but different conjugated main chains. They found that every zwitterionic CPE could boost the photovoltaic performances of OSCs when applied as the ECL, and achieved an impressive PCE of 8.74% for the PTB7:PC71BM composite. More interestingly, they found that the electron-deficient PFNSO-BT-based OSC exhibited poorer performance compared with devices based on an electron-rich PFNSO-TPA and PFNSO ECL, indicating that conjugated main chains apart from the polar groups also play an important role in interfacial modification. In addition to these sulfobetaine zwitterionic CPEs, the same group developed amino N-oxide-functionalised polyfluorenes (PNOs) as ECLs in OSCs.194 The amino N-oxide polymers were synthesised by oxidising their amino-functionalised precursor polymers with hydrogen peroxide. The amine oxidised polymers displayed excellent solubility in methanol. OSCs based on a PCDTBT:PC71BM blend and using PF6NO25Py as the ECL showed a PCE of up to 6.9%, much higher than that of a bare Al electrode device (PCE = 4.0%). In contrast, the OSCs using amino-functionalised precursor PF6N25Py (shown in Scheme 7) as the ECL yielded a PCE of only 5.7%.
Aside from the drawbacks caused by mobile counterions, it has been reported that CPEs could aggregate and form nanoparticles in aqueous solutions,19 resulting in discontinuous film coverage and thereby deteriorating the interlayer modification.45,178,179 Buriak's group44,48 demonstrated a way to improve the film-forming property and stability of CPEs by electrostatic LBL assembly, such as a CPE P3PHT+Br− electrostatic LBL assembly with colloidal suspensions of (PEDOT:PSS)−Na+. The schematics of the film deposition using the LBL method are displayed in Fig. 8. An AFM measurement showed that no apparent aggregation was detectable after the deposition of P3PHT/PEDOT:PSS. Moreover, there was a well-defined plateau after a region of film was physically removed, indicating uniform and continuous film coverage over the entire substrate. The absence of a sodium signal for the multilayers in the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra suggested a very low content of excess PSSNa in the P3PHT/PEDOT:PSS films. An absence of Na+ is beneficial for long-time stability in OSC devices, as it has been speculated that these segments are mobile and react with components of the photoactive layer.198 The research group used an ECL deposited by the LBL method in a P3HT:PC61BM system, and produced highly stable inverted OSCs that could remain at a PCE of ∼2% even after more than 500 hours of storage. The same group further applied the LBL method to a water-soluble small molecular n-type organic electrolyte: a (PTCDI+)I− (shown in Scheme 10) assembly with (PEDOT:PSS−)Na+.199 The inverted OSC based on this LBL interlayer maintained over 70% of its original PCE after 128 days of storage in air.
 Fig. 8  Schematics for the LBL assembly of P3PHT+Br− with (cPEDOT:PSS−)Na+ using an ITO substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
 Scheme 10  Molecular structures of WSCSs applied as ECLs in OSCs. 
Yang's group190 demonstrated another simple method for improving the film-forming properties and film coverage of CPEs via electrostatic self-assembly. The authors mixed the cationic CPE PTMAHT with an anionic surfactant sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDS). The electrostatic attraction between these two oppositely charged materials provided the driving force necessary to form a stable CPE–surfactant complex that could be easily coated onto the highly hydrophobic P3HT:PC61BM surface from its methanol solution. No obvious pinholes were observed after coating, indicating the formation of a uniform film. Because of its superior coating properties, the PTMAHT:SDS complex was used as the ECL in the P3HT:PC61BM-based OSCs. A PCE of 3.83% was achieved for the Ca/Al ECE devices, but a higher PCE of 4.01% was achieved using the PTMAHT:SDS complex-modified Al electrode. The research group also considered device stability. The device using single PTMAHT as the ECL surprisingly showed serious degradation at a more rapid pace than even that of the Ca/Al electrode device due to the sensitivity of the hydrophilic side groups of PTMAHT to moisture. However, the device stability was largely enhanced by introducing the PTMAHT:SDS complex as the ECL.
In addition to their direct use as a modifier for ITO and metal electrodes (such as Al, Ag, Cu, Au and MLG), CPEs have shown good modification capacity for n-type metal oxides to form hybrid ECLs in inverted OSCs. Choi et al.200 reported a hybrid ECL that combined TiOx and CPEs to achieve high performance-inverted OSCs. The bilayer ECL was deposited by spin-coating a layer of FPQ-Br on the surface of the TiOx layer. During the formation of the bilayer ECL, whereas the hydrophobic backbone of FPQ-Br was located preferentially at the side of the organic active layer, the hydrophilic cationic groups and bromide counterions were close to the inorganic TiOx layer. This spontaneous orientation led to the formation of permanent dipoles at the TiOx/active layer interface. An inverted OSC based on this bilayer ECL exhibited a PCE of 3.55% with P3HT:PC61BM as the active layer. On the contrary, the control device with only TiOx showed a PCE of 2.65%. The improved performance of the bilayer ECL solar cell was ascribed to the reduced energy barrier for electron extraction and transport, the reduced interfacial contact resistance and the reduced inherent incompatibility between the hydrophilic metal oxide and hydrophobic active layers. Yang et al.47 reported high performance-inverted OSCs with hybrid ECLs by casting a thin layer of PFN-Br onto the sol–gel-processed ZnO thin film. They re-engineered the interface between the ZnO ECL and active layer. As a result, a remarkably high PCE of 8.4% was achieved for the PBDT-DTNT:PC71BM201 (Scheme 8) solar cells. Chang et al.54 also found that the combination of CPEs with ZnO could serve as an effective interlayer in an inverted OSC based on PTB7:PC71BM.

4.1.3 WSCSs as ECLs. WSCSs, which possess the advantage of batch-to-batch homogeneity in terms of molecular weight and ease of purification, have also been reported as ECLs in OSCs. Scheme 10 presents the molecular structures of WSCSs applied as ECLs in OSCs. The photovoltaic parameters of the relevant solar cells are summarized in Table 6. Pho et al.202 reported a solution-processed WSCS Na+QHSO3− based on the commercially available pigment quinacridone as the ECL in an OSC. They found that while the PCE of PCDTBT:PC71BM could be enhanced to 5.2%, the control device with a bare Al ECE showed a PCE of only 4.3%. The main increase interestingly came from the FF instead of the Voc commonly reported for typical WSCP ECLs. The authors speculated that the discrepancy in improvement might have come from the difference in conjugated motifs (fluorene in CPEs vs. quinacridone) and/or the difference in pendant ionic groups (cationic tetraalkylammonium vs. anionic alkylsulfonate). Reilly III et al.203 reported a water-soluble n-type dicationic perylene diimide salt Petma+OH− (Scheme 10) that had the unusual property of self-doping when dehydrated and a conductivity that could be increased by ∼5 orders of magnitude after doping. When Petma+OH− was used as the ECL, the OSC of P3HT:PC61BM exhibited a PCE of approximately 3%, comparable with that of a Cs2CO3-modified device. Ye et al.204 designed and synthesised a series of electron-deficient pyridinium salts with different cores. One of these salts, known as F8PS, was introduced as the ECL in an OSC due to its ability to form a uniform film via spin-coating. The device performance showed that the PCE of the PCDTBT:PC71BM solar cell could be increased from 4.32% to 6.56% with the insertion of the F8PS ECL. The pyridinium rings were notably situated at the backbone of the molecules, quite different from the commonly used CPEs, in which polar groups are located at the terminal of the side chains. Such a design combined the dipole formation and electron transport characteristics and thereby led to largely enhanced device performance. Soon afterwards, the same research group reported a family of neutral alcohol-soluble small molecular materials comprising electron-rich triphenylamine (TPA) and fluorene featuring phosphate side chains (FEP). The best device based on PCDTBT:PC71BM with 3TPT-FEP as the ECL showed a PCE of 7.21%.205 Solution-processed zwitterionic-conjugated small molecules have also been used as ECLs in OSCs.206 The OSC based on PCDTBT:PC71BM with a thin layer of rhodamine 101 (a conjugated zwitterion with both positive and negative charges at different locations on the same molecule) as the ECL exhibited high performance compared with the OSC with an Al electrode. All three of the parameters improved substantially, i.e., a 15% enhancement in the Voc, a 10% enhancement in the Jsc and a 28% enhancement in the FF. This led to an overall enhancement in the PCE of 61% (from 3.81% to 6.15%). The photovoltaic performance of the PCDTBT:PC71BM OSCs with the rhodamine 101 interlayer prepared by thermal deposition was notably almost the same as that with the rhodamine 101 layer by solution processing, confirming that the device performance enhancement originated from the rhodamine 101 instead of the solvent isopropanol used to process it.
Table 6 Device parameters of OSCs with WSCSs as ECLs




ECL
Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Na+QHSO3−
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
9.83
0.84
62.6
5.17
202


Petma+OH−
ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
9.87
0.51
51.3
2.52
203


Petma+OH−
ITO/ECL/PSBTBT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
10.29
0.61
44.9
2.86
203


F8PS
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.25
0.94
62
6.56
204


3TPT-FEP
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.98
0.92
65.4
7.21
205


Rhodamine 101
ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.10
0.94
59
6.15
206


C60-mono
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.17
0.86
62
5.96
207


C60-mono
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al
11.12
0.87
64
6.19
207


C60-mono
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ag
11.28
0.87
64
6.28
207


C60-bis
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Al
11.19
0.88
60
5.87
208


C60-bis
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Cu
10.13
0.87
61
5.37
208


C60-bis
ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ag
11.5
0.88
61
6.22
208


B-PCPO
ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
9.50
0.89
61.7
6.20
209


PEGN-C60
ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al
9.21
0.626
66.6
3.84
210


PEGN-C60
ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C:PC71BM/ECL/Al
13.99
0.735
60.48
6.22
210


PEGN-C60
ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al
14.79
0.794
63.42
7.45
210


PCBDAN
ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al
17.36
0.78
56.9
7.70
211


PCBDANI
ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al
17.29
0.78
57.0
7.69
211




Fullerene derivatives are dominant electron acceptor materials in state-of-the-art OSCs. Fullerene-based ECL materials have shown great potential for application in OSCs. They not only match the energy level of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of a commonly used acceptor well, but also possess a sufficiently deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level, making them energetically ideal candidates for an ECL to facilitate electron selection and hole blocking in OSCs. Jen's group207 developed two methanol-soluble fullerene surfactants incorporating a cationic nitrogen and polar PEO groups as interfacial layers for ECEs in OSCs. These materials possessed proper electron mobility and the capability of tuning electrode work functions to improve electron extraction and photocurrent generation. Devices with either a C60 mono- or bis-adduct inserted between PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM (shown in Scheme 8) and various metal ECEs showed much improved Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE. OSC performance improved significantly (70% for the Al electrode and 40% for the Ag electrode). High-performing OSCs using a C60-bis ECL-modified Ag electrode were realised with PCEs as high as 6.63%, superior even to those of the C60-bis/Al and Ca/Al devices. To understand the origin of efficiency enhancement when a C60-bis is incorporated into OSCs, the same group further studied the electronic properties at the BHJ/C60-bis/metal interface.208 It found that the large increase in device Voc was independent of the choice of ECE metal due to the pinning of the metal Fermi energy to that of the C60-bis upon equilibration. The EQE data revealed the overall device performance enhancement to be due entirely to the ECL material itself, rather than a beneficial change in photoactive layer morphology. Duan et al.209 developed a phosphate-group-functionalised alcohol-soluble fullerene B-PCPO that integrated the benefits of the ITO modification function, the n-type nature and a good electron transport ability. Further, they fabricated OSC devices with a single layer of B-PCPO on top of ITO. The PCE of the PCDTBT:PC71BM OSC device was significantly enhanced from 4.83% for devices without ECLs to 6.20% for B-PCPO ECL devices. The group found the B-PCPO-modified device to be comparable with inverted OSCs that have sol–gel-processed ZnO as the ECL, based on the same BHJ system. Zhang et al.210 reported the use of an easily accessible poly(ethylene glycol)-end-capped fullerene derivative, PEGN-C60, as an ECL in an OSC. The device performance showed that the PCEs of the three composite systems P3HT:PC61BM, PBDTTT-C:PC71BM and PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM (shown in Scheme 8) reached 3.84%, 6.22% and 7.45%, respectively, by incorporating PEGN-C60. Such PCEs are slightly higher than those of the corresponding Ca/Al electrode devices (3.80%, 6.13% and 7.28%) and much higher than those of the bare Al electrode devices (1.89%, 3.33% and 4.13%). Very recently, Li et al.211 developed a new neutral amino group-modified C60 fullerene derivative PCBDAN and a relevant quaternary ammonium salt PCBDANI for use as ECL in OSCs. PDBDAN and PCBDANI were applied in three different active layer systems of P3HT/PC61BM, P3HT/ICBA, and PBDTTT-C-T/PC71BM to probe the universality of the materials in different OSCs. The results demonstrated that both PCBDAN and PCBDANI ECLs have identical or slightly better photovoltaic performance in OSCs relative to the traditional low work function metal Ca. The PCE of the OSC based on PBDTTT-C-T/PC71BM with PCBDAN ECL reached 7.7%.

4.2 Working mechanisms of WSCP and WSCS ECLs
The working mechanisms responsible for the great improvement in OSC device performance after incorporating WSCPs or WSCSs as ECLs, especially the increase in Voc, are still a subject of debate. It is widely accepted that the interfacial electrical dipole formation on the ECL/metal interface is the main cause of the improvement in electron transport in PLEDs.21,140,141 The interfacial dipoles are formed through the strong interaction and alignment of polar groups at the side chains of ECLs with a metal surface, which induces a vacuum level shift at the interface. This model is supported by small-angle X-ray diffraction and electroabsorption experiments in PLED devices with an ECL.141,212 In 2009, Seo et al.213 studied the electronic properties of the ECL/Au interface using XPS and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Whereas strong band bending and interfacial dipoles were observed on Au surfaces covered with cationic ECLs, such effects were not present on neutral and anionic ECL materials.
Such an interfacial dipole model was subsequently widely used to interpret the working mechanism of water/alcohol-soluble organic/polymer ECLs in OSCs.39,46,154,171 The vacuum level shift or band bending induced by interfacial dipoles could effectively increase the built-in voltage (Vbi) of an OSC device, thus increasing its Voc. Furthermore, by enhancing the internal electric field, which is proportional to Vbi, the charge mobility in the active layer can also be improved due to the field-dependent nature of the charge mobility in organic semiconductors. The improvement in charge mobility would in turn result in an improvement in the FF and Jsc in OSC devices.154 In the case of inverted OSCs, the increase in PCE is also explained by the enhancement of Vbi due to the work-function-lowering effect of the interlayer on the ITO side. This is supported by the work function measurement of ITO substrates with or without interlayers through UPS or a Kelvin probe.43,177 With different ECL materials, the work function of ITO can be decreased by 0.3–0.6 eV. In short, the incorporation of the ECL not only strengthens the Vbi, but also introduces a strong electric field in the vicinity of an ECE interface that may strongly influence electron extraction and transport. Because the increase in Vbi by the ECL does not directly change the energy levels of active materials and their band gap, it does not compromise the absorption of sunlight in the active layer. Therefore, the trade-off between Voc and Jsc can be avoided, and simultaneous improvements in Voc, Jsc and FF can be observed in ECL-incorporated OSC devices.
Although many groups have adopted the interfacial dipole model, it remains difficult to understand why WSCPs and/or WSCSs perform very well in both PLEDs and OSCs, as the direction of interfacial dipoles in PLEDs and OSCs should be opposite in principle. In PLEDs, electrons have been injected from the cathode to organic emission layer, whereas electrons have been extracted from the organic active layer to the ECE in OSCs. Jen's group214,215 recently observed efficient electron transfer from the anion of a quaternary ammonium salt to the fullerene core, which enabled the effective n-doping and high conductivity of the fullerene films. Further, Duan et al.124 observed the formation of an electron-transfer complex between a neutral tertiary amine and the fullerene core, which was confirmed by UPS. It is well known that a doped thin film can simultaneously lower transport loss and lead to ohmic contact at the interface of a BHJ organic layer and ECE. One could thus reasonably speculate that the formation of an electron-transfer complex, or the n-doping of fullerene at the interface of a BHJ active layer and ECL by an electron-rich specimen (such as anions or neutral tertiary amine) is responsible for the excellent electron extraction/transporting capacities of WSCPs and WSCSs. As aforementioned, Duan et al. revealed that tertiary amines acted as hole traps for charge transport. Numerical simulations based on a classical one-dimensional metal–insulator–metal model disclosed that the accumulation of hole traps near the metal electrode can lead to a higher electric field across the active layer. Such enhanced electric field consequently facilitated the transport of photo-generated electron–hole pairs and thereby improved device performances.124
An alternative mechanism of the ECL function is the local electric field enhancement model. This model states that the electric field near the ECE is enhanced by ion redistribution inside the ECL layer. It was first proposed by Hoven et al.216 to explain the efficiency enhancement in PLED devices when CPE materials were applied as the ECL. By examining the time response of current and luminance measurements of the PLED devices, the authors concluded that a redistribution of CPE counter-anions leaves excess cations near the ECE that create a double charged layer in the CPE thin film. This ion motion causes a steep field gradient adjacent to the ECE, thereby facilitating efficient electron injection. Electroabsorption spectroscopy results have also supported this theory.217 It directly probed the electric fields within PLED devices with or without CPE ECLs. The electric field in the emissive layer was found to be screened at voltages above the Vbi, which was not the case for devices without the CPE ECL. In theory, this field gradient should also enhance electron collection in the case of OSC devices. However, no reports have adopted this mechanism to explain the improvement of OSC performance with CPE interlayers. The problem is that because ion redistribution can only happen in CPE materials with mobile ions, the mechanism cannot explain the enhancement effect of neutral ECL materials.
The optical spacer effect of the ECL can also be a contributing factor to the enhancement of OSC performance.149 In effect, the transparent ECL can modulate the incident light distribution inside the active layer so that the device harvests the optimum amount of light from the maximum incident light intensity located around the centre of the active layer and consequently obtains the maximum Jsc possible. While the optical spacer effect is evident in OSC devices with metal oxide ECL materials (ZnO or TiOx), it is unclear whether this effect could really have an effect on device performance for WSCP-based ECL materials, the thickness of which is generally significantly smaller (∼40 nm for metal oxides vs. 5–10 nm for WSCPs). He et al.39 fortunately confirmed that a WSCP-based ECL can exhibit a significant optical spacer effect. In their latest report, the insertion of the PFN interlayer in the inverted OSC device increased the overall optical absorption of the active layer. A 10% increase in Jsc for the inverted OSC devices was observed in comparison with the conventional structured counterparts. Further, an increase in optical absorption was confirmed by optical modelling calculations, in which one dimensional transfer matrix formalism was applied218,219 and experimentally measured optical coefficients were used. The total absorbed incident photon flux density in the active layer calculated by modelling increased by 8% in the inverted structure devices (Fig. 9a and b). Both types of devices exhibited nearly the same FFs, implying that their charge carrier recombination losses were roughly the same. Therefore, the authors concluded that the 10% increase in Jsc occurred mainly due to enhanced optical absorption. It can also be implied from this report that the inverted structure can exploit the optical spacer effect of the ECL layer better than the conventional structure.
 Fig. 9  Comparison of calculated optical absorption profile for conventional and inverted devices. (a) Distribution of absorbed AM 1.5 G photon flux density inside the active layer. (b) Variation of maximum JSC with active layer thickness for two types of devices, both under AM 1.5 G illumination (440–800 nm). The open squares and filled circles represent conventional and inverted devices, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 
In addition to the enhancement of Vbi or optical absorption, the ECL can also avoid Fermi level pinning220 between the metal ECE and the fullerene molecules in the active layer by separating the two substances. Therefore, the ECL/Al electrode can be expected to be electron-selective in nature. Excessive holes can be blocked, and leakage current should be reduced as a result. Indeed, the electrical leakage for the devices with interlayers was considerably suppressed in He's report152 and many other studies on different ECL materials. According to the Shockley equation, a slightly higher Voc can be expected as a consequence of the reduced leakage current. Compared with the control devices, the superiority of the diode characteristics indicates that the ECL is efficient in blocking holes and collecting electrons. This is beneficial for the FF and Voc of an OSC device. Indeed, Xia et al. recently confirmed that the inverted OSC devices using PFN as the ECL decreased the surface recombination at the ECE interface.55 In addition, a decreased series resistance in devices with ECLs can further ensure a reduced Voc loss due to the potential drop at the bulk of the active layer and the interface with the electrodes.
Apart from WSCPs or WSCSs themselves, polar solvents also significantly contribute to overall device performance enhancements as simply introduced previously.45,183–185 Such a polar solvent effect was observed in PLEDs at first.183 Zhou et al.185 found that a methanol treatment of the active layer before ECE evaporation can drastically improve the PCEs of PTB7:PC71BM solar cells from 7.1% to 7.9% using Ca/Al as ECEs, and from 5.4% to 7.2% using Al as ECEs. A Kelvin probe force microscopy measurement and capacitance–voltage measurements disclosed that such substantial solvent effects were caused by an increase in Vbi across the device. This increase resulted from the passivation of surface traps on the surface of active layers and a corresponding increase in surface charge density, which led to decreased series resistance and increased carrier mobilities, enhanced charge extraction and decreased charge recombination. No obvious changes to the morphology and film roughness of the active layer were observed. On the contrary, Liu et al.184 found that ethanol treatment caused a substantial swelling of the active layer, whose root-mean-squared surface roughness increased from 0.3 to 1.2 nm. More interestingly, they found that ethanol treatment on top of the active layer could even improve the contact properties of the buried PEDOT:PSS/BHJ interface due to the diffusion of ethanol through the BHJ film, which hence resulted in enhanced device performance.
4.3 WSCPs and WSCSs as the HCL or HCE in OSCs
Interfacial engineering at the HCE is of equal importance to that at the ECE in OSC applications. In principle, a good HCL material should be solution processable, and use orthogonal solvents with active layer materials so that the film can withstand the organic solvent erosion from the solution process of the active layer for conventional OSC designs. Second, good optical transmittance is desired for the HCL to guarantee efficient incident light absorption in the active layer. Moreover, the surface properties of the HCL can significantly influence the phase separation process and morphology of the BHJ active layer. WSCPs and WSCSs can meet these three criteria well, and have thus been the most studied solution-processable HCL materials in the literature to date. While PEDOT:PSS is the most widely used water-soluble HCL material in OSC applications,221,222 it is a composite material with a large ratio of non-conjugated polymer content and thus is not covered in this review.
Apart from PEDOT:PSS, very few WSCPs and/or WSCSs have been used as the HCL for OSC applications in the literature. The molecular structures of WSCPs that have been used as HCLs are listed in Scheme 11. The reported performances of OSC devices using a WSCP as the HCL or WSCP-stabilised CNT electrodes are listed in Table 7.
 Scheme 11  Molecular structures of WSCPs as HCL materials or stabilisers for graphene or CNT electrodes. 
Table 7 Device parameters of OSCs with WSCPs or WSCSs as HCLs or stabilisers for CNT electrodes




HCL
Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




SPDPA
ITO/SPDPA/P3HT:PC61BM/Ca/Al
10.33
0.60
68.0
4.20
227


SPDPA
ITO/TiO2/P3HT:PC61BM/SPDPA/Ag
10.26
0.60
63.0
3.81
228


P3CPenT
ITO/P3CPenT/P3HT:PC61BM/LiF/Al
9.30
0.56
67.0
3.4
229


o-MWCNT:TSCuPc
ITO/o-MWCNT:TSCuPc/P3HT:PC61BM/LiF/Al
4.55
0.55
50.0
1.25
238


TSCuPC
ITO/TSCuPC/P3HT:PC61BM/Al
9.70
0.51
35.7
1.76
239




In 2006, Shi et al.223 reported the synthesis of two sulfonate-substituted polytriphenylamine CPEs PTPOBS and PTFTS, which are soluble in polar solvents such as methanol or N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The HOMO level of the two polymers can be tuned by the attachment of electron-donating groups like butyloxy or electron-withdrawing groups like CF3 and SO3 to the main chain. Making use of the excellent hole-transporting and electron-blocking properties in combination with good solubility in polar solvents, the authors fabricated PLED devices with PTPOBS and PTFTS as the HTL, and the performance was superior to the PEDOT:PSS counterparts. The authors later extended their work to the synthesis of a type of anionic CPE PFT-CF3 with trifluoromethyl (–CF3)-substituted triphenylamine and sulfonated fluorene as the backbone.224 They found that this CPE can act as a very efficient hole injection/transport layer (HIL) in red, green and blue PLED devices. Because these polytriphenylamine CPEs performed promisingly as HILs in PLEDs, it is reasonable to believe they may also serve as good HCLs in OSC applications. However, no reports on such applications have been given in the literature to date.
In 2008, Li et al.225 synthesised water/alcohol-soluble sulfonated poly(diphenylamine) (SPDPA) using a facile process for the sulfonation of polydiphenylamine (PDPA). The properties of SPDPA were observed to be distinct from its precursor PDPA,226 showing better water solubility, slightly reduced conductivity, better thermal stability and blue-shifted optical absorption. SPDPA was then successfully used as HTLs in PLEDs. One merit of using PDPA derivatives is that the PDPA polymerisation mechanism is different from that of other aniline derivatives in that it occurs through a 4–4′ phenyl–phenyl coupling instead of N–C coupling in other substituted anilines. As a consequence, PDPA combines the molecular structure of polyaniline and poly(p-phenylene), which can improve solubility and processability. The same group later applied SPDPA as the HCL in conventional OSC devices to substitute the PEDOT:PSS layer.227 Whereas the P3HT:PC61BM devices with SPDPA HTLs showed an excellent PCE of 4.2%, the reference device with a PEDOT:PSS HTL had a lower PCE of 3.7%. The authors measured the hole mobility of the active layer and found that the hole mobility of the P3HT:PC61BM layer increased when it was spin-coated on SPDPA compared with when it was spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS. They explained that because SPDPA has a strong polarity and can assist P3HT:PC61BM molecules in the a-axis orientation, the P3HT:PC61BM assembly near the interface can be guided by SPDPA to form a more ordered structure. Most recently, the same group applied SPDPA as the HCL in inverted OSC devices.228 In this case, the SPDPA was dissolved in ethanol instead of deionised water to wet the active layer surface. With P3HT:PC61BM as the active layer and sol–gel-processed TiO2 as the ECL, the inverted OSC device exhibited a moderate PCE of 3.81%. The devices notably maintained a PCE of 2.8% after 400 hours of storage in air.
In 2010, Li et al.229 introduced a carboxylated P3HT derivative poly[3-(5-carboxypentyl)thiophene-2,5-diyl] (P3CPenT) as the HCL for OSCs to directly replace PEDOT:PSS. P3CPenT can self-assemble into 10–20 nm diameter nanowires (NWs) after simply dispersing the polymer in polar-solvent DMSO. In this sense, although P3CPenT is not a true WSCP, the design concept is similar. Making use of this property, Li et al. applied P3CPenT NWs from a DMSO solution as the HCL beneath a P3HT:PC61BM active layer. The pendant carboxyalkyl group rendered the P3CPenT NWs insoluble in the active-layer solvents, thus allowing the conventional BHJ active layers to be applied over the P3CPenT films using standard spin-coating techniques. Due to their similar conjugated backbones, the P3CPenT derivative had energy levels similar to the donor, and thus the charge transfer across the P3CPenT/P3HT interface was energetically favourable. The devices with P3CPenT as the HCL showed an average PCE of 3.4%, slightly higher than the 3.1% obtained from the PEDOT:PSS HCL counterparts.
WSCPs and/or WSCSs cannot be used as HCEs for OSCs directly due to their intrinsically poor charge conductivity. However, they can be used to disperse graphene or CNT in common solvents and enable the concept of solution-processable graphene/CNT electrodes for OSC applications. Graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNT) are promising conducting materials and have the potential to replace the traditional ITO as transparent electrode materials in optoelectronic devices.230,231 High-conductivity graphene or CNT electrodes are usually fabricated using the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method.177 Although optimised CVD-processed graphene or CNT electrodes have excellent optical transparency and electrical conductivity that is comparable with ITO or even better,232 these HCEs should be solution processed to realise true low-cost, large-scale OSC applications. Because pristine graphene is insoluble in any solvent,233 studies have used reduced graphene oxide (rGO) instead. WSCPs can be effective stabilisers for rGO or CNT in aqueous solvents due to the π–π interaction between the WSCP-conjugated backbone and rGO or CNT surface.234–236 As a π–π interaction is non-covalent, WSCPs can greatly increase the solubility of rGO or CNT in water or alcohol without affecting their electronic properties. Thus, the solution processing of graphene or CNT electrodes can be achieved by simply spin-coating or printing the WSCP-dispersed rGO or CNT solutions. While no reports on the application of WSCP-dispersed solution-processed graphene or CNT electrodes in OSCs have been given in the literature to date, some reports have shown good potential for such an application. In a recent report by Qi et al.,235 the thin films spin-cast from rGO-PFVSO3 aqueous dispersion achieved a maximum conductivity of 218 S cm−1. In another report by Chunder et al.,237 rGO was dispersed into water by TSCuPc (shown in Scheme 4). The maximum conductivity was 7730 S cm−1. As the TSCuPc ratio increased, the dark conductivity decreased and the photoconductivity increased.
Instead of building HCEs, Hatton et al.238 used TSCuPc as a stabiliser for surface-oxidised multi-walled CNTs (o-MWCNTs) and spin-coated the o-MWCNT:TSCuPc aqueous dispersion to form HCLs on ITO for OSC devices. The P3HT:PC61BM device with a CNT:TSCuPc HCL showed a PCE of 1.25%, better than devices without HCLs but inferior to PEDOT:PSS HCL devices. The authors also examined the interaction between an o-MWCNT surface and TSCuPc molecules in detail, and revealed that sulfonate moieties attached to the periphery CuPc macrocycle can modify the molecular ionisation potential, promote the formation of extended cofacial molecular aggregates in the solid state and determine the nature of the charge-transfer interaction with o-MWCNTs. A recent report by Bechara et al.239 showed that TSCuPc itself can serve as effective HCL material for OSCs. By optimising the spin-coating conditions of the TSCuPc layer, a P3HT:PC61BM OSC device with TSCuPc as the HCL showed a PCE of 1.7% without any solvent or thermal treatment in the active layer. In summary, WSCPs and WSCSs can serve as effective HCLs for OSC devices. Further, they have the potential to take the place of PEDOT:PSS, as they generally possess better chemical stability. However, more efforts in molecular design and device optimisation are required to further increase the efficiency of the HCL functions and make them competitive with PEDOT:PSS. While the feasibility of solution-processed rGO or CNT electrodes for OSC application has been demonstrated by the latest research efforts, the best conductivity value reported is still lower than that of the CVD-processed graphene sheet by several orders of magnitude. Nevertheless, WSCPs are expected to continue to play an important role as stabilisers for graphene or CNT electrodes.
5. WSCPs in DSSCs
In addition to their extensive application in OSCs and HSCs, WSCPs also play an important role as effective light-harvesting sensitiser materials for DSSCs. The WSCPs reported as photosensitisers in DSSCs usually possessed carboxylic acids on the side chains to bind the polymer onto the porous nanocrystalline TiO2 surface. Scheme 12 shows the molecular structures of WSCPs used as photosensitisers in DSSCs. The photovoltaic parameters of the relevant DSSCs are summarized in Table 8.
 Scheme 12  Molecular structures of WSCPs for use as photosensitisers in DSSCs. 
Table 8 Device parameters of DSSCs using WSCPs as photosensitisers




Device structure
Jsc (mA cm−2)
Voc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt
8.0
0.36
—
1.4
240


FTO/TiO2:HPUTET/I3−:I−/Pt
5.7
0.46
—
1.5
240


FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt
9.76
0.40
61
2.4
241


FTO/SnO2–ZnO:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt
5.37
0.50
55
1.5
241


FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt
9.74
0.405
60
2.4
242


FTO/TiO2:P3TAA-PHT/I3−:I−/Pt
7.00
0.375
62
1.6
242


FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt
8.6
0.52
64
2.92
243


FTO/TiO2:P3TTBA/I3−:I−/Pt
10.47
0.59
64.23
3.97
244


FTO/TiO2:P3TTCA/I3−:I−/Pt
6.78
0.54
63.6
2.32
245


FTO/TiO2:PFBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt
4.03
0.523
66
1.39
247


FTO/TiO2:PPE-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt
1.46
0.47
49.2
0.34
248


FTO/TiO2:PPE-Th-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt
2.60
0.47
43.4
0.53
248


FTO/TiO2:PPE-EDOT-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt
3.12
0.50
37.2
0.58
248


FTO/TiO2:PPE-BT-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt
2.52
0.43
30.5
0.33
248


FTO/TiO2:PTPA-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt
9.20
0.717
51.4
3.39
250


FTO/TiO2:PFDBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt
7.02
0.55
43.8
1.68
251


FTO/TiO2:P3TBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt
12.58
0.54
44.9
2.99
251


FTO/TiO2:PTTHC/I3−:I−/Pt
4.5
0.42
62
1.2
252


ITO/CdS:LM3/I−:I2/Pt
7.42
0.65
39
2.37
253


ITO/In2S3:LM3/I−:I2/Pt
5.60
0.39
60
1.63
254


FTO/TiO2:P3SHT/Au
0.98
0.438
33
0.026
255




Kim and co-workers240 carried out pioneering work on WSCP-based DSSCs. They investigated the effects of carboxylic groups on the resulting photovoltaic performances by comparing a series of polythiophenes with different side chains (P3TAA and HPURET), and found that the polythiophenes with carboxylic chelating groups exhibited much better photovoltaic performance relative to P3HT. They tested TiO2/WSCPs films in DSSCs using an I3−/I− redox and a Pt/FTO counter electrode. The maximum PCEs for P3TAA and HPURET were measured at 1.4% and 1.5%, respectively. Moreover, the TiO2/WSCPs films prepared by dipping the TiO2 thin film into polymer solutions resulted in higher PCEs than those prepared by spin-coating a polymer solution onto the TiO2 film. Senadeera et al.241 also reported the use of P3TAA as a photosensitiser in DSSCs. DSSCs using a mesoporous semiconductor TiO2 or SnO2–ZnO as an electrode and electrolytes consisting of an I3−/I− redox were fabricated and tested. The photovoltaic cells of P3TAA exhibited PCEs of 2.4% and 1.5% for TiO2 and SnO2–ZnO, respectively, under AM 1.5 G illumination. Yanagida et al.242 reported the fabrication and characterisation of TiO2-based DSSCs using carboxylated homopolymer P3TAA and copolymer P3TAA-PHT as photosensitisers. The cells displayed PCEs of 1.1% and 0.9% for P3TAA and P3TAA-PHT, respectively. After adding an ionic liquid 1-methyl-3-hexylimidazolium iodide into the electrolyte, the PCEs were enhanced to 2.4% and 1.6%, respectively, due to the drastically enhanced Jsc. Cho and co-workers243 studied the effect of TiO2 mesoporous structures on the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs using P3TAA as a photosensitiser. They found that the semiconductor layer containing 60% small TiO2 nanoparticles and 40% large TiO2 nanoparticles could lead to the best device performance, with a PCE of 2.36%. They attributed this finding to the high degree of anchoring of the –COOH groups on TiO2 with large pores. The inference was further confirmed by obtaining a higher PCE of 2.92% for the DSSC using a low-molecular weight P3TAA sensitiser. Kim et al.244 recently developed a novel WSCP P3TTBA, on which a benzene ring was bridged between the polythiophene main chain and pendant carboxylic acid. The TiO2:P3TTBA film in the DSSC using an I3−/I− electrolyte and a Pt/FTO electrode delivered a maximum PCE of 3.97%, the highest value for DSSCs using WSCPs as photosensitisers to date. Meanwhile, the polymer P3TTCA, which did not contain the benzene ring, exhibited a smaller PCE of 2.32% in a similar device structure.245 Mwaura et al.246 demonstrated the use of a dual-polymer system to broaden the absorption of WSCP-sensitised TiO2 solar cells. PPE-CO2 and P3CPenT (shown in Scheme 11) absorb in different regions of the solar spectrum. The dual-polymer DSSC exhibited doubled PCE values due to the doubled Jsc compared with those of the individual cells. Despite the relatively poor device performance overall, this study demonstrated that the concept of dual photosensitisers is effective for conjugated polymer-sensitised photochemical solar cells. Liu's group247 reported DSSCs using a carboxylated polyfluorene derivative (PFBT-COOH) as a photosensitiser. PFBT-COOH contains 30% benzothiadiazole units and displays the maximum absorption at 444 nm, delivering a maximum PCE of 1.39% in the resulting DSSCs based on liquid electrolyte. Schanze's group248 synthesised and examined a series of poly(arylene-ethynylene)s (PPE-CO2, PPE-Th-CO2, PPE-EDOT-CO2 and PPE-BT-CO2) substituted with carboxylic acid side groups as photosensitisers in DSSCs to determine the structure–property relationship. The photovoltaic properties of the TiO2/WSCP films were evaluated in DSSCs using an I3−/I− propylene carbonate electrolyte and Pt/FTO counter electrode. The PCEs of the resulting DSSCs under AM 1.5 G illumination for PPE-CO2, PPE-Th-CO2, PPE-EDOT-CO2 and PPE-BT-CO2 were 0.34%, 0.53%, 0.58% and 0.33%, respectively. In general, the trend in PCE agreed with the red shift in the absorption spectra of the polymers overall. The lower PCE for PPE-BT-CO2 compared with that for other WSCPs was attributed to exciton trapping in the polymer aggregates. Sambur et al.249 used AFM and photocurrent spectroscopy to study the morphology and photoactivity of PPE-Th-CO2 and PPE-BT-CO2 deposited from different solvents onto a single crystal TiO2. The correlation of AFM images and sensitised photocurrent data revealed that the magnitude of photocurrents was related to the surface coverage and degree of aggregation of the polymers, indicating that the overall PCEs of the DSSCs using WSCP sensitisers could be optimised through the careful control of sensitiser adsorption conditions such as solvent properties and temperature.
Liu's group250 also synthesised a carboxylated polymer (PTPA-COOH) with a pendant D–π-A architecture for use as a photosensitiser. Their computational models suggested that the pendant donor–π-acceptor architecture could favour charge separation in the excited states and was thereby beneficial for electron injection to the TiO2 layer. The DSSCs using PTPA-COOH as a photosensitiser delivered a PCE of 3.39% under AM 1.5 G illumination. As discussed previously, because polymer sensitisers usually exhibited narrow absorption spectra, Schanze's group251 synthesised two linear donor–acceptor-type conjugated polymers with carboxylic acid side groups to extend the polymers' absorption spectra. The main chains of polymer PFDBT-COOH and P3TBT-COOH comprised a BT acceptor unit and a donor unit of either a thiophene–fluorene–thiophene triad or terthiophene segment. The polymers had broad absorption spectra throughout the visible region, with P3TBT-COOH showing an absorption onset at approximately 625 nm corresponding to a band gap of 1.9 eV. The DSSCs using the polymers as photosensitisers and I3−/I− as the electrolyte exhibited maximum PCEs of 1.68% and 2.99% for PFDBT-COOH and P3TBT-COOH, respectively. In addition, it was found that the molecular weight of the polymer sensitiser had a significant influence on the resulting photovoltaic performance, with an inverse correlation between the polymer chain length and device performance. This was ascribed to the more effective anchoring of lower molecular weight polymers on the mesoporous TiO2 film. The carboxylated polymer of poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylic acid) (PTTHC), which showed near-infrared absorption with a low band gap of 1.0 eV, was also synthesised for DSSC application. The TiO2:PTTHC film exhibited a PCE of 1.2% in DSSC devices.252
In addition to carboxylated polythiophenes, some efforts have been devoted to the development and use of other kinds of WSCPs as photosensitisers for DSSCs. Lee and co-workers253 reported the use of WSCP LM3 (shown in Scheme 5) with quaternary pyridinium salt and nanocrystalline CdS film to fabricate DSSCs in 2007. The photosensitiser LM3 was absorbed onto the surface of the nanocrystalline CdS thin film by dipping it in aqueous LM3 solution due to the polymer's water solubility. The DSSC of CdS:LM3 delivered a relatively high PCE of 2.37%, associated with a Jsc of 7.42 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.65 V and an FF of 39%. The same group also reported its use of LM3 as a photosensitiser on In2S3 nanorods to fabricate DSSCs in aqueous solution. The hydrophilic surface of In2S3 nanorods (with a water contact angle of <5°) matched well with the water-soluble LM3, and allowed the deposition of the polymer layer by dipping the In2S3 thin films in the aqueous solution of LM3. The resulting DSSCs exhibited a maximum PCE of 1.63%.254 Fully water-processed solid state DSSCs were also reported using a water-soluble polythiophene P3SHT as the photosensitiser and a hole conductor instead of the liquid electrolyte in combination with a water-processable nanoporous TiO2 layer. The best-performing solid state DSSC exhibited a Jsc of 0.98 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.438 V and an FF of 33% under AM 1.5 G illumination.255 Taranekar et al.256 prepared two hyperbranched conjugated polyelectrolytes (PSO3− and PNMe3+) with opposite ionic groups and studied their self-assembly and application as photosensitisers in TiO2-based DSSCs. The advantages of a hyperbranched structure compared with a linear structure include its low viscosity and high solubility for the resulting polymers. The authors fabricated and tested DSSCs with absorbed layers of PSO3− or PNMe3+ as monolayers and self-assembled bilayers. For the monolayer device, they found that PSO3− outperformed PNMe3+, which they ascribed to the stronger binding interaction of the former with TiO2. More interestingly, the bilayer cells generally yielded higher incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies (IPCE) and Jsc than the monolayer cell due to the increased dye density, which caused more light absorption in the bilayer compared with either monolayer.
6. Concluding remarks
This review provides an overview of the recent advances of WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components and interface modification layers in emerging photovoltaic technologies, and the synthetic development of new materials by new strategies. Owing to the extraordinary advantages of WSCPs and WSCSs in various new types of photovoltaic cells, the research field has developed rapidly and attracted increasing attention in a very short period. Many WSCPs with novel structures and self-assembly properties such as all-conjugated block polyelectrolytes have been developed using new synthetic strategies. Due to the excellent interface modification properties and unique processability of environmentally friendly polar solvents, most activities in this field have focused on the development of new materials to apply as interface modification layers and the study of structure–function relationships. Many WSCPs and WSCSs with different conjugated backbones, side chain polar groups and novel structures have been developed as interlayer materials for the modification of both ECEs and HCEs to make OSC devices highly efficient. Exciting breakthroughs have been made by applying WSCPs as ECLs in OSCs, which has led to state-of-the-art single junction OSCs with record high PCEs. WSCPs and WSCSs have been found to be effective ECLs for almost every kind of OSC system. In fact, interface modifications of OSCs by WSCPs and WSCSs have already become a universal method for improving OSC device performance. Moreover, the successes of WSCPs and WSCSs as interlayers in OSCs have directly contributed to the resurgence of the study of non-conjugated surfactants as electrode modifiers for OSCs and other organic optoelectronic devices. Despite their successful interfacial functions, the working mechanisms responsible for the great improvement in OSC device performance after incorporating WSCPs or WSCSs as ECLs, especially the increase in Voc, remain subject to debate. The mainstream explanation is that their distinguished interfacial functions as ECLs originated from the dipole formation between WSCPs or WSCSs and metal or metal oxide electrodes, resulting in a work-function reduction of the electrodes. In addition, the optical spacer effect may also contribute to the performance enhancement of WSCPs- or WSCS-modified OSCs.
The unique processability of WSCPs and WSCSs from environmentally friendly solvents such as water and alcohol provides intriguing opportunities to fabricate solar cells using real ‘green’ processing technologies. Extensive studies have been carried out using WSCPs and WSCSs as photoactive components in various photovoltaic cells, including OSCs, HSCs and DSSCs. The photovoltaic performances of these WSCPs and WSCSs remain incomparable with their non-water/alcohol-soluble counterparts. In OSCs and HSCs, the lagging photovoltaic properties of WSCPs and WSCSs may originate from their polar groups, which may perform as exciton-quenching centres and charge carrier trapping points. In fact, several relatively successful examples of environmentally friendly solvent-processed solar cells have been fabricated from water/alcohol-soluble precursors that finally convert them to polar/ionic-group-free conjugated polymers. Therefore, the development of high-performing environmentally friendly solvent-processable photovoltaic materials is far more involved than simply attaching highly polar groups onto classical conjugated backbones. A large number of polar groups must be evaluated, and new concepts must be developed.
AcknowledgementsThis work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21125419, 50990065, 51010003 and 51073058), the Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2009 CB623601 and 2009CB930604) and Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (No. S2012030006232).
Notes and ReferencesP. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733–758 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Grimsdale, K. L. Chan, R. E. Martin, P. G. Jokisz and A. B. Holmes, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 897–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. H. Zhu, J. B. Peng, Y. Cao and J. Roncali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3509–3524 RSC .J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. J. Cheng, S. H. Yang and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Li, M. Y. Liu, N. G. Pschirer, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6817–6855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. L. Chochos and S. A. Choulis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1326–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. H. Duan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10416–10434 RSC .Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .C. L. Wang, H. L. Dong, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Mei, Y. Diao, A. L. Appleton, L. Fang and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6724–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1272–1295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. W. Thomas, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. L. Feng, L. B. Liu, S. Wang and D. B. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2411–2419 RSC .A. Duarte, K. Y. Pu, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 501–515 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhu, L. Liu, Q. Yang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4687–4735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. V. Hoven, A. Garcia, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3793–3810 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, P. Taranekar, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4300–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Huang, H. B. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2500–2521 RSC .B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Conjugated Polyelectrolytes: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2013 Search PubMed .K. Meerholz, Nature, 2005, 437, 327–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. M. Zhong, C. H. Duan, F. Huang, H. B. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 326–340 CrossRef CAS .H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Science, 1999, 285, 692–698 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .Y. Y. Liang and L. P. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1227–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. He and Y. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4161–4177 RSC .L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575–2598 RSC .R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi and N. Camaioni, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 285–310 CAS .H. Ma, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1371–1388 CrossRef CAS .H. T. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Z. Sun and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 316–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. C. He, C. M. Zhong, S. J. Su, M. Xu, H. B. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, C. Qin, Y. Qu, Y. Geng and L. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 604–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-I. Na, S.-H. Oh, S.-S. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-H. Oh, S.-I. Na, J. Jo, B. Lim, D. Vak and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1977–1983 CrossRef CAS .S.-I. Na, T.-S. Kim, S.-H. Oh, J. Kim, S.-S. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223305 CrossRef .D. A. Rider, B. J. Worfolk, K. D. Harris, A. Lalany, K. Shahbazi, M. D. Fleischauer, M. J. Brett and J. M. Buriak, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2404–2415 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Seo, A. Gutacker, Y. M. Sun, H. B. Wu, F. Huang, Y. Cao, U. Scherf, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8416–8419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Yang, M. Wang, C. Duan, X. Hu, L. Huang, J. Peng, F. Huang and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8208–8214 CAS .B. J. Worfolk, T. C. Hauger, K. D. Harris, D. A. Rider, J. A. M. Fordyce, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc and J. M. Buriak, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 361–368 CrossRef CAS .Z. Tang, L. M. Andersson, Z. George, K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, P. Heriksson, R. Kroon, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 554–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Liao, Y. L. Li, T. H. Jen, Y. S. Cheng and S. A. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14271–14274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Li, A. Furlan, K. H. Hendriks, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5529–5532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. H. Duan, K. Zhang, X. Guan, C. Zhong, H. Xie, F. Huang, J. Chen, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1298–1307 RSC .J. Kesters, T. Ghoos, H. Penxten, J. Drijkoningen, T. Vangerven, D. M. Lyons, B. Verreet, T. Aernouts, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, J. Manca and W. Maes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300049 .Y.-M. Chang and C.-Y. Leu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6446–6451 CAS .R. Xia, D.-S. Leem, T. Kirchartz, S. Spencer, C. Murphy, Z. He, H. Wu, S. Su, Y. Cao, J. S. Kim, J. C. deMello, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 718–723 CrossRef CAS .A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Z. Wu and W. H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2039–2058 RSC .M. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3453–3488 RSC .Z. B. Henson, Y. Zhang, T.-Q. Nguyen, J. H. Seo and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4163–4166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Hayakawa, R. Goseki, M. A. Kakimoto, M. Tokita, J. Watanabe, Y. G. Liao and S. Horiuchi, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5453–5456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. L. Tu, H. B. Li, M. Forster, R. Heiderhoff, L. J. Balk, R. Sigel and U. Scherf, Small, 2007, 3, 1001–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liang, H. Wang, S. Yuan, Y. Lee, L. Gan and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2183–2194 RSC .U. Scherf, S. Adamczyk, A. Gutacker and N. Koenen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1059–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Plank, R. Güntner, U. Scherf and E. J. W. List, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1093–1105 CrossRef CAS .S.-Y. Ku, M. A. Brady, N. D. Treat, J. E. Cochran, M. J. Robb, E. J. Kramer, M. L. Chabinyc and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16040–16046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Nakabayashi and H. Mori, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9618–9625 CrossRef CAS .A. Gutacker, S. Adamczyk, A. Helfer, L. E. Garner, R. C. Evans, S. M. Fonseca, M. Knaapila, G. C. Bazan, H. D. Burrows and U. Scherf, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1423–1430 RSC .A. Gutacker, C.-Y. Lin, L. Ying, T.-Q. Nguyen, U. Scherf and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4441–4446 CrossRef CAS .L. Ying, P. Zalar, S. D. Collins, Z. Chen, A. A. Mikhailovsky, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 24, 6496–6501 CrossRef PubMed .C. A. Traina, R. C. Bakus Ii and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12600–12607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17724–17725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2678–2684 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang and X. Wang, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1587–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Fan, J. Zhang, H. Wei, D. Zhou, B. Xu, F. Li, W. Tian and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2831–2834 CAS .Z. X. Fan, H. Zhang, W. L. Yu, Z. Y. Xing, H. T. Wei, Q. F. Dong, W. J. Tian and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2919–2923 CAS .Q. F. Dong, W. L. Yu, Z. F. Li, S. Y. Yao, X. Y. Zhang, B. Yang, C. Im and W. J. Tian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 104, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. T. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Z. Sun, W. L. Yu, Y. Liu, Z. L. Chen, L. Y. Cui, W. J. Tian and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17827–17832 RSC .H. T. Wei, H. Z. Sun, H. Zhang, W. L. Yu, F. Zhai, Z. X. Fan, W. J. Tian and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9161–9165 RSC .W. L. Yu, H. Zhang, H. R. Tian, H. T. Wei, W. X. Liu, J. Zhu, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1322–1328 CAS .Z. L. Chen, H. Zhang, Z. Y. Xing, J. D. Hou, J. Li, H. T. Wei, W. J. Tian and B. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 254–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Li, J. Hou, H. Wei and B. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 433–437 CrossRef CAS .H. Wei, H. Zhang, G. Jin, T. Na, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Sun, W. Tian and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4035–4042 CrossRef CAS .C. E. Small, S. Chen, J. Subbiah, C. M. Amb, S.-W. Tsang, T.-H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, J. Gao, C.-C. Chen, J. You and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 825–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .J. You, C.-C. Chen, Z. Hong, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, R. Xu, S. Ye, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Gupta, A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, S. Chand, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Sci. Rep., 2013 DOI:10.1038/srep01965 .D. H. Wang, A. K. K. Kyaw, V. Gupta, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300277 .A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, D. Wynands, J. Zhang, T.-Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3796–3801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhou, Y. Zuo, X. Wan, G. Long, Q. Zhang, W. Ni, Y. Liu, Z. Li, G. He, C. Li, B. Kan, M. Li and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8484–8487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Helgesen, R. Sondergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36–60 RSC .T. Kawai, T. Yamaue, K. Tada, M. Onoda, S.-H. Jin, S.-K. Choi and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, L741–L744 CrossRef CAS .H. Mattoussi, M. F. Rubner, F. Zhou, J. Kumar, S. K. Tripathy and L. Y. Chiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1540–1542 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Durstock, B. Taylor, R. J. Spry, L. Chiang, S. Reulbach, K. Heitfeld and J. W. Baur, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 373–377 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Baur, M. F. Durstock, B. E. Taylor, R. J. Spry, S. Reulbach and L. Y. Chiang, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1547–1548 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Durstock, R. J. Spry, J. W. Baur, B. E. Taylor and L. Y. Chiang, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 3253–3259 CrossRef CAS .T. Piok, C. Brands, P. J. Neyman, A. Erlacher, C. Soman, M. A. Murray, R. Schroeder, W. Graupner, J. R. Heflin, D. Marciu, A. Drake, M. B. Miller, H. Wang, H. Gibson, H. C. Dorn, G. Leising, M. Guzy and R. M. Davis, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .M. Ogawa, N. Kudo, H. Ohkita, S. Ito and H. Benten, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 223107 CrossRef .Y. Maehara, S. Takenaka, K. Shimizu, M. Yoshikawa and S. Shiratori, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 438–439, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .T. Kawai, T. Yamaue, M. Onoda and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, 5789–5792 CrossRef CAS .T. Kawai, T. Yamaue, M. Onoda and K. Yoshino, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 971–972 CrossRef CAS .T. Yamaue, T. Kawai, M. Onoda and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 6008–6013 CrossRef CAS .K. Y. K. Man, H. L. Wong, W. K. Chan, C. Y. Kwong and A. B. Djurisic, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 365–367 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Tse, K. Y. K. Man, K. W. Cheng, C. S. K. Mak, W. K. Chan, C. T. Yip, Z. T. Liu and A. B. Djurišić, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 328–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. K. Mwaura, M. R. Pinto, D. Witker, N. Ananthakrishnan, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119–10126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhai, G. Cui, H. Liu, S. Xiao, Y. Liu, F. Lu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 6031–6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Lu, Y. Li, H. Liu, J. Zhuang, L. Gan and D. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2005, 153, 317–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Benten, N. Kudo, H. Ohkita and S. Ito, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2016–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Yang, A. Garcia and T. Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103514 CrossRef .R. Søndergaard, M. Helgesen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 68–71 CrossRef .T. R. Andersen, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, B. Andreasen, A. P. L. Böttiger, J. E. Carlé, M. Helgesen, E. Bundgaard, K. Norrman, J. W. Andreasen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4188–4196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. X. Nan, X. L. Hu, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, B. Andreasen, T. Tromholt, J. W. Andreasen, D. M. Tanenbaum, H. Z. Chen and F. C. Krebs, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 475301 CrossRef PubMed .T. T. Larsen-Olsen, B. Andreasen, T. R. Andersen, A. P. L. Bottiger, E. Bundgaard, K. Norrman, J. W. Andreasen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 22–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. T. Larsen-Olsen, T. R. Andersen, B. Andreasen, A. P. L. Bottiger, E. Bundgaard, K. Norrman, J. W. Andreasen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 43–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. J. Worfolk, D. A. Rider, A. L. Elias, M. Thomas, K. D. Harris and J. M. Buriak, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1816–1826 CrossRef CAS .M. Thomas, B. J. Worfolk, D. A. Rider, M. T. Taschuk, J. M. Buriak and M. J. Brett, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1887–1894 CAS .J. Vandenbergh, J. Dergent, B. Conings, T. Krishna, W. Maes, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. J. M. Vanderzande, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 1827–1835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Veldman, O. z. I'pek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. r. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. v. Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Hodgkiss, G. Tu, S. Albert-Seifried, W. T. S. Huck and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8913–8921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. J. A. Koster, S. E. Shaheen and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Duan, W. Z. Cai, B. B. Y. Hsu, C. M. Zhong, K. Zhang, C. C. Liu, Z. C. Hu, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan, A. J. Heeger and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013 10.1039/C3EE41838C .S. Schumann, R. A. Hatton and T. S. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4916–4921 CAS .C. Pramanik, Y. S. Li, A. Singh, W. M. Lin, J. L. Hodgson, J. B. Briggs, S. Ellis, P. Muller, N. E. McGruer and G. P. Miller, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2193–2201 RSC .A. Kumar, G. Pace, A. A. Bakulin, J. F. Fang, P. K. H. Ho, W. T. S. Huck, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1589–1596 CAS .Q. Q. Qiao and J. T. McLeskey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 153501 CrossRef .Q. Q. Qiao, L. Y. Su, J. Beck and J. T. McLeskey, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 094906 CrossRef .J. T. McLeskey and Q. Q. Qiao, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2006, 20951 Search PubMed .Q. Qiao, Y. Xie and J. J. T. McLeskey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9912–9916 CAS .A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123115 CrossRef .W. Lee, S. Shin, S. H. Han and B. W. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193307 CrossRef .T. Segal-Peretz, O. Leman, A. M. Nardes and G. L. Frey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2024–2032 CAS .P. Tiwana, P. Docampo, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5158–5166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Baeten, B. Conings, J. D'Haen, A. Hardy, J. V. Manca and M. K. Van Bael, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Y. Liu, L. J. Liu, H. Li, Q. F. Dong, S. Y. Yao, A. B. Kidd, X. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Li and W. J. Tian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Du, X. Cheng, X. Chen, Y. Jiang and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1597–1603 CAS .F. Huang, H. B. Wu, D. L. Wang, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 708–716 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Wu, F. Huang, Y. Q. Mo, W. Yang, D. L. Wang, J. B. Peng and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1826–1830 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Wu, F. Huang, J. B. Peng and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 118–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. F. Lan, J. B. Peng, M. L. Sun, J. L. Zhou, J. H. Zou, J. Wang and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 346–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Seo, A. Gutacker, B. Walker, S. Cho, A. Garcia, R. Yang, T.-Q. Nguyen, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18220–18221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. W. Hu, Y. Dong, F. Huang, X. Gong and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6537–6543 CAS .L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Zhang, M. Ceder and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1835–1838 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .A. Roy, S. H. Park, S. Cowan, M. H. Tong, S. N. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013302 CrossRef .H. Wu, F. Huang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Synth. Met., 2005, 153, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. He, C. M. Zhong, H. B. Wu, R. Q. Yang, W. Yang, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2617–2622 RSC .L. J. Zhang, C. He, J. W. Chen, P. Yuan, L. A. Huang, C. Zhang, W. Z. Cai, Z. T. Liu and Y. Cao, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9771–9778 CrossRef CAS .Z. He, C. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Chen, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3086–3089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xia, Y. Gao, Y. Zhang, J. Tong, J. Li, H. Li, D. Chen and D. Fan, Polymer, 2013, 54, 607–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef PubMed .B. Ecker, J. C. Nolasco, J. Pallarés, L. F. Marsal, J. Posdorfer, J. Parisi and E. von Hauff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2705–2711 CrossRef CAS .C.-H. Hsieh, Y.-J. Cheng, P.-J. Li, C.-H. Chen, M. Dubosc, R.-M. Liang and C.-S. Hsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4887–4893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, N. S. Baek, J. Zou, K. O'Malley and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253301 CrossRef .B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel and M. Niggemann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 491–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .C. M. Zhong, S. J. Liu, F. Huang, H. B. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4870–4876 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Liu, C. M. Zhong, J. Zhang, C. H. Duan, X. H. Wang and F. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 1745–1749 CrossRef CAS .Y. Dong, X. Hu, C. Duan, P. Liu, S. Liu, L. Lan, D. Chen, L. Ying, S. Su, X. Gong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3683–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhou, G. Qian, L. Ma, Y. X. Cheng, Z. Y. Xie, L. X. Wang, X. B. Jing and F. S. Wang, Macromolecules, 2004, 38, 5416–5424 CrossRef .B. Zhang, C. Qin, J. Ding, L. Chen, Z. Xie, Y. Cheng and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2951–2957 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Niu, C. J. Qin, B. H. Zhang, J. W. Yang, Z. Y. Xie, Y. X. Cheng and L. X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 203513 CrossRef .X. F. Xu, W. Z. Cai, J. W. Chen and Y. Cao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS .J. Sun, Y. Zhu, X. Xu, L. Lan, L. Zhang, P. Cai, J. Chen, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14188–14198 CAS .Y. Zhu, X. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Chen and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. H. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J. L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Kang, S. Hong, J. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3005–3009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. H. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. W. Shim, T. M. Khan and B. Kippelen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9827–9832 CAS .K. Zhang, X. Guan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Acta Chim. Sin., 2012, 70, 2489–2495 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Seo, E. B. Namdas, A. Gutacker, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3667–3672 CrossRef CAS .B. B. Y. Hsu, C. H. Duan, E. B. Namdas, A. Gutacker, J. D. Yuen, F. Huang, Y. Cao, G. C. Bazan, I. D. W. Samuel and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1171–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Jo, S.-I. Na, S.-H. Oh, S. Lee, T.-S. Kim, G. Wang, M. Choe, W. Park, J. Yoon, D.-Y. Kim, Y. H. Kahng and T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 213301 CrossRef .T. Shi, X. G. Zhu, D. Yang, Y. H. Xie, J. Zhang and G. L. Tu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 161602 CrossRef .Y. Chen, Z. T. Jiang, M. Gao, S. E. Watkins, P. Lu, H. Q. Wang and X. W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 203304 CrossRef .W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .H. X. Zhou, L. Q. Yang and W. You, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 607–632 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, J. Shi, C. Z. Li, C. M. Q. Su, L. Wang, C. Luo, D. G. Hu, J. Pei, J. Wang, J. B. Peng and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1858–1863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liu, W. Wen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Seifter, S. D. Collins, C. Luo, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1646–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Yao, L. Chen, Y. Chen, F. Li and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13780–13784 RSC .K. Zilberberg, A. Behrendt, M. Kraft, U. Scherf and T. Riedl, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Hoven, R. Yang, A. Garcia, A. J. Heeger, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10976–10977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Garcia, R. C. Bakus Ii, P. Zalar, C. V. Hoven, J. Z. Brzezinski and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2492–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-M. Chang, R. Zhu, E. Richard, C.-C. Chen, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3284–3289 CrossRef CAS .H. P. Li, Y. H. Xu, C. V. Hoven, C. Z. Li, J. H. Seo and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8903–8912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. H. Duan, L. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Guan and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1665–1669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. F. Fang, B. H. Wallikewitz, F. Gao, G. L. Tu, C. Müller, G. Pace, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 683–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Guan, K. Zhang, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2846–2854 CrossRef CAS .Z. A. Page, V. V. Duzhko and T. Emrick, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .C. Min, C. Shi, W. Zhang, T. Jiu, J. Chen, D. Ma and J. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3417–3420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .U. Scherf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5016–5017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Norrman, N. B. Larsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2793–2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Chen, B. J. Worfolk, T. C. Hauger, U. Al-Atar, K. D. Harris and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3962–3970 CAS .H. Choi, J. S. Park, E. Jeong, G.-H. Kim, B. R. Lee, S. O. Kim, M. H. Song, H. Y. Woo and J. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2759–2763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Wang, X. W. Hu, P. Liu, W. Li, X. Gong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9638–9641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. V. Pho, H. Kim, J. H. Seo, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4338–4341 CrossRef CAS .T. H. Reilly, A. W. Hains, H.-Y. Chen and B. A. Gregg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .H. Ye, X. Hu, Z. Jiang, D. Chen, X. Liu, H. Nie, S.-J. Su, X. Gong and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3387–3394 CAS .D. Chen, H. Zhou, M. Liu, W.-M. Zhao, S.-J. Su and Y. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 595–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Sun, B. Zhao, V. Murugesan, A. Kumar, K. Zeng, J. Subbiah, W. W. H. Wong, D. J. Jones and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24155–24165 RSC .C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, K. M. O'Malley, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8574–8578 RSC .K. M. O'Malley, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Duan, C. M. Zhong, C. C. Liu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1682–1689 CrossRef CAS .Z. G. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Qi, Z. W. Jin, G. Liu, J. H. Hou, Y. F. Li and J. Z. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 143902 CrossRef .S. S. Li, M. Lei, M. L. Lv, S. E. Watkins, Z. A. Tan, J. Zhu, J. H. Hou, X. W. Chen and Y. F. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300425 .S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1450–1472 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Seo, R. Q. Yang, J. Z. Brzezinski, B. Walker, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, F. Ding, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2457–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Z. Li, C. C. Chueh, F. Z. Ding, H. L. Yip, P. W. Liang, X. S. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4425–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. V. Hoven, R. Q. Yang, A. Garcia, V. Crockett, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 12730–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. V. Hoven, J. Peet, A. Mikhailovsky and T. Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 033301 CrossRef .L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganas, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .H. Hoppe, N. Arnold, N. S. Sariciftci and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 CrossRef .F. Zhang, M. Johansson, M. R. Andersson, J. C. Hummelen and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 662–665 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Lim, S. Lee, D. J. Herman, M. T. Lloyd, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193301 CrossRef .W. Shi, S. Q. Fan, F. Huang, W. Yang, R. S. Liu and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2387–2394 RSC .W. Shi, L. Wang, F. Huang, R. Liu, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .C.-Y. Li, T.-C. Wen, T.-F. Guo and S.-S. Hou, Polymer, 2008, 49, 957–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T.-C. Wen, J.-B. Chen and A. Gopalan, Mater. Lett., 2002, 57, 280–290 CrossRef CAS .C.-Y. Li, T.-C. Wen and T.-F. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4478–4482 RSC .C. Y. Li, T. C. Wen, T. H. Lee, T. F. Guo, J. C. A. Huang, Y. C. Lin and Y. J. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1643–1647 RSC .W. Li, B. J. Worfolk, P. Li, T. C. Hauger, K. D. Harris and J. M. Buriak, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11354–11363 RSC .K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2513–2517 CrossRef CAS .F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .F. Y. Cheng, P. Imin, S. Lazar, G. A. Botton, G. de Silveira, O. Marinov, J. Deen and A. Adronov, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9869–9874 CrossRef CAS .X. Qi, K.-Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Casagrande, P. Imin, F. Y. Cheng, G. A. Botton, I. Zhitomirsky and A. Adronov, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2741–2749 CrossRef CAS .A. Chunder, T. Pal, S. I. Khondaker and L. Zhai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15129–15135 CAS .R. A. Hatton, N. P. Blanchard, V. Stolojan, A. J. Miller and S. R. P. Silva, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6424–6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Bechara, J. Petersen, V. Gernigon, P. Lévêque, T. Heiser, V. Toniazzo, D. Ruch and M. Michel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 482–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. G. Kim, J. Walker, L. A. Samuelson and J. Kumar, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 523–525 CrossRef CAS .G. K. R. Senadeera, K. Nakamura, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 5470–5472 CrossRef CAS .S. Yanagida, G. K. R. Senadeera, K. Nakamura, T. Kitamura and Y. Wada, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 166, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Cho, H. Kim, M. Oh, M. S. Lah, Y. Majima, K. S. Sohn and M. Pyo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B106–B111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. M. Kim, J. H. Yoon, M. S. Won and Y. B. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 67, 201–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. H. Yoon, D. M. Kim, S. S. Yoon, M. S. Won and Y. B. Shim, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8874–8880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. K. Mwaura, X. Y. Zhao, H. Jiang, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6109–6111 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, R. Zhu, Y. Zhang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3789–3791 RSC .H. Jiang, X. Y. Zhao, A. H. Shelton, S. H. Lee, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 381–387 CAS .J. B. Sambur, C. M. Averill, C. Bradley, J. Schuttlefield, S. H. Lee, J. R. Reynolds, K. S. Schanze and B. A. Parkinson, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11906–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhang, Z. Fang, M. J. Su, M. Saeys and B. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1533–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Fang, A. A. Eshbaugh and K. S. Schanze, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. S. Saji, K. Zong and M. Pyo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 212, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Lee, R. S. Mane, S. K. Min, T. H. Yoon, S. H. Han and S. H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263503 CrossRef .W. Lee, S. K. Min, G. Cai, R. S. Mane, T. Ganesh, G. Koo, J. Chang, S. J. Baek, S. H. Lee and S. H. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54, 714–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Haeldermans, I. Truijen, K. Vandewal, W. Moons, M. K. Van Bael, J. D. H. Haen, J. V. Manca and J. Mullens, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 7245–7250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Taranekar, Q. Qiao, H. Jiang, I. Ghiviriga, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8958–8959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Chunhui Duan	Chunhui Duan was born in 1986. He obtained his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2008, and he is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang at South China University of Technology. His research interests are conjugated functional materials for organic/polymer optoelectronics.
Kai Zhang	Kai Zhang received his BS degree in Polymer Material and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2010, and was recommended for admission to South China University of Technology in the same year. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang. His current research focuses on high efficiency polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells.
Chengmei Zhong	Chengmei Zhong is a graduate student in Materials Science working in South China University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao and Prof. Fei Huang since 2008. His research interests are the physics of optoelectronic devices and transient spectroscopy studies on organic semiconductors.
Fei Huang	Fei Huang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Peking University in 2000 and gained his PhD degree in Materials Science from the South China University of Technology in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Yong Cao. After postdoctoral work at University of Washington with Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen, he began his academic career in 2009 as a professor of South China University of Technology. His main interests are in the fields of organic functional materials and devices for opto-electronics.
Yong Cao	Yong Cao, physical chemist, Professor of South China University of Technology since 1999. BS from Department of Chemistry, Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) University, PhD degree from Tokyo University, Japan. He was visiting senior researcher at University of California, Santa Barbara in 1988–1990 and senior scientist of UNIAX Corporation in 1990–1998. Current research interest: polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Typical device configuration of OSCs and HSCs. (b) Typical device configuration of DSSCs.	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthetic routes for the preparation of b-WSCPs (a) PF2/6-b-P3PHT, PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT and PF2/6-b-P3PyTHT, (b) PF6NBr-b-PF8 and (c) PF-PFPyBr-PF and PFPyBr-PF-PFPyBr.	 

 	Fig. 2  Graphical illustration of the vesicle structure formed by PF6NBr-b-PF8 from methanol and THF (orange: PF8 block; black: PF6NBr block). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthetic route for the preparation of uniform WSCP P8EOF-Si by Ni-initiated polymerisation.	 

 	Scheme 3  (a) Molecular structures of n-type WSCPs PPyClPh, PPyClPh-TFPh and PPyClPh-Th. (b) Synthetic route for the preparation of triblock WSCP P3TH-b-PPymPh-b-P3HT.	 

 	Scheme 4  Molecular structures of the WSCPs and WSCSs for use in OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of the processing procedures of OSCs using the standard laboratory procedure involving the use of toxic solvents and the slow metal evaporation deposition (top), and the all-water-processable method in which all of the steps are processed from an aqueous solution (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic images of inverted solar cells with a photoactive layer of a nanostructured C60 column and a WSCP P3CBT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

ITO/PTEBS-Na/C60/BCP/Al	0.97	0.67	53	0.43	112
ITO/ZnO/active layer/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	4.46	0.49	32	0.6	113
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Al	6.26	0.56	64	2.6	118
ITO/Cs2CO3/P3CBT:C60/V2O5/Al	4.6	0.33	45	0.8	119
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MTEMP-PPV/C60/Al	0.256	0.428	36	0.04	120
ITO/TSCuPc/C60/BCP/Al	1.47	0.52	41	0.32	125
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEDPAK/C60/Al	0.125	0.53	32.2	0.084	126

 	Scheme 5  Molecular structures of WSCPs for use in HSCs.	 

FTO/TiO2/PTEBS-Na/Au	0.35	0.81	40	0.13	128
ITO/(o-MWCNTs):PTEBS-Na/C60/Al	1.49	0.62	61	0.56	132
ITO/CdS:LM3/P3HT/Au	4.84	0.54	45	1.18	133
FTO/TiO2:P3PHT-K/Ag	0.543	0.78	48	0.2	136
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3PHT:a-dG/ZnO/Al	0.157	0.44	40	0.027	137

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of in situ polymerisation and sequential hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity control to construct an HSC using CPE LM3 as a photosensitiser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2008 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthetic route of the preparation of PPV, PNV and PBTPV via water-soluble precursor approaches.	 

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:TiO2/Al	0.14	0.46	26	0.018	74
ITO/PPV/PPV:TiO2/LiF/Al	0.3	0.84	42	0.11	77
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:CdTe/ZnO/Al	10.70	0.50	40	2.14	75
ITO/TiO2/CdTe/PPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au	16.08	0.591	50.1	4.76	138
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PPV:CdxHg1–xTe/Al	12.84	0.34	34.3	1.50	78
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PNV:CdTe/Al	6.14	0.44	32	0.86	76
ITO/TiO2/PNV:CdTe/MoO3/Au	12.5	0.544	53.1	3.61	82
ITO/TiO2/PBTPV:CdTe/MoO3/Au	13.3	0.58	43.2	3.3	83

 	Scheme 7  Molecular structures of neutral WSCPs as ECL materials.	 

PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al	4.41	1.05	42.8	1.99	152
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	4.68	0.61	54.9	1.54	152
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PF-DTBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al	2.64	1.00	51.5	1.30	153
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PCz-DBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al	4.68	0.90	65.3	2.75	153
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PPh-DBTA:PC61BM/ECL/Al	4.50	0.55	56.1	1.39	153
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PECz-DTQx:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.4	0.81	65.8	6.07	154
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al	12.7	0.90	59	6.79	46
PFN	ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al	15.75	0.756	70.15	8.37	46
PFN	ITO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	17.2	0.74	72	9.15	39
PFN-OX	ITO/PFN-OX/PBDT-TZNT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	11.71	0.92	65	7.11	164
PF-EP	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	10.28	0.64	66	4.33	40
PFCn6:K+	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:IC61BA/ECL/Ca/Al	11.65	0.89	72.6	7.50	50
PC-N	ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al	3.64	1.00	41	1.49	168
PC-NOH	ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al	4.00	1.02	41	1.67	168
PC-P	ITO/PEDOT/PFO-DBT35:PC61BM/ECL/Al	3.80	1.01	40	1.53	168
PC-P	ITO/ECL/PCDTBT12:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	10.68	0.97	58.3	6.04	169
PCP-NOH	ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	8.25	0.88	59.4	5.39	170
PCP-EP	ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	8.76	0.88	56.9	5.48	170
PF6N	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	6.87 (9.82)	0.93	61.13	5.58	174
PF6N25Py	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.3	0.90	56.0	5.7	194

 	Scheme 8  Molecular structures of some active layer materials whose photovoltaic performances could be enhanced by the interface modification materials of WSCPs and/or WSCSs.	 

 	Scheme 9  Molecular structures of CPEs that were applied as ECLs in OSCs.	 

WPF-oxy-F	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	9.86	0.63	60.7	3.77	41
WPF-6-oxy-F	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	10.08	0.64	60	3.89	42
WPF-6-oxy-F	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Ag	9.86	0.64	58	3.69	42
WPF-6-oxy-F	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Au	8.48	0.58	52	2.60	42
WPF-6-oxy-F	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Cu	8.72	0.63	61	3.36	42
WPF-6-oxy-F	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT/Ag	8.83	0.655	59	3.38 (aver.)	43
WPF-6-oxy-F	Glass/MLG/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT/Al	6.61	0.57	33	1.23	177
PFEOSO3Na	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	11.12	0.64	63	4.51	178
PSFNBr	ITO/PEDOT/PFOTBT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	9.36	1.04	47.93	4.23 (aver.)	179
P3TMAHT	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	10.8 ± 0.3	0.86 ± 0.01	66 ± 1	6.1 (aver.)	45
PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	10.6 ± 0.03	0.89 ± 0.01	67 ± 1	6.2 (aver.)	45
P3TMAHT	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	10.86	0.59	51.2	3.28	186
P3ImHT	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Ag	10.4	0.53	61	3.3	187
P3ImHT	ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	11.2	0.84	51	4.8	187
P3TMAHT	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.82	0.88	58	6.48	53
P3ImHT	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	12.05	0.87	59	6.69	53
PF6NO	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.6	0.91	66.2	6.9	194
PFNSO	ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al	16.38	0.73	73.1	8.74	52
PFNSO-TPA	ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al	17.07	0.71	62.1	7.51	52
PFNSO-BT	ITO/PEDOT/PTB7:PC71BM/ECL/Al	16.76	0.65	61.1	6.61	52
P3(TBP)PHT+Br−/PEDOT	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al	9.9	0.55	60	3.8	48
P3(TBP)PHT+/PEDOT−	ITO/ECL/PBDTTPD:PC71BM/V2O5/Al	11.2	0.91	55	5.6	48
PTCDI+:PEDOT:PSS−	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al	8.43	0.39	40	1.31	199
P3PHT/PEDOT	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/V2O5/Al	7.02	0.50	43	1.58	44
PTMAHT:SDS	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	9.54	0.62	67.8	4.01	190
PFQ-Br	FTO/TiOx/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/MoO3/Au	8.85	0.58	70	3.55	200
PFN-Br	ITO/ZnO/ECL/PBDT-DTNT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	17.4	0.75	61	8.4	47
PFFN-Br	ITO/ZnO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	15.5	0.75	68.9	8.01	54
PTMAHT	ITO/ZnO/ECL/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	15.3	0.74	67.5	7.64	54

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematics of an inverted OSC with the work-function-engineered MLG electrode. (b) Changes to the effective work functions (Δϕ) of an MLG film with interfacial dipole layers. (c) Energy-level diagram of the inverted-structure OSC with an MLG ECE. (d) J–V characteristics of the inverted-structure OSCs under illumination with and without the various interfacial layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photographs of water droplets on the surfaces of (a) PCDTBT:PC71BM, (b) PCDTBT:PC71BM after methanol spin-casting, (c) 0.01% P3TMAHT and (d) 0.02% PF2/6-b-P3TMAHT on PCDTBT:PC71BM substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematics for the LBL assembly of P3PHT+Br− with (cPEDOT:PSS−)Na+ using an ITO substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Scheme 10  Molecular structures of WSCSs applied as ECLs in OSCs.	 

Na+QHSO3−	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	9.83	0.84	62.6	5.17	202
Petma+OH−	ITO/ECL/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	9.87	0.51	51.3	2.52	203
Petma+OH−	ITO/ECL/PSBTBT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	10.29	0.61	44.9	2.86	203
F8PS	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.25	0.94	62	6.56	204
3TPT-FEP	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.98	0.92	65.4	7.21	205
Rhodamine 101	ITO/PEDOT/PCDTBT:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.10	0.94	59	6.15	206
C60-mono	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.17	0.86	62	5.96	207
C60-mono	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ca/Al	11.12	0.87	64	6.19	207
C60-mono	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ag	11.28	0.87	64	6.28	207
C60-bis	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Al	11.19	0.88	60	5.87	208
C60-bis	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Cu	10.13	0.87	61	5.37	208
C60-bis	ITO/PEDOT/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/ECL/Ag	11.5	0.88	61	6.22	208
B-PCPO	ITO/ECL/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	9.50	0.89	61.7	6.20	209
PEGN-C60	ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/ECL/Al	9.21	0.626	66.6	3.84	210
PEGN-C60	ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C:PC71BM/ECL/Al	13.99	0.735	60.48	6.22	210
PEGN-C60	ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al	14.79	0.794	63.42	7.45	210
PCBDAN	ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al	17.36	0.78	56.9	7.70	211
PCBDANI	ITO/PEDOT/PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM/ECL/Al	17.29	0.78	57.0	7.69	211

 	Fig. 9  Comparison of calculated optical absorption profile for conventional and inverted devices. (a) Distribution of absorbed AM 1.5 G photon flux density inside the active layer. (b) Variation of maximum JSC with active layer thickness for two types of devices, both under AM 1.5 G illumination (440–800 nm). The open squares and filled circles represent conventional and inverted devices, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

 	Scheme 11  Molecular structures of WSCPs as HCL materials or stabilisers for graphene or CNT electrodes.	 

SPDPA	ITO/SPDPA/P3HT:PC61BM/Ca/Al	10.33	0.60	68.0	4.20	227
SPDPA	ITO/TiO2/P3HT:PC61BM/SPDPA/Ag	10.26	0.60	63.0	3.81	228
P3CPenT	ITO/P3CPenT/P3HT:PC61BM/LiF/Al	9.30	0.56	67.0	3.4	229
o-MWCNT:TSCuPc	ITO/o-MWCNT:TSCuPc/P3HT:PC61BM/LiF/Al	4.55	0.55	50.0	1.25	238
TSCuPC	ITO/TSCuPC/P3HT:PC61BM/Al	9.70	0.51	35.7	1.76	239

 	Scheme 12  Molecular structures of WSCPs for use as photosensitisers in DSSCs.	 

FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt	8.0	0.36	—	1.4	240
FTO/TiO2:HPUTET/I3−:I−/Pt	5.7	0.46	—	1.5	240
FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt	9.76	0.40	61	2.4	241
FTO/SnO2–ZnO:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt	5.37	0.50	55	1.5	241
FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt	9.74	0.405	60	2.4	242
FTO/TiO2:P3TAA-PHT/I3−:I−/Pt	7.00	0.375	62	1.6	242
FTO/TiO2:P3TAA/I3−:I−/Pt	8.6	0.52	64	2.92	243
FTO/TiO2:P3TTBA/I3−:I−/Pt	10.47	0.59	64.23	3.97	244
FTO/TiO2:P3TTCA/I3−:I−/Pt	6.78	0.54	63.6	2.32	245
FTO/TiO2:PFBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt	4.03	0.523	66	1.39	247
FTO/TiO2:PPE-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt	1.46	0.47	49.2	0.34	248
FTO/TiO2:PPE-Th-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt	2.60	0.47	43.4	0.53	248
FTO/TiO2:PPE-EDOT-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt	3.12	0.50	37.2	0.58	248
FTO/TiO2:PPE-BT-CO2/I3−:I−/Pt	2.52	0.43	30.5	0.33	248
FTO/TiO2:PTPA-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt	9.20	0.717	51.4	3.39	250
FTO/TiO2:PFDBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt	7.02	0.55	43.8	1.68	251
FTO/TiO2:P3TBT-COOH/I3−:I−/Pt	12.58	0.54	44.9	2.99	251
FTO/TiO2:PTTHC/I3−:I−/Pt	4.5	0.42	62	1.2	252
ITO/CdS:LM3/I−:I2/Pt	7.42	0.65	39	2.37	253
ITO/In2S3:LM3/I−:I2/Pt	5.60	0.39	60	1.63	254
FTO/TiO2:P3SHT/Au	0.98	0.438	33	0.026	255

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
