Turning a disadvantage into an advantage: synthesizing high-quality organometallic halide perovskite nanosheet arrays for humidity sensors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC05165K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC05165K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2504-2508Turning a disadvantage into an advantage: synthesizing high-quality organometallic halide perovskite nanosheet arrays for humidity sensors†

        
          
            Kuankuan 
            Ren
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Le 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shizhong 
            Yue
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shudi 
            Lu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kong 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Azam
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhijie 
            Wang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Zhongming 
            Wei
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Shengchun 
            Qu
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zhanguo 
            Wang
          
        
      
Key Laboratory of Semiconductor Materials Science, Beijing Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Semiconductor Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100083, China.  and College of Materials Science and Opto-Electronic Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, 100049, China. E-mail: wangzj@semi.ac.cn; zmwei@semi.ac.cn; qsc@semi.ac.cn
Received 
      29th November 2016
    , Accepted 16th January 2017First published on 17th January 2017AbstractThough power conversion efficiencies of perovskite solar cells of over 21% have been reported, the degradation of the performance of these cells in the presence of moisture still inhibits the commercialization of these otherwise promising devices. Herein, we decided to utilize the moisture sensitivity of perovskite materials and fabricate a moisture detector based on high-quality CH3NH3PbI3−xClx nanosheet arrays. The resulting devices present a high sensitivity towards humidity with device resistance significantly dropping from 1.28 × 108 Ω at 30% relative humidity (RH) to 7.39 × 104 Ω at 90% RH and a response even faster than that of the commercial psychrometer. This response was even steeper than those of commercial psychrometers. Moreover, our device showed good reversibility and impressive specificity. Thus, the humidity sensitivity of perovskites, while disadvantageous for solar cell applications, was found to be quite applicable in a new field.
Organometallic halide perovskite materials have attracted much attention, owing to the suggestions that they would find applications in solar cells, light-emitting diodes and photodetectors within a decade.1–3 Indeed, these perovskite materials have been incorporated into solar cells that have shown power conversion efficiencies of up to 21%4,5 and these materials are relatively inexpensive, together indicating that they can be competitive in the photovoltaics industry. Despite such progress, the performances of their devices have been found to degrade, particularly in the presence of moisture. Such degradation poses the biggest obstacle to their commercialization, though substantial efforts have been devoted to improving their stability.6–9
In the perovskite architecture, the hydrogen-bonding interactions between the organic cations and halide ions of the perovskite lattice govern the stability of structure.10 It has been computationally demonstrated, however, that polar water molecules could readily intercalate into the perovskite lattice due to the capability of the water to form strong hydrogen bonds with the halides of the lattice.11 This intercalation has been indicated to result in the deformation of the crystal structure by forming hydrated crystal phases or irreversibly decomposing the perovskites by forming lead halide.12 Though the former reaction can be reversed by drying the material, both reactions are nevertheless detrimental to the performance of its photovoltaic devices.
The high sensitivity of perovskite materials to moisture gave rise to a new question: could we turn this disadvantage into an advantage by using these otherwise promising materials in another field? In our current work, we provided a positive answer to this question by constructing a humidity detector based on high-quality CH3NH3Pbl3−xCIx nanosheet arrays. This device design involved two advantageous considerations. First, with the aim to break the limit imposed by the planar structure (e.g., the low sensitivity and response towards the molecules like H2O et.al., attributing to the small surface area), we designed devices using highly uniform nanostructure arrays and proposed a convenient approach to synthesize CH3NH3Pbl3−xCIx nanosheet arrays. The resultant arrays showed greater morphological and orientational uniformity than did the previously reported perovskite nanostructures.13–15 Second, the chlorine-based structure we made decomposed less upon being exposed to moisture than did the previously reported structures. Accordingly, the device we made showed impressive sensitivity, repeatability and specificity for detecting moisture.
Highly uniform CH3NH3Pbl3−xCIx nanosheet arrays were prepared via a strategy involving surface-initiated solution growth by utilizing a lead acetate film on a glass/PEDOT:PSS substrate. The film was in contact with a mixed halide growth solution, specifically containing CH3NH3I (9 mg mL−1) and CH3NH3Cl (9 mg mL−1). The details for the synthesis (schematically shown in Fig. 1a) and a related discussion are given in the ESI† (Section 1 and Fig. S1–S6). Fig. 1b shows a representative scanning electron microscopic (SEM) image of the as-grown material, which formed nanosheet arrays whose long axes were oriented perpendicular to the main plane of the substrate. The thickness and width of each nanosheet were measured to be 105 nm and 2.05 μm, respectively. All of these nanosheets showed a set of flat rectangular end facets, suggestive of high crystalline quality. A higher-resolution cross-sectional SEM image is shown in Fig. 1c. The vertically oriented nanosheets showed a terrace-like smooth surface, indicating that the nanosheet may have grown epitaxially from a set of ultra-thin nanosheets. Further evidence for this mode of growth was found in the TEM image of an intentionally detached nanosheet, whose dimensions were similar to those measured in the SEM images and in whose cross profile was discerned a series of ultra-thin parallel nanosheet layers (Fig. 1d). The inset of this figure shows a selected-area electron diffraction pattern of the nanosheet; sharp diffraction spots were observed, and were indexed to a cubic crystal system with a [001] zone axis. A high-resolution TEM image of the corresponding nanosheet is given in Fig. 1e, and a clear crystal lattice was observed in this image. Moreover, the associated fast Fourier transform pattern showed sharp spots. These observations indicated the nanosheet to be highly crystalline.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for the preparation of the nanosheet arrays (NSAs). (b and c) Surface and cross-sectional SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx nanostructures grown from a PbAc2 thin film in a CH3NH3I1−xClx/isopropanol solution. (d) Corresponding TEM image and selected-area electron diffraction pattern (inset) along the [001] zone axis (ZA) and (e) high-resolution TEM image with the associated fast Fourier transform (inset). 
Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the SEM images of the samples grown for various durations. A comparison of these images indicated that the material changed from an irregular nanodot array at one minute of growth to a nanostructure array with nanodots, nanowires, and nanosheets at one hour of growth. Significantly, after longer growth time, the nanodots and nanowires began to disappear and the nanosheets became dominant in the images. This observation indicated that a standard Ostwald ripening process occurred, where nanostructures with large surface energies, such as the nanodots and nanowires, dissolved and the precursors redeposited epitaxially on the surface of large nanosheets.16 The corresponding XRD patterns of these nanostructures are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†), where the samples grown for a short period of time yielded both CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and PbAc2 patterns, and the samples grown for a long period of time showed the pattern corresponding to a pure phase of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx. The peaks at 15.81, 22.27 and 31.67° were indexed to the (001), (011), and (002) planes of the materials, respectively. More interestingly, only the approach using a 1:1 molar ratio of CH3NH3Cl to CH3NH3I resulted in the formation of high-quality nanosheet arrays, and other ratios generated a large nonuniformity in the morphology of the material, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). More detailed discussions on the growth dynamics are given in the ESI† (Section 2).
Fig. S6 (ESI†) shows the EDX spectra of the nanostructure array. Based on these spectra, the compositional ratio of Cl to I was estimated to be 14 to 1 and the resulting stoichiometric formula was estimated to be CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8. This result indicated that the examined material was a chlorine-based perovskite material, which exhibited a white color. Fig. S7 (ESI†) shows the absorption spectra of the material and the resulting Tauc plot. These data indicated the material to have a band gap value of 2.97 eV, in good agreement with the DFT calculated value for CH3NH3PbCl3 as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†).
To carry out the moisture-sensing experiment, we constructed a simple device with two stripes of Ag electrodes deposited on its top surface, and we studied the sensing capabilities of the device by placing it in a chamber whose humidity was monitored by using a psychrometer (Fig. 2a and b). The advantages of the as-grown perovskite material enabled us to not have to use the complicated interdigital electrode configuration. Fig. 2c shows the corresponding I–V curves in static air of 30–90% RH at 27 °C and these curves showed a good linearity, indicating an ohmic contact between CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and Ag. Interestingly, as the RH was increased, the current increased dramatically. Accordingly, the resistance was calculated to sharply drop from 1.28 × 108 Ω to 7.39 × 104 Ω, as the RH was increased from 30% to 90% (Fig. 2d). The sensitivity, defined as R30%RH/R, was found to increase dramatically, from 1 to 1422, as the RH was increased from 30% to 90%. These results indicated a strong response of the conductivity of the perovskite nanostructure arrays to the water molecules in the air. The values for the resistance of the device at humidity values lower than 30% are given in Fig. S9 (ESI†). Even at these low RH levels, the resistance changed with RH, and specifically was found to decrease from 1.40 × 109 Ω to 3.22 × 108 Ω as the RH was increased from near 0% (in a glove box, water content <1 ppm) to 27%. This observation indicated that the device can also work in low-humidity conditions. In contrast, at RH values greater than 90%, the nanostructure arrays began to decompose, as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the sensor structure. (b) Schematic illustration of the system for testing the sensor device. (c) I–V curves of the perovskite nanosheet array humidity sensor (PNSAHS) in atmospheres with various RHs from low humidity (30% RH) to 90% RH at 27 °C. (d) The average resistance of the PNSAHS (black line) and the resistance response sensitivity, which is defined by R30%RH/R (blue line), in the various RH conditions. (e) A resistance hysteresis loop of the PNPAHS. (f) Real-time current response properties of the PNSAHS in different RH (35–65%) gases at 27 °C. 
To show the reversibility of the device, we monitored its resistance as we increased and then reduced the humidity of the chamber. The two sets of sensitivity values generated from these two paths differed little from each other, i.e., by no more than the systemic errors at the given RH values (Fig. 2e). This result suggested that the water molecules were freely absorbed and released by the device, depending on the ambient humidity. Furthermore, we modulated the RH values in the chambers and determined the response of the current (at 2 V), as shown in Fig. 2f. Intriguingly, the current could be modulated strictly by changing the RH value. Even the tiny change of RH at 1430 s induced a corresponding response in the current, indicative of the high efficiency of the device at detecting moisture. Even more significantly, whereas it took 51 s for the RH detected by the psychrometer from the first change in RH to reach the first RH peak, it only took 24 s for the current of our device to reach the first peak. This shorter duration suggested that the perovskite device can also in general respond more rapidly to a change in moisture levels then can the psychrometer.
Samples that had experienced different humidity conditions were then placed in an ambient environment of 30% RH for XRD (Fig. S11a, ESI†) measurements. These samples yielded the same set of diffraction peaks, and without any peak indicative of a result of decomposition such as PbCl2 or PbI2, indicating that the perovskite nanosheet arrays were able to re-form their original state even after being placed in an environment with 90% RH. Fig. S11b (ESI†) shows the XPS spectra of the same set of samples, and the same series of elemental peaks without any obvious shifts were observed, also supporting the good reversibility of the as-grown perovskite materials. A detailed XPS analysis of the elemental evolution is given in the ESI† (Fig. S12). Additionally, after XPS measurements, the nanostructure arrays did not show any obvious features indicative of decomposition, as shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†).
Unlike conventional molecule detectors where the absorption and release of the molecules at the surface of the device dominate the sensitivity,17 in perovskite devices, water molecules could enter the bulk of the materials and intercalate into the perovskite lattice. Such penetration has been directly supported by previous investigations18,19 and our DFT simulations (Fig. 3), and is indicative of the advantage of our perovskite nanostructures in sensor applications. Fig. 3a–d show the calculated crystal structures of CH3NH3PbCl3 with various numbers of water molecules. In comparison with the bare structure, the presence of the water molecules was calculated to induce a deformation in the crystal lattice. As the modeled amount of water was increased to one molecule in each unit cell, this deformation was calculated to become prominent, but the bonds holding together the crystal structure were not calculated to break. This calculation suggested the perovskite materials to have a good capability in accommodating water molecules. The DFT calculated band structures of these water-intercalated CH3NH3PbCl3 species are given in Fig. S8 (ESI†). Though the water molecules were not calculated to add more levels to the band gap, the detailed energy levels in the valence band and conduction band, which affect the charge conduction, were indeed calculated to be modified. Intercalation of the water molecules with the CH3NH3PbCl3 lattice was thus indicated to yield a charge transfer, with electrons injected into the perovskite from the water molecules (Fig. 3e). This effect was reflected directly by the change in the density of states between the samples with different amounts of absorbed water (Fig. 3f).
 Fig. 3  (a–d) Calculated structures of four unit cells of CH3NH3PbCl3 with 0, 1, 2 and 4 adsorbed water molecules, respectively. (e) DFT calculated differential charge distribution of the structure with an absorbed water molecule. (f) Calculated density of states of the structures containing different contents of water molecules. 

Fig. 4a shows the UPS spectrum of the material. Its work function was measured to be 4.56 eV and the obtained valence band position vs. the vacuum energy level was 6.5 eV. In addition to the band gap value calculated from the absorption spectrum, the band structure was acquired, and is depicted in Fig. 4b, where a standard n type feature was indicated. With more water molecules absorbed by the structure, more electrons would be injected, which in turn would raise the Fermi level and enhance the conductivity of the material. We also experimentally observed the doping density (Table S1, ESI†) of the materials to increase with more water molecules in the structure, as illustrated by the Mott–Schottky analysis in the ESI† (Fig. S14). All of these results indicated that the as-grown perovskite nanosheet array showed a good ability to sense water molecules in the ambient environment.
 Fig. 4  (a) Utraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra (inset: the high resolved low binding energy region) and (b) energy level diagrams of as-grown CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and a schematic illustration of the influence of a water molecule. 
Due to the strong affinity of Cl anions for organic cations, the chlorine-based material was highly stable. This stability indicates that CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8 would be able to reversibly absorb and release water molecules over a broad range of water contents. Conventional CH3NH3PbI3 generally decomposes at an RH of 55%,20 while we found CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8 to still have a reversible ability for sensing water at 90% RH (an ability to sense water at 90% RH, and then again at lower RH values). In the reversible water-sensing region, the reactions could be described by the equationCH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8 + xH2O ↔ CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8·xH2OWater molecules in the ambient environment could intercalate the crystal lattice and form the hydrate. The amount of water interacting with the lattice is governed by the humidity of the ambient environment. In some cases, even multiple hydrates could be formed.19 Intriguingly, when the humidity of the ambient was modulated intentionally, the resistance of the device showed a corresponding series of responses. This observation indicated that water molecules would be absorbed (or released) when there is a negative (or positive) gradient of water concentration. Fig. 2d shows the corresponding curves of resistance vs. humidity. The resistance was observed to decrease sharply as the humidity was increased, until an RH of over 90% when irreversible decomposition reactions did finally occur. In the reversible hydration region, no saturation feature for the resistance vs. humidity was observed. Assuming an inversely proportional relationship between the resistance and the number of the absorbed water molecules, the relationship between humidity and the number of absorbed water molecules was in our case a standard BET relationship, rather than a Langmuir relationship.21 This relationship indicated that the water absorption by CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8 was not dominated by the surface-initiated monolayer absorbing mechanism. A multi-layer or bulk absorbing mechanism was instead responsible for this feature, thus endowing perovskite nanostructure arrays with an outstanding advantage over the conventional sensors based on surface-dominant absorption of molecules. In addition, the large surface area of the nanosheet array and the resulting large contact area with the ambient environment also apparently contributed to the high sensitivity and rapid response of this system. The slight expansion of the nanostructure arrays after water absorption (from calculation) and a resulting improved inter-crystal conductivity may have also contributed to the advantageous performance. To make a direct comparison, we also fabricated a sensor device based on the flat perovskite structure. As demonstrated in Fig. S15 (ESI†), as we changed the RH between 30% and 90%, the resistance only showed an approximately two-fold change. This change in resistance was several orders of magnitude lower than that from the devices based on nanostructure arrays, thus indicating the outstanding advantage of the nanostructure array devices.
To check the specificity of the system, we placed the device in an ambient environment with various gases and with saturated vapor pressure at room temperature. The ratio of the relevant resistance over the resistance in the ambient environment with those gases is shown in Fig. S16 (ESI†). The device showed different responses towards these different gases. When exposed to methanol, chlorobenzene and ammonium hydroxide, the resistance showed a decreasing trend. While in other gases like acetone, toluene and trichloromethane, the resistance was greater. The variation of the device resistance was highly dependent on the nature of the exposed gas, and the absorbed gases could change the electrical nature of the perovskite. In addition, we also measured the responses of our device towards CO, O2, and H2. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI†), these responses were not as large as those measured in methanol or other mentioned vapors, but still showed a relative selectivity. These results indicated that the as-prepared perovskite nanosheet arrays showed a good specificity to sensing not only water molecules but also other gases.
Conclusions
In summary, we have proposed a novel method to prepare high-quality CH3NH3PbI3−xClx nanosheet arrays. These nanosheets showed a uniform morphology unlike the other perovskite nanostructures synthesized by the conventional approach. More importantly, we demonstrated that it is possible to utilize the sensitivity of the perovskite materials to water molecules and fabricate high-performance water sensors with high sensitivity and good reversibility. The sensing devices also showed good specificity by showing different electrical responses when exposed to different gases.
Acknowledgements
This work was mostly supported by the Frontier Science Key Research Program of CAS (QYZDB-SSW-SLH006), and National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2014CB643503), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Contract No. 61504134, 21503209, 61622406), National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFB0700700), and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2162042). Z. J. W. and Z. M. W. also appreciate the support from the Hundred-Talent Program (Chinese Academy of Sciences).
Notes and references
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Meng, T. B. Song, T. F. Guo, Y. M. Yang, W. H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bella, G. Griffini, J. P. Correa-Baena, G. Saracco, M. Gratzel, A. Hagfeldt, S. Turri and C. Gerbaldi, Science, 2016, 354, 203–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 279–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and P. H. L. Sit, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22370–22378 CAS .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, S. Gu, X. Shen, N. Xu, Y. Tan, S. Zhuang, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 871–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Q. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Weber, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 955–960 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen and C. Lu, Sens. Lett., 2005, 3, 274–295 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .

          H. R. Pruppacher, J. D. Klett and P. K. Wang, Microphysics of clouds and precipitation, Kluwer Academic Publishers,  1998 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, additional figures and discussions. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc05165kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for the preparation of the nanosheet arrays (NSAs). (b and c) Surface and cross-sectional SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx nanostructures grown from a PbAc2 thin film in a CH3NH3I1−xClx/isopropanol solution. (d) Corresponding TEM image and selected-area electron diffraction pattern (inset) along the [001] zone axis (ZA) and (e) high-resolution TEM image with the associated fast Fourier transform (inset).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the sensor structure. (b) Schematic illustration of the system for testing the sensor device. (c) I–V curves of the perovskite nanosheet array humidity sensor (PNSAHS) in atmospheres with various RHs from low humidity (30% RH) to 90% RH at 27 °C. (d) The average resistance of the PNSAHS (black line) and the resistance response sensitivity, which is defined by R30%RH/R (blue line), in the various RH conditions. (e) A resistance hysteresis loop of the PNPAHS. (f) Real-time current response properties of the PNSAHS in different RH (35–65%) gases at 27 °C.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–d) Calculated structures of four unit cells of CH3NH3PbCl3 with 0, 1, 2 and 4 adsorbed water molecules, respectively. (e) DFT calculated differential charge distribution of the structure with an absorbed water molecule. (f) Calculated density of states of the structures containing different contents of water molecules.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Utraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra (inset: the high resolved low binding energy region) and (b) energy level diagrams of as-grown CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and a schematic illustration of the influence of a water molecule.	 
CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8 + xH2O ↔ CH3NH3PbI0.2Cl2.8·xH2O
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, additional figures and discussions. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc05165k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
