Frontiers in poly(ionic liquid)s: syntheses and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00620E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00620E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1124-1159Frontiers in poly(ionic liquid)s: syntheses and applications

        
          
            Wenjing 
            Qian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            John 
            Texter
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Feng 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *a
aJiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Polymer Design and Application, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: fyan@suda.edu.cn
bSchool of Engineering Technology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI 48197, USA
Received 
      18th August 2016
    First published on 9th February 2017AbstractWe review recent works on the synthesis and application of poly(ionic liquid)s (PILs). Novel chemical structures, different synthetic strategies and controllable morphologies are introduced as a supplement to PIL systems already reported. The primary properties determining applications, such as ionic conductivity, aqueous solubility, thermodynamic stability and electrochemical/chemical durability, are discussed. Furthermore, the near-term applications of PILs in multiple fields, such as their use in electrochemical energy materials, stimuli-responsive materials, carbon materials, and antimicrobial materials, in catalysis, in sensors, in absorption and in separation materials, as well as several special-interest applications, are described in detail. We also discuss the limitations of PIL applications, efforts to improve PIL physics, and likely future developments.
Wenjing Qian
Wenjing Qian is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Feng Yan in the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science in Soochow University. His research interests focus on the development of novel carbon materials and poly(ionic liquid) functional materials, as well as their application in supercapacitors, batteries and catalysis.
John Texter
Professor John Texter has been an editor of the Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology, the Journal of Nanoparticle Research, and Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science. He studied at Lehigh University (BSEE, PhD) and has authored 200+ publications (including five books and 46 patents) on stimuli-responsive polymers and materials and dispersion science-and-practice. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society, American Chemical Society, and Society for Imaging Science and Technology. He has chaired ACS COLL and two Gordon Research Conferences and has been visiting professor at Soochow University, Colloid and Interfaces Max Planck Institute, Kumamoto University, and Fachhochschule Esslingen.
Feng Yan
Prof. Feng Yan received his PhD degree in polymer science at Nanjing University in 2000, and was appointed as a professor at Soochow University in 2006. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis and characterization of functionalized ionic liquids, poly(ionic liquids), ionic polymers, polyelectrolytes and carbon materials for electrochemical energy harvesting/generation and antimicrobial applications. He has authored more than 120 publications. He received the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Outstanding Young Scholars in 2014.
1. Introduction
Poly(ionic liquid)s (PILs), or polymerized ionic liquids, are polyelectrolytes that comprise a polymeric backbone and an ionic liquid (IL) species in monomer repeating units. From monomers to oligomers to high molecular weight polymers, certain special properties of ILs, such as negligible vapor pressure, thermal stability, non-flammability, high ionic conductivity and a wide electrochemical stability window, are transferred to polymer chains. PILs form structures and morphologies that are not accessible using ILs. In addition, the designability of ILs and the selectivity of polymer segments enrich the properties and applications of PILs, which have aroused considerable attention in the fields of polymer and materials science.1–3
Early reviews of PILs describing systematic studies of synthetic strategies, extant PIL chemical structures, and physical properties and material applications of PILs, as well as bio-related topics, have been published by certain pioneering groups.2,4,5 For example, the synthetic aspects of PILs and the main aspects relating to their physicochemical properties (solution properties and solid state properties) have been reviewed by Mecerreyes in 2011.4 Two years later, Yuan et al. gave a comparative view of PILs and ILs.5 Examples of recent applications of PILs including in thermo-responsive materials, carbon materials, and energy harvesting/generation, as well as several biological applications, are described in this review.
However, PILs have entered a rapid growth stage, especially during the past five years. A series of PIL materials have been synthesized by introducing functional cationic and anionic IL groups (such as imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidonium, and hexafluoro-phosphate) into dynamic macromolecular polymeric architectures. These synthetic efforts have broadened PIL properties, structures, functionalities, and applications.
Here, we assemble a comprehensive review of new and significant scientific progress in PIL synthesis and applications. We describe an increasing breadth of IL monomers (ILMs) and PIL chemical structures and macromolecular motifs. Also discussed are advances in polymerization processes, the impacts of self-assembly behaviors, and the incorporation of these materials into heterogeneous polymerizations. Due to their tunable physical properties (summarized below, such as the glass transition temperature and hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity), PILs behave as distinctive polyelectrolytes that have much broader applicability in electrochemistry. This review also discusses rapid advances in the application of PILs in developing stimuli-responsive and smart materials, carbon materials, modified materials, catalytic materials, and separation/sorption materials, as well as bio-related materials.
2. Key properties of poly(ionic liquid)s
Integrating the properties of ILs pertaining to ionic conductivity, hydrophilicity, hydrophobicity, chemical durability, thermodynamic stability, and tunable construction into PILs has promoted innovative applications in diverse fields. From synthesis to application, it is essential to have a good understanding of how to design PILs to meet desired performance criteria. In the next section, energy and smart applications are discussed and some pivotal design features are examined.
2.1 Tunable ionic conductivity
Ionic conductivity is often an important property of PILs, particularly when applied to (quasi-)solid-state electrolytes for electrochemical and electromechanical applications. Unlike ILs or IL/polymer hybrids where both anions and cations are mobile, PILs are usually single-ion conductors. In these cases anions or cations are structurally constrained as part of the polymer skeleton. After polymerization, however, the ionic conductivity is generally lowered considerably in comparison to the monomeric ionic conductivity. This feature is due to both a considerable elevation of the glass transition temperature and a depletion in the number of mobile ions after covalent bonding of the component ions.6 Some related factors may affect the ionic conductivity in PILs; these include the glass transition temperature, polymer architecture, molecular weight, and chemical nature of polymer chains and IL moieties.
An exception to the above mentioned single ion conduction constraint in PILs occurs when a polymerizable IL is composed of polymerizable cations and anions, such as those introduced recently by Gu et al.7 This study also demonstrated how imidazolium stimuli-responsiveness could be used to achieve dramatic variations in proton conductivity.

2.1.1. Glass transition temperature (Tg). 
A lower Tg promotes a higher ionic conductivity.8 PILs possess weakly bound counter ions with more bulky sizes and lower mobilities than the counter ions typically found in conventional linear polyelectrolytes. PILs may display a low Tg in spite of having a very high charge density due to weak electrostatic ion pair interactions. Such effects differ from those found in more conventional ion containing polymers that typically have a high Tg because of strong electrostatic ion pair interactions. Counter ions impact the Tg of these polymers, and one way to reduce Tg is to substitute one mobile ion with another through an ion exchange process. Elabd's group replaced the BF4− anion with the bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (TFSI−) anion and discovered an enhancement in the ionic conductivity of a PIL.9 A significant reduction in Tg facilitated higher segmental motion of the polymer and higher anion mobility. Polymers with a poly(1-butyl-3-vinylbenzyl-imidazolium) (P[VBBIM]) backbone but different anions ranked according to increasing Tg adopt the following order: P[VBBIM][Tf2N] (3 °C) < P[VBBIM][Sac] (40 °C) < P[VBBIM][BF4] (78 °C) < P[VBBIM][PF6] (85 °C). The organic Tf2N− and o-benzoic sulphimide anions (Sac−) can substantially lower the Tg of the polymers because they plasticize the bulk polymer.10 Analogously, Baker et al. directly grafted TFSI anions onto a polyethylene oxide backbone through anionic ring-opening polymerization. The resulting PILs exhibit low Tg values (up to −14 °C) and moderate conductivity −∼10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C and ∼10−3 S cm−1 at 90 °C as polymer electrolytes.11
Choosing the right backbone or introducing a component with a low Tg into the polymer chain to form a copolymer also can reduce the Tg of PILs. PILs with the uniform anion BF4− but different backbones were characterized and are ranked in the following order of increasing Tg: P[BIEO][BF4] (33 °C) < P[MABIM][BF4] (54 °C) < P[VBBIM][BF4] (78 °C) < P[VBMIM][BF4] (110 °C).10 A more flexible backbone yields a lower Tg value. The loss of plasticization from a butyl group on the imidazolium units leads to a higher Tg. Elabd et al. reported the effect of random copolymerization on ionic conductivity by introducing different levels of n-hexyl methacrylate (HMA) with a low Tg. Their results indicated that the Tg of the copolymers decreased with increasing HMA content, and the ionic conductivity increased accordingly.9
Both the anionic and cationic moieties of PILs affect the PIL Tg. Recently, much research has been devoted to developing PILs with a low Tg. A PIL with a Tg of −57 °C was synthesized through the free radical polymerization of an acrylate-type ILM containing the 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonate anion and tris(2-[2-methoxyethoxy]ethyl)ammonium cation.12,13 Eventhough these PILs possessed high charge density, they exhibited a low Tg by structurally shielding coulombic interactions. Oxyethylene substituents could protect the protonated cations from coordinating with anionic sulfonates and control Tg, which facilitated a liquid flow of PIL. Quaternary ammonium cationic P[VBTA][Tf2N] was synthesized using atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), producing well-controlled molecular weights and narrow molecular weight distributions (Mw/Mn, PDI (polydispersity index) of 1.1–1.3). DSC characterization revealed that the monomer [VBTA][Tf2N] and the polymer had low Tg values of −57 °C and −43 °C, respectively.14


2.1.2. Polymer architecture. 
Most polycations with small anions possess higher conductivities than do the same polycations with more bulky counter anions, due to negative charge being more mobile with smaller anions. A comparison of various polyanions with the same pyrrolidinium cation suggests that the conductivity is determined by the delocalization of charge on the anion and its size. PILs with highly delocalized anions possess higher conductivities than polyanions with the SO3− group. Note that in a series of strongly delocalized anions, the polyelectrolyte with the smallest cyanosulfonylimide ion exhibits the highest conductivity.
The substituent position of the imidazolium cation, spacer structure and length, and anion species have obvious influences on the ionic conductivity.15,16 Both polycation-type and polyanion-type ILs having flexible spacers between the vinyl group and IL structure exhibit ionic conductivities of over 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. It is important to maintain the flexibility of the imidazolium cation in order to obtain higher ionic conductivities for IL-type polymers. Imidazolium cation mobility, translational and rotational, affects ionic conductivity.
The effects of varying the spacer length between the backbone and the imidazolium cation on the static dielectric constant have been demonstrated. The ionic conductivities increase considerably with the extension of the spacer in the side chains of both polycations and polyanions. Moving chemically bonded cations or anions farther from the polymer backbone increases their range of motion and facilitates mobile ion transport. Similarly, with increasing spacer length between ions hosted in the PIL backbone, the number density of ions decreases and conductivity decreases. Colby et al. synthesized a series of PILs based on imidazolium and methacrylates with different pendant structures containing a combination of alkylene ([CH2]n, n = 5 or 10) and oxyethylene ([OCH2CH2]n, n = 4 or 7.3) units as spacers between the imidazolium cations and the backbone. An increase in spacer length is accompanied by a marked reduction in Tg.17
Polymers are invariably and significantly more polarizable than their constituent monomers. The incorporation of imidazolium cations with longer non-ionic spacer lengths makes ions respond more easily to an applied electric field due to decreased electrostatic shielding. A significant increase in the relaxation strength of an α2 process in longer chain PILs results in a large increase in the static dielectric constant, and the static dielectric constant increases with PIL molecular volume.
Spacer structure also affects ionic conductivity. A comparative analysis of PILs with pyrrolidinium and imidazolium cations demonstrated that a transition from an ester spacer to an alkyl spacer and then to PILs with long flexible spacers containing oligo-oxyethylene fragments is accompanied by a marked increase in conductivity. IL type polymer brushes having flexible spacers between the polymerizable groups and imidazolium cations were prepared.18 Ohno and co-workers explored the effects of spacer length and the effects of different anions on conductivity in these imidazolium-containing PILs. Increasing the spacer length increased the conductivity. However, changing the anion unexpectedly also increased the conductivity. Doubling the anion size resulted in an increase in conductivity of approximately two orders of magnitude, which coincided with a 50 K lowering of Tg.
Macroscopic connectivity and morphological defects highly affect the conductivity of PIL block copolymers.19,20 A series of poly(styrene-b-4-vinylbenzylalkyl-imidazoliumbis(trifluoro-methanesulfonyl)imide) (PS-b-PVBn(alkyl)IMTFSI) (alkyl: CH3, n-C4H9, n-C6H13) were synthesized.19 Lamellar samples with similar compositions exhibit comparable conductivities.
The ionic conductivity of compositionally varied PS-b-PVBnHexIM TFSI diblocks depends nonlinearly on the PIL composition. The ionic conductivity of a single sample could be varied by more than one order of magnitude depending on the long-range ordering of the microphase morphologies. The conductivity of a lamellar sample was 5-fold less than for the corresponding homopolymer. The conductivity dropped off by an order of magnitude when comparing a lamellar sample to a lamellar + cylindrical coexistence sample (Fig. 1). The results indicate the potential for cylindrical domains to suffer from morphological defects and grain boundaries that decrease macroscopic connectivity and impede conductivity.
 Fig. 1  The effect of nanoscale morphology on the conductivity of polymerized ionic liquid block copolymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. © 2011, American Chemical Society. 


2.1.3. Molecular weight. 
PIL molecular weight can also influence the PIL Tg, viscosity, modulus, and ionic conductivity. It was found that the ionic conductivity of the imidazolium polycation decreases with increasing molecular weight and reaches a plateau at a molecular weight ≈105 Da.
Fan et al. studied a series of PILs with polymerization degrees ranging from 1 to 333 and molecular weights from 482 to 160400 Da.21 They found that the ion transport mechanism transforms from closely coupled to segmental dynamics to being strongly decoupled as the molecular weight increased. Packing frustration of the polymeric cation may facilitate the decoupling of ion transport from segmental dynamics. Tg exhibits an increase with increasing molecular weight and reaches a plateau when the degree of polymerization, n, exceeds about 70, which is similar to the behavior of regular flexible non-charged polymers. Conductivity decreases drastically with increasing molecular weight (from monomer to trimer) but displays no dramatic change in the higher molecular weight region (above ∼1000 Da).

2.2 Controlling aqueous solubility
The structures and properties of PIL functionalized materials can be easily controlled by changing the type of counter-ion.22 In particular, PILs can be tuned from being hydrophilic to hydrophobic through simple counter-ion exchange. For example, by replacing a halide with TFSI− or PF6−, PILs may be made hydrophobic and precipitated out of aqueous solution. Mecerreyes and co-workers23 examined the polymerization of ILs based on 1-vinylimidiazole halide monomers. The solubility characteristics of the resulting polymers were tuned via anion exchange with excesses of various alkali salts of BF4, PF6−, CF3SO3−, (CF3SO2)2N−, (CF3CF2SO2)2N−, and ClO4− to produce polymers that ranged from hydrophilic to hydrophobic. Gnanou and co-workers investigated the details of self-assembly in solution for PIL block copolymers and examined the effects of PIL anion responsive behavior.24 Anion exchange of Br− for Tf2N− turned the solution properties of PIL blocks from hydrophilic to hydrophobic, inducing the formation of water-soluble micellar aggregates.
Many IL units are moisture-retentive and assimilate water from the atmosphere, and their solubility in water increases with increasing temperature. Hydrogen bonding, intermolecular interactions between water hydrogens and IL heteroatom electron lone pairs, is considered an important factor in modifying miscibility. Cammarata et al. suggested that IL hydrophilicity could be employed as an indicator for the intensity of H-bonding interactions.25 It was noted that water molecules are inclined to interact with the H-2, H-4, and H-5 protons of the imidazolium ring and that is weakened.26
2.3 Thermal stability
The thermal stability of PILs is important because many application areas of polymers operate at high temperatures. The extensive structural variety of PILs contributes to a wide interval of PIL thermal stability, from 150 °C to more than 400 °C. The onset temperature of decomposition (Tonset) in TGA (thermo-gravimetric analysis) experiments is usually controlled through the nature of the PIL backbone chemical structure. Aromatic PILs usually possess a higher Tonset than PILs with aliphatic backbone structures. However, thermal stability decreases when introducing conjugation into a macrochain containing five-membered pyrrolidinium cycles, because the oxidation of double bonds is facile in the presence of oxygen. Imidazolium-based PILs have enhanced thermal stabilities due to their conjugated structures and steric hindrance; they have higher Tonset values than pyrrolidinium-based PILs. Ammonium polycations exhibit lower thermal stability relative to imidazolium and pyrrolidinium PILs, but better chemical stability than phosphonium and sulfonium. The thermal stability of a PIL increases with the length of substituent in the cation. Lengthening the alkyl spacer length between a polymer backbone chain and the ionic substituent group results in decreasing thermal stability.27
The chemical structures of anions also affect the Tonset values of PILs. A comparative analysis of the influence of counter-anions on PIL thermal stability resulted from studying poly(1-vinyl-3-ethyl-imizazolium) X− PIL. The thermal stabilities for various anions, X−, decreased in the following order: CF3SO3− > (CF3SO2)2N− > C12H25C6H4SO3− > PF6− > Br− > C16H34PO4−.28 Similar trends have been observed in other families of PILs and in similar series of ILs.28
2.4 Chemical and electrochemical stability
It has been recognized that PILs are resistant to chemical and electrochemical degradation. Nevertheless, side reactions such as structural rearrangement or degradation might occur under extreme circumstances in a particular device or reaction. Such effects must be studied in practical applications. For example, the hydroxide anion in PILs can give rise to chemical instability because of its highly nucleophilic nature. At highly alkaline concentrations and high temperatures, covalently connected cations in anion exchange membranes are prone to degradation through OH− attack. Relative to ammonium and phosphonium cations, C2- or N3-substituents highly affect the chemical stability of imidazolium cations under alkaline conditions.29
The electrochemical-stability windows of ILs are in the range of 2.5 to 5.0 V. Similar to ILs, the electrochemical-stability windows of PILs vary widely, depending on the particular PIL cation–anion pair. PIL electrochemical stability (up to 5 V with respect to Li/Li+) does not rank below structurally similar ILs and, in some cases, it even surpasses them. Pyrrolidonium-based PILs have been reported to have electrochemical stabilities superior to imidazolium-based PILs.30 Pyrrolidinium cations also present much wider cathodic decomposition potentials compared to non-cyclic and unsaturated cyclic quaternary ammonium cations.31
3. Synthesis of poly(ionic liquid)s
The diverse applications of PILs, in polymer electrolytes, electrochemical devices, smart materials, catalyst supports, the construction of porous polymers, and antibacterial materials, require different PIL structures and properties. Standard synthetic routes to PILs rely on fundamental strategies: (1) direct sequential chain growth polymerization of ILs with and without non-ionic monomers; (2) step growth polymerization of ILMs; and (3) post-modification of polymer chains with ILMs.
3.1 Free radical polymerization
Conventional free radical polymerization is a key and common polymerization technique for obtaining PIL polymers and material composites. This practical method for high volume polymerization is amenable to the incorporation of many functional groups and exhibits high tolerance to reaction mixture impurities. A very wide swath of standard polymerization approaches have been applied to making PIL and PIL-based advanced materials.

3.1.1. Miniemulsion polymerization. 
Minami and Zetterlund et al. reported the preparation of polymer nanoparticles (NPs) 300–500 nm in diameter containing rGO32 (reduced graphene oxide; GO, rGO and G incorporation in miniemulsions and other polymers has been recently reviewed33) nanosheets within their interior through free radical polymerization in an aqueous miniemulsion. Ethylmethacrylate (EMA) and an ILM, 1-vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide ([VEIM][TFSA]) stabilized rGO within the monomer droplets, presumably through π–π interactions between rGO and the imidazolium ring of [VEIM][TFSA] (Fig. 2). The addition of a small amount of the P[VEIM][TFSA] homopolymer contributed to markedly improved rGO stability, and enabled the preparation of polymer NPs comprising higher amounts of EMA.
 Fig. 2  A schematic diagram of the aqueous miniemulsion polymerization of EMA/[VEIM][TFSA]/rGO NPs stabilized using Tween 80. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Polymeric NPs containing rGO nanosheets with lateral dimensions of approximately 27 nm within the particle interior were synthesized through the aqueous miniemulsion radical polymerization of methyl methacrylate (MMA), employing a PIL as a stabilizer to decentralize the rGO in the monomer phase.34 A PIL block copolymer of the ILM 1-(2-methacryloyloxyethyl)-3-butylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide ([MBIM][TFSA]) and MMA helped stabilize rGO in the MMA monomer droplets; the imidazolium groups in the IL units provided adsorption sites on rGO through π–π overlap with the extended π system on the rGO surface. The authors showed that rGO dispersibility in the vinyl monomer utilizing the PIL block copolymer was superior to using a random statistical copolymer or a PIL homopolymer.


3.1.2. Emulsion polymerization. 
Leiza et al. employed ILMs as surfmers (reactive surfactant monomers) in the emulsion polymerization of MMA and n-butyl acrylate.35 Poly(MMA-co-butyl acrylate) latexes, particle powders, and coatings were synthesized through emulsion polymerization with the introduction of only 1 wbm% (weight based on monomers) of magnetic ILM (anion exchange of 1-vinyl-3-dodecyl-imidazolium bromide with FeCl3, CoCl2, and MnCl2). These latexes possessed better stability than those obtained through incorporating magnetic anions by anionic exchange. Powders derived from these latexes showed paramagnetic behavior, with weak antiferromagnetic interactions between adjacent metal ions, and responded to a magnetic field because some of the counter anions were paramagnetic. Coatings of these latexes presented new magnetic properties, which were suitable for preparing optically transparent microwave absorbing materials. Methods for incorporating magnetic anions into IL surfactants have been pioneered by Eastoe and co-workers,36,37 and exciting new applications of such monomers in PILs can be envisioned (see the Summary section).


3.1.3. Microemulsion polymerization. 
Microemulsions are a class of optically isotropic, transparent and thermodynamically stable solutions containing two immiscible liquids (usually water and oil), co-solubilized by a third component, typically a surfactant, and often a fourth component, often called a co-surfactant. Such solutions are homogeneous and nearly isotropic on the scale of the wavelengths of light, and heterogeneous on molecular and supramolecular length scales. Microemulsion polymerization is either a special case of solution polymerization or of dispersion polymerization. When the resulting PIL is soluble in the solvents remaining, it is a type of solution polymerization. When the resulting PIL is not soluble in the solvents remaining behind, it is a special case of dispersion polymerization.38,39
Nanostructured polymers and polymer latexes can be prepared in microemulsions through polymerization when one or more monomers are present. Often an oil component that is polymerizable is incorporated, such as common acrylate and methacrylate monomers. Microemulsion polymerization involving ILs has been reviewed by Qiu and Texter,40,41 and more recently interest has been focused on incorporating IL surfmers and other ILMs.
Texter and Yan initiated the use of ILMs as surfmers in microemulsion polymerization; they copolymerized MMA and an acrylate imidazolium bromide connected by an undecyl linker in an aqueous microemulsion.42 The incorporation of room temperature ILs (RTILs) or surfactant ILs in micellar solutions and microemulsions has been extensively studied. Compared with water/oil microemulsions, IL based microemulsions could overcome many solubility limitations of ILs in polar solvents, and provide hydrophilic or hydrophobic nanosized heterogeneous environments for reaction media, separation and extraction.40 On the other hand, it has also been demonstrated that IL type surfactants, especially alkylimidazolium based IL surfactants, can form supramolecular aggregates in ILs. Merrigan and co-workers reported that imidazolium type surfactants facilitate the emulsification of fluoroalkanes within IL-based microemulsions.43
Vancso and co-workers reported cross-linkable, redox-responsive poly(ferrocenylsilane)-based (PFS) PILs composed of PFS chains and vinyl-imidazolium pendant groups.44 They obtained self-cross-linked PFS–PILs that formed nanogels at low concentrations, and formed macroscopic hydrogels at higher concentrations. Moreover, these redox-responsive PILs were demonstrated to be efficient dispersants in microemulsion polymerization because PFS–PILs possess charged, hydrophilic imidazolium chloride units and a hydrophobic main chain. The polymerization of MMA in an oil/water microemulsion was stabilized using PFS–PILs and yielded PMMA NPs 45 ± 5 nm in diameter.
England et al. followed the early work of Yan and Texter in developing PIL nanolatexes (nanogels) synthesized through microemulsion polymerization.45 This work was significant for several reasons. First, these new nanogel particles represented for the first time that microemulsion nanostructure was preserved upon thermally initiated polymerization. This preservation was proven using SANS (small angle neutron scattering),46 and this was the first time such preservation was achieved without using UV-driven polymerization, as had been done by Gan.47 Second, these nanolatexes were shown to exhibit a Hofmeister series in destabilization.45,48 Third, these nanolatexes are the first known examples of the osmotic spheres predicted by Pincus.49 Fourth, because of their aqueous compatibility and affinity for many particle and nanoparticle surfaces, they have been used to prepare the most concentrated carbon nanotube dispersions and graphene dispersions reported to date.50–52
Yan et al. described the synthesis of N-(4-butyl-(1-methylimidazole))pyrrole bromide (Py-Br), which incorporates an imidazolium IL moiety.53 The microemulsion polymerization of Py-Br in water/oil (w/o) microemulsions produced PPy-Br NPs, which exhibited higher electrical conductivity and more enhanced thermal stability than particles obtained through polymerization in a homogeneous solution.
Cross-linked PIL microspheres with a diameter of ∼200 nm were also synthesized via polymerization in a water/oil (w/o) miniemulsion stabilized with Span-80.54 The anion exchange of PIL microspheres with the Pt precursor, followed by the reduction of the Pt ions, generated Pt NPs uniformly dispersed and strongly bound to the surface of the PIL microspheres. The resulting Pt/PIL hybrids presented high electrocatalytic activity towards the electrooxidation of methanol and could be readily recycled. A review of PIL-based particles has been provided by Yuan and co-workers.55


3.1.4. Suspension polymerization. 
Minami et al. reported the fabrication of hollow particles with a PIL shell through suspension polymerization from monomer droplets comprising a hydrophobic ILM, [2-(methacryloyloxy)-ethyl]trimethyl-ammonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide, ethylene glycol dimethacrylate, and n-butyl acetate containing dissolved poly(n-butyl methacrylate), utilizing the SaPSeP method (Fig. 3).56 Particle permeability could be controlled through varying the PIL shell properties from hydrophobic to hydrophilic using anion exchange. The encapsulation or release of particle inner materials could be controlled through the salt sensitivity, or stimuli responsiveness, of the PIL.
 Fig. 3  The synthesis route for PILs through suspension polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Sahiner et al. employed a photo-initiated inverse suspension polymerization technique for the synthesis of PIL microgels from 1,n-dialkyl-3,3′-bis-1-vinyl imidazolium bromide ILMs; ([C1,n(VIM)2][Br], n = 4, 6 and 10).57 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images showed that the sizes of the P[C6VIM][Br] microgels were in the 20–50 μm range with zeta potential values from 15–21 mV. These PIL microgels, P[C4VIM][Br], P[C6VIM][Br] and P[C10VIM][Br], were employed as catalysts for H2 generation through the methanolysis and hydrolysis of NaBH4.


3.1.5. Dispersion polymerization. 
Yuan et al. reported the facile preparation of vinylimidazolium-type PIL latexes and nanoparticles via the dispersion polymerization of ILMs in aqueous solutions.58 A series of homologous vinylimidazolium ILMs with different alkyl tail lengths (C8–C18) were synthesized via the quaternization of 1-vinylimidazole with the corresponding n-alkyl bromides. The dispersion polymerization of these monomers was conducted at a monomer concentration of 50 g L−1 in aqueous solution at 70 °C without the addition of further stabilizers. Of course the ILMs are surfactants, so additional surfactants were not needed. For ILMs with sufficiently long alkyl chains (≥C12), PIL NPs of 20–40 nm in diameter were self-stabilizing in aqueous media. In a nearly identical procedure, the preparation of cross-linked PIL NPs was performed using 10 mol% of a divinylimidazolium-based cross-linker. The cross-linked PIL NPs obtained could be transferred into organic solvents, such as polar dimethyl formamide (DMF) and nonpolar toluene, after anion exchange with LiTFSI. This dispersion polymerization potentially enables the large scale synthesis of PIL NPs in both aqueous and organic solutions. The applications of this unique type of organic NPs are expectedly broad; e.g., the particles are useful as powerful binders and dispersants for coatings and as colloidal templates.


3.1.6. Ring opening metathesis polymerization. 
Ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) has recently been used by Gin and co-workers for the synthesis of norbornene and alkylimidazolium-based PIL block copolymers with the aid of a Grubbs’ first generation catalyst.59 Further research from this group yielded the first ABC PIL triblock copolymers, based on norbornene backbones, with alternating hydrophobic–ionic–hydrophilic substituents.60 Later, Nishide and co-workers used ROMP and a Grubbs’ third generation catalyst to yield a norbornene-based PIL block copolymer with a redox-active block and an ethylimidazolium containing PIL block.61

3.2 Living free radical polymerization
In order to optimize the performances of PIL polymer materials, many efforts have been devoted to preparing PIL chains with predetermined molecular weights, narrow molecular weight distributions and ordered morphologies/architectures. Access to such tailor-made PILs has prominently benefited from controlled radical polymerization techniques.
Recently, various controlled polymerization techniques, such as ATRP, addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP), cobalt-mediated radical polymerization (CMRP), and organotellurium-mediated living radical polymerization (TERP), have been explored to polymerize ILMs. Most of these synthetic methods yield PILs with uniform polymerization degrees and respectably narrow molecular weight distributions.
1,2,3-Triazolium-based ionenes, having triethylene glycol (TEG) repeating units, were polymerized and examined to better understand associated structure–property relationships. 1,2,3-Triazolium-based ionenes were obtained through the quaternization of a parent poly(1,2,3-triazole) obtained from the copper(I)-catalyzed azide/alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) polyaddition of TEG-based α-azide–ω-alkyne monomers of α-azide to ω-alkyne. Tuning anions (bromide, iodide, tetrafluoroborate, hexafluorophosphate, or TFSI−), chemical structures, and pendant substituents (benzyl, methyl, or n-butyl) were studied. The effects of these structural parameters on properties such as ionic conductivity and thermal stability were examined; these properties are considered crucial for many applications of PILs.62
Detrembleur and co-workers provided the first report of well-defined PILs synthesized through controlled radical polymerization in water.63 Controlled polymerizations of hydrophilic N-vinyl-3-alkylimidazolium salts were conducted at moderate temperatures in the presence of an alkyl–cobalt(III) complex, employed as a mono-component initiator and mediating agent. The resulting PILs had excellent monodispersity at 30 °C, even after very high monomer conversion. This route provides pathways to the tailored synthesis of hydrophilic PILs under mild experimental conditions in water. Bernard et al. reported the aqueous RAFT polymerization of hydrophilic monodisperse imidazolium-based PILs.64 Homopolymers with degrees of polymerization up to 300 and a PDI below 1.20 were obtained using trithiocarbonate as the chain transfer agent. The resulting PIL macro-RAFT agents were exploited to polymerize 2-vinylpyridine in water and generate PIL-based NPs with morphologies evolving from spheres to worms and vesicles, according to the principles of polymerization-induced self-assembly (PISA).65–67

3.2.1. Atom transfer radical polymerization. 
The ATRP of ILMs was first applied to make triblock copolymers using a telechelic centre block of poly(propylene oxide) with an approximate molecular weight of about 3.5 kDa. The first example to be reported68 had end blocks of 1-methyl-3-(11-acryloxyundecyl)-imidazolium bromide and a molecular weight of about 14.5 kDa. This material exhibited interesting thermoreversible sol–gel behaviour, making it the first thermoreversible PIL to be reported, and it had a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) boundary in its aqueous two component phase diagram. It also was found to be an excellent dispersant stabilizer for nanocarbons and other materials, which is discussed at the end of this review.
Well-defined PILs were synthesized by Matyjaszewski et al. via activators regenerated through electron transfer atom transfer radical polymerization (ARGET ATRP).69 This method was utilized to synthesize PILs with well-controlled molecular weights and narrow PDIs (1.1–1.3) in the presence of ppm levels of copper catalyst. The ILM, 1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide [VBBIM][Tf2N], was polymerized with a tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPMA) ligand and ppm levels of copper catalyst. A high degree of chain-end functionality in the PILs synthesized using ARGET ATRP was achieved through the periodic addition of the reducing agent. Both AB and ABA type PIL block copolymers were synthesized using ILMs/neutral macro-initiators or PIL macroinitiators/neutral monomers through ARGET ATRP. The significantly reduced concentration of copper catalyst in the ARGET ATRP system minimized the influence of ionic impurities on the resulting PILs, which is important for preparing high purity PILs and their block copolymers with various structures. This approach could be easily extended to synthesize other PILs using ARGET ATRP with various ILMs, such as acrylate/methacrylate-based ILMs or ILMs with different cations and anions. Compared to normal ATRP conditions, which employ a high concentration of copper catalyst, ARGET ATRP with a very low concentration of copper greatly simplifies the post-polymerization purification processing and prevents residual ionic impurities having a significant effect on the structures and properties of the resulting PILs.
A straightforward and expeditious approach for the preparation of 1,2,3-triazolium-based PILs based on the solvent- and catalyst-free polyaddition of an α-azide–ω-alkyne monomer in the presence of methyl iodide or N-methyl bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide alkylating agents was reported.70 Poly(1,2,3-triazole)s generated in bulk or via thermal azide–alkyne cycloaddition are quaternized in situ to afford 1,2,3-triazolium-based PILs composed of 1,3,4- and 1,3,5-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazolium units. The physical and ion conducting properties of the PILs obtained were compared with PILs composed solely of 1,3,4-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazolium units derived through a multistep approach involving CuAAC polyaddition, the quaternization of 1,2,3-triazole groups, and anion metathesis. PILs obtained via this monotopic approach displayed thermal stabilities and ionic conductivities comparable to their pure regioisomeric analogues.70
Surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP) to prepare grafted PILs on nanosilica was reported by Patten et al.71 Such a silica templating method provides a good strategy for the formation of core–shell microspheres with a controllable shell layer. Luo et al. designed and synthesized organic–inorganic core–shell SiO2–poly(p-vinylbenzyl)trimethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (SiO2–P[VBTMA][BF4]) NPs via SI-ATRP,72 which combines strength and modulus properties and the ion conducting properties with synergistic effects. [VBTMA][BF4] monomers were first grafted onto the nanosilica particles, which have a small size and high specific surface area, and provide rigid support. These PILs showed good thermal stability and room temperature conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1, which is much higher than that of the pure PILs. This SI-ATRP approach could provide a versatile route to tuning the ionic conductivity of hybrid NPs through varying the chain lengths of the grafted polymers.72
Compared with synthetic polymers, using biopolymers as backbones for PILs is anticipated to provide advantages of natural abundance, low cost, nontoxicity, biocompatibility and biodegradability. The preparation of biopolymer-based PILs depends a lot on chemical reactions involving hydroxyl groups. Cellulosic PILs were prepared via the nucleophilic substitution of chlorinated cellulose by 1-methyl-imidazole, and their structures and thermal properties have been fully characterized. These cellulosic PILs were found to be green, efficient and recyclable catalysts for the cycloaddition of CO2 to epoxides under solvent-free conditions.73


3.2.2. Cobalt controlled living polymerization of diblock copolymers. 
CMRP was selected for use in polymerization due to its high efficiency in controlling the radical polymerization of non-conjugated vinyl monomers such as vinyl esters under mild experimental conditions. A vinyl ester monomer carrying a pendant 1,2,3-triazole group is synthesized in two steps and polymerized using CMRP. Subsequent alkylation with N-methyl bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide affords the corresponding poly(vinyl ester 1,2,3-triazolium). This unprecedented example of a poly(vinyl ester IL) exhibits an ion conductivity of 9.2 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 30 °C.74
Taton and co-workers introduced a new family of PIL block copolymers based on poly(N-vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium bromide) (P[VEtIM][Br]) and poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) using sequential CMRP.75 In addition to obtaining PVAc-b-PVEtIMBr diblock copolymers, the synthesis of PVAc-b-PVEtIMBr-b-PVAc triblock copolymers was achieved through the radical coupling of parent diblocks in the presence of the coupling agent isoprene. Taton and co-workers also produced a similar PIL diblock copolymer with poly(N-vinyl-3-butyl-imidazoliumbromide) (P[VBIM][Br]) as the PIL, using a commercially available coupling agent.76
Detrembleur et al. prepared amphiphilic double PIL block copolymers via the cobalt-mediated radical polymerization induced self-assembly (CMR-PISA) in water of N-vinyl imidazolium monomers carrying distinct alkyl chains (Fig. 4).77 The CMRP of N-vinyl-3-ethyl imidazolium bromide ([VEtIM][Br]) was first done to high conversion, employing an alkyl bis(acetylacetonate) cobalt(III) adduct as the initiator. The resulting hydrophilic P[VEtIM][Br] was employed as a macroinitiator for the CMR-PISA of N-vinyl-3-octyl imidazolium bromide ([VOcIM][Br]). The self-assembly of this amphiphilic poly(VEtIMBr-b-VOcIMBr) block copolymer in water formed polymer NPs with a hydrophilic P[VEtIM][Br] corona and a hydrophobic P[VOcIM][Br] core. The morphologies, sizes, and surface charges were adjusted to different values through the precise control of the initial reaction parameters and the ILM type, which has an important impact for potential uses, such as in sustainable antimicrobial coatings, nanoreactors for waterborne catalysis, and novel ionic conductive materials for battery applications.
 Fig. 4  General strategy for amphiphilic double PIL block copolymer synthesis through cobalt-mediated radical polymerization induced self-assembly in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. © 2016, Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.3. RAFT controlled living polymerization of diblock copolymers. 
Elabd et al. synthesized a PIL diblock copolymer, poly(MMA-b-MUBIM-HCO3), using an ILM, (1-[(2-methacryloyloxy)undecyl]-3-butylimidazoliumbicarbonate) (MUBIM-HCO3), and MMA, through anion exchange from a precursor bromide conducting PIL block copolymer, poly(MMA-b-MUBIM-Br).78 This ion exchange process from the bromide to bicarbonate form contributed to a mildly lower Tg for the PIL block and a slightly higher hydration number at all humidities studied, along with a high bicarbonate conductivity of 14.8 mS cm−1 at 60 °C and 95% relative humidity (rh).
PIL copolymers with both mobile cations and mobile anions are promising materials to explore for applications such as use in solid-state capacitors, electrodialysis, drug delivery, and bipolar membranes. Meek et al. reported the synthesis of a sulfonated PIL diblock copolymer, poly(SS-Li-b-AEBIM-TFSI), comprising both sulfonated blocks of sulfonated styrene (SS) and PIL blocks of 1-[(2-acryloyloxy)ethyl]-3-butylimidazolium (AEBIM) with mobilizable cations of lithium (Li+) and anions of TFSI−.79 Chemical analysis showed 100 mol% post-functionalization with BIM+, referring to the PIL blocks, and 15 mol% sulfonation with SO3−, referring to the styrene blocks. The sulfonated PIL copolymer, cast with a solution of 1 M LiTFSI/EMIM-TFSI, presented a high anhydrous ionic conductivity of more than 1.5 mS cm−1 at 70 °C and a weakly microphase-separated morphology with long-range order, which was more than two orders of magnitude higher than the non-sulfonated PIL block copolymer.
Texter et al. derived a new ILM, IL-AMPS, having polymerizable cations and anions – 1-methyl-3-[11-(acryloyloxy)undecyl] imidazolium (IL) and 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonate (AMPS).7 This ILM melts at about 27 °C and has a Tg transition at about −45 °C. UV irradiation produces a highly electrostatically crosslinked resin that is swellable in water and in other polar solvents. An important property for fuel cell and PEM applications is that this resin does not become hydrophobic on dehydration. When dry, poly(IL-AMPS) exhibits a glass transition at about 57 °C, and this transition temperature can be tuned through varying the water content. When polymerized the resulting resin has no mobile ions, but when loaded with various salts, ionic conductivity is obtained. Loading with an equivalent of HPF6 yielded proton conductivity more facilely than in Nafion at low relative humidity. A proton conductivity of about 10 mS cm−1 was obtained at 75% rh at 100 °C. This polymer also exhibits interesting dielectric permittivity properties and may be suitable for ultracapacitor applications.
Zhang et al. synthesized a thermo-responsive PIL of poly[1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-methylimidozoliumtetrafluoroborate]trithio-carbonate (P[VBMI][BF4]-TTC) via solution RAFT polymerization, which presented a soluble-to-insoluble phase transition in a methanol/water mixture at the upper critical solution temperature (UCST). The obtained P[VBMI][BF4]-TTC was used as a macro-RAFT agent to mediate RAFT polymerization under dispersion conditions to afford thermo-responsive diblock copolymer NPs of poly[1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-methylimidozolium tetrafluoroborate]-b-polystyrene (P[VBMI][BF4]-b-PS). Controllable solution RAFT polymerization was obtained as indicated through the linearly increasing polymer molecular weight with monomer conversion and the narrow molecular weight distribution. P[VBMI][BF4]-TTC macro-RAFT agent mediated dispersion polymerization afforded P[VBMI][BF4]-b-PS NPs and the size was uncorrelated with the polymerization degree of the P[VBMI][BF4] block. The polymerization degree, the polymer concentration and the water content of the methanol/water mixture solvent were found to be correlated with the UCST of the PIL.80

3.3 Microwave-assisted and electron beam-assisted chemistry
Microwave-assisted synthesis, compared with conventional techniques, can not only shorten reaction times from hours to minutes but can also reduce side reactions, increase yields, and improve reproducibility.81,82 It also arouses the interest of polymer chemists and has broad applications in polymer synthesis including ring opening polymerization (ROP), radical polymerization, and step-growth or condensation polymerization. Most of these microwave-assisted syntheses of polymers are bulk polymerizations, conducted without solvent.
In order to acquire well-defined PILs, physical technology can be introduced during the synthesis. For example, using microwave irradiation as a heat source can induce fast and effective homogeneous heating of monomers, which favors the homogeneous formation of nucleating polymer chains, resulting in fewer side reactions.83 Hydrophobic PIL particles synthesized via a microwave-assisted dispersion polymerization method have been reported by Yin's group.84 Their PIL particles were uniform microspheres with a narrow size distribution of ∼1.8 μm and a low density of ∼1.62 g cm−3.
Yang et al. reported PIL coated magnetic NPs, Fe3O4@SiO2@PIL (Tf2N), used for sulfonylurea herbicide (SUH) affinity-binding and determination in soil samples.86 The PIL-modified magnetic NPs had a large effective contact area and exhibited strong binding affinity with the target compounds. Such particles provided the rapid separation of SUHs from sample suspensions with the aid of an external magnetic field.
Ionizing radiation, such as electron beams, generates some reactive species called “spurs” where excitation and ionization occur.87 The reactive species trigger several chemical reactions, such as cross-linking effects. Kuwabata et al. reported a focused ion beam (FIB) method to fabricate micro/nano-sized polymer structures through etching the desired 3D structures on an ILM, 1-allyl-3-ethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-amide ([AllylEtIM][Tf2N]), film.88 Polymerization at the IL/vacuum interface and the reorganization of the liquid ILM due to capillarity raised the reaction position for beam-assisted polymerization. This effect resulted in PIL structures growing higher than the original thickness of the ILM coated layer.
Kuwabata et al. also fabricated microsized and nanosized polymers from an RTIL on a Si substrate via electron beam (EB) assisted polymerization (Fig. 5).85 Various 3D micro/nano-polymer structures with high aspect ratios of up to 5 and a resolution of sub-100 nm were prepared. The PIL structure shapes differed from those obtained using the FIB method88 discussed above. This technology provides a facile preparation procedure for some microstructures and nanostructures.85
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the polymerization of RTILs via electron beam irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Cationic polymerization
Controlled living cationic polymerization, which was discovered by the Higashimura and Kennedy groups in the 1980s,89,90 represents an attractive technique for the synthesis of well-defined polymers. Controlled living cationic polymerization has usually been achieved using an initiator and co-initiator system in an organic solvent under anhydrous conditions. High polarity organic solvents enhance the control of cationic polymerization, because the equilibrium between active and dormant species can be more easily maintained. However, polar solvents, especially chlorinated solvents, can cause environmental pollution due to their toxic, volatile and corrosive nature. In addition, Lewis acid catalyst separation from reaction products is difficult.
The cationic polymerization of isobutyl vinyl ether (IBVE) in an IL, 1-octyl-3-methylimidazoliumtetrafluoroborate ([OMIM][BF4]), was conducted at 0 °C.91 A variety of co-initiators were employed in conjunction with the IBVE–HCl adduct acting as a cationogen. Compared with polymerization in normal organic solvents, the cationic polymerization of IBVE in [OMIM][BF4] proceeded in a milder exothermic manner, yielding polymers with higher molecular weights and yielding higher monomer conversions. Although this polymerization in [OMIM][BF4] could not be controlled due to β-proton elimination, the monomer addition experiments confirmed the existence of long-lived species. Introducing a small amount of 2,6-di-tert-butylpyridine (DTBP) into the system may lead to more controlled polymerization.
3.5 Polymer-analogous reactions
Polymer-analogous reactions or post-polymerization modifications, in which chemical transformations of the monomer units (groups) of a given polymer are realized without any change in polymerization degree, have not been extensively employed in PIL syntheses. There may be difficulties in achieving complete conversion and in the removal of unreacted modifiers. However, the structures and molar masses of pre-polymers are usually easier to modify than those of PILs and, nevertheless, polymer analogous reactions offer possibilities for forming reactive PILs, wherein the reactive group number density can be tuned by degree of conversion.
Bohme took up this idea to synthesize PILs via the polymer analogous conversion of alternating maleic anhydride copolymers with 1-(3-aminopropyl)imidazole and the subsequent quaternization of the imidazole moieties (Fig. 6). The co-conversion of these polymers with aliphatic amines and optional partial quaternization allows for the tailoring of material properties. For example, aliphatic substituents with different lengths and substitution degree markedly influence thermal behaviors and solubilities. Significantly, this approach provides polymers with reactive anhydride or imidazole groups, and further modification reactions are available for the post-cross-linking or compatibilization of polymer blends and composites. For example, a reactive mixture with bromobutyl rubber (BIIR) was prepared and showed distinct self-healing effects.92
 Fig. 6  The synthesis of PILs via the polymer analogous conversion of poly(butadiene-alt-maleic anhydride) through interchain quaternization with pendant imidazole groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. © 2016, Elsevier. 
Satoh et al. synthesized hyperbranched polyethers with terminal hydroxyl groups based on glycidol and 3-ethyl-3-hydroxymethyl oxetane.93 Hyperbranched PILs with terminal imidazolium groups were obtained through employing polymer-analogous reactions of hyperbranched polyethers with terminal hydroxyl groups. The reaction process involved the substitution of a hydroxyl group by a tosyloxy group and subsequent quaternization with 1-alkylimidazole. The hyperbranched PILs possess LCST transitions in organic media, which can be used as thermosensitive separation agents and thermosensitive reaction promoters or inhibitors.
4. Morphologies and structures of PILs
4.1 Self-assembly of PILs
As discussed in the section Controlling aqueous solubility, PILs based on imidazolium groups are very sensitive to their counter ions, and the solubility and solution self-assembly of polymers containing such PIL segments can be transformed through the exchange of counter ions.
The self-assembly behaviors of amphiphilic random co-PILs, PIL-[Cl]x[PF6]y, in aqueous solution have been investigated by Yan's group.94 The partial anion-exchange of PIL-[Cl] homopolymers with PF6− anions yielded amphiphilic random copolymers. These amphiphilic copolymers are able to self-assemble in aqueous solution to form polymeric NPs (or vesicles) at room temperature. The size of the PIL-[Cl]x[PF6]y spherical micelles increased dramatically with a widening molecular weight distribution, while the anions and molecular weight have little effect on the micelle size. Furthermore, amphiphilic copolymers functionalized with vinylimidazole groups self-assembled into colloidosomes in aqueous solution, probably due to the vinylimidazole groups among and between the first-formed vesicles, and were further polymerized during the self-assembly process.
The self-assembly of PILs has received special interest due to their potential application as nanostructured functional materials. Yuan et al. have introduced a facile method to prepare PIL NPs via the dispersion polymerization of vinylimidazolium-type ILMs with long alkyl chains. The polymerization proceeded over 24 h at a monomer concentration of 50 g L−1 in aqueous solution at 70 °C, using the water-soluble nonionic initiator 2,2′-azobis[2-methyl-N-(2-hydroxyethyl)propionamide] (VA86). No externally added stabilizer was needed since these ILMs are surfactants.95,96 It was assumed, although not experimentally proven, that the as-formed PIL NPs were most likely set up in organized mesophases made up from separated nanodomains of charged IL moieties and long hydrophobic alkyl chains. This structure favors lamellar structures, as were observed, as most single-tail surfactants crystallize in lamellar packing motifs when they crystallize.
Yuan et al. reported the synthesis of PIL NPs with highly ordered and tunable concentric multi- or uni-lamellar inner structures, which formed spontaneously throughout polymerization in a single step. This cooperative process is representative of the most common assembly motifs seen in the single-tail surfactants.
Texter et al. demonstrated the reversible condensation of particles from di-stimuli responsive diblocks to produce poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) core NPs on heating, or poly(ILBr) core NPs on the addition of excess bromide.97 Weber et al. synthesized poly(styrene-b-4-vinylbenzylalkyl-imidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) (PS-b-PVBn-(alkyl)IMTFSI) diblock copolymers with varying compositions via the post-polymerization functionalization of PS-b-PVBCl with homologous N-alkylimidazoles (alkyl = CH3, n-C4H9, and n-C6H13).19 The block copolymer microphases separate into cylinders, lamellae, or the coexistence of cylinders + lamellae with varying degrees of long-range order depending on their composition and the film-preparation technique (solvent-casting vs. melt-pressing).

4.1.1. Colloids and core/shell structured particles. 
Materials and devices derived from particulate opaline materials have been reviewed.98 Anion sensors based on the combination of such structures and PILs have been reported by Li and co-workers.99 Photonic crystals, using 260 nm diameter silica beads, had their interstices infused with a solution of 1-methyl-3-[6-hexyl]-imidazolium bromide (ILM), MMA, and EGDMA (ethylene glycol dimethacrylate; cross-linker). These monomers were polymerized, followed by the dissolution of the silica template. The stimuli-responsiveness of the imidazolium bromide moiety, on interactions with various anions, produced expansions and contractions in this inverse opaline structure, modifying the apparent color.
PIL-inverse opaline structures were fabricated with silica-based photonic crystals via droplet-based microfluidic synthesis. Here, the formation of photonic crystals occurs within droplets formed microfluidically as the solvent phase evaporates or is washed away. Imidazolium-based ILMs are then infused into the photonic microsphere interstices; this infusion is driven by capillary forces. After UV-initiated polymerization, the silica particles are dissolved using aqueous HF. These beads are stimuli-responsive to various ions in the same way as the films discussed in their earlier film work.99 These PIL photonic beads with various anions were also shown to be sensitive to solvents.100
The synthesis of poly(vinyl acetate)-b-poly(N-vinyl-3-butyl-imidazoliumbromide) was achieved via sequential CMRP, using bis(acetylacetonato)cobalt(II) and a radical source. This PIL block copolymer self-assembles into aggregated core–shell particles in THF, whereas polymeric vesicles are observed in water. Anion exchange yields a PIL block copolymer with bis(trifluorosulfonyl)imide (Tf2N−) anions, which also gives an ordered lamellar phase in bulk samples. Both di- and tri-block PIL block copolymer analogues previously reported also show a lamellar phase with very similar behavior.101 Li et al. prepared double hydrophilic IL block copolymers, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-block-poly[1-methyl-3-(2-methacryloyloxy propylimidazoliumbromine)] ((PNIPAM-b-PMMPIMBr)), via a two-step RAFT process.102 Through the induction of the anion (CF3SO2)2N−, the self-assembly of PNIPAM-b-PMMPIMBr occurred to form a core–shell structure containing a core with hydrophilic PMMPIM–(CF3SO2)2N− surrounded by a shell of PNIPAM. Upon raising the temperature, PNIPAM-b-PMMPIMBr formed micelles composed of a PNIPAM core and PMMPIMBr shell.
“Liquid marbles” are usually defined as liquid (generally water) droplets covered with an exterior shell of a hydrophobic powder.103,104 The use of polymer powders obtained from polymer latexes as stabilizers of “liquid marbles” is particularly attractive. Polymer latexes are versatile precursors of microparticulate powders with composition and surface functionality that can be easily tuned. The resulting PILs show hydrophobic character and tailored wettability with water depending on the counter-anion. PILs with a TFSI− counter-anion can be used for the preparation of superhydrophobic coatings.105 Mecerreyes et al. prepared individual “liquid marbles” through the encapsulation of water droplets using flocculated polymer latexes stabilized with hydrophobic PIL powders.106 Very stable “liquid marbles” were prepared through gently shaking water droplets of different volumes onto such hydrophobic powders. The morphologies and stabilities of these liquid marbles were characterized using optical and confocal microscopy.
PILs that self-assemble in solution can act as soft templates for generating metal NPs. Prechtl and his group synthesized stable ruthenium and nickel NPs in the absence of a classical reducing agent in an imidazolium IL.108 Thiot and his team developed a method for preparing palladium nanoparticles (Pd-NPs) using PIL gels of a Merrifield type resin.109 Mandal et al. reported the synthesis of nanostructured crosslinked cationic poly(acrylamide) (PAAm) beads via dispersion polymerization with a vinylimidazolium-based ILM as the cross-linker and poly(vinyl methyl ether) (PVME) as the surface stabilizer.110 Polymeric nanosized beads were obtained and were well dispersed in water; the size could be adjusted by varying the amounts of cross-linker and surface stabilizing polymer PVME used. Anion exchange using [PdCl4]2− was done to prepare IL cross-linked PAAm precursor beads for the generation of Pd-NPs. Pd-NPs were produced inside the PAAm polymer without any conventional reducing agent.110
The precise control of the interior and outer shapes of polymer NPs has attracted broad interest in fundamental studies of particle physical properties, colloidal behavior, and applications. Realizing such control below a 50 nm scale, a size scale close to individual polymer chains, requires accurate manipulation of polymerization techniques and a judicious choice of chemical structure in monomers and polymers. Yuan et al. reported the first example of homopolymer NPs on a size scale below 50 nm with tunable shapes and highly ordered, complex internal structures, with sub-5 nm domain spacings (Fig. 7).107 This group used 1-vinyl-1,2,4-triazolium-type ILMs in a one-pot dispersion polymerization and obtained a range of PIL NPs with distinct interior patterns, from “wasp-like” to “spaghetti ball” and “onion-like” configurations. This morphological variation in particle shape and interior at this extremely small size is unusual for polymer colloids.
 Fig. 7  Representative cryo-electron microscopy images of PIL NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. © 2016, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2. Supramolecular PIL gels. 
Supramolecular structures can be prepared from self-assembly processes involving hydrogen bonding, host–guest interactions, and metal–ligand coordination, as well as ionic interactions. The latter ones, encountered in the field of electrolytes, have been widely used to create chemically and physically cross-linked structures in polymer matrices, such as alginates, halatopolymers, and a wide variety of ionomers.
Shape memory PIL gels with controllable macroscopic swelling were prepared via host–guest interactions.70 PILs with TFSI− anions were immersed in β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) aqueous solutions. Rapid swelling and shape memory behaviour were observed in this PIL gel due to a hydrophobic-to-hydrophilic transition induced by β-CD/TFSI− inclusion complex formation. However, this PIL gel swelled only slightly in the presence of water. The swelling of inclusion-sensitive polymer networks with shape memory will find applications in advanced sensor design and in biomedicine.111

4.2 Porous PILs
Porosity in polymers is a highly valued structural trait for applications such as gas storage and separation, catalysis, use in packaging materials, and in chromatography.112,113 Currently, micro- and mesoporous polymers with high specific surface areas are generating rapidly expanding interest, which can be attributed to their importance both in fundamental research and for practical applications, such as catalysis, absorption, ion-exchange, and separation. Compared with the creation of macropores, the preparation of micro- and mesoporous polyelectrolyte materials is far more difficult. A popular yet indirect approach is to chemically modify pre-synthesized nonionic porous polymers, for example, the sulfonation of mesoporous poly(divinylbenzene). Another approach is layer-by-layer assembly, which has been demonstrated to be capable of creating pores from tens of nanometers (silica template) in size to several micrometers. Therefore, porous polyelectrolytes with high specific surface areas are rarely reported. Facile and cost-effective processing approaches would be highly welcomed.
Mesoporous PILs with tunable porous structures were synthesized through the chain radical copolymerizations of imidazolium-type ILs and divinylbenzene. The meso-structures and chemical compositions of the imidazolium-type MPILs were controlled with multiple solvents used in polymerization, such as methanol (MeOH), ethanol (EtOH), acetonitrile (MeCN), MeCN–EA (EA = ethyl acetate) mixed solvent, and EtOH–EA–H2O mixed solvent. A series of 3-alkyl-1-vinylimidazolium bromide ILs with alkyl chain lengths of 4, 6, 8, 12 and 16 were used; the chain length affects pore formation.114
Porogenic solvents affect the porous character of polymeric monoliths through the solvation of polymer chains and ILMs in the reaction medium (solvent system).115 Miscible ILMs and porogenic solvents tend to promote small pores, and poorly miscible combinations promote macropore formation. ILMs are good candidates to replace volatile organic solvents as reaction media in polymerization processes. Tailorable IL structures make designing compatible IL porogens for a given ILM a possibility. Azcune et al. reported the radical polymerization of bisvinyl-ended ILs with analogous nonpolymerizable ILs, which acted as porogenic solvents and could be extracted after polymerization for reuse.116 Such porogenic solvents control monolithic porosity through polymer chain solvation in the reaction medium. ILs are ideal solvents to produce small pores due to their structural similarity to PILs. This synthetic approach is very sustainable because all reagents and solvents can be recycled.
Texter et al. presented a synthetic strategy for obtaining reversible solvent-induced porous polymers, based on the polymerization of microemulsions employing a surfactant based on a polymerizable IL.117 An IL comprising a polar imidazolium group and a hydrophobic tail was chosen as the surfactant for the microemulsion; a cross-linking side product of the surfactant synthesis provided light cross-linking.45,118 The resulting copolymer structures could be tuned between hydrogel and porous structures by exchanging the anions in the imidazolium IL moieties of the copolymer. In a more recent study, Gu and co-workers found that the time scale for anion exchange into condensed PIL stages could be in the order of weeks. Such transformations also were found to yield meso-porosity and micro-porosity.119
Soft-templating approaches using a Pluronic triblock copolymer, P123, were reported by Wang and co-authors to synthesize hierarchical imidazolium-based meso-macroporous PIL monoliths with tunable pore structures (Fig. 8).120 These pore structures can be adjusted by adjusting synthetic parameters such as IL precursor concentration and the template materials. The resulting polymeric matrices can disperse heteropolyanions through exchanging guest anions, owing to IL-like units in the mesopores. These heteropolyanion-loaded materials behave as recyclable heterogeneous catalysts with superior activity in cis-cyclooctene epoxidation with H2O2.
 Fig. 8  The synthetic process for hierarchical meso-macroporous PILs using a soft template, Pluronic P123. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yuan et al. have presented a process for making porous polyelectrolyte membranes, using a gradient in both cross-linking density and pore size along a cross-section by using a PIL.121 The pore sizes and pore size gradients of these membranes can be tuned using benzoic acid derivatives with different multivalencies, and through variations in the imidazolium/COOH molar ratio and PIL counter-anion type. Having these parameters in hand, one can design fabrication techniques for nanoporous asymmetric PIL membranes with high complexity and functionality, using an easy-to-perform synthetic protocol.121
Porous PILs also can be prepared using infiltration methods, with porous inorganic materials or nanostructured materials as hard templates, which are implemented through the in situ polymerization of ionic monomers, which infiltrate the cavities of the porous inorganics, followed by the removal of the templates to form pore structures. For example, Li et al. developed three dimensional ordered photonic IL polymer film through the polymerization of an imidazolium-based ILM, which infiltrated into the silica colloidal crystal arrays, and the removal of the silica particles via HF etching.99 This film, with a thickness of 2 mm, possesses an ordered and interconnected macroporous structure and inverse opal structure which was used for anion detection. The prepared macroporous PILs extend the functions of PILs from tunable photonic crystals and anion-directed molecular gating systems to surfaces with enhanced tunable wettability and unique stable electro-optic switching.122
4.3 Branched structural PILs
The roles of polymer architecture in self-assembly, interfacial behavior, and ionic conductivity are discussed below, along with an introduction to specific chemical protocols for synthesizing these materials. Only a few examples of well-defined star-like or bottle brush PILs can be found in the literature. Branched PILs are mostly represented by dendrimers and hyperbranched polymers. On many occasions, PILs having a relatively low molecular weight can be considered as a separate class of oligomeric compounds or oligo(ionic liquid)s (OILs).123 This combination of a dendritic structure with a modest molecular mass makes it possible to introduce a large number of terminal IL groups and maintain high mobility. Among the known representatives of this type of hyperbranched ionic structure, the vast majority incorporate cationic groups located at the periphery of branched chains.
Four-arm star block copolymers with poly(1-ethyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide) (P[VEIM][Br]) and PNIPAM segments as separated inner and outer blocks and opposite sequences were prepared by Mori et al. using RAFT polymerization.124 The thermally induced phase separation behavior and assembled structure depend on the location of the thermo-responsive segment within the arms (each block's sequence along the star arms). Star macromolecular block copolymers with inner PNIPAM segments exhibited rapid aggregation, forming large micellar clusters at temperatures above the LCST. However, star ionic copolymers with an outer thermo-responsive block presented a two-step transition into small micelles at 33 °C, followed by the formation of dehydrated clusters. This research provides a method to fine tune the stimuli-responsive phase separation behavior and assembled structures of responsive star block copolymers through modifying the ILM sequence, co-monomer composition, chain architecture and external stimuli.
PILs with well-defined architectures have shown significant potential in various fields, but establishing easy methods for their synthesis remains a challenge. Zhong et al. prepared comb-like copolymers composed of polystyrene and a PIL as the backbones and side chains, respectively, via polymerizing ILM through ATRP using poly(styrene-co-4-vinylbenzyl chloride) as a macro-initiator.125 Graft density and side chain length can be tailored through tuning the macroinitiator composition and reaction conditions. For comb-like copolymers with similar graft densities, the side chain lengths over the range of this study did not affect the Tg of the copolymers. In contrast, comb-like copolymers with high grafting densities showed higher Tg values despite having shorter side chains. Unlike Tg, the impedances of the copolymers showed a dependence on both side chain length and graft density. Both parameters aided charge transfer, resulting in better electrochemical properties. Comb-like copolymers presented a highly stable suspension of rGO in propylene carbonate and enhanced the N2/CO2 selectivity of a composite membrane compared to neat PIL.
4.4 Poly(ionic liquid) crystalline polymers
Firestone et al. reported the preparation of a liquid-crystalline IL-based interpenetrating polymer network (IPN), through sequentially photo-polymerizing a self-assembled aqueous mixture of an ILM (1-(10-(acryloyloxy)decyl)-3-methyl-imidazoliumchloride) with an acryloyl moiety at the terminus of a C10 alkyl chain of an IL cation.126 This well-blended constituent IPN adopted a lamellar structure, demonstrated using small-angle X-ray scattering. These IPN materials can absorb a weight equivalent mass of water and swelled to approximately 60 times their primitive volume, but retained their mechanical integrity to form a durable hydrogel. The same group also reported the photo-polymerization of a lyotropic mesophase via the co-assembly of an aqueous mixture containing an ILM, 3-decyl-1-vinyl-imidazoliumchloride, in a DMSO dispersion which formed a well-ordered 2D hexagonally structured network–polymer composite.127 The mesophase and composite structure presented a columnar architecture composed of amphiphilic IL cylinders comprising solvent-rich cores. These composite materials reversibly swelled in ethanol allowing structural changes and the modulation of NP internal packing.
4.5 Poly(ionic liquid) particles
Polymeric particles combine the merits of particles, such as a high surface-to-volume ratio, with the superior processability and flexible functionality of polymers. Various kinds of synthetic techniques can be used to prepare polymeric particles, such as emulsion and miniemulsion processes, suspension and dispersion polymerization, self-assembly, intramolecular cross-linking methods, etc.
Nanogels of controlled kinetic chain length were synthesized via cobalt-mediated radical crosslinking co-polymerization (CMRccP), containing a vinyl monomer and a divinyl cross-linker.128 This strategy was shown to produce neutral poly(vinyl acetate) nanogels, through the CMRccP of vinyl acetate with divinyl adipate as a cross-linker. CMRccP can be conducted either in an organic solvent (such as DMF) or in aqueous solution, demonstrating process robustness and versatility. Chain extensions of PIL nanogels were also done in water, forming core–shell structures and opening new avenues for functional nanogel design.
The synthesis of stimuli-responsive nanogels with average hydrodynamic sizes of 41 ± 15 nm was obtained via the simultaneous polymerization and crosslinking of a bio-based ILM. The resulting nanogel exhibited prolonged drug delivery of an anticancer drug, 5-fluorouracil, at pH 1.2 (stomach pH). However, no substantial drug delivery is observed at pH 5 and 7.4. Such a prolonged drug release profile makes the reported nanogel system a potential candidate for the formulation of pH-sensitive drug nanocarriers for the in vivo delivery of stomach-specific therapeutic agents.129
A novel basic PIL was synthesized via the miniemulsion polymerization of the ILM 1-ethyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide [EVIM][Br], which was crosslinked using an IL crosslinker, 1,4-butanediyl-3,3′-bis-1-vinylimidazoliumdibromide (BVD). The exchange of bromide anions in a PIL nanogel with hydroxide produced a supported basic IL catalyst. The catalytic performances of such PIL nanogels were evaluated in the synthesis of 4H-benzo[b]pyrans. This protocol represents a simple, ecologically safe, and cost-effective route to synthesize 4H-benzo[b]pyrans with high yield.130
Yuan et al. reported highly ordered and tunable inner structures of PIL NPs, which formed spontaneously via precipitation polymerization from water. These NPs exhibit either multilamellar or unilamellar vesicular morphology, depending on the tail lengths of the quaternary alkyl chains. The simplicity of the synthesis and composition and the high complexity of the ordered structures, which resemble liposomes, expand homopolymer self-assembly profiles. In addition, unidirectional superassembly to a nanoworm mesostructure was found at elevated concentrations.131 Yang et al. synthesized micro-particles via the suspension copolymerization of the ILM 1-allyl-3-methylimidazoliumbromide with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate. The obtained particles exhibited regular spherical shape and an average diameter of 65 ± 24 μm.132 These microparticles were applied to the solid-phase extraction and rapid pre-concentration of fluoroquinolones from urine.
5. Poly(ionic liquid)s in electrochemical devices
PIL-based polymer electrolytes present high ionic conductivities (up to 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C), wider electrochemical windows (up to 5 V), high thermal stabilities (up to 350 °C), nonflammability and good compatibility, in comparison with generic nonionic polymers. PILs are, therefore, continuing to be studied for various electrochemical device applications such as in electrolytes for fuel cells, dye sensitized solar cells, batteries, supercapacitors, electrochromic devices, transistors and so on.133–135 Synergistic interactions render PILs a versatile and distinctive class of polyelectrolyte for multiple applications. In the following we review some recent applications of PILs as electrolytes.
5.1 Polyelectrolyte membranes for fuel cells
Fuel cells are considered a clean energy conversion technology, converting the chemical energy stored in fuels into electrical energy without the emission of any polluting chemicals. Nafion is a common polymer electrolyte membrane material for fuel cells with excellent mechanical and thermal properties and outstanding conductivities when it is well hydrated.136,137 However, it is not feasible for fuel cells to work at temperatures over 80 °C due to water evaporation and low water affinity. Therefore, the replacement of water with low-volatility, nonaqueous proton carriers, such as protic ILs, is particularly advantageous for high temperature fuel cells under anhydrous conditions.138,139 In general, proton-conducting membranes (PEMs) were prepared through incorporating a PIL into a poly(vinylidenfluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVdF) membrane.140–142 The polymer electrolyte membranes obtained show high ionic conductivity at elevated temperatures.
Yan and co-workers synthesized proton conducting membranes via the polymerization of PIL based microemulsions.143,144 The resultant PEMs showed good thermal stabilities and good mechanical properties, and have conductivities up to the order of 1 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 160 °C under non-humidifying conditions because of the well-connected PIL nanochannels formed in the samples.143 Such PIL-based membranes combine the high proton conductivities and good mechanical properties in a unique way. However, the long-term operation of PIL-based membranes could be affected by a progressive release of the PIL during fuel cell operation. Therefore, proton-conducting hybrid membranes were prepared via the in situ cross-linking of a mixture containing styrene/acrylonitrile oils, PILs and silica NPs (or mesoporous silica nanospheres).145–147 The addition of the proper amount of silica filler could significantly increase the proton conductivity of the membranes, because of the ion transport channels or network structures formed in the membranes. However, the further incorporation of silica fillers may block ion transport channels and decrease the conductivity. In addition, mesoporous silica nanospheres are effective in preventing the release of PILs from composite membranes and enhancing the conductivity. Yan's group also prepared phosphoric acid-doped PIL based proton conducting membranes via the copolymerization of vinylimidazole, styrene and acrylonitrile, followed by the sulfonation of pendant imidazole groups with butanesultone, and further doping with phosphoric acid.148 The composite electrolyte membranes showed anhydrous proton conductivity up to the order of 10−2 S cm−2 and good chemical stability at 160 °C.
Compared with PEM fuel cells, alkaline anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs) are a type of fuel cell that uses an alkaline anion-exchange membrane (AEM), in which the charge carriers are hydroxide ions instead of protons. Since the catalysts are generally stable in basic media, these improvements enable the use of non-precious metal catalysts (such as nickel and silver), and thereby dramatically reduce the cost of fuel cells.149 As one of the key components of AEMFCs, the chemical stability of AEMs has been extensively studied.
Yan et al. reported the first example of alkaline imidazolium cation-based polymer electrolytes for alkaline fuel cell applications.149 The effects of the substituents and substitution positions on the alkaline stability of imidazolium cations and their corresponding AEMs were systematically investigated through both experimental studies (quantitative 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)) in high pH solutions and theoretical (density functional theory, DFT) calculations.150–156 Substitutions at the C-2, N-1, and N-3 atom positions were found to have a significant and positive impact on the alkaline stability of the imidazolium cations. Furthermore, the higher LUMO energy values may also enhance the alkaline stability of imidazolium cations.
Membranes based on PILs offer important innovations in the development and applications of fuel cells, thus reinforcing the improvement and implementation of strategies to produce clean energy independent of fossil fuels sources. However, most of the research is still at the stage of theoretical studies or fundamental research. Future works will aim to develop PIL membranes with high chemical and mechanical stabilities and high conductivities, to implement these types of electrolytes in a cost-effective manner to obtain high performance devices.
5.2 (Quasi-) solid-state electrolytes for dye sensitized solar cells
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are photo-electrochemical systems based on light-sensitive semiconductors and formed by contacting a photo-sensitized (semiconductor) anode with an appropriately formulated electrolyte. These systems are thin film solar cells.157,158 To avoid evaporation and leakage problems from organic solvent liquid electrolytes, even RTIL based electrolytes, polymeric ILs have been introduced to DSSCs with high power conversion efficiencies and excellent long-term stabilities. They demonstrate specific functions such as transporting target ions, and providing a polar environment and mechanical durabilities corresponding to their respective polymer structures and compositions.
Manca et al. synthesized imidazole-based ionically conductive polymers, which were implemented as effective gelators in iodine/iodide based liquid electrolytes for DSSCs.159 A maximum power conversion efficiency of 5.73% was obtained, which was superior to 85% of the corresponding liquid electrolytes. This DSSC also exhibited excellent cell stability after 500 days of storage. Yan et al. synthesized a photochemically stable PIL, poly(1-butyl-3-vinylimidazolium bis(trifluoro-methanesulfonyl)-imide) (P[BVIM][TFSI]), and dissolved it in a RTIL to form VOC-free (volatile organic solvent-free) IL/PIL electrolytes.160 The diffusion coefficient of I3− in this liquid electrolyte is 1.4 times higher than in a P[BVIM][TFSI]-based electrolyte, while the viscosity of the P[BVIM][TFSI]-based electrolyte is about 35 times higher than that of the liquid electrolyte. The presented polymer structure formed interconnected IL nanochannels, which enabled the facile diffusion of both I3− and I−. DSSCs based on P[BVIM][TFSI] electrolytes exhibited a maximum efficiency of 4.4% under simulated air mass 1.5 solar spectrum illumination at 100 mW cm−2.
Polymeric ILs can also be functionalized to serve as charge transfer intermediates, a source of required redox couples, as well as polymer hosts in electrolytes. Han et al. synthesized poly(1-alkyl-3-vinylimidazolium iodide) and employed it to prepare an iodine-free quasi-solid-state electrolyte for DSSCs.161 These PIL-based devices presented a power conversion efficiency of up to 6.18% and showed better photovoltaic performance when compared to liquid electrolyte-based devices. PIL networks contributed to an increase in Voc (open circuit voltage) and Jsc (circuit current density). Compared with mono-cationic ILs, dicationic ILs show higher thermal stability, lower volatility and greater flexibility in tuning the physicochemical properties of such PIL-based DSSCs.162,163 The bis-imidazolium based PIL electrolyte, poly(1-butyl-3-(1-vinylimidazolium-3-hexyl)-imidazolium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide) (P[BVIM][HIM][TFSI]) dissolved in RTILs showed higher thermal stability and conductivity than mono-imidazolium based (P[BVIM][TFSI]) in ILs, due to charge transport networks formed in these gel electrolytes via π–π stacked imidazolium ring clusters. These DSSCs showed superior long-term stability and yielded a power conversion efficiency of 5.92% under simulated air mass 1.5 solar spectrum illumination at 100 mW cm−2.164
The addition of inorganic NPs into electrolytes is an effective way to improve DSSC performance.165 IL/PIL grafted silica NPs forming gel-state electrolytes were used in DSSCs.166 The ionic conductivity of these composite gel electrolytes reached 0.8 mS cm−1 at room temperature and 14.7 mS cm−1 at 90 °C, which was comparable with neat IL electrolytes. PIL/IL/GO composite gel electrolytes containing poly(1-butyl-3-vinylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide), 1-propyl-3-methyl-imidazoliumiodide and GO were prepared for DSSCs.167 The selection of appropriate amounts of GO distinctly increased the composite electrolyte conductivity. A DSSC based on such composite electrolytes containing 2 wt% GO displayed an improved power conversion efficiency of 4.83% under simulated AM 1.5 solar spectrum irradiation, and improved long-term stability. PILs doped with IL-tethered TiO2 NPs were used to prepare a nanocomposite gel electrolyte by Yan et al.,168 resulting in improved device performance with enhanced Jsc and Voc. The effective Grotthuss conduction mechanism enhanced the ionic conductivity and diffusion coefficients of I3− and contributed to increased Jsc and Voc values. Kawano et al. reported low conversion efficiencies of 1.0–1.5% for DSSCs with a PIL-based solid polymer electrolyte and plain PEDOT counter electrode, which resulted from the high internal resistance of the DSSCs.169 Based on this research, Kim et al. synthesized PEDOT nanofibers with high catalytic activity as a counter electrode, assembled with a PIL-based gel polymer electrolyte.170 These assembled devices exhibited a high conversion efficiency of 8.12% at 100 mW cm−2, which was higher than that of the common comparison cell with a liquid electrolyte and Pt counter electrode.
5.3 Electrolytes for batteries
Gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs), with polymer hosts to immobilize liquid electrolytes, have attracted great attention as promising safe electrolytes for lithium ion batteries. Compared with liquid electrolytes, dendrite formation can be suppressed in GPEs because the polymer electrolyte mobility is substantially lowered.171 However, conventional polymer hosts, such as poly(ethylene oxide), poly(vinylidene fluoride), and poly(acrylonitrile) based GPEs, still possess less stability with time because of liquid leaching from the GPEs.172,173 Therefore, the excellent electrochemical stabilities and ionic peculiarities of PILs make them good candidates for use as electrolyte hosts even when operating at high potentials.174
Marcilla et al. explored the application of a LiTFSI salt dissolved pyrrolidinium-based PIL in lithium metal batteries.30 They prepared GPEs and found time-stable interfacial resistance values and good lithium stripping/plating performance. GPEs based on guanidinium-based PILs were prepared for lithium metal batteries by Li et al. The Li/LiFePO4 cells delivered discharge capacities of about 140 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.1C at 80 °C.175,176 However, satisfactorily low temperature operation was not feasible. Afterwards, Li et al. synthesized tetraalkyl-ammonium-based PIL GPEs, which could be operated at 60 °C.177,178 Imidazolium-based PIL electrolytes for lithium metal batteries and Li/LiFePO4 cells were also prepared, which exhibited discharge capacities of ∼160 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.1C and at 60 °C.179,180
Most of the mono-cationic PIL-based electrolytes for lithium metal batteries performed well only at 60 °C or above. To solve this limitation, Zhang and co-workers prepared a dicationic PIL/LiTFSI electrolyte.181 Their batteries, using such an electrolyte, could be operated at room temperature, and this showed promise as a safe electrolyte for use in lithium metal batteries.
The power delivery of lithium batteries using polymer electrolytes is usually limited by the concentration gradient of the lithium salt. Single-ion conducting polyelectrolytes represent an ideal solution since their nature prevents polarization. Shaplov et al. synthesized block copolymer polyelectrolytes comprising poly(lithium 1-[3-(methacryloyloxy)-propylsulfonyl]-1-(tri-fluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) and poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate blocks. The polyelectrolytes from these copolymers were used as solid polyelectrolytes and as binders in the formulation of lithium metal batteries with a specific capacity of up to 130 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.067C.182
5.4 Electrolytes for electrochemical supercapacitors
One of the most promising strategies to design flexible and lightweight supercapacitors is to replace liquid electrolytes with solid or quasi-solid polymer electrolytes, which thereby obviate strict sealing and housing requirements.183,184 Therefore, PIL electrolytes have been considered as ideal solid electrolytes for supercapacitors. However, only a few works have been reported in this area by Marcilla et al., which are summarized below.
A mixture containing poly(diallyldimethylammonium) bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide dissolved in an IL, N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoro-methylsulfonyl)imide ([PYR14][TFSI]) was prepared and applied as the electrolyte in solid-state supercapacitors.185 Impregnating the electrodes with the electrolytes before assembling the supercapacitors is a critical process to improve the carbon-electrolyte contact. However, these fabricated supercapacitors showed low performance due to a poorly performing electrode/electrolyte interface. Further work using pyrrolidinium based PIL electrolytes with high ionic conductivity significantly improved the specific capacitance.186
5.5 Electrolytes for other electrochemical applications

5.5.1. Electrochromic devices. 
Another intriguing field for the possible application of PILs is using PILs in electrochromic devices, such as information displays, cathode ray tubes, storage devices, electromagnetic shutters and mirrors. Shaplov et al. prepared solid-state electrochromic devices using an imidazolium type PIL electrolyte.187 These electrochromic devices possessed a fast switching time of 3 s, high coloration efficiency (390 cm2 C−1 at 620 nm), a maximum optical contrast of up to 22%, and the possibility of working under vacuum.
The functionality of PIL electrolytes can be enhanced by incorporating redox-active species. Frisbie et al. recently reported solution processable, electrochromic IL gels composed of block copolymer and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethyl-sulfonyl)imide, including an electrochromic redox molecule, methyl viologen, for flexible displays. The device showed a coloration efficiency of 105 cm2 C−1 and high operational stability under air.188 More recently, thermo- and electro-dual responsive PIL electrolytes were synthesized through the co-polymerization of an ILM, 3-butyl-1-vinyl-imidazolium bromide ([BVIM][Br]) and NIPAM using diallyl-viologen as both the cross-linking agent and the electrochromic material (Fig. 9). The electro- and thermo-responsive behaviors can be observed simultaneously under electrical and temperature stimuli, which demonstrates the dual-responsive smart window applications.189
 Fig. 9  (A) General synthetic routes for P(NIPAM-DAV) IL gels and P(NIPAM-BVIm-DAV) gels, and (B) a schematic mechanism of thermochromic and electrochromic devices based on the prepared polymer gels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.5.2. Organic transistors and memory devices. 
The electrochemical doping of mobile cations, through the addition of an IL to a unipolar ion conductor, diminishes the performance of n-type organic electrolyte-gated transistors, which is independent of the dopant cation type. Therefore, it is essential to acquire a unipolar electrolyte to gate n-type organic semiconductors and hold back unfavorable electrochemical doping.190
Lodge et al. synthesized a PIL triblock copolymer (PS–PIL–PS), composed of 1-[(2-acryloyloxy)ethyl]-3-butylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide and styrene.190 The obtained triblock copolymer acted as a gate dielectric to allow low-voltage n-type organic electrolyte-gated transistor operation. Little or no infiltration of ions into an n-type semiconductor is expected because of the attachment of the cations to the PIL backbone. The use of PIL block copolymer electrolytes as gate insulators opens up unique opportunities to explore the role of ion penetration in n-type organic electrolyte-gated transistors by tuning the extent of electrochemical doping.
The switching speed is a key property for memory devices. Usually, the switching of electrochemical transistors occurs more slowly compared to field-effect transistors, due to the limitation of ion diffusion rates from semiconductor films. PIL electrolytes were therefore selected for memory devices because they have several advantages over conventional inorganic/organic salt doped electrolytes, including mechanical stability, safety, simplicity of processing, moderate ionic conductivity (depending on the polymer backbone), and their counter-ions. Li et al. constructed a three-terminal non-volatile memory device, using poly[1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-butyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate] (PVBIT) as a polyelectrolyte layer and a hydrophilic polythiophene, regioregular poly(3-carboxypentylthiophene) (P3CPT) as the active layer (Fig. 10).191 Memory effects could be obtained at higher write/erase voltages (+3/−3 V) and a lower read voltage (0.5 V) in a three-terminal device. The memory behavior of P3CPT/PVBIT could be attributed to the polarization of the polythiophene backbone due to the P3CPT polaron and then stabilization through both of the carboxylate anions and the BF4− ions that immigrate from the polyelectrolyte layer. Simultaneous monitoring of both the “write” and “read” operations demonstrated an instantaneous response and a fast switching speed.
 Fig. 10  Chemical structures of the materials used in the accompanying non-volatile memory device architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. © 2014, Wiley-VCH. 

5.6 PIL modified carbon electrodes and sensors
ILs having high ion conductivities, non-volatility, high decomposition temperatures, and especially wide electrochemical stability windows, are considered comparatively ideal electrolytes for supercapacitors with high energy densities. However, the accessibility of ions from the electrolyte to active regions of the carbon electrode materials is a key problem to be overcome. Immobilization processes for ILs that tether them to substrates can transfer their properties to the substrates.192 Suh et al. reported surface covalent modification methods with PILs to contribute to grapheme oxide electrode materials being well wetted by the chosen ILs. The utilization of poly(1-vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium) salts bearing the bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide anion can effectively stabilize hydrazine-reduced rGO platelets via electrostatic and cation–π interactions.193 The PIL modified electrodes provide enhanced compatibility with the IL electrolyte and increase the effective surface area of the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. Supercapacitors assembled with a PIL:rGO electrode and [EMIM][Tf2N] electrolyte showed a stable electrochemical response up to an operating voltage of 3.5 V. A maximum energy density of 6.5 W h kg−1 with a power density of 2.4 kW kg−1 was obtained. In a similar work, two types of electrodes (an rGO-based electrode and a PIL-modified rGO electrode) were compared. Supercapacitors assembled with PIL-modified rGO electrodes and a [MPPy][TFSI] electrolyte showed an electrochemical stability of 3 V and provided a capacitance of 71.5 F g−1 at room temperature, which is 130% higher than a control rGO-based supercapacitor.194 Recently Yang and coauthors developed non-covalently PIL-functionalized graphene through the solvothermal reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of imidazolium-based PILs. An electrode based on this composite exhibited enhanced capacitive performance compared to that of pure rGO.195
PIL modified rGO materials have been used as sensors and as sensor supports. Wang et al. employed thermally reduced graphene modified with a PIL to hybridize AgNPs.196 The resulting composites were used for the electrochemical sensing of hydrogen peroxide. The 1-vinyl-3-butylimidazolium bromide based PIL–graphene composite served as a good support for enzyme immobilization and for a biosensor exhibiting superior performance in detecting glucose.197 Li and coauthors prepared an rGO–PIL composite through the free radical polymerization of a 1-vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate monomer on a reduced graphene oxide matrix and applied this composite material as an electrochemical sensor for phenylethanolamine A (PEA) determination.198 This rGO–PIL sensor could detect PEA with high sensitivity due to the synergistic contributions of rGO and PIL. Compared with a PIL sensor and a bare electrode, this rGO–PIL sensor had a higher peak current response for PEA.
5.7 Binders for batteries
PVDF has been extensively studied and applied as a binder for lithium ion batteries due to its electrochemical stability.199 However, its insulating and electrolyte swelling properties lead to increased contact resistance between active materials and conductive agents, and the deterioration of electrodes under long operational runs.200
Yuan et al. prepared thiazolium-type PILs with TFSI− counter anions and used them as binder materials in lithium ion batteries.201 Thiazolium-type PILs can enhance charge carrier mobility through creating a PIL/electrolyte nano-heterojunction at the electrode surface. In addition, the superior wettability of PILs compared to PVDF by the electrolyte significantly enhances the performance. Paillard et al. prepared imidazolium based PIL NPs, which could be used as a nanolatex binder in combination with Li4Ti5O12 or graphite to fabricate electrodes with outstanding capacities, rate performances and limited capacity decay.202 PIL reduction processes at low potentials contribute to the chemical bonding of the binder to the carbon material surface, but lead to irreversible capacities in the first cycles that should be addressed before commercial application. Yuan et al. proposed an overall mechanism for how PIL binders assist the electrochemical reactions in lithium ion batteries.198 PIL binders glue the particles together, and actively promote favorable Li+ conductivity in the two-phase nano-heterojunction.203,204 The PIL binders assimilate organic electrolytes in the chain structures and establish nanometer-scale lamellae with a higher concentration of Li+ at the interface with the active material of PIL binder and bulk electrolyte.
6. Smart materials and chemomechanical coupling in PILs
Stimuli-responsive materials can be regarded as soft materials, and these materials respond to chemical, physical or biochemical stimuli in the solid state, in solution or as gels. More recently, temperature, pH, light, and redox-responsive “smart” PILs have been extensively studied for their potential applications in smart materials, and for applications in matrix chemistry, medicine and biochemistry.205–209
6.1 Thermo-responsive PIL sol/gel transitions
Thermally triggered actuating PILs can undergo a reversible phase transition from a soluble state (sol) to precipitation at a critical temperature, including the LCST and UCST. Equilibria between chain segment/segment interactions and segment/solvent intermolecular interactions are shifted through temperature changes. Responsive behaviors depend on the nature of the thermo-responsive polymer chain segments, and the response temperature can be regulated by adjusting constituents of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups.210,211
Wu et al. covalently grafted a PIL functionalized temperature-responsive copolymer (monomers: 1-vinylimidazole, NIPAM, bromoethane) onto a brominated poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) membrane.212 The size of the copolymer membrane changes significantly at the LCST. Lonov et al. prepared porous electrospun fibrous mats via the sequential electrospinning and subsequent photo-crosslinking of a thermoresponsive polymer (P(NIPAM-ABP)) and thermo-plastic polyurethane, and employed these fibers in actuators with large scale movements in less than 1 s.213 The responsive properties of P(NIPAM-ABP) resulted in the actuation of a bilayer mat in warm water and the restoration of the original shape in cold water.
Imidazolium-based cross-linked PIL nanogels exhibited reversibly transitions to a precipitate or macrogel in methanol upon temperature change.214,215 Hydrogen-bonding interactions between carboxyl groups could contribute to reversible nanogel–macrogel transitions. Xiong et al. prepared thermo-responsive nanogels through the copolymerization of imidazolium-based and phosphorous-based ILs with chain transfer agents (CTAs) containing carboxyl groups in RAFT polymerizations.216 The critical gelation temperatures of the nanogels could be tuned by adjusting the ratio of ILM and CTA. Tang et al. prepared poly[oligo(ethylene glycol)methacrylate] (POEGMA) based microgels using a type of PIL cross-linker.217 The content of hydrophilic PIL cross-linker strongly affected the temperature induced volume phase transition behavior. The hydrophilic PIL moieties might develop polymer–water–polymer interactions with CO groups as CO⋯D2O–PIL hydrogen bonds emerged in the less cross-linked system.
Diamond et al. prepared chemically cross-linked thermo-responsive PIL hydrogels, based on the ILMs tetrabutyl-phosphonium styrenesulfonate ([P4,4,4,4][SS]) and tributyl-hexylphosphonium 3-sulfopropylacrylate ([P4,4,4,6][SPA]).218 The LCST of the resulting PIL gels lowered with increasing cross-linker concentration. Surface polymerization can convert the primary PIL NPs to structurally complex colloidal systems. Yuan et al. prepared PIL NPs grafted with a PNIPAM brush shell via ATRP.219 This colloidal system presented responsiveness to temperature and ionic strength in an aqueous solution. The NP-g-PNIPAM brush particles showed enhanced colloidal stability against a high ionic strength of CKBr up to 0.66 M, because of the steric repulsion between the PNIPAM chains. Furthermore, the NP-g-PNIPAM particles could be switched between aggregated and dispersed states via thermal and ionic strength actions occurring simultaneously from the effects of both Debye–Hückel charge screening and steric repulsion.
Ohno et al. synthesized PIL homopolymers ([P444n][MC3S]), composed of alkyltributylphosphonium cations (alkyl: n = 4, 6, and 8) and 3-sulfopropyl methacrylate anions.220 The LCST could be easily adjusted through blending two PILs with different hydrophobicity in aqueous media.221 This blending allows one to regulate the phase transition behavior of PILs without copolymerization or precise control of their molecular weight distributions. Based on host–guest interactions, pseudo-LCST effects from P([BVIM][Tf2N]) in the presence of β-CD in aqueous solution were reported by Ritter's group.222 The β-CD ring complexes the anions (Tf2N−) and slips off at higher temperatures, where the PIL loses its aqueous solubility.
Wang and co-workers223 reported the syntheses of a series of thermoresponsive PILs via the RAFT copolymerization of 1-vinyl-3-butylimidazolium bromide and NIPAM, followed by the anion exchange of bromide for the D-alanine amino acid carboxylate anion. The PILs were thermo-responsive in acetonitrile with the UCST varying from 25.7 to 34.8 °C, due to the introduction of this amino acid anion. PIL/acetonitrile solutions could be used as the extracting phase for the separation of tocopherol homologues in hexane. Such PILs could be reused for multiple extraction cycles with negligible changes in the tocopherol distribution and selectivity coefficients.
6.2 pH-Triggered actuators
Nanoporous polyelectrolyte membranes with hierarchical and unique pore architectures can be readily made via electrostatic complexation between imidazolium-based PILs and poly(acrylic acid). Yuan et al. introduced a template-free method to prepare hierarchically structured nanoporous polyelectrolyte membranes by using a simple film-casting and solution immersion/activation procedure.224 Both membrane and pore formation are promoted simultaneously by NH3 triggering in situ ionic complexation between a hydrophobic PIL and deprotonated poly(acrylic acid) (Fig. 11). Being highly charged and nanoporous in nature, these membranes are highly promising for a wide range of applications. An optical fiber coated with such a membrane was demonstrated to break the common “trade-off” rule in sensor applications, showing superior pH sensing performance with a fast response (tr = 5 s, tf = 12 s) and high sensitivity (2.04 and −2.48 nm per pH unit). Since solution casting is an industrially well-established membrane formation procedure, such a method should prove to be practical for manufacturing such nanoporous polyelectrolyte films and coatings.
 Fig. 11  (a) A cartoon illustrating pore generation controlled by the diffusion of aqueous NH3 into the membrane. (b) Fluorescent confocal laser scanning microscopy image of the polyelectrolyte membrane cross section after the film was soaked for 2 h in 0.2 wt% aqueous NH3 doped with 15 ppm rhodamine B. (c–e) Time-dependent cross-section structures of the membrane soaked in 0.2 wt% aqueous NH3 for 10, 25, and 50 min, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
pH-Responsive PIL membranes were synthesized via the photo-crosslinking of imidazolium type ILMs with acrylic acid (AA), NIPAM, and acrylonitrile (AN).225 The transmittance of the PIL membranes was determined by the concentration of acrylic acid units as well as the hydrophobicity of the PIL counter anions, and could be altered in response to both temperature and pH. Shape deformation of the PIL membranes could be reversibly tuned through changing the pH values of aqueous solutions or gas atmospheres (NH3/HCl) (Fig. 12). The dual-responsive PIL membranes prepared in this work could perform as soft actuators, and they have potential applications in advanced sensors and functional materials for the inscription of information.
 Fig. 12  Reaction scheme for the preparation of PIL-based membranes via in situ photo-crosslinking and mechanisms for thermo- and pH-responsive behaviors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
PIL microgel beads have been applied as solid-phase probes for robust and reversible pH sensing because IL units can accommodate several polar and nonpolar solute molecules. Highly mono-dispersed, pH-responsive PIL[Br] beads have been prepared by Khan et al. using microfluidic devices.226 The PIL beads indicated a distinct, uniquely pH-dependent band of color upon exposure to different pH environments and responded reversibly to the switching of pH environments. Yan et al. prepared reusable plastic pH-sensitive membranes via the photo-cross-linking of an ILM, 1-butyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide ([BVIM][Br]), with acrylonitrile, followed by anion exchange with sulfonated anionic dyes, such as cresol red, bromothymol blue, bromocresol green, and methyl orange.227
The membranes obtained were transparent, free-standing, and strong enough to be cut into any desired size and shape. The pH-responsive behaviour of these PIL membranes was very similar to that of the small molecular dyes, and is reversible in both acidic and basic aqueous and organic solutions.
6.3 Photo-responsive objects
Photo-responsive polymers are usually supplied with photo-active groups, such as azobenzene, spirobenzopyran, triphenylmethane, or cinnamonyl, which can undergo reversible structural changes under UV or visible illumination. These functional fragments change size and shape, or form ionic or zwitterionic species upon irradiation. Lu et al. designed photosensitive polymers through the ionic self-assembly of a PIL and the azobenzene dye, methyl orange.228 Under irradiation from pulsed UV (laser) light, these PILs developed a highly ordered lamellar nanostructure. Florea et al. synthesized semi-interpenetrating networks via copolymerizing NIPAM with spiropyran (SPA) and acrylic acid, and then embedding in a PSPA matrix.229 Photo-induced shrinking can be observed in the hydrated gels, with optimal results appearing at 0.5% and 1% NaCl concentration, with an area contraction of ∼12% for semi-interpenetrating networks under the influence of white light.
6.4 Solvent-responsive materials
It has been recently reported that TFSI− anions can form host–guest inclusion complexes with β-CD, and therefore pseudo-LCST phase behavior in water could be observed.230 Yan et al. reported the synthesis of shape memory PIL gels with controllable macroscopic swelling via noncovalent host–guest interactions between β-CD and TFSI− anions.111 Quick swelling and shape memory behavior of these PIL gels was observed in β-CD aqueous solution due to the hydrophobic-to-hydrophilic transition induced by the β-CD/TFSI− inclusion complexes, while the PIL gel undergoes only slight swelling in the presence of water. Phase-separation of the hydrophobic PIL in an aqueous environment promoted poration. Yuan et al. reported a facile approach to prepare hydrophilic porous membranes from PILs, which combines pore formation and ionic complexation.231 These membranes exhibit a stimuli-responsive porosity with open and closed pores in isopropanol and water. Fast actuation speed, robust responsiveness and large-shape deformation are pivotal for synthetic soft actuators. Porous PIL membranes that bend in response to acetone vapour at a fast speed were prepared via the co-polymerization of 3-cyanomethyl-1-vinylimidazolium bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and acrylic acid.232 These PIL actuators are multi-responsive towards various organic vapours under both dry and wet conditions. This responsiveness emanates from gradients in vapor adsorption combined with the chemomechanical opening and closing of pores.233
6.5 Redox-active PILs
The reversible sol–gel phase transition behavior of PILs can be easily triggered by multiple stimuli, including temperature, electrochemical redox reactions, and chemical redox reactions. An electrochemical stimulus plays an important role in controlling the assembly/disassembly of PIL supramolecular systems that are intrinsically electroactive.
Xiong et al. synthesized redox-responsive PIL nanogels via free radical chain copolymerization. The redox-response performances of these nanogels were evaluated through size variation in the presence of dithiothreitol (DTT). The capability of PIL-based nanogels for controlled release was investigated using rhodamine B as a prototype model drug. It was found that DTT triggered the release of rhodamine B.234 Vancso et al. synthesized a redox-active organometallic PIL that is soluble in ILs.235 Such an organometallic PIL/IL solution could be used for the surface electro-grafting of Au electrodes. This technique produces a robust redox-active grafted electrode surface for sensors, fuel cells, and energy conversion materials.
Electroactive supramolecular PIL gels based on host–guest interactions between a host polymer containing β-CD and an IL-type gemini guest containing both TFSI− and ferrocene (Fc) guest groups were synthesized by Yan et al.206 A supramolecular gel derived from such a PIL exhibits reversible sol–gel transitions that accompany electrochemical redox reactions. The Fc group can be drawn into the β-CD cavity due to its hydrophobic nature, and it is excluded upon oxidation to Fc+. Additional supporting electrolytes were not needed for charge transport due to the intrinsic ionic conductivity of the PIL gels formed. A voltage-switchable “polymer Velcro” based on such host–guest recognition between PIL strips was recently prepared by the same group.236 Polymer Velcro was synthesized via the surface grafting of PIL membranes with Fc and β-CD moieties, which act as hooks and loops, respectively (Fig. 13). The prepared PIL Velcro exhibited strong adhesion in air and in aqueous solutions (including basic and acidic aqueous solutions and seawater), and could be unfastened and fastened via mechanical compression and electrochemical means, respectively. Compared with silicon wafer-based Velcro,237 PIL based Velcro is flexible and ready for the next adhesion cycle.236
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the synthesis of PIL–β-CD and PIL–Fc membranes, and the hook-and-loop strategy for adhesion based on β-CD and Fc-modified PIL membrane surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The incorporation of redox active polymers in polyelectrolyte membrane frameworks can provide unique responsive platforms and control structure and function to switch ionic transport. Vancso et al. formed redox-responsive porous membranes through electrostatic complexation between redox active PFS-based PILs (PFS-VIMTf2N) and the organic acids poly(acrylic acid)s (PAA) (Fig. 14).238 The phase separation of a PIL in contact with water contributes to the formation of the pore walls, while the simultaneous electrostatic complexation between the PIL and acid groups (COOH) gave an ionic network, stabilizing the pore structures. Open and closed porous structures could be reversibly switched via redox-induced changes in the PIL membrane.
 Fig. 14  The preparation of a porous poly(ferrocenylsilane) membrane. (a) Chemical structures of PFS-VIMTf2N and PAA used. (b) Illustration of the preparation of a porous membrane from a polymer blend solution of PFS-VIMTf2N and PAA in DMF. (c) SEM images of a porous membrane with a thickness of 1.3 μm. (d) Representation illustrating the pore-formation process induced by ammonia diffusion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238. © 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
6.6 CO2-Responsive gels
CO2 is a pivotal metabolite in biological cells and has good biocompatibility and membrane permeability. CO2 can react with responsive groups, for example amines or amidines, generating hydrophilic compounds. The removal of CO2, through purging with inert gases such as N2 or Ar or heating, regenerates the original group and, employing CO2 as a trigger, can produce many switching cycles without the accumulation of byproducts.239 Recent studies have shown that CO2 could be applied as an important raw material for organic and polymer syntheses.240–242 Particularly, CO2 could be used as a protonating agent for amine- and amidine-generating compounds and polymers.
Recently, Yan's group reported PIL gels with CO2 stimulus responsiveness. These PILs were synthesized through the co-polymerization of an imidazolium-type ILM with 2-(dimethyl amino) ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA), using poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate as a cross-linker (Fig. 15).243 Upon bubbling with CO2 gas, the PIL solution was converted to a transparent and stable gel, which could be reversed to the initial solution state after N2 bubbling. This reversible sol–gel phase transition behavior is proved by the reversible values of viscosity and ionic conductivity. The formation of CO2 responsive PIL gels arises from the tertiary amine groups becoming protonated and charged, and converting to water-soluble ammonium bicarbonates. These ammonium cations formed a strong electrostatic interaction between protonated DMAEMA cations and the associated anions (BF4−, PF6−, or TFSI−) in the PIL segments. This gel structure could be converted back to the initial structure by passing an inert gas such as Ar or N2 through the gel and reversing the equilibration of CO2 in carbonic form. This hypothesis was further confirmed via the host–guest interactions of PIL–TFSI with β-CD. Upon the addition of β-CD to a PIL–TFSI solution, however, no stable PIL gels could be obtained after bubbling with CO2, due to the formation of β-CD/TFSI− inclusion complexes. Electrostatic interactions between the protonated DMAEMA cations and the anions of the PIL segments highly affect the formation of PIL gels. These properties make such CO2 responsive materials potential candidates for use as CO2 scavenging agents in the intelligent delivery system and smart biomaterial fields.
 Fig. 15  An illustration of the formation mechanism of PIL gels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. © 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
7. PIL-derived nanostructured carbon materials
Carbon materials have been widely used in diverse fields, especially in energy-related applications.244–247 As a type of carbon precursor, PILs are relatively new but are being increasingly evaluated in carbon chemistry.248 Generally speaking, PILs possess several features as carbon precursors: (1) their very low volatility and high thermodynamic stability lead to high carbon yields during carbonization processes; (2) they have well-designed shapes and morphologies, and tunable components for different carbon nanomaterials; (3) PILs have tunable hydrophilic–hydrophobic properties and the ability to wet most surfaces and form homogeneous films and coatings;249 and (4) PILs comprising conjugated nitrogen, sulfur, boron, or phosphorus atoms provide heteroatom sources to better the physico-chemical properties of the derived carbons.244,250,251 Thus, the thermal treatment of PIL-based precursors generates desired forms of carbon superior to those from other polymer precursors.
PILs were first used as a novel carbon precursor in 2010.252 Mesoporous graphitic carbon nanostructures were synthesized via the carbonization of imidazolium-based ILMs or PILs as precursors in the presence of FeCl2, which plays a key role in controlling both the chemical structure and the textural morphology of the graphitization process. A featured PIL, poly(1-cyanomethyl-3-vinylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide), could produce nitrogen-doped microporous (and mesoporous) carbon above 400 °C under an inert atmosphere via encoded cyclisation reactions.253 The cyanomethyl group can induce trimerisation reactions, producing triazine units to crosslink the polymer chains and form a solid network at about 300 °C, while the TFSI anions can be thermally evaporated together with an eliminated proton and act as a porogen to produce micropore structures in carbonaceous networks derived above 400 °C.254 Smarsly et al. systematically studied the chemical components and physico-chemical properties of N-doped carbon nanostructures from different precursors of P[BVPy][Dca] and PAN, and the blends from electrospinning.255 Carbonized PIL/PAN blends show superior conductivity of 320 S cm−1. The chemical settings of the inserted nitrogen atoms and the microstructural evolution of the π-conjugated carbon network determine the conductivities of the N-doped carbon materials, which correlate with the annealing temperatures and the chemical compositions.
The carbonization of PILs in air using a salt-assisted approach was demonstrated to be a feasible and easy-to-operate process.256 Common inorganic halide salts served as high-temperature ionic solvents and activation agents to introduce pores into these carbon materials, and this was confined to a local oxygen-free environment. This concept can be extended to natural sources, such as having sea salt as the reaction medium or oak leaves as a carbon precursor.
Yuan et al. grafted PILs to natural cotton cellulose surfaces. Such a surface modification accelerated the activation of cotton into porous carbon.257 The microscopic fiber structure is preserved and the resulting microporous carbons are mechanically flexible. This work provides a pathway to process biomass with special architecture into functional porous carbons. Beetles functionalized with PILs on their surface via the in situ free radical polymerization of the corresponding ILM in DMF were converted into carbonaceous beetles at 400 °C under nitrogen.259 The PIL bearing a dicyanamide anion resulted in the most precise microstructural preservation.
PILs also could be employed as a stabilizer and pore-generating agent during hydrothermal carbonization processes. Porous nitrogen-containing carbon materials were obtained via hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) with D-glucose and D-fructose as carbon sources, which generally undergo dehydration to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and aggregate into secondary spherical particles.260 In hydrothermal carbonization processes, the PIL chains stabilize the primary NPs and allow growth only by the further addition of monomers. The charge of the PILs introduces electrostatic repulsion to keep the NPs stable in solution and minimizes agglomeration to lower the particle size from 2.3 mm to <50 nm. These plentiful small primary entities finally grow together to form a hierarchical network. The anion type and PIL macromolecular architecture affect the structure and composition of the resulting carbon materials, allowing for variations in pore network structure and surface functionality.
The introduction of nitrogen atoms into a carbon matrix can stabilize metal or metal oxide NPs via the formation of topological defects and the activation of nitrogen-neighboring carbon atoms, because of the electron affinity of nitrogen.261–263 Recently, metal oxide-functionalized carbon has been employed in electrical energy storage devices such as supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Wei et al. prepared Fe2O3 NPs confined in porous N-doped hollow carbon spheres through grafting a thin layer of PIL onto silica particles as a carbon and nitrogen source.264 As the anode material in a lithium-ion battery, Fe2O3–carbon spheres presented a reversible capacity of 1120 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA g−1, and a coulombic efficiency of ∼98% after 65 cycles with a rate of 500 mA g−1.
Highly dispersed metal NPs in a carbon framework were employed to obtain sufficient electrochemically active surface areas and stabilities, and to provide high yield products from a catalytic aspect. Yan et al. synthesized a PIL, 1-butyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide ([BVIM][Br]), and copolymerized this with acrylonitrile to produce poly(1-butyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide-co-acrylonitrile) (PBA).258 The ion exchange capabilities of the imidazolium IL groups with the Pt precursor (H2PtCl6) enable the preparation of high loading, well dispersed Pt NPs immobilized on the carbon material surface. The nitrogen-doped carbon–Pt nanohybrid particles exhibited good electrocatalytic activity and stability in the electro-catalytic oxidation of methanol. Similarly, Mandal et al. synthesized Pd embedded carbon NPs directly from the anaerobic carbonization of Pd@CPAAm, which were produced via anion exchange with K2PdCl4 (Fig. 16).110 These Pd-embedded carbon NPs nearly replicated the shape and size of the CPAAm beads, and have the potential to work as good supported catalysts. Nabid et al. prepared yolk/shell spheres including a movable Fe3O4 magnetic core and a PIL-derived porous carbon shell with nickel NPs confined in the porous shell.265 The catalyst resulted in high yields in the tandem de-hydrogenation of sodium borohydride and the hydrogenation of several nitro/nitrile compounds in aqueous media, with only a small amount needed. Ma et al. reported the preparation of Co based NPs grown on two-dimensional N-doped macroporous carbon nanosheets, based on PILs functionalized with nitrate groups, which served as the pore formers and precursors.266
 Fig. 16  Scheme for the preparation of nitrogen-doped carbon/Pt nanoparticle hybrids prepared via the carbonization of P([BVIM][Br]-co-acrylonitrile) for the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
High surface areas and chemical inertness make nitrogen-doped porous carbons a promising sorbent for the physisorption and regeneration of CO2. Strong binding interactions, for instance, dipole–quadrupole interactions, acid–base interactions and hydrogen bonding between CO2 molecules and N-modified heterogeneous pore walls inside the carbon matrix, improve the CO2 affinity of N-doped adsorbents.267 Yuan et al. synthesized N-doped porous carbon nanosheets using a PIL as the precursor and C3N4 nanosheets as the sacrificial templates via a one-pot condensation approach.268 The presence of C3N4 nanosheets significantly improves the yield and nitrogen content of the carbon materials. The carbon nanosheets showed a large specific surface area of 1120 m2 g−1 without post-treatments or activation processes. The obtained carbon nanosheets showed reversible high CO2 adsorption performance.
8. Exploiting other use
8.1 PIL catalysts and catalyst supports
The enhanced mechanical stability accompanying PILs is superior to that of ILs, and renders catalytic reactions in a simple to understand context. The role of PILs in catalysis could be divided into catalyst support, catalyst, and pre-catalyst.269–271 Catalytic effects are facilitated by having the freedom to choose the cation and anion, the tunable form in the macromolecular structures, and modern polymer-processing techniques.
PILs can be employed as catalytic supports that can complex, stabilize and modify metal and metal oxide NPs. Embedding metal NPs into PILs can help prepare multifunctional hybrid materials that combine polymers, having flexibility, processability, and mechanical durability, with the established electrical and catalytic properties of inorganic NPs. Moghaddam et al. introduced a reusable heterogeneous catalyst based on Au(III) immobilized on magnetic poly(imidazole/imidazolium) NPs for the synthesis of propargylamines.273 This high loading catalyst was stable under air and could be easily dispersed in water. Li et al. prepared magnetic CoFe2O4 NP supported basic PIL catalysts via a surface grafting method.274 These catalysts were applied to transesterification and to Knoevenagel condensation, and yields of the target of about 93 and 97%, respectively, were obtained.
Groppo et al. synthesized palladium NPs inside nonionic vinylimidazolium based polymers and PILs, and evaluated their catalytic properties for selective hydrogenation of p-chloronitrobenzene to p-chloroaniline. In nonionic polymers, Pd NPs (<2 nm) are stabilized primarily through interactions with the nitrogen functionality of the imidazole ring.275 In PILs these NPs are stabilized by iodide anions, which directly interact with the Pd surface with a total electronic effect much larger than that of the positively charged imidazole ring. These PILs/Pd materials exhibited excellent catalytic performance and chemoselectivity in this selective reduction.
Shi and co-authors presented an approach for the in situ synthesis of PIL–Pt NPs in a pre-pulled glass capillary (Fig. 17).272 This process was carried out by injecting a composite precursor solution into a capillary tip, and was followed by drying at 130 °C. The agglomeration of Pt NPs on electrodes can be excluded because of charge adsorption and binding between the positively charged functional groups of PILs and the negatively charged Pt precursors. Such electrostatic interactions restrict particle growth during reduction, and this results in an ultra-fine dispersion of Pt NPs.276 These PIL–Pt capillary electrodes provide a favourable microenvironment for encapsulated Pt NPs, and promote mass transfer, higher electrocatalytic activity, and better stability for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).
 Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a PIL–Pt composite capillary electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
PIL functionalized polypyrrole nanotubes (PILs/PPyNTs) were successfully synthesized and used in the modification of an electrode to simultaneously determine dopamine and ascorbic acid (Fig. 18).277 The presence of PILs on the surface of the PILs/PPyNTs changed the electrokinetic surface charge to a positive value and improved the dispersibility of PPyNTs in aqueous solution. In addition, dopamine and ascorbic acid oxidation on the electrode was also enhanced. A large potential difference made it possible to distinguish dopamine from ascorbic acid, and these modified PIL/PPy nanotube electrodes exhibited favourable sensitivity and stability for the simultaneous detection of dopamine and ascorbic acid.
 Fig. 18  The reaction procedure for the preparation of PILs/PPyNTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
PILs (PILs without metal catalysts) can be directly used as catalysts and are easily separated and recycled. Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts, such as imidazolium salts, have been developed for the synthesis of cyclic carbonates from CO2 and epoxides. Imidazolium cations can be heterogenized through polymerization or chemical immobilization onto support polymers for use as heterogeneous catalysts.278,279 Zhang et al. prepared silicon-based poly(imidazolium) salts, which are efficient metal-free heterogeneous catalysts for the transformation of CO2 and epoxides into cyclic carbonates under solvent-free conditions.280 A DFT study revealed that the hydroxyl groups of the polymer chains play a key role in the high activity. Meso-macroporous hierarchical PILs were synthesized by Wang et al. via the free radical self-polymerization of a bis-vinylimidazolium monomer.281 Their PILs possessed tunable pore structures and large surface areas, and were found to be active for CO2 conversion.282 He et al. synthesized a series of heterogeneous catalysts through immobilizing imidazolium-based functionalized ILs on FDU-type mesoporous phenolic/formaldehyde resins (FDU-EIMBr).282,283 These FDU meso-polymers promoted the cycloaddition of CO2 with epoxides in the absence of any co-catalyst or organic solvent. The phenolic hydroxyl groups of FDU-15 contributed to promoting the reaction in cooperation with quaternary ammonium halides. Hydrogen bonding between the epoxide and the phenolic hydroxyl group of FDU-EIMBr led to the polarization of the C–O bonds of the epoxide.
Bordiga et al. synthesized imidazolium type PILs through introducing IL units to nonionic polymeric matrices, such as divinylbenzene and vinylimidazole, using an alkylation reaction.285 These porous PILs were excellent catalysts for coupling CO2 and ethylene oxide to give ethylene carbonate under mild conditions (room temperature and low pressure). In addition, the catalytic activity increased with increasing nucleophilicity of the anion and increasing alkyl chain length, while it declined when steric factors became important. This method provided a simple route to obtaining various PILs starting from the same non-ionic polymers.
Guan and Wan et al. reported the synthesis of a macroporous PIL catalyst for biodiesel production via the free radical polymerization of a Brønsted acid ILM, 1-vinyl-3-(3-sulfopropyl)imidazolium hydrogen sulfate ([VSIM][HSO4]); Fe3O4 particles were used as a hard template (Fig. 19).284 The macroporous polymeric network was multilayered and displayed repeating units of ASO3H and AHSO4 with fine separation efficiency. The macroporous structure remarkably lowered the limitation of mass transfer in biodiesel production in comparison with other microporous/mesoporous solid acidic catalysts, especially when catalyzing large molecule substances, such as oleic acid with long carbon chains. This catalyst could be easily recycled and exhibited good reusability; this behavior is vital for green synthetic chemical production.
 Fig. 19  A multi-layered macroporous PIL with repeating catalytic units proves to be a novel and efficient heterogeneous acidic catalyst for biodiesel production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. © 2016, Elsevier. 
Homogeneous catalysts are considered to have higher catalytic activities,215 whereas heterogeneous catalysts are more easily separated from products. There has been great interest in combining the advantages of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts. For example, high swelling PILs open an avenue for projecting quasi-homogeneous dispersed heterogeneous catalysts and increasing the catalytic activities similarly to the corresponding homogeneous ILMs. Gao et al. reported the preparation of swelling cross-linked PILs via the free radical copolymerization of N-vinylimidazolium ILs with sodium acrylate to enhance the catalytic activities of heterogeneous catalysts (Fig. 20).286 The swelling ability of nonporous PILs using polar solvents was significantly influenced by the cross-linking density and chain length of the imidazolium-ring substituents. The catalytic activities of PILs and their swelling ratios were linearly related in ethylene carbonate.
 Fig. 20  High swelling PILs for use as catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 286. © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
PILs can also be used as pre-catalysts for poly(n-heterocyclic carbene)s (PNHCs). Taton et al. synthesized poly(3-vinyl-1-alkylimidazolium TFSI) via the radical polymerization of 3-alkyl-1-vinylimidazolium bromide and anion exchange with LiTFSI.269 These PILs were deprotonated using a strong base to produce PNHCs, which could further react with CO2 and form relatively air-stable and thermolabile PNHC–CO2 adducts. Both PNHC and PNHC–CO2 were used as active soluble polymer-supported organic catalysts in transesterification and benzoin condensation reactions under homogeneous conditions.
8.2 Selective separation
Multi-dimensional separations, allowing for the analysis of complex mixtures, are designed on the basis of combining multiple separation modes, including hydrophilic interactions, reversed-phase chromatography, size-exclusion chromatography, ion-exchange, etc. PILs are able to interact with other molecules through hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions, hydrogen bonds, ion exchange, π–π stacking, and electrostatic interactions, due to their powerful exchangeability and the modifiability of cation and anion parts. For example, guanidinium-based ILs could form up to five hydrogen bonds with nucleic acids, to recognize phosphate anions through ion pairing and hydrogen bonding, and to interact with aromatic amino acids existing on the surface of proteins through cation⋯π interactions. In addition, the biocompatibility of PILs also improves the separation efficiency of proteins.
Wang and co-authors287 developed boronate-functionalized graphene-coupled guanidinium type PILs for the separation of glycoproteins (Fig. 21). The high separation efficiency could be largely attributed to the good orthogonality of the boronate-functionalized graphene and guanidinium type PIL monoliths. The grafting of guanidinium onto the separation segments greatly improved the separation efficiency and allowed for the baseline separation of multiple types of glycoproteins, including ovalbumin, horseradish peroxidase, transferrin, ribonuclease A, and alpha fetoprotein. These results demonstrate the potential of the current PILs for clinical diagnosis.
 Fig. 21  A scheme for boronate-functionalized graphene-coupled poly(guanidinium ionic liquid) interface-free 2D monolithic materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287. © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Forward-osmosis (FO) desalination is an osmotic process that uses a semi-permeable membrane for the desalination of seawater or brackish water. With an osmotic pressure gradient, a “draw” solution of high concentration induces a net flow of water through the membrane into the draw solution.288,289 Thermosensitive PIL hydrogels have been successfully prepared and applied as smart draw agents for FO desalination (Fig. 22).290 PIL hydrogels were prepared via the polymerization of an ILM, tributyl-4-vinylbenzylphosphonium sulfonate, using a mixture of poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate and poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate as cross-linkers in dimethylsulfoxide. The prepared hydrogel is partially swollen at 60 °C (part I), and then desalination is conducted at 4 °C by drawing the fresh water from the feed solution to the hydrogel, across the membrane. After the FO process, the hydrogel adopts a swollen state (part II). When the temperature is increased to 60 °C again, the hydrogel deswells into the partially swollen state induced by a volume phase transition (part III). Simultaneously, the desalinated water is recovered as a liquid. Desalination can be achieved via a cyclic drawing–dewatering process to perpetually produce desalinated water. By tuning the transition temperatures of thermo-sensitive PIL hydrogels, it is feasible to build a practical desalination system operating using diurnal changes in temperature, or by utilizing waste heat.
 Fig. 22  A FO desalination system designed to perpetually produce desalinated water via the cyclic drawing–dewatering of the hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. © 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
8.3 PIL adsorbents

8.3.1. CO2 capture. 
CO2 capture and separation is a significant potential application field for ILs, due to the reversible solubility of CO2.291–294 It was found that transforming ionic monomers into PILs led to a higher CO2 capture efficiency compared with the corresponding ILs.295–297 The chemical structure of the polycations highly affects the CO2 capacities.298 The CO2 sorption capacities of polycations follow the order: ammonium > pyridinium > phosphonium > imidazolium.299 For example, ammonium-based PILs possess higher CO2 sorption capacities than imidazolium-based PILs, due to their more substantial positive charge densities and stronger interactions with CO2.295 The sorption capacities of anions are in the order of BF4 > PF6 ≫ Tf2N.299 However, long alkyl substituents on the cation and cross-linking lower the CO2 sorption capacity, because steric hindrance decreases CO2–cation interactions and the microvoid volume.299
Mikkola et al. evaluated imidazolium-based PILs with different counter anions in terms of CO2 capture. Acetate anions displayed a remarkably higher CO2 sorption performance than BF4−, PF6−, Tf2N−, trifluoromethanesulfonate (OTf−) and Br−.295 Jiang et al. found that gas molecules (CO2 and N2) in PILs interact more strongly with imidazolium cations than with anions.298 The role of anions in gas solubility is insignificant, which is in contrast to monomeric ILs. Einloft and co-workers synthesized a series of imidazolium-based polyurethanes.300 PILs having nitrogenated and polyether structures in the backbone allied to counter-cations are worthy of note for CO2 sorption. Chen et al. prepared cross-linked PIL porous particles, which presented good CO2 adsorption capabilities of 14.04 mg g−1 at 0.2 MPa and 25 °C, and can be recovered by desorption under vacuum and at 80 °C.301


8.3.2. CO2 separation. 
PIL membranes offer undeniable engineering and economic advantages over other separation technologies for CO2 capture from fossil fuels flue gas streams and also in natural gas separation and purification. Recently, phosphonium type PILs have been studied as alternatives to ammonium and imidazolium PILs for potential transport and separation applications. Noble et al. reported the effects of the cation alkyl chain length of poly([(tri-n-alkyl)-vinyl-benzylphosphonium][bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide]) (P([PnnnVB][Tf2N]), n = 4, 6, 8) on gas separation properties.302 The gas permeability was found to grow approximately linearly with the alkyl chain length substituted on the phosphonium cations. However, gas selectivity decreased with a rise in alkyl chain length from n = 4 to 6 and kept almost constant between n = 6 and 8. Marrucho et al. synthesized five PIL/IL composite membranes containing different IL cations (imidazolium, pyridinium, pyrrolidinium, ammonium and cholinium).303,304 Membranes based on tetra-alkyl ammonium-based PILs (pyrrolidinium, ammonium and cholinium) presented lower gas permeabilities and diffusivities, and higher CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 permselectivities than those of imidazolium and pyridinium type PILs. Since the permeability of CO2, CH4 and N2 in ILs is two orders of magnitude higher than in PILs, PIL/IL composite membranes possess an increasing permeability for all these gases, overcoming the hindered diffusion of gas in the polymer. These composites revealed increased permselectivity for CO2/N2, and the opposite behavior for CO2/CH4.304 The same group further studied pyrrolidinium-based polymer films containing different cyano-functionalized counter-anions and different amounts of free ILs.305 The results showed that increasing the IL content in the composite membranes increased the CO2 permeability and boosted the CO2/N2 permselectivity.
Ionic polyimides with a quaternization degree of up to 0.96 were prepared by Shaplov et al.306 Compared with neutral precursor polyimides, the prepared ionic polymers showed higher gas permeabilities, which were found to be dependent on the counter anion selection. The CO2 permeabilities of these polyimides are roughly identical to those for pure PILs with the TFSI anion. In addition, the incorporation of ILs into polyimide-based PILs improved the gas transport properties of the composite membranes. Bara et al. prepared PIL–IL composite membranes containing copper(I) chloride (CuCl) via the photo-polymerization of an ILM, 1-vinyl-3-butylimidazolium bistriflimide ([C4VIM][Tf2N]), in the presence of CuCl and a non-polymerizable IL, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazoliumchloride ([C4MIM][Cl]).307 Increasing the non-polymerizable IL content enhanced the permeabilities of CO2, H2, N2 and CO, while the addition of CuCl induced a reduction in gas diffusivity. The gas permeability and ideal gas pair selectivity for CO2/N2 and H2/N2 separations in these Cu-containing composite membranes were superior to the neat P[C4VIM][Tf2N] membranes.


8.3.3. Chemical absorption. 
Recently, Yuan et al. demonstrated a solution method to prepare mesoporous PIL membranes via the in situ ionic complexation of a PIL, poly(3-cyanomethyl-1-vinylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) (P[CMVIM][Tf2N]) and multivalent carboxylic acids under alkaline conditions.308,309 Porous PIL complex networks could effectively remove methyl orange (MO) from ethanol due to being highly dipolar, polarizable, and in a mesoporous state.310
Huang et al. prepared a macro/mesoporous polymeric network via in situ ionic complexation between a positively charged PIL and a negatively charged carboxylated pillar[5]arene (Fig. 23).311 These materials showed a specific surface area of 350 m2 g−1, and a pore volume of 1.22 cc g−1. These porous polymeric materials adsorbed 1,6-hexanediol from deuterated chloroform. Variation of the substrate showed good binding with aliphatic diols, with the highest affinity coming from 1,4-butanediol. This study provided a method to introduce the host–guest properties of macrocycles into solid-state materials and offered a more general framework for the construction of functional materials with controllable affinity for designated substrates.
 Fig. 23  The synthetic route to, and SEM images of, porous materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 311. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Amphiphilic PILs based on quaternized ethoxylate octadecylamine acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonate-co-acrylic acid (AMPS/AA) copolymers were synthesized by Attah et al. via free radical chain polymerization.312 These PILs showed high dispersion and demulsification efficiencies for oil (spill) and petroleum emulsions, respectively.
Mecerreyes et al. recently developed oil sorbent magnetic microcapsules via encapsulating an aqueous solution of magnetic NPs in nanoparticulated PIL based liquid marbles.313 Exposure to chloroform vapors produced magnetic micro-capsules with a balance between shell porosity and capsule mechanical stability, and without collapse of the capsule with the evaporation of the water. Empty microcapsules exhibited high selectivity for oil removal in oil/water mixtures. The adsorption capacity (11 g of oil per gram of capsule) was slightly superior to the gold standard for synthetic oil sorbents, polypropylene (10 g of oil per gram of sorbent).

8.4 PIL-based antimicrobial materials
Microbial infections are one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in hospitalized patients. Therefore, the development of alternative and highly efficient antibacterial materials that bacteria are not easily able to develop resistance to has gained considerable attention.314,315 Therefore, cationic polymers substituted with quaternary ammonium, pyridinium phosphonium, or imidazolium cations have been extensively studied. When microorganisms contact a cationic polymer surface, the cationic units will adsorb to the bacterium, and penetrate the cell membrane, leading to cell death.316
Recently, imidazolium type PILs have shown a broad-spectrum of antimicrobial activities.316 Yan et al. synthesized imidazolium based PIL membranes via in situ photo-cross-linking polymerization followed by anion-exchange with two different amino acids (L-proline (Pro) and L-tryptophan (Trp)).317 The resultant membranes showed high antimicrobial activities against both S. aureus and E. coli, low cytotoxicity, and good blood compatibility. The PIL–Trp membranes showed higher antibacterial activity due to the synergistic antibacterial effect of the anions. Furthermore, these PIL-based membranes could be easily recycled without a significant decrease in antimicrobial activity. Zhou et al. grafted high-density imidazolium type PIL brushes onto TiO2 surfaces via surface-initiated ring-opening metathesis polymerizations. The resulting hybrid materials presented good antibacterial and anti-bio-fouling properties.318 The eco-friendly PIL–TiO2 nanomaterials could be applied to various anti-microbial applications ranging from light activated systems to dark sterilization approaches.
The structure–antibacterial activity relationship between small molecular compounds and the corresponding polymers is still elusive. Yan et al. studied the structure–antibacterial activity relationships of imidazolium-type ILMs, PILs, and PIL membranes with various substituents.319 The effects of the carbon chain length of substitution at the N3 position and the charge density of the imidazolium cations (mono- or bis-imidazolium) on antimicrobial activities against both S. aureus and E. coli were investigated. A longer alkyl chain length and higher charge density lead to higher antibacterial properties for both ILMs and PILs in bacteria suspension. The antibacterial activities of these PIL membranes were correlated with their chemical composition and with the molecular surface structure. Activity increased with charge density and decreased with increasing alkyl chain length. These results indicated that antibacterial studies of small molecules and homopolymers may not provide a sufficient basis for understanding the antibacterial activity observed in corresponding polymer membranes.
Quaternary ammonium-based polymers are widely studied cationic materials for anti-microbial applications. While such polymers are not necessarily PILs, their structural similarities to many PILs make them important materials to examine. Hedrick et al. reported a thermally sensitive antimicrobial hydrogel formed from the lactide stereocomplexation of poly(L-lactide)-b-poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-lactide) and quaternary ammonium based charged polycarbonate triblock polymers.320 These stereocomplexes formed soluble micelles in aqueous solution at room temperature. Nevertheless, gel-like polymeric materials with distinctive supramolecular fibers and ribbon-like structures were formed upon heating to physiological temperature (37 °C). This material exhibited a remarkable enhancement in antimicrobial activity and induced no significant hemolysis or cytotoxicity towards mammalian cells. Liu et al. synthesized cationic poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPVNMe3+) for the rapid discrimination of fungi, Gram-positive, and Gram-negative bacteria.321 Zeta potential measurements showed that the binding of PPV–NMe3+ to C. albicans and E. coli was dominated by electrostatic interactions, while hydrophobic interactions (thermodynamic) dominated for PPV–NMe3+ and B. subtilis.
Modification of the counter-anion of the antimicrobial polymer was demonstrated to dramatically influence the antimicrobial and hemolytic activities. Sardon et al. investigated a series of quaternary ammonium-based polycarbonates modified via anion metathesis exchange reactions with eight different counteranions, including chloride, penicillin G, acetate, lactate, trifluoroacetate, benzoate, citrate, and malonate.322 Among the investigated anions, trifluoroacetate and benzoate afforded the highest antimicrobial activities and were less hemolytic than the chloride anion.
Wang et al. constructed an antibiotic switch relying on supramolecular self-assembly and disassembly between a poly-(phenylenevinylene) (PPV) derivative quaternary ammonium type PIL and cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]) for the reversible turn-on and turn-off of its antibacterial activity.323 PPV–PIL could form a noncovalent complex with CB[7] that featured a hydrophilic exterior and a hydrophobic cavity for encapsulating quaternary ammonium cations. The PPV/CB[7] complex formed reduced the biocidal activity of PPV owing to the encapsulation of quaternary ammonium groups (switch off). Upon adding amantadine (AD), a more stable CB[7]/AD complex formed and released PPV through competitive replacement. This release of PPV (switch on) affords antibiotic activity. This strategy requires no active site chemical modification of an existing antibacterial agent and could be applied to other macromolecular cationic antibiotic agents.
8.5 Photoresists & corrosion inhibitors
Azide-functionalized triazolium type PILs have been applied as ion conducting negative tone photoresists.324 After UV-irradiation through an optical mask, micron-scaled, patterned, solid polyelectrolyte layers with controlled sizes and shapes were obtained. The alkylation of poly(1,2,3-triazole)s can be generalized in the synthesis of PILs with a tunable amount of pendant functionalities.
For the first time, Long et al. reported the 3D printing of phosphonium type PILs via photopolymerization with low UV light intensity and high digital resolution.325 The obtained cross-linked phosphonium PIL exhibited high thermal stability, a tunable Tg, optical clarity, and ion conductivity. Most recently, Choudhury et al. reported using crosslinked PIL NPs for anticorrosion coatings, which were synthesized via photo-polymerization in a water-based miniemulsion.326 These PIL NPs, with a diameter of about 200 nm, boosted the corrosion resistance of the self-assembled nanophase particle-metal interface by preferentially migrating to the metal surface during coating. This result exemplified the potential for PIL emulsions to enhance barrier functions and increase corrosion protection in metal coatings.
8.6 Supporting electrolyte for electro-organic synthesis
Electro-organic chemistry is an intriguing field which is regarded to be more green and eco-friendly in comparison with conventional organic synthesis.327,328 Electro-organic synthesis can lead to the replacement of toxic chemical reagents, because electrons may act as both reagents and catalysts. ILs have been used as electrolytes for electrochemical transformations to provide efficient transport of charge.329 However, the high viscosity and low conductivity of ILs reduced the mass transport rate of the electro-active species, leading to low current flow.
Pyrrolidinium type PIL/carbon black composite electrolytes have been prepared by Little et al. and applied as electrolytes for synthetic transformations. Such a stable electrolyte could be reused and recovered. In addition, a composite electrolyte can accelerate mass transport through the modification of an electrode surface.330 More recently, Yoo et al. showed that a PIL/carbon NP composite electrolyte can expand the operational electrochemical window to include cathodically initiated processes occurring at potentials of up to −2.6 V vs. Ag/AgNO3.331
8.7 Dispersants and stabilizers
Imidazolium type PILs are highly effective dispersants for nanocarbon materials in aqueous and organic suspensions. The aromatic nitrogen-containing five-membered cation ring cannot only coordinate with metal ions but can also undergo cation–π interactions with aromatic carbon nanostructures. The dispersion process is commonly conducted via the sonication of the disperse phase in an aqueous solution containing imidazolium-based PILs.
The dispersion of graphene in various solvents provides the motivation to make graphene more industrially processable, enabling bulk transport by pumping and accurate volumetric metering and making graphene coatable on the microscopic to macroscopic length scale. Physically adsorbed PILs have helped enhance the long-term stability of graphene dispersions. Texter et al. demonstrated the essentially complete exfoliation of graphene aggregates in water at concentrations of up to 5% by weight (166-fold greater than the previous high concentration reported) using recently developed triblock copolymers and copolymeric nanolatexes based on a reactive IL acrylate surfactant.52 The visible absorption coefficient in aqueous dispersion, 48.9 ± 1.3 cm2 mg−1 at 500 nm, is about twice that formerly accepted. Dilute and concentrated graphene dispersions were also shown to be rheo-optical fluids that exhibit an isotropic to nematic transition upon the application of a shear field.
Metallic NPs, exhibiting properties that differ markedly from the properties of bulk metals, have attracted much attention recently in the areas of catalysis, bactericidal agents, sensors, optics, etc.332,333 From a practical point of view, the metal NPs must be stabilized in suspension for the prevention of aggregation and flocculation.334,335 Lu et al. synthesized imidazolium-type PIL colloids for the immobilization of Au and Pd NPs.336 These metal nanocomposite NPs can catalyze efficiently the reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol in the presence of sodium borohydride. The catalytic activity is variable in terms of the ionic strength, which offers an effective method to modulate the catalytic behavior of these metal NPs.
Recently, Mecerreyes et al. proved a concept for the use of an all-in-one reducing agent and stabilizer for making metal NPs, and they showed that the size and shape of metal NPs could be adjusted by altering the reaction conditions such as the reactant stoichiometry and the concentration.337 Various redox active counter anions (such as ReO4−, WO42−, BH3CN−) have been used for preparing functional PIL colloids, which were then used for making Ag and Au NPs without using an external reducing agent.
PILs can be considered “smart” stabilizers for metal NPs, which can have tunable properties with diverse applications. Charan et al. studied the preparation of stable Au, Ag, and Ni-NPs in a liquid phase by employing imidazolium-based PILs as stabilizers. The impact of the alkyl chain length on the imidazolium ring and the counter anion on the core size of PIL stabilized metal NPs was studied.338 These PILs also act as NP carriers and reversible solubility switches between aqueous and organic media. The use of PIL-based nanolatex stabilizers45 and of PIL triblock copolymers68 as reversible solubility switches has been demonstrated for graphene dispersion phase transfer.52 Both PIL triblock copolymers and PIL nanolatexes have been shown to be effective stabilizers for diverse substrates including organic pigments, nanocarbons, and conventional latexes.339 Particularly important were demonstrations of how such PIL stabilizers can immunize aqueous dispersions against salt-induced Dubye–Hückel charge screening induced destabilization.339 Such stabilizing materials provide osmotic brush stabilization through adsorption from solution (triblock copolymers) and from suspension (nanolatexes).
9. Summary perspective
The topic of PILs is steadily broadening, as more and more diverse applications are demonstrated. Developments over the past five to ten years have taken the polymerization of ILs into essentially every principal type of radical polymerization used in industry and academia, with the exception of large-scale bulk polymerization. These polymerization areas include suspension polymerization and its variant miniemulsion polymerization, solution and dispersion polymerizations and their variant microemulsion polymerization, emulsion polymerization, and several types of living polymerization. ILs have been shown to be good solvents for doing cationic polymerizations. It will not be too long before oxirane-functionalized ILs will lead to UV photoinitiated cationically cured PIL coatings, and the condensation polymerizations of ILs will become more common.
The variations in physical properties (mainly solubility) that accompany anion exchanges provide many degrees of freedom in tuning PILs and in tuning materials derived from PILs. These tunable properties and associated structure–property relationships have produced reversibly porating materials, tunable conductivities, and controlled phase transfer switches for manipulating disperse systems. The menu of anionic recognition agents useful in PIL stimuli-responsiveness has expanded to include metal anions and double tail surfactant anions. Such materials offer new material properties including catalytic activity, magnetic field responsiveness, and storage modulus effects.
In addition to the intrinsic solvent and anion stimuli-responsiveness of PILs, other specific chemical interactions are also being used to design responsive materials, including pH and redox-active functionality. Reversible CO2 complexation is arguably one of the most significant interactions demonstrated using PILs, and it has great potential in assisting new sustainability efforts in storing and using CO2 to decrease the carbon footprint of our chemical industries. Other important applications for porous materials emanating from PILs include environmental applications. In addition to providing diverse approaches for CO2 sequestration, PIL membranes are being developed for water purification, drug delivery, and other applications.
Diverse architectures have been achieved through self-assembly and branching. Some of these efforts have produced porosity on different length scales, ranging from microporosity to mesoporosity and macroporosity. 3D PILs appear to have intrinsic chemomechanical potential, because anion exchange modifies how PILs exhibit intra-network segmental interactions. These properties have been harnessed to produce highly sensitive probes for vapor and chemical component detection. These new 3D materials have been accompanied by new particulate systems, beginning with nanogels and nanolatexes and growing to micron-sized beads with controlled porosity.
The range of PILs in electrolytes has expanded from fuel cells and DSSCs applications to advanced membranes and electrodes for various electrochemical devices, such as supercapacitors, lithium metal batteries, electrochromic devices, transistors, and memory devices. A variety of applications in energy storage materials are being found for PILs. These applications begin with the design of PILs for PEMs (polyelectrolyte membranes). Recent results have demonstrated designed PILs that yield proton conduction with a lower activation to conduction than Nafion. Other applications involve electrode development and tunable electrolytes for use in batteries and fuel cells. PILs are also finding applications in supercapacitor design and fabrication. Further, they are finding applications in carbon chemistry as precursors, porosity inducing agents, and stabilizers for nanocarbon of every type.
10. Expected future developments
This review has outlined major efforts in synthetic and material developments of PILs based on free radical polymerization chemistries. A significant opportunity exists for extending IL moieties to new classes of monomers suitable for condensation polymerization. Condensation polymerization producing PILs and PIL-composite materials will greatly expand the utilization of ILs and greatly extend the range of materials derived from PILs. A recent example includes the synthesis of a PIL polyurethane that is the first cross-linked network to exhibit Tm < Tg.
The reversible core–shell precipitation of dihydrophilic diblock copolymers incorporating a PIL block provides promise in understanding the thermodynamic stabilization of dispersions. Varying the block lengths of the stabilizing and core-forming blocks should provide significant insight into how to stabilize NPs. Of course, to better understand block copolymer chemistries, we must learn to distinguish micellization from precipitation, and this advance represents a learning opportunity for polymer and materials scientists, with extant recipes coming from colloid chemistry.
PILs have found applications in electrical energy storage (EES) devices and materials and have already been discussed as novel PEMs and electrolytes for batteries, fuel cells, and dye sensitized solar cells. While PIL applications in these and related EES devices will advance, PILs are particularly well poised to assist in carrying such devices into the realm of flexible electronics and roll-to-roll coating.
A technology in its infancy in the development of PILs themselves is liquid PILs (LPILs). Besides providing new and more easily recovered solvents for reactions, LPIL are expected to revolutionize PEM technologies, the plasticization of industrial polymers, and separation technologies. Such materials are also expected to provide new approaches to improving composite toughness when adding nanofillers and limiting embrittlement.
In addition to EES material applications, the conversion of PILs and PIL-based materials to magnetically responsive materials is expected to burgeon. An initial application discussed earlier can be envisioned to be extended to all porous PIL materials and to PIL-stabilized dispersions. Simple anionic exchange with paramagnetic anions suffices for such conversion, and once converted, applied magnetic fields can be used to orient and collect such materials. For the same reasons, PIL-supported noble metal catalysts are expected to become much more prevalent. They can be incorporated as large anions through exchange, and then can be chemically reduced to form small metal NPs. The intrinsic thermal stability of PILs and their easily designed porosity make them ideal candidates for new catalyst systems. Combining such metal catalysts with nanolatexes and nanogels derived from PILs will offer a new approach to designing heterogeneous catalysts that function as homogeneous catalysts. We hope this review will aid the experienced polymer and materials scientist in preparing, modifying, and applying PIL technology to new and challenging materials challenges.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (no. 21425417), the Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21274101), and the Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
References
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, F. Yan and J. Texter, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 431–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan and W. Zheng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mecerreyes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1629–1648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, D. Mecerreyes and M. Antonietti, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1009–1036 CrossRef CAS .
M. Döbbelin, I. Azcune, M. L. Bedu, A. Ruiz de Luzuriaga, A. Genua, V. Jovanovski, G. N. Cabañero and I. Odriozola, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1583–1590 CrossRef .
H. Gu, F. Yan and J. Texter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1218–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Green, S. Grubjesic, S. Lee and M. A. Firestone, Polym. Rev., 2009, 49, 339–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J.-H. Choi, D. Salas-dela Cruz, K. I. Winey and Y. A. Elabd, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4809–4816 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, H. Tang, W. Sun, M. Radosz and Y. Shen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 5477–5489 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, W. Yuan, L. Lu, H. Zhao, Z. Jia and G. L. Baker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 2104–2110 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Ricks-Laskoski and A. W. Snow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12402–12403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Prescher, F. Polzer, Y. Yang, M. Siebenbürger, M. Ballauff and J. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 12–15 CrossRef PubMed .
H. He, H. Chung, E. Roth, D. Luebke, D. Hopkinson, H. Nulwala and K. Matyjaszewski, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2015, 26, 823–828 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshizawa and H. Ohno, Chem. Lett., 1999, 889–890 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirao, K. Ito and H. Ohno, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1291–1294 CrossRef CAS .
U. H. Choi, A. Mittal, T. L. Price Jr, H. W. Gibson, J. Runt and R. H. Colby, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1175–1186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshizawa and H. Ohno, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 1723–1728 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Weber, Y. Ye, A. L. Schmitt, S. M. Banik, Y. A. Elabd and M. K. Mahanthappa, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5727–5735 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Meek, S. Sharick, Y. Ye, K. I. Winey and Y. A. Elabd, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 4850–4862 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fan, W. Wang, A. P. Holt, H. Feng, D. Uhrig, X. Lu, T. Hong, Y. Wang, N.-G. Kang, J. Mays and A. P. Sokolov, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4557–4570 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. João, L. C. Tomé, M. Isik, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 27462–27472 RSC .
R. Marcilla, J. Alberto Blazquez, J. Rodriguez, J. A. Pomposo and D. Mecerreyes, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijayakrishna, D. Mecerreyes, Y. Gnanou and D. Taton, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5167–5174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cammarata, S. G. Kazarian, P. A. Salter and T. Welton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 5192–5200 RSC .
A. Mele, C. D. Tran and S. H. De Paoli Lacerda, Angew. Chem., 2003, 115, 4500–4502 CrossRef .
A. Shaplov, D. Ponkratov and Y. Vygodskii, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2016, 58, 73–142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marcilla, J. A. Blazquez, R. Fernandez, H. Grande, J. A. Pomposo and D. Mecerreyes, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye and Y. A. Elabd, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 8494–8503 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Appetecchi, G. T. Kim, M. Montanino, M. Carewska, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes and I. De Meatza, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3668–3675 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-B. Zhou, H. Matsumoto and K. Tatsumi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2196–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tokuda, S. C. Thickett, H. Minami and P. B. Zetterlund, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Texter, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 163–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tokuda, M. Yamane, S. C. Thickett, H. Minami and P. B. Zetterlund, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 3955–3962 RSC .
A. Bonnefond, M. Ibarra, D. Mecerreyes and J. R. Leiza, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 1145–1152 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brown, A. Bushmelev, C. P. Butts, J. Cheng, J. Eastoe, I. Grillo, R. K. Heenan and A. M. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2414–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brown, C. P. Butts, J. Eastoe, E. Padron Hernandez, F. L. D. A. Machado and R. J. de Oliveira, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2765–2767 RSC .
Z. Chen, F. Yan, L. Qiu, J. Lu, Y. Zhou, J. Chen, Y. Tang and J. Texter, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3803–3806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Qiu, Z. Deng, J. Texter and F. Yan, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7948–7955 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu and J. Texter, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 13, 252–262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, J. Guo, Z. Si and F. Yan, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4059–4066 RSC .
F. Yan and J. Texter, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2696–2698 RSC .
T. L. Merrigan, E. D. Bates, S. C. Dorman and J. H. Davis Jr, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2051–2052 RSC .
X. Sui, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4023–4025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. England, N. Tambe and J. Texter, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 310–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Page, D. England and J. Texter, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 1398–1402 CrossRef CAS .

          C. P. Yong and L. M. Gan, in Polymer Particles, ed. M. Okubo, Springer,  2005, vol. 3, pp. 257–298 Search PubMed .
J. Texter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1996–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pincus, Macromolecules, 1991, 24, 2912–2919 CrossRef CAS .
M. Antonietti, Y. Shen, T. Nakanishi, M. Manuelian, R. Campbell, L. Gwee, Y. A. Elabd, N. Tambe, R. Crombez and J. Texter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 649–653 CAS .
J. Texter, D. Ager, V. A. Vasantha, R. Crombez, D. England, X. Ma, R. Maniglia and N. Tambe, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 1377–1379 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ager, V. Arjunan Vasantha, R. Crombez and J. Texter, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11191–11205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, F. Yan, Z. Chen, H. Diao, F. Chu, S. Yu and J. Lu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 746–753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L. Qiu, B. Liu, Y. Peng, F. Yan and S. Shang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 4531–4538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Men, D. Kuzmicz and J. Yuan, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura, M. Tokuda, T. Suzuki and H. Minami, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 2331–2337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sahiner and A. O. Yasar, Fuel Process. Technol., 2016, 152, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan and M. Antonietti, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 744–750 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Wiesenauer, J. P. Edwards, V. F. Scalfani, T. S. Bailey and D. L. Gin, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5075–5078 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Wiesenauer, P. T. Nguyen, B. S. Newell, T. S. Bailey, R. D. Noble and D. L. Gin, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 7923–7927 RSC .
T. Suga, M. Sakata, K. Aoki and H. Nishide, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 703–707 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Mudraboyina, M. M. Obadia, I. Allaoua, R. Sood, A. Serghei and E. Drockenmuller, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1720–1726 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cordella, A. Kermagoret, A. Debuigne, R. Riva, I. German, M. Isik, C. Jérôme, D. Mecerreyes, D. Taton and C. Detrembleur, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Yan, P. Alcouffe, A. Charlot, E. Fleury and J. Bernard, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1008–1011 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Warren and S. P. Armes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10174–10185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang and S. Zhu, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 755–758 CrossRef CAS .
B. Charleux, G. Delaittre, J. Rieger and F. D’Agosto, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6753–6765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Texter, V. A. Vasantha, R. Crombez, R. Maniglia, L. Slater and T. Mourey, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, D. Luebke, H. Nulwala and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6601–6609 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Obadia, B. P. Mudraboyina, I. Allaoua, A. Haddane, D. Montarnal, A. Serghei and E. Drockenmuller, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 794–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Von Werne and T. E. Patten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7409–7410 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y.-N. Zhou, J.-S. Luo and Z.-H. Luo, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 882–891 RSC .
Q. Chen, C. Peng, H. Xie, Z. Kent Zhao and M. Bao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44598–44603 RSC .
M. Obadia, G. Colliat-Dangus, A. Debuigne, A. Serghei, C. Detrembleur and E. Drockenmuller, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3332–3335 RSC .
C. Detrembleur, A. Debuigne, M. Hurtgen, C. Jérôme, J. Pinaud, M. Fèvre, P. Coupillaud, J. Vignolle and D. Taton, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6397–6404 CrossRef CAS .
P. Coupillaud, M. Fèvre, A.-L. Wirotius, K. Aissou, G. Fleury, A. Debuigne, C. Detrembleur, D. Mecerreyes, J. Vignolle and D. Taton, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 422–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cordella, A. Debuigne, C. Jérôme, Z. Kochovski, D. Taton and C. Detrembleur, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1181–1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Nykaza, R. Benjamin, K. M. Meek and Y. A. Elabd, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 154, 119–127 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Meek and Y. A. Elabd, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1200–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, S. Wang, H. Zhou, C. Gao and W. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 945–954 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Tang, J. Huang, L.-Y. Xu, Y. Li, J. Song, Y. Ma, L. Yang, D. Yuan and H.-Y. Wu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 107, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Fang, G. Han and H. Zhang, in Microwave-assisted Polymer Synthesis, ed. R. Hoogenboom, U. S. Schubert, F. Wiesbrock and D. Achilias, Spring, online,  2016, vol. 3, pp. 87–129 Search PubMed .
X.-J. Tang, J. Huang, L.-Y. Xu, Y. Li, J. Song, Y. Ma, L. Yang, D. Yuan and H.-Y. Wu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 107, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, J. Yin and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9812–9819 CAS .
H. Minamimoto, H. Irie, T. Uematsu, T. Tsuda, A. Imanishi, S. Seki and S. Kuwabata, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4281–4289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, P. Su, X. Chen, R. Zhang and Y. Yang, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 3246–3252 RSC .
I. A. Shkrob, T. W. Marin, S. D. Chemerisov, J. Hatcher and J. F. Wishart, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 9043–9055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuwabata, H. Minamimoto, K. Inoue, A. Imanishi, K. Hosoya, H. Uyama, T. Torimoto, T. Tsuda and S. Seki, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3722 Search PubMed .
M. Miyamoto, M. Sawamoto and T. Higashimura, Macromolecules, 1984, 17, 2228–2230 CrossRef CAS .
R. Faust and J. Kennedy, Polym. Bull., 1986, 15, 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, L. Han, X. Zhang, J. Mao, L. Gong, W. Guo, K. Gu and S. Li, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 2560–2568 RSC .
M. Suckow, S. Zschoche, G. Heinrich, B. Voit and F. Böhme, Polymer, 2016, 96, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tamaki, T. Taguchi, Y. Kitajyo, K. Takahashi, R. Sakai, T. Kakuchi and T. Satoh, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 7032–7042 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Zhou, L. Qiu, C. Yuan and F. Yan, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 4004–4009 RSC .
X. Ma, R. Crombez, M. Ashaduzzaman, M. Kunitake, L. Slater, T. Mourey and J. Texter, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10356–10358 RSC .
X. Ma, M. Ashaduzzaman, M. Kunitake, R. Crombez, J. Texter, L. Slater and T. Mourey, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7148–7157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tauer, N. Weber and J. Texter, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6065–6067 RSC .
J. Texter, C. R. Chim., 2003, 6, 1425–1433 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, J. Huang, W. Zhang, M. Li, C. Tao and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4074–4078 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, W. Zhu, N. Gao, J. Li, H. Yang, Y. Jiang, P. Seidel, B. J. Ravoo and G. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3844–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Coupillaud, M. Fèvre, A. L. Wirotius, K. Aissou, G. Fleury, A. Debuigne, C. Detrembleur, D. Mecerreyes, J. Vignolle and D. Taton, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 422–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, W. Wu, J. Li, C. Han, S. Zhang, J. Guo and H. Zhou, Front. Mater. Sci., 2015, 9, 254–263 CrossRef .
G. McHale and M. I. Newton, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 2530–2546 RSC .
E. Bormashenko, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 16, 266–271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Genua, D. Mecerreyes, J. A. Alduncin, I. Mondragon, R. Marcilla and H.-J. Grande, Polym. J., 2011, 43, 966–970 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fernandes, R. Gracia, G. P. Leal, M. Paulis and D. Mecerreyes, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3397–3403 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Kochovski, Y. Lu, B. V. K. J. Schmidt, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7731–7737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. G. Prechtl, P. S. Campbell, J. D. Scholten, G. B. Fraser, G. Machado, C. C. Santini, J. Dupont and Y. Chauvin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2601–2606 RSC .
C. Thiot, M. Schmutz, A. Wagner and C. Mioskowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2868–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Das, T. K. Paira, M. Biswas and T. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4324–4332 CAS .
C. Yuan, J. Guo and F. Yan, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3431–3435 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, F. Xu, B. Sun, R. Fu, H. He and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3959–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Supasitmongkol and P. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1961–1972 CAS .
X. Feng, C. Gao, Z. Guo, Y. Zhou and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23389–23395 RSC .
C. Viklund, F. Svec, J. M. J. Fréchet and K. Irgum, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 744–750 CrossRef CAS .
I. Azcune, I. García, P. M. Carrasco, A. Genua, M. Tanczyk, M. Jaschik, K. Warmuzinski, G. Cabañero and I. Odriozola, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3407–3412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan and J. Texter, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 2492–2495 CrossRef .
D. England, F. Yan and J. Texter, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 12013–12024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gu and J. Texter, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3378–3384 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, G. Chen, X. Wang, J. Li, Y. Zhou and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4969–4972 RSC .
K. Täuber, Q. Zhao, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 39–42 CrossRef .
J. Huang, C.-A. Tao, Q. An, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Li, D. Shen and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 967–969 RSC .
V. V. Shevchenko, A. V. Stryutsky, N. S. Klymenko, M. A. Gumenna, A. A. Fomenko, V. N. Bliznyuk, V. V. Trachevsky, V. V. Davydenko and V. V. Tsukruk, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3349–3359 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mori, Y. Ebina, R. Kambara and K. Nakabayashi, Polym. J., 2012, 44, 550–560 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Zheng, J. Zhang, L. Sun, F. Chen, P. Fan and M. Zhong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32853–32861 RSC .
G. A. Becht, M. Sofos, S. Seifert and M. A. Firestone, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1421–1428 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Ringstrand, S. Seifert, D. W. Podlesak and M. A. Firestone, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1155–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Weiss-Maurin, D. Cordella, C. Jérôme, D. Taton and C. Detrembleur, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2521–2530 RSC .
C. Mukesh, J. Bhatt and K. Prasad, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1498–1504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pourjavadi, S. H. Hosseini and Z. S. Emami, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 232, 453–457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, S. Soll, M. Drechsler, A. H. Müller and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17556–17559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Yuan, X. Yang, Y. Han and H. Yan, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 2201–2208 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jangu and T. E. Long, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3298–3304 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, B. Lin and F. Yan, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 335–337 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qian, C. Yuan, J. Guo and Y. Feng, Acta Chim. Sin., 2015, 73, 310 CrossRef CAS .
R. Souzy and B. Ameduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2005, 30, 644–687 CrossRef CAS .
H. Diao, F. Yan, L. Qiu, J. Lu, X. Lu, B. Lin, Q. Li, S. Shang, W. Liu and J. Liu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6398–6405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernicola, B. Scrosati and H. Ohno, Ionics, 2006, 12, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakamoto, A. Noda, K. Hayamizu, S. Hayashi, H.-o. Hamaguchi and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1541–1548 CAS .
A. Martinelli, A. Matic, P. Jacobsson, L. Börjesson, A. Fernicola, S. Panero, B. Scrosati and H. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12462–12467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fernicola, S. Panero, B. Scrosati, M. Tamada and H. Ohno, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fernicola, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yan, S. Yu, X. Zhang, L. Qiu, F. Chu, J. You and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1480–1484 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, F. Yan, X. Zhang, J. You, P. Wu, J. Lu, Q. Xu, X. Xia and G. Ma, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3389–3392 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, S. Cheng, L. Qiu, F. Yan, S. Shang and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1807–1813 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chu, B. Lin, F. Yan, L. Qiu and J. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7979–7984 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chu, B. Lin, B. Qiu, Z. Si, L. Qiu, Z. Gu, J. Ding, F. Yan and J. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18411–18417 RSC .
Z. Si, F. Gu, J. Guo and F. Yan, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1311–1317 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, L. Qiu, J. Lu and F. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6718–6725 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, H. Dong, Y. Li, Z. Si, F. Gu and F. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1858–1867 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, H. Dong, Y. Li, Z. Si and F. Yan, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, H. Dong, Y. Li, Z. Sun and F. Yan, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6740–6747 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Si, L. Qiu, H. Dong, F. Gu, Y. Li and F. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4346–4355 CAS .
B. Qiu, B. Lin, Z. Si, L. Qiu, F. Chu, J. Zhao and F. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, B. Lin, L. Qiu and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1040–1045 RSC .
L. Gu, H. Dong, Z. Sun, Y. Li and F. Yan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 94387–94398 RSC .
M. Graetzel, R. A. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. D. Gregorio, R. Agosta, R. Giannuzzi, F. Martina, L. D. Marco, M. Manca and G. Gigli, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3109–3111 RSC .
J. Zhao, X. Shen, F. Yan, L. Qiu, S. Lee and B. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7326–7330 RSC .
Y. Rong, Z. Ku, M. Xu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, J. Chen, A. Mei, T. Liu and H. Han, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9271–9274 RSC .
J. L. Anderson, R. Ding, A. Ellern and D. W. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 593–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shirota, T. Mandai, H. Fukazawa and T. Kato, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2011, 56, 2453–2459 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, L. Qiu, D. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Han, B. Sun, G. Fu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18018–18024 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, B. Sun, X. Chen, Q. Li, L. Qiu and F. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 61, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, W. Yuan, H. Zhao and G. L. Baker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, T. Feng, F. Chu, S. Zhang, N. Yuan, G. Qiao and J. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 57216–57222 RSC .
X. Chen, Q. Li, J. Zhao, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, B. Sun and F. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kawano, T. Katakabe, H. Shimosawa, M. Khaja Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel, H. Matsui, T. Kitamura, N. Tanabe and M. Watanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1916–1921 RSC .
N. Jeon, D. K. Hwang, Y. S. Kang, S. S. Im and D.-W. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tatsuma, M. Taguchi and N. Oyama, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 1201–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone, P. Mustarelli, A. Magistris, M. Fagnoni, S. Protti, C. Gerbaldi and A. Spinella, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Seidel, S. Jeschke, P. Vettikuzha and H. D. Wiemhofer, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12048–12051 RSC .
R. Marcilla, F. Alcaide, H. Sardon, J. A. Pomposo, C. Pozo-Gonzalo and D. Mecerreyes, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Yang, S. Fang, S. Dong, S.-i. Hirano and K. Tachibana, Polym. Int., 2012, 61, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Yang, S. Fang, S. Dong, S.-i. Hirano and K. Tachibana, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8662–8668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, B. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Fang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 447, 222–227 CAS .
M. Li, L. Wang, B. Yang, T. Du and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yin, Z. Zhang, L. Yang and S.-I. Hirano, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 150–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Feng, Z. Zhou and J. Nie, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 256, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, L. Yang, K. Tachibana and S.-i. Hirano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 170–178 CAS .
L. Porcarelli, A. S. Shaplov, M. Salsamendi, J. R. Nair, Y. S. Vygodskii, D. Mecerreyes and C. Gerbaldi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10350–10359 CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55–67 CAS .
G. A. Tiruye, D. Muñoz-Torrero, J. Palma, M. Anderson and R. Marcilla, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 472–480 CrossRef .
G. A. Tiruye, D. Muñoz-Torrero, J. Palma, M. Anderson and R. Marcilla, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 560–568 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Shaplov, D. O. Ponkratov, P.-H. Aubert, E. I. Lozinskaya, C. Plesse, F. Vidal and Y. S. Vygodskii, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3191–3193 RSC .
H. C. Moon, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Y. Ren, J. Guo and F. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1595–1598 RSC .
J.-H. Choi, W. Xie, Y. Gu, C. D. Frisbie and T. P. Lodge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7294–7302 CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Song, X. Zhang, X. Wu, F. Wang and Z. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xin and J. Hao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7171–7187 RSC .
T. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kim and K. S. Suh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. C. Trigueiro, R. L. Lavall and G. G. Silva, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 264–273 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, S. Sun, H. Peng, C. P. Tsui, D. Shi, X. Xie and Y. Yang, Composites, Part B, 2016, 106, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and Y. Yun, Microchim. Acta, 2013, 180, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. Wu, L. Zhang, J. Lu, F. Verproot, Y. Liu, Z. Xing, J. Li and X.-M. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2632–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Li, Y. Zeng, T. Tang, Y. Pan and L. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 717–725 RSC .
S. S. Zhang and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 422–426 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 334, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Grygiel, J.-S. Lee, K. Sakaushi, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1312–1316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Von Zamory, M. Bedu, S. Fantini, S. Passerini and E. Paillard, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, K. Sakaushi, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85517–85522 RSC .
J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 805–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Muller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101–113 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yuan, J. Guo, M. Tan, M. Guo, L. Qiu and F. Yan, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 271–275 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, J. Guo and F. Yan, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3431–3435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Texter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1996–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Motornov, Y. Roiter, I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 174–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Iwata, M. Oodate, Y. Uyama, H. Amemiya and Y. Ikada, J. Mater. Sci., 1991, 55, 119–130 CAS .
Y. Lu, A. Zhuk, L. Xu, X. Liang, E. Kharlampieva and S. A. Sukhishvili, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 5464–5472 RSC .
Y. Tang, B. Tang and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7919–7928 CAS .
S. Jiang, F. Liu, A. Lerch, L. Ionov and S. Agarwal, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4865–4870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Firestone, P. G. Rickert, S. Seifert and M. L. Dietz, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2004, 357, 3991–3998 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Wang and R. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9114–9118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zuo, N. Guo, Z. Jiao, P. Song, X. Liu, R. Wang and Y. Xiong, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 169–178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, H. Tang and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 25525–25535 RSC .
B. Ziółkowski and D. Diamond, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10308–10310 RSC .
Y. Men, M. Drechsler and J. Yuan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1721–1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deguchi, Y. Kohno and H. Ohno, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 238–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, X. Yin, N. A. D. Burke and H. D. H. Stöver, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5937–5943 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amajjahe and H. Ritter, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3250–3253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, G. Yu, W.-J. Wang, Q. Ren, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 915–924 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, M. Yin, A. P. Zhang, S. Prescher, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5549–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, J. Guo, D. Xu and F. Yan, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 1330–1336 RSC .
M. T. Rahman, Z. Barikbin, A. Z. M. Badruddoza, P. S. Doyle and S. A. Khan, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9535–9543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, L. Qiu, Z. Deng and F. Yan, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1309–1312 RSC .
S. Xiao, X. Lu and Q. Lu, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7944–7950 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tudor, L. Florea, S. Gallagher, J. Burns and D. Diamond, Sensors, 2016, 16, 219 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Amajjahe and H. Ritter, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3250–3253 CrossRef CAS .
K. Täuber, A. Zimathies and J. Yuan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 2176–2180 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhao, J. W. Dunlop, X. Qiu, F. Huang, Z. Zhang, J. Heyda, J. Dzubiella, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4293 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhao, J. Heyda, J. Dzubiella, K. Täuber, J. W. Dunlop and J. Yuan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2913–2917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Miao, F. Li, Y. Zuo, R. Wang and Y. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 3013–3019 RSC .
X. Feng, X. Sui, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7865–7868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, C. Yuan, M. Guo, L. Wang and F. Yan, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3261–3266 RSC .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jang, N. Selvapalam, G. Yun and K. Kim, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 3222–3226 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, X. Feng, X. Sui, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13789–13793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Darabi, P. G. Jessop and M. F. Cunningham, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4391–4436 RSC .
C. Federsel, A. Boddien, R. Jackstell, R. Jennerjahn, P. J. Dyson, R. Scopelliti, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9777–9780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, J. Zhang, N. Shi, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Wan, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7201–7205 RSC .
S. Lin and P. Theato, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1118–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, D. Xu, J. Guo, Z. Sun, W. Qian, Y. Zhang and F. Yan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1194–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qian, F. Sun, Y. Xu, L. Qiu, C. Liu, S. Wang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 379–386 CAS .
W. Qian, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, X. Wu and F. Yan, Small, 2015, 11, 4959–4969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. S. Miran, A. Ikoma, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1690–1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mascotto, D. Kuzmicz, D. Wallacher, M. Siebenbürger, D. Clemens, S. Risse, J. Yuan, M. Antonietti and M. Ballauff, Carbon, 2015, 82, 425–435 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 168–197 RSC .
M. Antonietti, D. Kuang, B. Smarsly and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4988–4992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, X. Tan, H. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 CAS .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5003–5012 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, T.-P. Fellinger, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5113–5120 CAS .
J. S. Lee, X. Wang, H. Luo, G. A. Baker and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4596–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Einert, C. Wessel, F. Badaczewski, T. Leichtweiß, C. Eufinger, J. Janek, J. Yuan, M. Antonietti and B. M. Smarsly, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 1930–1944 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ambrogi, Y. Men, F. Polzer and J. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37714–37720 RSC .
M. Ambrogi, K. Sakaushi, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Polymer, 2015, 68, 315–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, L. Qiu, Y. Peng and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13578–13584 RSC .
M. Ambrogi, K. Täuber, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5778–5782 CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Yuan, T. P. Fellinger, M. Antonietti, H. Li and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6028–6032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, S. Jiang, G. Jian, H. Tao, L. Yu, X. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Hu and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 224–229 CAS .
Y.-H. Li, T.-H. Hung and C.-W. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 850–855 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, D. Xu, W. Qian, J. Zhang and F. Yan, Small, 2016, 12, 1935–1944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Balach, H. Wu, F. Polzer, H. Kirmse, Q. Zhao, Z. Wei and J. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7979–7986 RSC .
M. R. Nabid, Y. Bide and Z. Habibi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2258–2265 RSC .
J. Gao, N. Ma, Y. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Gui, C. Guo, H. An, X. Tan, Z. Yin and D. Ma, ChemCatChem, 2016 DOI:10.1002/cctc.201601207 .
W. Xing, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, S. Zhuo, Z. Yan, H. Gao, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7323–7327 CAS .
J. Gong, H. Lin, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7313–7321 CAS .
J. Pinaud, J. Vignolle, Y. Gnanou and D. Taton, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1900–1908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Restrepo, P. Lozano, M. I. Burguete, E. García-Verdugo and S. V. Luis, Catal. Today, 2015, 255, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Sun, L. Zhu, X. Meng and F.-S. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16948–16950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Liu, S. Ding, A. Zhu and G. Shi, Analyst, 2014, 139, 5965–5970 Search PubMed .
F. M. Moghaddam, S. E. Ayati, S. H. Hosseini and A. Pourjavadi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34502–34510 RSC .
H. Yuan, Q. Jiao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, S. Neerunjun and H. Li, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 951–959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dani, V. Crocellà, L. Maddalena, C. Barolo, S. Bordiga and E. Groppo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1683–1692 CAS .
L. Qiu, B. Liu, Y. Peng and F. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2934–2936 RSC .
H. Mao, H. Zhang, J. Liang, D. Liu, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Wu, G. Zhang and X.-M. Song, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5310–5317 RSC .
W. Cheng, X. Chen, J. Sun, J. Wang and S. Zhang, Catal. Today, 2013, 200, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, J. W. O'Brien, K. A. Kitselman, L. E. Tompkins, G. C. T. Curtis and F. M. Kerton, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1513–1528 CAS .
J. Wang, J. Leong and Y. Zhang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4515–4519 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Guo, G. Chen, J. Li, Y. Shi, Y. Liu and J. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6916–6924 RSC .
W. Zhang, Q. Wang, H. Wu, P. Wu and M. He, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4767–4774 RSC .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7215–7221 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, C. Chen, Q. Guo, B. Li, Y. Que, L. Wang, H. Wan and G. Guan, Fuel, 2016, 184, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dani, E. Groppo, C. Barolo, J. G. Vitillo and S. Bordiga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8508–8518 CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Wang, E. H. M. Elageed, L. Qin, B. Ni, X. Liu and G. Gao, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 435–438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Q. Deng, G. Fang, X. Huang, S. Wang and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20430–20437 CAS .
K. Lutchmiah, A. Verliefde, K. Roest, L. C. Rietveld and E. R. Cornelissen, Water Res., 2014, 58, 179–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hartanto, S. Yun, B. Jin and S. Dai, Water Res., 2015, 70, 385–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, H. Liu, Y. Gao, Z. Zou, V. S. J. Craig, G. Zhang and G. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4156–4161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Cowan, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 724–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Jin, L. Sun, F. Chen, P. Fan, M. Zhong and J. Yang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 44592 Search PubMed .
M. Isik, S. Zulfiqar, F. Edhaim, F. Ruiperez, A. Rothenberger and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 7200–7208 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2785–2824 RSC .
E. I. Privalova, E. Karjalainen, M. Nurmi, P. Mäki-Arvela, K. Eränen, H. Tenhu, D. Y. Murzin and J.-P. Mikkola, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1500–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zulfiqar, M. I. Sarwar and D. Mecerreyes, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6435–6451 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Huang, R. Yang, Z. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Gao, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and Z. Zhong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3478–3518 CAS .
W. Fang, Z. Luo and J. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 651–658 RSC .
J. Tang, Y. Shen, M. Radosz and W. Sun, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 9113–9118 CrossRef CAS .
T. O. Magalhaes, A. S. Aquino, F. D. Vecchia, F. L. Bernard, M. Seferin, S. C. Menezes, R. Ligabue and S. Einloft, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18164–18170 RSC .
G. Yu, Q. Li, N. Li, Z. Man, C. Pu, C. Asumana and X. Chen, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2014, 54, 59–63 CAS .
M. G. Cowan, M. Masuda, W. M. McDanel, Y. Kohno, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 498, 408–413 CAS .
L. C. Tomé, A. S. L. Gouveia, C. S. R. Freire, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 486, 40–48 Search PubMed .
L. C. Tomé, D. Mecerreyes, C. S. R. Freire, L. P. N. Rebelo and I. M. Marrucho, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 428, 260–266 Search PubMed .
L. C. Tomé, M. Isik, C. S. Freire, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 483, 155–165 Search PubMed .
A. S. Shaplov, S. M. Morozova, E. I. Lozinskaya, P. S. Vlasov, A. S. Gouveia, L. C. Tomé, I. M. Marrucho and Y. S. Vygodskii, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 580–591 RSC .
G. Zarca, W. J. Horne, I. Ortiz, A. Urtiaga and J. E. Bara, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 515, 109–114 CAS .
Q. Zhao, P. Zhang, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11852–11855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, S. Soll, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 2432–2435 RSC .
Q. Chen, M. Luo, P. Hammershøj, D. Zhou, Y. Han, B. W. Laursen, C.-G. Yan and B.-H. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6084–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Q. Zhao, J. Yuan, M. Antonietti and F. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2595–2597 RSC .
M. M. S. Abullah, H. A. Al-Lohedan and A. M. Attah, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 219, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fernandes, M. Paulis, J. Yuan and D. Mecerreyes, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 734–739 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. A. Blair, M. A. Webber, A. J. Baylay, D. O. Ogbolu and L. J. V. Piddock, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2015, 13, 42–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bos, Q. Zhang, S. Vyawahare, E. Rogers, S. M. Rosenberg and R. H. Austin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 178–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Riduan and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9055–9070 RSC .
J. Guo, Q. Xu, Z. Zheng, S. Zhou, H. Mao, B. Wang and F. Yan, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, T. Gao, F. Wan, B. Yu, X. Pei, F. Zhou and Q. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13123–13131 RSC .
Z. Zheng, Q. Xu, J. Guo, J. Qin, H. Mao, B. Wang and F. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12684–12692 CAS .
Y. Li, K. Fukushima, D. J. Coady, A. C. Engler, S. Liu, Y. Huang, J. S. Cho, Y. Guo, L. S. Miller and J. P. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 674–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, Z. Liu, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Wang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4333–4338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Isik, J. P. K. Tan, R. J. Ono, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, D. Mecerreyes, Y. Y. Yang, J. L. Hedrick and H. Sardon, Macromol. Biosci., 2016, 16, 1360–1367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, H. Yuan, C. Nie, B. Wang, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13208–13213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Abdelhedi-Miladi, D. Montarnal, M. M. Obadia, H. Ben Romdhane and E. Drockenmuller, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1187–1190 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Schultz, P. M. Lambert, N. A. Chartrain, D. M. Ruohoniemi, Z. Zhang, C. Jangu, M. Zhang, C. B. Williams and T. E. Long, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1205–1209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taghavikish, S. Subianto, N. K. Dutta, L. de Campo, J. P. Mata, C. Rehm and N. R. Choudhury, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 29–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kathiresan and D. Velayutham, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17499–17516 RSC .
J.-i. Yoshida, K. Kataoka, R. Horcajada and A. Nagaki, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2265–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sawamura, S. Kuribayashi, S. Inagi and T. Fuchigami, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 644–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoo, L. J. Li, C. C. Zeng and R. D. Little, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3744–3747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Herold, S. R. Waldvogel, R. D. Little and S. J. Yoo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 735–740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Texter, P. Ziemer, S. Rhoades and D. Clemans, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 34, 571–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fuku, R. Hayashi, S. Takakura, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7446–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dupont and J. D. Scholten, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1780–1804 RSC .
K. Manojkumar, A. Sivaramakrishna and K. Vijayakrishna, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 103 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, S. Wunder, F. Warmuth and Y. Lu, Polymer, 2012, 53, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gracia, K. Vijayakrishna and D. Mecerreyes, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 79, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Prabhu Charan, N. Pothanagandhi, K. Vijayakrishna, A. Sivaramakrishna, D. Mecerreyes and B. Sreedhar, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 60, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Texter, V. Arjunan Vasantha, K. Bian, X. Ma, L. Slater, T. Mourey and G. Slater, in Non-Conventional Functional Block Copolymers, ed. B. Coughlin, P. Theato and A. Kilbinger, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  2011, vol. 9, pp. 117–130 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Wenjing Qian
	Wenjing Qian is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Feng Yan in the College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science in Soochow University. His research interests focus on the development of novel carbon materials and poly(ionic liquid) functional materials, as well as their application in supercapacitors, batteries and catalysis.

John Texter
	Professor John Texter has been an editor of the Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology, the Journal of Nanoparticle Research, and Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science. He studied at Lehigh University (BSEE, PhD) and has authored 200+ publications (including five books and 46 patents) on stimuli-responsive polymers and materials and dispersion science-and-practice. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society, American Chemical Society, and Society for Imaging Science and Technology. He has chaired ACS COLL and two Gordon Research Conferences and has been visiting professor at Soochow University, Colloid and Interfaces Max Planck Institute, Kumamoto University, and Fachhochschule Esslingen.

Feng Yan
	Prof. Feng Yan received his PhD degree in polymer science at Nanjing University in 2000, and was appointed as a professor at Soochow University in 2006. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis and characterization of functionalized ionic liquids, poly(ionic liquids), ionic polymers, polyelectrolytes and carbon materials for electrochemical energy harvesting/generation and antimicrobial applications. He has authored more than 120 publications. He received the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Outstanding Young Scholars in 2014.

 	Fig. 1  The effect of nanoscale morphology on the conductivity of polymerized ionic liquid block copolymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic diagram of the aqueous miniemulsion polymerization of EMA/[VEIM][TFSA]/rGO NPs stabilized using Tween 80. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The synthesis route for PILs through suspension polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  General strategy for amphiphilic double PIL block copolymer synthesis through cobalt-mediated radical polymerization induced self-assembly in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. © 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the polymerization of RTILs via electron beam irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  The synthesis of PILs via the polymer analogous conversion of poly(butadiene-alt-maleic anhydride) through interchain quaternization with pendant imidazole groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. © 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representative cryo-electron microscopy images of PIL NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  The synthetic process for hierarchical meso-macroporous PILs using a soft template, Pluronic P123. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) General synthetic routes for P(NIPAM-DAV) IL gels and P(NIPAM-BVIm-DAV) gels, and (B) a schematic mechanism of thermochromic and electrochromic devices based on the prepared polymer gels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical structures of the materials used in the accompanying non-volatile memory device architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. © 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A cartoon illustrating pore generation controlled by the diffusion of aqueous NH3 into the membrane. (b) Fluorescent confocal laser scanning microscopy image of the polyelectrolyte membrane cross section after the film was soaked for 2 h in 0.2 wt% aqueous NH3 doped with 15 ppm rhodamine B. (c–e) Time-dependent cross-section structures of the membrane soaked in 0.2 wt% aqueous NH3 for 10, 25, and 50 min, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Reaction scheme for the preparation of PIL-based membranes via in situ photo-crosslinking and mechanisms for thermo- and pH-responsive behaviors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the synthesis of PIL–β-CD and PIL–Fc membranes, and the hook-and-loop strategy for adhesion based on β-CD and Fc-modified PIL membrane surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  The preparation of a porous poly(ferrocenylsilane) membrane. (a) Chemical structures of PFS-VIMTf2N and PAA used. (b) Illustration of the preparation of a porous membrane from a polymer blend solution of PFS-VIMTf2N and PAA in DMF. (c) SEM images of a porous membrane with a thickness of 1.3 μm. (d) Representation illustrating the pore-formation process induced by ammonia diffusion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238. © 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  An illustration of the formation mechanism of PIL gels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. © 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Scheme for the preparation of nitrogen-doped carbon/Pt nanoparticle hybrids prepared via the carbonization of P([BVIM][Br]-co-acrylonitrile) for the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a PIL–Pt composite capillary electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  The reaction procedure for the preparation of PILs/PPyNTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  A multi-layered macroporous PIL with repeating catalytic units proves to be a novel and efficient heterogeneous acidic catalyst for biodiesel production. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. © 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  High swelling PILs for use as catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 286. © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  A scheme for boronate-functionalized graphene-coupled poly(guanidinium ionic liquid) interface-free 2D monolithic materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287. © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  A FO desalination system designed to perpetually produce desalinated water via the cyclic drawing–dewatering of the hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. © 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  The synthetic route to, and SEM images of, porous materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 311. © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
