High-humidity processed perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA01178A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA01178A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10481-10518High-humidity processed perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Mohamad Firdaus 
            Mohamad Noh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nurul Affiqah 
            Arzaee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Inzamam Nawas 
            Nawas Mumthas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nurul Aida 
            Mohamed
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Siti Nur Farhana 
            Mohd Nasir
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Javad 
            Safaei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Abd Rashid bin Mohd 
            Yusoff
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Mohd Asri 
            Mat Teridi
          
        
      *a
aSolar Energy Research Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia. E-mail: asri@ukm.edu.my
bCentre for Clean Energy Technology, Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney, Broadway, NSW, 2007 Australia
cDepartment of Physics, Vivian Tower, Singleton Park, Swansea, SA2 8PP, UK
dGroup for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
Received 
      30th January 2020
    , Accepted 2nd May 2020First published on 5th May 2020AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered the next-in-line technology in the solar industry. This technology can reduce the cost of solar energy to an unprecedented level given their remarkably high efficiency and ease of manufacturing. Hitherto, many studies have preferred well-regulated inert conditions or a low-humidity atmosphere (relative humidity < 30%) for fabricating highly efficient PSCs to avoid the adverse impact of humidity on a perovskite film. This is because humidity is the main reason for perovskite instability and can alter the film growth kinetics during the fabrication process, thereby ultimately affecting the morphology of the grown film and the device performance. The requirement for an inert or low-humidity environment can increase the capital costs of setting up the fabrication facilities and hamper the large-scale production of PSCs. Therefore, efforts have been devoted to preparing PSC devices in a high-humidity environment to comprehend perovskite crystal growth kinetics and improve the morphological properties and stability of the perovskite film. This review highlights the modifications implemented towards (1) perovskite materials, (2) charge-selective layers, and (3) deposition protocols by spin-coating, to adapt a high-humidity atmosphere (RH ≥ 30%) for developing efficient PSCs. The progress of scalable processing methods such as blade-coating, inkjet printing, slot-die coating, and spray-coating, and the translation of spin-coating-modified protocols into these methods are also discussed. Finally, this review provides the remaining challenges to realizing the high-humidity fabrication of PSCs for commercialization.
Introduction
Considering that electricity has become an indispensable part of modern life, an adequate and reliable supply of electrical power is imperative. The generation of electricity from conventional energy sources, such as domestic coal and natural gas, will become less promising in the future following the impending exhaustion of fossil fuel reserves and the rising concern of global warming. To focus on the unstoppable growth of electrical energy demand, solar energy can prove to be truly effective because it is ubiquitous, abundant, and safe for the ecosystem.1–4 Photovoltaic technology is utilized to convert sunlight into electricity directly using a device composed of semiconducting materials. Currently, first-generation (silicon wafer-based) solar cells are dominating the photovoltaic market.5,6 The efficiency of commercial-scale panels is fairly high (between 15% and 22%) and the provided modules usually carry a 25 year performance warranty. Besides, silicon panels are rather cheap and the price is on the decline.7 This prompts the question: is there any technological breakthrough that could take over the market domination of silicon PV cells?
For fulfilling such a task, scientists have been in pursuit of cheaper yet increasingly efficient materials for producing solar cells at significantly reduced costs. In the past few years, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have become a prominent topic of discussion in the photovoltaic community. Since the introduction of PSCs in 2009 by Miyasaka et al.,8 the PCE of single-junction devices has surged to 25.2% given the extraordinary optoelectronic properties of perovskite materials and voluminous optimization through device engineering.9,10 In addition, a lab-scale study has confirmed the capability of perovskite solar modules to sustain the efficiency over 1 year of operation, but the reported efficiency was merely around 11%.11 This value is much lower than that of commercial silicon-based PV cells. Therefore, there is still more room for increasing the efficiency, improving the stability and minimizing the production costs of PSCs, before this technology can outperform its silicon predecessor. Any research efforts towards achieving this goal should be welcomed. They include the reduction of the expenditure for setting up the manufacturing facilities. As this research stream is still ongoing at a rapid pace, the solar community is positive that the PSC development will soon be sufficiently matured to join the photovoltaic market.12
For enabling successful fabrication of highly efficient PSCs, precise and meticulous control of the air constituent in the environment along the assembly line is required. To prevent the adverse impact of humidity on perovskite films, the preparation of PSCs in the research laboratory is mostly conducted under ambient conditions controlled at a low relative humidity level (RH < 30%) or an inert atmosphere consisting of pure nitrogen or pure argon gas in which the RH level is nearly equal to 0% or less than 1 part-per-million (ppm). This environment can only be achieved by using a sophisticated air/humidity-controlling system. Consequently, this situation significantly augments the installation costs for fabrication facilities in real manufacturing plants, allows the fabrication and study of PSC devices only on the lab-scale, and hampers mass production for commercialization.13 Thus, efforts to develop a perovskite layer using humidity insensitive processing techniques have continued to ensure the commercial viability of the device in the future.
Humidity not only results in the irreversible decomposition of perovskite materials14,15 but also affects the morphology of the perovskite film during the fabrication process;16,17 this aspect has been unpopular with the majority of researchers in this field. Although the study related to the effect of humidity during film preparation is much less than the investigation for improving the long-term stability of a perovskite device, several research groups have made a series of fascinating discoveries by exploiting humidity for preparing highly efficient PSCs. A comprehensive understanding of the influence of humidity during perovskite film preparation will certainly ease the fabrication procedure and narrow the capital expenditure for manufacturing facilities.
A humid environment can affect the perovskite fabrication at three processing stages, namely, prefabrication stage (Stage 1), film fabrication stage (Stage 2), and post-fabrication stage (Stage 3). The prefabrication stage refers to the stage during material synthesis and storage during which water molecules can be absorbed into the perovskite precursor materials that alter their properties, such as purity and molecular weight.18 The film fabrication stage can be further categorized into three substages, namely, precursor solution preparation, film deposition, and post-deposition treatment. The post-fabrication stage is the period after completely preparing the perovskite film and typically correlated with the long-term stability issue.19,20 Several intrinsic and extrinsic factors, such as UV light, oxygen, perovskite crystal structure, and high temperature, have been recognized as the cause of poor stability of perovskite devices. Among those degradation-inducing factors, humidity sits at the top of the list.14
The impact of humidity on the morphology of perovskite films varies according to the environmental relative humidity (RH). In the development of PSCs, the device fabrication in humid air has been performed in a wide range of humidity levels from RH10% to RH80%. The humid conditions can be grouped into three categories namely low-humidity (<RH30%), moderate-humidity (RH30–50%) and high-humidity (RH > 50%). The exact boundaries of the RH range are subjective, but previous studies have observed significant morphological differences in perovskite films when the humidity level exceeds RH30%.21–24 According to Schlipf et al.,25 PSCs fabricated in humid air should be accompanied by an additional drying process at elevated temperature or in a low-humidity environment (RH ≤ 30%) prior to encapsulation of the whole device. This is because the moisture molecules are able to be adsorbed on the perovskite layer during the fabrication in humid air and ultimately results in the degradation of the device even after encapsulation is applied. This also means that RH30% is a critical boundary for PSC fabrication.
Therefore, this review will focus on the influences of humid air with RH ≥ 30% on the growth dynamics of the perovskite layer during the film fabrication stage (Stage 2) and the modification strategies for enhancing the device performance. For the convenience of the reader, this review will consider RH ≥ 30% as high-humidity conditions because the fabrication in this RH range can lead to an obvious change in film growth dynamics and the resulting perovskite morphology. In the initial section of this paper, we provide a general overview of the intrinsic properties of perovskite materials, device architectures along with the working mechanism, and the effect of water during PSC fabrication. The core part of this paper elaborates in detail the modifications implemented to adapt to high-humidity conditions for developing efficient perovskite devices. Three modification approaches, namely, (1) modification of perovskite materials, (2) modification of charge selective layers, and (3) modification of conventional spin-coating protocols, are reviewed (Fig. 1). In addition, other device engineering technologies to make large-scale processing techniques compatible with humid air processing are studied. In the final section, we present the remaining challenges for realizing the high-humidity fabrication of PSCs for commercialization.
 Fig. 1  Modification strategies towards enabling high-humidity processed PSCs. 
General overview of PSCs
The heart of a PSC is the inorganic–organic metal halide perovskite-structured materials that function as the main light absorber. The true potential of this technology lies in the excellent intrinsic properties of perovskite materials, such as a high light absorption coefficient, low binding energy of excitons, long carrier diffusion length, high charge carrier mobility, bandgap tunability, and large defect tolerance.10,12,26–28 The device, however, must be supported with electron and hole transport layers (ETL and HTL, respectively) to extract the photoexcited charges and fully utilize the capability of perovskite for generating electrical power.28,29 In the next section, the intrinsic properties of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites and the commonly investigated device architectures are discussed accordingly.
Properties of perovskite materials
The most common perovskite material used as a light harvester in solar cell fabrication is methyl ammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3). This material possesses excellent light absorption in the full range of visible light, which is attributed to its direct bandgap energy of approximately 1.55 eV.30–32 MAPbI3 has also been confirmed to possess a weakly indirect bandgap absorption transition with a value of 60 meV lower than the direct bandgap, which originates from Rashba-splitting of the conduction band.33 The indirect bandgap of MAPbI3 can be utilized to extend its light absorption capability beyond the wavelength of 800 nm through the development of a single-crystal MAPbI3 thin film.34 The impressive light absorption ability is also attributed to the high absorption coefficient (approximately 10−5 cm−1 at λ = 500 nm, which corresponds to an absorption depth of ca. 100 nm).35,36 The exciton binding energy of MAPbI3 at room temperature has been determined to be approximately 19–55 meV,37–39 whereas the exciton Bohr radius is nearly 22–28 Å.40,41 Such a small exciton binding energy and large exciton Bohr radius are ascribed to the large dielectric constant, which enables MAPbI3 to generate Wannier-type excitons upon light absorption. This type of exciton is easily converted to free carriers at room temperature; thus, it promotes the generation of a high open-circuit voltage within the solar cell.42 The electron and hole mobilities are reported to reach 24 ± 7 and 105 ± 35 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, whereas the carrier lifetime is approximately 95 ± 8 μs.43 Furthermore, MAPbI3 also shows an exceptionally long charge carrier diffusion length that reaches 100 nm in a polycrystalline structure36,44 and more than 175 μm in a single-crystal structure.43 The long charge diffusion length can be attributed to (i) the slow charge recombination process relative to its charge mobility45 and (ii) unusual defect physics of the perovskite material.46 Interestingly, the absorption edge wavelength of the perovskite light absorber can be tuned from 1.15 eV to 3.06 eV by simply manipulating the mixing ratio of cation (e.g., methylammonium [MA], formamidinium [FA], cesium [Cs], rubidium [Rb]), metal (e.g., lead [Pb] and tin [Sn]), and/or halide (e.g., iodine [I], bromine [Br], and chlorine [Cl]) components.30,47 The adjustable bandgap allows the construction of perovskite/silicon or even all perovskite tandem solar cells.
Despite the excellent optoelectronic properties of MAPbI3, the light absorption capability of MAPbI3 remains insufficient to generate a high photocurrent. Thus, FAPbI3 perovskite which has a lower bandgap value (1.48 eV) than the conventional MAPbI3 has been developed. The low bandgap of FAPbI3 is the consequence of FA having a larger ionic radius than MA (MA+ = 0.18 Å and FA+ = 1.9–2.2 Å). This optical characteristic of FAPbI3 extends the absorption edge to nearly 840 nm and enables larger photocurrent generation.48 The charge carrier mobility is reported to reach 27 ± 2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is almost similar to that of MAPbI3. Interestingly, the carrier diffusion length of polycrystalline thin films of FAPbI3 can reach 3.1 μm, a value that is far greater than that of MAPbI3.49,50 However, Liu et al.51 claimed that the formation energy of FA-related defects in FAPbI3 is much lower compared to MA-related defects in MAPbI3. The defects serve as non-radiative recombination centers and thus are responsible for the reduced carrier lifetime and poor open-circuit voltage. Furthermore, the fill factor of FAPbI3-based PSCs is typically quite low because FAPbI3 shows phase instability. Photoactive black phase FAPbI3 (trigonal α-FAPbI3) is usually formed at higher temperature of 125–165 °C, which might explain its relatively good thermal stability (i.e., FAPbI3 can withstand high-temperature-induced degradation).52 However, FAPbI3 readily turns to a photo-inactive yellow phase (hexagonal δ-FAPbI3) at room temperature resulting in unstable operation of the device. In addition, the FA cation exhibits greater vulnerability to humidity than MAPbI3 (ref. 53), thus making the fabrication of FAPbI3 in a high-humidity environment challenging.
To circumvent this issue, both perovskites are mixed together to create the MAFAPbI3 system, which allows the preparation of increasingly efficient and stable PSCs.54,55 In most of the highly efficient PSCs containing MAFAPbI3, the FA cation is usually more dominant than the MA cation in terms of molar ratio because the main purpose of introducing the smaller MA cation is to stabilize the FAPbI3 structure while preserving the high light harvesting capability of FAPbI3.54 Binek et al.57 reported that MA possesses ten times greater dipole moment compared to FA and hence, MA exhibits stronger interaction with the PbI6 octahedra stabilizing the 3D arrangement of α-FAPbI3 with insignificant lattice shrinkage or changes in optical properties. Since FA is a large cation, its presence will increase the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) value, which influences the structural instability and results in the appearance of a minimal amount of yellow phase.55 Therefore, small cations, such as Cs or Rb, have also been introduced into FA-based or MAFA-based perovskite to avoid this yellow phase completely and boost the device performance.58,59 Cs incorporation can also suppress the phase segregation or ion redistribution in mixed-halide (I and Br) perovskite due to light exposure.52,60,61 The formation of double- or triple-cation-based perovskite not only improves the structural and thermal stability, but also minimizes moisture-induced degradation of the perovskite, ensuring longer device operational lifetime.15 In summary, all of these features make inorganic–organic halide perovskite materials suitable for developing highly efficient new-generation solar cell devices.
Device architectures
In the early developmental stage of PSCs, the perovskite material has been originally used as a sensitizer in liquid-state dye-sensitized solar cells.8 Given that a perovskite light harvester has poor stability in liquid electrolytes, a solid-state device, which significantly improves the stability and efficiency of perovskite, has been invented.62 This discovery has become a benchmark of the new era for PSC development. Three architectures of PSCs, namely, conventional planar, mesoporous, and inverted planar structures (Fig. 2a–c), are being extensively developed. The conventional planar and mesoporous structures are n–i–p-based devices because the n-type ETL resides on top of the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) from which the light is passing through before being absorbed by the perovskite layer. By contrast, the inverted planar structure is also called a p–i–n-based device given the inverse arrangement of the charge-selective layer in which the light enters from the p-type HTL side.63
 Fig. 2  The architectures of widely studied PSCs. (a) Conventional planar, (b) mesoporous and (c) inverted planar structured. (d) Schematic diagram of energy levels and charge transfer processes in an ETL/perovskite/HTL cell. (1) Electron injection, (2) hole injection, (3) radiative and (4) non-radiative exciton recombination, (5) electron back transfer at the perovskite/ETL interface, (6) electron back transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface, and (7) electron–hole pairs recombination at the ETL/HTL interface. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
In any case, producing electrical power using PSC devices begins with the absorption of an incoming photon through the perovskite material and instantaneously leads to the excitation of charge carriers. The photoexcited electrons and holes diffuse through the perovskite layer before being injected into the ETL and HTL, respectively. The charge carriers are then transported by the respective charge-selective layers to an external circuit for completing an electrical circuit and generating electrical power.19 In a real operating environment, undesirable charge recombination may occur within the device through various pathways, which can negatively impact the overall device performance. The possible charge transfer and recombination pathways are illustrated in Fig. 2d. A major factor that contributes to non-radiative charge recombination is the morphological imperfections of the perovskite film, such as the existence of pinholes, non-uniform surface, and excessive precursor residual in the film; environmental humidity during the film fabrication process can further exacerbate these issues.63–65 To this end, a myriad of modification steps have been explored to eliminate the detrimental effect of humidity and yield high-quality perovskite films.
Influence of water on perovskite
The existence of water during the perovskite precursor solution preparation stage may trigger several unpleasant issues based on the following hypothesis.66–68
(1) The organic components in perovskite, such as CH3NH3I, is highly soluble in water, and water can decompose the perovskite into PbI2 during the film deposition stage. The degradation of perovskite reflects a decrease in the light active domain, which reduces the light absorption ability, whereas the presence of PbI2 increases the non-radiative charge recombination rate.
(2) Water hardly dissolves the inorganic component of perovskite (e.g., solubility of PbI2 in water is merely around 4.2 mg mL−1 at 100 °C),69 thus causing the formation of colloids or undissolved bulky particles in the solution and eventually resulting in the deposition of a low-quality film.
(3) Although the precursor solution can be filtered, some concern over the local compositional imbalance may arise. The difference in the water solubility between the organic and inorganic components of perovskite, to some extent, caused incomplete transformation of the precursor into perovskite given the inadequacy/excess of a particular component.
(4) Water has a lower boiling point and higher vapor pressure than other commonly used solvents, such as DMF and DMSO, for perovskite. The presence of water in the deposited perovskite precursor solution can change the drying kinetics during film deposition and annealing, which influences the morphological properties.
Based on those hypothesis, high-purity precursor powder and anhydrous solvents are typically considered the optimal option to acquire high-quality perovskite films for high efficiency devices.74 In spite of this well-known fact, several studies intentionally added water in the perovskite precursor solution during the preparation in an inert atmosphere and proved that water can actually bring about some beneficial impact on the PSC performance. For example, Conings et al.70 substituted a portion of anhydrous solvent with water (up to 10 vol%) in the precursor solution. These researchers observed that the presence of water only slightly impacts the morphology, light absorption, crystallinity, and phase purity of the as-prepared perovskite film, and thus the corresponding device PCE was marginally affected (Fig. 3a). Such a discovery implies that the presence of water in a slight amount during the solution preparation and film deposition stages is not totally harmful for the fabrication of efficient PSCs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs fabricated from a precursor containing various quantities of water. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Stability analysis for PSCs prepared using pure DMF and DMF/water solvents. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Perovskite precursor solutions containing a high quantity of water additive after storage overnight. Reproduced with permission.72 (d) PbI2 precursor solution containing various amounts of water additive. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For a one-step deposition technique, Gong et al. incorporated 2% water as the dopant in a PbCl2/MAI/DMF mixture, thereby resulting in the improvement of all photovoltaic parameters as a consequence of pinhole elimination in the perovskite film.71 The existence of water also promotes the device stability given the generation of stable perovskite hydrates (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx·nH2O), as illustrated in Fig. 3b.71 Recently, a 2% water additive has been determined to promote the performance of PSCs based on a triple-cation-mixed halide indicative of the favorable effect of water regardless of the perovskite precursor system.68 From previous studies, the ratio of water to the total precursor volume is usually limited to less than 5% because the excessive amount of water in the precursor solution typically leads to the formation of a colloidal lead halide in the solution. Surprisingly, an investigation by Liu et al.72 revealed that the perovskite solution containing up to 20% water has no significant changes even after storage overnight (Fig. 3c). When a vacuum assisted drying method is employed during the device fabrication, the corresponding device shows an impressive PCE of over 20% which is comparable to that of the water-free-based device counterpart. Although the vacuum-assisted drying might be the major determining factor for the outstanding PCE, this finding proves that the water content in the perovskite precursor may only limit the solubility of the precursor rather than the device performance, if an appropriate fabrication protocol is used.
The water additive has also been confirmed to be useful in preparing perovskite films through a sequential spin-coating method. In certain circumstances, the PbI2 powder is hardly dissolved in dried DMF solvent, particularly when high-purity PbI2 (99.999% trace metal basis) was used, thereby resulting in a cloudy colloidal suspension rather than a clear homogeneous solution. This result is ascribed to the presence of a non-negligible quantity of adsorbed water in PbI2,66 which might emerge during the synthesis stage, powder handling, etc. Since water has a strong coordination ability towards PbI2,75 the adsorbed water can possibly form insoluble hydrate impurities and interrupt the solubility of PbI2 in dried DMF. Thus, an additional drying process of PbI2 powder by vacuum heating is typically required prior to the dissolution of PbI2 in DMF66 (for that reason, most studies prefer to use the costly “99.999% perovskite graded” PbI2 which has been dried beforehand).74
Wu et al.73 discovered that the solubility issue can be fixed by first dissolving PbI2 in dried DMF and then introducing a minimal amount of water (nearly 2–3 wt% vs. DMF) into the pre-mixed solution (Fig. 3d). The scientific reasoning for the contradictory observation is that high-purity PbI2 may contain hydroxy bridged polymers, which are not soluble in DMF, however in the presence of water as a strong coordinating ligand assist dissolution in DMF. Consequently, a densely packed PbI2 film is successfully deposited and highly reproducible inverted PSCs with a PCE of up to 18% and exceptional fill factor of 85% are produced.73 The same research group extends the use of a water additive (0.5 vol%) in the MAI solution and observes a notable enhancement in the crystallinity and crystalline domain size of the perovskite as the water aids the penetration of MAI into the PbI2 crystal structure.76 The PCE increased to 20.1% through DMF vapor post-treatment. Notably, the optimized water content in previous reports varies because it depends on the fabrication conditions, such as the type of precursor, precursor purity, and deposition method, during the experiment. Nevertheless, these stimulating findings present solid evidence that an ultra-low humidity environment is not the primary prerequisite for preparing perovskite films.
Modification for high-humidity-processed PSCs
The assembly of PSCs involves strict processing protocols because a slight variation during the fabrication can significantly affect the device performance. For example, Saliba et al. claimed that the temperature of the environment during perovskite film preparation must be maintained in the range of 22–27 °C because the device efficiency drops with the rise in atmospheric temperature to higher than 28 °C.74 Moreover, the aging period of the perovskite precursor solution can also markedly influence the formation of the perovskite layer, thereby eventually determining the final performance of the solar cells.77 Even the delay time for anti-solvent washing (e.g., 3, 8, and 15 s) can result in a significant change in the average grain size of the perovskite layer.78
The same phenomenon applies to the RH level of the environment. A minor deviation of the RH level during the device fabrication process can lead to a major fluctuation of device efficiency. A possible factor for the poor performance of PSCs fabricated in humid air is the generation of a low-quality perovskite film prompted by the ambient humidity, thus leading to the formation of pinholes and rough surfaces.79 A rough morphology will deteriorate the charge transfer process at the interface of perovskite/charge-selective layers, whereas pinhole formation leads to a direct contact between the ETL and HTL, thereby intensifying charge recombination. Furthermore, the humidity limitation restricts the transfer of this technology to large-scale processing techniques, which are typically conducted in a high-humidity environment. Such events will raise doubts among photovoltaic market players to invest in the development of PSCs because the risk of manufacturing unusable or low-efficiency PSCs is fairly high.
However, humidity is not totally deleterious to the perovskite layer; in fact, proper exploitation of the humid atmosphere can be useful for enhancing the PSC performance. For example, Liu et al.80 revealed that exposing a spin-coated perovskite layer to humid air (RH60%) for 3 min prior to the annealing process is advantageous for improving the morphological properties of a perovskite film. This advantage is attributed to the partial solvation of the methylammonium component in the perovskite layer using moisture that ameliorates the diffusion mobility of MAI and enhances perovskite crystallization. A device efficiency as high as 15.55% is achieved by substituting the conventional hot plate annealing technique with a hot-air annealing process. Even though this example signifies the humid air processability of PSCs, the efficiency is still relatively low in comparison to the state-of-the-art PSC device. In the following, possible modifications to allow PSC fabrication in a humid environment are reviewed. The modifications are principally directing toward (1) producing robust perovskite materials for enabling a complete assembly of the device in high humidity within a certain timeframe without apparent degradation and (2) acquiring the optimal film quality at a high-RH level for ensuring efficient charge generation and transfer while hindering non-radiative charge recombination. These adjustments can be categorized into modifications of perovskite materials, device structures, and fabrication techniques.
Modification of perovskite materials
Material modification aims to produce highly efficient PSCs in high-humidity and improve long-term device stability. As mentioned previously, the most common perovskite material used in developing solar cells is CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) because this material can deliver high efficiency, and the intrinsic properties of this material have been profoundly understood. However, the hygroscopic nature of CH3NH3+ complicates the deposition of a smooth surface and full coverage of the MAPbI3 film under high humidity.81 Thus, materials that are minimally sensitive to humidity during fabrication have been explored. A list of PSCs fabricated in a high-humidity atmosphere using numerous types of perovskite combinations and their respective photovoltaic parameters are given in Table 1.
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs based on various perovskite combinations prepared under high-humidity conditions




RHa [%]
Device structureb

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Ref.





a Air represents RH ≥ 30%.
b Spiro-: spiro-OMeTAD.
c MWCNT: multi-walled carbon-nanotube.
d BTA: n-butylamine.
e NP: nanoparticles.
f TBP: 4-tert-butylpyridine.
g TEOS: tetraethyl orthosilicate.





50
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag
18.9
0.64
40.7
5.7

83



Air
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag
15.3
0.61
56.0
5.2

84



70
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x/spiro-/Au
21.1
0.96
75.0
15.1

79



70
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x + NaSCN/spiro-/Au
20.9
1.03
72.6
15.6

87



70
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x + KSCN/spiro-/Au
20.5
1.07
76.2
16.6

87



70
ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x/spiro-/Ag
22.8
0.94
75.4
16.2

89



30
FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-/Ag
12.2
0.65
44.0
4.1

92



30
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/m-Al2O3/CsPb0.96Sb0.04I3/C
14.7
0.73
50.0
5.3

93



40
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-/Au
23.3
1.00
74.2
17.3

95



40
FTO/c-SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-/Au
22.8
1.05
66.2
15.8

96



70
ITO/poly-TPD/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
23.4
1.00
66.6
15.6

97



35
ITO/c-TiO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3(Cl)/spiro-/MoO3/Ag
22.6
1.11
81.6
20.4

98



35
ITO/c-TiO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3−xBrx(Cl)/spiro-/MoO3/Ag
21.9
1.14
81.3
20.3

98



50
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.7FA0.3)0.95PbI3/C
22.8
0.96
68.8
15.0

55



40
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx + V2Ox/PCBM/Bphen/Ag
21.6
0.98
75.1
16.1

99



55
ITO/c-SnO2/MAxFA1−xPbI3−yBry + MWCNTc/C
23.5
1.04
66.5
16.3

100



70
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx + BTAd/spiro-/Au
20.2
1.02
65.0
13.4

82



60
ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3 + ZnO NPe/spiro-/Ag
22.2
1.07
77.4
18.3

101



45
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TBPf/spiro-/Ag
20.1
1.04
61.1
12.6

102



45
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 + TBPf/PCBM/Ag
20.7
0.99
79.0
16.2

103



50
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TEOSg/spiro-/Ag
18.6
0.89
52.0
8.6

104



Air
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TEOSg/spiro-/Ag
23.5
1.07
73.2
18.4

105






Modification of anions. 
In comparison with conventional pure MAPbI3, MAPbI3−xClx is found to be slightly less sensitive to moisture-induced degradation.82 On this basis, several research groups have attempted to fabricate a perovskite device under high-humidity conditions based on MAPbI3−xClx, but simply introducing chloride anion without modifying other fabrication protocols still cannot boost the PCE to exceed 10%.83–85 In contrast to the chloride additive, thiocyanic (SCN), a kind of pseudohalide, has shown much promising potential to modify the compositional ratio of iodide anions in MAPbI3 and increase the performance of humid air-processed PSCs. In terms of chemical properties, SCN− behaves relatively similarly to I−. SCN− has an ionic radius of 2.15–2.20 Å and is comparable to that of I− (2.20 Å), thus making the replacement of I− ions by SCN− ions in the perovskite lattice possible.86 However, the ionic interaction is much stronger between SCN− and Pb2+ than between I− and Pb2+.87 This phenomenon is attributed to the strong bond between lone pairs of electrons from S and N atoms with Pb ions.88 Hydrogen bonds are also formed between CH3NH3+ and SCN−, as depicted in Fig. 4a.87 Thus, the framework is more stable in MAPbI3−x(SCN)x than in pristine MAPbI3. This means that MAPbI3−x(SCN)x has better ability to withstand degradation induced by moisture. To acquire a good film quality of MAPbI3−x(SCN)x, a two-step spin-coating method is typically adopted, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and isopropanol are usually preferred as solvents for lead(II) thiocyanate (Pb(SCN)2) and MAI, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Calculated crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3 (left) and CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x (right). The hydrogen bond between CH3NH3+ and SCN− is highlighted with red. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Evolution of the efficiency of the PSC based on CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x with the incorporation NaSCN and KSCN additives. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
The development of thiocyanic-based PSCs has begun in 2015 when Jiang et al.88 observed a negligible degradation of a MAPb(SCN)3−xIx film even after 4 h of exposure to 95% humidity. Although the corresponding device was actually fabricated in dry air, the outstanding stability denotes the potential of the material for device fabrication under high-humidity conditions. This finding was confirmed eventually by several other research groups. Tai et al.79 replaced the commonly used PbI2 precursor with Pb(SCN)2 and achieved a PCE of 15.12% when fabricating the device at RH > 70%. The impressive PCE was attributed to the capability of MAPbI3−x(SCN)x perovskite to form a smooth film even in the presence of humidity. In addition, MAPbI3−x(SCN)x exhibited a lower density of trap states than conventional MAPbI3. This condition results in more than 8 times enhancement of carrier lifetime. Tai et al. also confirmed that the unique intrinsic properties of the material (i.e., ionic interactions between SCN− and Pb atoms and formation of a hydrogen bond between SCN− and CH3NH3+) enhance the chemical stability of PSCs in ambient air. The properties of MAPbI3−x(SCN)x thin films can be further improved by introducing alkali thiocynates (e.g. KSCN or NaSCN) as additives.87 The crystallinity, grain size, optical absorption, defect density, charge transport ability, and electron diffusion length are among the aspects that experience obvious improvement after the introduction of the additive. Accordingly, the insertion of 3.5% KSCN or 2.5% NaSCN not only promoted the ambient air stability (Fig. 4b) but also enhanced the overall device performance by 30% and 23%. A PCE of 16.23% has also been reported for PSCs employing SnO2 as the ETL fabricated at RH70%, indicating the compatibility of the electronic structure of MAPbI3−xSCNx with the typically utilized electron-transporting materials.89


Modification of cations. 
Given the humidity-sensitive nature of the organic component in the perovskite, the substitution of the component with an inorganic-based counterpart is seen as a viable approach. Thus far, cesium (Cs) has demonstrated considerable potential for fulfilling such a task. The first successful fabrication of CsPbI3-based PSCs, which achieved a maximum PCE of 2.9%, was reported by Snaith et al.90 Despite performing the fabrication in an inert gas-filled glove box, Snaith et al. reveal that an organic cation is unnecessary for acquiring a perovskite light harvester with good photovoltaic properties. However, CsPbI3 has several phases where the only useful light active phase is cubic α-CsPbI3 considering its appropriate bandgap value of approximately 1.73 eV. This phase appears black and is typically obtainable at a temperature of approximately 310 °C. Furthermore, the α-CsPbI3 perovskite phase is thermodynamically unstable at room temperature and rapidly transforms into a yellow non-perovskite δ-phase in ambient air (Fig. 5a). This phenomenon challenges the feasibility of fabricating a α-CsPbI3-based PSC device under high-humidity conditions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structures and the corresponding thin films of α-CsPbI3 (freshly coated) and δ-CsPbI3 (after 1 day of exposure to ambient air). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM images of α-CsPbI3 without and with 4% Sb doping. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Steady-state efficiency under a bias voltage of 0.82 V for the PSC based on α-FAPbI3 fabricated from a NMP-containing precursor in RH40%. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
An effective strategy for solving such an issue is by preparing an α-CsPbI3 film from Cs4PbI6, which is an increasingly stable intermediate in the ambient atmosphere.91 Luo et al.92 pioneered the development of α-CsPbI3-based PSCs under high-humidity conditions (RH30%) and obtained a relatively favorable PCE of up to 4.13%. These researchers used 66 μL mL−1 hydroiodic acid as an additive in dimethyl formamide (DMF) solution to improve the solubility of the precursors that induce the formation of a film containing Cs4PbI6 intermediates. Then, the film was dipped in hot isopropanol to convert Cs4PbI6 into α-CsPbI3. The synergistic effect between hydroiodic acid and isopropanol treatment improved the stability of the α-CsPbI3 film, thus enabling complete integration of the whole device in air without apparent degradation. Xiang et al.93 discovered that using a nonstoichiometric precursor with a CsI to PbI2 molar ratio of 1.5 to 1 enables α-CsPbI3 and Cs4PbI6 formation at low heating temperature (110 °C) in an ambient atmosphere. Isopropanol treatment was also adopted to transform the intermediates into α-CsPbI3 while removing excess CsI. To improve the phase stability of α-CsPbI3 further, 4% Sb has also been introduced as the dopant. Sb atoms infiltrate into the crystal lattice of the perovskite, thereby causing lattice distortion and enhancing the phase stability. Despite the slight broadening of the bandgap upon doping with Sb, the resulting PSCs still exhibit higher JSC and PCE than the conventional device given the improved morphology (Fig. 5b) and significant charge carrier collection efficiency. Stable α-CsPbI3 crystals are obtained upon substituting PbI2 with HPbI3 as a precursor because the precursor induces tensile lattice strain.94 The existence of tensile lattice strain reduces the bandgap by 0.04 eV, thus expanding the light-harvesting ability of the device. The modified device also shows an improved carrier diffusion length that reaches 1.6 μm.
Although organic cations are sensitive to humid air, this class of materials are still considered an optimal candidate for producing perovskite compounds with a high light absorption ability. Therefore, in addition to MA, FA has been extensively developed as a cation component in the perovskite absorber. Nevertheless, attaining photoactive α-FAPbI3 under humid conditions is rather difficult given the structural and moisture instability of α-FAPbI3. Thus, the study on humid air processed α-FAPbI3 is very limited. Notable progress has been recently reported by Wang et al.95 who succeeded in fabricating PSCs using α-FAPbI3 as the light absorber at an elevated RH level of 40% and achieved a fairly high stabilized PCE of 16.69% (Fig. 5c). This impressive performance was attainable by introducing N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as an additive into the FAPbI3 precursor and annealing the film at high temperature of 140 °C. NMP assisted in reducing the crystallization rate by forming an FAI:PbI2:NMP intermediate. At the annealing stage, NMP is rapidly detached from the intermediate phase leading to straightforward transformation of the intermediates into α-FAPbI3. This process averts the indirect δ- to α-phase conversion route which could leave δ-phase residues in the film. Alternatively, to fabricate FAPbI3-based perovskite at a high humidity level with a simpler procedure, the photoactive black phase α-FAPbI3 perovskite at room temperature must be stabilized. This objective is realizable by partially substituting FA with MA or Cs57 to create a double- or triple-cation perovskite. This process will be discussed further in the next section.


Modification of the cation/anion mixture. 
The use of double-cation (MA/FA)PbI3 perovskite for photovoltaic applications was first reported by Pellet et al.;47 however, in the study, the PSC fabrication was performed under dry conditions. A preliminary study by Miyasaka et al.96 confirmed that PSCs utilizing a double-cation/double-anion perovskite ((FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15) as the light absorber can still provide a reasonably high PCE that reaches 15.7% even when fabricated in RH40%. As stated previously, Cs incorporation can stabilize the α-phase FAPbI3, and the development of the corresponding device in high humidity was pioneered by Xu et al.97 The PSCs assembled in RH70% showed a PCE of 15.56% with improved thermal stability and moisture resistance. This performance was achievable by generating Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3 perovskite through two-step spin-coating in which hot FAI solution was dropped on a preheated substrate coated with a PbI2–CsI0.15–FAI0.3 complex. Given that FAI is hygroscopic, preheating the solution and substrate removes moisture ingress in the growing perovskite layer during the spin-coating process. The intermediate film with FAI pre-intercalated into PbI2 enabled the pre-expansion of the layer to facilitate the complete conversion of PbI2 upon dropping the FAI solution. Both approaches synergistically promoted the formation of highly crystalline and compact perovskite films. Another way to fabricate efficient (Cs/FA)PbI-based PSCs with PCE over 20% in humid air (RH35%) is by spin coating an ethanol solution containing CsI or CsBr, FAI and MACl at a weight ratio of 4:50:10 on a PbI2-coated substrate.98 MACl works as a morphology control and will vaporize during the annealing process whereas CsI and CsBr contribute to enlarging the perovskite grains.
A HTL-free carbon-based PSC employing triple-cation lead iodide (Cs/MA/FA)PbI3 perovskite made in RH50% has also been reported recently to achieve a PCE that exceeds 15%.55 When a mixed-halide system (i.e., (Cs/MA/FA)Pb(I/Br) perovskite) was introduced, an efficiency of 20.8% has been recorded for a device prepared in humid air.106 The optimal concentration of Cs doping for high-humidity-processed perovskite was 5%; this result is consistent with other reports that used an inert gas-filled glove box.58,106,107 The addition of 5% Cs improved the purity of the perovskite film by completely preventing the formation of a photo-inactive yellow phase that typically emerges in double-cation (MA/FA)Pb-based perovskite. Cs incorporation also promoted film quality, crystallinity, charge transport, and carrier lifetime while reducing the trap density at the interface and charge recombination rate, which boosted the overall device performance. However, with a high loading of Cs, the grain size decreased, and impure phases appeared, thereby resulting in low efficiency and slightly poor stability. This is because the bond length mismatch became dominant in the perovskite lattice as a result of different ionic radii of Cs+, FA+, and MA+.55,106


Introduction of additives. 
The insertion of additives into the perovskite precursor has facilitated the fabrication of highly efficient PSC devices either through one- or two-step deposition procedures in ambient air. The material selection, however, depends on the purpose of introducing the additive. Thus far, three main functions of additives have been identified for developing PSCs in a high RH environment; these functions are (1) regulating the growth dynamics of PbI2 or perovskite layers, (2) minimizing the influence of humidity by improving the hydrophobicity, and (3) protecting the decomposition of perovskite by creating a protective layer, thereby further improving the device stability.82,99,102,104
Regulating growth dynamics. 
Vanadium oxide (V2Ox) is an excellent candidate for growing large perovskite grains in ambient air due to the formation of V2Ox·nH2O hydrate. The presence of the V2Ox additive promotes the emergence of hydrogen bonds in between the perovskite lattice and V2Ox·nH2O and assists the grain growth process. Moreover, 2.5 wt% of V2Ox additive has promoted the PCE of PSCs made in RH40% by 15% and has remarkably reduced the hysteresis effect as a consequence of conducive charge separation and transfer in the device.99 Zhou et al.100 reported that 0.5% multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are also capable of enlarging the perovskite grain size prepared in air (RH30–80%). MWCNTs can slow down the transformation rate of the perovskite encouraging the formation of defect-free and large-size perovskite crystals. MWCNTs also improve the hydrophobicity of the perovskite film considerably. As a result, the MAFAPbIBr-based PSC achieved a PCE of 16.25%.
For the two-step deposition method, achieving a high-quality morphology of the PbI2 layer is a paramount aspect, and thus, an additive is typically included in a PbI2-based precursor. For example, introducing n-butyl amine, which has strong Lewis base nature and good infiltrative properties, as an additive has aided the homogeneous distribution of PbI2 solution throughout the substrate in humid air (RH60–80%).82 The additive also reduces the crystallization rate of PbI2 to allow the growth of a continuous and highly packed PbI2 film. This reduction subsequently enables the formation of a high-quality perovskite layer (Fig. 6a) with high shunt resistance and nearly double the FF value of the device. An improved FF value of PSCs is also detected when implementing the nanoparticle-induced fast nucleation method for preparing a pinhole-free PbI2 layer at a high RH level of 55–65%.101 In this method, 0.057 wt% ZnO nanoparticles are deliberately inserted in the PbI2 precursor solution to provide additional nucleation sites for PbI2 crystals and accelerate the nucleation process of PbI2. This process generates numerous PbI2 small domains that can fill the pinholes created by inhomogeneous distribution of large PbI2 crystal domains. Accordingly, a device efficiency that reaches 18.3% has been recorded.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of PbI2 films (i) without and (ii) with n-butyl amine and (iii and iv) respective perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Illustration of the working mechanism of 4-tert-butylpyridine in enhancing the hydrophobicity of PbI2 and MAPbI3. (c) Water contact angle of PbI2 and MAPbI3 films in the absence and presence of 4-tert-butylpyridine. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Improving the hydrophobicity. 
Liu et al.102 added 10 vol% of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) to increase the hydrophobicity of the PbI2 layer for minimizing the moisture impact during the fabrication process while improving the device stability. Considering the strong coordination between the N atom in TBP and Pb2+ ion in PbI2, the pyridyl groups will attach to the PbI2 surface, thereby causing the highly hydrophobic tertiary butyl groups to surround the molecules (Fig. 6b) and consequently make the perovskite layer increasingly hydrophobic. The improvement of the hydrophobicity of PbI2 and perovskite films has been confirmed from water contact angle measurement, as demonstrated in Fig. 6c. In addition, the presence of TBP in perovskite is advantageous for improving the contact with the HTL, which also contains TBP and leads to a double PCE enhancement (from 6.03% to 12.6% at RH50%). By properly tuning the amount of TBP to 40 μL mL−1 PbI2 solution, Chen et al.103 managed to attain 16.16% efficiency for the device fabricated without a glove box. Notably, the proper selection of the additive is crucial to alter the hydrophobicity level of the perovskite layer. For example, the hydrophilic amino and hydroxyl groups can accelerate the perovskite degradation process, whereas tertiary butyl and ethyl groups, which are hydrophobic, are useful as a perovskite surface modifier.102
Creating a protective layer. 
Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), a colorless liquid that is soluble in isopropanol, was firstly adopted by Carvalho et al. as an additive in the MAI precursor solution during the perovskite layer preparation in RH50%.104 Upon reaction between MAI and PbI2, liquid TEOS is driven out of the growing perovskite lattice and eventually has remained at the grain boundaries. Then, this material absorbs water molecules from the environment and creates an inert and optically non-absorbing SiO2 passivation layer at grain boundaries, thereby preventing further decomposition of perovskite by humidity. The effectiveness of grain boundary passivation by TEOS relies on the concentration of the additive. A low amount of TEOS would not passivate the grain boundaries sufficiently whereas an excessive TEOS additive would form amorphous SiO2 nanoparticles on the perovskite surface. To date, the highest PCE (18.38%) obtained using TEOS as an additive was reported by Guan et al.105 simply by adding 0.3 mol% of TEOS in MAPbI3. The respective solar cell retains approximately 80% of its maximum PCE over 28 days even without encapsulation.

Modification of charge-selective layers
The scientific community indisputably agrees that both charge-selective layers are crucial for a PSC to accelerate the charge extraction and transport process within the device, thereby ultimately boosting the overall performance. In addition to governing the charge separation mechanism within PSCs, the presence of an ETL and HTL can also significantly impact the morphological characteristics and stability of the perovskite film fabricated in high humidity.

Electron transport layer. 
Up to now, most of the highly efficient mesoporous- and planar-based PSCs employed TiO2 or SnO2 as ETLs given that these materials can effectively extract the photogenerated electrons from the perovskite. Besides, the properties of the metal oxide-based ETL are usually unaffected by the processing conditions of the subsequent perovskite layer. However, modification of the ETL is still beneficial to give a further boost to the performance of high-humidity processed PSCs. Changing the fabrication method,108,109 tuning nanostructures,110 introducing dopants,111,112 developing nanocomposites,113 depositing a double ETL,114 using another kind of ETL material,115 and applying surface treatment112 are among the approaches that have been adopted to improve the interfacial charge extraction and bulk charge transport abilities of the ETL. For high-humidity processed devices, the modification of the ETL has an additional target, i.e. to improve the device stability. This target can be achieved by (1) controlling the hydrophobicity and (2) tuning the nanostructure of the ETL.
It is well documented that oxygen vacancies naturally exist in n-type metal oxide semiconductors and the adsorption of water molecules is energetically favored on these defective sites.116–118 Thus, their hydrophobicity must be enhanced to prevent the decomposition of the overlying perovskite film. Besides, more hydrophobic surfaces may promote the growth of large perovskite grains.119 However, enhancing the hydrophobicity has a side-effect as it reduces the wettability of the perovskite precursor, thereby resulting in non-homogeneous and incomplete perovskite distribution on the surface of the substrates.23 A balance between the hydrophobicity and wetting properties is vital for growing a high-quality perovskite film. Thus far, two approaches related to the enhancement of the hydrophobicity have shown positive outcomes for high-humidity processed PSCs. They include reducing the oxygen vacancies120 and employing an additional hydrophobic layer.114
The oxygen vacancies in oxide-based ETLs can be alleviated by changing the fabrication method. Noh et al.120 showed that the density of oxygen vacancies in SnO2-based ETLs can be reduced by replacing the spin-coating technique with an aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition technique. The few oxygen vacancies make the layer hydrophobic, as indicated by the water contact angle measurement in Fig. 7a. The hydrophobic surface has a low surface tension dragging force, which enhances the grain boundary mobility (i.e. the rate at which grains grow).121,122 During the grain coarsening process (e.g. annealing stage), the perovskite grain boundary expands gradually. At the perovskite/ETL interface, the surface tension of the ETL exerts forces that prevent the perovskite grain boundary from expanding. However, the dragging force of a hydrophobic ETL is low119 due to the low surface tension. Consequently, the hydrophobic ETL improves the grain boundary mobility and encourages the formation of large and well-defined perovskite grains even in RH40%. Deploying a hydrophobic layer such as ITIC polymer as a second ETL on the SnO2 film is another way to improve the hydrophobic nature of the ETL and the stability of PSCs.114Fig. 7b proves that the size of perovskite grains increased with increasing hydrophobicity of the ETL due to the increment of the thickness of the ITIC layer. As a result, the device fabricated in RH45% showed PCE enhancement from 14.6% to 16.1% with respect to the single SnO2 ETL.
 Fig. 7  (a) Water contact angle measurement of SnO2 layers prepared by AACVD and spin coating which contain a large and small number of oxygen vacancies, respectively. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) SEM images of perovskite grains grown in RH45% on (i) thin (less hydrophobic) and (ii) thick (more hydrophobic) ITIC layers. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Film structure and charge transport in the PSC with (i) thin (or planar) and (ii) thick mesoporous TiO2 layers. (iii and iv) The corresponding PSC after exposure to air for a certain period. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of (i) MAPbI3, (ii) MAPbI3/PCBM and (iii) MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO:TIPD prepared in RH55%. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of electron transport in Li-doped TiO2 and Li-free BaSnO3 at different RH levels. The formation of the LixO layer is intensified in RH40% obstructing the electron movement in TiO2 whereas the absence of LixO in BaSnO3 ensures efficient electron transport throughout the device. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Given that the degradation of the perovskite layer may start after its formation due to exposure to humidity during fabrication, the degradation rate can be slowed down by introducing a mesoporous layer. The labyrinthine network of the mesoporous film can act as a barrier that prevents moisture from intruding into the scaffold structure.110,123,124 Thus, the high-humidity-processed device with a thick mesoporous layer typically exhibits better stability than the planar heterojunction or thin mesoporous analogues. Moreover, perovskite degradation occurs primarily at grain boundaries, thereby causing the formation of a PbI2 layer that envelops the perovskite domain (Fig. 7c). Consequently, “dead zones” are created because the insulating nature of PbI2 traps the photogenerated electrons in the non-degraded perovskite region.29,125 The non-extracted charges will eventually recombine and significantly deteriorate the device performance. Nevertheless, in the presence of a mesoporous scaffold, a path exists for the electrons to diffuse to the external circuit without passing through the PbI2 barrier layer. Thus, the efficiency of PSCs remains high even after long-term exposure to humidity. However, the thickness of a mesoporous layer must be well-balanced to ensure long-term stability while preserving the high PCE of PSCs.
In inverted structure PSCs, an excellent ETL depends not only on the charge extraction/transport abilities but also on the effectiveness to act as a moisture barrier. Hence, the material selected as the ETL must have a high degree of hydrophobicity and the ETL film must be compact enough to fully cover the underlying perovskite layer. [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) is a common ETL in inverted PSCs. Nevertheless, PCBM itself is inefficacious in inhibiting moisture intrusion into the perovskite layer.126 Besides, a uniform PCBM layer that fully covers the underlying perovskite is rather difficult to be formed due to the aggregation behavior of PCBM and its tendency to crystallize.127 Increasing the thickness of PCBM might solve the coverage issue but the low charge mobility of PCBM might limit the charge transportability in the device. Therefore, the PCBM ETL is modified to improve the ability to prevent moisture intrusion into the underlying perovskite film during high-humidity processing.
Elnaggar et al.128 substituted the methyl ester chain of PCBM with a propyl ester counterpart and used the synthesized polymer as an ETL. The longer side chain of the synthesized fullerene derivative optimally fills in the gaps between the fullerene spheres, thus effectively blocking the pathways for moisture penetration into the perovskite layer. Zhu et al.126 improved the efficiency and stability of PSCs prepared in RH55% by introducing a composite film consisting of ZnO and titanium (diisopropoxide) bis(2,4-pentanedionate) (TIPD) between the PCBM layer and Ag electrode. ZnO promotes effective charge separation from PCBM which could minimize the trapped charge-induced perovskite degradation.126,129 Meanwhile, the TIPD encourages the formation of a compact film which eventually creates an excellent moisture barrier. Fig. 7d shows that the perovskite grains are still visible after the deposition of the PCBM layer and the ZnO:TIPD composite that was deposited on PCBM completely protects the underlying perovskite film.
It is worth noting that not all modifications that are compatible with inert-environment processing can be applied for high-humidity processing. For example, a Li salt has been commonly adopted to treat the surface of a TiO2 layer115 to passivate the electronic defects or trap states induced by oxygen vacancies and improve charge collection efficiency.130 However, the hygroscopic nature of Li ions may worsen the stability of high-humidity processed devices because moisture molecules can react with Li ions on the TiO2 surface and induce the formation of a LixO layer. The LixO layer interrupts the electron transport process to TiO2 which considerably reduces the device performance. Fig. 7e illustrates the formation of the LixO layer in low humidity (RH10%) and high humidity (RH40%) along with the electron movement mechanism; the LixO is intensified upon exposure to high humidity. Thus, the use of Li-treated TiO2 as an ETL is inadvisable for high-humidity processed PSCs. Alternatively, Chung et al.115 proposed to use Li-free BaSnO3 as an ETL because BaSnO3 possesses high electron conductance and outstanding chemical stability. In addition to the impressive device performance (certified PCE of 21.3%), the BaSnO3-based PSC fabricated in RH40% exhibited much better stability than the Li-treated TiO2-based counterpart. A similar phenomenon might also be applicable for other type of ETL but further investigation is needed to confirm such an argument.


Hole transport layer. 
From the viewpoint of the HTL, organic p-type materials, such as spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA, are typically used in n–i–p-based PSCs, whereas PEDOT:PSS is dominant in p–i–n-based devices.131 However, an inappropriate choice of the HTL can negatively influence the freshly prepared underlying perovskite film. For example, spiro-OMeTAD is commonly chosen as a HTL for PSCs but spiro-OMeTAD requires Li-TFSI as a dopant to enhance the conductivity. The employment of hygroscopic Li-TFSI may slightly trigger the instability issue because Li-TFSI tends to absorb moisture leading to the decomposition of the underlying perovskite.29,134 Furthermore, water molecules that are absorbed from a humid atmosphere can induce pinhole formation in the spiro-OMeTAD film.135 The pinholes facilitate reactions between the perovskite and metal electrode (e.g. silver) and thus aggravate the device degradation.136 This condition implies that any materials that are deployed as an HTL must be minimally hygroscopic and free from Li-dopants to avoid unnecessary absorption of humidity during the fabrication in ambient air. Similar to the ETL for inverted devices, the HTL should also be able to protect the underlying perovskite layer from moisture ingress.
PTB7 is one of the materials that has been tested as an alternative HTM to replace spiro-OMeTAD. Although the PCE of the air-processed device improved by over 4%, PTB7 still requires Li-TFSI as an additive to enhance the conductivity.85 Lv et al.137 employed CuSCN as a dopant-free HTM in PSCs prepared at RH50%. However, the stability of the device does not show any significant improvement upon employing CuSCN. Thus, Nandi et al.138 synthesized a copolymer consisting of P3TAA and P3HT which has a conductivity exceeding that of spiro-OMeTAD and used the copolymer as a dopant-free HTM. As a result, a PSC with an efficiency of 12.0% and improved stability was successfully prepared at RH80%.139 Recently, an encouraging study has been reported by Rana et al.132,140 who synthesized a series of donor–π–acceptor conducting polymers and employed them as HTLs in PSCs fabricated in RH50%. A maximum PCE approaching 16% was attained when using a HTL termed R1 (Fig. 8a). The new polymer has highly hydrophobic nature, perfect energy band alignment with respect to perovskite, and high hole mobility and it does not require Li-TFSI as a dopant. The polymer also forms a uniform film coverage on the perovskite layer which allows it to act as an effective moisture barrier. Although many other Li-free hydrophobic HTLs have been successfully synthesized by several research groups and the materials have shown great potential for replacing spiro-OMeTAD; their compatibility for high-humidity processing is yet to be proven.
 Fig. 8  (a) Molecular structures of a polymer HTM (R1). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Mass gain analysis for PEDOT:PSS and NiOx powders upon exposure to a humid atmosphere (RH70%). Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
For inverted planar PSCs, PEDOT:PSS is not a recommended HTL for high-humidity processing because PEDOT:PSS has considerable affinity to water.128,133 As confirmed by the mass gain analysis presented in Fig. 8b, the weight of PEDOT:PSS rapidly rises by approximately 35% within 100 min upon exposure to an ambient atmosphere as a consequence of moisture ingress. The use of the hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS as an HTL for high-humidity processing is definitely unfavorable for the stability of the device. Thus, Ciro et al.133 suggested the use of minimal hygroscopic NiOx as the HTL to avoid water-induced degradation during deposition of the subsequent perovskite layer in RH70%. Table 2 summarizes the performances of high-humidity processed PSCs employing various charge selective materials.
Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs employing numerous types of ETLs and HTLs prepared under high-humidity conditions




RHa [%]
Modification of the charge transport layer
Device structureb

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Ref.





a Air represents RH ≥ 30%.
b Spiro-: spiro-OMeTAD.
c ITIC: 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:20,30-d0]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b0]dithiophene.
d TIPD: titanium (diisopropoxide) bis(2,4-pentanedionate).
e PTB7: poly[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophenediyl].
f R1: new polymer synthesized from three monomers namely 4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene, pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,3-dione, and [3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophenediyl].





40
Reducing oxygen vacancies in SnO2
FTO/c-SnO2/PCBM/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag
14.7
1.03
67.5
10.2

120



45
Employing hydrophobic ITIC on SnO2
ITO/PEIE/c-SnO2/ITICc/(MAPbBr3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.95/spiro-/Au
22.8
1.01
70.0
16.1

114



40
Modifying nanostructure of mesoporous TiO2
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
21.6
1.05
68.0
16.7

110



40
Replacing PCBM with phenyl-C61-butyric acid propyl ester (PCBP)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBP/Mg/Ag
18.3
0.93
73.0
11.4

128



55
Employing a compact ZnO:TIPD layer on PCBM as the moisture barrier
ITO/CuInS2/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO:TIPDd/Ag
20.3
0.92
73.0
13.7

126



40
Replacing Li-passivated TiO2 with Li-free BaSnO3
FTO/c-TiO2/c-SnO2/mp-BaSnO3/(FAPbI3)0.93(MAPbBr3)0.07/spiro-/Au
24.4
1.13
80.7
22.4

115



Air
Replacing Li-doped spiro-OMeTAD with Li-doped PTB7
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/PTB7e/Ag
20.2
0.94
70.0
13.3

85



50
Employing Li-free CuSCN
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/FA0.83MA0.17PbI2.49Br0.51/CuSCN/C
19.5
1.00
68.5
14.9

137



85
Using Li-free P3TAA-co-P3HT to improve device stability
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/P3TAA-co-P3HT/Ag
17.2
1.07
65.0
12.0

139



50
Using newly synthesized Li-free polymer (R1) as the moisture barrier
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/R1f/Au
23.7
0.98
68.3
15.9

132



70
Replacing hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS with minimally hygroscopic NiOx
ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag
18.1
0.93
61.0
11.1

133






Modification of the fabrication technique
As mentioned previously, environmental humidity impacts the perovskite formation kinetics in three fabrication substages, namely, (1) precursor solution preparation, (2) film deposition, and (3) post-deposition treatment. The film prepared under high-humidity conditions possesses a totally different morphology compared to the counterpart prepared in an inert or low-humidity atmosphere. The former typically shows incomplete film coverage with a rough surface and thus, the final device performance decreases significantly.21 Therefore, the fabrication protocols require proper modification to adapt to high-humidity conditions well.

Precursor solution preparation stage. 
The success of fabricating high-quality perovskite thin films begins with the correct stoichiometry of the precursor solution. Although the film fabrication process can be performed under high-humidity conditions, the preparation of a perovskite precursor solution is suggested to be conducted in an inert atmosphere or under low-humidity conditions (at least less than RH40%).133 These conditions are applied for any lab- or industrial-scale methods. Preparing the solution in high humidity can damage the purity of the precursor powders. For example, unrestrained air exposure of the powder of the organic component of perovskite such as MAI may lead to partial oxidation of I− to I2. Raman spectroscopy in Fig. 9a revealed that a peak near 100 cm−1 appears after a MAI solution prepared in a glove box was exposed to humid air and room light for 60 min which verifies the formation of iodine derivatives.141 Thus, the perovskite precursor solution that was prepared from oxidized MAI powder will interrupt the stoichiometric ratio of organic halide to lead salt. Besides, continuous absorption of water in the PbI2 powder can induce the formation of a colloidal cloudy dispersion in the solution, as stated previously,75 and adversely affect the quality of the perovskite film.133 However, if the appearance of a small amount of undissolved precursor suspension is inevitable, the solution should be heated or filtered prior to deposition to produce a clear solution.
 Fig. 9  (a) Raman spectra of MAI solution prepared in a glove box and after exposure to humid air. Characteristic peaks observed at 45 and 68 cm−1 correspond to DMF whereas the peak near 100 cm−1 corresponds to the iodine derivative. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of PbI2:MAI:additive complexes in the presence of dissolved water molecules from humid air. (c) Ratio of DMSO:Pb required to obtain maximum efficiency for device preparation at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although a clear solution is attainable after the mechanical treatments, moisture still can gradually dissolve in the solution during device preparation in humid air. The amount of absorbed H2O relies on the RH level and time of exposure of the precursor solution to humid air. The absorbed H2O will act like a solvent additive, which influences the growth kinetics of the fabricated perovskite film.71,75 This aspect has been often inadvertently neglected to date and thus, information regarding the interplay between the absorbed moisture, the resulting film properties and the device performance is extremely limited.
The additive-like behavior of absorbed H2O is proven by Aranda et al.75 during device preparation at various RH levels via a one-step method. They noticed that the absorbed H2O competes with the DMSO additive to coordinate with the Pb atoms to generate the PbI2:MAI:additive complex because H2O has greater coordination ability to PbI2 than DMSO. To achieve a compact perovskite film and hinder the presence of chemical defects, a well-balanced proportion of additives is necessary.142
An insufficient amount of solvent additives can result in the formation of perovskite with a fiber-like morphology, whereas an excessive amount of additives can randomly develop pinholes. Therefore, the optimum molar ratio of solvent additives to Pb is 1.5, as illustrated in Fig. 9b (assuming that the molar ratio of DMSO = n and water = m, the optimum value of additives is n + m = 1.5).75 In other words, to acquire an optimal morphology and reach maximum efficiency, a lower quantity of DMSO is needed for fabrication conducted at a higher RH level and vice versa (Fig. 9c).


Deposition stage by one-step spin-coating. 
Although the development of PSCs has been active for over a decade, conventional spin-coating is still considered the method of choice for most research labs. This choice can be attributed to the facile process and matured understanding of the perovskite film growth mechanism. The film growing kinetics during spin-coating depend heavily on the RH level.143,144 In general, simple spin-coating of a MAPbI3−xClx or MAPbI3 perovskite layer without any modification steps in high RH constantly leads to incomplete surface coverage. MAPbI3−xClx and MAPbI3 films tend to grow into island and rod-like structures, respectively. As shown in Fig. 10a, the percentage of uncovered area enlarges with the increase in the humidity level. This characteristic reduces the light absorption ability of the device and minimizes the generation of photocurrent (i.e., low JSC). The exposed surface also causes a direct contact between the ETL and HTL, thereby resulting in a low shunt resistance, high charge recombination rate, and reduced VOC.21
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of MAPbI3−xClx (top row) and MAPbI3 (bottom row) layers prepared in (i and v) RH0%, (ii and vi) RH10%, (iii and vii) RH40% and (iv and viii) RH70%. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Schematic representations of (b) solvent evaporation kinetics and (c) spin coating induced crystallization under the influence of humidity. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The formation kinetics of the perovskite film by one-step spin-coating in a high-humidity environment can be explained as follows. During the spinning process, the excess perovskite solution is initially spun away, and thus, the solvent (e.g. DMF, DMSO, etc.) starts to evaporate, thus leading to a rise in the concentration of the remaining perovskite precursor. The evaporation rate of the solvent is high at a low RH level, whereas the solvent undergoes weak evaporation at a high RH level (Fig. 10b). Fig. 10c shows that continuous evaporation causes the perovskite precursor to exceed the supersaturation concentration (Cs), and consequently, small nuclei are randomly generated. Additional solute tends to precipitate either to create new nuclei or to promote the growth of the formerly generated nuclei with the progress of evaporation. The dominant process (i.e., nuclei formation or growth) is governed by the difference in the highest concentration over the supersaturation concentration or supersaturation quench depth (ΔC). High ΔC reflects that nuclei formation is more dominant than nuclei growth, whereas an inverse phenomenon is indicated by low ΔC. A strong evaporation process in the low RH atmosphere rapidly increases the concentration of the solution on the spinning substrate, thus resulting in a high ΔC. This increase denotes that dense nuclei are formed on the film because the nuclei generation rate is greater than the nuclei growth rate. Therefore, the film easily grows into a compact perovskite film, which consists of a high density of small grains. Conversely, moisture molecules in the high RH environment can adsorb into the perovskite precursor solution, thus delaying the time for the solution to reach a supersaturation status in which ΔC is reduced. High humidity also suppresses the evaporation of the solvent causing low ΔC, thereby promoting the nuclei growing process over the nuclei formation process. Although this phenomenon encourages the growth of large perovskite grains, the film frequently suffers from incomplete surface coverage.21,144,145 This occurrence is one of the two primary reasons (the other one is the decomposition of the perovskite material by moisture) for the low efficiency of PSC devices fabricated through the one-step method under high humidity.
Anti-solvent-based method. 
To manage the perovskite crystal growth in a humid atmosphere and obtain a highly efficient device, modification particularly during the anti-solvent treatment is absolutely necessary. Given the groundbreaking work by Jeon et al.,146 anti-solvent treatment has become a formidable tool for the one-step deposition method. In this approach, a non-dissolving liquid or so-called anti-solvent is typically dropped onto a spinning substrate containing a perovskite solution to remove particular solvents, such as DMF and GBL, promptly. The treatment induces rapid nucleation in the film and transforms the precursor into a homogeneous intermediate film. The film is then subjected to annealing to generate a smooth perovskite film.147 To date, the anti-solvent is typically dropped 15 s after the start of the fast spinning program, while chlorobenzene, toluene, and diethyl ether are the most commonly utilized anti-solvents in PSC fabrication.74,147 The most crucial part in applying anti-solvent treatment is determining an appropriate time delay for quenching anti-solvents.
To achieve this goal, the turbid point during the spin deposition stage must be identified. The turbid point refers to the time at which the precursor film turns from transparent to turbid during spin coating. The time delay increases with the rise in the RH level. This result is related to the solvent evaporation dynamics described previously. According to Wang et al.,145 the turbid point appears approximately after 9, 15, 19, and 20 s for RH0%, RH50%, RH70%, and RH90%, respectively (Fig. 11a). The optimal quenching time for the anti-solvent to obtain a smooth and shiny film is several seconds before the turbid point. Early dripping may lead to the removal of the perovskite layer, whereas long-delayed dripping may cause millimetric cracking of the film.133
 Fig. 11  (a) Photograph of MAPbI3 samples to determine the turbid point during spin coating at various humidity levels. Bottom figures are microscopy images of the respective MAPbI3 films. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Film coverage and average grain size of the perovskite layer with respect to the volume percentage of chlorobenzene/ethanol anti-solvent mixtures. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Top-view SEM images of the perovskite layer prepared at different RH levels using various types of anti-solvents. Reproduced with permission.22 (d) J–V curves of PSC devices made using methyl acetate (MA), ethyl acetate (EA), propyl acetate (PA) and butyl acetate (BA) as anti-solvents. Reproduced with permission.149 
Apparently, determining an accurate dripping time is an inconvenient procedure for developing PSCs under high-humidity conditions. In addition, some water molecules from the environment can be adsorbed on the surface of perovskite intermediates after washing with conventional anti-solvent and affect the homogeneity of the final film.151 Thus, there are three possible strategies to avoid the strict time window for anti-solvent dripping including (1) using an anti-solvent mixture by combining traditional non-polar solvents, such as diethyl ether and chlorobenzene, with other polar solvents (e.g., alcohol), (2) finding another anti-solvent that is suitable for high-humidity processing and completely substituting the commonly used anti-solvent and (3) employing preheating treatment towards the solution and substrates.
The development of anti-solvent mixtures can be categorized into anti-solvent mixtures containing (1) a low amount and (2) a high amount of polar solvent. The presence of a polar solvent in the anti-solvent can dissolve the adsorbed H2O molecules on the perovskite intermediate layer and remove them simultaneously with DMF and excess DMSO. Consequently, a homogeneous perovskite intermediate, which eventually transforms into a smooth and pinhole-free film, is formed, thereby inhibiting charge recombination due to the direct contact between the ETL and HTL. Yang et al.151 showed that the PCE of PSCs fabricated in RH50% surges from 6.3% to 16.4% when using diethyl ether mixed with 3% methanol as the anti-solvent. Ethanol, 2-propanol, and 1-butanol have also been tested as additives in the anti-solvent, and the device performance has exhibited a positive outcome. In the case of a high amount of polar solvent, the anti-solvent mixture can also dissolve excess MAI and provide a second chance for the remaining unreacted PbI2 to react with the excess MAI. Gedamu et al.148 prepared PSCs in RH40% and claimed that an optimal balance between the surface coverage and grain size of the perovskite film is attainable by treating the film with an anti-solvent mixture consisting of chlorobenzene and ethanol with a volume ratio of 3:1 (Fig. 11b).
As mentioned, replacing the conventional anti-solvent is another feasible approach to form a high-quality perovskite film in high humidity. Troughton et al.22 proposed to utilize ethyl acetate for the high-humidity fabrication of PSCs (up to RH75%). This result was attributed to the properties of ethyl acetate that can absorb considerable moisture in air (up to 3.3 vol% of water) in comparison with other anti-solvents, such as toluene (0.033 vol%), chlorobenzene (0.04 vol%), and diethyl ether (1.5 vol%). Besides, ethyl acetate forms a hydrogen bond with DMSO in the perovskite intermediate, preventing itself from rapidly evaporating after dripping.152 These characteristics allow ethyl acetate to absorb the moisture in air and inhibit the moisture from reacting with the intermediate phase of perovskite. Subsequently, uniform and smooth films can be formed regardless of the RH level (Fig. 11c). Inspired by this fact, Yang et al.149 examined several acetate-based anti-solvents for PSC fabrication in RH60–70% and found that methyl acetate, which possesses 3 times greater water solubility than ethyl acetate, can further improve the quality of the perovskite film. In Fig. 11d, the solar cell efficiency escalated from 15.1% to 16.3% as a result of the increment in all photovoltaic parameters when methyl acetate is used instead of ethyl acetate. An alternative anti-solvent for perovskite preparation in high humidity is chloroform because chloroform can shield the perovskite intermediate from water and oxygen molecules.150
Another effective strategy for making the anti-solvent treatment humidity insensitive is to accelerate the rate of solvent evaporation through substrate pre-annealing such that the turbid point manifests itself earlier. Wang et al.145 claimed that when the substrate was pre-heated to 70 °C, the anti-solvent can be applied to the perovskite film 2 s after the spinning protocol started regardless of the humidity level to facilitate the fabrication of highly efficient PSCs with PCE up to 19.5%. Sveinbjörnsson13 mentioned that a translucent and non-uniform intermediate phase of perovskite that typically appears at room temperature in an ambient atmosphere can be changed to a uniform intermediate phase by depositing the perovskite at an elevated temperature (Fig. 12). The PCE of the device prepared in RH50% augmented from 12.6% to 18.8% upon preheating the substrate at 50 °C. However, preheating above 70 °C causes the rapid formation of perovskite even before completing the spin-coating process, thereby resulting in island formation and low efficiency.
 Fig. 12  Images of the (top) intermediate perovskite phase and (bottom) resulting perovskite film prepared at RH50% after pre-annealing treatment at various temperatures. Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Anti-solvent-free method. 
The use of anti-solvent not only involves toxic materials and increase material consumption, but is also hardly translatable to large-scale fabrication methods.153 In contrast, the employment of the one-step method without anti-solvent treatment typically leads to poor perovskite surface coverage. Hence, anti-solvent-free approaches that are capable of producing a uniform perovskite film in a humid atmosphere have been developed. They include (1) the gas-quenching method, (2) additive engineering and (3) solvent engineering.
The gas-quenching approach imitates the concept of ultra-fast removal of precursor solvent by anti-solvent treatment. In gas quenching, air or N2 gas is blown on the wet precursor coated on the substrate, thereby accelerating the evaporation of the solvent. The process triggers rapid saturation and precipitation of the film which eventually promotes the growth of smooth and densely packed perovskite grains after annealing.153,155Fig. 13a illustrates a gas-quenching-based one-step spin-coating process and an example of the SEM image of the resultant perovskite film is shown. One of the most significant studies associated with the high-humidity-based gas-quenching technique was reported by Gao et al.156 when they applied a multi-flow air knife process and attained a PCE of 17.7% for device prepared in RH40%. This result was achieved by optimizing the air flow-rate and the distance between the air knife and the substrate surface to 300 L min−1 and 1 mm, respectively. The research group anticipated that a meter scale-sized device can simply be realized by tuning the length of the air knife.
 Fig. 13  (a) One-step spin-coating of a perovskite layer based on the gas-quenching technique and the SEM image of the resulting film. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) (i) J–V curves of the PSC made using room temperature molten salt MAAc solvent. (ii) Photograph of perovskite precursor solution in various solvents. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Additive engineering is also effective for preparing PSCs without anti-solvent dripping in high humidity. Wang et al.157 showed that a 18.6% efficient device is attainable by introducing Cu-doped NiO nanoparticles into the MAPbI3 perovskite. The presence of Cu and NiO nanoparticles not only enhances the light absorption ability, but also forms a strong chemical interaction with perovskite components, which may effectively prevent ion migration and moisture ingress.
Entirely replacing the conventional solvents (i.e., DMF, DMSO, and GBL) with other polar solvents has proven to be another powerful approach to fabricating high-humidity PSCs without anti-solvent dripping. At present, dimethylacetamide158 and a room-temperature molten salt, namely, methyl-ammonium acetate (RTMS MAAc),154 have shown promising results, whereby efficiency exceeding 16% has been recorded. However, the most notable discovery was reported by Chao et al.;154 their results surpassed the 20% efficiency threshold for PSCs developed at a very high humidity level reaching 80% using RTMS MAAc as the solvent. As shown in Fig. 13b, the perovskite precursor clearly appears very light yellow in MAAc in comparison with the clear yellow that is typically observed for other conventional solvents given the formation of hydrogen bonds between MAAc molecules and the perovskite precursor. During film formation, MAAc tends to self-assemble with PbI2 and generate an intermediate phase, which decomposes back to PbI2 under heat exposure, thereby allowing the organic component to enter the crystal lattice for forming the perovskite structure. This process encourages the rapid crystallization of the perovskite. In addition, MAAc protects the perovskite from humidity during film growth considering its high viscosity. Therefore, the film has a low defect density, which improves the carrier lifetime and diffusion length.


Deposition stage by sequential deposition. 
In a typical two-step sequential deposition method, the PbI2 layer is independently spin-deposited on an ETL- or HTL-coated substrate prior to the deposition of MAI through a solution- or a vapor-based approach. For high-humidity processing, most modifications are performed to improve the solution-based approach to obtain the optimal film quality.
PbI2 deposition. 
The quality of the perovskite film is primarily governed by the characteristics of the PbI2 layer. Although PbI2 is minimally sensitive to water molecules in comparison to MAI,158 the presence of moisture during spin-coating of the PbI2 layer still significantly impacts the solvent-drying dynamics, which eventually influences the film growth kinetics and final film morphology.159 Cheng et al.23 demonstrated that the PbI2 layer is converted into an isolated branching structure and leads to a poor surface coverage when the RH level is greater than 20% (Fig. 14a). This result was ascribed to the fast crystallization of PbI2 during the spin-coating stage induced by humidity. Accordingly, the resulting perovskite layer exhibited a morphological trend that is similar to the underlying PbI2 film and ultimately reduced light absorption and improved JSC. Thus, attaining a uniform coverage of the PbI2 film is a key to producing high-efficiency PSCs in a high-humidity atmosphere.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of vapour shield formation by pre-annealing treatment for alleviating the humidity impact during PbI2 film deposition. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Top- and side-views of SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared in RH50% with the substrate pre-annealed at (i and v) room temperature, (ii and vi) 40 °C, (iii and vii) 50 °C and (iv and viii) 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The polarity of numerous solvents and PbI2 crystal formation when treated with the respective solvents. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared in the presence of (i) CsI, moisture and toluene dripping, (ii) CsI and moisture, (iii) CsI and toluene dripping, and (iv) moisture and toluene dripping. Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Similar to the one-step method, pre-annealing of the substrate prior to perovskite precursor deposition is a facile yet powerful strategy in the two-step method to obtain a compact perovskite film. The elevated temperature of the substrate affects the growth of the PbI2 layer in three ways. (1) Pre-annealing releases the adsorbed moisture and oxygen from the substrate. This process improves the wettability of the substrate and assists the infiltration process of PbI2 into the labyrinthine structure of the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, thus perfecting the surface coverage.23,159 (2) High substrate temperature induces rapid solvent evaporation during spin deposition and creates a vapor shield above the PbI2 film simultaneously, thereby suppressing moisture intrusion into the system (Fig. 14b).23,97 (3) The crystallinity, thickness, and compactness of the PbI2 layer improve with an increase in substrate temperature given the fast PbI2 crystallization rate at elevated temperature.159,160
The optimum pre-annealing temperature prior to the PbI2 deposition varies depending on the fabrication conditions. For example, Ko et al.159 claimed that pre-annealing the substrate to 50 °C provides the optimum performance for the device assembled under RH 50% because the resulting PbI2 film has the right thickness and zero pinholes (Fig. 14c). The increase in the pre-annealing temperature beyond 50 °C will thicken the PbI2 layer, which consequently causes incomplete conversion of PbI2 to MAPbI3 because the penetration of the subsequent perovskite precursor into PbI2 is blocked. The presence of a thick PbI2 layer hinders the charge transfer process at the perovskite/ETL interface, intensifies the charge recombination and significantly decreases the device performance. The result was supported by Huang et al.;160 these authors also used a pre-annealing temperature of 50 °C and attained a PCE of 18.38% for a Cs0.21FA0.56MA0.23Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3 perovskite-based device fabricated in RH40%. Nevertheless, Cheng et al. reported that the optimum pre-annealing temperature is 80 °C for fabricating PSCs at RH70% where the maximum efficiency of 18.11% and 15.56% is recorded for MAPbI3- and Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3-based devices, respectively.23,97 The contradictory temperature reported by these studies might be associated with the humidity level during the perovskite layer fabrication. However, the interplay between the RH of the atmosphere and the pre-annealing temperature during the perovskite layer deposition through the two-step method merits further scrutiny.
The anti-solvent approach has also been adopted for the PbI2 deposition process under humid conditions, although the study on this topic is limited. Wang et al.161 tested numerous anti-solvents with various polarities, including toluene (low-polarity), dry isopropanol (mid-polarity), and water (high-polarity), during the PbI2 deposition. A uniform PbI2 film was acquired using dry isopropanol and enabled the production of a device at RH50–60% with an efficiency of over 16%. Fig. 14d depicts the relative polarities of various solvents and their effect on the crystal size and dispersity of PbI2 in the respective solvents. In addition to instantaneous crystallization during the solvent washing process, PbI2 can form a homogeneously dispersed suspension in the form of small crystals inside isopropanol, which aids in the formation of a smooth film. Moreover, the mid-polarity of isopropanol induces partial affinity to PbI2 molecules, thus causing PbI2 to be organized into small grains of reduced crystallinity. Conversely, the poor suspensibility of PbI2 in toluene (low-polarity solvent) and no affinity between PbI2 and water (high-polarity solvent) led to a low-quality PbI2 layer. In contrast, Xu et al.162 claimed that toluene is still applicable as an anti-solvent for preparing PbI2 in RH60%, but a small amount of CsI must be incorporated into the PbI2 solution. The synergistic effect between toluene, CsI and moisture will allow the formation of a fully covered PbI2 film with a porous microstructure (Fig. 14e). The porous structure facilitates the infiltration of the subsequent organic solution and provides spaces for volume expansion of perovskite crystals which eventually leads to a smooth and compact perovskite film.
MAI deposition. 
MAI deposition through a two-step solution-based approach can be classified into (1) a dipping strategy where a PbI2-coated substrate is dipped into an MAI-containing solution and (2) a drop-and-spin strategy where the MAI precursor is loaded on top of a preformed PbI2 layer followed by spinning. The former can reduce the unfavorable impact of moisture because the perovskite conversion reaction occurs inside the dipping solution, thereby isolating the perovskite from the humid atmosphere. Cuboid crystals are typically formed using this approach regardless whether the dipping process is conducted in an inert environment or under humid conditions.165–167 However, the perovskite grains gradually lose the cuboid form once the dipped film is dried in a high-humidity atmosphere (see the next section).24 Furthermore, the morphology of the dip-coated perovskite film in ambient air may change depending on the characteristics of the MAI solution, such as the concentration, type of solvent, and dipping period.82,168
Typically, isopropanol is used as a solvent for MAI, but this solvent has a relatively strong tendency to absorb moisture in air which could affect the perovskite growth during the dipping process or decompose the perovskite in situ. Zhang et al.82 claimed that this issue can be alleviated by substituting isopropanol with minimal hydrophilic n-butanol for preparing the MAI/MACl solution. To improve the morphological properties of the dip-coated perovskite film further, the multi-cycle short-time dipping reaction (STDR) rather than the traditional long-time dipping reaction (LTDR) was adopted, as exhibited in Fig. 15a. In brief, a PbI2-coated substrate was dipped in MAI/MACl solution dissolved in n-butanol for 30 s and dried through spin coating for 10 s by dripping n-butanol. The process was repeated several times before annealing for 30 min at 100 °C. In comparison to the standard LTDR method, the device PCE was augmented from 15.09% to 17.74% after five cycles of the STDR.
 Fig. 15  (a) Multi-cycle short-time dipping reaction (STDR) protocol for perovskite film fabrication. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Development of the perovskite layer through an ambient engineering procedure. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Stability test for the device prepared with and without hot isopropanol treatment. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
In the MAI drop-and-spin strategy, the exposure of the perovskite film to a high-humidity environment, particularly during the spinning process remarkably affects the final morphology. In addition, poor management of evaporated solvents, such as DMF and DMSO, during fabrication can affect the ambiance inside the glove box and ultimately deteriorate the perovskite film quality. Therefore, Huang et al.163 controlled the deposition atmosphere by deliberately introducing chlorobenzene vapor during the MAI drop-and-spin process (Fig. 15b). The reaction rate between MAI and PbI2 decreased in chlorobenzene ambient, thereby eventually suppressing the grain nucleation rate. Therefore, perovskite grains as large as 1 μm were produced, leading to a reasonable increase in the JSC and FF values. Ren et al.164 applied hot isopropanol on the spinning MAPbI3 film after the MAI deposition at RH50%, thereby attaining a smooth and pinhole-free perovskite layer. The device recorded a PCE of 15.1% with reduced hysteresis behavior. Dripping hot isopropanol slightly dissolves the surface perovskite, which allows MAI to infiltrate further into the layer and react with the remaining PbI2 to form complete MAPbI3. The hot isopropanol also transfers the initial grains to void-rich areas and fills the voids with MAPbI3 during the recrystallization process. Furthermore, the hot isopropanol is capable of extracting the residual DMF solvent from the PbI2 layer, thus ameliorating the stability of the device (Fig. 15c).


Post-annealing stage. 
Annealing the perovskite layer after the deposition process is a standard yet crucial step for completely removing the remaining solvent and facilitating the formation of a crystalline perovskite film.80 In a typical procedure for PSC fabrication in an inert atmosphere, the annealing process is simply performed on a hot plate at a temperature of approximately 80–100 °C for 5–120 min.10,74,170 For fabrication under ambient conditions, several reports have argued that such a procedure will lead to a rough perovskite layer with large perovskite grains, which increase the risk of pinhole formation.171,172 However, many groups proved that air annealing actually exerts some beneficial effects on the perovskite layer.24,143,169 The impact of humid air annealing towards the perovskite morphology is almost similar regardless of the perovskite deposition methods (i.e. one- or two-step methods).
For instance, You et al.143 discovered that exposing the perovskite film prepared via a one-step method to an environment with around RH35% instead of a N2 environment during the annealing stage transforms the perovskite into larger grains (Fig. 16a). The improved morphology amplifies the fill factor and PCE of the PSC to 80.2% and 17.1%, respectively, given the enhanced carrier mobility and charge carrier lifetime. Similarly, Gangishetty et al.24 reported that the perovskite film prepared using the two-step dipping strategy grows into a small, well-defined cuboid structure at a very low humidity level (RH1%). Exposing the perovskite layer to a moderate humidity level of RH40% causes the perovskite grains to lose their initial cuboid form, begin to merge with each other, and subsequently lead to a reduction in film roughness (Fig. 16b). However, the device performance decreased with the further rise in humidity to RH60% given that the shape of the grains appears increasingly rounded. The same phenomenon was also observed when the two-step drop-and-spin strategy was employed where the film starts to become smooth when the RH level increases to 40%.169 The surface roughness rises again with further increment in the humidity level because humidity affects the growing orientation of perovskite and leads to 3D growth of the crystals (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of the perovskite layer prepared via one-step spin coating and annealed in N2 and RH35%. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (b) SEM images of perovskite films after dipping a compact PbI2 layer in MAI solution and annealing at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 3-Dimensional AFM images of perovskite films prepared at different RH levels by means of the drop-and-spin strategy. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
The change in the grain structure in the presence of moisture is attributed to the dissolution and recrystallization of MAPbI3, particularly at the grain edges. Since MAI is hygroscopic, water molecules from humid air can be reversibly absorbed into the perovskite film during the annealing process. This phenomenon leads to slight dissolution of perovskite at the grain boundaries, thereby inducing grain boundary creep and eventually merging the adjacent grains together. Continuous annealing of the film releases the absorbed water molecules and recrystallizes the perovskite layer.24,143,169 Multiple studies have verified that the humid air annealing approach is also an effective protocol for improving the morphology of mixed cation-based perovskite176,177 and fascinating results with PCE exceeding 20% have been reported.178–182 Moreover, Jiang et al. proved that a PSC with a certified PCE of 23.32%, which stands among the highest recorded efficiencies to date, is attainable by using the humid air annealing approach.9,182 It is noted that various modifications are required to reach PCE over 20% such as modification of the charge selective layers,180 surface passivation at the perovskite/HTL interface182 and introduction of down-shifting quantum dots at the back of the cell.178 Nevertheless, the results suggest that a high humidity environment is not entirely deleterious for perovskite film formation and in fact, annealing at a moderate RH level is advantageous for improving the quality of the film. To date, annealing of perovskite in humid air has been typically performed in RH30–50% at a temperature ranging from 100 °C to 150 °C for 15 to 45 min. A lower annealing temperature usually requires a longer annealing time. The annealing of perovskite at a higher RH level, however, is not encouraged because the massive amount of adsorbed H2O molecules at the perovskite grain boundaries could diffuse inside the grains. This circumstance could lead to irreversible degradation of perovskites given the formation of a monohydrate or dihydrate.25
In a quest to explore the potential of humid-air annealing, some research groups have replaced hot-plate annealing with other annealing instruments. For example, Zhou et al.173 demonstrated that air-heated oven annealing facilitates homogeneous crystal growth and minimizes pinhole evolution, resulting in a device efficiency of 14.9% (Fig. 17a). The hot air containing humidity of RH30% with a well-controlled temperature that fills the oven allows the complete heating of the substrate from all directions. In addition, this process reduces the annealing time and provides a convenient annealing environment because the samples can be placed in any manner regardless of the position and postures, thereby making the process appropriate for large-scale production. Another potential annealing technique for high-humidity processing is microwave annealing.171 The microwave annealing can shorten the annealing time to merely 6 min because the underlying FTO readily absorbs incoming heat and causes a rapid rise in temperature throughout the substrate (Fig. 17b). This condition creates an inert protection layer on top of the perovskite layer, thereby alleviating the negative influence of oxygen or moisture on the film and subsequently enabling the formation of the perovskite layer with perfect surface coverage, homogeneous, and improved crystallinity.
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of the perovskite film annealed at RH 30% on a hot plate and in an oven. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of the heat transfer process in a microwave annealed glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite substrate. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Temperature profile of the FTO, FIRA-chamber and perovskite film during the flash-infrared annealing process. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic diagram of the perovskite film prepared via the gas pump method. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, an ultra-fast annealing procedure using infrared radiation in RH30–40% known as flash infrared annealing (FIRA) has been developed by Sanchez et al.174,183 which remarkably minimizes the annealing time of the perovskite film to below 2 s. In this method, the spin-coated film was exposed to infrared radiation for a brief instant in a FIRA oven and then was kept in that oven for several seconds prior to removal followed by cooling for several minutes. Similar to microwave annealing, the infrared was effectively absorbed by FTO causing its temperature to rise sharply and crystallizing the overlying perovskite film. Fig. 17c displays the temperature profile of the FTO, chamber and perovskite film during the FIRA process.174 The FIRA-based perovskite exhibited relatively similar optical and structural properties with respect to the anti-solvent-based/hot-plate-annealed counterpart and hence, the device unveiled comparable performance.
It is worth mentioning that an approach to reducing the influence of moisture during the post-annealing step, namely vacuum-annealing treatment, has also been developed. The perovskite layer annealed in a vacuum possesses small gaps between grains and large film coverage because the fast evaporation of solvent improves the supersaturation of perovskite and promotes the growth of uniform and densely packed perovskite crystals.175,184 Consequently, the interfacial charge recombination is strongly suppressed and the performance is boosted. A vacuum-assisted process can also be applied to the deposited perovskite film prior to annealing. The device developed with this strategy (which is termed the gas-pump method as shown in Fig. 17d) has recorded 19.0% efficiency, although the perovskite film has been spin-coated and annealed in a RH45–55% environment.175


Generalization of the perovskite fabrication protocol in humid air. 
The device structures, photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC, FF and PCE) and key fabrication protocols of all the discussed PSCs prepared via spin coating under humid conditions (RH ≥ 30%) are summarized in Table 3. In Fig. 18, we provide a generalization of the fabrication protocol for perovskite films in humid air. The purpose, the optimal conditions and the example of materials described above are listed as well to give a comprehensive picture of the possibilities for high-humidity processing of PSCs. Note that the chart illustrates only a portion of commonly used methods for high-humidity processing of perovskite, while there are various other possible approaches that are applicable for the fabrication under the same conditions.
Table 3 Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs and the corresponding key modification of the fabrication protocol for adapting high-humidity conditions




RH [%]
Modification of the fabrication protocol
Device structurea

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Ref.





a Spiro-: spiro-OMeTAD.
b Exact values of photovoltaic parameters are unavailable.





30
The DMSO additive is adjusted according to the RH level to balance with the adsorbed H2O
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
22.4
1.05
78.0
18.7

75



50
Diethyl ether anti-solvent is dropped on the substrate within the correct time window (∼10 s)
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
20.9
1.09
74.0
16.9

144



70
Device is spin-coated under RH10% but annealed in RH70%
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Ag
19.5
0.89
58.2
10.1

21



90
Substrate is preheated at 70 °C; diethyl ether anti-solvent is dropped 2 s after spinning
ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
23.4
1.08
77.0
19.5

145



50
3% methanol is added to diethyl ether anti-solvent
FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
22.5
1.04
70.0
16.4

151



40
25% ethanol is added to chlorobenzene anti-solvent
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Au
24.3
0.91
61.7
14.0

148



50
Ethyl acetate is used as anti-solvent
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Agb
>21.0
>1.00
>70.0
15.0

22



38
Ethyl acetate is used as anti-solvent
FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
21.4
1.12
74.6
17.8

152



65
Methyl acetate is used as anti-solvent
FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
22.2
1.05
70.0
16.3

149



30
Chloroform is used as anti-solvent
FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
21.6
1.12
73.0
17.7

150



40
Gas quenching based on a multi-flow air-knife is used
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
23.5
1.09
69.0
17.7

156



50
Cu:NiO additive is used in an anti-solvent-free one-step method
FTO/c-SnO2/mp-Al2O3/mp-Cu:NiO/MAPbI3−xClx + Cu:NiO/spiro-/Au
23.1
1.03
78.0
18.6

157



32
Dimethyl acetate replaced DMF as solvent
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag
20.8
1.03
66.3
14.2

158



80
Room-temperature molten-salt namely methylammonium acetate replaced DMF as solvent
FTO/CPTA/BACl/MAPbI3/spiro-/MoO3/Au
23.2
1.11
78.0
20.1

154



50
Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition using an anti-solvent-based one-step method
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-/Au
22.5
1.14
73.0
18.8

13



50
Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
21.3
1.03
71.8
15.8

159



70
Substrate is preheated at 80 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method
ITO/poly-TPD/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
23.0
1.05
74.9
18.1

23



70
Substrate is preheated at 80 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method
ITO/poly-TPD/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
23.4
1.00
66.6
15.6

97



40
Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method
ITO/c-SnO2/Cs0.21FA0.56MA0.23Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3/spiro-/Ag
23.4
1.11
71.1
18.4

160



55
PbI2 is treated with isopropanol
ITO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag
20.3
1.09
73.2
16.3

161



70
Perovskite is prepared via a multi-cycle short-time dipping reaction
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Au
22.6
1.07
72.0
17.4

82



35
Chlorobenzene vapor is used to control the ambient atmosphere
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
19.0
1.05
72.6
14.6

163



50
Perovskite film is treated with hot isopropanol prior to annealing
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
20.2
1.01
73.8
15.1

164



60
Perovskite film is exposed to RH60% before annealing in a dry oven
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ca/Al
20.4
0.95
80.3
15.6

80



60
Perovskite film is annealed using a microwave
FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Ag
20.1
0.92
60.0
11.1

171



35
Perovskite film is exposed to RH35% during annealing
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/PFN/Al
20.3
1.05
80.2
17.1

143



40
Perovskite film is exposed to RH40% after deposition
ITO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag
18.9
0.94
57.0
12.2

24



40
Perovskite film is completely fabricated in RH40%
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/LiF/Al
17.1
1.02
73.0
12.7

169



50
Perovskite film is completely fabricated in RH50%
ITO/c-SnO2/MA1−xFAxPbI3−yBry/spiro-/Au
22.8
1.10
77.0
19.5

176



40
Perovskite film is annealed in RH40%; CdSe/CdS is used as a down-shifting quantum-dot at the back of the device
ITO/c-NiO/Cs0.10FA0.90PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
23.1
1.14
77.0
20.8

178



40
Perovskite film is annealed in RH30–40%; PEAI is used for surface passivation
ITO/c-SnO2/MA1−xFAxPbI3/PEAI/spiro-/Au
25.2
1.18
78.4
23.3

182



30
Perovskite film is annealed in an oven
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Al
20.3
1.02
72.0
14.9

173



30
FIRA process is applied on a perovskite film coated on mesoporous TiO2 for 1.7 s
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au
22.6
1.11
76
19.0

174



40
FIRA process is applied on a perovskite film coated on compact TiO2 for 1.2 s
FTO/c-TiO2/CsMAFAPbIBr/spiro-/Au
22.5
1.09
74
18.1

183



50
Perovskite film is deposited in RH50% but annealed in a vacuum
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/C60/Al
18.4
1.02
69.4
13.0

184



55
Gas-pump method is applied between the spin-coating and annealing stages
FTO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-/MoO3/Ag
22.7
1.08
77.8
19.0

175





 Fig. 18  Generalization of the fabrication protocol of the perovskite thin film under high-humidity conditions. The purposes, the examples of materials and the optimal methods for high-humidity processing are included as well. 
Generally, restricting the exposure of the perovskite precursor to high humidity during the solution preparation stage is essential to avoid damage to the powder or undesirable contamination in the prepared solution. Meanwhile, modifications developed for the deposition stage by spin-coating mostly aim toward alleviating the moisture impact on the growth kinetics of perovskite films. On the other hand, thermally treating perovskite films under humid conditions especially in the range of RH30–50% is a propitious approach for ameliorating the quality of the film.

High-humidity-processed large-scale methods
Currently, most studies on the lab-scale are mainly focused on improving perovskite film formation through a conventional spin-coating method. Nevertheless, this technique has low compatibility in large-scale manufacturing for commercialization. Even though modules with an area of up to 10 cm × 10 cm have been successfully fabricated, the PCE is considerably lower than that of the state-of-the-art small-area counterparts.170,185 Furthermore, approximately 90% of the precursor solution is wasted during the spin-coating process.170 Thus, efforts have been exerted to transfer numerous concept and modification strategies of perovskite film deposition that have been explored in the spin-coating technique to other scalable and continuous coating techniques. The main goal is principally aiming for mass production of large-area PSCs in an ambient atmosphere while preserving their high-efficiency and long-term stability. Blade-coating, inkjet printing, slot-die coating, and spray coating are among the deposition techniques that have been intensively developed for that purpose. The significant progress of those industrially viable coating techniques is elaborated in the following.
Doctor blade
Blade-coating or sometimes called the doctor-blade technique is a facile, environmentally benign, and low-cost method for fabricating optoelectronic devices.186,187 This technique can yield uniform films in a large area, while avoiding the waste of materials due to excessive consumption.188 The morphological parameters of the blade-coated perovskite film are controllable by tailoring the blade height (i.e., distance between the blade and substrate), blade raster speed, volume and viscosity of precursor solution, and substrate temperature.186,189
Environmental humidity also plays a major role in determining the morphological quality of the perovskite layer and, therefore, its corresponding device performance. Yang et al.186 manipulated the RH to 15–25%, 40–50%, and 60–70% to evaluate its effect on blade-coated perovskite. The overall optical absorption, crystallinity, and surface coverage of the perovskite film have improved dramatically with the decrease in the environmental humidity during blade coating (Fig. 19a). The effect of the RH level on the formation kinetics of the blade-coated perovskite film is unclear. Yet, it is postulated that the film growth process has a slight resemblance to that of spin-coating21,145 since the resulting film exhibited a similar morphological trend (Fig. 19b).186
 Fig. 19  (a) Absorption spectra and X-ray diffraction curves of the perovskite layer blade-coated at various RH levels. (b) SEM images of perovskite blade-coated at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) The size of perovskite islands with respect to substrate temperature during blade-coating. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) J–V curves of perovskite mini-modules prepared in air using RTP and hot-plate annealing. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Better quality of blade-coated perovskite films is attainable simply by exploiting particular fabrication protocols developed in the spin-coating technique. For example, in situ thermal-annealing of the substrate during the blade-coating process, which is analogous to the substrate pre-annealing of spin coating,13,145 has been adopted to promote perovskite crystal growth.188,189 The in situ thermal-annealing not only triggers a fast conversion reaction of the perovskite phase but also simplifies the perovskite film fabrication procedure by excluding the post-annealing treatment. Few perovskite crystals with larger islands are observed by increasing the substrate temperature because the crystallization rate is favored over the rate of nucleus formation (Fig. 19c). However, a high substrate temperature will expedite perovskite degradation given the intrinsic thermal properties of the perovskite material.188,189 Tang et al.191 demonstrated that the introduction of Br− and Cs+ ions into a blade-coated perovskite active layer suppressed the evolution of non-perovskite phases and halide segregation, respectively, thus verifying the compositional engineering of perovskite materials formulated for spin-coating.52,60,61 The device containing (Cs/MA/FA)Pb(I/Br) perovskite blade-coated in RH50% reached a PCE of 18.2%.191 A rapid thermal processing (RTP) instrument, which is adapted from the FIRA concept,174,183 has been utilized by Ouyang et al.190 to induce rapid crystallization (within 20 s) toward the blade-coated perovskite film in air. The RTP technique removes the need for a long period of annealing on a hot plate and still allows the assembly of low-hysteresis PSCs. Besides, the efficiency of the large-area device based on RTP treatment outperformed that of the hot-plate-annealed counterpart by about 1% (Fig. 19d) which indicates the viability of employing this technique for upscaling the PSC manufacturing.
The feasibility of blade-coating technology to replace the conventional spin-coating to produce industrially compatible PSCs has been verified by several studies. For example, Kim et al.81 reported that PSCs fabricated in ambient air using blade-coating has a PCE difference of merely 0.78% with respect to the device prepared in a N2-filled glove box. Wang et al.192 fabricated PSCs containing the device structure ITO/NiOx/4-bromobenzoic acid/perovskite/PCBM/bis-C60/Ag under RH40–50%, which exhibited a PCE of 11.1%. Interestingly, all layers, except the ITO electrode and Ag back contact, were prepared by blade coating, thus signifying that this coating technology demonstrates considerable potential for scaling up the perovskite cells. The practicability of the blade-coating method for producing commercial-sized solar modules was further confirmed by Deng et al.193 when they successfully fabricated solar devices with an active area of more than 50 cm2 and an efficiency of approximately 15% using a doctor blade in ambient air.
Inkjet printing
Inkjet printing is another potentially scalable technique for fast preparation of large-area perovskite films. This method can avoid the overconsumption of materials and allows precise patterning and automatic repeating deposition by controlling a series of setting programs, as presented in Fig. 20a. This advantage indicates the versatility of this deposition technology for solar cell design.186,196 For the fabrication of efficient PSCs, the wettability of the ink,196,197 the number of printed sublayers198 and drop spacing (i.e., the distance between two neighboring droplets)199 are among the critical technical parameters that entail meticulous control in the inkjet printing process because these variables determine the amount of material deposition on the substrate. The manipulation of these variables affects the thickness, coverage, roughness and grain sizes and ultimately influences the JSC generated by the device.
 Fig. 20  (a) A bitmap version of a digital image of the perovskite film fabricated via inkjet printing indicating precise printing of this coating method. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Normalized PCE of inkjet-printed and spin-coated PSCs with different sizes of active area. (c) Dark J–V curves (semilog scale) of PSCs deposited using inkjet printing and spin coating followed by VTA-treatment. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
An early study on fabricating a perovskite device using an inkjet printer in high humidity (RH30–40%) was reported by Li et al.; the device reached a JSC value as high as 19.55 mA cm−2.196 Inkjet printing can also be adopted for printing charge-selective layers, such as WOx as an ETL and spiro-OMeTAD as a HTL, in a high-humidity atmosphere (RH60%), which revealed a device efficiency of 10.7%.197 Liang et al. discovered that the PCE of an inkjet-printed device reduced by merely 23% from the maximum value when the active area was expanded from 0.04 cm2 to 4 cm2, while the PCE of the spin-coated counterpart decreased substantially by 78% (Fig. 20b).195 This result provides clear evidence of the scalability of inkjet printing for preparing commercial-sized PSCs. Nevertheless, a primary challenge in the inkjet printing of perovskite is the risk for the nozzle of printer cartridges to experience clogging due to a rapid formation of perovskite crystals. To avoid such an issue, the perovskite ink must be stabilized to prevent it from crystallizing before printing. For example, selecting high-boiling-point solvents, such as γ-butyrolactone with a boiling point of 206 °C, may prevent solvent evaporation during the printing operation.196 Hashmi et al. claimed that including a minimal amount of 5-ammonium valeric acid iodide considerably reduces the crystallization rate of perovskite before and after the deposition by inkjet printing, thus preventing the clogging effect.194
After all, the formation of a well-distributed and smooth perovskite layer in a high-humidity atmosphere, which is apt for efficient solar cells, remains the pivotal concern for inkjet printing technology. For one-step inkjet-printed perovskite, applying heat during printing is a facile way to accelerate solvent evaporation and manage film crystallization. A temperature of 50 °C has been reported to give the best PCE for the device prepared in RH30–40%.196 Treating the perovskite layer through vacuum-assisted thermal annealing (VTA) can also yield pure-phase perovskites with improved film quality. Although VTA was initially developed for spin-coating,184 VTA post-treatment is surprisingly more favorable for the inkjet-printed perovskite film in contrast to the spin-coated one,195 as supported by the dark current analysis presented in Fig. 20c. The low dark current suggests small series resistance in the inkjet-printed device. Therefore, the optimal photovoltaic performance of the sample that was inkjet-printed in RH35% and annealed at 90 °C for 2 min under vacuum conditions (50 Pa) surpassed that of spin-coated PSCs by 2.03%. Nevertheless, a vacuum-based approach typically involves batch processing and thus, integration in a continuous roll-to-roll printing process prevails as a vital challenge.200
Slot-die
Another deposition technique that can be performed in an ambient environment and has a roll-to-roll mass production potential is slot-die coating.201,202 Slot-die enables effective in-line deposition for manufacturing large-area solar modules;186 previously, this processing technique has been verified to be industrially applicable for large-scale fabrication of organic solar cells.203 In principle, a slot-die coating system consists of a pump and a slot from which the perovskite ink is supplied to the meniscus. This method can be adopted to fabricate a perovskite film on either rigid or flexible substrates at a relatively high coating speed. In addition, slot-die coating allows facile patterning of materials in blocks or stripes and hinders excessive material wastage during the coating process.207
Several studies have confirmed the practicability of the slot-die method for the production of fully printed PSCs on rigid and flexible substrates under high-humidity conditions. For example, Burkitt et al.208 successfully applied slot-die coating for fabricating four active layers in PSCs, including compact and mesoporous TiO2 layers, a MAPbI3−xClx layer, and a spiro-OMeTAD HTL, thus achieving a device PCE of 5.73%. The efficiency of the device prepared in RH30%, however, rises to 11.74% upon using the conventional spin coating for the deposition of spiro-OMeTAD while keeping the other layers slot-die-coated given the inhomogeneous distribution of the HTL on the perovskite surface. To improve the surface coverage and the homogeneity of the HTL, Qin et al.209 synthesized a new polymer called Bifluo-OMeTAD and applied the slot-die method to coat the HTL in PSCs, thereby boosting the PCE to 14.7%. Large-scale devices with an active area of up to 10 cm2 and efficiency of 8.2% have also been demonstrated by mixing different lead precursors.210 Schmidt et al.211 showed that the conventional thermal evaporation technique that is typically adopted for depositing back contact electrodes can be replaced through slot-die coating by using heat-curable silver ink (Dupont 5025). However, the corresponding device performance is rather low and requires profound investigation for optimizing the fabrication conditions.
During the early developmental stage of slot-die-coated PSCs, fabricating a defect-free perovskite film in an ambient atmosphere through the one-step deposition method without any processing modification is challenging. This difficulty is attributed to the slow drying of the slot-die-coated perovskite, thus leading to overgrown crystals with poor surface coverage. Cotella et al.204 revealed that the drying dynamics of a precursor solution during one-step slot-die deposition can be regulated by preheating the substrate and adopting a cold air-knife on the coated solution. Both strategies, which are basically adapted from the conventional spin coating method,145,153 enhanced the surface coverage (Fig. 21a) and remarkably reduced the perovskite film roughness. The discovery was endorsed by Kim et al.212 when they revealed that an elevated substrate temperature of approximately 65 °C during the slot-die coating expedites solvent evaporation, whereas blowing of gas after 25 s of deposition halts ion migration. A reasonable PCE of 12.7% was generated, thereby indicating the potential of the one-step deposition route for slot-die coating. An example of the modified slot-die system equipped with an extra head for N2 blowing is illustrated in Fig. 21b.205 Huang et al.206 slot-die coated a perovskite film in RH50–60% via a two-step approach and thermally treated the PbI2 and MAI layers via a conventional oven or modified near-infrared (NIR) radiation. The fully NIR-treated sample exhibited slightly lower efficiency (around 2%) than the oven-treated device mainly due to the decrease of JSC and VOC (Fig. 21c). However, the annealing time was remarkably shortened from 25 min to only 30 s upon substituting oven annealing with NIR treatment which signifies its great potential for integrating in a real manufacturing plant after further optimization.
 Fig. 21  (a) Optical microscope image of the perovskite film prepared using slot-die coating before and after substrate pre-heating and gas quenching treatments. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of a modified slot-die coater with a N2 blowing system. Reproduced with permission.205 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) J–V measurement of the slot-die coated PSC using a two-step method and annealed using an oven or near-infrared radiation (the notation represents the annealing approaches for PbI2 and MAI, respectively). Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Spray coating
As a widely used deposition technique in the industry, spray coating can fabricate functional films over huge areas at fast deposition rates.215 This method is also extendable for the coating of a perovskite light active layer. The corresponding PSCs have shown impressive performance that is on par with the device fabricated through conventional spin coating, and the results are increasingly reproducible.216 The development of a spray-coated perovskite device in ambient air (RH approximately 30%) was pioneered by Barrows et al.; these researchers achieved 11.1% efficiency for inverted planar MAPbI3−xClx-based solar cells.217 Later, these researchers established the compatibility of the spray-coating technique for preparing PEDOT:PSS and PCBM as the HTL and ETL in PSCs, respectively.218 Although the efficiency of all-spray-casted PSCs (9.9%) is slightly lower than the spin-coated device counterpart (12.8%) at that time, the success of depositing charge-selective layers and perovskite layers leads to realizing scalable PSC manufacturing.

Fig. 22a illustrates the growing dynamics of the perovskite layer by spray coating. Once the sprayed perovskite solution reaches the substrate, the solvents in the solution start to evaporate, thus leaving the perovskite to crystallize into small grains. The crystallized small perovskite grains are re-dissolved in the freshly deposited perovskite solution with the continued deposition process. This process results in merging of tiny grains into large crystal grains, which subsequently re-crystallize upon evaporation of the solvent. The most crucial part in the spray-coating process is controlling the deposition/evaporation rate of the solvent, which accompanies the perovskite precursor onto/from the heated substrate. The evaporation rate of solvent (Fout) must be equivalent to or slightly slower than the deposition rate of the solvent contained in the perovskite solution droplet (Fin) to obtain a high-quality perovskite film with grain size similar to film thickness. In the case of a considerably high solvent evaporation rate (i.e., Fin ≪ Fout), the perovskite precursor in the solution droplet is rapidly crystallized before the solution that can re-dissolve the underlying perovskite film. Such conditions can retard the merging process of the grains and induce the formation of a film with small crystal grains and many pinholes. On the other hand, a considerably high solvent deposition rate (i.e., Fin ≫ Fout) can lead to a rough perovskite surface given the dewetting of the wet underlying perovskite layer during spray coating (Fig. 22b).214,217
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of (a) crystal evolution and (b) side-view morphology of the perovskite film with respect to the deposition rate (Fin) and evaporation rate (Fout) during spray coating. (c) Schematic illustration of the perovskite spray-coating process combined with hot-air blowing. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Solar sub-module based on the spray-deposited perovskite layer. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The quality of the spray-coated perovskite film relies on many technical parameters, including the distance of the spray nozzle from the substrate, precursor formulation/concentration, type/composition of solvent, spray flow rates, mobility of the substrate/spray nozzle, and substrate temperature.213,214 Most studies have conducted spray coating of perovskite under ambient conditions with a humidity level that ranges from 25% to 50%.213,214,217–220 However, no systematic study has been reported on the influence of the humidity level on spray-coated perovskite films. A preliminary analysis by Barrows et al. determined that increasing the environmental humidity from RH30% to RH55% during ultrasonic spraying of perovskite negatively impacts the PCE considering the reduced FF and JSC.218 This could be ascribed to the lack of understanding on the film growth kinetics at different RH levels.
To acquire high-quality films with high perovskite crystallinity under high-humidity conditions, many pre- and post-treatments that were primarily intended for the spin-coating process have been integrated with the spray-coating method. For example, the pre-annealing strategy of spin-coating has been adopted by Bi et al.220 to control the solvent evaporation and film crystallization dynamics. However, the optimum substrate temperature for the spray-coated sample (110 °C) differs from that of typical temperature for the spin-coated sample counterpart (50–70 °C) due to the slight difference in the film growth mechanism. A device with a PCE of up to 13.5% in RH50% was produced by regulating the flow rate of the precursor solution to 1.0 g min−1 and minimizing the fabrication period to 5 s. Lan et al.221 proved that applying post-annealing in humid air is also advantageous for spray-coated perovskite films. Annealing for 20 min at 100 °C in RH40% leads to reduction of defects and improvement of morphological and optical properties. Meanwhile, solvent evaporation during the spray-coating process can be modulated through the adaptation of the gas-quenching concept as demonstrated by Su et al.213 As shown in Fig. 22c, hot-air having a temperature of 120 °C was blown on the spray-deposited perovskite film for 15 s in RH 30% to induce uniform perovskite nucleation which eventually facilitates the formation of a pinhole-free film. The hot-air blowing method, however, slightly differs from the typical gas quenching in which the high temperature of the air simultaneously regulates the nucleation and crystallization of the perovskite film while drawing out the solvent. Hence, post-annealing is not required when using the hot-air blowing method.
To date, the optimal device efficiency based on ambient air spray-deposited perovskite films is 18.3%, as reported by Heo et al.214 These researchers also successfully developed a solar sub-module with a total active area of 40 cm2 (Fig. 22d) and attained a remarkable PCE of 15.5%, thereby proving its applicability to commercial use. In that study, the device used MAPbI3−xClx dissolved in a DMF:GBL solvent mixture with a volume ratio of 8:2 as a precursor, and the spray coating process was performed for 2 min. A two-step sequential ultrasonic spray coating has also been investigated, thus indicating the versatility of this deposition technique for fabricating PSCs.221
Other concerns over high-humidity processing
Environmental parameters that affect film growth
Humidity is not the sole factor that influences the growth kinetics of perovskite thin films. The percentage of oxygen, environmental temperature, presence of light and an uncontrollable amount of solvent vapors are among other “hidden” parameters that require further attention during the fabrication process. These parameters are well-known causes of perovskite degradation; however, only the effect during the perovskite film fabrication stage will be discussed in the following.

Oxygen. 
Controlling the partial pressure of oxygen during the fabrication of an oxide-based charge selective layer such as TiO2 and SnO2 is very important to avoid the formation of a high density of oxygen vacancies in the film.120,222 The oxygen vacancies may cause severe device hysteresis223 and poor long-term stability.224 Meanwhile, oxygen could accelerate the perovskite degradation through the formation of superoxide anions (O2−).225 However, oxygen alone is not harmful for the perovskite morphology and stability. Oxygen can amplify the degradation process only when humidity and trapped charges (trapped charges are induced by light) are present.129 You et al.143 proved that the morphology of the perovskite film annealed in a dry oxygen environment is similar to the case of a N2 atmosphere and their respective devices also exhibit comparable performance. Thus, to avoid perovskite degradation during the fabrication process in an atmosphere containing humidity and oxygen, the generation of trapped charges by light should be minimized.


Atmospheric temperature. 
The RH level depends on the atmospheric temperature and pressure. However, less attention has been paid towards the influence of environmental temperature during device preparation under humid conditions. For lab-scale development of PSCs, the preparation of the perovskite layer and HTL is usually conducted in a space where the spin coater and hot plate are typically placed next to each other. In the case of poorly regulated atmospheric temperature, the use of a hot plate right before or during the deposition of the perovskite layer would definitely increase the atmospheric temperature. The lack of control of atmospheric temperature in the fabrication environment might explain the large variability observed in the perovskite film morphology and the corresponding device performance acquired in different research laboratories. It is suggested that the temperature in the fabrication environment should be kept in the range between 22 and 27 °C during the fabrication of PSCs.74 When the atmospheric temperature exceeds this temperature range, the efficiency of the resulting device may drop considerably, despite the perovskite films being uniform and dark.74 Higher atmospheric temperature is suspected to form crystallites within the perovskite precursor prior to the deposition of the solution on the substrate which eventually affects the morphological characteristics and the quality of the film.226 Therefore, the temperature of the fabrication environment must be well-controlled to prevent unexpected negative effects on PSC performance.


Light. 
The presence of light might seem trivial for the fabrication of PSCs. Nonetheless, Ummadisingu et al.227 scientifically approved that light illumination exerts a significant influence on the formation process of perovskite layers. The research team investigated the effect of the light intensity and photon wavelength on the formation kinetics of perovskite films grown by sequential deposition and one-step anti-solvent dripping approaches. The presence of light at higher intensity or with a photon wavelength above the band gap of PbI2 is found to be favorable for the sequential deposition method because the photoexcited charges in the PbI2 layer enhance the nucleation process. This encourages the growth of greater quantity of small perovskite crystals leading to a more compact film and enhanced device performance. On the other hand, light illumination is less beneficial for the one-step method as it induces the formation of smaller perovskite crystals and more grain boundaries which are detrimental to PSC performance. This finding indirectly suggests that the presence of light could be a factor that determines the quality of the perovskite film. Besides, the presence of light could generate trapped charges, leading to degradation of PSCs during the fabrication stage as described earlier. Thus, a dim-light environment is recommended for preparing PSCs under high-humidity conditions to allow the production of repeatable results.


Solvent vapors. 
Solvent vapors refer to all solvents that evaporate during the fabrication of PSCs. They may include precursor solvents which are used to dissolve the perovskite powder such as dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL) etc. or anti-solvents which are dropped during the spinning process of perovskite such as chlorobenzene, diethyl ether, toluene, etc. Improper control of the solvent vapor concentration particularly during the fabrication in a closed system could alter the film growth kinetics. This can adversely influence the morphology of the perovskite film and thus the final device efficiency.74,106 It is noted that the presence of solvent vapors during the perovskite post-annealing step could be a useful surface treatment for enlarging the perovskite grain size.76 However, this is only true if the fabrication parameters such as the time of exposure and type and concentration of solvent vapors are properly controlled. Otherwise, poorly regulated solvent vapors during PSC fabrication in a humid environment may lead to unexpected and irreproducible results.

Encapsulation
Since the coating of all functional layers is performed in a high-humidity atmosphere, the adsorption of moisture molecules on the perovskite crystal after complete assembly of the device is practically inevitable. Therefore, the encapsulation technology applied at the end of the fabrication process necessitates slight modification.228 Otherwise, an improper sealing procedure in air can eventually lead to the irreversible degradation of the perovskite layer. Drying the fully assembled PSC at elevated temperature or in an environment with RH ≤ 30% has been suggested as one of the effective procedures to remove the adsorbed moisture prior to encapsulation.25 Coupling encapsulation glass with a getter can be another potential strategy for absorbing trapped moisture in high-humidity processed PSCs.229
Health and environment
High-humidity fabrication of PSCs removes the necessity of using a glove box, thereby indicating that the industrial and lab workers are directly or potentially exposed to hazardous chemicals during the fabrication procedures. Up to now, this aspect has not attracted considerable interest from researchers, despite possessing great significance for ensuring the successful commercialization of PSCs. Highly toxic precursors and solvents used for preparing the perovskite light absorber, ETL, and HTL must be handled with utmost care to avoid contaminating oneself and the work area. The substitution of the currently utilized materials with green alternatives is another good measure for reducing the toxicity impact. An encouraging study was reported by Yavari et al.;230 these researchers utilized anisole as an environmentally benign anti-solvent in the one-step spin deposition method, thereby achieving a device efficiency that is comparable to that of the device counterparts employing conventional toxic anti-solvents such as chlorobenzene and toluene. Ethyl acetate has also been recognized as a green anti-solvent that can produce a uniform and densely packed film with a large grain size and low defect density in a humid fabrication environment.152
Challenges and future outlook
Although many research groups have verified the high-humidity processability of PSC devices, several challenges remain for the successful commercialization of this process. For example, studies in this area have mostly focused on developing the standard MAPbI3 perovskite perhaps due to the simple preparation process and well-understood properties of the material. Knowledge on the humid air processability of pseudohalide-incorporated perovskite, inorganic Cs-based perovskite, and mixed cation/anion-based perovskite has remained limited, although the reported cells have shown impressive performance and improved stability. Considering that the film growth kinetics exhibit a significant change with the substitution or a mixture of cation or/and anion species, profound analysis on its film fabrication in high humidity still requires exhaustive research.
From the viewpoint of long-term stability, the optimal option for perovskite materials to date is still susceptible to degradation from environmental stress, particularly under prolonged exposure in air. Therefore, the fabricated perovskite layer must be able to withstand moisture-induced degradation within a certain timeframe until the complete assembly of the device. As discussed earlier, some additives especially oxide-based nanoparticles can positively affect the perovskite morphology while other additives such as tBP and TEOS can improve the stability of the perovskite light absorber. Perhaps combining these additives could be an effective measure and an interesting exploration route for producing more robust and highly efficient devices in high humidity. Still, more efforts are needed to comprehend the potential of additive engineering for high-humidity-processed PSCs.
The selected materials as the ETL and HTL for humid air processing can significantly influence the operational lifetime of PSCs. The commonly used metal oxide-based ETL is sufficiently good for high-humidity processing, but further improvement in terms of hydrophobicity and nanostructuring is beneficial for enhancing the device performance and stability. As for the HTL, only a small number of organic semiconductors have been tested in high-humidity-based PSCs. In fact, it is known that a myriad of additive-free HTLs have been successfully synthesized but their high-humidity processability remains unexplored and underappreciated. Since the film formation of the HTL might also be affected by the RH level, the development of hydrophobic materials with excellent optoelectrical properties under humid conditions requires urgent attention to replace spiro-OMeTAD and avoid the use of hygroscopic additives. Meanwhile, the investigation into the modification of the ETL and HTL for high-humidity processed-inverted PSCs is also scarce to date and in need of broader exploration.
From the viewpoint of the fabrication procedure, spin-coating is a facile method for lab-scale study but the transfer of the fabrication protocol from an inert to a high-humidity atmosphere necessitates numerous modifications. The understanding of the film growth process during precursor preparation, film deposition and post-annealing stages can assist in the development of new modification strategies. The generalization of fabrication protocols provided in this review can be taken as a useful guideline for producing highly efficient PSCs under humid conditions.
In terms of industrial-scale production, spin-coating is not a scalable high-throughput process, but the fundamental mechanisms determined and modifications of the deposition process implemented in spin-coating provide highly valuable information for the progress of large-scale processing techniques. Blade-coating, inkjet printing, slot-die coating, and spray coating are among the large-scale methods that have benefited from the development of high-humidity spin-coated PSCs. Fabrication protocols such as substrate pre-annealing, gas quenching, vacuum treatment, infrared post-annealing, formulation of perovskite compositions etc. are easily adaptable for large-scale methods. Many other modifications developed for spin-coating are still awaiting to be incorporated into large-scale methods. Even so, not all spin-coating-compatible protocols are readily translatable. For example, liquid anti-solvent quenching is not only inconvenient for rapid solvent removal during roll-to-roll fabrication, but also leads to a surge in material consumption and production costs. Another example is that nanoparticle based additives used in spin-coating for controlling crystal growth kinetics might lead to the clogging issue for some instruments such as inkjet printers and spray coaters due to the formation of precipitates in the precursor solution. However, the conceptual and methodological insights gained from those modifications are still crucial for other areas of study (e.g. anti-solvent quenching for gas quenching). Extensive development of fabrication protocols, which are translatable into large-scale processing and can contribute to the enhancement of device performance/stability and the reduction of manufacturing time/cost, is of paramount importance for propelling the commercialization of PSC technology.
Many studies simply reported on making the device in a wide range of RH levels. To gain a comprehensive picture of the growing dynamics of perovskite films in ambient air, proper regulation of the RH level with small deviation is essential. Other environmental parameters including oxygen, atmospheric temperature, light and solvent vapors must be taken into consideration as well. For example, the RH level technically depends on the temperature and pressure of the atmosphere. The RH level also varies greatly with respect to the region, day/night and season. Poor management of the environmental parameters may cause large variability in the device performance. The encapsulation procedure that is commonly implemented for inert-environment processing also necessitates appropriate modification as the environment of device fabrication changes. Similarly, greener and less-polluting materials are highly demanded to comply with the health, safety and environment (HSE) standards. The lack of interest in these aspects might restrict the successful commercialization of high-humidity-based PSC technology.
Conclusions
Given the present research momentum, PSCs are indisputably the next-in-line technology to enter the photovoltaic market. Given the tremendous advances made by several research groups and companies, the efficiency of PSCs has outperformed those of most single-junction solar cells, which currently hold a record PCE of 25.2%.9 However, the development of PSCs is still restricted in an inert atmosphere or ambient environment with a low-humidity level (RH < 30%). In the present review, three modification strategies in terms of perovskite materials, charge-selective layers, and fabrication protocols for adapting a high-humidity atmosphere (RH ≥ 30%) to produce efficient PSCs have been highlighted. Several studies have confirmed that high-humidity processing of PSCs is feasible and cells with efficiency beyond 20% are attainable by properly tailoring the properties of the perovskite material and their fabrication procedures.106,154,231 The positive outcome of this approach can substantially cut down the capital cost for instrumental set up. A significant mission in understanding the fundamentals of high-humidity processing lies in translating the lab-scale spin-coating technique to industrially applicable manufacturing methods. Although the maximum efficiency of PSCs produced from large-scale methods is still much lower than that of the most advanced spin-deposited one, the large-area PSCs have presented very promising results. With profound insights offered by the scientists in the future, further exciting discoveries are certainly awaiting to be realized.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for the financial support through Dana Impak Perdana (DIP-2018-009). MKN acknowledges the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) funding through the Synergia Grant Episode, grant no. CRSII5_171000.
References
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
N. A. Ludin, N. I. Mustafa, M. M. Hanafiah, M. A. Ibrahim, M. Asri Mat Teridi, S. Sepeai, A. Zaharim and K. Sopian, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 96, 11–28 CrossRef .
J. Safaei, N. A. Mohamed, M. F. Mohamad Noh, M. F. Soh, N. A. Ludin, M. A. Ibrahim, W. N. Roslam Wan Isahak and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22346–22380 RSC .
M. F. M. Noh, M. F. Soh, C. H. Teh, E. L. Lim, C. C. Yap, M. A. Ibrahim, N. A. Ludin and M. A. M. Teridi, Sol. Energy, 2017, 158, 474–482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, H. Du, J. Ren, B. K. Sovacool, Y. Zhang and G. Mao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 197–206 CrossRef .
S. Comello, S. Reichelstein and A. Sahoo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 92, 744–756 CrossRef .
A. Extance, Nature, 2019, 570, 429–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies-190416.pdf, accessed 12 June 2019.
A. R. Bin Mohd Yusoff, P. Gao and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 373, 258–294 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sveinbjörnsson, K. Aitola, J. Zhang, M. B. Johansson, X. Zhang, J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16536–16545 RSC .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Tan, P. D. Lund and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2284–2311 RSC .
Y. Cheng, F. So and S.-W. Tsang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1611–1624 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. Van Franeker, D. W. Dequilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini, D. S. Ginger, R. A. J. Janssen, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9380–9393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Lim, C. C. Yap, M. H. H. Jumali, M. A. M. Teridi and C. H. Teh, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Il Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Bao, F. Li, T. Yu, J. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, G. Fu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9110–9117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Troughton, K. Hooper and T. M. Watson, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, X. Xu, Y. Xie, H.-W. Li, J. Qing, C. Ma, C.-S. Lee, F. So and S.-W. Tsang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700097 CrossRef .
M. K. Gangishetty, R. W. J. Scott and T. L. Kelly, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6300–6307 RSC .
J. Schlipf, L. Bießmann, L. Oesinghaus, E. Berger, E. Metwalli, J. A. Lercher, L. Porcar and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2015–2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kavadiya, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Huang and P. Biswas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. H. Teh, R. Daik, E. L. Lim, C. C. Yap, M. A. Ibrahim, N. A. Ludin, K. Sopian and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15788–15822 RSC .
M. F. Mohamad Noh, C. H. Teh, R. Daik, E. L. Lim, C. C. Yap, M. A. Ibrahim, N. Ahmad Ludin, A. R. B. M. Yusoff, J. Jang and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 682–712 RSC .
M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2554–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, B. Daiber, J. M. Frost, S. A. Mann, E. C. Garnett, A. Walsh and B. Ehrler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 509–515 RSC .
Z. Chen, Q. Dong, Y. Liu, C. Bao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Xiao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1890 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Yan, Y. Li, S. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Bian, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399–407 RSC .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirasawa, T. Ishihara, T. Goto, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Phys. B, 1994, 201, 427–430 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X.-H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu and C. Yam, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6800–6804 RSC .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, K. Bush, R. Cheacharoen, R. Beal, A. Bowring and M. D. McGehee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11483–11500 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Gong, Y. Xiao, M. Su, S. Kong, F. Qi, H. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Sun, C. Wang and X. Z. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 218–221 RSC .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Mabrouk, F. Wu, K. Chen, S. Yang and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2406–2431 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Ji, R. Liu, C. Zhang, C. H. Mak, X. Zou, H.-H. Shen, S.-Y. Leu and H.-Y. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12842–12875 RSC .
L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Lu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 10582–10593 RSC .
A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 711–713 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Clever and F. J. Johnston, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1980, 9, 751–784 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Xiong, J. Li and W. A. Daoud, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12699–12708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Ponpon and M. Amann, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2010, 623, 1009–1013 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conings, A. Babayigit, T. Vangerven, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H.-G. Boyen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19123–19128 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. B. Shi, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, C. J. Traverse, P. Chen, M. Elinski, C. Yang, L. Wang, M. Young and R. R. Lunt, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700484 CrossRef .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 RSC .
M. Saliba, J. P. Correa-Baena, C. M. Wolff, M. Stolterfoht, N. Phung, S. Albrecht, D. Neher and A. Abate, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4193–4201 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aranda, C. Cristobal, L. Shooshtari, C. Li, S. Huettner and A. Guerrero, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 540–547 RSC .
C. H. Chiang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and C. G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 808–817 RSC .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, Y.-H. Lin, J. C. Blancon, S. Tretiak, J. Even, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602159 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Q. Niu, X. Tang, H. Wang, W. Huang, R. Xia, W. Zeng, J. Yao and B. Yan, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 7666–7671 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, I. Shin, I. W. Hwang, J. Lee, S. Kim, D. Y. Lee, S. H. Lee, J. W. Jang, Y. K. Jung, J. H. Jeong, S. H. Park and K. H. Kim, Sol. Energy, 2017, 146, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 2–7 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, X. Xu, J. Tang, X. He, J. Wu and Z. Lan, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 942–950 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seetharaman S, P. Nagarjuna, P. N. Kumar, S. P. Singh, M. Deepa and M. A. G. Namboothiry, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24691–24696 RSC .
A. K. Chauhan, P. Kumar, S. R. Pal, S. K. Srivastava and S. Muthiah, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 10886–10897 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Cai, J. Ni, J. Li, H. Yu, X. Sun, Y. Wu, H. Wen and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66981–66987 RSC .
Y. Iwadate, K. Kawamura, K. Igarashi and J. Mochinaga, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 5205–5208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Cai, H. Liu, Q. Qin, X. Lu, X. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J. M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 52–58 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Cai, H. Liu, Q. Qin, Q. Tai, X. Lu, X. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 468–476 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
O. N. Yunakova, V. K. Miloslavskii and E. N. Kovalenko, Opt. Spectrosc., 2012, 112, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luo, W. Xia, S. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Cheng, C. Xu and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3603–3608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiang, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu and H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9996–10004 RSC .
S. Xiang, Z. Fu, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu and L. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1824–1831 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Wang, J. Qiu, Z. Yan, K. Tai, W. Yu and X. Jiang, Sol. Energy, 2019, 187, 147–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pinpithak, H.-W. Chen, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 382–384 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Ma, Y.-M. Xie, Y. Cheng, Y. Tian, M. Li, Y. Ma, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7731–7740 RSC .
T. Liu, H. Lai, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5264–5271 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, T. He, K. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, H. Ma and M. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24282–24291 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Wu, N. Li, X. Li, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17594–17603 RSC .
W. T. Wang, J. Sharma, J. W. Chen, C. H. Kao, S. Y. Chen, C. H. Chen, Y. C. Feng and Y. Tai, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, W. Ding, X. Zhou, J. Gao, C. Cheng, X. Zhao and B. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6546–6553 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Zhuang, L. Song, P. Du, J. Xiong and F. Ko, J. Power Sources, 2019, 442, 227216 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. de Carvalho, S. Kavadiya, S. Huang, D. M. Niedzwiedzki and P. Biswas, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 532–538 Search PubMed .
M. Guan, Q. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Liu, J. Zhao, C. Jia and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
T. Singh and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1700677 CrossRef .
L. Gil-Escrig, C. Momblona, M.-G. La-Placa, P. P. Boix, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(14), 1703506 CrossRef .
T. Su, Y. Wu, Y. Tung and T. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2429–2433 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kam, Q. Zhang, D. Zhang and Z. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 6963 CrossRef .
J. Yin, H. Qu, J. Cao, H. Tai, J. Li and N. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24596–24602 RSC .
J. Bahadur, A. H. Ghahremani, B. Martin, T. Druffel, M. K. Sunkara and K. Pal, Org. Electron., 2019, 67, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Dong, J. Wu, S. Hou, J. Xing, H. Liu and H. Hao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 201, 110110 CrossRef CAS .
A. Apostolopoulou, D. Sygkridou, A. Rapsomanikis, A. N. Kalarakis and E. Stathatos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Noh, J. H. Lee, I. S. Jin, S. H. Park and J. W. Jung, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chung, S. S. Shin, G. Kim, N. J. Jeon, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Joule, 2019, 3, 1977–1985 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sarkar, S. Ghosh, M. Annamalai, A. Patra, K. Stoerzinger, Y. Lee, S. Prakash, M. R. Motapothula, Y. Shao-Horn, L. Giordano and T. Venkatesan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 109234–109240 RSC .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601 RSC .

          M. F. M. Noh, N. A. Arzaee and M. A. M. Teridi, in Solar Cells, ed. S. K. Sharma and K. Ali, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2020, pp. 283–305 Search PubMed .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Mohamad Noh, N. A. Arzaee, J. Safaei, N. A. Mohamed, H. P. Kim, A. R. Mohd Yusoff, J. Jang and M. A. Mat Teridi, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 773, 997–1008 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Upama, N. K. Elumalai, M. A. Mahmud, D. Wang, F. Haque, V. R. Gonçales, J. J. Gooding, M. Wright, C. Xu and A. Uddin, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jaysankar, W. Qiu, J. Bastos, J. G. Tait, M. Debucquoy, U. W. Paetzold, D. Cheyns and J. Poortmans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10524–10531 RSC .
A. Fakharuddin, F. Di Giacomo, I. Ahmed, Q. Wali, T. M. Brown and R. Jose, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fakharuddin, F. Di Giacomo, A. L. Palma, F. Matteocci, I. Ahmed, S. Razza, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, J. Ismail, A. Di Carlo, T. M. Brown and R. Jose, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8420–8429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, J. Cao, X. He, S. Yuan, S. Sun, J. Li, N. Zheng and L. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16860–16866 RSC .
L. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Weng, F. Li and Q. Lou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 198, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, K.-T. Lee and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 640–648 RSC .
M. Elnaggar, M. Elshobaki, A. Mumyatov, S. Y. Luchkin, N. N. Dremova, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900223 CrossRef .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. S. Rana, R. K. Gunasekaran, S. H. Park, V. Tamilavan, S. Karuppanan, H.-J. Kim and K. Prabakar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 8560–8568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ciro, R. Betancur, S. Mesa and F. Jaramillo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 163, 38–42 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. Qiu, Y. Jiang and Y. Qi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 294001 CrossRef .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
Y. Lv, Y. Jin, W. Cai, Z. Zhang, X. Zhou and H. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 153272 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shit, P. Chal and A. K. Nandi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 15890–15900 RSC .
A. Shit, P. Chal, S. Mondal and A. K. Nandi, Polymer, 2019, 185, 121973 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Gunasekaran, P. J. S. Rana, S. H. Park, V. Tamilavan, S. Karuppanan, H.-J. Kim and K. Prabakar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 199, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. DeQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. Ye, H. Sarvari, S. M. Park, A. Abtahi, K. Graham, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Liu, P. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Ji, L. Chen, Z. D. Chen, J. Wu, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12166–12175 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Jia, Y. Li, K. Zhao, X. Cui, L. Ci, D. Zhuang and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7639–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gedamu, I. M. Asuo, D. Benetti, M. Basti, I. Ka, S. G. Cloutier, F. Rosei and R. Nechache, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, G. Kapil, P. Zhang, Z. Hu, M. A. Kamarudin, T. Ma and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16482–16489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Liang, Q. Li and D. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, M. A. Kamarudin, P. Zhang, G. Kapil, T. Ma and S. Hayase, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2348–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Tang, X. Li and X. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, H. Boyen and B. Conings, Joule, 2018, 2, 1205–1209 CrossRef .
L. Chao, Y. Xia, B. Li, G. Xing, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Chem, 2019, 5, 995–1006 CAS .
L.-L. Gao, K.-J. Zhang, N. Chen and G.-J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18120–18127 RSC .
L.-L. Gao, C.-X. Li, C.-J. Li and G.-J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1548–1557 RSC .
Y. Wang, T. Mahmoudi, W.-Y. Rho and Y.-B. Hahn, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103964 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lv, X. Dong, X. Fang, B. Lin, S. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Ding and N. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93957–93963 RSC .
H.-S. Ko, J.-W. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8808–8815 RSC .
K. Huang, H. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Gao, T. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Peng, L. Ding and J. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800318 CrossRef .
W.-T. Wang, S. K. Das and Y. Tai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10743–10751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, M. Li, Y.-M. Xie, Y. Ma, C. Ma, Y. Cheng, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6126–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Yu, J. Xie, D. Xu, Z. Tang, C. Cui and D. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21505–21511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, M. Zhu, X. Li and C. Dong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 317–326 CrossRef CAS .
K.-L. Wu, A. Kogo, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 321–323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Il Seok, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1704177 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Ahmed, H. T. Butt, Z. Hussain, I. A. Shahid and A. Habib, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 12028–12035 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jeong, S. M. Cho, S. H. Cho, J. H. Lee, I. Hwang, S. K. Hwang, J. Cho, T. W. Lee and C. Park, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Z. Hu, X. Jia, L. Huang, X. Huang, L. Wang, P. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Org. Electron., 2016, 34, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Raga, M. Jung, M. V Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Z. Jin, H. Li and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sanchez, X. Hua, N. Phung, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702915 CrossRef .
B. Ding, L. Gao, L. Liang, Q. Chu, X. Song, Y. Li, G. Yang, B. Fan, M. Wang, C. Li and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20067–20073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, C. Xin, F. Hou, B. Shi, S. Pan, S. Hou, J. Zhang, P. Wang, H. Ren, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Li and X. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17691–17696 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, Y. Peng, Y. Gao, J. Shi, H. Li, X. Mo, H. Huang, Y. Gao, L. Ding and J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901419 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli, M. Saliba and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14753–14760 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703852 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. Xia, S. Tong, J. He, D. Niu, C. Zhou, K. Ding, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700209 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sánchez, M. Vallés-Pelarda, J.-A. Alberola-Borràs, R. Vidal, J. J. Jerónimo-Rendón, M. Saliba, P. P. Boix and I. Mora-Seró, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 39–46 CrossRef .
G. Wang, D. Liu, J. Xiang, D. Zhou, K. Alameh, B. Ding and Q. Song, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43299–43303 RSC .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. Chan Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. Il Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 RSC .
Z. Yang, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–6 CAS .
I. Burgués-Ceballos, M. Stella, P. Lacharmoise and E. Martínez-Ferrero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17711–17722 RSC .
H. Wu, C. Zhang, K. Ding, L. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Org. Electron., 2017, 45, 302–307 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Mallajosyula, K. Fernando, S. Bhatt, A. Singh, B. W. Alphenaar, J. C. Blancon, W. Nie, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 3, 96–102 CrossRef .
Z. Ouyang, M. Yang, J. B. Whitaker, D. Li and M. F. A. M. van Hest, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3714–3720 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Tang, Y. Fan, D. Barrit, X. Chang, H. X. Dang, R. Li, K. Wang, D.-M. Smilgies, S. F. Liu, S. De Wolf, T. D. Anthopoulos, K. Zhao and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1095–1104 RSC .
Q. Wang, M. Eslamian, T. Zhao and A. K.-Y. Jen, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2018, 8, 1662–1669 Search PubMed .
Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, Q. Wang, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 560–566 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hashmi, D. Martineau, X. Li, M. Ozkan, A. Tiihonen, M. I. Dar, T. Sarikka, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Paltakari, P. D. Lund and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600183 CrossRef .
C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song, G. Shao, N. Mathews and G. Xing, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1770150 CrossRef .
S.-G. Li, K.-J. Jiang, M.-J. Su, X.-P. Cui, J.-H. Huang, Q.-Q. Zhang, X.-Q. Zhou, L.-M. Yang and Y.-L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9092–9097 RSC .
A. Gheno, Y. Huang, J. Bouclé, B. Ratier, A. Rolland, J. Even and S. Vedraine, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800191 CrossRef .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
F. Mathies, H. Eggers, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eggers, F. Schackmar, T. Abzieher, Q. Sun, U. Lemmer, Y. Vaynzof, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903184 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jakubka, M. Heyder, F. Machui, J. Kaschta, D. Eggerath, W. Lövenich, F. C. Krebs and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 120–125 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo, D. M. Tanenbaum, S. A. Gevorgyan, R. Andriessen, B. van Remoortere, Y. Galagan and M. Jørgensen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4116 RSC .
G. Cotella, J. Baker, D. Worsley, F. De Rossi, C. Pleydell-Pearce, M. Carnie and T. Watson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hwang, Y. Jung, Y. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, C. Li, Z. Huang, P. Liu and C. Tsao, Sol. Energy, 2019, 177, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ciro, M. A. Mejía-Escobar and F. Jaramillo, Sol. Energy, 2017, 150, 570–576 CrossRef CAS .
D. Burkitt, J. Searle and T. Watson, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 172158 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Qin, W. Huang, J. E. Kim, D. Vak, C. Forsyth, C. R. McNeill and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y.-S. Jung, Y. Heo, S. Lee, K. Hwang, Y. Jeon, J.-E. Kim, J. Park, G. Y. Jung and D. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16133–16139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Schmidt, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. E. Carlé, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J.-E. Kim, Y. Jung, Y. Heo, K. Hwang, T. Qin, D. Kim and D. Vak, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, H. Cai, X. Ye, X. Zhou, J. Yang, D. Wang, J. Ni, J. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10689–10696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, M. H. Lee, M. H. Jang and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17636–17642 RSC .
J. E. Bishop, D. K. Mohamad, M. Wong-Stringer, A. Smith and D. G. Lidzey, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7962 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Uličná, B. Dou, D. H. Kim, K. Zhu, J. M. Walls, J. W. Bowers and M. F. A. M. van Hest, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1853–1857 CrossRef .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
D. K. Mohamad, J. Griffin, C. Bracher, A. T. Barrows and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. E. Bishop, J. A. Smith, C. Greenland, V. Kumar, N. Vaenas, O. S. Game, T. J. Routledge, M. Wong-Stringer, C. Rodenburg and D. G. Lidzey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39428–39434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bi, Z. Liang, X. Xu, Z. Chai, H. Jin, D. Xu, J. Li, M. Li and G. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lan, S. Hong, L. Chou, X. Wang and C. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 270–277 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Ho, M. N. F. Hoque, E. Stoneham, J. Warzywoda, T. Dallas and Z. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23939–23946 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Guo, Y. Zhao, X. Shan, K. Jin, H. Tian, Q. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Lu, G. Lu and S. Meng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 802–812 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Cai, Y. Wu, Z. Xing, Z. Li, J. Xu, L. Huang, J. Ni, J. Li and J. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13679–13686 RSC .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ummadisingu, L. Steier, J.-Y. Seo, T. Matsui, A. Abate, W. Tress and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2017, 545, 208–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ham, J. Park and Y. Kim, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2174–2179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yavari, M. Mazloum-Ardakani, S. Gholipour, M. M. Tavakoli, S. H. Turren-Cruz, N. Taghavinia, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Gu, G. Liu, N. Zhu, W. Luo, D. Han, X. Guo, B. Qu, S. Wang, Z. Bian, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1902974 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Modification strategies towards enabling high-humidity processed PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The architectures of widely studied PSCs. (a) Conventional planar, (b) mesoporous and (c) inverted planar structured. (d) Schematic diagram of energy levels and charge transfer processes in an ETL/perovskite/HTL cell. (1) Electron injection, (2) hole injection, (3) radiative and (4) non-radiative exciton recombination, (5) electron back transfer at the perovskite/ETL interface, (6) electron back transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface, and (7) electron–hole pairs recombination at the ETL/HTL interface. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photovoltaic parameters of PSCs fabricated from a precursor containing various quantities of water. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Stability analysis for PSCs prepared using pure DMF and DMF/water solvents. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Perovskite precursor solutions containing a high quantity of water additive after storage overnight. Reproduced with permission.72 (d) PbI2 precursor solution containing various amounts of water additive. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


50	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag	18.9	0.64	40.7	5.7	
83

Air	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/P3HT/Ag	15.3	0.61	56.0	5.2	
84

70	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x/spiro-/Au	21.1	0.96	75.0	15.1	
79

70	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x + NaSCN/spiro-/Au	20.9	1.03	72.6	15.6	
87

70	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x + KSCN/spiro-/Au	20.5	1.07	76.2	16.6	
87

70	ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3−x(SCN)x/spiro-/Ag	22.8	0.94	75.4	16.2	
89

30	FTO/c-TiO2/CsPbI3/spiro-/Ag	12.2	0.65	44.0	4.1	
92

30	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/m-Al2O3/CsPb0.96Sb0.04I3/C	14.7	0.73	50.0	5.3	
93

40	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/FAPbI3/spiro-/Au	23.3	1.00	74.2	17.3	
95

40	FTO/c-SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-/Au	22.8	1.05	66.2	15.8	
96

70	ITO/poly-TPD/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	23.4	1.00	66.6	15.6	
97

35	ITO/c-TiO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3(Cl)/spiro-/MoO3/Ag	22.6	1.11	81.6	20.4	
98

35	ITO/c-TiO2/CsxFA1−xPbI3−xBrx(Cl)/spiro-/MoO3/Ag	21.9	1.14	81.3	20.3	
98

50	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/Cs0.05(MA0.7FA0.3)0.95PbI3/C	22.8	0.96	68.8	15.0	
55

40	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx + V2Ox/PCBM/Bphen/Ag	21.6	0.98	75.1	16.1	
99

55	ITO/c-SnO2/MAxFA1−xPbI3−yBry + MWCNTc/C	23.5	1.04	66.5	16.3	
100

70	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx + BTAd/spiro-/Au	20.2	1.02	65.0	13.4	
82

60	ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3 + ZnO NPe/spiro-/Ag	22.2	1.07	77.4	18.3	
101

45	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TBPf/spiro-/Ag	20.1	1.04	61.1	12.6	
102

45	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 + TBPf/PCBM/Ag	20.7	0.99	79.0	16.2	
103

50	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TEOSg/spiro-/Ag	18.6	0.89	52.0	8.6	
104

Air	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3 + TEOSg/spiro-/Ag	23.5	1.07	73.2	18.4	
105


 	Fig. 4  (a) Calculated crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3 (left) and CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x (right). The hydrogen bond between CH3NH3+ and SCN− is highlighted with red. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Evolution of the efficiency of the PSC based on CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x with the incorporation NaSCN and KSCN additives. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structures and the corresponding thin films of α-CsPbI3 (freshly coated) and δ-CsPbI3 (after 1 day of exposure to ambient air). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM images of α-CsPbI3 without and with 4% Sb doping. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Steady-state efficiency under a bias voltage of 0.82 V for the PSC based on α-FAPbI3 fabricated from a NMP-containing precursor in RH40%. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of PbI2 films (i) without and (ii) with n-butyl amine and (iii and iv) respective perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Illustration of the working mechanism of 4-tert-butylpyridine in enhancing the hydrophobicity of PbI2 and MAPbI3. (c) Water contact angle of PbI2 and MAPbI3 films in the absence and presence of 4-tert-butylpyridine. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Water contact angle measurement of SnO2 layers prepared by AACVD and spin coating which contain a large and small number of oxygen vacancies, respectively. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) SEM images of perovskite grains grown in RH45% on (i) thin (less hydrophobic) and (ii) thick (more hydrophobic) ITIC layers. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Film structure and charge transport in the PSC with (i) thin (or planar) and (ii) thick mesoporous TiO2 layers. (iii and iv) The corresponding PSC after exposure to air for a certain period. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of (i) MAPbI3, (ii) MAPbI3/PCBM and (iii) MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO:TIPD prepared in RH55%. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of electron transport in Li-doped TiO2 and Li-free BaSnO3 at different RH levels. The formation of the LixO layer is intensified in RH40% obstructing the electron movement in TiO2 whereas the absence of LixO in BaSnO3 ensures efficient electron transport throughout the device. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Molecular structures of a polymer HTM (R1). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Mass gain analysis for PEDOT:PSS and NiOx powders upon exposure to a humid atmosphere (RH70%). Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 


40	Reducing oxygen vacancies in SnO2	FTO/c-SnO2/PCBM/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag	14.7	1.03	67.5	10.2	
120

45	Employing hydrophobic ITIC on SnO2	ITO/PEIE/c-SnO2/ITICc/(MAPbBr3)0.05(FAPbI3)0.95/spiro-/Au	22.8	1.01	70.0	16.1	
114

40	Modifying nanostructure of mesoporous TiO2	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	21.6	1.05	68.0	16.7	
110

40	Replacing PCBM with phenyl-C61-butyric acid propyl ester (PCBP)	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBP/Mg/Ag	18.3	0.93	73.0	11.4	
128

55	Employing a compact ZnO:TIPD layer on PCBM as the moisture barrier	ITO/CuInS2/MAPbI3/PCBM/ZnO:TIPDd/Ag	20.3	0.92	73.0	13.7	
126

40	Replacing Li-passivated TiO2 with Li-free BaSnO3	FTO/c-TiO2/c-SnO2/mp-BaSnO3/(FAPbI3)0.93(MAPbBr3)0.07/spiro-/Au	24.4	1.13	80.7	22.4	
115

Air	Replacing Li-doped spiro-OMeTAD with Li-doped PTB7	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/PTB7e/Ag	20.2	0.94	70.0	13.3	
85

50	Employing Li-free CuSCN	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/FA0.83MA0.17PbI2.49Br0.51/CuSCN/C	19.5	1.00	68.5	14.9	
137

85	Using Li-free P3TAA-co-P3HT to improve device stability	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/P3TAA-co-P3HT/Ag	17.2	1.07	65.0	12.0	
139

50	Using newly synthesized Li-free polymer (R1) as the moisture barrier	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/R1f/Au	23.7	0.98	68.3	15.9	
132

70	Replacing hygroscopic PEDOT:PSS with minimally hygroscopic NiOx	ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag	18.1	0.93	61.0	11.1	
133


 	Fig. 9  (a) Raman spectra of MAI solution prepared in a glove box and after exposure to humid air. Characteristic peaks observed at 45 and 68 cm−1 correspond to DMF whereas the peak near 100 cm−1 corresponds to the iodine derivative. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of PbI2:MAI:additive complexes in the presence of dissolved water molecules from humid air. (c) Ratio of DMSO:Pb required to obtain maximum efficiency for device preparation at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM images of MAPbI3−xClx (top row) and MAPbI3 (bottom row) layers prepared in (i and v) RH0%, (ii and vi) RH10%, (iii and vii) RH40% and (iv and viii) RH70%. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Schematic representations of (b) solvent evaporation kinetics and (c) spin coating induced crystallization under the influence of humidity. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photograph of MAPbI3 samples to determine the turbid point during spin coating at various humidity levels. Bottom figures are microscopy images of the respective MAPbI3 films. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Film coverage and average grain size of the perovskite layer with respect to the volume percentage of chlorobenzene/ethanol anti-solvent mixtures. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Top-view SEM images of the perovskite layer prepared at different RH levels using various types of anti-solvents. Reproduced with permission.22 (d) J–V curves of PSC devices made using methyl acetate (MA), ethyl acetate (EA), propyl acetate (PA) and butyl acetate (BA) as anti-solvents. Reproduced with permission.149	 

 	Fig. 12  Images of the (top) intermediate perovskite phase and (bottom) resulting perovskite film prepared at RH50% after pre-annealing treatment at various temperatures. Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) One-step spin-coating of a perovskite layer based on the gas-quenching technique and the SEM image of the resulting film. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) (i) J–V curves of the PSC made using room temperature molten salt MAAc solvent. (ii) Photograph of perovskite precursor solution in various solvents. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of vapour shield formation by pre-annealing treatment for alleviating the humidity impact during PbI2 film deposition. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Top- and side-views of SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared in RH50% with the substrate pre-annealed at (i and v) room temperature, (ii and vi) 40 °C, (iii and vii) 50 °C and (iv and viii) 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The polarity of numerous solvents and PbI2 crystal formation when treated with the respective solvents. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM images of the PbI2 film prepared in the presence of (i) CsI, moisture and toluene dripping, (ii) CsI and moisture, (iii) CsI and toluene dripping, and (iv) moisture and toluene dripping. Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Multi-cycle short-time dipping reaction (STDR) protocol for perovskite film fabrication. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Development of the perovskite layer through an ambient engineering procedure. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Stability test for the device prepared with and without hot isopropanol treatment. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of the perovskite layer prepared via one-step spin coating and annealed in N2 and RH35%. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (b) SEM images of perovskite films after dipping a compact PbI2 layer in MAI solution and annealing at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 3-Dimensional AFM images of perovskite films prepared at different RH levels by means of the drop-and-spin strategy. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of the perovskite film annealed at RH 30% on a hot plate and in an oven. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic diagram of the heat transfer process in a microwave annealed glass/FTO/TiO2/perovskite substrate. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Temperature profile of the FTO, FIRA-chamber and perovskite film during the flash-infrared annealing process. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic diagram of the perovskite film prepared via the gas pump method. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 


30	The DMSO additive is adjusted according to the RH level to balance with the adsorbed H2O	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	22.4	1.05	78.0	18.7	
75

50	Diethyl ether anti-solvent is dropped on the substrate within the correct time window (∼10 s)	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	20.9	1.09	74.0	16.9	
144

70	Device is spin-coated under RH10% but annealed in RH70%	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Ag	19.5	0.89	58.2	10.1	
21

90	Substrate is preheated at 70 °C; diethyl ether anti-solvent is dropped 2 s after spinning	ITO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	23.4	1.08	77.0	19.5	
145

50	3% methanol is added to diethyl ether anti-solvent	FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	22.5	1.04	70.0	16.4	
151

40	25% ethanol is added to chlorobenzene anti-solvent	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Au	24.3	0.91	61.7	14.0	
148

50	Ethyl acetate is used as anti-solvent	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Agb	>21.0	>1.00	>70.0	15.0	
22

38	Ethyl acetate is used as anti-solvent	FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	21.4	1.12	74.6	17.8	
152

65	Methyl acetate is used as anti-solvent	FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	22.2	1.05	70.0	16.3	
149

30	Chloroform is used as anti-solvent	FTO/c-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	21.6	1.12	73.0	17.7	
150

40	Gas quenching based on a multi-flow air-knife is used	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	23.5	1.09	69.0	17.7	
156

50	Cu:NiO additive is used in an anti-solvent-free one-step method	FTO/c-SnO2/mp-Al2O3/mp-Cu:NiO/MAPbI3−xClx + Cu:NiO/spiro-/Au	23.1	1.03	78.0	18.6	
157

32	Dimethyl acetate replaced DMF as solvent	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag	20.8	1.03	66.3	14.2	
158

80	Room-temperature molten-salt namely methylammonium acetate replaced DMF as solvent	FTO/CPTA/BACl/MAPbI3/spiro-/MoO3/Au	23.2	1.11	78.0	20.1	
154

50	Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition using an anti-solvent-based one-step method	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/spiro-/Au	22.5	1.14	73.0	18.8	
13

50	Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	21.3	1.03	71.8	15.8	
159

70	Substrate is preheated at 80 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method	ITO/poly-TPD/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	23.0	1.05	74.9	18.1	
23

70	Substrate is preheated at 80 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method	ITO/poly-TPD/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	23.4	1.00	66.6	15.6	
97

40	Substrate is preheated at 50 °C prior to deposition of PbI2 using a two-step method	ITO/c-SnO2/Cs0.21FA0.56MA0.23Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3/spiro-/Ag	23.4	1.11	71.1	18.4	
160

55	PbI2 is treated with isopropanol	ITO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-/Ag	20.3	1.09	73.2	16.3	
161

70	Perovskite is prepared via a multi-cycle short-time dipping reaction	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Au	22.6	1.07	72.0	17.4	
82

35	Chlorobenzene vapor is used to control the ambient atmosphere	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	19.0	1.05	72.6	14.6	
163

50	Perovskite film is treated with hot isopropanol prior to annealing	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	20.2	1.01	73.8	15.1	
164

60	Perovskite film is exposed to RH60% before annealing in a dry oven	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Ca/Al	20.4	0.95	80.3	15.6	
80

60	Perovskite film is annealed using a microwave	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-/Ag	20.1	0.92	60.0	11.1	
171

35	Perovskite film is exposed to RH35% during annealing	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/PFN/Al	20.3	1.05	80.2	17.1	
143

40	Perovskite film is exposed to RH40% after deposition	ITO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/P3HT/Ag	18.9	0.94	57.0	12.2	
24

40	Perovskite film is completely fabricated in RH40%	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/LiF/Al	17.1	1.02	73.0	12.7	
169

50	Perovskite film is completely fabricated in RH50%	ITO/c-SnO2/MA1−xFAxPbI3−yBry/spiro-/Au	22.8	1.10	77.0	19.5	
176

40	Perovskite film is annealed in RH40%; CdSe/CdS is used as a down-shifting quantum-dot at the back of the device	ITO/c-NiO/Cs0.10FA0.90PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	23.1	1.14	77.0	20.8	
178

40	Perovskite film is annealed in RH30–40%; PEAI is used for surface passivation	ITO/c-SnO2/MA1−xFAxPbI3/PEAI/spiro-/Au	25.2	1.18	78.4	23.3	
182

30	Perovskite film is annealed in an oven	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/Al	20.3	1.02	72.0	14.9	
173

30	FIRA process is applied on a perovskite film coated on mesoporous TiO2 for 1.7 s	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-/Au	22.6	1.11	76	19.0	
174

40	FIRA process is applied on a perovskite film coated on compact TiO2 for 1.2 s	FTO/c-TiO2/CsMAFAPbIBr/spiro-/Au	22.5	1.09	74	18.1	
183

50	Perovskite film is deposited in RH50% but annealed in a vacuum	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/C60/Al	18.4	1.02	69.4	13.0	
184

55	Gas-pump method is applied between the spin-coating and annealing stages	FTO/c-ZnO/MAPbI3/spiro-/MoO3/Ag	22.7	1.08	77.8	19.0	
175


 	Fig. 18  Generalization of the fabrication protocol of the perovskite thin film under high-humidity conditions. The purposes, the examples of materials and the optimal methods for high-humidity processing are included as well.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Absorption spectra and X-ray diffraction curves of the perovskite layer blade-coated at various RH levels. (b) SEM images of perovskite blade-coated at different RH levels. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) The size of perovskite islands with respect to substrate temperature during blade-coating. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) J–V curves of perovskite mini-modules prepared in air using RTP and hot-plate annealing. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) A bitmap version of a digital image of the perovskite film fabricated via inkjet printing indicating precise printing of this coating method. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Normalized PCE of inkjet-printed and spin-coated PSCs with different sizes of active area. (c) Dark J–V curves (semilog scale) of PSCs deposited using inkjet printing and spin coating followed by VTA-treatment. Reproduced with permission.195 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Optical microscope image of the perovskite film prepared using slot-die coating before and after substrate pre-heating and gas quenching treatments. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of a modified slot-die coater with a N2 blowing system. Reproduced with permission.205 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (c) J–V measurement of the slot-die coated PSC using a two-step method and annealed using an oven or near-infrared radiation (the notation represents the annealing approaches for PbI2 and MAI, respectively). Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of (a) crystal evolution and (b) side-view morphology of the perovskite film with respect to the deposition rate (Fin) and evaporation rate (Fout) during spray coating. (c) Schematic illustration of the perovskite spray-coating process combined with hot-air blowing. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Solar sub-module based on the spray-deposited perovskite layer. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
