Absolute quantum yields in NaYF4 :Er,Yb upconverters – synthesis temperature and power dependence   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33457G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33457G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24330-24334Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAbsolute quantum yields in NaYF4:Er,Yb upconverters – synthesis temperature and power dependence†

        
          
            Daniel O. 
            Faulkner
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Srebri 
            Petrov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Doug D. 
            Perovic
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nazir P. 
            Kherani
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Geoffrey A. 
            Ozin
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada. E-mail: gozin@chem.utoronto.ca
bDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Toronto, 184 College St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E4, Canada
cDepartment of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, 10 King's College Rd., Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G4, Canada
Received 
      29th May 2012
    , Accepted 21st July 2012First published on 25th July 2012AbstractWe investigate the temperature and power dependence of the emission quantum yield of NaYF4:Er,Yb upconverters. We show that the quantum yields may vary by almost three orders of magnitude. We demonstrate that formation of the hexagonal phase of this material is not in itself sufficient to guarantee high upconversion efficiency.
Upconverters,1,2 which allow the conversion of near infrared to visible light via non-simultaneous multiphoton absorption, have attracted much attention in recent years for their potential applications to solar power,3,4 biological imaging,5–7 and display technologies.8,9 Although the luminescence properties of these materials has been well studied,10 very little characterization of their emission quantum yields,11–13 a critical measure when considering likely practical applications, has been reported. This work presents a characterisation of the temperature dependence of the upconversion quantum yields of bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb. Relevant prior work includes studies by Page et al.14 and Boyer and Veggel;15 whereas Page et al. presented a very in depth and specific model which is only applicable to a particular material and must be adapted for all applications, we discuss our results in the context of a simpler and more general model which should be extensible to many systems without modification. In particular their work did not discuss the β-1 form of the power dependence which is a central focus of the model that we use. Boyer et al.'s work, whilst setting a precedent for the investigation of upconversion quantum yields using an integrating sphere, concentrates on a significantly different system (size dependence of nanocrystal quantum yields vs. temperature dependence of bulk quantum yields in the present case) to the one investigated in this work, and furthermore did not investigate the power dependence of the quantum yield. We begin by discussing a simple theoretical treatment of the quantum yields of multiphoton processes and then present an investigation of the dependence of the quantum yields of NaYF4:Er,Yb upconverters on excitation power and synthetic temperature. Crucially, whilst this material itself is well known, no other work that we are aware of has attempted to study the dependence of its emission properties on synthesis temperature.
Emission quantum yield (η) is defined by:  
Assuming (as should be valid in the case of relatively low incident powers when saturation is unlikely to occur) the number of photons absorbed by a material is linearly proportional to the number of photons incident upon it, and hence to the irradiance of the sample, we have:number of photons emitted ∝ η × irradiance
As discussed in ref. 16 there are a number of regimes in which multiphoton processes may occur, and most generally we expect a dependence of the form:number of photons emitted ∝ irradianceβwhere the exponent β depends on the number of photons involved in the process, n, as well as the efficiency of upconversion, the mechanisms of upconversion and decay, and various other environmental factors. Combining the preceding equations it can be seen that in general:η ∝ irradianceβ−1
However, in the simplest case of upconversion being a minor pathway relative to decay to a lower lying state, which applies in our case despite the relatively very high upconversion yields demonstrated, and has been shown to apply10 for NaYF4:Er,Yb in cases similar to that described herein, the emission intensity resulting from a n-photon process is proportional to the nth power of the irradiance, i.e. β = n. Accordingly, for a n-photon process we have:number of photons emitted ∝ irradiancen(this situation is analogous to the treatment of chemical reactions of different orders by classical kinetics, except in this case the ‘reactants’ and ‘products’ are low and high energy photons, respectively).
And hence:η ∝ irradiancen−1
We therefore expect that in contrast to the constant quantum yield observed for single-photon processes, for an n-photon upconversion process in NaYF4:Er,Yb (and any other material or process in which this power dependence applies) the quantum yield will depend on the (n − 1)th power of the irradiance (incident power).
Bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb was synthesized via the thermal decomposition of a mixed-metal trifluoroacetate precursor prepared in an Na:Y:Yb:Er ratio of 1:0.78:0.2:0.02 as described in the literature.17,18 The decomposition was carried out in a quartz tube and boat in a tube furnace under air. Samples were heated at a rate of 300 °C per hour, held at the final synthesis temperature for 2 hours and then cooled in air. The cooling rate was not controlled. Fig. 1 shows PXRD patterns for samples prepared at 75 °C increments from 250 to 700 °C, which were collected with a Siemens D5000 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation.
 Fig. 1  PXRD patterns for samples of bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures, as indicated. Reference patterns for both cubic (Fm3m) and hexagonal (P63/m) phases are also shown. The vertical scale is arbitrary. 
It can be seen that the samples all contain a mixture of both cubic and hexagonal phases. Each synthesis was completed in triplicate, analyzed by PXRD, and the relative abundances of the cubic and hexagonal phases in each were fitted using TOPAS software and are shown in Fig. 2. It is evident that all samples consist primarily of the hexagonal phase. This is an extremely important observation, as it is frequently stated that the hexagonal phase is the preferred phase for upconversion,19,20 but our results will clearly show that the reality is far more complicated than this, and that formation of the hexagonal phase does not in itself guarantee efficient luminescence. The re-emergence of the cubic phase is becoming apparent at 700 °C as is expected from the known high-temperature phase behaviour of this material.21 The PXRD data was further used to estimate the mean particles sizes in each of the samples according to Rietveld analysis and this is shown in Fig. 3. It is clear from the figure that in general the crystallite sizes increases dramatically with synthesis temperature, and that as a rule of thumb the hexagonal domains are approximately 10 times larger than the cubic.
 Fig. 2  Cubic (crosses) and hexagonal (squares) phase composition of NaYF4:Er,Yb as a function of synthesis temperature, fitted by Rietveld refinement. Each synthesis was repeated three times and the results of all fittings are shown. 
 Fig. 3  Cubic (top) and hexagonal (bottom) domain sizes fitted by Rietveld refinement of PXRD data for bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures. Note that the maximum sizes fitted for the cubic phase was 450 nm and for the hexagonal phase was 4.5 μm. Points plotted at these sizes should be interpreted as ‘greater than or equal to’ the indicated size. 
A typical upconversion emission spectrum for NaYF4:Er,Yb is shown in Fig. 4, and the peaks are labelled with the term symbols of the states that lead to these emissions. A more thorough discussion of the spectroscopic properties of this material may be found elsewhere.10
 Fig. 4  Emission spectrum of an NaYF4:Er,Yb sample prepared at 700 °C under 380 mW 972 nm excitation, showing the main transitions giving rise to visible upconversion emission. The peak heights are proportional to the number of photons contributing to each wavelength, and are produced by multiplying the measured intensity (which is proportional to power) by the wavelength, as is required for the measurement of absolute quantum yields. The vertical scale is arbitrary. 
The red and green emission peaks, appearing from roughly 640–680 and 510–565 nm, respectively, are studied in this work. The violet emission around 400–420 nm is often extremely weak and we were unable to collect high quality spectra for it from many of our samples, so we excluded it from the present study.
Absolute emission quantum yields, recorded using an integrating sphere according to the method by de Mello et al.11 using samples in powder form are summarized for both the red and green emissions in Fig. 5. The use of an integrating sphere allows the characterization of the quantum yields of inhomogeneous samples such as powders and thin films, and also minimizes the effect of potential differences in sample geometry that may arise due to, for example, different crystal size distributions leading to one sample displaying greater scattering than another. The laser signal was collected with an Ocean Optics Maya 2000 USB Spectrometer and the upconversion with an Oriel 74100 monochromator and Oriel 77341 photomultiplier tube. The integrating sphere used was custom made by Gigahertz Optik, and the system was calibrated with an Oriel 63358 quartz-tungsten halogen lamp. The system was controlled and the data collected and processed with LabVIEW software that was created in-house.
 Fig. 5  Red and green emission absolute quantum yields of samples of NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures and recorded under 380 mW of 972 nm laser excitation. The inset shows the region from 250–475 °C in greater detail. 
It is evident that the quantum yields of these materials display extremely strong temperature dependence, with almost three orders of magnitude separating the samples at either extreme from a minimum quantum yield of ∼0.05% at 400 °C to a maximum of ∼20% at 700 °C. The total quantum yield for a given sample may be seen by adding the separate red and green contributions; in all cases the ratio of red and green quantum yields at a given synthesis temperature was approximately the same (e.g. the sample prepared at 700 °C with the highest red quantum yield also had the highest green quantum yield). Also of note is that there is a significant (and reproducible) difference in quantum yield for samples prepared under nominally identical conditions, at this time we are not able to fully explain this behaviour but it serves to underline the sensitivity of these materials to the synthetic environment. These results underline the necessity of high-temperature processing when trying to achieve upconverters with high luminescence efficiency. One of the key limiting factors of upconverting nanoparticles preventing their deployment into a range of applications is their limited brightness.
It is worth underlining again that from a phase perspective all of the samples are very similar – predominantly hexagonal phase. This highlights the fact that simple phase control is not sufficient to achieve high upconversion efficiency and that a more detailed understanding of the material properties is required. We are currently actively investigating potential causes of the difference in luminescence intensity displayed by samples prepared under different conditions. By comparing Fig. 3 and 5 one can clearly see that in general the measured quantum yield increases with the crystallite size. This in itself does not offer a satisfactory explanation for the observed trend; due to the strong inverse power dependence of energy transfer efficiency and the fact that the vibrational behaviour of the materials shows little variation across the range of size studied herein (see below) it seems unlikely that this trend can be fully explained in terms of the Dexter theory22 of energy transfer or due to a different phononic environment leading to different preferred relaxation pathways. One simple explanation which we have sought to rule out is any effect of possible carbon contamination from the precursor and isomorphous replacement of hydroxide for fluoride in the lattice. The ESI† shows FTIR spectra of samples prepared at 250, 400 and 700 °C, and demonstrates that whilst the 250 °C sample does contain some of these kinds of impurities, the appearance of the 400 and 700 °C samples is nearly identical in FTIR, despite the luminescence properties of the 250 and 400 °C samples being almost identical and the 700 °C being orders of magnitude brighter. In addition, the absence of any apparent amorphous background – which may indicate the presence of carbon – in the PXRD, and the fact that no change in luminescence was seen after treatment in air plasma for 90 minutes to remove potential residual carbon contaminants, indicates that this is unlikely to be responsible for the observed trend in luminescence. We propose that the most likely explanation for the observed behaviour is a difference in defect structure with temperature, for example the presence of long-range defects such as dislocations at low temperatures which may be annealed out by high temperature treatment. Unfortunately a comprehensive study in order to validate this hypothesis is extremely challenging especially given the morphology of these powder samples but we hope to be able to shed more light on this area in the future.
In addition to probing the dependence of the quantum yield on synthesis temperature, we also investigated its dependence on excitation power, shown in Fig. 5.
The red and green upconversion emission processes for this material under 972 nm excitation are primarily two-photon emissions,10 and so from the equation for the power dependence of the quantum yield of an n-photon process derived above we would expect to see a linear relationship. We can see from Fig. 6 that this behaviour is satisfied well for both emissions; in particular, we see that in both cases the y-intercept is close to zero, in line with our expectations. Of note is that the quantum yields recorded in this study are slightly lower than those in Fig. 6, this is likely due to a slight difference in alignment between the two experiments and serves to underline the sensitivity of these measurements to experimental geometry. Indeed, whilst with a given alignment the quantum yields for a given sample were highly reproducible (typically to within a few percent) it was not uncommon to see as much as a factor of two difference emerge when a change in alignment occurs. For this reason, we emphasise that when studying quantum yields, and particularly in the case of upconverters which have added complexity due to the strong power dependence of their emission, it is the trend rather than the actual values which should be used to draw the main conclusions. Although we would ideally seek to extend the range of incident powers investigated to cover a wider range, due to the relatively poor efficiency of integrating spheres at collecting emitted light this was not possible; nonetheless the evidence we have been able to collect appears to experimentally validate the model used, and we conclude that a linear relationship between absolute quantum yield and excitation power is present as expected. The reader should note that whilst it is conventional to report incident power density (W cm−2) rather than simply incident power (W) when studying these materials, in this case it was impractical for two reasons: firstly, the sample was isolated inside an integrating sphere and it was impossible to accurately measure the dimension of the incident beam; although this could be estimated by measuring the distance from the focusing lens to the sample, this would likely be inaccurate due to the tight focusing of the beam at the sample; a small error in the measurement of this distance would result in a large error in calculated intensity. Secondly, due to the highly scattering nature of the powders used in this study, the power density at the focal point of the excitation beam is likely not truly representative of the real power used to excite the materials, and we expect scattering to lower the effective excitation power density somewhat. The strong dependence of emission quantum yield on excitation power observed here further underlines the necessity of high excitation power density when working with these materials, and this is a key reason why upconverter-coupled solar cells have not yet realized their promise.
 Fig. 6  Incident power dependence of the absolute quantum yields of red and green emissions for a sample of NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at 700 °C. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the upconversion quantum yield of bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb displays a significant dependence on the synthesis temperature, and that this cannot be explained simply in terms of the crystal phase of the material. We believe that this is likely to be of interest to the many researchers working to realize practical applications of this material. Additionally, we have investigated the AQYs of two-photon red and green emission processes from bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb and have discussed this in terms of a simple and widely applicable model. This result is likely to be of interest both to those studying the practical applications of upconverters and to those interested more broadly in multiphoton processes. The power dependence of the quantum yield demonstrated herein would likely not just manifest itself in upconversion processes but also in multiphoton photochemical processes and may be of interest to those studying processes such as sunlight-driven water-splitting and solar fuel generation.
Acknowledgements
GAO is Government of Canada Research Chair in Materials Chemistry and Nanochemistry. He acknowledges the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council NSERC for strong and sustained support of his research. This research was supported by Ontario Research Foundation – Research Excellence program under the aegis of the advanced photovoltaics program.
Notes and references
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .
J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1919–1922 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Chatteriee, A. J. Rufalhah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 937–943 CrossRef .
S. F. Lim, R. Riehn, W. S. Ryu, N. Khanarian, C. K. Tung, D. Tank and R. H. Austin, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sivakumar, P. R. Diamente and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5878–5884 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Maciel, A. Biswas, R. Kapoor and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1978–1980 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Xu, H. P. Ma, D. W. Fang, Z. X. Zhang and Z. H. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3066–3068 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Suyver, J. Grimm, M. K. van Veen, D. Biner, K. W. Kramer and H. U. Gudel, J. Lumin., 2006, 117, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. de Mello, H. F. Wittmann and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 230 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Demas and G. A. Crosby, J. Phys. Chem., 1971, 75, 991 CrossRef .
C. Wuerth, M. Grabolle, J. Pauli, M. Spieles and U. Resch-Genger, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3431–3439 Search PubMed .
R. H. Page, K. I. Schaffers, P. A. Waide, J. B. Tassano, S. A. Payne, W. F. Krupke and W. K. Bischel, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1998, 15, 996–1008 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boyer and F. van Veggel, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1417–1419 RSC .
M. Pollnau, D. R. Gamelin, S. R. Luthi, H. U. Gudel and M. P. Hehlen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 61, 3337–3346 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7444–7445 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Kramer, D. Biner, G. Frei, H. U. Gudel, M. P. Hehlen and S. R. Luthi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1244–1251 CrossRef .
A. Grzechnik, P. Bouvier, W. A. Crichton, L. Farina and J. Kohler, Solid State Sci., 2002, 4, 895–899 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details: material synthesis and quantum yield measurements, FTIR Spectroscopy. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm33457gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 		 
number of photons emitted ∝ 
η
 × irradiance
number of photons emitted ∝ irradiance
β
η ∝ irradianceβ−1
number of photons emitted ∝ irradiance
n
η ∝ irradiancen−1

 	Fig. 1  PXRD patterns for samples of bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures, as indicated. Reference patterns for both cubic (Fm3m) and hexagonal (P63/m) phases are also shown. The vertical scale is arbitrary.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cubic (crosses) and hexagonal (squares) phase composition of NaYF4:Er,Yb as a function of synthesis temperature, fitted by Rietveld refinement. Each synthesis was repeated three times and the results of all fittings are shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cubic (top) and hexagonal (bottom) domain sizes fitted by Rietveld refinement of PXRD data for bulk NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures. Note that the maximum sizes fitted for the cubic phase was 450 nm and for the hexagonal phase was 4.5 μm. Points plotted at these sizes should be interpreted as ‘greater than or equal to’ the indicated size.	 

 	Fig. 4  Emission spectrum of an NaYF4:Er,Yb sample prepared at 700 °C under 380 mW 972 nm excitation, showing the main transitions giving rise to visible upconversion emission. The peak heights are proportional to the number of photons contributing to each wavelength, and are produced by multiplying the measured intensity (which is proportional to power) by the wavelength, as is required for the measurement of absolute quantum yields. The vertical scale is arbitrary.	 

 	Fig. 5  Red and green emission absolute quantum yields of samples of NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at different temperatures and recorded under 380 mW of 972 nm laser excitation. The inset shows the region from 250–475 °C in greater detail.	 

 	Fig. 6  Incident power dependence of the absolute quantum yields of red and green emissions for a sample of NaYF4:Er,Yb prepared at 700 °C.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details: material synthesis and quantum yield measurements, FTIR Spectroscopy. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm33457g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
