Emerging perovskite materials for high density data storage and artificial synapses  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC05326F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05326F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1600-1617Emerging perovskite materials for high density data storage and artificial synapses

        
          
            Yan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ziyu 
            Lv
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jinrui 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            V. A. L. 
            Roy
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Su-Ting 
            Han
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Electronic Science & Technology and Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: yezhou@szu.edu.cn; sutinghan@szu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR. E-mail: val.roy@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      21st November 2017
    , Accepted 16th January 2018First published on 16th January 2018AbstractSince the discovery of perovskite materials with the general chemical formula ABX3 in 1839, research on perovskite materials has drawn exponentially greater attention, owing to their flexible properties, including their ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and dielectric, as well as resistive switching, properties. Perovskite materials have high potential for developing nonvolatile high-density data storage devices. In this review, we summarized the current development of the application of perovskites in nonvolatile memories with an emphasis on the resistive switching properties. The unique advances of perovskite materials are introduced, followed by an assortment of the characterisations of their compositions and crystal structures. The insight into perovskite materials in artificial synapses has also concluded with predictable opportunities and challenges in this promising field.
Yan Wang
Dr. Yan Wang is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her PhD degree in Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2016). Her research interests include the fabrication and applications of perovskite materials.
Ziyu Lv
Dr. Ziyu Lv is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. He received his PhD degree in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University of Technology (2017). His research interests include the fabrication and applications of biomaterial-based electronic devices and artificial synapses.
Li Zhou
Dr. Li Zhou is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from City University of Hong Kong (2016). Her research interests include organic/inorganic semiconductors and nanostructured materials for flexible electronics, such as data storage and solar cells.
Ye Zhou
Prof. Ye Zhou is an IAS Fellow in the Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University. His research interests include flexible and printed electronics, organic/inorganic semiconductors, surface and interface physics, nanostructured materials, and nano-scale devices for technological applications, such as logic circuits, data storage, energy-harvesting, photonics and sensors.
V. A. L. Roy
Prof. Vellaisamy A. L. Roy is an associate professor at the Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on materials and device engineering for electronic devices, such as transistors, flash memory, photovoltaic devices, and sensors. His research is interdisciplinary and he leads a team of physicists, chemists, and engineers.
Su-Ting Han
Prof. Su-Ting Han is an associate professor at Shenzhen University. She received her MSc degree in Analytical Chemistry from Hong Kong Baptist University and her PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. After graduation, she worked at the City University of Hong Kong as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include functional electronic devices and flexible, stretchable, and wearable electronics.
1. Introduction
In 1839, the inorganic perovskite CaTiO3 was found in the Ural Mountains by the German mineralogist Gustav Roseand and named in honor of the Russian Count, Lev A. Perovski, who first described the perovskite structure. The perovskite structure refers to a compound that possesses the same CaTiO3 crystal structure.1 ABX3 is the universal chemical formula of perovskites, in which cations with different sizes are A and B and the anion, usually oxygen or halogen, is X and coordinated to the B cation. Fig. 1 exhibits the ideal cubic closed-packed perovskite structure in which the B-site cations are located at the corners while the X-site anions are placed at the centers of the twelve cube edges. An extended network perovskite structure is formed by the corner-shared BX6 octahedra, in which the A-site cations are located in the center of the framework. The A-Site cations and X-site anions are stacked along the [111] direction in the cubic close-packed layers.2,3
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of perovskite in various application fields. 
Among the various kinds of perovskites, perovskite oxides and perovskite halides have been widely used in electronic devices. ABO3, as the general formation of the perovskite oxide, contributes to 90% of perovskite materials. Most metallic elements are stable in the form of ABO3. In addition, A-site cations and B-site cations can be partly substituted into the formula of A1−xA′xB1−xB′xO3. The unique structure promises broad diverse properties of perovskite materials,4 which can be applied in various application fields (Fig. 1), such as supercapacitors, solar cells, sensors, photodetectors, rechargeable batteries, hydrogen evolution reaction, oxygen electrochemistry, and memory. Take an ideal perovskite oxide material structure, for example, there are many different types of distortions including octahedra tilting, cation displacements from the centers of the coordination polyhedra, as well as Jahn–Teller distortions originating from electronic factors, such as forced octahedra distortions.5–7 The features of the perovskite family are unique and indispensable to access unprecedented physical, electronic, and chemical properties due to the bond angle flexibility inside the structure.8–11 These intriguing properties of perovskite materials, including colossal magnetoresistance,7,12–16 superconductivity,17–20 ferroelectricity,21–24 piezoelectricity,25–28 pyroelectricity,29–32 non-linear dielectric behavior,33–36 as well as multiferroic property,37–40 offer great opportunities to integrate the application requirements of sensors,41–44 catalyst electrodes,45–48 fuel cells49–52 and memories.53–57
Another subclass of ABX3 material is perovskite halides in which the X-site is substituted by halide anions.58 Impressive novel properties, such as photovoltaic performance,59 light-emitting properties,60 optically switched magnetism,61 refrigeration mechanocaloric effects62 and large piezoelectric response,63 are displayed in the perovskite halide materials. Based on the structural perspective, perovskite halides can be divided into subclasses including ABX3 perovskites,64–66 A3BX antiperovskites,67,68 and A2BB′X6 double perovskites.69–72 On the other hand, according to the different type A-site cations, perovskite halides can be divided approximately into the all-inorganic perovksite halides and the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite halides (HOIPHs). The structural characterization of HOIPHs with cubic phases of CH3NH3PbX3 (X represents Cl, Br, or I) was first reported by Weber et al. in 1978.73 HOIPHs are featured for their structural flexibility and having some intriguing functionalities.74 Complicated phase transitions are introduced in HOIPHs originating from synergistic combinations of replacements, order–disorder, octahedral tilting, and columnar shift.75–78 Many noticeable properties are consequences of the phase transistion.79–83 The structural distortion originated primarily from the BX6 octahedral units tilting and the replacement of the A-sites or B-sites. Nevertheless, the situation of perovskite halides in which the halide anions are evolved to a molecular linker becomes more complicated when no longer corner-sharing. The adjacent octahedral units may introduce new tilting possibilities. Besides, the replacement of the A-sites, as well as the dynamic movement of the A-sites or X-sites, is attributed to the symmetry of the perovskite halides. The chemical and versatile structural tenability provides essential approaches for adjusting the physical properties via chemical processing, which can be potentially applied in multifunctional electronic devices.
Besides the series of perovskite oxides and perovskite halides, other kinds of perovskites have been synthesized by replacing the X-site anion from the single halide to bridge molecular linkers, including cyanide (CN−),84,85 azide (N3−),86 rhodanide (SCN−),87–89 hypophosphite (H2POO−),90 and borohydride (BH4−).91 Metal–organic framework perovskites, such as metal dicyanamide92–95 and metal formate,96–99 are another variety of hybrid perovskite derivatives formed by the introduction of organic components in the X-site place. Since the recent research related to perovskite based nonvolatile memories focuses on perovskite oxides and perovskite halides, we will mainly present the progress on these two subclasses of perovskites in this review.
Nonvolatile memory is indispensable to the next generation of digital technology.100–109 The most studied perovskite based nonvolatile memory can be classified into resistive random access memory (RRAM) and flash memory. Specifically, resistive memory features two-terminal simple structure, as well as high storage density.110–113 RRAM is composed of the resistance switchable materials that are sandwiched between the two electrodes. The information is stored based on the material bistability originating from the variation of the intrinsic properties.112,113 The low resistive state (LRS) and high resistive state (HRS) of RRAM can be alternatively switched to realize information storage via voltage stimulation. In March 2017, Intel announced their first commercial RRAM production, 3D Xpoint, which exhibits longer lifetime, faster performance, and high density and is expected to work as both a solid state disk and random access memory unit. It demonstrates that RRAM has emerged as next-generation nonvolatile memories owing to the small dimensional size, fast information processing ability, and low energy efficiency.54,114–116 The mechanism of resistive switching includes space charge and traps,117,118 filamentary conduction,119–121 charge transfer,122–124 conformal change,125–127 tunnelling effect,128,129 and ionic conduction.111,130–132 The exploration of perovskites can be traced back to a long time ago, but it is only recently that perovskites have been innovatively applied in RRAM devices.133 Promising research on perovskite materials further enriched the exploration of perovskite-based RRAM devices.53–57,134–146
Another category of the prevailing studied nonvolatile memory is field effect transistor (FET) based flash memory.147 FET is a transistor whose electronic behaviour can be modulated by the applied electrical field. Generally, FET is composed of three terminals, named as source, drain, and gate. FET based flash memory has a similar structure to FET except there is an additional charge-storing layer, structured as a floating gate, between the gate dielectric and semiconductor layer. When sufficient programming voltage is applied, the charge carriers can be moved from the conducting channel to the floating gate by quantum tunneling or thermal emission. This phenomenon results in a shift of the threshold voltage of the transistor because the stored charges on the floating gate partially screen the electric field between the control gate and the semiconductor. An ultra-thin tunneling dielectric layer is usually introduced in the memory structure, which can isolate the semiconductor layer and the floating gate layer. Thus, charge carriers stored in the floating gate can be maintained after the removal of gate voltage. When a reverse bias is applied, releasing the trapped charge carriers back into the channel can result in a reverse shift of the threshold voltage, which is defined as the erasing process. Several parameters, including the memory window, retention time, and endurance property, can be used to characterize a flash memory. The unique properties of the easy-integrated structure, multiple-bit writing and non-destructive reading have made flash memory an extraordinary alternative high-density data storage application. Despite the advantages of developing perovskite integrated flash memory, compared with RRAM, three-terminal flash memory is limited by the scalability. Thus, current research is much less than desirable for achieving scalability, high-performance, and reliability. Thus, the advanced exploration of perovskite based flash memory should be worthwhile.
Modern developments in the personal computer are limited by the data travel rate between the processor and memory, which is known as the von Neumann bottleneck. A gap between the nonvolatile memories and microprocessors will be created since close and frequent communication is imperative among the external nonvolatile memory and the CMOS based volatile computers. Inspired by the neural synapses, artificial synapse devices exhibiting low power-consumption and high processing performance for parallel information are promising candidates for next generation data storage.148,149 Thus, based on the current memory system, advanced artificial synaptic memory is constructed, which is discussed in the fourth section. Mimicking the biological synapse structure, the synapse-motivated device brings a new challenge to current memory. In order to create spike timing dependent plasticity, different types of artificial synapse are developed. Structures of RRAM and flash memory have been introduced into the study of artificial synapses, including the two-terminal memristive synapse149–151 and three-terminal FET based synapse.152–154 Research progress on the artificial synapse deepens the understanding of the human brain and improves the performance of computers. The combination of computational science, biological science, and material science allows for rapid artificial synapse discoveries.
Both perovskite oxides and perovskite halides have been utilized for constructing nonvolatile memory devices and synaptic devices including FET-, memristor- and RRAM-architectures.82–86,134–146 The structure of perovskite oxides is inherently stable to harbor the distinct redox activity as well as oxygen vacancy defects. Some of the perovskite oxide materials possess magnetic, ferroelectric, and piezoelectric properties. All of these properties can be utilized in nonvolatile memories and artificial synapses to access the indispensable multifunctional memory behaviors that combine the data storage capability with the magnetic, polarity, and pressure behaviours. Purely inorganic perovskites with various compositions and structures exhibit versatile physical, electronic, and chemical properties, so that it is important to recognize the association between the oxygen vacancy generated defects and the other behaviors with nonvolatile memory characteristics and functionalities. In another aspect, HOIPH polycrystalline films can be prepared on various substrates by facile and low-temperature methods, including spin-coating, spray and doctor-blade coating,155 as well as slot-die coating156 which are compatible with flexible substrates. The defect migration in the organolead halide perovskite film under an electric field exhibited an obvious hysteresis in the current–voltage response,157–160 implying its potential application in memory devices and artificial synapses.
Although the application of perovskites in solar cells and light-emitting diodes were proposed recently, a comprehensive review about new progresses in memory and artificial synapse devices has not been reported yet. This will be the primary focus of this review. Offering a timely review that is not only summarizing the recent advancement on the memory applications of the perovskite materials but also proposing the prospective trend of artificial synapses is of great importance to present many technological and academic opportunities in perovskite materials.
2. Perovskite oxide based RRAM
Perovskite oxide materials with the general formula ABO3 have attracted significant attention owning to their flexible electronic properties. They are promising candidates for application in the microelectronics, electro- and nonlinear optics fields.161–164 As the upper valence band (VB) in the perovskite structure is formed by mixing the np2 orbitals from the O2− anions with the ns2 orbitals from the metal “M” in the ABO3 perovskite, antibonding mixing the np6 orbital from the O2− anion with the np/nd orbitals from the M-site cation in the perovskite materials is attributed to the formation of the lower conductive band (CB).165–171 Although A-site cations with different sizes have a slight impact on the band structure of the perovskite materials,172 the electronic states of the A-site cations contribute no direct charge transfer near the bandgap as its position lies far away from the VB and CB.165 Consequently, the composition of the B-site cations in addition to the X-site anions will significantly influence the bandgap structure. In addition, the size and shape of the perovskite nanocompounds have a close relationship with the bandgap energy. Although the first characterization of a perovskite can be dated back to 1839, inorganic perovskites started to be applied in resistive memory devices when Asamitsu reported resistive switching in Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 (PCMO) in the late 1990s.173 With further exploration of the difference in the bandgap energy, the perovskite-based memory property can be tuned by light.174
2.1. ATiO3-type-perovskite
The archetypical perovskite oxide BaTiO3, composed of BaO12 cuboctahedra and TiO6 octahedra, is well-known for its ferroelectric, piezoelectric, dielectric, and resistive switching properties, which can be applied in various areas such as ceramic capacitors,175,176 piezoelectric transducers,177 thermistors,178 waveguide modulators,179,180 pressure transducers181 and nonvolatile memory devices.140,182–188Via the layer-by-layer assembly method, Kim et al. successfully constructed a polymer/perovskite nanocomposite film in which the BaTiO3 nanoparticles were mono dispersed cube-like nanoparticles of ∼8 nm.189 The composite film shows both resistive and ferroelectric bipolar switching behavior, which could be further improved and manipulated by readily adjusting the ferroelectric site density in either the lateral or vertical directions.
The main point defects of the densely packed perovskite-type oxides are listed to be the vacancies of the holes, the electrons and the substitutional impurities, as well as all three sublattices. The theoretical calculations further confirmed that Schottky disorder190 is the only possible type of intrinsic disorder191 in which the negatively charged cation vacancies serve as the acceptor centers while the positively charged vacancies behave as the donor centers. In particular, the oxygen vacancies exhibit high mobility to affect the overall performance of the perovskite based device.171 The brittle and hard perovskite single crystals and ceramics always exhibit small elastic strain, which is not compatible with a flexible substrate. In 2017, Yang et al. fabricated a flexible, semitransparent, and cost-effective resistive memory device based on a large-scale and high-quality BaTi0.95Co0.05O3 film and SrRuO3 buffered layer.139 10 μm thick mica with over 80% transmittance was employed as the substrate. Since most incident visible light is absorbed by the SrRuO3 buffered layer, the transmittance of mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3 is over 50% with a wavelength of 500–800 nm. The forming and rupture process of the metal filaments within the local regions under external electrical bias are tempted by the immigration of the oxygen vacancies in BaTi0.95Co0.05O3, which results in a conductive channel transfer from the insulator to metal. Meanwhile the flexibility of the memory device satisfies the ordinary demands of wearable devices and flexible screens. As shown in Fig. 2, no obvious fluctuation was observed in the resistive-switching properties after repeated bending of the memory with a 2.2 mm bending radius. Furthermore, the memory device is stable under high-temperature conditions, as the ratio of HRS to LRS can be kept over 50 even after 360000 programs per erase cycles or at 500 °C annealing.
 Fig. 2  (a) The I–V curves of the mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au RRAM device. (b) The dependent relationship between the RHRS and RLRS and retention time (red curves) and the writing/erasing cycles (black dots). (c) The HRS and LRS of the memory device by splitting the top electrode into two parts. The inserted pictures exhibit the cross section of the cells with conductive filaments. (d) The flexibility of the mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au RRAM device. (e) The I–V curves measured on the flat memory device under three testing conditions: the original memory device, the memory device bent to a 2.2 mm radius, and the memory device after bending to a 3 mm radius 10000 times. (f) The relationship between the RHRS and RLRS and retention time and the writing/erasing cycles of the two testing conditions: the memory device bent to a 2.2 mm radius and the memory device after bending to a 3 mm radius 10000 times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
SrTiO3 possesses an inherently stable perovskite structure dispersed along the dislocation sites of the Ti sublattice. An amorphous SrTiO3 (a-STO) thin film with adjustable oxygen vacancy was applied in a RRAM with outstanding uniformity of the vital resistive switching characteristics as demonstrated by Nili et al. in 2013 (Fig. 3).192 The conductive nano-filaments are uniformly distributed in the SrTiO3 layer. Each of these filaments acts as independent nano-switches to induce excellent resistive switching behaviors. The oxygen deficiency in the Pt/Ti/a-STO/Pt memory device can be improved during the electroforming step. Thus, oxygen ions along the electron forming direction are the major motivation for the bipolar switching performance in the memories.
 Fig. 3  (a) Typical I–V curves of the Pt/Ti/a-STO/Pt memory device for 106 consecutive write/erase cycles. (b) The relationship between the density of the oxygen and width of the oxide layer. (c) The schematic of the electroforming in the write/erase cycles. (d–f) The in situ scanning probe microscopy (SPM) scans on the Pt/Ti/a-STO/Pt memory device without the Pt/Ti electrodes. (d) The in situ SPM scan on the surface of a-STO in the original device. (e) The in situ SPM scan on a-STO under the electroforming state ahead of electrical indentation. (f) The in situ SPM scan on a-STO under the electroforming state following electrical indentation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192 © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2015, Nili et al. further characterized the performance of the amorphous donor-induced SrTiO3 RRAM and investigated the dynamics kinetics of the as-prepared device in addition to the temperature factor.193 The oxygen vacancy grown in perovskite and donor-induced dislocated sites play a vital role in the improvement of the stability and controllability of the RRAM. Along the defect structure, which is pre-existing, migration of the oxygen vacancies leads to extending defect structure from the pseudo-ohmic electroforming grounded electrode to inert electrode in a typical electroforming process. While the increased amount of doping sites results in the adjustment of out-of-plane oxygen diffusion. The low rate doped donor Nb induces a modified insulator oxide with dislocated sites to act as the charge carrier modulator, which means it possesses multilevel storage and low energy consumption. This work highlighted that donor-doped SrTiO3 shows great potential for high-density integrated-circuits.
The synergistic combination of perovskites and different nanomaterials with tunable properties is an effective strategy to realize novo devices with unprecedented multifunctionalities. Multifunctional RRAMs fabricated on wurtzite ZnO nanorods/perovskite Nb-doped SrTiO3 heterojunction are demonstrated by Rera et al. in 2013.146 Single crystallinity is achieved via solution-processed hydrothermal method at a low temperature even though the lattice structures of ZnO and Nb-doped SrTiO3 are distinct. The tunable ON and OFF states in memory devices are obtained through manipulating both the light and electricity. The device exhibits versatile light-tunable resistive switching characteristics, integrating the functionalities of a diode, photodetector, and RRAM. The resistive switching and data retention behaviors of the device suggest bias-controlled multilevel storage. This facile approach provides a promising way to construct diverse kinds of devices based on distinct crystalline structures with both optical and electrical stimuli.
2.2. AMnO3-type-perovskite
A field-effect transistor-architectured memory device based on magnetoelectric composite heterostructures with magnetic behavior was investigated a long time ago. Magnetization orientation in perovskites is promising to be employed for information processing and storage applications. In 2015, Zhao et al. reported wide-band (011)-Pr0.7Sr0.3MnO3/0.7Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–0.3PbTiO3 heterostructures with electrically controlled magnetic properties.134 An in-plane anisotropic strain field induced by the electric field is introduced during the cooling procedure so that the wide-band Pr0.7Sr0.3MnO3 film exhibits in-plane anisotropic, nonvolatile modulation of the magnetic properties at low temperatures. This anisotropic memory effect is attributed to the ferromagnetic domain’s growth and preferential seeding under the strain field.
Both the ferroelectricity and magnetism suggest that multiferroic materials are promising for multifunctional device applications. The resistive switching behaviours of bismuth manganite with a distorted perovskite structure were first studied by Sun et al. in 2015.143 The outstanding light-modulated resistive switching memory device, with structure Ag/BiMnO3/Ti and well-controlled prominent ferroelectricity, can be fabricated by growing the uniform BiMnO3 nanowire array on Ti substrate.
2.3. Other-type-perovskite
Bismuth ferrite is a ferroelectric semiconductor material with a narrow bandgap of ∼2.7 eV and large polarization of ∼60 μC cm−2,194,195 which promise nonlinearity factor and high forward current in a memory cell that is selector-free. Jeon et al. reported selector-free RRAMs constructed on BiFeO3 nano-island arrays and Nb-doped SrTiO3 substrates.196 The BiFeO3 nano-island device exhibits a large ON/OFF ratio of 4420, high resistance ratio, and a nonlinearity factor of ∼1100, which offers a facile building block for high density RRAM. By utilising the layer transfer technique, Bakaul et al. integrate the 〈001〉 oriented inorganic perovskite ferroelectric material memory device SrRuO3 (20 nm)/PbZrxTi1−xO3 (60 nm)/SrRuO3 (30 nm) on a flexible substrate.82 Compared with the typical materials used in electronic devices on flexible substrates,197,198 the operating voltage is reduced by nearly an order of magnitude. This work demonstrated that the attained memory has reliable operation for over 1010 cycles, as well as a long retention time over 10 years.
3. Perovskite halide based RRAM and floating-gate flash memory
Common perovskite halides consist of a three dimensional crystal structure framework of corner-sharing lead halide octahedra. In addition to the structural flexibility, perovskite halides exhibit extraordinary optical and electrical behaviors, such as strong light absorption. Ion migration plays a vital role in perovskite halide-based devices, since a hybrid ionic-electronic conduction property is observed.206 Perovskite halides are considered as ideal charge transport and light absorber materials for photovoltaic devices.
Hysteresis, which is defined as a shift in the I–V curves during the reverse sweep directions, hinders the practical application of perovskites in the solar cell research field, while it is desirable for memory devices. Studies reveal that hysteresis can be magnified by the slow voltage sweep rate and elevated temperature.64,65 Different device structures and compositions can also vary the hysteresis behaviour. The mechanisms are proposed as follow:65 (i) the charge trapping mechanism. Charge trapping centers with different energy levels are generated by the inherent point defects, vacancies, interstitials, and antisites in HOIPHs.199 (ii) The inherent point defects, vacancies, interstitials, and antisites may migrate in the perovskite layer.200 Thus, charge trapping and ion/defect migration are associated with hysteresis in perovskite materials.65,199 Yu et al. successfully varied the precursor ratio in HOIPHs to produce different defects and vacancies.64 The results exhibited that an increased concentration of vacancies of CH3NH3 (VCH3NH3) is associated with the varied hysteretic current–voltage loops. In addition, the increased concentration of VCH3NH3 will benefit the migration process of the iodide ions, which has been proved to have an important role in the resistive switching behaviour of RRAM devices.207 Herein, we can utilize the main mechanisms of the hysteresis phenomenon to enhance the memory effect in nonvolatile memory devices. The outstanding charge trapping ability, in addition to the large-scale production compatibility, low-temperature annealing process, and excellent ion mobility, indicate the high potential for HOIPHs to be applied in memory devices.
3.1. CsPbBr3 perovskite based RRAM
Möller first reported all-inorganic cesium lead trihalides (CsPbX3, X is Cl, Br, or I) in 1959.201 A great amount of work has been carried out in solution-processed chemical synthesis, optoelectronic properties, and device applications after this report. CsPbBr3 possesses advantageous optoelectronic properties that endows it as a promising candidate for photodetectors, solar cells, lasing, and light emitting diodes. In 2016, Wu et al. first reported high performance and stable RRAMs based on CsPbBr3.174 Depositing the CsPbBr3 film onto a ZnO interlayer could increase the smooth quality of the film and improve the quality of the interface between the CsPbBr3 and electrode. As shown in Fig. 4, this delicate design not only prevents interactions between the CsPbBr3 and interface of the metal electrode or moisture, but also reduces power consumption and injection barrier. The device exhibits high stability with data retention time longer than 104 s and low operation voltage of less than 1 V. Meanwhile, tuning the resistance state via adjusting both the optical and electric generates a light-induced resistive switching effect of more than 103 and rapid access time of less than 1 ms.
 Fig. 4  (a) A cross-sectional SEM image of the Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO device. (b) The device structure of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (c) The I–V curves of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (d) The resistance-state stability of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (e) The I–V curves of the memory device measured with and without light, respectively. (f) The I–t curves of the Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO structured memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016. 
In 2017, Liu et al. employed an orthorhombic CsPbBr3 film with high crystallinity as the resistive switching layer in flexible RRAMs.138 The device, with structure Al/CsPbBr3/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/indium tin oxide (ITO)/polyethylene terephthalate (PET), possesses low SET voltage of −0.6 V and an ON/OFF ratio of ∼102. The mechanism of the bipolar resistive switching effect can be interpreted into the ohmic behavior and space charge limited current. The switching state of the conducting filaments through the CsPbBr3 layer was also utilized to explain the switching effect.
3.2. HOIPH perovskite based RRAM
In 2015, Yoo et al. first demonstrated a HOIPH-based RRAM with remarkable bipolar resistive switching behavior.145 A low operating voltage, long retention time of longer than 104 s, and stable endurance can be achieved in a Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) device. The impressive resistive switching behavior suggests that the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite material fulfils the criteria of an active layer in nonvolatile RRAMs. As reported in previous work on RRAMs, the resistive switching mechanism is related to the selection of the metal electrodes in the device architecture.202 Usually, inert metal electrodes, such as Pt and Au, act as counter-electrodes for reduction and transport paths for charge carriers, which have no contribution to the resistive switching effect, while active metal electrodes directly impact the switching behavior through an electrochemical reaction. The functional metal electrode atoms were ionized and diffused to the counter inert electrodes, which induced the formation of conducting filaments.
The J. S. Lee group in Pohang University of Science and Technology, specializing in organic electronics and memory devices, fabricated and characterized flexible CH3NH3PbI3-based RRAMs on a plastic substrate.54 CH3NH3PbI3 HOIPHs display reliable and reversible resistive switching behavior to be the active layer of RRAMs, in which CH3NH3PbI3 is sandwiched between the bottom ITO and top Au electrode. The authors assumed that the migration of the iodide vacancies and formation of a metal filament with applied electric field is the main reason for the resistance change in a memory device.
In 2015, Wang et al. reported a solution processed HOIPH-based memory device with ITO/CH3NH3PbI3:PVK/Al architecture.141 The device exhibits write-once read-many-times (WORM) memory behavior with a 103 ON/OFF ratio. The filamentary configuration of the CH3NH3PbI3:PVK active layer was observed in situ by conductive atomic force microscopy (AFM). The mechanism of resistive switching is assigned to an electric-field-tempted electron transfer from PVK to CH3NH3PbI3.
A novel sandwiched ITO/PEDOT:PSS/HOIPHs/metal RRAM was built by Lin et al. in 2015.203 The device exhibited a transition between HRS and LRS with an ON/OFF ratio over 104 and low operating voltage of 50 mV. Control experiments of Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/Cu, Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/Au, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/ITO, and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Au structures were carried out to study the barrier situation of the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/Cu interface. The Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/Cu and Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/Au devices exhibit no resistive switching effect due to the metallic contact of the Cu/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. The energy difference between the LOMO level of CH3NH3PbI3 and Fermi level of Ag is only 0.3–0.4 eV, so that Ag is not recommended as an electrode. Consequently, the authors attribute the resistive switching property to the conversion in the PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 barrier. Altering the constituent of the perovskite could tune the memory characteristics, including the SET/RESET voltage and ON/OFF ratio. A memory device with improved properties can be developed by designing a migration barrier of interface and employing different halogen elements in the HOIPH perovskite. It is suggested to employ this RRAM device as a logic OR gate via combining the optical and electric stimuli. This work presents the practical applications of HOIPH RRAMs in logic circuits and optical quantum information for essential supplementation of the von Neumann architecture.
The inherent instability under ambient conditions, due to sensitivity to water and oxygen, is the major drawback of HOIPHs. In order to address this issue, Muthu et al. selected HOIPHs consisting of octylammonium in the nanoparticle form as the capping agent. The easily-processed long alkyl chain from the capping agent ensures extraordinary stability to moisture and air.142 Furthermore, the nonvolatile memory device with FTP/PN/Ag configuration was investigated with excellent bipolar switching performance. The write–erase voltages of the devices is reduced from 2.66 V to 0.53 V as the chloride content x in the CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx is increased from 0 to 1.03. Meanwhile, the ON/OFF ratio, retention capability, as well as endurance property of the devices can be enhanced via an increase in x in CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx. This work demonstrates a facile route to modulate the memory characteristics through chemical modifications. In 2017, the J. S. Lee group investigated the mixed-halide HOIPH RRAM based on CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) thin films as the resistive switching layer (Fig. 5).55 A lower switching voltage is required when the content of Br in CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx is increased since the ionic migration barrier of Br− is 0.23 eV, compared with I− (0.29–0.30 eV). The switching behavior is attributed to the immigration of the halide defect induced configuration of the conductive filaments by the application of electric bias in the active layer. They further fabricated a RRAM device with passivated CH3NH3PbI3 film.56 The passivation effect is carried out using ZnO or AlOx, which can protect the CH3NH3PbI3 film to embrace a comparably reliable stability. Compared with the bulk materials, zero dimensional nanoparticles usually display some intriguing physical properties, such as quantum confinement effect with a diameter less than 10 nm and high surface area. In 2017, Yang et al. embedded CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite quantum dots in a polymer matrix to fabricate flexible nonvolatile RRAM devices in which the quantum dots were synthesized via a facile one step strategy.136 The memory device exhibits reproducible and reliable resistive switching behaviors with a large 103 ON/OFF ratio.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic structure of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3)/ITO/glass substrate memory device. (b) The cross-sectional SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) layers. (c) The I–V curves of the Au/perovskite/ITO structured memory device. The inset picture shows the top view of the device. (d) The retention time characteristics of the memory device at the LRS and HRS. (e) The statistical distribution of the set electric fields of the CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) based resistive switching memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 © 2017, Springer Nature. 
Li et al. reported a multi-bit memory device by employing the perovskite material CH3NH3PbI3 as the light harvester, n-type mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 to conduct the electrons, and p-type 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-bifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) to conduct the holes.204 Both a porous device with the structure of FTO/TiO2/Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3/HTL/Au and a planar device with FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/HTL/Au structure were fabricated. Even though the amount of shallow and deep traps is diverse, both of the devices exhibited multi-bit memory property with writing times of 0.54 s and 0.91 s for the porous device and planar device, respectively.
In 2016, Choi et al. fabricated the sandwiched Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt cell by spin-coating and annealing a 400 nm-thick CH3NH3PbI3 thin film.205 The authors studied the resistive switching behavior of the memory cell under extremely low electric fields. Abrupt resistive switching is triggered by a highly electrochemical active top electrode. Conducting filaments are formed in the organolead halide perovskite film by Ag migration. As shown in Fig. 6, the hysteresis loop with a high ON/OFF ratio of ∼106 indicates a bipolar switching behavior of the memory device. The multilevel resistive switching properties are also exploited by manipulating the compliance current of the SET process. The CH3NH3PbI3 film based memory device is capable of achieving at least four data storage levels, which originate from the vigorously benign immigration of anion defects.
 Fig. 6  (a) The in situ movement of the A-site cation in the crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3. (b) The cross-sectional SEM image of the memory device with Ni/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si vertical structure. The inset shows the resistive switching schematic of the metal/CH3NH3PbI3/metal vertical structure. (c) The typical I–V curves of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt device. (d) The resistive switching characteristic related with the number of writings. The writing voltage is 0.15 V, its pulse width is 200 ms, and the reading voltage is 0.02 V. (e) The I–V curves of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt device under different compliance currents (10−2, 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 A). (f) The reversible resistive switching cycles under different compliance currents (10−2, 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 A). Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Vapor deposition, including sequential vapor deposition and hybrid chemical deposition, has been widely used to fabricate HOIPHs. High density, large scale, and excellent quality films can be achieved by vapour deposition technology. However, precise control of the deposition rate is required in vacuum deposition, which is sensitive to contamination of the chamber. In 2017, the J. S. Lee group used sequential vapor deposition to form uniform organolead halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 layers on 250 nm via-hole perforated wafers.57 The fabrication procedure of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si memory device is illustrated in Fig. 7a–c. A bipolar resistive switching memory characteristic is observed from the I–V characteristics. A conductive pathway of the iodine-vacancy-related filaments is formed during the SET process and ruptured during the RESET process. The I–V curves of LRS and HRS show almost no fluctuation during the cycling endurance measurement. The as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3-based nanoscale RRAM and cross-point array structure also shows rapid switching speed, low operating voltage, superior endurance, and long data retention.
 Fig. 7  The schematic fabrication process of the organic–inorganic perovskite based memory devices. (a) The Pt via-hole substrate. (b) The CH3NH3PbI3 layer formed by a sequential vapor deposition process. (c) Au deposition by thermal evaporation as the top electrode. The electrical properties of the memory device with Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structure. (d) The typical I–V characteristic of the memory device. (e) The retention time of the memory device. (f) The ac pulse endurance of the memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Ion migration inside HOIPHs strongly influences the stability of HOIPH-based devices. Both I− and MA+ are verified as mobile ions under an electric field. The point defects including interstitials, vacancies, and substitutions, such as VPb, VI, VMA, MAi, Ii, and MAPb, can form shallow defects levels in both the CB and VB of CH3NH3PbI3. Therefore, accumulation of highly concentrated shallow defects may induce the decrease in the resistance of CH3NH3PbI3. Subsequently, electric-field-driven or optical-stimuli-triggered resistive switching can be obtained. In 2017, Zhu et al. studied the iodine vacancy distribution in the organic–inorganic halide perovskite film with formation/annihilation of the iodine vacancies, triggered by electric and light stimulation, which can induce pronounced resistive switching effects.206 As shown in Fig. 8, the structure of the memory device is Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au/Ti/SiO2/Si, in which a 200 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3 film was deposited through a solution-processed method. The HRS and LRS of the device can be repeatedly switched for over 103 cycles via alternating the positive and negative voltage sweeps. However, the LRS spontaneously transforms to HRS without RESET operation. This retention failure at LRS may originate from the diffusion of the ions with gradient concentration. It is worth noting that substituting the Au top electrode with Ag produces a dramatic improvement in the retention capability at the LRS. Meanwhile, the SET voltage of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au device is lower than that of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au device. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy was utilized to map the ion distribution during the resistive switching process. From EDX, the formation of Ag filaments can be ruled out while the highly concentrated iodine vacancies can act as conducting channels to induce HRS switch to LRS. In Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au, the stored I atoms diffuse and combine with iodine vacancies in the CH3NH3PbI3 film once the external bias is removed while diffusion of the I− ions is suppressed due to the formation of AgIx in Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au.
 Fig. 8  (a) The schematic of the I–V measurement of the device with the structure metal/CH3NH3PbI3/Au. The SEM images on the right show the top view and side view of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. (b) The I–V curves of the memory device in the program process. (c) The stable endurance behaviors. (d) The relationship between the LRS retention behavior and temperature. The inset shows the ln(t) linear relationship with 1/kT. (e) The retention time of the memory device with Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au and Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au structures, respectively. (f) The relationship between the LRS resistance and the retention times of Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au and Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au structures, respectively. (g) The hypothesized schematic process of the storage and diffusion of the I− ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, light illumination can inhibit the formation of conductive paths in the CH3NH3PbI3 film. Through the integrated application of the electric field and light illumination, ion migration in CH3NH3PbI3 can be properly controlled. Further improvement towards the performance of the memory device has been explored. Recently, Choi et al. reported an Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structured flexible device. Enhanced endurance over 103 cycles and a high on/off ratio ∼106 can be observed without electroforming, as shown in Fig. 9.207 The HRS is on account of the SCLC and thermally assisted hopping mechanism, which can be switched into LRS at a low set voltage ∼0.3 V. The crystallinity and uniform distributed composition of the CH3NH3PbI3 film contributes to the improved operation speed and retention time. Thus, the author predicted the bright future for HOIPH materials in flexible memories. Fiber-shaped devices with bendable and stretchable properties are compatible with next generation wearable electronics. In 2016, Yan et al. first presented a CH3NH3PbClxI3−x-based fiber-shaped nonvolatile memory on a 250 μm diameter titanium wire.137 The Au wires were entwined outside the perovskite layer to act as the other RRAM electrode. The potential barrier between Au and CH3NH3PbClxI3−x retains most of the electrons inside the active layer at low positive voltage. The fiber-shaped perovskite memory device exhibits an apparent bipolar resistance-switching loop and excellent retention capability. The typical I–V curves of the memory devices are shown in Fig. 10c, which was also schemed in ln–ln scale. According to the different slopes, various conduction models were employed for result data fitting.
 Fig. 9  (a) The schematic demonstration of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structured RRAM device. (b) The I–V characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 based RRAM device. The inset shows the fabricated RRAM device on a flexible substrate. (c) The I–V characteristics of the RRAM flexible device with a bending radius of 5 mm. (d) The retention characteristics of the smooth CH3NH3PbI3 thin film fabricated RRAM device. The endurance properties of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structured flexible device (SET voltage ∼0.4 V, RESET voltage ∼−0.6 V, input pulse widths ∼50 ms) with different bending radii. (e) Bending radii ∼7.5 mm and (f) bending radii ∼5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  (a) The structure of the fiber-shaped Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memristor. (b) The retention curves of the Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memory device. (c) The I–V curves of the memory device with two types of structure, Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au and Ti/TiO2/Au, respectively. (d) The I–V curves of the fiber-like shaped Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memristor plotted in logarithm form. The positive and negative voltage scans are exhibited in the left plot and right plot, respectively. The numbers marked in the figure are the slopes for different sections according to the linear fitting results. The insets are the ln(I)–V1/2 plots for the blue sections in the figure and the linear fitting results. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.3. HOIPH perovskite based floating gate flash-memory
Very recently, Chen et al. first characterized the fabrication and performance of the perovskite based nonvolatile floating-gate photo memory. In order to modify the interface between the perovskite and semiconductor to capture the light stimulated charge, polystyrene matrix mixed with CH3NH3PbBr3 is employed in this work as the floating gate.144 With sensitive photo responsibility, this novel nonvolatile memory can realize multilevel memory storage with a high ON/OFF ratio exceeding 104. As shown in Fig. 11f, different laser sources are utilized to modulate the multilevel memory behavior. The author proposed that the operating mechanism is effective due to the charge transfer being close to the gap between the energy levels of pentacene and the CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoparticles, as illustrated in Fig. 11g. In addition, the well dispersed CH3NH3PbBr3 nanoparticles in the polystyrene matrix are effective trapping elements for the separated carriers.
 Fig. 11  (a) The device structure of the perovskite based photomemory. (b) The SEM images of the CH3NH3PbBr3/pentacene composite layer. (c) The TEM images of the CH3NH3PbBr3/pentacene composite layer. (d) The transfer curves of the CH3NH3PbBr3 based photomemory device at VDS = −60 V. (e) The relationship of the IDS with time. The shadow in the picture presents the illustration of the 365 nm laser source (3.5 mW cm−2) for 120 s. (f) Temporal IDS under a different laser source (450, 530, and 630 nm wavelength, 120 s) programming the photomemory. (g) The photo writing process of the perovskite based photomemory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
For better understanding of the application potential of perovskite materials in the nonvolatile memory field, the main performance parameters for the aforementioned memory devices are listed in Table 1, comparing with classic metal oxide based RRAMs. The traditional metal oxides, such as AlOx, SiO2, ZnO, ZrOx and WOx, have demonstrated reliable resistive switching behaviours,208–212 which are appropriate for application in the logical device. Since perovskite materials have been studied for RRAMs in the past decade, statistical numbers are listed in Table 1 for comparison with the performances of traditional metal oxides. Considerable effort is needed to exploit the application potential of perovksite materials in RRAMs. The statistical numbers in the table provide a comprehensive analysis from the perspective of the composition, device structure, and device performance.
Table 1 A summary of the performance parameters for perovskites and classic metal oxides applied in nonvolatile memory devices




Structure
Set voltage [V]
Reset voltage [V]
Endurance [times]
Retention [s]
On/off ratio
Ref.




Au/CH3NH3PbI3/ITO/PET
0.7
−0.5
400
104
∼10

54



Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/ITO (x = 0, 1, 2, 3)
—
—
30
104
>102

55



Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si
∼1
∼−1
500
105
>103

57



Ag/polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)/PeQDs:PMMA/PMMA/ITO
∼1
∼−1
—
4000
>103

136



Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au
1
−1.58
—
104
∼20

137



Al/CsPbBr3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PET
−0.6
1.7
50
—
∼102

138



Mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au
∼12
−6
105
8.6 × 104
>50

139



Al/CH3NH3PbI3:PVK/ITO
−1.57
—
106
104
>103

141



Ag/CH3NH3PbBr3/FTO
∼0.7
∼−0.3
250
103
103

142



Ag/CH3NH3PbBr2.54Cl0.46/FTO
∼0.8
∼−1.3
250
103
103

142



Ag/CH3NH3PbBr1.97Cl1.03/FTO
∼2.3
∼−3
250
103
103

142



Ag/BiMnO3/Ti
3.9
−3.75
100
—
∼10

143



Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO
0.8
0.6
100
104
∼2

145



Au/Ti/ZnO/Nb-doped SrTiO3(NSTO)/Al/Au
−2
3
30
104
∼102

146



Ni/ZnO/CsPbBr3/FTO
−1.0
0.7
100
104
∼105

174



Pt/(NH2-dendrimer/oleic acid-stabilized BaTiO3)n/Au
1.5
−1.8
200
105
104

189



Pt/Ti/a-SrTiO3/Pt
−1.6
1.9
106
105
103–104

192



Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO
1.5
−1.5
103
4 × 104
102

202



Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO
3
−3
3000
104
∼104

203



Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt
0.13
−0.13
350
11000
106

205



Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au/Ti/SiO2/Si
∼0.33
∼−0.13
103
1200
106

206



Al/AlOx/CsTe:Sb nanowire junction
6–8
∼0
30
3 × 104
106

208



Pt/SiO2/Pt
4
6
1000
4.6 × 105
104–107

209



Ag/ZnO:Mn/Pt
2
∼−2
100
107
107

210



Ti/Mo:ZrO2/Pt
0.6–1
1.2–1.5
1000
107
∼102

211



Al/WOx/FTO
∼−5.5
0
—
12000
104

212





4. Perovskite material based artificial synapses
Neuromorphic computing is an attractive research field that would further conquer the Von-Neumann bottleneck in the limited data transfer speed of memorizing and information processing.213 For emulating synaptic plasticity in biological neural systems, ultra small dimensional synaptic electronic devices are emphasized as the basic components of the neuromorphic computing system.214–232 Notably the spiking neural network in the biologically neuromorphic organism is comprised of mutually linked arrays of pre-neurons and post-neurons. Synaptic plasticity triggered by the chemical transfer process is related to the timing diversity between the post-neuron and pre-neuron. A post-synaptic current is generated by the modulation of the synaptic weight stimulated with the pre-neuronal voltage spike. The synapse plasticity can be subdivided into short-term plasticity and long-term plasticity, which can be further classified as the short-term potentiation and short-term depression, as well as long-term potentiation and long-term depression, respectively. Among these four types of plasticity, long-term potentiation, which resulted from lasting alteration in the synaptic connection strength, is essential for memory strengthening and establishing a long-term memory.233 The exploitation of the artificial synapse, emulating the activity-dependent long-term potentiation dominated synaptic plasticity, paves a way towards advanced information-exchange interconnectivity, which further benefits the development of a highly-integrated and low power-consumption memory device.234,235
The main feature of the active materials for artificial synapses is the realization of functions including multi-level data storage and indispensable nonvolatiles.214,236,237 Compared with other functional materials, referring to chalcogenides,214,215 inorganic oxides,216–219 alloys,220 and large biomolecules,221–223 HOIPH materials are advanced in their lower cost, solution-processing, resistive switching properties, etc. In addition to HOIPH materials, inorganic perovskite materials exhibited ion migration properties that can be utilized in the memristor and synapse device as well. With lower tunable conductivity, the perovskite family are promising candidates for low energy consumption and high density neuromorphic devices.
4.1. Perovskite-based two-terminal synaptic device
In 2016, Xu and co-workers demonstrated CH3NH3PbBr3 based two terminal memristor-based synaptic devices.224 As the first reported HOIPH based artificial synapse (Fig. 12), the artificial synaptic behavior was emulated, including the excitatory postsynaptic current, short-term and long-term potentiation, paired-pulse facilitation, and spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Ionic migration in the CH3NH3PbBr3 film will cause sequential conductance variation, which endows the synaptic circuits with flexibility in the single transmission and learning behavior. Subsequently, synaptic plasticity was investigated with a CH3NH3PbI3-based switchable p–i–n device structure.225 The drifting of the ions inside the memristor and synapse device was enhanced by increasing the density along the CH3NH3PbI3 film grain boundary. The learning speed of the CH3NH3PbI3 based synapse device is ∼100 μs. Though the speed is slightly inferior to the phase change memristor226 and ferroelectric memristor,227 it is three orders faster than the signal receiving speed of the human brain (∼100 ms). Additionally, the energy consumption of the synapse device is fixed as low as the biological synapses.
 Fig. 12  (a) The schematic mechanism of the connections between the neurons. (b) The synapse structure. (c) The schematic structure of the HOIPH based artificial synapse. (d) The crystal structure of CH3NH3PbBr3. (e) The schematic mechanism of the formation of the short-term and long-term synapses. (f) The I–V characteristic of the CH3NH3PbBr3 based memristor device. (g) The variation of the post-synaptic current in the device. (h) The long-term potentiation of the artificial synapse with sequentially applied pulses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In terms of the inorganic perovksite, Park and co-workers fabricated a synapse device with a structure of Ag/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3.228 The heterojunction structure was functionalized by the modulation of the gradual conductance by varying the ferroelectric domain configurations. As shown in Fig. 13, a 4 nm thick PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 layer is utilized as an electrolyte to trigger ion migration and diffusion in the synapse device without extra application of an external electric field, so that modulation of the synaptic plasticity was realized. The formation and abruption of the conductive bridge in the synapse device are repeatable. The optimizing design of the ferroelectric polarization and ion migration benefits the single capture and the memorizing and learning behaviors of the synapse device. The impact of the oxygen concentration in the perovskite layer was also investigated in the Pt/LaAlO3/Nb-doped SrTiO3 neuromorphic memristor.229 The relationship between the current and spike time-dependent plasticity can be effectively modulated by the oxygen concentration in the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 13  A schematic demonstration of the ion migration in the synapse device at (a) low resistive state and (b) high resistive state. (c) The typical I–V characteristic of the Ag/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 structured device. (d) The manipulation of the current flowing through the Ag/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 structured device with consecutive applied pulses of ∼0.35 V amplitude for 0.3 s duration at two polarization directions. (e) The currents at different pulse amplitudes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228 © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The ability of achieving memory from the environment and responding to information plays a crucial role in distinguishing the living being, which will be further developed into habituation. Recently, Zuo and co-worker demonstrated a habituation-based plasticity based on a perovskite quantum system.230 The traditional inorganic perovskite SmNiO3 was selected as the functional material in the synaptic emulator. Based on the typical perovskite frame-work lattice, the incorporation of doped hydrogen by the catalytic electrodes was reversible and the electronic properties can be modulated in a nonlinear manner. As shown in Fig. 14a and b, reduction of the Ni element in the perovskite material can be triggered by exposure to H2 which is regarded as environmental stimulus 1. Environmental stimulus 2 is a combination of air exposure within seconds, followed by re-exposure to H2, which leads to extra proton injection. However, slower kinetics and volatile memory characteristic were observed with stimulation 2. The resistive switching behavior is sensitive to Ni reduction, which promises that the SmNiO3-based memory should be an effective emulating synapse. Fig. 14c and d display the conductivity variation of SmNiO3 against different stimulations. A dynamic learning environment to further study the diminished memory behavior, which symbolized the forgetting process for the previously learned information, is exhibited in Fig. 14e and f.
 Fig. 14  (a) The habituation learning process observed in the gradual reduction of the response of Physarum polycephalum to the continuous stimulus. (b) The resemblance to the habituation process observed in the SmNiO3 material responding to the cyclic stimulus and the habituation mechanism in the SmNiO3 material are shown. (c) The visualization of the in situ habituation. (d) The different stimulation dependent conductance variations. (e) The structural lattice breathing. (f) The spiking neural network learnt with standard spike-timing dependent plasticity. (g) The spiking neural network learnt with adaptive synaptic plasticity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 © 2017, Springer Nature. 
4.2. Perovskite-based three-terminal synaptic device
There are two limits for the development of the memristive synaptic device, one is the signal delayed transmission and the other one is the signal transmit through a single path between the postneuron and the preneuron spikes. Three-terminal FET-based synapses could pass the signals through channel mediums while realizing the learning event by controlling the synaptic weight through the gate terminals.231 Thus, FET-based synapses have unique advances in single transmission and acquisition. Shi et al. investigated the SmNiO3 based synaptic transistor in which the resistance and multilevel synapse plasticity were controlled by modulating the composition microstructure of the perovskite film.232 As shown in Fig. 15, synaptic learning was emulated as the time variation between the pre-synapse and post-synapse by applying a voltage pulse on the gate. The oxygen vacancy in the SmNiO3 perovskite material proved to be a promising candidate to realize the modulation of the analogue states in the as-prepared synaptic device.
 Fig. 15  (a) The schematic description of the synapse weight. (b) The schematic diagram of the three-terminal SmNiO3 based transistor. (c) The resistance switching mechanism. (d) The repeated stimulated conductance regulation. (e) The different types of spike-timing-dependent plasticity in the FET-based synapse. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232 © 2013, Springer Nature. 
5. Challenges and outlook
In summary, perovskite materials exhibit great potential for the improvement of RRAM performance, which has attracted enormous attention from leading research groups in the past few years. Compared to traditional Si-based memories, one illustrious advantage of perovskite-based RRAMs is their vision of high density data storage, which originates from the intriguing optical and electrical properties of both the inorganic perovskite and HOIPHs. The first part of this paper was a comprehensive review of recent progress in nonvolatile memory devices, particularly in the development of perovskite-based RRAMs. Offering a timely review that is not only summarizing the recent advancements in the applications of perovskite materials, but also proposing a prospective trend in perovskite-based memories, is of great importance to present many technological and academic opportunities in nonvolatile memories, and this was the main purpose of this paper.
Although extraordinary progress has been made towards the development of perovskite-based RRAMs, the performance of perovskite memory devices still lags behind that of commercialized traditional memory products. The RRAM device for practical application is expected to have lower operating voltage, excellent ambient stability, good endurance, and large and stable ON/OFF ratio. However, optimizing the performance of the perovskite-based memory device is a major challenge. Obvious deficiencies hinder the practical application of the perovskite-based RRAM. The relaxation of the HRS and LRS significantly influences the retention time and stable endurance. Effective interfacial engineering should be dedicated to the control of the trapping depth. Moreover, substantial efforts on the synthesis and post-treatment of a high-quality perovskite active layer are still needed. Nano-filaments formed in the perovskite layer are switchable in isolation and act as individual resistive nano-switches. Therefore, a high-quality perovskite layer is crucial for the enhancement of the memory device performance.
It is expected that the memory characteristics of perovskite-based RRAMs can be further improved by resolving the following challenges: (1) the ambiguous working mechanisms; the working mechanisms of nonvolatile perovskite-based memory devices have not been clearly revealed yet. It appears that the redox processes in the perovskite material, as well as the ionic motion of the oxygen vacancies in the crystal structure, are attributed to the resistive switching behavior in the inorganic perovskite based memory device. Meanwhile, the most popular explanation for the resistive switching behavior in the HOIPH-based memory device is the formation and rupture of metal filaments in the active layer. Nevertheless, the resistive switching mechanism related to the chemical composition, crystal structure, electrode metal, and fabrication process has been randomly elucidated. For example, the roles of the conducting filaments are closely associated with the selection of the electrode metal since the utilization of active metals as electrodes can strongly improve the RRAM performance. Hence, in order to further exploit the potential of perovskite materials to exceed the limits, deep investigation of clearer switching mechanisms of perovskite-based RRAMs is one of the most critical challenges.
(2) The unsystematically studied effects of the perovskite structure, especially the structural defects, towards the performance of the memory device. The defects in the all-inorganic perovskite materials include surface traps, ground boundaries, vacancy defects, and lattice distortion. These defects may cause undesired trap-mediated charge recombination as well as poor charge transport ability. By engineering the stacking structure and defects in the perovskite materials, the resistive switching parameters, including the Vset, Vreset, ON/OFF ratio, retention time and endurance property, can be greatly enhanced. Meanwhile, the interface-engineering-induced redistribution of the defects and alteration of the concentration at a certain level could improve the electrical migration ability of ions and carriers. The ferroelectric polarisation in the ferroelectric perovskite can be switched to control the resistance of the ON/OFF states. Related research revealed that the stable resistive behaviour benefited from the stable crystal structure and local ionic migration. In addition, research on the HOIPHs structure reveals that these stacking architectures are based on the weak van der Waals forces. The organic part may inhibit the charge transfer between the inorganic layers while improving the environmental stability of the whole material. Employing these structural defects in the hybrid perovskite materials may avoid deterioration of the memory performance. Besides, the device structure and fabrication technologies are also important factors to consider in pursuing RRAMs with high performance.
Recent progress of the artificial synapse of perovskite materials is introduced in the second part of this paper. The reported synapse-motivated perovskite based device can be categorized into two-terminal memristors and three-terminal FET based synapse devices, which can vividly imitate the spike timing dependent plasticity and the learning-forgetting process of the biological neural system. The synaptic elasticity and plasticity functions are attributed to the information memorizing and learning-forgetting ability in the biological neural system. Thus, the investigation of the memory based synapse device is focused on the parallel information processing realization. Current memristor synapses need to separate the transmission of electronic signals with the self-learning process, while FET based synapses can simultaneously transfer the signals during the learning process.
Current research on the application of perovskite materials in artificial synapses extends their application to data storage. We believe that this old material could bring its superiority into full play in the electronics territory due to its unique structure and intriguing properties. Despite every kind of material having its own limitations, it is worthwhile to explore the advanced synthesis method of perovskites and combine the perovskites with other kinds of novel materials to improve the concurrent signal processing. Given the moving on of the understanding of the resistive switching properties of perovskite materials, a promising future for perovskite materials in nonvolatile memory devices with artificial intelligence could be predicted by resolving the above scientific and technical challenges.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the grants from the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61601305 and 61604097), the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (Grant No. JCYJ20170302145229928, JCYJ20170302151653768 and KQJSCX20170327150812967), the Guangdong Provincial Department of Science and Technology (Grant No. 2017A010103026), the Department of Education of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2015KQNCX141 and 2016KTSCX120), the Natural Science Foundation of SZU, and City University of Hong Kong project number 7004378.
Notes and references

          H.-R. Wenk and A. Bulakh, Minerals: their constitution and origin, Cambridge University Press,  2016 Search PubMed .
L. G. Tejuca, J. L. G. Fierro and J. M. D. Tascon, Adv. Catal., 1989, 36, 237 CAS .
A. S. Bhalla, R. Y. Guo and R. Roy, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2000, 4, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oró-Solé, L. Clark, W. Bonin, J. P. Attfield and A. Fuertes, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2430 RSC .
D. J. Singh and W. E. Pickett, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 88 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Millis, Nature, 1998, 392, 147 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, C. A. Field, W. T. A. Harrison and A. M. Guloy, Nature, 1994, 369, 467 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Knutson, J. D. Martin and D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. I. Mazin and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 2556 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646 RSC .
M. Uehara, S. Mori, C. H. Chen and S. W. Cheong, Nature, 1999, 399, 560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fuertes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3293 RSC .
K. L. Kobayashi, T. Kimura, H. Sawada, K. Terakura and Y. Tokura, Nature, 1998, 395, 677 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Visser, A. P. Ramirez and M. A. Subramanian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 3947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oró-Solé, L. Clark, N. Kumar, W. Bonin, A. Sundaresan, J. P. Attfield, C. N. R. Rao and A. Fuertes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2212 RSC .
Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. G. Bednorz and F. Lichtenberg, Nature, 1994, 372, 532 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Cava, B. Batlogg, J. J. Krajewski, R. Farrow, L. W. Rupp, A. E. White, K. Short, W. F. Peck and T. Kometani, Nature, 1988, 332, 814 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, Q. Huang, A. P. Ramirez, Y. Wang, K. A. Regan, N. Rogado, M. A. Hayward, M. K. Haas, J. S. Slusky, K. Inumara, H. W. Zandbergen, N. P. Ong and R. J. Cava, Nature, 2001, 411, 54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon, W. R. McKinnon, L. H. Greene, G. W. Hull and E. M. Vogel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 226 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Cohen, Nature, 1992, 358, 136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Junquera and P. Ghosez, Nature, 2003, 422, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bokov and Z. G. Ye, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 31 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Singh, M. Ghita, M. Fornari and S. V. Halilov, Ferroelectrics, 2006, 338, 1489 CrossRef .
G. Srinivasan, E. T. Rasmussen, B. J. Levin and R. Hayes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 134402 CrossRef .
G. Suyal, E. Colla, R. Gysel, M. Cantoni and N. Setter, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Budimir, D. Damjanovic and N. Setter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 174106 CrossRef .
T. Takenaka and H. Nagata, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2693 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jang and M. K. Cho, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 1435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niederberger, N. Pinna, J. Polleux and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ravez, R. von der Muhll, A. Simon and P. Sciau, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2829 RSC .
W. Liu, G. Wang, S. Cao, C. Mao and X. Dong, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 3023 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Liu, R. L. Withers, F. Brink, H. Yang and M. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 116101 CrossRef .
L. Curecheriu, F. Gheorghiu, A. Ianculescu and L. Mitoseriu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 172904 CrossRef .
S. Roberts, Phys. Rev., 1949, 76, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lim and N. K. Kim, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 4373 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saha, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 20 RSC .
M. Mochizuki, N. Furukawa and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 144409 CrossRef .
Y. Tokunaga, N. Furukawa, H. Sakai, Y. Taguchi, T.-h. Arima and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ramesh and N. A. Spaldin, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, Q. Ge, S. Wang, M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, J. Hu and Y. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 548 RSC .
J. W. Fergus, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 123, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Waleed, Y. Xiao, K.-H. Tsui, Y. Lin, L. Liao, J. Wang and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sharifi, C. Larsen, J. Wang, W. L. Kwong, E. Gracia-Espino, G. Mercier, J. Messinger, T. Wagberg and L. Edman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600738 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, M. Zhao, F. Liang, S. C. Smith and Z. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 495 RSC .
K. Lee, M. D. Losego, D. H. Kim and G. N. Parsons, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 419 RSC .
A. Fuertes, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 453 RSC .
Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 578 RSC .
A. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 378 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. Liu, G. E. Eperon, T. C. Leijtens, D. McMeekin, M. Saliba, W. Zhang, M. Bastiani, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, H. Lin and H. J. Snaith, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 315 RSC .
M. Franckevičius, A. Mishra, F. Kreuzer, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 613 RSC .
S. R. Bakaul, C. R. Serrao, O. Lee, Z. Lu, A. Yadav, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, R. Ramesh and S. Salahuddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605699 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gu and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang, C. Gu, D. Lee and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43794 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 673 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701048 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Xie, G. Kieslich, D. M. Evans, M. A. Carpenter, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 328 RSC .
G. Grancini, S. Marras, M. Prato, C. Giannini, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis, M. De Bastiani, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and L. Manna, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Náfrádi, P. Szirmai, M. Spina, H. Lee, O. V. Yazyev, A. Arakcheeva, D. Chernyshov, M. Gibert, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13406 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Bermúdez-García, M. Sánchez-Andújar and M. A. Señarís-Rodríguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4419 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-M. You, W.-Q. Liao, D. Zhao, H.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou, X. Niu, J. Wang, P.-F. Li, D.-W. Fu, Z. Wang, S. Gao, K. Yang, J.-M. Liu, J. Li, Y. Yan and R.-G. Xiong, Science, 2017, 357, 306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, H. Lu, F. Xie, S. Zhou and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1411 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Xie, D. Zhang, H. Su, X. Ren, K. S. Wong, M. Grätzel and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Hsieh, J. Liu and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 081112(R) CrossRef .
I. R. Shein, V. V. Bannikov and A. L. Ivanovskii, Phys. C, 2008, 468, 1 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Xie, G. Kieslich, D. M. Evans, M. A. Carpenter, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 328 RSC .
T. T. Tran, J. R. Panella, J. R. Chamorro, J. R. Morey and T. M. McQueen, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 688 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Bisquert and J. Buriak, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 904 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen and L. Balents, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 84, 094420 CrossRef .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., B: Anorg. Chem., Org. Chem., 1978, 33, 1443 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 206 RSC .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. B. Boström, J. A. Hill and A. L. Goodwin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31881 RSC .
K. Chondroudis and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Lyu, Q. Wang, J. H. Yun and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11727 RSC .
W.-J. Xu, P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, W.-X. Zhang, R.-G. Xiong and X.-M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Xu, Z.-Y. Du, W.-X. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 7915 RSC .
W.-J. Xu, K.-P. Xie, Z.-F. Xiao, W.-X. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 7212 CAS .
C. Shi, C.-H. Yu and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Cai, R.-G. Xiong, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Claudia Gomez-Aguirre, B. Pato-Doldan, A. Stroppa, L.-M. Yang, T. Frauenheim, J. Mira, S. Yanez-Vilar, R. Artiaga, S. Castro-Garcia, M. Sanchez-Andujar and M. Antonia Senaris-Rodriguez, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7863 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Shi, D. Li, F. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Xiao and S. Wang, Synth. Met., 2016, 215, 56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Daub and H. Hillebrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, S. Shaker, F. Brivio, R. Murugavel, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Butler, K. Svane, G. Kieslich, A. K. Cheetham and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 180103(R) CrossRef .
J. M. Bermudez-Garcia, M. Sanchez-Andujar, S. Yanez-Vilar, S. Castro-Garcia, R. Artiaga, J. Lopez-Beceiro, L. Botana, A. Alegria and M. A. Senaris-Rodriguez, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4889 RSC .
A. Garcia-Fernandez, J. M. Bermudez-Garcia, S. Castro-Garcia, R. Artiaga, J. Lopez-Beceiro, M. A. Senaris-Rodriguez and M. Sanchez-Andujar, Polyhedron, 2016, 114, 249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Manuel Bermudez-Garcia, S. Yanez-Vilar, A. Garcia-Fernandez, M. Sanchez-Andujar, S. Castro-Garcia, J. Mira, J. Agostinho Moreira, T. A. Centeno and M. Antonia Senaris-Rodriguez, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 3124 RSC .
J. M. Bermudez-Garcia, M. Sanchez-Andujar, S. Castro-Garcia, J. Lopez-Beceiro, R. Artiaga and M. A. Senaris-Rodriguez, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sanchez-Andujar, S. Presedo, S. Yanez-Vilar, S. Castro-Garcia, J. Shamir and M. A. Senaris-Rodriguez, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pato-Doldan, M. Sanchez-Andujar, L. C. Gomez-Aguirre, S. Yanez-Vilar, J. Lopez-Beceiro, C. Gracia-Fernandez, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Ritter, S. Castro-Garcia and M. A. Senaris-Rodriguez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8498 RSC .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Baker, T. Lancaster, I. Franke, W. Hayes, S. J. Blundell, F. L. Pratt, P. Jain, Z. M. Wang and M. Kurmoo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 012407 CrossRef .
S.-T. Han, L. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y.-J. Zeng, S. Ruan, C. Pan and Z. Peng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600435 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, S.-T. Han, J. Zhuang, Q.-J. Sun and V. A. L. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8415 RSC .
L. Zhou, S.-T. Han, S. Shu, J. Zhuang, Y. Yan, Q.-J. Sun, Y. Zhou and V. A. L. Roy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34101 CAS .
P.-Y. Gu, Y. Ma, J.-H. He, G. Long, W. Chen, Y. Liu, Q.-F. Xu, J.-M. Lu and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3167 RSC .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, B. Chen, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, H. Zhang and V. A. L. Roy, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17496 RSC .
P.-Y. Gu, J. Gao, C.-J. Lu, W. Chen, C. Wang, G. Li, F. Zhou, Q.-F. Xu, J.-M. Lu and Q. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 1, 446 RSC .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, P. Sonar, H. Wei, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, C.-S. Lee and V. A. L. Roy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1699 CAS .
Y. Zhou, S.-T. Han, X. Chen, F. Wang, Y.-B. Tang and V. A. L. Roy, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, Q. D. Yang, L. Zhou, L.-B. Huang, Y. Yan, C.-S. Lee and V. A. L. Roy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, P. Gu, B. Hu and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10055 RSC .
D. Panda and T.-Y. Tseng, Ferroelectrics, 2014, 471, 23 CrossRef CAS .
R. Waser and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, S. Gao, C. Chen, C. Song and F. Zeng, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2014, 83, 1 CrossRef .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart and R. S. Williams, Nature, 2008, 453, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, N. Qin, G. Wu, Y. Lin, S. Li and D. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 8, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Taylor, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2006, 13, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Majumdar, A. Bandyopadhyay, A. Bolognesi and A. J. Pal, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 2433 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dearnaley, D. Morgan and A. Stoneham, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1970, 4, 593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Segui and B. Ai, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1976, 20, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
H. Henisch and W. Smith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 24, 589 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chu, J. Ouyang, J. H. Tseng and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1440 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Q.-D. Ling, E.-T. Kang, K.-G. Neoh, D.-J. Liaw, F.-C. Chang, C.-X. Zhu and D. S.-H. Chan, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 024502 CrossRef .
R. Potember, T. Poehler and D. Cowan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1979, 34, 405 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Donhauser, B. Mantooth, K. Kelly, L. Bumm, J. Monnell, J. Stapleton, D. Price, A. Rawlett, D. Allara and J. Tour, Science, 2001, 292, 2303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Lim, Q. Ling, E. Y. H. Teo, C. X. Zhu, D. S. H. Chan, E.-T. Kang and K. G. Neoh, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5148 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandyopadhyay and A. J. Pal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 999 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lauters, B. McCarthy, D. Sarid and G. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 013507 CrossRef .
K. Sakai, H. Kawada, O. Takamatsu, H. Matsuda, K. Eguchi and T. Nakagiri, Thin Solid Films, 1989, 179, 137 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sawa, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28 CrossRef CAS .
F. Verbakel, S. C. Meskers and R. A. Janssen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2707 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Smits, S. C. Meskers, R. A. Janssen, A. W. Marsman and D. M. de Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsui, A. Baikalov, J. Cmaidalka, Y. Y. Sun, Y. Q. Wang, Y. Y. Yue, C. W. Chu, L. Chen and A. J. Jacobson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Kuang, F. X. Hu, Y. Liu, R. R. Wu, X. X. Zhang, J. R. Sun and B. G. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, F. Ma, Z. Li, J. Qiao, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 5, 7285 Search PubMed .
K. Yang, F. Li, C. P. Veeramalai and T. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 083102 CrossRef .
K. Yan, B. Chen, H. Hu, S. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and D. Zou, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600160 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Q. Lin, Z. Zang, M. Wang, P. Wangyang, X. Tang, M. Zhou and W. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6171 CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Yuan, Z. Yan, Y. Wang, X. Lu and J. M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700425 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Son, J.-H. Lee, S. Song, Y.-H. Shin and H. M. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Chen, Y. Cao and S. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 484 RSC .
C. Muthu, S. Agarwal, A. Vijayan, P. Hazra, K. B. Jinesh and V. C. Nair, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600092 CrossRef .
B. Sun and C. M. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 6718 RSC .
J.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Chiu, Y.-T. Li, C.-C. Chueh and W.-C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1702217 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bera, H. Peng, J. Lourembam, Y. Shen, X. W. Sun and T. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4977 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Shih, W.-Y. Lee and W.-C. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 294 RSC .
D. Kuzum, R. G. D. Jeyasingh, B. Lee and H.-S. P. Wong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Alibart, S. Pleutin, D. Guérin, C. Novembre, S. Lenfant, K. Lmimouni, C. Gamrat and D. Vuillaume, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, W. Ma, T. Chang, P. Sheridan and W. D. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4290 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Joshi, S. E. Savel’ev, H. Jiang, R. Midya, P. Lin, M. Hu, N. Ge, J. P. Strachan, Z. Li, Q. Wu, M. Barnell, G.-L. Li, H. L. Xin, R. S. Williams, Q. Xia and J. J. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tuma, A. Pantazi, M. L. Gallo, A. Sebastian and E. Eleftheriou, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, C.-L. Chen, Q. Truong, A. M. Shen and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Alibart, L. Gao, B. D. Hoskins and D. B. Strukov, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075201 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944 CAS .
K. Hwang, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and P. R. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Hörantner and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1983 Search PubMed .
G. I. Distler, V. P. Konstantinova, Y. M. Gerasimov and G. A. Tolmacheva, Nature, 1968, 218, 762 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Urban, W. S. Yun, Q. Gu and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Ahn, K. M. Rabe and J. M. Triscone, Science, 2004, 303, 488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sai, A. M. Kolpak and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 059901 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Ravi, G. B. Markad and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 665 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Piskunov, E. Heifets, R. I. Eglitis and G. Borstel, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2004, 29, 165 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizokawa and A. Fujimori, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 5368 CrossRef CAS .
T. Atou, H. Chiba, K. Ohoyama, Y. Yamaguchi and Y. Syono, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 145, 639 CrossRef CAS .
R. Waser, R. Dittmann, G. Staikov and K. Szot, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2632 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asamitsu, Y. Tomioka, H. Kuwahara and Y. Tokura, Nature, 1997, 388, 50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Huang, F. Cao, D. Yu, X. Li and H. Zeng, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1584 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kishi, Y. Mizuno and H. Chazono, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rao, S. Ogitani, P. Kohl and C. P. Wong, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 83, 1084 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Shrout and S. J. Zhang, J. Electroceram., 2007, 19, 113 CrossRef .
A. B. Alles and V. L. Burdick, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 401 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Gill, C. W. Conrad, G. Ford, B. W. Wessels and S. T. Ho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petraru, J. Schubert, M. Schmid and C. Buchal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1375 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Samara, Phys. Rev., 1966, 151, 378 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Dicken, L. A. Sweatlock, D. Pacifici, H. J. Lezec, K. Bhattacharya and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Ionescu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Spanier, A. M. Kolpak, J. J. Urban, I. Grinberg, L. Ouyang, W. S. Yun, A. M. Rappe and H. Park, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim, N. M. Doss, J. P. Tillotson, P. J. Hotchkiss, M.-J. Pan, J. Li, J. P. Calame and J. W. Perry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, X. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Xie and P. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2327 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schroeder, L. A. Majewski and M. Grell, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1535 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, S. C. Jones, P. J. Hotchkiss, J. N. Haddock, B. Kippelen, S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, K. Kook, S. K. Hwang, C. Park and J. Cho, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Smyth, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1985, 15, 329 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Lewis and C. R. A. Catlow, Radiat. Eff. Defects Solids, 1983, 73, 307 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nili, S. Walia, S. Balendhran, D. B. Strukov, M. Bhaskaran and S. Sriram, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nili, S. Walia, A. E. Kandjani, R. Ramanathan, P. Gutruf, T. Ahmed, S. Balendhran, V. Bansal, D. B. Strukov, O. Kavehei, M. Bhaskaran and S. Sriram, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3172 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lebeugle, D. Colson, A. Forget and M. Viret, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 022907 CrossRef .
B. C. Huang, Y. T. Chen, Y. P. Chiu, Y. C. Huang, J. C. Yang, Y. C. Chen and Y. H. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 122903 CrossRef .
J. H. Jeon, H. Y. Joo, Y. M. Kim, D. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, Y. S. Kim, T. Choi and B. H. Park, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghoneim and M. Hussain, Electronics, 2015, 4, 424 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Kim, D. H. Kim, J. Xiao, B. H. Kim, S. I. Park, B. Panilaitis, R. Ghaffari, J. Yao, M. Li, Z. Liu, V. Malyarchuk, D. G. Kim, A. P. Le, R. G. Nuzzo, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, Z. Kang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Møller, Mat.-Fys. Medd. - K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk., 1959, 32(2), 15 Search PubMed .
E. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. Choi and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7824 RSC .
G. Lin, Y. Lin, R. Cui, H. Huang, X. Guo, C. Li, J. Dong, X. Guo and B. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10793 RSC .
W. Li, H. Dong, G. Dong and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 208 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D. H. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. D. Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N. G. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, J. Lee and W. D. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700527 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Choi, Q. V. Le, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, J. S. Han, K. C. Kwon, P.-R. Cha, Y. Kwon, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30764 CAS .
C. Xie, B. Nie, L. Zhu, L.-H. Zeng, Y.-Q. Yu, X.-H. Wang, Q.-L. Fang, L.-B. Luo and Y.-C. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 355203 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yang, F. Pan, Q. Liu, M. Liu and F. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Wang, D.-Y. Lee, T.-Y. Huang, J.-W. Wu and T.-Y. Tseng, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 495201 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-T. Wu, J.-J. Wu and J.-S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2616 CAS .
Z. Q. Wang, H. Y. Xu, X. H. Li, H. Yu, Y. C. Liu and X. J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2759 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, T. Hasegawa, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, J. K. Gimzewski and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nayak, T. Ohno, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, J. K. Gimzewski and M. Aono, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3606 CrossRef CAS .
A. Serb, J. Bill, A. Khiat, R. Berdan, R. Legenstein and T. Prodromakis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prezioso, F. Merrikh-Bayat, B. D. Hoskins, G. C. Adam, K. K. Likharev and D. B. Strukov, Nature, 2015, 521, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, T. P. Chen, J. J. Wang, Q. Yu, L. J. Deng, Y. Yin and S. Hosaka, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, X. Liu, J. Park, S. Jung, W. Lee, J. Woo, J. Shin, G. Choi, C. Cho, S. Park, D. Lee, E.-J. Cha, B.-H. Lee, H. D. Lee, S. G. Kim, S. Chung and H. Hwang, IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology, 2012, 155 Search PubMed .
K. Nakayama, K. Kojima, F. Hayakawa, Y. Imai, A. Kitagawa and M. Suzuki, J Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part I, 2000, 39, 6157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, L. Q. Zhu, P. Feng, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, J. Zhang, X. Wan, Y. Yang and S. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6249 RSC .
Y. Park and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, H. Cho, Y.-H. Kim, Y.-T. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-G. Park and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600100 CrossRef .
D. Kuzum, R. G. Jeyasingh, B. Lee and H.-S. P. Wong, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 2179 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chanthbouala, V. Garcia, R. O. Cherifi, K. Bouzehouane, S. Fusil, X. Moya, S. Xavier, H. Yamada, C. Deranlot and N. D. Mathur, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yoon, J. H. Lee, S. Lee, J. H. Jeon, J. T. Jang, D. H. Kim, Y. H. Kim and B. H. Park, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Jang, D. Ko, G. Ahn, H. R. Yu, H. Jung, Y. S. Kim, C. Yoon, S. Lee, B. H. Park, S.-J. Choi, D. M. Kim and D. H. Kim, Solid-State Electron., 2017 DOI:10.1016/j.sse.2017.10.032 .
F. Zuo, P. Panda, M. Kotiugu, J. Li, M. Kang, C. Mazzoli, H. Zhou, A. Barbour, S. Wikins, B. Narayanan, M. Cherukara and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 240 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Balakrishna Pillai and M. M. De Souza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1609 CAS .
J. Shi, S. D. Ha, Y. Zhou, F. Schoofs and S. Ramanathan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2676 Search PubMed .
T. V. P. Bliss and G. L. Collingridge, Nature, 1993, 361, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Indiveri, B. Linares-Barranco, R. Legenstein, G. Deligeorgis and T. Prodromakis, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 384010 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Raoux, W. Welnic and D. Ielmini, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Waser, Microelectron. Eng., 2009, 86, 1925 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Yan Wang
	Dr. Yan Wang is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her PhD degree in Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China (2016). Her research interests include the fabrication and applications of perovskite materials.

Ziyu Lv
	Dr. Ziyu Lv is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. He received his PhD degree in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University of Technology (2017). His research interests include the fabrication and applications of biomaterial-based electronic devices and artificial synapses.

Li Zhou
	Dr. Li Zhou is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from City University of Hong Kong (2016). Her research interests include organic/inorganic semiconductors and nanostructured materials for flexible electronics, such as data storage and solar cells.

Ye Zhou
	Prof. Ye Zhou is an IAS Fellow in the Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University. His research interests include flexible and printed electronics, organic/inorganic semiconductors, surface and interface physics, nanostructured materials, and nano-scale devices for technological applications, such as logic circuits, data storage, energy-harvesting, photonics and sensors.

V. A. L. Roy
	Prof. Vellaisamy A. L. Roy is an associate professor at the Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on materials and device engineering for electronic devices, such as transistors, flash memory, photovoltaic devices, and sensors. His research is interdisciplinary and he leads a team of physicists, chemists, and engineers.

Su-Ting Han
	Prof. Su-Ting Han is an associate professor at Shenzhen University. She received her MSc degree in Analytical Chemistry from Hong Kong Baptist University and her PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. After graduation, she worked at the City University of Hong Kong as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include functional electronic devices and flexible, stretchable, and wearable electronics.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of perovskite in various application fields.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The I–V curves of the mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au RRAM device. (b) The dependent relationship between the RHRS and RLRS and retention time (red curves) and the writing/erasing cycles (black dots). (c) The HRS and LRS of the memory device by splitting the top electrode into two parts. The inserted pictures exhibit the cross section of the cells with conductive filaments. (d) The flexibility of the mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au RRAM device. (e) The I–V curves measured on the flat memory device under three testing conditions: the original memory device, the memory device bent to a 2.2 mm radius, and the memory device after bending to a 3 mm radius 10000 times. (f) The relationship between the RHRS and RLRS and retention time and the writing/erasing cycles of the two testing conditions: the memory device bent to a 2.2 mm radius and the memory device after bending to a 3 mm radius 10000 times. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Typical I–V curves of the Pt/Ti/a-STO/Pt memory device for 106 consecutive write/erase cycles. (b) The relationship between the density of the oxygen and width of the oxide layer. (c) The schematic of the electroforming in the write/erase cycles. (d–f) The in situ scanning probe microscopy (SPM) scans on the Pt/Ti/a-STO/Pt memory device without the Pt/Ti electrodes. (d) The in situ SPM scan on the surface of a-STO in the original device. (e) The in situ SPM scan on a-STO under the electroforming state ahead of electrical indentation. (f) The in situ SPM scan on a-STO under the electroforming state following electrical indentation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192 © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A cross-sectional SEM image of the Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO device. (b) The device structure of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (c) The I–V curves of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (d) The resistance-state stability of a Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO RRAM. (e) The I–V curves of the memory device measured with and without light, respectively. (f) The I–t curves of the Ni/ZnO/CPB/FTO structured memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic structure of the Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3)/ITO/glass substrate memory device. (b) The cross-sectional SEM images of the CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) layers. (c) The I–V curves of the Au/perovskite/ITO structured memory device. The inset picture shows the top view of the device. (d) The retention time characteristics of the memory device at the LRS and HRS. (e) The statistical distribution of the set electric fields of the CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (x = 0, 1, 2, 3) based resistive switching memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 © 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The in situ movement of the A-site cation in the crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3. (b) The cross-sectional SEM image of the memory device with Ni/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si vertical structure. The inset shows the resistive switching schematic of the metal/CH3NH3PbI3/metal vertical structure. (c) The typical I–V curves of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt device. (d) The resistive switching characteristic related with the number of writings. The writing voltage is 0.15 V, its pulse width is 200 ms, and the reading voltage is 0.02 V. (e) The I–V curves of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt device under different compliance currents (10−2, 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 A). (f) The reversible resistive switching cycles under different compliance currents (10−2, 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 A). Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  The schematic fabrication process of the organic–inorganic perovskite based memory devices. (a) The Pt via-hole substrate. (b) The CH3NH3PbI3 layer formed by a sequential vapor deposition process. (c) Au deposition by thermal evaporation as the top electrode. The electrical properties of the memory device with Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structure. (d) The typical I–V characteristic of the memory device. (e) The retention time of the memory device. (f) The ac pulse endurance of the memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The schematic of the I–V measurement of the device with the structure metal/CH3NH3PbI3/Au. The SEM images on the right show the top view and side view of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer. (b) The I–V curves of the memory device in the program process. (c) The stable endurance behaviors. (d) The relationship between the LRS retention behavior and temperature. The inset shows the ln(t) linear relationship with 1/kT. (e) The retention time of the memory device with Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au and Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au structures, respectively. (f) The relationship between the LRS resistance and the retention times of Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au and Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Au structures, respectively. (g) The hypothesized schematic process of the storage and diffusion of the I− ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The schematic demonstration of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structured RRAM device. (b) The I–V characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 based RRAM device. The inset shows the fabricated RRAM device on a flexible substrate. (c) The I–V characteristics of the RRAM flexible device with a bending radius of 5 mm. (d) The retention characteristics of the smooth CH3NH3PbI3 thin film fabricated RRAM device. The endurance properties of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt structured flexible device (SET voltage ∼0.4 V, RESET voltage ∼−0.6 V, input pulse widths ∼50 ms) with different bending radii. (e) Bending radii ∼7.5 mm and (f) bending radii ∼5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207 © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The structure of the fiber-shaped Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memristor. (b) The retention curves of the Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memory device. (c) The I–V curves of the memory device with two types of structure, Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au and Ti/TiO2/Au, respectively. (d) The I–V curves of the fiber-like shaped Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au memristor plotted in logarithm form. The positive and negative voltage scans are exhibited in the left plot and right plot, respectively. The numbers marked in the figure are the slopes for different sections according to the linear fitting results. The insets are the ln(I)–V1/2 plots for the blue sections in the figure and the linear fitting results. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The device structure of the perovskite based photomemory. (b) The SEM images of the CH3NH3PbBr3/pentacene composite layer. (c) The TEM images of the CH3NH3PbBr3/pentacene composite layer. (d) The transfer curves of the CH3NH3PbBr3 based photomemory device at VDS = −60 V. (e) The relationship of the IDS with time. The shadow in the picture presents the illustration of the 365 nm laser source (3.5 mW cm−2) for 120 s. (f) Temporal IDS under a different laser source (450, 530, and 630 nm wavelength, 120 s) programming the photomemory. (g) The photo writing process of the perovskite based photomemory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144 © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Au/CH3NH3PbI3/ITO/PET	0.7	−0.5	400	104	∼10	
54

Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx/ITO (x = 0, 1, 2, 3)	—	—	30	104	>102	
55

Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si	∼1	∼−1	500	105	>103	
57

Ag/polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)/PeQDs:PMMA/PMMA/ITO	∼1	∼−1	—	4000	>103	
136

Ti/TiO2/CH3NH3PbClxI3−x/Au	1	−1.58	—	104	∼20	
137

Al/CsPbBr3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PET	−0.6	1.7	50	—	∼102	
138

Mica/SrRuO3/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3/Au	∼12	−6	105	8.6 × 104	>50	
139

Al/CH3NH3PbI3:PVK/ITO	−1.57	—	106	104	>103	
141

Ag/CH3NH3PbBr3/FTO	∼0.7	∼−0.3	250	103	103	
142

Ag/CH3NH3PbBr2.54Cl0.46/FTO	∼0.8	∼−1.3	250	103	103	
142

Ag/CH3NH3PbBr1.97Cl1.03/FTO	∼2.3	∼−3	250	103	103	
142

Ag/BiMnO3/Ti	3.9	−3.75	100	—	∼10	
143

Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO	0.8	0.6	100	104	∼2	
145

Au/Ti/ZnO/Nb-doped SrTiO3(NSTO)/Al/Au	−2	3	30	104	∼102	
146

Ni/ZnO/CsPbBr3/FTO	−1.0	0.7	100	104	∼105	
174

Pt/(NH2-dendrimer/oleic acid-stabilized BaTiO3)n/Au	1.5	−1.8	200	105	104	
189

Pt/Ti/a-SrTiO3/Pt	−1.6	1.9	106	105	103–104	
192

Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO	1.5	−1.5	103	4 × 104	102	
202

Cu/CH3NH3PbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	3	−3	3000	104	∼104	
203

Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt	0.13	−0.13	350	11000	106	
205

Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au/Ti/SiO2/Si	∼0.33	∼−0.13	103	1200	106	
206

Al/AlOx/CsTe:Sb nanowire junction	6–8	∼0	30	3 × 104	106	
208

Pt/SiO2/Pt	4	6	1000	4.6 × 105	104–107	
209

Ag/ZnO:Mn/Pt	2	∼−2	100	107	107	
210

Ti/Mo:ZrO2/Pt	0.6–1	1.2–1.5	1000	107	∼102	
211

Al/WOx/FTO	∼−5.5	0	—	12000	104	
212


 	Fig. 12  (a) The schematic mechanism of the connections between the neurons. (b) The synapse structure. (c) The schematic structure of the HOIPH based artificial synapse. (d) The crystal structure of CH3NH3PbBr3. (e) The schematic mechanism of the formation of the short-term and long-term synapses. (f) The I–V characteristic of the CH3NH3PbBr3 based memristor device. (g) The variation of the post-synaptic current in the device. (h) The long-term potentiation of the artificial synapse with sequentially applied pulses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224 © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  A schematic demonstration of the ion migration in the synapse device at (a) low resistive state and (b) high resistive state. (c) The typical I–V characteristic of the Ag/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 structured device. (d) The manipulation of the current flowing through the Ag/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 structured device with consecutive applied pulses of ∼0.35 V amplitude for 0.3 s duration at two polarization directions. (e) The currents at different pulse amplitudes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228 © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The habituation learning process observed in the gradual reduction of the response of Physarum polycephalum to the continuous stimulus. (b) The resemblance to the habituation process observed in the SmNiO3 material responding to the cyclic stimulus and the habituation mechanism in the SmNiO3 material are shown. (c) The visualization of the in situ habituation. (d) The different stimulation dependent conductance variations. (e) The structural lattice breathing. (f) The spiking neural network learnt with standard spike-timing dependent plasticity. (g) The spiking neural network learnt with adaptive synaptic plasticity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 © 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The schematic description of the synapse weight. (b) The schematic diagram of the three-terminal SmNiO3 based transistor. (c) The resistance switching mechanism. (d) The repeated stimulated conductance regulation. (e) The different types of spike-timing-dependent plasticity in the FET-based synapse. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232 © 2013, Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
