Theoretical insights into single-atom catalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00795A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00795A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8156-8178Theoretical insights into single-atom catalysts

        
          
            Lulu 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Chang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhi-Jian 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      *abc
aKey Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: zjzhao@tju.edu.cn
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China
cJoint School of National University of Singapore and Tianjin University, International Campus of Tianjin University, Binhai New City, Fuzhou 350207, China. E-mail: jlgong@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      25th June 2020
    First published on 1st September 2020AbstractSingle-atom catalysts (SACs) with atomically dispersed metals have emerged as a new class of heterogeneous catalysts and have attracted considerable interest because they offer 100% metal atom utilization and show excellent catalytic behavior compared with traditionally supported nano-particles. However, it is challenging to explore the active sites and catalytic mechanisms of SACs through common characterization methods due to the isolated single atoms. Therefore, employing theoretical calculations to determine the nature of SACs’ active sites and the reaction mechanisms is particularly meaningful. This paper describes the nature of SACs by summarizing the diverse applications and properties of SACs, which starts from computational simulation on a couple of important applications of SACs. Then the distinctive and fundamental properties of SACs are discussed. At last, the challenges and future perspectives of computational calculations for SACs are outlined.
Lulu Li
Lulu Li received her degree in applied chemistry (2017) from Dalian University of Technology and MS degree in chemical technology (2019) from Tianjin University. She is currently a PhD candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Zhi-Jian Zhao. Her research focuses on mechanistic studies of heterogeneous catalysts in electrocatalysis.
Xin Chang
Xin Chang received her degree in chemical processing of forest products (2017) from Nanjing Forestry University. She is currently a PhD candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Gong. Her research focuses on theory-guided alloy catalyst design for propane dehydrogenation.
Xiaoyun Lin
Xiaoyun Lin received her degree in chemical engineering and technology (2018) from Beijing University of Chemical Technology. She is currently a MS candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Zhi-Jian Zhao. Her research focuses on molecular level understanding of electrocatalytic reactions.
Zhi-Jian Zhao
Zhi-Jian Zhao received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Zhejiang University and his PhD degree from Technische Universität München in 2012. After working as a Postdoc with Prof. Greeley in Purdue University, and with Dr Studt and Prof. Nørskov at Stanford University, now he is a professor at Tianjin University. He serves as an Associate Editor of Chemical Engineering Science. He has published nearly 100 papers in peer-refereed journals. His current research focuses on mechanistic studies on heterogeneous catalyst using multi-scaling simulation methods.
Jinlong Gong
Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. He currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship at the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University. He has served on the editorial boards of several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He has published >250 papers in peer-refereed journals and has been listed as a co-inventor on 73 patents and applications. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilization of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.
1 Introduction
Energy shortage and environmental pollution are two major issues for the sustainable development of human society.1–3 One of the effective methods is to convert polluting substances into useful chemicals. Normally, a suitable catalyst is needed to achieve the fast conversion of the reactants and high selectivity towards aimed products. Traditional thermo-catalytic processes mainly cover important industrial reactions like Haber–Bosch process,4–8 Fischer–Tropsch synthesis,9–11 methanol synthesis,12–14 and many others, which can efficiently utilize fossil resources to produce a broad range of fuels and chemicals. Other sustainable routes include electro- or photo-catalytic processes, such as water splitting, CO2 reduction, and nitrogen reduction. All these chemical reactions have been studied intensively to explore clean and value energy while the improvement of catalytic performance for these reactions is still a challenge.
Typically, catalysts are the core of chemical reactions. Over 80% of chemicals are fabricated through catalytic reaction processes.15 There are three types of catalysts, namely homogeneous, heterogeneous, and biological catalysts. Among them, heterogeneous catalysts have been widely utilized in chemical reactions owing to the simple separation of catalysts and reactants/products and operation without interruption. The development of high-performance heterogeneous catalysts with superior activity, selectivity, and stability is an eternal subject in both academia and industry. The nature of active sites, including the coordination environment and electronic structure, is quite an important factor affecting the overall properties of the catalysts. Conventional heterogeneous catalysts are generally supported nanoparticles with limited dispersion.16,17 Therefore, increasing the dispersion of catalysts can significantly improve the utilization of the active compounds and benefit sustainable catalytic technology.18,19 Nevertheless, only a small fraction of coordination unsaturated metal atoms of a nanoparticle is exposed to the reactants, that is, single-atom catalysts (SACs) are ideal catalysts to maximize atomic efficiency in catalytic reactions.
SACs with atomically dispersed metals have emerged as a brand-new class of heterogeneous catalysts and have attracted considerable interest due to their maximized atomic utilization of catalytically active metals. The advent of atomically dispersed heterogeneous catalysts can be traced back to the 1990s.20 Immediately afterward, the method utilized by theoretical calculations to explore the catalytic mechanisms was quickly applied.21 In 2003, Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and co-workers fully proved through experimental methods that atomically dispersed metal sites (Au1 and Pt1/CeO2) are the true active centers, subverting the cognition that nanoparticles are the active centers.19 Subsequently, research in this field has continued to develop.11,22,23 In 2011, the term SACs was suggested by Zhang, Li, Liu, and co-workers.24 In recent years, in-depth understanding of related reaction mechanisms by simulations and the preparation of high-load single-atom preparations have also made important progress (Fig. 1).25–28 A large number of studies have shown that SACs can exhibit superior catalytic performance in various reactions such as ammonia synthesis,29,30 selective hydrogenation,31–33 CO oxidation,24,34,35 CO2 conversion36,37 and (reverse) water-gas shift reactions.38–40 However, due to their unique geometric environment and electronic structure, it is challenging to explore the active sites and catalytic mechanism of SACs through common characterization methods. Thus, a combination of spectroscopic methods is required, which is mainly based on synchrotron radiation and spherical electron microscopy with a resolution at the atomic scale, especially under operando or in situ conditions, like scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM),41 X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)42 and probe molecule Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).43 Nevertheless, due to the limited spatial/time resolution, these characterization techniques sometimes cannot provide satisfactory information about the active sites of SACs.
 Fig. 1  A timeline of the development of atomically dispersed catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis. 
In the last three decades, computational chemistry has become a powerful tool to explore elementary steps and mechanisms of many catalytic processes at the atomic scale, which are hard to be investigated experimentally.44–46 Employing the theoretical calculations, especially the density functional theory (DFT) calculation, to determine the nature of active sites and the reaction mechanisms towards SACs is particularly meaningful (Fig. 2). Besides, such theoretical findings could also in turn provide fundamental guidance and reasonable prediction for rational design and synthesis of SACs. More importantly, with the advantages of the well-defined single atomic site, SACs are ideal model systems to perform computational study for gaining atomic-level insight into active sites and the corresponding catalytic reaction mechanisms.47–51
 Fig. 2  Overview of basic SAC models and related application directions. 
It can be found that research on SACs has been carried out intensively and great progress has been made. Various excellent studies and reviews have been published in recent years.15,52–75 For instance, a series of platinum group metals (PGM) dispersed atomically in metal hosts (Cu, Ag, Au) were constructed. Based on a combination of DFT and kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulations, hot topics like CO poisoning and catalysts stability were explored comprehensively by Stamatakis and co-workers.76 However, based on our knowledge, there are few studies that systematically summarize SACs at the atomic and mechanistic level. In this review, we first provide a detailed discussion about the unique properties of SACs, especially the dynamism, strong interaction with the support, and electronic structure. Then, we focus on the catalytic mechanism of SACs in different reactions from the perspective of theoretical calculations. Finally, major challenges and perspectives for future theoretical research on SACs are presented.
2 Intrinsic properties of SACs
Different from nano-scale and subnano-scale catalysts, the electronic structure of SACs often change dramatically, compared with nano-clusters or particles, for instance, regarding the increased surface free energy, quantum size effects, unsaturated coordination environment and the strong metal–support interaction. Because of these unique structural features, SACs exhibit superior activity, stability and catalytic mechanism compared to traditional heterogeneous catalysts. SACs can not only decrease the loading and improve the utilization efficiency of metals, but also change the adsorption and desorption ability of the active components on SACs, thus affecting the whole chemical reaction kinetics. Based on the brief summary of SACs in different types of reactions theoretically, we first discuss a couple of intrinsic properties of SACs aiming to provide a deep understanding of SACs with regard to their catalytic mechanisms and reaction types. Meanwhile, basic and rational guidance for the design of high-performance SACs is also quite useful for the experiment.
2.1 Strong covalent metal–support interaction
Due to the isolated metal single atoms (SAs) dispersed on the support, SACs can show high catalytic activity or selectivity. However, the wide application of SACs is still limited due to the aggregation of SAs. The issue of stability of SACs has been addressed extensively and theoretical insights into the nature of active sites are necessary to explore the interaction between SAs and the support.77–83 Many publications indicate that the strong metal–support interaction (SMSI) can result in stable anchoring of SAs. Therefore, the following content that we discuss is mainly around the DFT studies of SACs’ property – SMSI – which hopefully can provide the general methodology for designing SACs rationally.
Actually, for many heterogeneous catalysts, the interaction between the metal particles and the corresponding support can alter the electronic structure of the metals, leading to a crucial effect on the metal dispersion and morphology of the active sites. As for SACs, the studies of strong interaction between SAs and the support, especially the oxide support, show that SAs are stabilized by specific anchoring sites on the support under the realistic reaction conditions. For example, Pt single atoms on CeO2 are stabilized by the most ubiquitous defects on ceria surfaces – monoatomic step edges – in the form of single Pt2+ ions in planar PtO4 moieties.81 The calculations manifest that the binding energy of Pt at the steps is 1.6–3.4 eV higher than at stoichiometric or defective (111) terraces, indicating that the step edges represent intrinsic defects and may become a common adsorption site for stabilizing and dispersing SAs. Li, Wang, and co-workers reported that Au SAs prefer to adsorb at the step site of CeO2 rather than the terrace surface (schematic illustration in Fig. 3a).80 Moreover, the interaction of eleven different transition metals from group VIII to XI with nanoparticulate CeO2 was explored systematically through DFT.84 These calculations, together with previous work of anchoring single Pt atoms on nanostructured ceria,77 demonstrate that CeO2(100) exposing O4 sites is effective in anchoring SAs stably, especially the metals in later periods, in the form of Mn+ cations accompanied by CeO2 reduction from Ce4+ to Ce3+ (Fig. 3b). These results could provide useful guidance for the preparation of SACs with high resistance.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of metal NPs and SAs on the support and the relative stability. (b) Part of the periodic table is used to explore the structure of M1–Ce40O80 (marked in red is the strong interaction of transition metals with CeO2). (c) Illustration of the structure of the reducible support, non-reducible support and metal NPs sintering/dispersing on different supports. 
In addition, the stability of SACs also highly depends on the conditions like reaction temperature, partial pressure, and reducibility of the support. For example, from the comparison of Gibbs free energy of Au disintegration, Au SAs would be more stable on a reducible support. The strong interaction of Au SAs with the support results in charge transfer to the metal cation leading to the positively charged Au+ atom, which is stable for CO adsorption. In addition to SAs located on the defective support, it was reported, by Zhang, Li, Qiao, and co-workers, that a strong covalent metal–support interaction also exists between SAs and support without defects while the reducibility of iron oxide is crucial for stabilizing SAs.82 Computational modelling study suggests that the evaporation energy of Pt1 can reach 4.00 eV while that of PtO2 is only −0.61 eV from a Pt(221) step at 800 °C due to the SMSI of Pt1 with the surface atoms. The dissociative adsorption of PtO2 on Fe2O3(0001) without vacancies is highly exothermic (−2.46 eV at 800 °C) through SMSI with Fe and O atoms of the surface. In comparison, the interaction of Pt with alumina surface is quite weak attributed to the irreducibility of Al3+. Moreover, the strategy of non defect-stabilization can also be extended to irreducible oxide support doped with iron oxide. All these findings provide deep insights into the nature of SACs and theoretical route to design more stable SACs (Fig. 3c).
2.2 Dynamics of SACs
The stability of SACs is the problem that researchers have always been seeking to solve.81,82,85 However, the structure–performance relations of these active sites, their dynamic responses to the environment and catalytic functionality are also important for understanding the SACs and have been proved difficult to establish experimentally.86 Therefore, the theoretical simulation has been considered as one of the most effective methods to explore the dynamism of SACs under the reaction conditions.
Rousseau, Li, and co-workers used DFT-based ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations to explore the dynamics of ceria-supported Au catalysts and found that a cationic Au+–CO species can be created in the presence of CO (Fig. 4a), which could lower the energy barrier of redox steps.26 After the catalytic cycle, the Au single atom would reintegrate into the particles. Moreover, the dynamism is also strongly dependent on the temperature and oxygen partial pressure. The relative stability of oxygen adsorption as a function of oxygen chemical potential has been explored. Under high O2 pressure conditions, the 4Oad surface is the most favourable resulting in a model with 3Oad and an Oad–Au+–CO (Fig. 4b).87 With this surface CO oxidation, the energy barrier of CO activation and CO2 desorption drops down obviously compared to the low oxidizing conditions. Meanwhile, the single Au atom reintegrates back into the Au particles after CO2 desorption, indicating that only during the catalytic process in high oxidizing conditions can the single atom transiently form. In addition, the local coordination of Pt single atoms is also dependent on the varied environmental conditions: (1) under mild oxidation conditions, the Pt single atom will enter the subsurface layer of TiO2, replace and occupy the six-coordinated Ti site; (2) under mild reducing conditions, Pt will be pulled out of the surface to form PtO2 species; (3) severe reduction will cause Pt to form a movable PtOH surface. These dynamic changes have important effects on the reactivity and can be used to tune the catalytic performance (Fig. 4c).85
 Fig. 4  (a) Configuration of the AIMD simulation of the dynamic behavior at the interface for a metal cluster with the adsorption of CO. (b) Gibbs free energy of oxygen adsorption as a function of the chemical potential (μO) and energy diagram of the CO oxidation mechanism at the Oad–Au+–CO site under different oxidation states with 0, 2, or 3 extra Oad on the Ti5c site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic showing the proposed dynamic evolution of Ptiso/TiO2 catalysts following oxidation, mild reduction and harsh reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
Apart from the dynamism of geometric position, the charge on the surface of SACs is also not static but dynamic. Through exploring Pt/CeO2(100) SACs’ surface based on a combination of DFT and AIMD, the density of states (DOS) calculations demonstrate that the difference of electron transfer at the Pt–nO interface is caused by the relative position of the Ce (4f) levels compared to the metals (Fig. 5).88 Furthermore, this kind of phenomenon also occurs in other SAs and supports.78
 Fig. 5  DOS decomposition for the Pt–2O systems with different oxidation states and local coordination of the unrelaxed oxygen ligands around the Pt vacancy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
2.3 Electronic structure
As mentioned above, in addition to the SMSI and the dynamism of SACs, the features of the SAs themselves should also be focused on. With the advantages of SACs in geometry, that is, only a metal anchoring in the support, it is convenient to construct the corresponding models to analyse the electronic structure of the SAs. Combined with theoretical calculations, the insightful understanding of SAs’ electronic property would be essential to develop design principles for SACs.
As an isolated metal atom, there is a drastic reduction of intensity near the Fermi level for the Pt single atom relative to the pure Pt surface, as revealed by DOS measurements.89 Moreover, the single atom alloys (SAAs) can exhibit a free-atom like electronic structure for the minority element resulting from the weak wavefunction mixing between minority and majority elements.90,91 Specifically, the Cu 3d states are five times narrower than those of bulk Cu (0.5 eV for Cu in AgCu compared to 2.5 eV for bulk Cu) (Fig. 6a). Given this extreme narrowness, it can be found that the interaction strength increases effectively between the narrow d band and the O 2p levels so that the 2px and 2py orbitals become involved in bonding to π bonds between O and Cu of AuCu. Moreover, the bonding of other elements to this narrow d band feature can reveal some general bonding trends, which is because of ionic and covalent contributions. The ionic contribution is affected by the increased charge density on the Cu center of AgCu, which leads to a stronger bonding with electronegative elements. Besides, the covalent contribution leans on the valency and energetic position of the adsorbates relative to the 3d states and the Fermi level of Cu. This prediction of SAs offers a design approach that may lead to alloys with unprecedented catalytic properties.
 Fig. 6  (a) The difference spectrum of AgCu and Ag, plotted with a Cu reference spectrum and adsorption energy trends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) DFT calculation results of electron states of isolated Pd atoms on alloying into Au(111), Ag(111), and Cu(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (c) The coordination effect of single-atom Fe–NxCy catalytic sites for benzene oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
The electronic structure of SAs can be regulated by the coordination environment. The electronic effects caused by the electronegativity difference between the isolated Pd atoms and the hosting atoms lead to obvious electron change of the Pd single atom (Fig. 6b),92 which plays a key role in regulating the catalytic performance. Also, the pDOS of different numbers of N and C atoms coordinated Fe SAs shows that the interaction of Fe–N2 and Fe–N3 doped graphene with Fe is stronger than that of Fe–N4 (Fig. 6c).93 The pDOS of FeO also determines that the charge transfers from Fe to O apparently with the distribution of O 2p above the Fermi level. These electronic features directly affect the catalytic reaction pathway and the formation of key oxidative species of benzene oxidation. Therefore, exploring the unique electronic structure of SACs, especially that of SAs, could provide a deep understanding of the structure–activity relationship and catalytic mechanism at the atomic level.
3 Application of SACs from theoretical insight
3.1 Thermo-catalysis
Thermo-catalysis has been pivotal in a myriad of chemical transformations to deal with global challenges like energy and resource shortage, environmental pollution, etc., showing tremendous potential to promote the development of a sustainable society. A comprehensive understanding of SACs is indispensable to better determine their catalytic performance for thermo-catalysis. Foremost in this regard is the difficulty in tailoring the structure (both geometric and electronic) of catalysts and the corresponding reaction process at an atomic level. At the mercy of the ever-accelerated development of theoretical methods and super computer hardware, researchers are able to construct sofisticated models to accurately describe surface chemical reactions. Here, from a theoretical perspective, several important reactions including CO oxidation, alkane dehydrogenation, alkyne hydrogenation, methanol conversion, and reverse water-gas shift reaction (RWGS) are outlined to illustrate the reaction mechanism and calculation modeling, along with the characteristic of specific SACs.

3.1.1 CO oxidation. 
The conversion of CO to CO2via oxidation is an important reaction in the removal of CO from H2 in fuel cell applications and automotive emission control. SACs maximize the atom utilization of noble metals and are considered as an ideal system to understand the reaction mechanisms at the atomic scale. The catalytic activities of SACs with different elements, mainly Pt-group metals24,35,94–101 and Au,102–104 have been explored by extensive trial and error approaches. However, the reaction mechanism of low-temperature CO oxidation over supported metal single atoms is still highly debated. There are basically three reaction mechanisms, namely Mars van Krevelen (Mvk), Langmuir–Hinshelwood (L–H), and Eley–Rideal (E–R) mechanisms. Therrien et al.105 employed DFT calculations and displayed that the atomically dispersed Pt atoms supported on Cu2O were the active species. Olattice of Cu2O combines with adsorbed CO to form CO2 due to the reducibility of Cu2O and this elementary step has the largest reaction barrier in the CO oxidation process via a MvK mechanism (Fig. 7a). Hensen and co-workers used CeO2 to stabilize single Pd atoms in the form of PdO and PdO2. Theoretical simulations evaluate that these Pd single sites play an essential role in the low-temperature CO oxidation reaction. Specifically, the O of PdO or PdO2 and CO are co-adsorbed on the catalyst with the L–H mechanism (Fig. 7b).106 Also, the E–R mechanism of CO oxidation is also explored through DFT calculations. Lu et al.34 studied single atom Ir supported on MgAl2O4 to identify the active single-atom structure (Fig. 7c). The stability of Ir(CO)(O) in He and O2 conditions while reacting with CO uncovers that the reaction follows an E–R mechanism as the adsorption of CO weakens the O binding strength on Ir sites by ∼3 eV. The adsorbed O2 can dissociate easily to heal the vacancy with a negligible barrier after the open coordination at Ir single atoms created, which is more favorable than the adsorption of another CO from the gas phase associated with an entropic barrier. In this way, it can be found that the detailed mechanism of CO oxidation depends on the redox property of the oxide support and the environment of these metal single sites because both determine the presence or source of O involved in CO oxidation and the adsorption capability of CO. As mentioned above, apart from Pt-group metals, Au on an oxide support has also been studied extensively due to its size dependency in CO oxidation. He and co-workers107 prepared the single Au atom doped aluminum oxide clusters AuAl3O3+, AuAl3O4+, and AuAl3O5+ and clarified the specific reaction mechanism during the CO oxidation process. The AuAl3O5+ cluster, in which the Au atom is bonded with two oxygen atoms, is reduced by CO and transforms into AuAl3O4+ (Au bonded with one Al atom) converting the Au–O bonds into Au–M bonds. After reduction by two CO molecules consecutively, the AuAl3O3+ cluster is generated, and the spin density distributed on an Al atom can adsorb an O2 molecule with a binding energy greater than 2 eV. The regeneration of AuAl3O5+ from O2 is both thermodynamically and kinetically favorable.
 Fig. 7  Theoretical applications in CO oxidation. (a) Energy profile for the oxidation of CO on the model Pt single-atom active site supported on Cu2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) Free-energy profile for CO oxidation on a single Pd atom anchoring on the CeO2(111) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (c) DFT-calculated free-energy diagram of CO oxidation on Ir single atoms supported on MgAl2O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. 


3.1.2 Alkane dehydrogenation. 
Dehydrogenation of alkanes for the production of light alkenes is a crucial chemical process in the field of industry, in which C–H bond activation rather than C–C bond activation is desired.108 At present, the importance of propane dehydrogenation (PDH) to form propylene is more pronounced owing to the growing demand for propylene. Propane dehydrogenation is a structure insensitive reaction, while side reactions like propane hydrogenolysis are structure-sensitive reactions which lead to undesired products. As illustrated by Meyer, Miller, and co-workers,109 the ideal catalyst for catalytic reactions, where there are both structure-sensitive and structure-insensitive reactions, should have single metallic sites with few ensemble sites. Therefore, SACs have great potential for catalyst engineering of these kinds of reactions. For structure-insensitive reactions, the rate is directly proportional to the dispersion as every surface atom is an active site.109 Xiong et al.110 reported that the conversion of propane is up to 100% with Pt atoms singly dispersed on CeO2.
Moreover, decreasing contiguous active sites in SACs can lead to the suppression of structure-sensitive side reactions which is crucial to improve the selectivity towards propylene. Luo and co-workers systemically investigated the properties of a single-Pd-doped Cu55 nanoparticle toward propane dehydrogenation by first-principles calculations.111 First C–H bond activation α-type (occur at the terminal methyl group) and β-type (occur at the central carbon) is the rate-determining step for the whole reaction, and the barrier for initial C–H dissociation activation to yield the 1-propyl and 2-propyl species is 24.4 and 24.7 kcal mol−1 on the single-Pd-doped Cu55 SAC, respectively, much lower than the corresponding energy barrier of 30.2 and 31.4 kcal mol−1 on a pure Cu55 cluster (Fig. 8a). Moreover, the diffusion of H atoms on the Cu surface can stabilize the product configuration. With small barriers of 3.8 and 4.3 kcal mol−1, respectively, the detached H atoms could be transferred to their adjacent sites, which also contributes to a low-energy catalytic mechanism for the conversion of propane to propylene. Besides, the energy barriers for propylene dehydrogenation to yield the 1-propenyl and 2-propenyl species are higher than the values for propylene desorption, which means that propylene desorption is much more favorable. Therefore, the introduction of a single Pd atom to the Cu55 cluster brings about excellent activity toward C–H bond activation. The relatively inactive Cu surface can facilitate the desorption of weakly adsorbed H atoms and reduce the side reactions. In comparison, Cao and co-workers applied four Pd-doped Cu(111) surface models with different Pd ensembles, using a simplified network of propane dehydrogenation to propylene (Fig. 8b and c), to explore their catalytic activity and selectivity in PDH, and came up with similar conclusions as mentioned above.112 This work further revealed that the d band center of the surface Pd atom moves up with the increase of the number of Pd atoms, leading to an enhanced strength of adsorbate–surface bonding and a reduced barrier of dehydrogenation (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) The equilibrium structures of species involved in the catalytic conversion starting from configurations c and e and energy profiles for the dehydrogenation of propane to propylene on the single-Pd-doped Cu55 cluster. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Optimized structures of Cu(111) surfaces with Pd doping. (c) Catalytic scheme for the catalytic conversion of propane to propylene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the aforementioned work, Gong and co-workers reported a theory-guided catalyst design of a thermally stable Pt/Cu SAA. It breaks the Pt3M (M = 3d and 4d transition metals) alloy scaling relationship during PDH, achieving a great enhancement of propylene selectivity and appreciable propane conversion (Fig. 9).33 The isolated Pt atom in the Pt/Cu SAA brings about more unstable adsorption configurations of C3H6 and C3H5, resulting in more facile propylene desorption and hindered C–C cracking. In contrast, no binding mode change for propyl indicates the reason why the Pt/Cu SAA can maintain dehydrogenation activity. The DFT calculation also shows that the deep dehydrogenation is strongly endothermic over the Pt/Cu SAA with a much higher free energy barrier while the corresponding barriers of propane dehydrogenation only slightly increase. Moreover, in ethane dehydrogenation (EDH), SACs like the intermetallic Pt1Zn1 alloy with isolated Pt surface sites enable near 100% C2H4 selectivity.113 DFT calculations reproduce the resonant inelastic X-ray spectroscopic (RIXS) signatures of Pt 5d valence orbitals in Pt/SiO2 and PtZn/SiO2 accurately, demonstrating that the electronic promotion of Pt by Zn lowers the energy of the filled states of the Pt 5d electrons, thus weakening the bond formation between the 5d orbitals and adsorbates.
 Fig. 9  (a) Screening of the Pt-based bimetallic catalyst for PDH. (b) Binding energy difference and structures of dehydrogenated intermediates C3Hx (x = 7, 6, 5) over pure Pt surfaces and Pt/Cu SAA surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. 
The selective catalytic transformation of methane, especially for the initial C–H bond cleavage, is also a major challenge in catalysis. Sykes, Stamatakis, Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, and co-workers114 successfully applied Pt/Cu SAAs as coke-resistant catalysts for efficient C–H activation. DFT calculations speculate the successive scission of C–H bonds from methane through to atomic carbon on Cu(111), Pt/Cu(111) SAA and Pt(111), which elucidates that the Pt/Cu SAA has intermediate C–H scission barriers but beneficial Cu-like reaction energies (Fig. 10a and b). Stamatakis and co-workers also presented a DFT-based study that examines the reactivity of 12 SAAs consisting of Ni-, Pd-, Pt-, and Rh-doped Cu(111), Ag(111), and Au(111) in CH4 dehydrogenation.115 The C–H bond activation in CH4 occurs over the dopant top site on each SAA and the transition state is stabilized by doping the more reactive metal atom, which significantly lowers the barrier of C–H dissociation compared to the pure host metal. Besides, it is found that the pure metal surfaces and the SAA surfaces follow distinct BEP relationships (Fig. 10c). Beyond that, Toyao et al. developed a simple and efficient machine learning (ML) model with 12 descriptors to accurately predict adsorption energies of CH4 related species, namely, CH3, CH2, CH, C, and H, on 46 Cu based SAAs without time-consuming DFT calculations.116
 Fig. 10  (a) Optimized configurations from DFT for CxHy species on the surface of the Pt/Cu(111) SAA. (b) Energy profiles for the full dehydrogenation of CH4* on Cu(111), Pt/Cu(111) SAA, and Pt(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (c) Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi relationships for catalytic bond scissions on pure metal(111) and SAA(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 Semihydrogenation of alkynes. 
Semihydrogenation of alkynes to alkenes has been widely studied, for which the protection of the produced CC bond in hydrogenation conditions is the crux of the matter. Acetylene semihydrogenation is an important industrial process used to remove trace acetylene from crude ethylene. Pd-Based catalysts have been proved to be efficient for acetylene conversion, while it is challenging to enhance the selectivity to ethylene. Zhang and co-workers prepared SiO2 supported IB-metal (Au, Ag, Cu) alloyed Pd SACs.92,117,118 The Cu-alloyed Pd SAC showed ∼85% selectivity to ethylene, rivaling the selectivity of the Ag-alloyed Pd SAC and surpassing the selectivity of the Au-alloyed Pd SAC. The isolation of Pd by the IB metal greatly weakens the adsorption of the CC bond on the catalyst surfaces, corresponding to the significantly enhanced ethylene selectivity compared to the Pd/SiO2 catalyst. It is noted that the calculated differences in electron transfer between the IB metal and Pd may be the key to different selectivity of ethylene over the corresponding SACs. Li and colleagues119 also demonstrated that PdIn(110) with single-atom Pd sites is more selective towards ethylene than Pd3In(111) with contiguous Pd trimer sites based on DFT modeling, which is further validated by experimental results. For PdIn(110), C2H2 tends to adsorb on two adjacent Pd atoms, whereas C2H4 coordinates on one Pd atom via weak π bonding. The adsorption energy of intermediates and the hydrogenation barrier of elementary steps state that both semihydrogenation of acetylene and desorption of ethylene are facile (Fig. 11a). A similar phenomenon can be found in the highly active and selective PdZn IMA,120 in which the spatial arrangement of Pd sites in the Pd–Zn–Pd ensembles results in the moderate σ-bonding pattern for acetylene with two neighboring Pd sites and the weak π-bonding mode of ethylene adsorption on the single Pd site.
 Fig. 11  Theoretical applications in semihydrogenation of alkyne. (a) Hydrogenation mechanism of acetylene to ethane on the PdIn(110) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Energy profile of acetylene hydrogenation on the Cu1/ND@G catalyst and the structures of intermediates and transition states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
Besides, DFT calculations revealed the remarkable catalytic properties of the MOF-confined sub-2 nm PdZn intermetallic nanoparticles121 because of the energetically more favorable path for acetylene hydrogenation and ethylene desorption over ultra-small particles than over larger ones, based on modeling by a Pd33Zn32 nanoparticle and a periodic slab, respectively. However, the different calculated results may not necessarily account for the different catalytic performance as selectivity should not depend on the size of particles if Pd has been well isolated by Zn in the PdZn IMA. The presence of continuous Pd ensembles with the increase in the size of PdZn nanoparticles is likely to be the reason for the deterioration of selectivity.122 Additionally, single atoms supported on graphene are extensively studied for the hydrogenation of alkynes. Atomically dispersed Pd123 or Cu124 species on graphene are effective in selective hydrogenation of acetylene (Fig. 11b). The high selectivity of them in acetylene hydrogenation reaction is due to the competition of ethylene desorption and further hydrogenation at the catalytic active sites. Easy desorption of ethylene, with lower desorption energy compared to the high barrier of further hydrogenation of the adsorbed C2H4 intermediate to ethane, is the key to the outstanding selectivity of the catalyst.


3.1.4 Methane conversion. 
Direct conversion of methane with high selectivity is one of the most promising methods to obtain value-added chemicals, as methane is abundant and inexpensive.125 However, once the first C–H bond is activated, the remaining C–H bonds would be activated easily, leading to the uncontrollable conversion of methane to the target product. Additionally, the oxidation of methane to CO and CO2 is thermodynamically favorable. Hence, controlling the extent of methane oxidation selectively to obtain oxygenated products with non-noble metal catalysts remains challenging.
One of the effective methods to control the selectivity of CH4 oxidation is stabilizing CH3 species, which can be achieved by SACs. For example, Kwon et al.126 employed a single-atom Rh catalyst dispersed on the ZrO2 surface for selective activation of methane to C2H6. The DFT calculation displays that the adsorbed CH3 intermediate (CH3*) has the lowest energy during the methane dehydrogenation on the single-atom Rh site and the dehydrogenated species of the adsorbed CH2 (CH2*) has a higher energy than CH3* as shown in Fig. 12a. Thus, the CH3 intermediate could be energetically stabilized on the single-atom Rh site to suppress the deep dehydrogenation of methane. In addition, Bao and co-workers127 explored the single Fe sites embedded in a silica matrix to efficiently activate the first C–H bond and suppress the complete dehydrogenation (Fig. 12b). This catalyst converts methane to ethylene and aromatics, exclusively. The single Fe site initiates the release of a ˙CH3 radical via CH4 dehydrogenation from the surface with an energy barrier of 2.32 eV instead of it undergoing further dehydrogenation. Moreover, another role of SACs in CH4 conversion is that the absence of adjacent Fe sites prevents further C–C coupling and coke deposition.
 Fig. 12  Theoretical applications in methane conversion. (a) Energy diagram of methane activation on the RhZr–Hyd (4.3 OH per nm2) model with optimized geometries of the intermediates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) DFT calculations of the catalytic generation of methyl radicals at 1223 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright (2014) American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) CeO2(110) anchored with a Ni1 and Ru1 atom. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
In addition to facilitating the stabilization of CH3* and hindering coke deposition, the SACs can also guide a more comprehensive understanding of the methane conversion reaction mechanism. Hu, Tao, and co-workers128 used single atom Ni1 and Ru1 sites on the same CeO2 surface for dry reforming of CH4 to elucidate the molecular mechanism upon the observed synthetic effects. Computational studies revealed that the molecular-level origins of synergistic effects of Ni1 and Ru1 sites are (1) the complementary function of Ni1 for activation of CH4 (1.88 eV compared with Ru1 2.01 eV) and of Ru1 for activation of CO2 (0.01 eV vs. Ni1 1.23 eV) and (2) the subsequent role of first generating H atoms coupled to form H2 on a Ru1 site (0.56 eV in comparison with Ni1 (1.96 eV)) (Fig. 12c). Such a synergistic effect displays a new avenue for the design of a catalyst with an outstanding catalytic performance at a low temperature.


3.1.5 Reverse water-gas shift reaction (RWGS). 
Supported noble metal nanoparticles are widely investigated in RWGS due to their high activity and selectivity for valuable products.32,40,129–131 However, these noble metals are expensive and scarce, limiting their application. Therefore, SACs consisting of isolated atoms anchored onto supports are explored to maximize the efficiency of noble metals and have become a new frontier in catalysis science recently.129 However, there are still some problems, for example, the stabilization of single atoms and their specific local coordination.
Sautet, Li, and co-workers39 found that Rh single atom catalysts do not have static local coordination, which can switch from inactive to the active structure under reaction conditions according to a theoretical study. Rh SAs prefer to localize at the 6-fold Ti site under low O2 partial pressure or rather high temperature. CO molecules play an important role in stabilizing the supported Rh SAs with a lower CO adsorption energy of −4.89 eV (Rh1/TiO2) compared with Rh substitution (−2.74 eV for Rh1/TiO2−2x). Moreover, under reaction conditions, 6H/Rh1@TiO2−2x and 6H/Rh1/TiO2−x are the most favorable hydrogenated structures for substitutional and supported models.

3.2 Electro- and photocatalysis
Electrocatalysis and photocatalysis are clean and effective methods to solve the energy crisis and global climate change by directly utilizing renewable energy as the driving force for chemical reactions. Recently, SACs have attracted wide attention in the related applications. In particular, single-atom catalysts confined in 2D materials could optimize their catalytic performance with a unique geometric and electronic structure. The catalytic performance of SACs has been tested with almost all popular reactions, including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) and so on. In this section, the detailed mechanisms of SACs in these reactions from the perspectives of theoretical calculations are discussed.

3.2.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Hydrogen is one of the promising clean energy candidates for the future.132–135 Among various ways to produce hydrogen, water splitting by solar energy, either directly via the photocatalytic process or indirectly via the electrocatalytic process, has received great attention. The electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is an essential step in water splitting. Therefore, high-performance electrocatalysts with low overpotential and fast kinetics of HER are significant for large-scale hydrogen production. Pt has been considered as the most promising candidate to trigger HER while the expensive cost and the natural scarcity greatly limit its development and application.136,137 Compared to the traditional Pt-based catalysts, Pt-based SACs have attracted lot of interest for minimizing the amount of Pt loading. Combined with a conductive matrix, Pt-based SACs can present excellent catalytic activity for HER.48,138–145
The computational study on SACs for HER can not only provide the basic understanding of the reaction mechanism, but also put forward insights into the active sites boosted by the doped single-atom. Song and Jiang et al.146 used onion-like nanospheres of carbon (OLC) to anchor single Pt atoms stably as the optimal catalyst for HER. The PtO2C295 model was built and the adsorption free energy of H (ΔGH*) was calculated. The active site formed under reaction conditions may be H2Pt1/OLC. Besides, with plenty of exposed basal planes and Mo vacancies of MXene, single Pt atoms can be immobilized stably to form highly catalytic Pt-SACs for HER and effectively improve the d-electron domination near the Fermi level leading to a low ΔGH* of −0.08 eV and high HER catalytic activity (Fig. 13a).147 It is well known that the sluggish Volmer step of water dissociation is the limiting step for water splitting in the natural and alkaline conditions. In this regard, single-atom Pt decorated nano-porous Co0.85Se can significantly reduce the energy barrier of water dissociation to only 0.491 eV (Fig. 13b). Additionally, the Pt dopant also optimizes the d-electron domination of Co atoms, which provides more suitable sites for H* compared to Pt(111).148 Bao and co-workers149 made use of single-atom Pt doping to trigger the catalytic activity of in-plane S atoms of 2D MoS2 so that the adsorption strength of H* on in-plane S sites neighbouring doped Pt atoms was tuned. Moreover, other transition metals were also screened by DFT calculations according to the general descriptor of HER-ΔGH* and the result shows that non-precious metal (such as Co and Ni) doped MoS2 can also become an efficient electrocatalyst for HER.
 Fig. 13  Theoretical applications in HER. (a) Calculated pDOS of Mo2TiC2O2 and Mo2TiC2O2–PtSA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) Free energy diagrams for the Volmer step on the np-Co0.85Se, Pt(111) and Pt/Co0.85Se models. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (c) Calculated energy diagram for H2O dissociation for the Volmer step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. 
Although Pt-based SACs show a fabulous catalytic performance for HER, the expensive cost and scarcity still cannot be ignored. As mentioned above, non-precious SACs have been studied intensively.150–159 For example, by binding isolated Co1–N4 sites with hydroxide electrolytes, Wei, Yao, and co-workers constructed a high-valence HO–Co1–N2 active moiety on which the strong charge transfer occurs (Fig. 13c). This feature makes a low barrier of water dissociation and the next step of H adsorption is also accelerated, leading to an enhanced HER catalytic activity in alkaline media.153 This work provides a way of regulating the coordinating environment of active sites to promote the catalytic performance. Moreover, in addition to electronegative N and O coordinated atoms, P-coordinated single atom catalysts have been explored.155 Compared to the N-coordinated SACs, from the projected density of states (pDOS), the P-coordinated SACs are localized in a lower energy region leading to their electro-efficient feature of the active sites, which is beneficial for electron transfer to the adsorption species and for a relatively low formation energy of H2. In particular, Ru SAs@PN exhibits the lowest ΔGH* at approximately zero, and thus it can be considered as the promising P-coordinated SAC for HER.


3.2.2 CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). 
The reduction of CO2 into alternative fuels like carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH4), methanol (CH3OH), ethylene (C2H4), and ethanol (C2H5OH) is an imperative mission to improve the global carbon balance and energy storage. The exploration of supported metal nanoparticles for CO2RR has continued over the past few decades, whose catalytic performance is more excellent than that of the metal surfaces with crystal structure.160–162 Recently, with the goal of decreasing the metal loading, the proposal of using a single metal atom anchored on a stable support as the catalyst has emerged as a promising method to improve the performance for CO2RR.
Theoretically, the activation of CO2 molecules is difficult because of the chemical inertness of CO2 thermodynamically.163,164 Liu, Zhang, and co-workers reported that the single-Ni-atom nitrogenated graphene (A-Ni-NG) catalyst comprising a monovalent Ni(I) atomic center with d9 electronic configuration contributes to the bending of CO2 molecules on the active site (Fig. 14b).165 In addition, it has been found that single atom Co incorporated into Bi3O4Br favors the transfer of electronic charge, which benefits CO2 activation by stabilizing the key COOH* intermediates for the production of CO from CO2RR and tunes the desorption of CO* thereby improving the selectivity of CO (Fig. 14c).166 In fact, a large number of SAC materials have emerged in recent years for the efficient electrocatalysis for CO2RR,37,167–179 especially N-doped carbon SAC materials,169,180–183 which can highly stabilize the adsorption of key intermediate species of CO2RR. The structures of these materials could be modeled by the unit of single-atom metal coordinated with nitrogen (M–Nx) in the carbon substrate theoretically. Xie, Wu, and co-workers constructed exclusive Ni–N4 sites, which have lower formation energy of COOH* compared to N–C, leading to the high selectivity of CO.180 Besides, Chen,184 Liu, et al.185 also used the Ni–N4 structure incorporated in different carbon supports to achieve high selectivity and activity of CO2RR to CO. Moreover, the different coordination numbers of Ni–N for CO2RR are also studied through the theoretical calculation to explore the structural effect.186 The free energies of *COOH on coordinatively unsaturated NiN3, NiN3V and NiN2V2 are significantly lower than those on NiN4, suggesting that the high CO2RR activity originates from those coordinatively unsaturated Ni–N sites. In addition to Ni–N–C, Fe,177 Zn,16 Co175 and Bi–N–C182 SACs also show excellent selectivity of CO2RR to CO due to the strong COOH* interaction and moderate binding interaction of CO. Because the specific reaction mechanism involved is similar, it will not be discussed in detail here. It could be concluded that since the catalytic mechanism of CO2RR to CO is relatively simple, regulating the adsorption strength of the key intermediate COOH* can be considered as an effective method to improve the performance of SACs. Moreover, high selectivity of HCOOH can also be obtained from atomically dispersed Sn atoms on N-doped graphene.187 The mechanistic investigation results show that positively charged Sn atoms can not only activate CO2 molecules but also stabilize HCOO* leading to low overpotential and high performance of CO2RR to formate.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the distribution of CO2RR products catalyzed by SACs. (b) The activation processes for CO2 molecules on the Ni (i) site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (c) Schematic representation and free energy diagrams of CO2 photoreduction to CO for Bi3O4Br and Co–Bi3O4Br. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (d) Free energies for conversion of *CO to CH3OH on the Cu–N4 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (e) Comprehensive reaction network for CO2RR toward CH4via CO and CH2O over the Fe–N–C catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (f) Structure of Cu–N–C and Gibbs free-energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction on different Cu–Nx coordination structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. 
Apart from CO and HCOOH, methane (CH4) and methanol (CH3OH) are also the main C1 products of CO2RR.188 Yang et al.189 proposed that isolated Cu decorated through-hole carbon nanofibers (CuSAs/TCNFs) can produce an efficient Cu single atom, which possesses a high CO* binding energy and is capable of reducing COH* to CHOH* rather than C*, leading to a high selectivity to CH3OH as shown in Fig. 14d. In addition, the Fe–N–C catalyst is designed to bind CO* strongly so that the protonation of CO* to CHO* can occur which makes CH4 as the final product (Fig. 14e).190 Therefore, it can be concluded that the advantages of SACs in other C1 products lie in the strong CO adsorption capacity and geometrically single adsorption sites which hinder C–C coupling to deep reduction. Moreover, screening calculations are also carried out to predict the promising candidate and ideal structure of SACs.191–198 Xia, Zhang, and co-workers194 discovered an intrinsic descriptor (φ = VM × EM/rM) that can well describe the catalytic behavior of CO2RR on M–N–C based SACs and found that Ti- and Co-SACs favor CO2RR theoretically. The Cu-based SAA has also been explored by means of first-principles calculations and the Co@Cu SAA can be considered as a promising catalyst for CH3OH for the formation of the free atom-like d-band due to the isolated Co atoms, which gives rise to a strong binding between COH* and Co.196
To date, there are few studies on further reduction of CO2 to C2 products by SACs. Qiao and co-workers199 conducted DFT calculations and experimental validations and found that the molecular scaffold can offer the additional active center. In this case, dual active centers can be observed in the Cu–C3N4 complex model, resulting in a promising capability for C2 production. Recently, Zheng and co-workers obtained single-atom Cu–Nx coordination structures which can catalyze CO2 into hydrocarbons.200 Specifically, it can be calculated that two adjacent Cu–N2 sites are beneficial to bind two CO*, leading to the formation of C2H4 (Fig. 14f). Therefore, it can be proposed that by regulating the coordination environment of Cu sites at a specific atomic level, it is possible to find more efficient SAC electrocatalysts and achieve the regulation of specific products of CO2RR, especially deep reduction products.


3.2.3 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
Low-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have great potential as substitutes for conventional combustion engines as they can convert chemical energy into electrical energy efficiently.201 However, the development of PEMFCs is heavily hindered by the sluggish kinetics of ORR even when catalyzed by the commercial Pt/C cathode catalyst.202,203 In addition, the high cost and less abundance of Pt also impose limitations for the fuel cells. Therefore, increasing Pt utilization efficiency on a per Pt atom basis or searching for alternative metal-based electrocatalysts (Fe, Co, Ni or Zn) has been considered as one of the promising methods to improve ORR performance.
It has been realized that Pt-based SACs are more active and stable than the corresponding Pt particles or single crystals.204,205 For example, Liu and Jiao et al. reported the carbon-supported Pt SAC for fuel cells.206 Through DFT calculations modeled by doped-N on Pt1–carbon (g-P–N1–Pt1), it can be found that the O–O bond length (1.42 Å) in adsorbed O2 on the single Pt atom is longer than that on bulk Pt (1.37 Å), indicating the easier breaking of the O–O bond on the single Pt site. Moreover, OH* desorption in the form of H2O is generally considered as the rate-limiting step under all potentials. From the free energy diagram in Fig. 15a, the proceeding exothermic step on g-P–N1–Pt1 is only 0.91 eV leading to almost the same level ORR process of single crystal-Pt(111). All these calculations confirm that Pt-based SACs indeed have high catalytic performance equivalent to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst.
 Fig. 15  Theoretical applications in ORR. (a) The proposed reaction pathways for complete oxygen reduction reaction on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright (2017) Springer Nature. (b) Free energy diagram for the ORR process at the equilibrium potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (c) The calculated ORR activity volcano plot for the 2e− pathway to H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
In addition, the exploration of non-Pt catalysts has also been carried out recently.207–215 A single Nb atom incorporated in a graphite layer has been prepared for excellent ORR performance. The theoretical simulations indicate the charge density near the Fermi level is dense and the O–O dissociation energy is relatively low.216 Besides, the structure of Fe, Co and Ni-based SACs has been analyzed to compare the activity for ORR.217 FeN4S2 has the highest density states near the Fermi level and an enhanced electron transfer leading to higher conductivity and catalytic performance. The Gibbs free energy of ORR also clearly demonstrates that the limiting step energy of FeN4S2 is only −0.65 eV while CoN3S1 and NiN3S1 have 1.15 and 2.79 eV, respectively. Therefore, the FeN4S2 structure in Fe-SAs/NSC is more suitable for catalyzing ORR compared to the Co-SAs/NSC and Ni-SAs/NSC. It has been reported that utilizing Cu to achieve the isolated single-atom site catalysts can be modeled by the structure of Cu–N3–C originally.218 With the consideration of carbon defect, basic models are constructed during the DFT calculation shown in Fig. 15b and the result illustrates that Cu–N3–V has the lowest energy for the rate-determining step and asymmetry charge density distribution. The above examples show that defects and N coordination around the SACs play important roles in enhancing the activity of ORR.
Instead of the traditional direct 4e− of ORR into H2O, the 2e− pathway to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) has become increasingly important as a green method for H2O2 generation.219–223 Wang et al. discovered that TM single atoms anchored into carbon nanotubes (TM-CNTs) can be used to catalyze ORR to H2O2 effectively, whose efficient motifs may be TM-C–O (Fig. 15c).224 The exact atomic structures are investigated intensively by theoretical calculations to explore the effects of O and N with a Fe atom doped CNT on the ORR performance. ΔG*OOH is used as a descriptor to estimate the limiting potential of ORR to H2O2. By comparing the ORR activity of Fe or C sites in different model systems, it can be suspected that the C sites rather than Fe sites in the Fe–C–O motif are the sites where O2 gets selectively reduced to H2O2, which is consistent with the corresponding experimental results.


3.2.4 Oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 
The electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) plays a crucial role in various clean energy technologies, such as water splitting,225 CO2 reduction,226 and rechargeable metal–air batteries.227 As it still suffers from sluggish reaction kinetics, the development of high-activity OER electrocatalysts is highly desirable. Noble metal-based catalysts, especially Ru-based OER catalysts, are widely used due to their excellent catalytic performance.228 To further optimize OER performance on the Ru site, Yao and co-workers229 reported an efficient and durable O–Ru1–N4 site by anchoring a single Ru atom on a nitrogen–carbon support (Ru–N–C). DFT calculations show that the adsorption of a single oxygen atom leads to a higher oxidation state on Ru, which is beneficial for reducing the limiting reaction barrier. Besides, Li and co-workers28 embedded Ru atoms in a series of Pt–Cu alloys and revealed that Ru1–Pt3Cu exhibits outstanding OER activity because its compressive surface strain with respect to that of the pristine Pt leads to the O* adsorption energy on Ru1 at an optimized level (Fig. 16a and b). In addition, the Pt–Cu alloys are found as an electron reservoir for transferring electrons to reaction intermediates and help in suppressing the over-oxidation and dissolution of Ru1.
 Fig. 16  Theoretical applications in OER. (a) In-plane lattice contraction relative to the Pt(111) pristine surface and the corresponding d-band center εRu-d of Ru1. (b) Corresponding adsorption energy EO of the oxygen atoms and overpotential η. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. Proposed reaction scheme with the intermediates having optimized geometry of (c) single-site and (d) dual-site mechanisms towards OER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. 
Considering that the rare nature of Ru-based catalysts hinders their large-scale application, many 3d-metals (Fe, Co and Ni) have been studied as active sites with improved OER activity.230,231 Wang, Chu, and co-workers232 suggested that the OER performance of the newly predicted Co SACs embedded in graphene-like 2D polyaniline (C3N) is comparable to that of the noble-metal benchmark catalysts. Additionally, by constructing MN4C4 (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) moieties in the nitrogen-doped holy graphene framework (MHGF), Huang, Duan, and co-workers233 analyzed the relationship between the atomistic structure of the metal centers and OER activities. It is theoretically predicted that the reaction pathways depend strongly on the number of d electrons of metal centers and the activities follow the trend Ni > Co > Fe. Ni-NHGF exhibits the highest performance because of the participation of C atoms (dual-site mechanism) in the OER process, as shown in Fig. 16c and d. Moreover, Ni(OH)2-based catalysts have also been reported as promising candidates for OER.234 Ma and co-workers235 proved that compared to bare Ni(OH)2, the doping of a single d0 W6+ atom with a low spin-state could stabilize the O radical and the subsequent O–O coupling, resulting in an improved OER activity.


3.2.5 Nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). 
The electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) is an environmentally friendly alternative route for ammonia synthesis, which can solve the problems like high energy consumption and pollution caused by the traditional high-temperature and high-pressure Haber–Bosch process.236–239 So far, transition metals (TM) have been widely studied as catalysts for NRR. However, they often exhibit high overpotential and low Faraday efficiency due to the extreme inertness of the N2 molecule and severe HER as side reaction.240–243 Recently, SACs have been experimentally and theoretically reported as a promising candidate to improve the catalytic activity and selectivity for NRR.4,244,245 Jung and co-workers246 theoretically reported that SACs can effectively inhibit HER and enhance N2 adsorption with the help of the electronic effect (positive charges on the metal) and the lack of the ensemble effect.
By coordinating different metal centers with a variety of supports, many works have been carried out to screen out new NRR electrocatalysts with high activity and selectivity as well as reveal the fundamental mechanisms.247–249 Among them, the Mo metal center has been proven to exhibit excellent catalytic performance on a wide range of supports,250,251 which is consistent with its remarkable intrinsic NRR activity in biological nitrogen fixation and homogeneous catalysis. Chen and Zhao29 revealed that the single Mo atom supported by a defective boron nitride (BN) nanosheet is a superior catalyst with quite a low overpotential at 0.19 V through stabilizing N2H* and destabilizing NH2* (Fig. 17a). Besides, the W atom can also exhibit high NRR activity and selectivity as a metal center supported on N-doped graphyne252 and graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) because of the significant positive charge and large spin moment on it.253 Moreover, Yang, Zhang, and co-workers reported a new reaction mechanism of NRR suggesting that one metal atom may simultaneously capture more than one nitrogen containing fragment (NxHy*, x = 1–2, y = 0–6) and hydrogen atoms.
 Fig. 17  Theoretical applications in NRR. (a) Calculated adsorption energies of N2H* and NH2* species on Mo–BN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Comprehensive comparisons of the limiting potential of SACs consisting of different metal centers and supports for NRR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Controlling the coordination environment of metal centers is an important method to achieve high performance.254 Wang, Du, and co-workers254,255 coupled the Mo atom with various combinations of ligands, including (P), boron (B), nitrogen (N), sulfur (S), and carbon (C) on black phosphorus. The calculations show that B and C ligands can effectively shift the d-band center to the Fermi energy and thus improve NRR performance on the Mo center. In addition, Huang and co-workers256 found that the magnetic moment of the Fe atom, which varies with the coordination of the neighboring N atom, plays an important role in N2 activation. A theoretical guideline for the design of high-efficiency SACs is also urgently needed. Qiao, Jiao, and co-workers247 proposed a two-step strategy by selecting the most promising family (e.g., g-C3N4 supported SACs in their work) and tuning the adsorption energies of the key intermediates to further improve the activity of the best candidate in this family (Fig. 17b). Besides TM, boron has been identified as a promising p-block atom center for NRR.242 Wang, Du, and co-workers257 revealed that B-decorated g-C3N4 can achieve a record low onset potential (0.20 V). Moreover, Sun and co-workers258 demonstrated that negatively charged boron sites are promising for catalytic activity and selectivity, which can be hardly obtainable from TM catalysts.

4 Challenges and perspectives
It can be seen that SACs have gained plenty of interest in recent years and are applied in various reaction systems due to their excellent catalytic behaviours compared with traditional heterogeneous catalysts. In this review, the basic concepts of SACs have been introduced. Moreover, the unique structural and electronic properties of SACs are also emphasized systematically, such as the dynamism of SACs, strong metal–support interaction, and detailed electronic structure of the single atom center, aiming to provide essential guidelines for SAC screening and design at the atomic level. In addition, from the view of theoretical simulation, the foundational insights into the catalytic behaviours of SACs in thermo-, electro- and photocatalysis are summarized. It can be concluded that through the utilization of SACs, the new understanding of the catalytical mechanisms of different reactions has been provided. Although numerous excellent works have been conducted on SACs and great progress has been made, including not only the theoretical simulation but also the advanced experimental characterization, the challenges remain.
The essence of exploring the catalytic mechanisms is the rational recognition of the active sites of the catalysts, and SACs are no exception. The SAC is defined as a supported metal catalyst which exclusively contains isolated monometallic active sites on the surface,64 and the single metal atom is considered as the catalytically active center in the related reactions. The real component of the active site of SACs participating in the catalytic reaction is still ambiguous due to the interaction of the single metal atom with the support and the diversity of the support. Unlike single site catalysts, in which the active site only includes one kind of sites, there is a great possibility that the atom coordinated with the single metal atom would be involved in the reactions as a co-catalytic site and even some research has proven this point.199,200 The key catalytic characters are also determined by the corresponding supports. However, the coordinated environment of single metal atoms is complicated, uneven, and dynamic during the catalytic reaction, making the active site difficult to be determined.
In this regard, theoretical simulations and related computational algorithms could offer great opportunities to carry out a series of fundamental studies and explore the intrinsic active sites comprehensively. It can be found that the combination of DFT and molecular dynamics (MD), such as AIMD and constraint AIMD, provides a good choice for obtaining basic information on the kinetics of elementary reactions and exploring the dynamism as well as the essential nature of SACs’ active sites. Other than the well-developed reaction force field,259 recent development of artificial intelligent algorithms, e.g. neural network,260 offers an alternative approach for fast fitting of a potential energy surface at higher level of theory (e.g. DFT), and starts to show its power to reveal the reaction mechanisms of complex heterogeneous processes.261 Besides, the systematic insights into the structure–performance relations of SACs are desired to provide the theoretical understanding and rational guidance of structure designs for the experiment. Moreover, the construction of a database combined with theory and experiment is also considered as a promising method to supply a data platform for systematic and comprehensive exploration of SACs. Then, using high-throughput calculation, screening, and other related methods, the specific structure of SACs with excellent performance and stability can be quickly and truly predicted.
At the same time, it should be fully combined with advanced experimental characterization. In order to optimize and improve the catalytic properties of SACs, determining the coordination environment and electronic structure of single metal atoms precisely is quite urgent. Meanwhile, the methods of solving this problem mainly depend on theoretical analysis. However, models based on theory alone often deviate from the actual configuration of SACs in the experiment. Therefore, it is necessary to provide basic structural information utilizing advanced structure characterization including in situ (or operando) spectroscopy studies with spatial resolution to confirm the global and local environment of atomically dispersed metal catalysts. Moreover, other important information such as the surface-adsorbed intermediates and chemical state of the active sites also can be gained from in situ spectroscopic investigations.
At last, the construction of a more realistic simulation model is also a non-negligible aspect of exploring the essence of SACs’ catalytic activity. The clearness of pure SACs’ geometric structure offers an ideal model for the theoretical simulation. Combined with related experimental characterization, the basic theoretical model can be constructed conveniently with the determination of the local coordinated environment of the single metal center. Generally, the main process of theoretical simulation is carried out under an ideal condition like the ultra-high vacuum. However, the determination of the reaction mechanism that meets the real experimental condition is also crucial for the exploration of SACs. Actually, the real reaction atmosphere is complicated which includes the reactants, the environmental molecules, the issues of pH and solvation. The interaction between the environment and the reaction intermediate species plays an important role in the exploration of the catalytic mechanism. In addition, the reconstruction of SACs during catalyzing the corresponding reactions is also a problem that cannot be ignored. According to this review, theoretical calculations mainly focus on simple reactions involving only key intermediates and electronic structures. Therefore, utilizing multifaceted physical and chemical methodologies such as ab initio constrained thermodynamics262,263 and microkinetic models264,265 is a promising simulation direction to develop a multiscale computational modelling approach.
In conclusion, this review emphasizes the important role of theoretical calculations in the study of SACs and summarizes the basic properties of SACs from a theoretical guidance for the experiment. On this basis, catalytic mechanisms of SACs in different types of reactions are sorted out. In the end, it can be found that although a lot of research has been carried out to improve the performance of SACs and their application in reactions, there are still some challenges and key research directions in the future that deserve attention. Based on a more thorough investigation of the structure–activity relationship and catalytic mechanism of SACs theoretically, it is very hopeful that the design of SACs under the guidance of theoretical calculations can achieve efficient atomic utilization and large-scale applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB0600901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21525626, 21761132023, and 21606169), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006) for financial support.
References
L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5423–5443 RSC .
D. Li, X. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11529–11653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, X. Liu, J. Chen, R. Lin, H. Liu, F. Lue, S. Bak, Z. Liang, S. Zhao, E. Stavitski, J. Luo, R. R. Adzic and H. L. Xin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2321–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, J. Zhao, Q. Wei, Y. Ma, H. Guo, Q. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri, B. Li, B. Tang and X. Sun, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 116–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Hao, Y. Guo, L.-W. Chen, M. Shu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-A. Bu, W.-Y. Gao, N. Zhang, X. Su, X. Feng, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang, C.-W. Hu, A.-X. Yin, R. Si, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Andersen, V. Colic, S. Yang, J. A. Schwalbe, A. C. Nielander, J. M. McEnaney, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, J. G. Baker, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, M. J. Statt, S. J. Blair, S. Mezzavilla, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. Cargnello, S. F. Bent, T. F. Jaramillo, I. E. L. Stephens, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nature, 2019, 570, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, F. Chang, W. Gao, J. Guo, G. Wu, T. He and P. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2016, 9, 64–70 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Luk, C. Mondelli, D. C. Ferre, J. A. Stewart and J. Perez-Ramirez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1358–1426 RSC .
Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, X. Xiong, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1972–2010 RSC .
W. Chu, A. Y. Khodakov and P. Fongarland, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1692–1744 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Snider, V. Streibel, M. A. Hubert, T. S. Choksi, E. Valle, D. C. Upham, J. Schumann, M. S. Duyar, A. Gallo, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3399–3412 CrossRef CAS .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. F. Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. M. Behrens, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schlögl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Qin, P. Liu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700286 CrossRef .
F. Yang, P. Song, X. Liu, B. Mei, W. Xing, Z. Jiang, L. Gu and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12303–12307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Zhou, S. Miao, Y. Li, S. Kuld, J. Sehested, J. Liu, T. Aoki, S. Hong, M. F. Camellone, S. Fabris, J. Ning, C. Jin, C. Yang, A. Nefedov, C. Wöll, Y. Wang and W. Shen, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 334–341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bruix, Y. Lykhach, I. Matolinova, A. Neitzel, T. Skala, N. Tsud, M. Vorokhta, V. Stetsovych, K. Sevcikova, J. Myslivecek, R. Fiala, M. Vaclavu, K. C. Prince, S. Bruyere, V. Potin, F. Illas, V. Matolin, J. Libuda and K. M. Neyman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10525–10530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, H. Saltsburg and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Science, 2003, 301, 935–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. K. Asakura, N. Ichikuni and Y. Iwasawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 313–324 CrossRef .
A. S. S. Abbet, U. Heiz, W.-D. Schneider, A. M. Ferrari, G. Pacchioni and N. Rosch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 3453–3457 CrossRef .
S. Wang, A. Y. Borisevich, S. N. Rashkeev, M. V. Glazoff, K. Sohlberg, S. J. Pennycook and S. T. Pantelides, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 143–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen, D. Kumar, C.-W. Yi and D. W. Goodman, Science, 2005, 310, 291–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kyriakou, M. B. Boucher, A. D. Jewell, E. A. Lewis, T. J. Lawton, A. E. Baber, H. L. Tierney, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Science, 2012, 335, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, D. Mei, V. A. Glezakou, J. Li and R. Rousseau, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Science, 2016, 352, 797–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z.-Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C.-R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mehta, P. Barboun, F. A. Herrera, J. Kim, P. Rumbach, D. B. Go, J. C. Hicks and W. F. Schneider, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 269–275 CrossRef .
H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Luo, X. Wang, R. Zeng, A. Li, H. Li, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, C. Ma, R. Si and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 14036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sun, Z. J. Zhao, R. Mu, S. Zha, L. Li, S. Chen, K. Zang, J. Luo, Z. Li, S. C. Purdy, A. J. Kropf, J. T. Miller, L. Zeng and J. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4454 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Kovarik, X. Zhang, A. S. Hoffman, A. Gallo, S. R. Bare, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, V. Dagle, H. Xin and A. M. Karim, Nat. Catal., 2018, 2, 149–156 CrossRef .
H. Wang, J. X. Liu, L. F. Allard, S. Lee, J. Liu, H. Li, J. Wang, J. Wang, S. H. Oh, W. Li, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M. Shen, B. R. Goldsmith and M. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3808 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Chai, X. Cai, M. Chen, R. Jin, W. Ding and Y. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9775–9779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-M. Millet, G. Algara-Siller, S. Wrabetz, A. Mazheika, F. Girgsdies, D. Teschner, F. Seitz, A. Tarasov, S. V. Leychenko, R. Schloegl and E. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2451–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, J. Liu, S. Lee, B. Zugic, J. Huang, L. F. Allard and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3470–3473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. Asokan, M. Xu, G. W. Graham, X. Pan, P. Christopher, J. Li and P. Sautet, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4488 CrossRef .
M. A. Rivero-Crespo, M. Mon, J. Ferrando-Soria, C. W. Lopes, M. Boronat, A. Leyva-Perez, A. Corma, J. C. Hernandez-Garrido, M. Lopez-Haro, J. J. Calvino, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, D. Armentano and E. Pardo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 17094–17099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1460–1472 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ogino, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1481–1488 CrossRef .
C. Asokan, L. DeRita and P. Christopher, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1473–1480 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Zhao, C.-C. Chiu and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4403–4425 RSC .
A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6112–6113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. L. Nie, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Kovarik, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Li, V. Fung, D. E. Jiang, W. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Iwasawa, T. Sakata, L. Nguyen, X. Zhang, A. I. Frenkel and F. F. Tao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1231 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y.-W. Li, C. Shi, X.-D. Wen and D. Ma, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, M. Li, L. F. Allard, S. Lee and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Nature, 2017, 551, 605–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and B. C. Gates, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2012, 3, 545–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Q. W. X.-F. Yang, B. T. Qiao, J. Li, J. Y. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 34–59 CrossRef .
C. Wang, M. Yang and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 429–439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lykhach, A. Bruix, S. Fabris, V. Potin, I. Matolínová, V. Matolín, J. Libuda and K. M. Neyman, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4315–4345 RSC .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, W. Li, P. Ryabchuk, K. Junge and M. Beller, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 385–397 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5316–15329 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Su, R. Ge, Y. Dong, F. Hao and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14025–14042 RSC .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
A. Beniya and S. Higashi, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 590–602 CrossRef .
S. Ding, M. J. Hülsey, J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 1–33 CrossRef .
G. Giannakakis, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 237–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao and H.-L. Jiang, Chemistry, 2019, 5, 786–804 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lai, Z. Miao, Y. X. Wang, J. Z. Wang and S. L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Wu, W. Gu, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2565–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Samantaray, V. D'Elia, E. Pump, L. Falivene, M. Harb, S. Ould Chikh, L. Cavallo and J. M. Basset, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 734–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 47, 783–792 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Darby, E. C. H. Sykes, A. Michaelides and M. Stamatakis, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 428–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bruix, Y. Lykhach, I. Matolinova, A. Neitzel, T. Skala, N. Tsud, M. Vorokhta, V. Stetsovych, K. Sevcikova, J. Myslivecek, R. Fiala, M. Vaclavu, K. C. Prince, S. Bruyere, V. Potin, F. Illas, V. Matolin, J. Libuda and K. M. Neyman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10525–10530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Tang, Y. Wu, X. Su, X. Li, S. Xu, S. Zhuo, J. Ma, D. Yuan, C. Wang and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14731–14739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Wang, H. Wang, R. Wu and R. Ragan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21919–21926 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Liu, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6190–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dvorak, M. Farnesi Camellone, A. Tovt, N. D. Tran, F. R. Negreiros, M. Vorokhta, T. Skala, I. Matolinova, J. Myslivecek, V. Matolin and S. Fabris, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lang, W. Xi, J. C. Liu, Y. T. Cui, T. Li, A. F. Lee, F. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Li, L. Li, J. Lin, S. Miao, X. Liu, A. Q. Wang, X. Wang, J. Luo, B. Qiao, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-H. Lee, S. Park, M. Kim, A. K. Sinha, S. C. Lee, E. Jung, W. J. Chang, K.-S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S.-P. Cho, H. Kim, K. T. Nam and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 620–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Figueroba, G. Kovács, A. Bruix and K. M. Neyman, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6806–6813 RSC .
L. DeRita, J. Resasco, S. Dai, A. Boubnov, T. Ho Viet, A. S. Hoffman, I. Ro, G. W. Graham, S. R. Bare, G. Pacchioni, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Patera, F. Bianchini, C. Africh, C. Dri, G. Soldano, M. M. Mariscal, M. Peressi and G. Comelli, Science, 2018, 359, 1243–1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Wang, D. C. Cantu, M.-S. Lee, J. Li, V.-A. Glezakou and R. Rousseau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10467–10476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Daelman, M. Capdevila-Cortada and N. Lopez, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Duchesne, Z. Y. Li, C. P. Deming, V. Fung, X. Zhao, J. Yuan, T. Regier, A. Aldalbahi, Z. Almarhoon, S. Chen, D.-E. Jiang, N. Zheng and P. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1033–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Greiner, T. E. Jones, S. Beeg, L. Zwiener, M. Scherzer, F. Girgsdies, S. Piccinin, M. Armbruster, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlogl, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1008–1015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhao, R. Mu, X. Wang and J. Gong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 8700–8706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, X. Yang, L. Zhang, A. Wang, L. Li, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Chen, K. Wu, Z. Chen, S. Liu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, T. Meng, J. Luo, L. Zheng, C. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Li and C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4290 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jeong, G. Lee, B.-S. Kim, J. Bae, J. W. Han and H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9558–9565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. R. Lucci, M. Yang, S. Lee, M. D. Marcinkowski, A. J. Therrien, C. T. Williams, E. C. H. Sykes and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6396–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kropp, Z. Lu, Z. Li, Y.-H. C. Chin and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1595–1604 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nie, D. Mei, H. Xiong, B. Peng, Z. Ren, X. I. P. Hernandez, A. DeLaRiva, M. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Kovarik, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Science, 2017, 358, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Su, Y. Wang, J.-X. Liu, I. A. W. Filot, K. Alexopoulos, L. Zhang, V. Muravev, B. Zijlstra, D. G. Vlachos and E. J. M. Hensen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3289–3297 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liang, J. Lin, X.-F. Yang, A.-Q. Wang, B.-T. Qiao, J. Liu, T. Zhang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21945–21951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Tan, S. Yu and K. Zhou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2873–2881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C.-J. Jia, H. Bongard and F. Schuth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1520–1522 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiao, J. Lin, A. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Zhang and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Therrien, A. J. R. Hensley, M. D. Marcinkowski, R. Zhang, F. R. Lucci, B. Coughlin, A. C. Schilling, J.-S. McEwen and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
G. Spezzati, Y. Su, J. P. Hofmann, A. D. Benavidez, A. T. DeLaRiva, J. McCabe, A. K. Datye and E. J. M. Hensen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6887–6891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Li, Z. Yuan, X.-N. Li, Y.-X. Zhao and S.-G. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14307–14313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, J. Liu, M. Li, S. Lustig, S. Lee and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 534–543 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Childers, N. M. Schweitzer, S. M. K. Shahari, R. M. Rioux, J. T. Miller and R. J. Meyer, J. Catal., 2014, 318, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiong, S. Lin, J. Goetze, P. Pletcher, H. Guo, L. Kovarik, K. Artyushkova, B. M. Weckhuysen and A. K. Datye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8986–8991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Ji and Y. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 119, 1016–1023 CrossRef .
X. Cao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65524–65532 RSC .
V. J. Cybulskis, B. C. Bukowski, H.-T. Tseng, J. R. Gallagher, Z. Wu, E. Wegener, A. J. Kropf, B. Ravel, F. H. Ribeiro and J. Greeley, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4173–4181 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Marcinkowski, M. T. Darby, J. Liu, J. M. Wimble, F. R. Lucci, S. Lee, A. Michaelides, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M. Stamatakis and E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 325–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Darby, R. Réocreux, E. C. H. Sykes, A. Michaelides and M. Stamatakis, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5038–5050 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toyao, K. Suzuki, S. Kikuchi, S. Takakusagi, K.-I. Shimizu and I. Takigawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 8315–8326 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, A. Wang, A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, L. Li, X. Pan, X. Yang, X. Wang, Z. Tai, K. Wilson and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3717–3725 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, A. Wang, L. Li, Y. Huang, T. Zhang, J. W. Lee, B. W. L. Jang and C.-Y. Mou, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2043–2051 RSC .
Q. Feng, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, D. He, D. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, L. Gu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, R. Yu, J. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7294–7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, X. Yang, L. Li, X. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Pan, A. Wang, J. Li and T. J. A. C. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1054–1061 CrossRef CAS .
C. Riley, S. Zhou, D. Kunwar, A. De La Riva, E. Peterson, R. Payne, L. Gao, S. Lin, H. Guo and A. Datye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12964–12973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 683–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Cai, M. Peng, Z. Jia, P. Ren, D. Xiao, X. Wen, N. Wang, H. Liu and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13142–13146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Cai, M. Peng, Z. Jia, J. Xie, D. Xiao, X. Wen, N. Wang, Z. Jiang, H. Liu and D. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4431 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Harrath, X. Yu, H. Xiao and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8903–8909 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, T. Y. Kim, G. Kwon, J. Yi and H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17694–17699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. X. Guo, G. Li, H. Ma, H. Fan, L. Yu, C. Ma, X. Wu, D. Deng, M. Wei, D. Tan, R. Si, S. Zhang, J. Li, L. Sun, Z. Tang, X. Pan and X. Bao, Science, 2014, 344, 616–619 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Wei, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Nguyen, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Shen, F. F. Tao and P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7283–7293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, J. Liu, S. Lee, B. Zugic, J. Huang, L. F. Allard and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3470–3473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jing, Q. Li, J. Wang, D. Liu and K. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 123, 1235–1251 CrossRef .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Ram Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 1256–1260 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, B. Chen, Z. Li, X. Duan, L. Wang, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, F. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, G. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Xu, B. Liu, P. Gao, R. You, W. Huang, L. Zheng, L. Gu, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, Q. Shang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao, T. Yao, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705112 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Han, H. Liu, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13694–13698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-P. Yin, H.-J. Wang, S.-F. Tang, X.-L. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, S. Lee, H.-E. Kim, A. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Ye, J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16038–16042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kwon, M. Kim, J.-P. Grote, S. J. Cho, M. W. Chung, H. Kim, D. H. Won, A. R. Zeradjanin, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, M. Choi, H. Kim and C. H. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16198–16205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. Ouyang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
Q. Zuo, T. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Ji, X. Gong, Y. Mai and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10198–10203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yang, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, B. Liu, M. Luo, S. Ning, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1743 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
H. J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, S. Chen, Q. Luo, H. Yan, Y. Lin, W. Liu, L. Cao, J. Lu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12191–12196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2018, 2, 134–141 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, B. Chen, X. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, J. Dong, W. Chen, W. Yan, T. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9495–9500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Kuznetsov, Z. Chen, P. V. Kumar, A. Tsoukalou, A. Kierzkowska, P. M. Abdala, O. V. Safonova, A. Fedorov and C. R. Muller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17809–17816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, T. Ling, S. Chen, B. Jin, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, L. Song, J. Luo and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12252–12257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Yang, P. Gao and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14184–14188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koo, R. Malik, N. Alvarez, L. White, V. N. Shanov, M. Schulz, B. Collins, J. Sankar and Y. Yun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16362–16367 RSC .
C. Kim, H. S. Jeon, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Kim, C. M. Friend, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13844–13850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju, A. Bagger, P. Franco, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7270–7284 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Zhang, V. Sethuraman, R. Michalsky and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3742–3748 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948–4955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, C. Chen, S. Z. Yang, S. Chen, M. Duan, J. Xiong, C. Zhu, R. Long, W. Hao, Z. Chi, H. Chen, Y. X. Weng, J. Xia, L. Song, S. Li, H. Li and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2840 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 587–589 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, K. Jiang, N. Ta, Y. Hu, J. Zeng, J. Liu and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Jeong, M. Balamurugan, V. S. K. Choutipalli, E.-S. Jeong, V. Subramanian, U. Sim and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10651–10661 RSC .
J.-H. Liu, L.-M. Yang and E. D. Ganz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3805–3814 RSC .
S. K. Iyemperumal, T. D. Pham, J. Bauer and N. A. Deskins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25274–25289 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman, D. R. Alfonso, D. N. Tafen, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, J. W. Lekse, X. Deng, V. Espinoza, J. A. Trindell, O. K. Ranasingha, A. D. Roy, J.-S. Lee and H. L. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27991–28000 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rong, H. J. Wang, X. L. Lu, R. Si and T. B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 1961–1965 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, C. Chen, S. Liu, S. Hong, Q. Zhu, Q. Qian, B. Han, J. Zhang and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 4717–4721 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Li, S. Xi, Y. Du, X. Hai, J. Wang, H. Xu, G. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14871–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
D. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, W.-C. Cheong, L. Zheng, F. Ren, G. Ying, X. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Peng, G. Wang and C. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, M. Chen, Y. Sun, H. Ju, W. Yan, J. Zhu, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14889–14892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Yu, J. Liu, W. Chen, A. Li, H. Rong, R. Lin, S. Ji, X. Zhene, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, C. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16569–16573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. Liu, J. H. Lee, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, S. Kattel, L. Song and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, H. B. Yang, S. F. Hung, J. Ding, W. Cai, L. Liu, J. Gao, X. Li, X. Ren, Z. Kuang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 798–803 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yan, H. Li, Y. Ye, H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. Xiao, S. Miao, S. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC .
X. Zu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, T. Yao, W. Yan, S. Gao, C. Wang, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1808135 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Lin, Q. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, X. Wang, Y. Tsai, F. Luo, T. Möller, H. Wang, J. Rossmeisl, A. S. Varela and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1663–1671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Cheng, J.-P. Veder, B. Johannessen, M. Saunders, L. Zhang, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm, R. De Marco, J. Liu, S.-Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5286–5297 CAS .
M.-J. Cheng, E. L. Clark, H. H. Pham, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7769–7777 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Liu, L.-M. Yang and E. Ganz, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15494–15502 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gong, D. Zhang, C. Y. Lin, Y. Zhu, Y. Shen, J. Zhang, X. Han, L. Zhang and Z. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Back, J. Lim, N. Y. Kim, Y. H. Kim and Y. Jung, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 1090–1096 RSC .
Z. Zhao and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4380–4387 CrossRef CAS .
H. He and Y. Jagvaral, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11436–11446 RSC .
C. Kirk, L. D. Chen, S. Siahrostami, M. Karamad, M. Bajdich, J. Voss, J. K. Nørskov and K. Chan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1286–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, P. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18093–18100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. Quan, C. Peng, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, C. Yang, Y. Ji, L. Qian, X. Xu and G. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Brian and C. H. Steele, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J. P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Gu, Z. Zhou and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. Liu, S. Liu, M. Norouzi Banis, Z. Song, J. Li, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, Y. Zhao, R. Li, M. Zheng, S. Ye, Z.-J. Zhao, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9350–9358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. Zhang, D. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, M. Luo, X. Liu, W. Xing, W. Xu, Z. Jiang and L. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700802 CrossRef .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, L. Li, T. Sheng, G. Hu, Y. Chen and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11594–11598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Shang, W. Chen, T. Sun, H. Li, J. Dong, J. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Wang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, Z. Yang, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3508–3514 RSC .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, G. Li, N. Li, S. Li, Z. P. Cano, L. Ma, P. Cui, P. Xu, G. Jiang, H. Jin, S. Wang, T. Wu, J. Lu, A. Yu, D. Su and Z. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9640–9645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y.-J. Tang and K. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14115–14119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Jin, C. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li, J. Ge, Q. He, Z. Wu, Z. Chen and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19800–19806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. C. Huang, C. L. Dong, C. J. Chen, R. S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, B. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Qu, F. Zhou, C. Zhao, Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, X. Duan and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3734 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Siahrostami, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, M. Karamad, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, B. Wickman, M. Escudero-Escribano, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, T. W. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. Stephens and J. Rossmeisl, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Norskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, L. Arnarson, L. Silvioli, V. Čolić, R. Frydendal, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Stephens, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4064–4081 CrossRef CAS .
M. Melchionna and P. Fornasiero, Chemistry, 2019, 5, 1927–1928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, S. Lin, J. Gu, S. Zhang, Z. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11042–11054 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Back, A. J. Akey, C. Xia, Y. Hu, W. Liang, D. Schaak, E. Stavitski, J. K. Norskov, S. Siahrostami and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3997 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
W. Kim, B. A. McClure, E. Edri and H. Frei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3221–3243 RSC .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
S. Siracusano, N. Van Dijk, E. Payne-Johnson, V. Baglio and A. S. Aricò, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 488–495 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Liu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. He, H. Xie, Z. U. Rehman, C. Wang, P. Wan, H. Jiang, W. Chu and L. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 861–868 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, F. Wang, P. He, T. A. Shifa, Z. Wang, Z. Cheng, X. Zhan and J. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703290 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, G. Gao, J. Kang, W. Chu and L.-W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12050–12059 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, L. Kong, Y. Ji, J. White, Y. Li, J. Zhang, P. An, S. Liu, S. T. Lee and T. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2149 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Foster, S. I. P. Bakovic, R. D. Duda, S. Maheshwari, R. D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, M. J. Janik, J. N. Renner and L. F. Greenlee, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 490–500 CrossRef .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano, Y. Inoue, Y. Yamazaki, F. Hayashi, S. Kanbara, S. Matsuishi, T. Yokoyama, S.-W. Kim, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 934–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. M. Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360 Search PubMed .
E. Skulason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Norskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Légaré, G. Bélanger-Chabot, R. D. Dewhurst, E. Welz, I. Krummenacher, B. Engels and H. Braunschweig, Science, 2018, 359, 896–900 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 706–709 CrossRef .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L.-X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Hang, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chemistry, 2019, 5, 204–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, Q. K. Li, J. Cheng, L. Liu, Q. Yan, Y. Wu, X. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Wang, Q. Qiu and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8706–8709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, S. Back, N.-Y. Kim, J. Lim, Y.-H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7517–7525 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9664–9672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Q. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4771–4776 RSC .
X. Ma, J. Hu, M. Zheng, D. Li, H. Lv, H. He and C. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 684–692 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Yu and J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 12835–12844 RSC .
J. Zhao, J. Zhao and Q. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 9248–9255 RSC .
T. He, S. K. Matta and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 1546–1551 RSC .
Z. Chen, J. Zhao, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800368 CrossRef .
C. Ling, X. Bai, Y. Ouyang, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16842–16847 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Gu, X. Hu, S. Zhang, Z. Chen and S. Huang, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 110–116 CrossRef .
X. Guo and S. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 392–399 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, X. Niu, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Q. Li, C. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2884–2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. T. van Duin, S. Dasgupta, F. Lorant and W. A. Goddard III, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 9396–9409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 146401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, S.-D. Huang and Z.-P. Liu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 671–677 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Fernandes, M. V. d. Bossche, J. Knudsen, M. H. Farstad, J. Gustafson, H. J. Venvik, H. Grönbeck and A. Borg, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4154–4161 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lorenzi, S. Matera and K. Reuter, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5191–5197 CrossRef CAS .
A. Logadottir, T. H. Rod, J. K. Nørskov, B. Hammer, S. Dahl and C. J. H. Jacobsen, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 229–231 CrossRef CAS .
K. Reuter, C. P. Plaisance, H. Oberhofer and M. Andersen, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 040901 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Lulu Li
	Lulu Li received her degree in applied chemistry (2017) from Dalian University of Technology and MS degree in chemical technology (2019) from Tianjin University. She is currently a PhD candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Zhi-Jian Zhao. Her research focuses on mechanistic studies of heterogeneous catalysts in electrocatalysis.

Xin Chang
	Xin Chang received her degree in chemical processing of forest products (2017) from Nanjing Forestry University. She is currently a PhD candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Gong. Her research focuses on theory-guided alloy catalyst design for propane dehydrogenation.

Xiaoyun Lin
	Xiaoyun Lin received her degree in chemical engineering and technology (2018) from Beijing University of Chemical Technology. She is currently a MS candidate in chemical technology at Tianjin University under the supervision of Professor Zhi-Jian Zhao. Her research focuses on molecular level understanding of electrocatalytic reactions.

Zhi-Jian Zhao
	Zhi-Jian Zhao received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Zhejiang University and his PhD degree from Technische Universität München in 2012. After working as a Postdoc with Prof. Greeley in Purdue University, and with Dr Studt and Prof. Nørskov at Stanford University, now he is a professor at Tianjin University. He serves as an Associate Editor of Chemical Engineering Science. He has published nearly 100 papers in peer-refereed journals. His current research focuses on mechanistic studies on heterogeneous catalyst using multi-scaling simulation methods.

Jinlong Gong
	Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. He currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship at the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University. He has served on the editorial boards of several journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Chemical Science, and AIChE Journal. He has published >250 papers in peer-refereed journals and has been listed as a co-inventor on 73 patents and applications. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilization of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.

 	Fig. 1  A timeline of the development of atomically dispersed catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of basic SAC models and related application directions.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of metal NPs and SAs on the support and the relative stability. (b) Part of the periodic table is used to explore the structure of M1–Ce40O80 (marked in red is the strong interaction of transition metals with CeO2). (c) Illustration of the structure of the reducible support, non-reducible support and metal NPs sintering/dispersing on different supports.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Configuration of the AIMD simulation of the dynamic behavior at the interface for a metal cluster with the adsorption of CO. (b) Gibbs free energy of oxygen adsorption as a function of the chemical potential (μO) and energy diagram of the CO oxidation mechanism at the Oad–Au+–CO site under different oxidation states with 0, 2, or 3 extra Oad on the Ti5c site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic showing the proposed dynamic evolution of Ptiso/TiO2 catalysts following oxidation, mild reduction and harsh reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  DOS decomposition for the Pt–2O systems with different oxidation states and local coordination of the unrelaxed oxygen ligands around the Pt vacancy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The difference spectrum of AgCu and Ag, plotted with a Cu reference spectrum and adsorption energy trends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) DFT calculation results of electron states of isolated Pd atoms on alloying into Au(111), Ag(111), and Cu(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (c) The coordination effect of single-atom Fe–NxCy catalytic sites for benzene oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Theoretical applications in CO oxidation. (a) Energy profile for the oxidation of CO on the model Pt single-atom active site supported on Cu2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) Free-energy profile for CO oxidation on a single Pd atom anchoring on the CeO2(111) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (c) DFT-calculated free-energy diagram of CO oxidation on Ir single atoms supported on MgAl2O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The equilibrium structures of species involved in the catalytic conversion starting from configurations c and e and energy profiles for the dehydrogenation of propane to propylene on the single-Pd-doped Cu55 cluster. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Optimized structures of Cu(111) surfaces with Pd doping. (c) Catalytic scheme for the catalytic conversion of propane to propylene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Screening of the Pt-based bimetallic catalyst for PDH. (b) Binding energy difference and structures of dehydrogenated intermediates C3Hx (x = 7, 6, 5) over pure Pt surfaces and Pt/Cu SAA surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Optimized configurations from DFT for CxHy species on the surface of the Pt/Cu(111) SAA. (b) Energy profiles for the full dehydrogenation of CH4* on Cu(111), Pt/Cu(111) SAA, and Pt(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (c) Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi relationships for catalytic bond scissions on pure metal(111) and SAA(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Theoretical applications in semihydrogenation of alkyne. (a) Hydrogenation mechanism of acetylene to ethane on the PdIn(110) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Energy profile of acetylene hydrogenation on the Cu1/ND@G catalyst and the structures of intermediates and transition states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Theoretical applications in methane conversion. (a) Energy diagram of methane activation on the RhZr–Hyd (4.3 OH per nm2) model with optimized geometries of the intermediates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) DFT calculations of the catalytic generation of methyl radicals at 1223 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright (2014) American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) CeO2(110) anchored with a Ni1 and Ru1 atom. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Theoretical applications in HER. (a) Calculated pDOS of Mo2TiC2O2 and Mo2TiC2O2–PtSA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (b) Free energy diagrams for the Volmer step on the np-Co0.85Se, Pt(111) and Pt/Co0.85Se models. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (c) Calculated energy diagram for H2O dissociation for the Volmer step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the distribution of CO2RR products catalyzed by SACs. (b) The activation processes for CO2 molecules on the Ni (i) site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature. (c) Schematic representation and free energy diagrams of CO2 photoreduction to CO for Bi3O4Br and Co–Bi3O4Br. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (d) Free energies for conversion of *CO to CH3OH on the Cu–N4 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (e) Comprehensive reaction network for CO2RR toward CH4via CO and CH2O over the Fe–N–C catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (f) Structure of Cu–N–C and Gibbs free-energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction on different Cu–Nx coordination structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Theoretical applications in ORR. (a) The proposed reaction pathways for complete oxygen reduction reaction on the g-P–N1–Pt1 catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright (2017) Springer Nature. (b) Free energy diagram for the ORR process at the equilibrium potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. (c) The calculated ORR activity volcano plot for the 2e− pathway to H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  Theoretical applications in OER. (a) In-plane lattice contraction relative to the Pt(111) pristine surface and the corresponding d-band center εRu-d of Ru1. (b) Corresponding adsorption energy EO of the oxygen atoms and overpotential η. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. Proposed reaction scheme with the intermediates having optimized geometry of (c) single-site and (d) dual-site mechanisms towards OER. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright (2018) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  Theoretical applications in NRR. (a) Calculated adsorption energies of N2H* and NH2* species on Mo–BN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Comprehensive comparisons of the limiting potential of SACs consisting of different metal centers and supports for NRR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
