Chemical doping of organic semiconductors for thermoelectric applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00204F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00204F
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7210-7228Chemical doping of organic semiconductors for thermoelectric applications

        
          
            Wenrui 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiamin 
            Ding
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chong-an 
            Di
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Daoben 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: zouye@iccas.ac.cn; dicha@iccas.ac.cn; zhudb@iccas.ac.cn
bSchool of Chemical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
Received 
      20th May 2020
    First published on 25th September 2020AbstractDoping is essential to manipulate the electrical performance of both thermoelectric (TE) materials and organic semiconductors (OSCs). Although organic thermoelectric (OTE) materials have experienced a rapid development over the past decade, the chemical doping of OSCs for TE applications lags behind, which has limited further breakthroughs in this cutting-edge field. Recently, increasing efforts have been devoted to the development of energetically matched host and dopant molecules, exploring novel doping methods and revealing the doping mechanisms. This tutorial review covers the basic mechanisms, fundamental requirements, recent advances and remaining challenges of chemical doping in OSCs for TE applications. We first present the basic knowledge of the trade-off relationship in TE materials and its critical requirements for doped OSCs, followed by a brief introduction of recent advances in the molecular design of OSCs and dopants. Moreover, we provide an overview of the existing categories of doping mechanisms and methods, and more importantly, emphasize the summarized doping strategies for the state-of-the-art OTE materials. Finally, challenges and perspectives on the chemical doping of OSCs are proposed to highlight the research directions that deserve attention towards a bright future of OTE materials.
Wenrui Zhao
Wenrui Zhao received his BS degree in chemistry from Lanzhou University (2016). Since 2016, he has been at the Key Laboratory of Organic Solids in ICCAS for a PhD degree. His current research interests include organic transistors and organic thermoelectric devices.
Jiamin Ding
Jiamin Ding received her BS degree in chemistry from Lanzhou University in 2017. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Daoben Zhu at Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). Her research interest is on organic thermoelectric materials and devices.
Ye Zou
Ye Zou received his BS (2007) and PhD (2012) degree from Beijing Jiaotong University. He then carried out postdoctoral research at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He was appointed to the position of assistant Professor in 2014 and promoted to the associate Professor in 2017 at ICCAS. Currently, his research interests include organic optoelectronic devices and surface science.
Chong-an Di
Chong-an Di received his PhD degree in Chemistry from ICCAS in 2008. He was appointed to the position of associate professor in 2010 and promoted to a professor in 2016 at ICCAS. His research currently focuses on the investigation of organic thin-film transistors and organic thermoelectric devices.
Daoben Zhu
Daoben Zhu is a professor and director of the Organic Solids Laboratory in the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. He finished his graduate courses at the East China University of Science and Technology in 1968. He was selected as an academician of the CAS in 1997. His research interests include molecular materials and devices.

Key learning points
(1) Requirements of efficient TE conversion to carrier concentration of OSCs.
(2) Basic doping mechanisms and key doping methods for weakly interacting organic materials.
(3) Ordered and low-dimensional molecular assembly strategies in doped OTE materials.
(4) Methods for improving operational stability of doped OSCs.
(5) Effects of density of states (DOS) on TE performance of OSCs.

1. Introduction
Huge energy exists in the form of waste heat, solar heat and body heat in our daily life. Thermoelectric (TE) materials can directly convert these renewable sources of heat into electricity via the Seebeck effect, which was discovered in 1821 by Thomas J. Seebeck. Moreover, TE materials can also carry out the reverse energy conversion by exploiting the Peltier effect, enabling both spot-cooling and heating applications. After 200 years of evolution, an important trend in TE materials is to satisfy the increasing demand for distributed energy, which relies on the development of flexible and low-cost devices. Organic thermoelectric (OTE) materials are not only characterized by their molecular diversity, mechanical flexibility, elemental abundance and compatibility with various printing techniques, but also their intrinsically low thermal conductivity (κ) and remarkable performance at room temperature. As a result, OTE materials are considered to be promising candidates for lightweight powering elements of a variety of Internet of Things. In addition, these devices could be used in wearable health monitoring sensors, portable refrigerators and e-textiles.
Similar to their inorganic counterparts, promising OTE candidates should possess high electrical conductivity (σ), high Seebeck coefficient (S) and low κ. These basic guidelines imply that both conducting polymers and organic semiconductors (OSCs) can serve as prominent OTE materials. Despite the plenty of studies on conducting polymers since the 1970s and early utilization of the Seebeck effect in probing the charge transport mechanism of conjugated materials in the 1980s,1,2 OTE materials only experienced a slow development before 2010. Over the past decade, breakthroughs in two conducting polymers, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and poly(nickel 1,1,2,2-ethenetetrathiolate) (poly(Ni-ett)), have enabled figure of merit (ZT) values of greater than 0.3, boosting the rapid development of p- and n-type OTE materials.3,4 From the viewpoint of charge transport, a high mobility (μ) is preferable to achieve a high σ without changing the carrier concentration (n), thus breaking the trade-off relationship (σ and κ increase with n whereas S changes inversely) of the key TE parameters. In contrast to the relatively low μ (<0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1) of conventional conducting polymers, higher μ values than 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 have been achieved in many OSCs.5 However, these pure OSCs cannot directly function as OTE materials owing to their ultralow n and relatively poor σ. Therefore, this fundamental feature raises a key issue: how can we manipulate the electronic properties of OSCs towards the state-of-the-art OTE materials?
Doping is indispensable for semiconductors to modulate their energy level and improve the n. To enable efficient TE conversion, the chemical doping of OSCs is particularly challenging because: (1) OSCs aggregate via non-covalent interactions, and the relatively weak coupling between host molecules and dopants compared with covalent inorganic materials makes systematic studies on deep doping mechanisms highly desired; (2) the optimized n for TE conversion is typically beyond 1019 cm−3,6 which can be hardly achieved using doping methods developed for typical organic devices such as transistors, light-emitting diodes and solar cells; (3) the TE performance of different materials should be maximized at varied doping levels, and this is critical for achieving generality and controllability of chemical doping; and (4) the negative effects of doping on molecular packing must be avoided to take advantage of the high μ in OSCs. As a result, investigation of the chemical doping of OSCs for TE applications is attracting increasing attention.
Several excellent reviews of OTE materials and doped OSCs have been published.7–9 However, in this tutorial review, we aim to bridge the gap between research into OTE materials and the chemical doping of OSCs. Keeping this in mind, we will present a brief overview of recent progress in and perspectives for doping engineering in OSCs for TE applications. In the first part, we take a concise introduction to the critical requirements of doping to achieve high-performance OTE materials. In the second part, we highlight several design rules for both OSCs and dopants for optimized chemical doping. In the third part, advances in doping mechanisms and methods for OTE applications are summarized in a clear way. Then, we present several key strategies for chemical doping towards high performance OTE materials. Finally, we provide an outlook, which we hope will stimulate more interests from molecular design to doping modulations for boosting the rapid development of OTE materials in the future.
2. Critical requirements of chemical doping for TE conversion
For evaluating the performance of TE materials, a dimensionless figure of merit ZT has been introduced and determined by the σ, S, κ and absolute temperature (T): (1)where σ is relevant with the carrier concentration (n) and the charge transport mobility (μ), expressed as: σ = neμ(2)For metals and degenerate semiconductors, S which reflects the average entropy transported per charge carrier, is defined as: (3)where kB, ℏ, and m are the Boltzmann constant, Planck constant and density of states (DOS) effective mass of carriers, respectively.6 The κ, which is decisive for maintaining the temperature difference in TE generators for practical applications, consists of the contributions from two components namely the charge carriers (κc)and phonons (κL): (4)where L is the Lorentz number, CV is the constant-volume specific heat, ν is the phonon speed and I is the phonon mean free path. Notably, the κ of many organic materials is relatively low and its measurement is particularly difficult. Consequently, most studies on OSCs have focused on maximizing the power factor, PF = S2σ.
Based on these fundamental descriptions, it is clear that an excellent TE material should possess high σ and S but low κ to functionalize as an electronic crystal and a phonon glass, simultaneously. The increase of n can contribute to an increase in σ, but also lead to an undesirable enhancement in κ and decrease in S, respectively. As a result, a maximum ZT can only be obtained at an optimal n with balanced TE parameters. The contradictory interplay between the key TE parameters and n results in a complicated trade-off relationship in both inorganic and organic TE materials.
Breaking the trade-off relationship of TE materials is always vital to maximize their performance. An effective strategy relies on the decoupling of interrelated parameters. In fact, S, σ and κ are not solely determined by n, but are also related to the DOS, μ and κL, respectively. Owing to the ultralow n of intrinsic OSCs resulting from their large bandgaps, chemical doping by adding or removing electrons from conjugated semiconductors is a prerequisite for efficient TE conversion. Notably, the n of OSCs coincides with the energy offset between the Fermi level and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level in p-type or lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level in n-type materials.9 Because the Fermi level can be manipulated by varying doping level, which also affects the DOS, μ and κL, the key TE parameters and their balanced ZT in OSCs are significantly affected by the doping level.
The doping mechanism of weakly interacting OSCs differs from that of covalently bonded inorganic semiconductors. For example, the carriers in organic materials are usually described as polarons or bipolarons compared with the free carriers in covalent solids.7 Moreover, n in many conjugated materials is limited by the molecular density (nearly 1022 cm−3), which gives rise to a required μ over 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 to ensure a desirable σ.8 These features have resulted in several open issues for chemical doping of OSCs, including rational molecular design of host and dopant materials, development of appropriate doping methods, and identification of the specific doping mechanism (Fig. 1). Based on detailed discussions on these topics in the following sections, we also discuss the possibility of combining doping engineering with previous concepts to design inorganic TE materials, such as the phonon glass-electron crystal (PGEC) model, grain boundary effect, energy filtering and low-dimensionality.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of chemical doping engineering in OSCs toward TE applications. 
3. Molecular design for optimized chemical doping
The fundamental process of chemical doping is the interaction between molecules, which makes the molecular design of host materials and dopants key to the development of OTE materials. In this section, we present general design concepts for both OSCs and dopants, such as energy level modulation, heteroatomic substitution, side-chain effect, etc., from the viewpoint of charge transfer, molecular packing and intermolecular interactions. Moreover, the relationships among the molecular structures, the doping level and TE performance are also summarized.
3.1. Molecular design of host materials

3.1.1. Tuning of conjugated backbones. 
The electrical properties of OSCs are determined by their electronic structure and molecular packing. The electronic structure is dominated by frontier orbitals, i.e. the LUMO and HOMO. The Fermi level, which almost locates in the middle of bandgap in intrinsic conjugated semiconductors, determines the electrical property of OSCs to a large extent. The doping takes place with donor molecules (dopants) adding electrons to the LUMO of OSCs (n-type doping) or with acceptor molecules (dopants) removing electrons from the HOMO of OSCs (p-type doping), leading to the shift of Fermi level and enhanced n. In most cases, the LUMO of dopants should be deeper than the HOMO of the OSCs for p-type doping, and the HOMO of dopants should be shallower than the LUMO of the OSCs for n-type doping toward efficient charge transfer. A larger energy level offset results in more efficient charge transfer because such offset refers to the free energy in this process. Therefore, for an intrinsic OSC, the energy level of the dopants must be matched to obtain a higher doping level and tunable TE performance.
The energy levels of OSCs are strongly associated with their backbone structures, which are mainly constructed by electron-rich and electron-deficient conjugated groups. For example, poly[2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)thieno(3,2-b)thiophene] (PBTTT) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) are mainly constituted by thiophene units and have high HOMO levels that match most existing p-type dopants. Notably, the conjugated units in OSCs are linked by two modes, namely the aromatic form with single bond connection or the quinoid form with double bonds between the monomers. Even with the same chemical groups, the distinctions in connection modes can result in different charge distribution conditions along the backbone, leading to diverse energy levels and doping effects. The solution-processable thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPPTT) derivatives A-DCV-DPPTT and Q-DCM-DPPTT had a similar molecular geometry but the former showed aromaticity and the other possessed a quinone structure (Fig. 2a).10 Compared with Q-DCM-DPPTT, A-DCV-DPPTT had a higher LUMO level of −3.9 eV. In the doped solid state, electrons were extracted from singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) levels (−2.4 eV) of (4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl)dimethylamine (N-DMBI) radicals, as shown in Fig. 2b. However, direct charge transfer from the HOMO of N-DMBI (−4.4 eV) to the LUMO of Q-DCM-DPPTT (−4.5 eV) occurred upon admixture of two solutions with low energy-level offset, leading to a relatively low n and poor TE performance. Consequently, A-DCV-DPPTT achieved a superior σ of 5.3 S cm−1 and an unprecedented ZT of 0.23 ± 0.03 at 373 K, which was the highest value among reported OTE materials based on small molecular OSCs (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  The rational design of host materials from the perspectives of tuning the conjugated backbones and tailoring the side chains. (a) The molecular structures of A-DCV-DPPTT and Q-DCM-DPPTT. (b) Charge transfer mechanism and (c) PF at different dopant concentrations of N-DMBI doped A-DCV-DPPTT and Q-DCM-DPPTT. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) The molecular structures of N2200 and TEG-N2200. (e) The coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of N-DMBI molecules dissolved in N2200 and TEG-N2200 side chain phase. (f) S and PF at different doping concentrations of N-DMBI doped N2200 and TEG-N2200. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The energy of molecular orbitals can be manipulated by the introduction of heteroatoms. Many studies have focused on heteroatomic substitution, mainly considering the following effects. At first, the substitution of hydrogen by electronegative elements such as halogen atoms, which withdraw electrons from the conjugated backbone, can lead to a deeper LUMO and enhancement in the n-type doping efficiency.11 Secondly, halogen atom-induced non-bonding interactions such as H⋯F will promote backbone planarity, facilitating extended polaron delocalization length and inter- or intrachain charge transport.11 Thirdly, heteroatomic substitution on the backbone has been demonstrated as an effective way to enhance the intermolecular interaction and fine-tune the molecular packing.11,12 For instance, Ding et al. reported selenium substituted diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) derivative (PDPPSe-12) for TE applications.12 In comparison with sulfur-based PDPPS-12, the stronger intermolecular interactions in PDPPSe-12 enabled dopants to penetrate domains without disrupting ordered molecular packing. As a result, FeCl3 doped PDPPSe-12 film exhibited a prominent Hall mobility of up to 2.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an optimal ZT of 0.25 at 328 K, which was almost twice that of PDPPS-12.


3.1.2. Tailoring of side chains. 
The side chains in conjugated molecules can not only be modulated to improve solubility, but also to manipulate molecular packing for achieving high μ.13 To date, many studies have been performed to investigate the side-chain effect regarding chain length, steric bulkiness, and branch position by introducing alkyl, oxyalkyl, oligoether, and fluoroalkyl chains.13 From the viewpoint of chemical doping, the polarity, length and packing of the side chains have a great influence on the distribution of dopant molecules and their interactions with OSCs. First, the length and conformation of the side chains are relevant with the diffusion of dopant molecules in the polymer matrix and affect the interchain packing, crystalline morphology and doping level of the OSCs.14 Secondly, dopant molecules are inclined to be distributed within the amorphous regions comprising flexible side chains. Therefore, the introduction of polar side chains has been considered as an effective strategy to improve the miscibility between dopants and host materials.15 For example, the TE performance of TEG-N2200, an n-type polymer with polar triethylene glycol-based side chains, was investigated for comparison with alkyl side chain substituted poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene) N2200 (Fig. 2d).15 According to molecular dynamics simulations, polar N-DMBI dopants exhibited a strong tendency to disperse in the side chain phase of TEG-N2200 because of the hydrophilic matrix environment induced by triethylene glycol-based side chains (Fig. 2e). Benefitting from the intimate contact between host and dopant molecules, the σ (0.17 S cm−1) of doped TEG-N2200 was 200 times greater than that of N2200, resulting in an optimum PF of 0.4 μW m−1 K−2 (Fig. 2f).

3.2. Molecular design of dopants

3.2.1. Manipulation of energy levels. 
In order to dope OSCs with a high efficiency, plenty of studies have focused on the molecular design of dopants. To date, modulating the energy level has been recognized as the most efficient strategy. In principle, dopants with high EA values (5.2–6.0 eV) (or LUMO level) for p-type or low IE values (2.8–3.6 eV) (or HOMO level) for n-type OSCs are preferable to achieve a high doping efficiency.9 It's worth noting that the modulation of the SOMO level in the radical form of some dopants also deserves attention.10 To meet these requirements, most existing p-type dopants possess an electron-deficient core with delocalized π-bonds or a central metal atom, whereas electron-withdrawing groups such as –CN and –CF3 are bonded at the edges of the molecular structure to decrease the EA further. Of these dopants, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) is a widely utilized p-type dopant, which has an EA value of −5.24 eV. Owing to their lack of stability under ambient conditions, n-type dopants are more challenging to be designed and synthesized. A series of amine compounds such as N-DMBI and its derivatives have been demonstrated as efficient and stable n-type dopants.16,17 In addition, organometallic dopants such as mesitylene pentamethylcyclopentadienyl ruthenium dimer ((RuCp*mes)2) with strong electron-donating properties have been investigated extensively in both small molecules and polymeric semiconductors.16 The detailed molecular structures and energy levels of a number of p- and n-type dopants are shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  The charge transfer process of both p- and n-type doping in OSCs (left); molecular structures and corresponding LUMO or HOMO levels of typical dopants (right). 
Three N-DMBI based n-type dopants 2-Cyc-DMBI-H, (2-Cyc-DMBI)2 and (2-Cyc-DMBI-Me)2 were synthesized to investigate the influence of diverse HOMO levels on the doping level of OSCs.17 Among them, (2-Cyc-DMBI-Me)2 possessed the highest HOMO level of −4.59 eV, leading to the most effective doping and an excellent PF of up to 33.3 μW m−1 K−2. However, the TE performance is closely related to both σ and S. Thus, a large energy level offset doesn’t always ensure high TE performance. In 2,5-difluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F2TCNQ) (EA = −4.95 eV) or F4TCNQ (EA = −5.24 eV) doped PBTTT samples, because of the inefficient doping caused by the lower EA, the σ of F2TCNQ vapor doped PBTTT films was only 36 S cm−1, which was much lower than that of F4TCNQ doped films (220 S cm−1).18 However, the moderate S (140 μV K−1) of the F2TCNQ/PBTTT film resulted in a PF of 70 μW m−1 K−2, which was almost twice the value obtained from F4TCNQ/PBTTT.


3.2.2. Modulation of dopant size and configuration. 
In addition to the modulation of energy level, controlling the size and spatial configuration of dopant molecules is also important. The size of the dopant molecule has complicated effects on the doping process because: (1) a large dopant frequently leads to distortions in the doped OSCs and impedes the effective charge transport between adjacent molecules;19 (2) the incorporation of large dopants might cause unfavourable phase separation, leading to inhomogeneous doping and poor TE performance; (3) enhancing dopant size will increase the mean electron–hole distance and suppress Coulomb binding, producing more free carriers;20 and (4) according to hard soft acid/base (HSAB) theory, doped OSCs which can be regarded as soft anions or cations, tend to form stable ion pairs with large dopant counterions and result in improved stability.
Compared with that of F4TCNQ, the large size of 2 nm in a boron substituted dodecaborane cluster dopant DDB-F72 limited its penetration into P3HT films and resulted in the poor crystallinity of the doped polymer (Fig. 4a).20 However, as shown in Fig. 4b, the σ of DDB-F72 doped P3HT is much higher than that of the F4TCNQ doped sample. It was speculated that the robust and kinetically stable DDB clusters allowed strong electron delocalization around the boron scaffold. This superior characteristic made it possible to shield conjugated polymer polarons from counterions, promoting highly delocalized and mobile charge carriers. As a result, a high σ of 12.8 S cm−1 was achieved for DDB-F72 doped P3HT, and this value was an order of magnitude higher than those of F4TCNQ doped films.
 Fig. 4  The effect of dopant size and spatial configuration on σ. (a) The molecular structures and size of F4TCNQ and DDB-F72 dopant. (b) σ (solid symbols, calculated using the measured thickness) and idealized σ (open symbols, calculated using the 120 nm original thickness) of P3HT films doped by F4TCNQ (red symbols) and DDB-F72 (blue symbols) at different dopant concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Spatial configurations of RuCp*mes+ and N-DMBI+ dopant cations. (d) σ of FBDPPV doped by (RuCp*mes)2, N-DMBI-H and (N-DMBI)2 at different doping concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the dopant size, the spatial configuration of dopants also has great influences on the doping process and TE performance of OSCs. In contrast with a planar structure, bulky dopants generally have lower diffusion rate which is beneficial for the stability of the doped state. However, bulky dopants will suppress their intercalation into crystalline domains and occupy more volume in the microstructure, leading to a limited doping efficiency and more disruptions of morphology. Besides, considering the intermolecular orbital interactions and polaron delocalization effect, the conformation of dopants influences ion formation and subsequent electrostatical screening, affecting the n of doped OSCs. The strong electron donors (RuCp*mes)2 and (DMBI)2 are two n-type dimer dopants, and their cations (RuCp*mes)+ and N-DMBI+ are formed during the charge transfer process, respectively.16 The two dopant materials have almost the same size (molecular volumes of 2388 and 2176 Bohr3, respectively), but N-DMBI+ has a planar structure and the Ru complex shows a bulky shape (Fig. 4c). Grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) characterization indicated that the planar cation N-DMBI+ could intercalate the lamellar alkyl side-chain region of polymer FBDPPV, whereas bulky (RuCp*mes)+ anions enlarged the lamellar distance and disturbed π–π interactions. In other words, more orderly molecular stacking and larger delocalization length were obtained in the (DMBI)2 doped films. Consequently, the FBDPPV film doped by (DMBI)2 exhibited a higher σ of 8 S cm−1, which was almost five times that of the (RuCp*mes)2 doped sample, finally contributing to a PF of 7 μW m−1 K−2 (Fig. 4d).

4. Doping mechanism and doping methods for OTE applications
A fundamental requirement for manipulating chemical doping is to understand the doping mechanism and reveal the key factors that determine the doping processes. Depending on the mechanism of how host molecules are oxidized or reduced to produce free carriers, the chemical doping of OSCs can be classified into charge transfer and acid–base doping (Fig. 5). According to the way that dopant molecules are inserted into the matrix of host materials, doping methods are mainly made up by mixed doping, sequential doping and electrochemical doping. Crucially, these different doping methods have different effects on molecular packing and significantly affect TE performance.
 Fig. 5  The basic doping mechanism of OSCs that involves charge transfer doping and acid–base doping. 
4.1. Doping mechanism

4.1.1. Charge transfer. 
Charge transfer between a donor and an acceptor is a basic mechanism of chemical doping in OSCs. Differing by the degree of charge transfer, two doping mechanisms, namely integer charge transfer (ICT) and ground-state charge-transfer complex (CPX), have been identified to generate carriers (Fig. 5).9,21 For p-type materials, if the energy offset that acts as the thermodynamic driving force for electron transfer is sufficient (EAdopant > IEOSC), the LUMO of the dopant will extract an electron from the HOMO of the OSC. In this process, an integer charge transfer occurs and both OSC and dopant molecules are fully ionized, thus forming an ion pair. At an early stage, the F4TCNQ molecule with a high EA of 5.24 eV has been used as a strong electron acceptor for a sequence of p-type polymers like P3HT and PBTTT. Neher and coworkers investigated the dopant molar ratio dependent ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption of both doped solid film and solution samples.22 It was demonstrated that the charge transfer took place upon the admixture of F4TCNQ and PBTTT solutions. Two absorption peaks at 1.43/1.62 eV stood for the existence of singly negatively charged F4TCNQ.
In most cases, ICT takes place between the OSC and dopant in the ground state. Since the driving force for a donor–acceptor (D–A) system is primarily determined by the electrochemical redox potential, effective doping occurs only when the charge transfer is energetically advantageous. The doping level can be promoted by adjusting the energy level, but chemical instability often occurs when the EA is decreased. Therefore, it is necessary to expand the selection range of potential molecular dopants. In fact, apart from the energy offset, the electrostatic energy of the ionic states can stabilize the ion pair formation and further promote the ICT process, which may facilitate new charge transfer mechanisms.
Recently, an anion exchange technique to improve the doping level has been explored, and this technique can overcome the redox potential limitations described by Marcus theory.23 In this scenario, the F4TCNQ firstly interacted with PBTTT, forming an ion pair [PBTTT˙+ F4TCNQ˙−], which is same with the traditional doping method (Fig. 6a). Instantaneously, bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (TFSI) anions were spontaneously exchanged with the F4TCNQ radical anions and formed [PBTTT˙+ TFSI−] (Fig. 6b). Unlike the conventional binary D–A system, this process could promote the charge transfer reaction and overcome the redox potential limitations because the additional energy gained in the anion exchange process reduced the Gibbs free energy of the final state, as shown in Fig. 6c. Notably, the anion exchange efficiency was controlled by the size of the cations and anions, which was related to the electrostatic surface potentials (Fig. 6d). The Li-TFSI ionic liquid was identified as the optimized combination of X+/Y−, yielding a remarkable enhancement in the doping level and a high σ of up to 620 S cm−1 (Fig. 6e). Benefiting from the hydrophobically closed shell of TFSI−, the doped PBTTT films exhibited a dramatically suppressed decrease in σ at 160 °C. Therefore, the doping process driven by anion exchange can act as a new strategy to improve the doping level and thermal durability, which might contribute to new breakthroughs in OTE materials.
 Fig. 6  The molecular doping driven by the anion-exchange process. (a) Conventional molecular doping and (b) anion-exchange doping process. (c) Energy alignment diagram and change in Gibbs energy due to anion-exchange doping. (d) Molecular structures and electrostatic potentials of investigated cations and anions. (e) The σ of PBTTT films doped by F4TCNQ or anion-exchange with EMIM-TFSI and Li-TFSI. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Springer Nature. 
In contrast with ICT, the degree of charge transfer in CPX is less than 1 when frontier orbitals of the OSC and the dopant hybridize to generate a new set of occupied bonding and empty antibonding orbitals, which results in new local HOMO and LUMO states (Fig. 5). Therefore, partial charge transfer occurs in CPX, and these charges are shared between the OSC and dopants. Generally, CPX could form even if EAdopant ≪ IEOSC (p-type doping) or IEdopant ≫ EAOSC (n-type doping). Considering the interaction of molecular orbitals, the degree of hybridization and the resulting energetic splitting of orbitals are strongly associated with the energetic and spatial overlap of the individual orbitals, as well as the energy level mismatch of OSC and dopant. The existence of CPX can also be determined by UV-Vis absorption and infrared spectroscopy. Salzmann et al. systematically investigated the doping mechanism of the F4TCNQ doped polymer P3HT (ICT) and thiophene oligomer 4T (CPX).21 The appearance of an absorption band at 0.7 eV indicated CPX formation. More importantly, shifts of the characteristic cyano-vibrational absorption peak (Δν) in the Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) could manifest the negatively charged state of F4TCNQ and allow the quantitative characterization of the degree of charge transfer (δ) expressed by: (5)where ν0 and ν1 refer to the vibrational frequencies of the neutral dopant and its radical anion, respectively. The cyano-vibrational band shifted from 2227 cm−1 for the pristine F4TCNQ molecule to approximately 2194 cm−1 for the F4TCNQ anion, and this redshift of near 33 cm−1 acted as a benchmark for ICT. Therefore, a redshift of about 7 cm−1 demonstrated that only partial charge transfer (δ = 0.21) occurred in F4TCNQ doped 4T oligomer.
Under the same doping conditions, the maximum σ of P3HT was 1 S cm−1 (ICT) while that of 4T was just about 10−3 S cm−1 (CPX), illustrating the low σ caused by CPX.21 Comparing with ICT, the partial charge transfer in CPX doesn’t produce carriers directly and a thermal ionization by excitation of an electron from a neutral OSC site is required. Therefore, the inadequate charge transfer in the CPX state usually leads to low n and poor σ.9 However, for OSC/dopant systems, the dominant factor that determines whether ICT or CPX will occur is still not clear. Although energy level offset plays an important role, the electron–hole (Madelung) interaction, spin statistics and relaxation effects cannot be ignored.


4.1.2. Acid–base doping. 
Differing from charge transfer with neutral dopants, acid–base doping which has been investigated extensively in conducting polymers such as polyaniline takes place through the transfer of hydride ions/cations from the dopant to the host matrix (Fig. 5). For example, during the proton related doping process, the number of electrons does not change, and protons just enter the backbone of the doped polymers, making the host materials positively charged. This process is analogous to the loss of electrons and an oxidation of OSC occurs. At the same time, charges are redistributed on the backbone via conjugative effect, and the corresponding anions enter the host materials to maintain electric neutrality. It's worth noting that the proton-acid doping is completely reversible and dedoping is possible by reaction with the base to convert back into the insulator. The reversibility of the doping process endows polymers with many unique properties. Therein, polymeric semiconductors such as PBTTT have been acid-doped using proton acids such as 4-ethylbenzenesulfonic acid (EBSA) and (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)trichlorosilane (FTS).24
In addition to some proton acid–base, Lewis acids and bases have also been utilized as effective dopants in OTE materials.14,25 Nguyen et al. used magnetic resonance techniques and density functional theory (DFT) calculations to illustrate the complex process of Lewis acid doping.25 The p-type polymer poly[2,6-(4,4-bis(2-hexadecyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) was doped by tris(pentafluorophenyl) borane (B(C6F5)3), which formed a BCF–H2O complex with water molecules firstly and then this complex protonated the backbone moiety. Subsequently, electron transfer occurred between the neutral segment and the positively charged polymer backbone [PCPDTBT-H]+. By this way, the conductivity of B(C6F5)3 doped PCPDTBT film could be improved over four orders of magnitude. Moreover, such doping process might occur as an intramolecular behavior.

4.2. Doping methods
The degree of solid-state ordering of doped conjugated semiconductors strongly depends on both molecular structures, as well as on specific doping methods. In contrast with inorganic semiconductors for which the dopant ratio is even lower than 1%, the doping concentration of OTE materials can reach more than several tens of mole percent. Such large dopant fractions are accompanied by obvious changes in the nanostructure. As a consequence, identifying the effects of doping methods on OSC/dopant interactions and TE performance is indispensable. Because of the differences in doping mechanisms and aggregate structures, conventional doping methods such as thermal diffusion and ion implantation in inorganic semiconductors are not applicable in their organic counterparts. For instance, the large energy produced in ion implantation (100 eV to 10 MeV) will destroy the molecular ordering based on weak intermolecular interactions (<1 eV) in OSCs, leading to poor morphologies and charge transport properties. Thus, dopant molecules are inserted into the matrix of host materials mainly by mixed doping, sequential doping and electrochemical doping (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  The typical doping methods of OSCs for TE applications mainly including mixed doping, sequential doping and electrochemical doping. 

4.2.1. Mixed doping. 
Mixed doping means that host materials and dopants undergo an intensive mixing process before thin film deposition, making dopant molecules distribute as evenly as possible. In the co-deposition of OSCs and dopants, the doped film is fabricated in a set mixing ratio in a high-vacuum chamber and the thickness can be accurately controlled. Other than vapor co-deposition, solution blending is the most utilized mixed doping method, especially for polymeric OSCs. Through regulation of the relative weight or molar ratio of dopants, the doping level can be fine-tuned to maximize the TE performance. Moreover, blending can enable homogeneous doping and facilitate the fabrication of micrometer-level thick OTE films. Nevertheless, blending has several drawbacks. For example, the addition of polar dopants often drastically reduces the solubility of the OSC and it was found that 2–4 mol% F4TCNQ doped P3HT films were almost insoluble in a wide range of solvents.26 Considering the solution processability, many insoluble dopants such as the fluorinated fullerenes C60F36 and C60F48 are hard to be utilized by this doping method. Moreover, the strong molecular interaction between the OSCs and dopants in the liquid state makes it difficult to fabricate doped films with morphology similar to that in the undoped state.


4.2.2. Sequential doping. 
Doping treatments including immersing the OSC film into dopant solution, spin coating or vapor depositing dopant molecules on the surface of the OSC film are classified as sequential doping methods. The key point of these methods is firstly fabricating a high-quality film of host material and then carrying out the diffusion of dopant molecules into the OSC film. The doping ratio is modulated by controlling the dopant concentration, immersion time or spin-coating speed. In contrast with mixed doping, sequential doping can preserve the film morphology to a great extent and achieve a superior σ. For example, Moulé and coworkers found that the film prepared in a sequential solution process was more uniform than the blending method for F4TCNQ doped P3HT.26 It was speculated that P3HT molecules were probably surrounded by a shell of dopant ions in mixed P3HT:F4TCNQ solution. Therefore, discontinuous polymer domains were formed in the cast film due to the repulsion of F4TCNQ˙−. In contrast, in the sequential doping method, a large number of dopant counterions were distributed within the amorphous regions between the crystalline domains (Fig. 8a), allowing for unimpeded charge transport. As a result, an enhancement in σ by a factor of 5 to 15 at the same doping level was achieved in sequentially doped films because of the improved morphology, as shown in Fig. 8b.
 Fig. 8  The effect of different doping methods on molecular packing and TE performance of P3HT and PBTTT. (a) The influence of doping methods on dopant distribution within the microstructure. (b) The σ of P3HT doped with F4TCNQ by blending and spin coating. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 2D RSoXS images and (d) Lorentz-corrected scattering profiles for F4TCNQ doped thin films by vapor deposition (purple) and solution blending (orange), respectively. (e) S–σ and (f) PF–σ relationships of PBTTT films doped by different dopants and methods. Reproduced from ref. 18. © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. 
The vapor-phase doped PBTTT also showed better TE performance than the corresponding film cast by the blending method.18 The orientational correlation length (OCL) inferred from 2D resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) images has been utilized to quantify the backbone alignment and explain the difference in TE performance (Fig. 8c and d). It showed that the OCL was strongly associated with doping methods and FnTCNQ (n = 2 or 4) doped films with larger OCL value possessed higher apparent μ. The F4TCNQ vapor-doped PBTTT films had almost the same OCL of 220 nm as neat films, whereas that of the blended films was only about 44 nm. Consequently, the introduction of dopant molecules from a vapor phase have less perturbation to the local order and orientational alignment of the backbone, bringing about a higher σ and TE performance (Fig. 8e and f).
Although sequential doping has been widely studied, the understanding of this method is still far from satisfactory. The main problem is the unsharpness of the dopant penetration process. Firstly, it's difficult to predict and characterize the diffusion depth of the dopant molecules into the film. Secondly, the sequential doping method should be prudently applied for large and bulky dopants. Thirdly, more efforts need to be focused on precisely controlling the dopant distribution within the OSC matrix.


4.2.3. Electrochemical doping. 
The doping process of OSCs can also be conducted by electrochemical doping. In traditional electrochemical doping, the polymer is coated on the electrode surface, or the monomer is directly polymerized on the surface of electrodes to form a thin film. The potential of the electrode can be adjusted so that a charge transfer process occurs between the polymer film and the electrode, and the polymer loses or gains electrons and transforms into an oxidized or reduced state. The counterions in the electrolyte diffuse into the polymer film to maintain electric neutrality (Fig. 7). Compared with chemical doping, electrochemical doping has many advantages: (1) the doping level can be simply controlled by changing the potential difference between the OSC and electrode; (2) the doping and dedoping are completely reversible and there is no need to remove any additional chemical reagents in the process; and (3) electrochemical doping permits well-controlled doping of many conjugated systems that cannot be realized by common doping methods.
In addition to conventional electrochemical doping procedures, the doping state of OSCs can also be fine-tuned in a transistor geometry.27–29 For such kind of device, liquid and hydrogel electrolytes with mobile ions are utilized as dielectric layers. Upon a voltage bias, the ions migrate and accumulate at the dielectric/organic interface with electrical double layer formation (electrolyte-gated FET), which induces the accumulation of carriers in the OSC layer and leads to electrostatic doping of the OSC. If the migrated ions penetrate into the OSC layer, formation of compensated charge carriers in the OSC leads to bulky electrochemical doping in the organic electrochemical transistor (OECT). The initial investigation of this concept in OSC-based TE study was based on the fabrication of PBTTT-based transistors with a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)/[EMIM][TFSI] dielectric layer.28 Benefiting from a large capacitance of 28 μF cm−2, the total induced n reached 2 × 1013 cm−2, leading to an impressive σ of 100 S cm−1 and a PF of 22 μW m−1 K−2, respectively. A similar concept has been utilized to study the doping-induced impacts on the charge transport properties and TE performance of OSC-based OTE materials.29 More interestingly, OSC-based OECTs have attracted increasing interests in the past few years. Although these devices were typically fabricated to construct biological elements,27 printed logic circuits and neuromorphic devices, they should be also utilized to dope OSCs in a controllable way for TE applications.

5. Strategies for the chemical doping of OSCs towards the state-of-the-art OTE materials
5.1. Accurate evaluation of doping level and efficiency
In the doping of OSCs, both the doping level and doping efficiency have a decisive influence on the electrical properties of doped films. The doping level represents how many OSC molecules are oxidized or reduced, which determines the n of OTE materials. To some degree, the doping level also affects μ by trap filling and carrier scattering effects. Doping efficiency represents the ratio of dopant molecules that veritably interact with host molecules and result in effective charge transfer, which contributes to n. Considering dopant aggregation, CPX formation, strong Coulomb binding and trap states, the doping efficiency in OSCs is always less than 100%.9 Therefore, the exact evaluation of the doping level and doping efficiency is of vital importance and can help to identify the bottleneck issues in the doping process. However, this step is frequently neglected and the dopant/host molar ratio is widely used to evaluate the doping level with simplification, which is fundamentally unscientific.
To reveal the doping state of OSCs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has been utilized to measure and calculate the doping level of host materials according to the change of element's characteristic peaks.30 Besides, the intensity change of some substituent groups in UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra can also be employed to evaluate not only the doping level but also the doping efficiency. For example, through the absorption of F4TCNQ doped P3HT layers, Neher et al. found that although most F4TCNQ molecules were ionized (beyond 50% at different doping ratios), only 5% of them contributed to producing free charge carriers, which explained the low σ of the doped film.22
In contrast, measurement of n is a more direct and accurate way to obtain doping efficiency. Schwartz and coworkers conducted the AC Hall effect measurement to characterize the μ and n of P3HT films doped by F4TCNQ and DDB-F72, respectively.20 After calculations, n of 7.9 × 1020 cm−3 and dopant density of (6.9 ± 1.2) × 1020 cm−3 were obtained in the DDB-F72 doped film, simultaneously. Despite the test error, the almost matched data yielded a doping efficiency of nearly 100% while the value of only 10% existed in the F4TCNQ doped P3HT sample, which accounted for their difference in σ.
5.2. Manipulating charge transport mobility in doped states
Generally speaking, a high σ can be achieved by increasing n and/or μ. In fact, a decent μ can contribute to an impressive σ at relatively low doping level, preventing the diminution of S along with increased n. For instance, a series of OSCs with high μ have been theoretically demonstrated as promising TE candidates.31 To further explore excellent TE performance in view of superior charge transport, both the rational design of OSCs and fine-tuned doping process are essential. Considering the molecular design, a planar conjugated structure contributes to stronger intermolecular interactions, which facilitates electronic coupling of neighboring molecules, in favor of efficient charge transport, and suppresses the possible disturbance induced by the dopant molecules.
In spite of the previous design of various high-mobility OSCs, the Coulomb scattering in the doped states would lead to severe decline in μ especially at a high doping level. Therefore, an open issue of doped OSCs relies on the achievement of high μ even with moderate dopant concentration. To overcome this problem, the first possible way is to increase the doping efficiency, which can make it possible to achieve a fixed doping level even at lower dopant concentration, leading to a weaker influence on charge transport.11,15 For instance, Pei et al. found that, compared with PDPH, more dopant cations and larger Fermi level shift appeared in N-DMBI doped PDPF at the same doping concentration, indicating a higher doping efficiency.11 Benefiting from preserved μ at a relative low doping concentration of 7%, the doped PDPF exhibit a maximum σ of 1.3 S cm−1. In contrast, the σ only reached 10−3 S cm−1 in 13% N-DMBI doped PDPH.
Manipulating the distribution of dopant molecules in the doped films represents an alternative way to ensure high μ. The preferable polycrystalline film should possess homogeneous distribution of effective dopants in the domain areas and inhomogeneous aggregation of extra dopants in grain boundary regions, to avoid negative effects on π–π intermolecular interactions and even to fill charge transport traps, respectively. For instance, in the solid state diffusion of PBTTT, the dopant F4TCNQ molecules were incorporated into the side chain regions without disturbing the semicrystalline lamellar π-stacking of the polymer backbones.30 Such fine-tuned microstructure suppressed the extra introduced disorder, benefitting the delocalization of charge carriers. The Hall effect measurement indicated that the delocalization effect of incorporated dopants led to the coherent charge transport and exhibited an impressive μHall of 1.8 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. In addition to the strategies mentioned above, strictly controlling the processing conditions regarding the solvent effect, casting methods and annealing treatments will also improve the ratio of crystalline domains to improve μ.
5.3. Engineering DOS
Following the localized states model, the distribution of localized state sites, which is related to the energy occupied by the sites, can be described by DOS distribution. A commonly used strategy to acquire the DOS is to assume a DOS function and obtain relevant numerical results by theoretical calculations. Subsequently, the calculated DOS is assessed by comparing the model parameters with the experimental results and then the parameters are modified to match the experimental data. In these cases, the obtained DOS is much closer to a Gaussian distribution (Fig. 9a): (6)where N0 is the total concentration of localized states, σDOS is the Gaussian DOS width and E refers to the energy of the state.32
 Fig. 9  The relationship among DOS, doping and TE performance. (a) A typical Gaussian DOS distribution. (b) The measured DOS shape. (c) S and PF of N-DMBI doped PNDI2TEG-2T and PNDI2TEG-2Tz. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Theoretically calculated effect of doping on DOS distribution with different dopant ion concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Physical Society. 
Therotically speaking, σ and S associate with the DOS and the location of the Fermi level in a homogeneous system. Only free carriers with energies near the Fermi level take part in charge transport. Therefore, enhancing the DOS near the Fermi level contributes to the improvement in S. It has been widely accepted that a narrow DOS will increase the asymmetry of the Fermi energy, leading to an enlargement in S. For the same reason, a material with a larger slope at the Fermi level typically shows a considerable S.33 For example, by means of ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) characterization, the DOS at the Fermi level was found to vary more significantly for PEDOT:tosylate (Tos) than PEDOT:poly(styrenesulphonate) (PSS), which was consistent with the large S in the former.33 Koster et al. found that a higher site density and narrower distribution were observed with the introduction of heteroatoms to the backbone of N2200-based n-type polymer PNDI2TEG-2T, not only in the pristine state but also in the doped film (Fig. 9b), which explained the more than three orders of magnitude enhancement in μ of PNDI2TEG-2Tz.34 Furthermore, this modification led to an increment in σ to 1.8 S cm−1 with a reduced loss in S (Fig. 9c).
The DOS distribution of OSCs is not only determined by molecular structure, but also closely associated with the doping process.32 On one hand, the introduction of dopant molecules increases n. Nevertheless, on the other hand, Coulomb interactions between charge carriers and related ionized dopant molecules will also be enhanced. Such electrostatic binding will give rise to the trap tail state and increase the energetic disorder (Fig. 9d). As a result, with increasing dopant ratio and doping level, the n will be enhanced due to the augment of total DOS, contributing to the increased σ. Moreover, S is going to decrease because the enhanced energetic disorder shallowed the slope of the DOS at the Fermi level.29,32 An alternative strategy to modify the DOS distribution of OSCs is blending with another OSC. In this case, DOS distribution is tailored with disorder, where the Fermi level is established by a small fraction additive with shallow HOMO (deep LUMO) and the electrical transport is predominantly in the deep HOMO (shallow LUMO) p-type (n-type) host matrix. By this way, the simultaneous increase in both σ and S can be achieved with enhanced TE performance.35 However, the true DOS distribution in OSCs is still far from a clear understanding and wide recognition. Hence, by performing further theoretical calculations and enriching the characterization methods of DOS, the effects of DOS engineering on TE performance can be expected to be identified.
5.4. Building low-dimensional materials with doped OSCs
For inorganic TE materials, there is strong theoretical and experimental evidence that reduction of the dimensionality improves TE performance.36,37 Superlattice materials and one-dimensional nanowires are two well-known low-dimensional TE candidates. A superlattice refers to two or more lattice-matched materials deposited alternately along a given direction in a certain order. Consequently, the constituent materials should have a similar lattice structure and low chemical reactivity at the interfaces. In principle, κ strongly depends on the properties of the phonon scattering interface. Taking the superlattice structure as an example, diffuse reflection induces a decrease in κ depending on the thickness of the unit cell. A low thickness of the unit cell results in an increased interfacial ratio, thus contributing to a decrease in κL while maintaining the charge transport behavior. In contrast, the basic idea of nanowire-based TE materials is: (1) the mean free path difference between carrier and phonon enhances phonon scattering and reduces the κL, and (2) both increasing the energy dependent carrier relaxation time and energy filtering effect can improve S and PF. Therefore, the development of low-dimensional doping materials can break the trade-off relationship between TE parameters to achieve significant improvements in performance.
In spite of the aforementioned advantages of superlattice materials, they can be hardly constructed with doped OSCs because of the challenge in molecular assembly of two different weakly interacted components. Numata et al. attempted to fabricate a superlattice-like structure composed by copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and naphthalene-1,4,5,8-tetracarboxylic-1,8:4,5-dianhydride (NTCDA) on potassium chloride crystals by an organic molecular beam deposition technique.38 However, the detailed electronic structure and electrical properties were not discussed, which would have provided more powerful evidence of superlattice structure formation. Koumoto et al. fabricated an inorganic–organic hybrid superlattice TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z] (Fig. 10a) through electrochemical interaction and solvent exchange.39 The high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) characterization revealed that the TiS2/organic layers were stacked alternately, forming a wavy structure, and the length of the unit cell was 9.65 Å (Fig. 10b and c). Benefitting from high n, an excellent σ of 790 S cm−1 was achieved in the hybrid superlattice (Fig. 10d). It's worth noting that even with such high σ, the measured in-plane κ was only 0.69 W m−1 K−1, but a much higher value of 4.45 W m−1 K−1 was obtained in the single crystal sample (Fig. 10e). According to the equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations using the Green–Kubo method, an eightfold reduction in κL was observed after the intercalation of organic components to the bulky crystal, which came from the electrostatic interactions between the inorganic layer and hexylammonium ions. Because of the very low κ, a high in-plane ZT of 0.28 was achieved in TiS2[(HA)0.08(H2O)0.22(DMSO)0.03] at 373 K, which was the highest ever value of n-type flexible TE materials (Fig. 10f). Despite these achievements based on hybrid materials, the assembly of superlattice materials with doped OSCs is still challenging and deserves increasing attention.
 Fig. 10  The structure and TE performance of inorganic–organic TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z] hybrid superlattice. (a) A schematic diagram of TiS2 based hybrid superlattices. (b and c) HAADF-STEM images of the layered structure. Temperature dependent in-plane (d) σ, (e) κ and (f) ZT of TiS2 single crystal and its hybrid superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature. 
5.5. Enabling homogeneous doping
As mentioned above, homogeneous distribution of the dopant molecules is of great concern for ideal doping. In general, a uniform dopant distribution ensures sufficient interactions between the OSCs and dopant molecules, which allows high doping efficiency. By contrast, a heterogeneous doping usually introduces extra defects or insulating areas, decreasing the crystallinity of the doped film and hindering effective charge transport. Of particular note, the non-uniform doping impedes the accurate extraction of the doping level and TE performance, since σ and S are contributed by doping sites with different doping levels: (7)where fn and σn refer to the geometrical factor of one region and its local σ.8 Therefore, the local charge transport properties have a region dependence and this relationship hinders the analyses of the doping conditions and TE parameters.
For doped OTE materials, the uniform distribution of dopants in the out-of-plane direction is particularly important. However, this basic requirement is hard to be achieved in typical sequential doping, because dopant ratio tends to decrease as a function of the OSC depth profile (Fig. 11a). Sirringhaus and coworkers conducted XPS to delineate the elemental depth profile of an F4TCNQ doped PBTTT film, which was prepared by thermally depositing the F4TCNQ layer on the surface of the PBTTT film.30 The molecular ratio estimated from the nitrogen 1s peak demonstrated that the content of F4TCNQ molecules on the surface of the PBTTT layer was very high and the ratio of F4TCNQ/PBTTT gradually decreased from 1.1 at the interface to 0.2 at the bottom of the film (Fig. 11b). Another problem is that the diffusion of dopant molecules is limited by the film thickness; thus these methods are not suitable for thick film doping. Müller et al. attempted to realize the homogeneous doping of thick films directly.40 They fabricated 1.5 mm-thick P3HT foams by salt leaching and thermally induced phase separation. The unique micro-sized and nanoporous structure permitted the rapid uptake of the dopants during the doping process. The energy-filtered dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurement revealed that the F4TCNQ molecules were distributed evenly in P3HT foam, while a prominent gradient was generated in the solid film owing to incomplete diffusion even after 72 h (Fig. 11c). Whereas, the σ of doped foam decreased an order of magnitude around comparing with solid film. Therefore, developing a novel method that could combine the advantages of foam structures and solid films will achieve a uniform doped film with superior TE performance.
 Fig. 11  The concept of homogeneous doping in OSC films. (a) Two types of dopant molecule distribution varied with depth of the film. (b) The XPS depth-profile analyses showing diminishing dopant ratio along with film depth in F4TCNQ sequentially doped PBTTT film. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) The EDX analyses indicating uniform fluorine element distribution in F4TCNQ doped P3HT foam. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Two patterns of dopant distribution within the microstructure of OSC films. The AFM images of 17% N-DMBI doped (e) PDPH and (f) PDPF films. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the macroscopical dopant distribution in the out-of-plane direction, the in-plane clustering of dopant molecules suppresses effective charge transport (Fig. 11d). The nonpolar environment of the host OSC matrix usually leads to the phase separation of dopant materials, causing the clustering or aggregation of dopant molecules even after mixed doping. Generally, such phase separation will worsen with increasing dopant concentration. In particular, for doped n-type OTE materials with dopant ratios over tens of mole percent, the phase separation caused dopant molecule aggregation is very serious.11 To solve this problem, firstly, smaller dopants with better dispersibility can result in a uniform dopant distribution, giving rise to homogeneous doping.19 Secondly, taking into consideration that most neutral dopants are polar molecules, introducing polar side chains to OSCs can be used to optimize the OSC/dopant miscibility to avoid dopant aggregation.15 The same target can also be realized by the substitution of a polar group on the conjugated backbone. Pei et al. demonstrated that the introduction of a fluorine atom on the backbone of PDPF strongly enhanced the OSC/dopant miscibility and intermolecular interactions.11 Besides, PDPF showed both edge-on and face-on orientations, which produced more transition areas to accommodate the dopant molecule distribution. Based on these advantages, the doped PDPF resulted in uniform dopant distribution and superior TE performance (Fig. 11e and f).
5.6. Improving doping stability
Stability is a determining factor for TE applications. In inorganic semiconductors, dopant atoms are strongly covalently bonded (E > 200 kJ mol−1) with the host matrix whereas molecular dopants interact electrostatically with host molecules (E < 80 kJ mol−1) in OSCs.9 Partly owing to the relatively weak OSC/dopant interactions, the stability of doped OTE materials is still not satisfactory. From the viewpoint of realistic TE operation, stable doping of OSCs in air, at increased temperature and upon long-term bias of temperature gradient are highly required (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  The strategies to enhance the stability of doped OTE materials, free from the (a) invasion of the ambient environment, (b) dedoping at increased temperature and (c) diffusion upon long-term bias of temperature gradient. 
Stability under ambient conditions is a basic requirement to be concerned for doped OSCs. For example, water and oxygen molecules might penetrate into the active layer and interact with host or dopant materials. In terms of energy levels, the ambient stability is mainly determined by the IE/EA values. In particular, n-type materials with low EA values suffer from chemical instability due to reactions with water, oxygen and other trap states. In addition, on exposure to light, photoexcitation can result in the photochemical reaction of both OSCs and dopants, leading to the inactivation of the doping process. To ensure excellent ambient stability, high EA and low IE values are required. Wetzelaer et al. concluded that electron trapping would take place in OSCs with EAs below 3.6 eV whereas hole trapping would occur with IEs beyond 6 eV.41 On the basis of this requirement, a series of relatively stable n-type OSCs, such as perylene diimide (PDI) and naphthalene diimide (NDI) derivatives have been designed and synthesized.15,34,42 Coating the doped films with a protective layer can physically prevent the diffusion of water clusters and oxygen molecules, as well as light exposure. Besides, to alleviate photochemical instability, exposure of the device to light should be avoided.
TE generators must contact with heat sources to create temperature differences, and the thermal stability of the doped OTE materials is vital to ensure that devices can function under typical operating conditions. Considering the relatively stable microstructure and charge transport properties near room temperature, the reduction of the doping level in the high and low-temperature regimes accounts for the possible dedoping and decreased TE performance. To date, the poor thermal stability of doped OSCs is mainly caused by the sublimation of neutral dopant molecules out of the film, such as tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene (TDAE) and I2. Dopants with high sublimation temperatures or low saturated vapor pressure can restrain the effusion of dopant molecules caused by high temperature. One of the mostly studied dopants F4TCNQ usually sublimates at 140 °C under vacuum (10−6 Torr), whereas hexacyano-trimethylene-cyclopropane (CN6-CP) and 1,3,4,5,7,8-hexafluoro-tetracyanonaphthoquinodimethane (F6TCNNQ), which are larger molecules, show higher sublimation points over 200 °C and better thermal stability. On the other hand, compared with neutral dopants, some ionic dopant species with larger activation energies to return to the undoped state should have a superior thermal stability.9
In the doping of inorganic semiconductors, dopants usually penetrate the host matrix by thermal diffusion or ion implantation. The dopant atoms occupy the lattice sites in the crystal, and there is a large activation barrier to diffusion within the semiconductor matrix. In contrast, for the doping of OSCs, the energy barrier to overcome the weak intermolecular interactions between dopants and OSCs is much lower, especially in the presence of an electric field during operation, resulting in the migration of dopant molecules or ions. OSCs with a dense molecular packing or low amorphous volume ratios will have fewer diffusion pathways, thus increasing the immobilization of dopant species especially for organic small molecular semiconductors.43 It's widely accepted that dopants with large molecular sizes will form more stable ion pairs with the host matrix, and larger dopant ions could promote operational stability due to their low ionic μ. In addition, structural modifications such as using polar side chains have been shown to suppress the diffusion rate of the dopant significantly.44
5.7. Doping OSCs without heterogeneous dopants
In most cases, doping is conducted in binary systems by adding molecular dopants or electrolyte ions to the OSC matrix. However, heterogeneously distributed dopants and their weak interactions with the host matrix lead to a series of problems. First, the dopant molecules usually form non-conductive regions, which have a negative impact on charge transport. Secondly, because of the volatility and movability of small-molecule dopants, the stability of doped OSCs is limited at high temperatures. Thirdly, the complex interaction mechanisms between OSCs and dopant materials make it difficult to fine-tune the doping process. Aiming at solving these problems, several strategies were recently proposed. For example, if two polymers with matched energy levels are mixed together, charge transfer similar to that of small-molecule-based charge transfer salts may occur to induce efficient doping. Moreover, for molecules with both electron-rich and electron-deficient groups, the intra- or intermolecular charge transfer may also take place, leading to self-doping without additional dopants.
Recently, a ground-state electron transfer (GSET) process has been observed in an all polymer D–A system.45,46 A large decrease in sheet resistance (more than five orders) compared with individual donor or acceptor polymer films was observed when the high EA polymer poly(benzoimidazobenzophenanthrolines) (BBL) was combined with the low IE donor polymer bithiophene-thiophene (P(g42T-T)) (Fig. 13a). The UPS and low-energy inverse photoelectron spectroscopy (LEIPS) measurements revealed a vacuum level shift of 0.55 eV in BBL:P(g42T-T) heterojunctions, indicating a large amount of electron transfer from P(g42T-T) to BBL (Fig. 13b). This electron transfer resulted in the formation of a 2 nm-thick quasi-two-dimensional interfacial layer and the accumulation of electrons/holes near one side of the interface, as shown in Fig. 13c. In addition, a strong electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal intensity was observed in the P(g42T-T):BBL bilayers, which coincided with the GSET-induced polarons with a density of 4–5 × 1019 cm−3 inferred from kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulations (Fig. 13d). For optoelectronics applications, a BBL:P(g42T-T) blend based D–A bulk heterojunction (BHJ) with 1:1 weight ratio was fabricated, and a bulky σ of 0.23 ± 0.02 S cm−1 was achieved. The negative S value of the BHJ blend polymer indicated that, in this combination the electron and energy transport were dominant over the hole transport (Fig. 13e). What is noteworthy is that the D–A BHJ film exhibited excellent thermal stability when annealed at 200 °C for 20 h. The value of σ was only reduced by less than one order, whereas for TDAE-doped BBL, the performance droped by more than four orders of magnitude under the same conditions. Therefore, this method not only broadens the doping methods of OTE materials, but also possibly relieves the deficiencies of heterogeneous dopants such as non-uniform doping, morphology perturbation and instability.
 Fig. 13  The ground-state electron transfer (GSET) in all polymer D–A heterojunctions: (a) the molecular structure of BBL and P(g42T-T). (b) Energy level diagram of the BBL:P(g42T-T) heterojunction. (c) The illustration of quasi-two-dimensional charge transfer at the interface of two polymers. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Volume-normalized EPR signal of blend samples and the corresponding single component polymers. (e) σ and S of BBL:P(g42T-T) blend films at different BBL contents. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Self-doping is an interesting strategy for eliminating the drawbacks caused by dopants and realizing efficient charge transfer between OSC molecules simultaneously. For example, organic diradicaloids that contain two unpaired electrons (radicals) in an open shell will lead to enhanced spin orbital interactions and more efficient charge transport.47 Among them, diradicaloids based on quinoidal oligothiophene derivatives (QOTs) together with electron-poor dicyanomethylene groups, show great potential for the development of single-component materials with excellent electron transport capability and ambient stability. At first, the planar and rigid backbone structure as well as spin–spin interactions result in superior charge transport properties. Moreover, the electron-poor tetracyano moieties can stabilize the diradical structure and yield a deep LUMO level which is beneficial for ambient stability.
Guo et al. synthesized two organic diradicaloids BTICN and QTICN.48 Electron-deficient quinoidal (closed shell) and electron-rich aromatic structures (open-shell) exist in diradicaloids, which enable the self-doping process, as shown in Fig. 14a. EPR spectra showed a sharp peak for QTICN with much stronger intensity than BTICN, indicating a stronger diradical character and higher doping level (Fig. 14b). The drain current of the QTICN-based OFET device was approximately 10−5 A at a gate voltage (VG) of zero (Fig. 14c and d), demonstrating that self-doping induced high n compared with conjugated semiconductors. Because of its stronger diradical character and extremely low LUMO level, the QTICN film displayed a superior σ of 0.34 S cm−1, a promising PF of 1.52 μW m−1 K−2, and an excellent ambient stability with half-lives over 60 days.
 Fig. 14  The illustration of self-doping mechanisms and characterization of electrical properties. (a) The molecular structure of BTICN and QTICN, as well as the self-doping mechanism in QTICN. (b) EPR spectra of BTICN and QTICN thin films. Transfer characteristics of OFET devices based on (c) BTICN and (d) QTICN. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society. (e) The molecular structures and self-doping mechanism of ionic PDI derivatives. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) The spacer length independent spin concentrations in PDIs. (g) The impact of spacer length on σ and S in three PDI variants. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The transformation of materials with ionic tetrabutylammonium side chains into the radical anion represents another self-doping approach (Fig. 14e).49 Originally, the use of this strategy demonstrated that charged ethyl side chains could enable a controllable and reversible self-doping mechanism activated by low-temperature thermal treatment, yielding a reasonable σ of 10−3 S cm−1.50 Subsequently, to explore the possibility of this strategy for TE conversion, a series of PDI derivatives with different side chain length were designed and synthesized.42 The EPR experiment demonstrated that the polaron charge carrier densities among three PDI small molecules were within an order of magnitude (3 × 1020 to 3 × 1021 polarons cm−3), indicating that similar doping levels have been achieved (Fig. 14f). When the spacer length increased from 2 to 6, σ was improved by over two orders of magnitude and reached 0.5 S cm−1 with a decent PF of 1.4 μW m−1 K−2, while S was almost the same (Fig. 14g). So far, the doping level of existing self-doped OSCs cannot satisfy the requirement of high performance OTE materials. However, with more molecular design, self-doping will become a powerful way of modifying OTE materials with excellent performance and prominent stability.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
The ultimate goal of doping for maximizing TE conversion efficiency is not only to enhance σ, but also to achieve balanced σ, S and κ towards maximized ZT at optimized n, which raises a critical requirement of chemical doping for OSCs compared to that of many other optoelectrical applications. Although TE-oriented chemical doping of OSCs has experienced a rapid development over the past decade, there are many remaining challenges. How can we describe the general doping model of OSCs and design the host/dopant molecules in a rational way? What is the most efficient way to manipulate doping efficiency and determine the optimal doping level for different OSCs? Is there a powerful method to achieve large-area, stable and patterned doping such as that for inorganic materials? To address these open questions, tremendous efforts to investigate the fine-tunability, predictability, “visibility,” stability and processability of chemical doping in OSCs deserve attention (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  The key aspects of TE oriented doping in OSCs that need to be focused on. 
Fine-tuning S, σ and κ via doping engineering plays a central role in the development of the state-of-the-art OTE materials. Despite previous investigations, the tunability of the energy level and molecular packing is far from satisfactory. From the viewpoint of energy level, matching OSCs and dopants in an accurate way might open up unprecedented opportunities. For instance, many OSCs possess prominent ambipolar behavior, but the doped materials usually exhibit unipolar charge transport behavior because of the lack of appropriate dopants. As a result, the precise modulation of the dopants for ambipolar OSCs could enable both p- and n-type OTE candidates with one host material. As far as the condensed structure is concerned, the doped materials should possess ordered molecular packing to serve as an electronic crystal. Unfortunately, the bi-component blends of host materials and dopants usually involve complicated molecular interactions and lead to increased molecular packing disorder. Combining the well-developed doping methods with fine-tuned self-assembly strategies will provide a shortcut to meet these requirements.
Looking beyond the aforementioned studies, further investigations will aim at predicting the chemical doping of OSCs to realize rationally designed OTE materials. Intensive studies should be devoted to the prediction of (i) ideal dopants, (ii) optimal doping conditions for OSCs, and (iii) the preferred micro-/macrostructure of the doped OSCs. Previously performed theoretical studies on molecular doping have facilitated the design of molecular dopants for low-conductivity applications. Further investigation on the doping model and the structure–property relationship of OSCs will not only offer new insights into the ideal dopants, but also permit artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted design of the dopants. In addition, systematic studies on the trade-off relationship might enable the prediction of preferred doping conditions, such as optimal n and polycrystalline features, to guide experimental studies in a straightforward way.
To understand how the dopant shape, size and orientation affect the TE performance of doped OSCs, atomic imaging of charge delocalization and three-dimensional molecular distribution is particularly interesting. However, the so-called “atom-visible” investigation, which relies on spatial- and time-resolved characterization at ultrahigh resolution, has not been realized, even with the existing GIWAX characterization of doped films. Recently, the required ultrahigh resolution has been realized by cryo-electron microscopy, aberration-corrected high-resolution electron microscopy and atom resolved AFM. Trying to combine these techniques, together with existing characterization methods, might offer new opportunities to depict the doped OSCs beyond the molecular level.
Stability and processability are of vital importance for realistic applications. With regard to stability, the existing dopants for OSCs are often sensitive to the ambient environment, making poor air stability a key issue especially for n-type OSCs. Moreover, de-doping at increased temperature is still a limiting factor for the unsatisfactory operational stability. Tremendous efforts should be made to probe the activation energy, de-doping mechanism and diffusion rate of the dopants. Moreover, it is necessary to enhance the bonding of the dopant molecules to improve device longevity. Introducing anchoring groups for dopants or designing novel self-doped OSCs with a higher doping level could pave a way to solve these stability issues. From the viewpoint of scalable processability, large-area and patterned printing of doped films on flexible substrates with uniform thickness and TE performance should be the focus of attention. Even with previous studies on this topic, more investigations into related techniques would be highly desirable.
We conclude that the chemical doping of OSCs is essential for efficient conversion in OTE materials. Further development should focus on combined theoretical and experimental studies on doping factors in determining TE performance, stability, and processability. By resolving the aforementioned challenges, we will obtain the true benefits promised by OTE materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0204700 and 2018YF-E0200700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21805285), and the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences of CAS (QYZDY-SSW-SLH024).
Notes and references
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 Search PubMed .
D. Zhu, P. Wang, M. Wan, Z. Yu and N. Zhu, Physica B&C, 1986, 143, 281–284 Search PubMed .
G. H. Kim, L. Shao, K. Zhang and K. P. Pipe, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 719–723 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Qiu, L. Tang, H. Geng, H. Wang, F. Zhang, D. Huang, W. Xu, P. Yue, Y. S. Guan, F. Jiao, Y. Sun, D. Tang, C. A. Di, Y. Yi and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3351–3358 Search PubMed .
A. F. Paterson, S. Singh, K. J. Fallon, T. Hodsden, Y. Han, B. C. Schroeder, H. Bronstein, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801079 Search PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 Search PubMed .
R. Kroon, D. A. Mengistie, D. Kiefer, J. Hynynen, J. D. Ryan, L. Yu and C. Muller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6147–6164 Search PubMed .
B. Russ, A. Glaudell, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc and R. A. Segalman, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16050 Search PubMed .
I. E. Jacobs and A. J. Moule, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703063 Search PubMed .
D. Huang, H. Yao, Y. Cui, Y. Zou, F. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Shen, W. Jin, J. Zhu, Y. Diao, W. Xu, C. A. Di and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13013–13023 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Yang, W. L. Jin, J. Wang, Y. F. Ding, S. Nong, K. Shi, Y. Lu, Y. Z. Dai, F. D. Zhuang, T. Lei, C. A. Di, D. Zhu, J. Y. Wang and J. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802850 Search PubMed .
J. Ding, Z. Liu, W. Zhao, W. Jin, L. Xiang, Z. Wang, Y. Zeng, Y. Zou, F. Zhang, Y. Yi, Y. Diao, C. R. McNeill, C. A. Di, D. Zhang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18994–18999 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Liu, G. Zhang, X. Zhang and D. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903104 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Kim, T. L. Nguyen, M. Kim, J. Park, Y. Lee, S. Hwang, Y.-W. Kwon, J. Kwak and H. Y. Woo, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3360–3368 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Qiu, R. Alessandri, X. Qiu, G. Portale, J. Dong, W. Talsma, G. Ye, A. A. Sengrian, P. C. T. Souza, M. A. Loi, R. C. Chiechi, S. J. Marrink, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704630 Search PubMed .
H. I. Un, S. A. Gregory, S. K. Mohapatra, M. Xiong, E. Longhi, Y. Lu, S. Rigin, S. Jhulki, C. Y. Yang, T. V. Timofeeva, J. Y. Wang, S. K. Yee, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and J. Pei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900817 Search PubMed .
D. Yuan, D. Huang, C. Zhang, Y. Zou, C. A. Di, X. Zhu and D. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28795–28801 Search PubMed .
S. N. Patel, A. M. Glaudell, K. A. Peterson, E. M. Thomas, K. A. O'Hara, E. Lim and M. L. Chabinyc, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700434 Search PubMed .
E. K. Sichel, M. Knowles, M. Rubner and J. Georger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1982, 25, 5574–5577 Search PubMed .
T. J. Aubry, J. C. Axtell, V. M. Basile, K. J. Winchell, J. R. Lindemuth, T. M. Porter, J. Y. Liu, A. N. Alexandrova, C. P. Kubiak, S. H. Tolbert, A. M. Spokoyny and B. J. Schwartz, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805647 Search PubMed .
H. Mendez, G. Heimel, S. Winkler, J. Frisch, A. Opitz, K. Sauer, B. Wegner, M. Oehzelt, C. Rothel, S. Duhm, D. Tobbens, N. Koch and I. Salzmann, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8560 Search PubMed .
P. Pingel and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B, 2013, 87, 115209 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamashita, J. Tsurumi, M. Ohno, R. Fujimoto, S. Kumagai, T. Kurosawa, T. Okamoto, J. Takeya and S. Watanabe, Nature, 2019, 572, 634–638 Search PubMed .
S. N. Patel, A. M. Glaudell, D. Kiefer and M. L. Chabinyc, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 268–272 Search PubMed .
B. Yurash, D. X. Cao, V. V. Brus, D. Leifert, M. Wang, A. Dixon, M. Seifrid, A. E. Mansour, D. Lungwitz, T. Liu, P. J. Santiago, K. R. Graham, N. Koch, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1327–1334 Search PubMed .
I. E. Jacobs, E. W. Aasen, J. L. Oliveira, T. N. Fonseca, J. D. Roehling, J. Li, G. Zhang, M. P. Augustine, M. Mascal and A. J. Moulé, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3454–3466 Search PubMed .
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, M. Berggren and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17086 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Zang, D. Huang, C. Di, X. Gao, H. Sirringhaus and D. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3004–3012 Search PubMed .
E. M. Thomas, B. C. Popere, H. Fang, M. L. Chabinyc and R. A. Segalman, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2965–2972 Search PubMed .
K. Kang, S. Watanabe, K. Broch, A. Sepe, A. Brown, I. Nasrallah, M. Nikolka, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, D. Matsumoto, K. Marumoto, H. Tanaka, S. Kuroda and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 896–902 Search PubMed .
W. Shi, J. Chen, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2669–2677 Search PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans, E. V. Emelianova and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 045214 Search PubMed .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, H. Wang, S. Braun, D. R. Evans, M. Fabretto, P. Hojati-Talemi, D. Dagnelund, J. B. Arlin, Y. H. Geerts, S. Desbief, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, R. Lazzaroni, W. M. Chen, I. Zozoulenko, M. Fahlman, P. J. Murphy, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 190–194 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, G. Ye, B. V. Zee, J. Dong, X. Qiu, Y. Liu, G. Portale, R. C. Chiechi and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804290 Search PubMed .
G. Zuo, X. Liu, M. Fahlman and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703280 Search PubMed .
R. Venkatasubramanian, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O'Quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597–602 Search PubMed .
H. Böttner, G. Chen and R. Venkatasubramanian, MRS Bull., 2011, 31, 211–217 Search PubMed .
Y. Imanishi, S. Hattori, A. Kakuta and S. Numata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 2098–2101 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Gu, F. Dang, T. Itoh, Y. Wang, H. Sasaki, M. Kondo, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, G. J. Snyder, R. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 622–627 Search PubMed .
R. Kroon, J. D. Ryan, D. Kiefer, L. Yu, J. Hynynen, E. Olsson and C. Müller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704183 Search PubMed .
N. B. Kotadiya, A. Mondal, P. W. M. Blom, D. Andrienko and G. A. H. Wetzelaer, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1182–1186 Search PubMed .
B. Russ, M. J. Robb, F. G. Brunetti, P. L. Miller, E. E. Perry, S. N. Patel, V. Ho, W. B. Chang, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker and R. A. Segalman, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3473–3477 Search PubMed .
L. Muller, S. Y. Rhim, V. Sivanesan, D. Wang, S. Hietzschold, P. Reiser, E. Mankel, S. Beck, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, A. Pucci, W. Kowalsky and R. Lovrincic, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701466 Search PubMed .
J. Li, C. Koshnick, S. O. Diallo, S. Ackling, D. M. Huang, I. E. Jacobs, T. F. Harrelson, K. Hong, G. Zhang, J. Beckett, M. Mascal and A. J. Moulé, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5476–5489 Search PubMed .
K. Xu, H. Sun, T. P. Ruoko, G. Wang, R. Kroon, N. B. Kolhe, Y. Puttisong, X. Liu, D. Fazzi, K. Shibata, C. Y. Yang, N. Sun, G. Persson, A. B. Yankovich, E. Olsson, H. Yoshida, W. M. Chen, M. Fahlman, M. Kemerink, S. A. Jenekhe, C. Muller, M. Berggren and S. Fabiano, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 738–744 Search PubMed .
B. Kippelen, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 702–704 Search PubMed .
D. Yuan, Y. Guo, Y. Zeng, Q. Fan, J. Wang, Y. Yi and X. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4958–4962 Search PubMed .
K. Yang, X. Zhang, A. Harbuzaru, L. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Koh, H. Guo, Y. Shi, J. Chen, H. Sun, K. Feng, M. C. Ruiz Delgado, H. Y. Woo, R. P. Ortiz and X. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4329–4340 Search PubMed .
C. Z. Li, C. C. Chueh, F. Ding, H. L. Yip, P. W. Liang, X. Li and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4425–4430 Search PubMed .
T. H. Reilly, A. W. Hains, H.-Y. Chen and B. A. Gregg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 455–460 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Wenrui Zhao
	Wenrui Zhao received his BS degree in chemistry from Lanzhou University (2016). Since 2016, he has been at the Key Laboratory of Organic Solids in ICCAS for a PhD degree. His current research interests include organic transistors and organic thermoelectric devices.

Jiamin Ding
	Jiamin Ding received her BS degree in chemistry from Lanzhou University in 2017. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Daoben Zhu at Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). Her research interest is on organic thermoelectric materials and devices.

Ye Zou
	Ye Zou received his BS (2007) and PhD (2012) degree from Beijing Jiaotong University. He then carried out postdoctoral research at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He was appointed to the position of assistant Professor in 2014 and promoted to the associate Professor in 2017 at ICCAS. Currently, his research interests include organic optoelectronic devices and surface science.

Chong-an Di
	Chong-an Di received his PhD degree in Chemistry from ICCAS in 2008. He was appointed to the position of associate professor in 2010 and promoted to a professor in 2016 at ICCAS. His research currently focuses on the investigation of organic thin-film transistors and organic thermoelectric devices.

Daoben Zhu
	Daoben Zhu is a professor and director of the Organic Solids Laboratory in the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. He finished his graduate courses at the East China University of Science and Technology in 1968. He was selected as an academician of the CAS in 1997. His research interests include molecular materials and devices.

Key learning points
(1) Requirements of efficient TE conversion to carrier concentration of OSCs.
(2) Basic doping mechanisms and key doping methods for weakly interacting organic materials.
(3) Ordered and low-dimensional molecular assembly strategies in doped OTE materials.
(4) Methods for improving operational stability of doped OSCs.
(5) Effects of density of states (DOS) on TE performance of OSCs.

	(1)
σ = neμ	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of chemical doping engineering in OSCs toward TE applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  The rational design of host materials from the perspectives of tuning the conjugated backbones and tailoring the side chains. (a) The molecular structures of A-DCV-DPPTT and Q-DCM-DPPTT. (b) Charge transfer mechanism and (c) PF at different dopant concentrations of N-DMBI doped A-DCV-DPPTT and Q-DCM-DPPTT. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) The molecular structures of N2200 and TEG-N2200. (e) The coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of N-DMBI molecules dissolved in N2200 and TEG-N2200 side chain phase. (f) S and PF at different doping concentrations of N-DMBI doped N2200 and TEG-N2200. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  The charge transfer process of both p- and n-type doping in OSCs (left); molecular structures and corresponding LUMO or HOMO levels of typical dopants (right).	 

 	Fig. 4  The effect of dopant size and spatial configuration on σ. (a) The molecular structures and size of F4TCNQ and DDB-F72 dopant. (b) σ (solid symbols, calculated using the measured thickness) and idealized σ (open symbols, calculated using the 120 nm original thickness) of P3HT films doped by F4TCNQ (red symbols) and DDB-F72 (blue symbols) at different dopant concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Spatial configurations of RuCp*mes+ and N-DMBI+ dopant cations. (d) σ of FBDPPV doped by (RuCp*mes)2, N-DMBI-H and (N-DMBI)2 at different doping concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  The basic doping mechanism of OSCs that involves charge transfer doping and acid–base doping.	 

 	Fig. 6  The molecular doping driven by the anion-exchange process. (a) Conventional molecular doping and (b) anion-exchange doping process. (c) Energy alignment diagram and change in Gibbs energy due to anion-exchange doping. (d) Molecular structures and electrostatic potentials of investigated cations and anions. (e) The σ of PBTTT films doped by F4TCNQ or anion-exchange with EMIM-TFSI and Li-TFSI. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Springer Nature.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  The typical doping methods of OSCs for TE applications mainly including mixed doping, sequential doping and electrochemical doping.	 

 	Fig. 8  The effect of different doping methods on molecular packing and TE performance of P3HT and PBTTT. (a) The influence of doping methods on dopant distribution within the microstructure. (b) The σ of P3HT doped with F4TCNQ by blending and spin coating. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 2D RSoXS images and (d) Lorentz-corrected scattering profiles for F4TCNQ doped thin films by vapor deposition (purple) and solution blending (orange), respectively. (e) S–σ and (f) PF–σ relationships of PBTTT films doped by different dopants and methods. Reproduced from ref. 18. © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 9  The relationship among DOS, doping and TE performance. (a) A typical Gaussian DOS distribution. (b) The measured DOS shape. (c) S and PF of N-DMBI doped PNDI2TEG-2T and PNDI2TEG-2Tz. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Theoretically calculated effect of doping on DOS distribution with different dopant ion concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The structure and TE performance of inorganic–organic TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z] hybrid superlattice. (a) A schematic diagram of TiS2 based hybrid superlattices. (b and c) HAADF-STEM images of the layered structure. Temperature dependent in-plane (d) σ, (e) κ and (f) ZT of TiS2 single crystal and its hybrid superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 11  The concept of homogeneous doping in OSC films. (a) Two types of dopant molecule distribution varied with depth of the film. (b) The XPS depth-profile analyses showing diminishing dopant ratio along with film depth in F4TCNQ sequentially doped PBTTT film. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) The EDX analyses indicating uniform fluorine element distribution in F4TCNQ doped P3HT foam. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Two patterns of dopant distribution within the microstructure of OSC films. The AFM images of 17% N-DMBI doped (e) PDPH and (f) PDPF films. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  The strategies to enhance the stability of doped OTE materials, free from the (a) invasion of the ambient environment, (b) dedoping at increased temperature and (c) diffusion upon long-term bias of temperature gradient.	 

 	Fig. 13  The ground-state electron transfer (GSET) in all polymer D–A heterojunctions: (a) the molecular structure of BBL and P(g42T-T). (b) Energy level diagram of the BBL:P(g42T-T) heterojunction. (c) The illustration of quasi-two-dimensional charge transfer at the interface of two polymers. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Volume-normalized EPR signal of blend samples and the corresponding single component polymers. (e) σ and S of BBL:P(g42T-T) blend films at different BBL contents. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  The illustration of self-doping mechanisms and characterization of electrical properties. (a) The molecular structure of BTICN and QTICN, as well as the self-doping mechanism in QTICN. (b) EPR spectra of BTICN and QTICN thin films. Transfer characteristics of OFET devices based on (c) BTICN and (d) QTICN. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society. (e) The molecular structures and self-doping mechanism of ionic PDI derivatives. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) The spacer length independent spin concentrations in PDIs. (g) The impact of spacer length on σ and S in three PDI variants. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  The key aspects of TE oriented doping in OSCs that need to be focused on.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
