Graphene/graphitic carbon nitride hybrids for catalysis  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7MH00379J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7MH00379J
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 832-850Graphene/graphitic carbon nitride hybrids for catalysis

        
          
            Qing 
            Han
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Chen
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Zhang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liangti 
            Qu
          
        
      *
      Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, Key Laboratory of Cluster Science Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: gabechain@bit.edu.cn; lqu@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      30th May 2017
    , Accepted 20th July 2017First published on 20th July 2017AbstractBenefiting from the large specific surface area, outstanding electronic, optical, thermal and mechanical properties of graphene, as well as the exceptional electronic band structure and good physicochemical stability of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids present great potential in electrochemical and photochemical catalysis. In this review, we summarize recent research advances in synthesizing graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid-based catalysts, and their applications in energy conversion, environmental decontamination, and other fields. The current limitations and some future trends of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid-based nanomaterials as advanced catalysts are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Catalysts have great prospects for development in energy related systems, environmental protection and organic synthesis.1–5 Most of the conventional catalysts are rare precious metals, metal oxides and enzymes.6–8 However, the low efficiency, high cost and serious environmental pollution block their practical applications to a certain extent. Carbon-based materials have been increasingly used to replace the conventional catalysts or used as support matrices for improving the catalytic performance.9–14
Given its huge specific surface area, superior thermal conductivity and electron mobility,15–18 two-dimensional (2D) graphene is considered to be an important component for developing new catalysts.19,20 However, graphene itself has weak catalytic activity. In this regard, various strategies have been proposed to improve its catalytic performance including doping with heteroatoms, chemical modification of graphene and self-assembled nanostructures.21–23 Thus far, graphene and its derivatives have been successfully explored as catalysts for electrochemical, photochemical or chemical reactions.24–26 An alternative approach to expand the applications is the hybridization of graphene with other carbonaceous materials (such as graphitic carbon nitride, g-C3N4).27,28 In this case, graphene usually acts as a supporting material for loading other catalysts.
Polymeric g-C3N4, a fascinating conjugated polymer with a graphite-like structure,29–32 has become a new research hotspot as a metal-free and visible-light-responsive photocatalyst in the field of artificial photosynthesis and environmental remediation. This application benefits from its earth-abundant nature, attractive electronic band structure, and good physicochemical stability.33–37 However, g-C3N4 has weak catalytic activity due to its poor electronic conductivity, low specific surface area (∼10 m2 g−1), and wide band gap (∼2.6 eV), which seriously restrict the applications.35,36 The combination of g-C3N4 with graphene as a catalyst will overcome the disadvantages of each component, and will endow graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids with interesting optical, electric, and catalytic properties for broad applications.
In this review, we summarize the recent advances in the synthesis, microstructure control and applications of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids in numerous catalytic reactions, such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), water splitting, photodegradation, CO2 reduction, organic reactions, etc. This review will provide information on the design and fabrication of high-performance graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid based catalysts. The major challenges and opportunities of these novel catalysts for future development are also discussed.
2. Synthesis of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids
The catalytic activities of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids strongly depend on their structure and interaction, which are mainly determined by the synthesis processes. This section covers the synthesis methods of graphene, g-C3N4 and graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids, respectively.
2.1. Synthesis of graphene
Since the discovery of graphene in 2004, various techniques have been developed to synthesize it.15 So far, high-quality graphene has been prepared through mechanical cleavage, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and epitaxial growth methods.15–17 However, these approaches make decoration of graphene with g-C3N4 difficult, thus affecting its application in catalysis. In contrast, graphene obtained from chemical methods has residual functional groups and structural defects, which are well dispersed in aqueous or organic media, and can be conveniently combined with g-C3N4 to create functional nanocomposites.23,26,38,39 Consequently, these chemically modified graphene nanomaterials, such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), have been widely developed. In this section, the synthesis of chemically modified graphene is outlined briefly.

2.1.1. GO. 
Owing to various oxygen functional groups of GO, g-C3N4 or its precursor can deposit on GO sheets more readily than on pristine graphene, which would enhance the stability and dispersion of supported g-C3N4. GO is usually produced by the oxidative treatment of natural graphite powder.23–26 A well-known way of preparing GO was developed by Hummers.25 Typically, GO was firstly synthesized by oxidization of graphite power with strong oxidants (KMnO4 and NaNO3) in acidic medium (e.g., concentrated H2SO4). Due to the introduction of numerous oxygenated groups on the basal planes and edges of GO, the finally obtained GO nanosheets have a thickness of about 1 nm and good dispersibility in water or polar organic solvents.
The presence of oxygenated functionalities vastly destructs the conjugated graphite structure, thus making the obtained GO an insulator. In order to regulate the size, composition and properties of GO nanosheets, different modified Hummers' methods were developed.40–44 Shi et al. synthesized mildly oxidized GO with increased conductivity by reducing the amount of KMnO4,43 which led to the formation of a larger π-conjugated structure and fewer oxygenic functional groups than those of GO produced by traditional Hummers' method. Besides, KMnO4 could be used as the only oxidant in H2SO4/H3PO4 acidic media to prepare the much more oxidized GO,44 while there were no toxic gases (e.g., N2O and NO2) generated during the preparation process.


2.1.2. rGO. 
Though GO shows excellent adaptability for blending with g-C3N4, the presence of residual defects will significantly reduce the electrical conductivity, charge carrier mobility and separation, which finally lowers the catalytic performance. rGO, a reduced GO in which most oxygen functional groups are removed, has been widely studied because of its relatively high conductivity along with retention of good distribution of incorporated g-C3N4, and consequently enhanced catalytic efficiency. Generally, rGO is prepared via a chemical reduction strategy. A variety of reducing agents such as hydrazine monohydrate, NaBH4, hydroiodic acid, hydroquinone, vitamin C or bovine serum albumin have been used to synthesize rGO.45–55 However, rGO sheets easily aggregated because of their large conjugated domains with strong π–π stacking and hydrophobic properties. To overcome the drawback, methods such as chemical modification and pH control are developed to increase dispersibility.55–57
The majority of reducing agents employed for the preparation of rGO are either toxic or explosive, which are not applicable for large-scale production. To avoid the use of harmful reagents and the introduction of additional functional groups, Dey et al. proposed a facile method for the reduction of GO by using Zn metal as the reducing agent and mineral acid at room temperature.58 Furthermore, Wang and co-workers reported a green reduction of GO in green tea solution. It was found that the polyphenol in tea solution served as both reducing agent and stabilizer, which endowed the resulting rGO with good solubility in aqueous and various organic solvents.50
Apart from the aforementioned strategies, other options including thermal, hydrothermal, solvothermal, electrochemical, and microwave-assisted thermal or laser-directed reduction have been employed to convert GO to highly conductive rGO with few oxygenated groups.59–64

2.2. Structure and synthesis of g-C3N4

2.2.1. Structure of g-C3N4. 
The basic structural units used to build allotropes of g-C3N4 are the triazine (C3N4) ring (Fig. 1a) and the tri-s-triazine/heptazine (C6N7) ring (Fig. 1b).65–67 These two types of structures possess different energetic stabilities because of their different electronic environments of the N atoms and the size of the nitride pores. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations demonstrated that the tri-s-triazine based g-C3N4 was stable and energetically favored.67 Hence, tri-s-triazine is broadly recognized as the basic unit for the formation of the 2D sheets of g-C3N4.
 Fig. 1  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine/heptazine structures of g-C3N4. 


2.2.2. Synthesis of g-C3N4. 
Based on the discovery of polymeric carbon nitride reported by Berzelius and Liebig, considerable effort has been devoted to preparing bulk and nanostructured g-C3N4via a solvothermal method and a solid-state reaction.68–71 For instance, poorly crystalline g-C3N4 was synthesized solvothermally using cyanuric chloride and melamine as starting materials, and triethylamine or diisopropylethylamine as solvents under modest pressure.68 In contrast, highly crystallized g-C3N4 was obtained through a solid-state reaction of melamine and cyanuric chloride by heating at 500–600 °C under high pressure (1–1.5 GPa).70 However, this method is realized under hard conditions with high cost.
Another approach to synthesize g-C3N4 is thermal polymerization of nitrogen-rich precursors such as cyanamide, dicyandiamide, melamine, urea, thiourea and so forth.35,72,73 The synthesis combined polyaddition and polycondensation processes, in which the cyanamide precursors were condensed to tri-s-triazine units via rearrangements of melamine when heated to 390 °C.72,74,75 Further condensation of these units generated polymeric g-C3N4 at a temperature of around 520 °C, and it became unstable slightly above 600 °C. Beyond 700 °C, g-C3N4 decomposed into nitrogen and cyano fragments. Due to its simple experimental operation and large productivity, thermal polymerization has been the most popular strategy for g-C3N4 preparation.
Nevertheless, g-C3N4 bulk materials prepared by direct polymerization of nitrogen-rich precursors have a small surface area and limited active sites, which are not favorable to catalysis. The improvement of physicochemical properties and catalytic activity of g-C3N4 can be achieved by the introduction of different nanostructures and ordered porosity in the g-C3N4 bulk. Thus far, controllable nanoarchitectures of g-C3N4, such as 1D nanostructures, porous g-C3N4, hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres, have been thoroughly explored via a hard-template approach.76–81 For example, silica nanospheres and ordered mesoporous silica (such as SBA-15, KCC-1, KIT-6) could be employed as hard templates to construct desirable g-C3N4 nanostructures. In one study, mesoporous g-C3N4 was prepared by infiltration and polymerization of cyanamide within close-packed silica nanospheres with diameters of 20–80 nm, followed by HF treatment to etch the silica nanosphere template.78 The resultant g-C3N4 materials show a mesoporous structure with high porosity giving rise to large surface area and more active sites.
The hard-template strategy inevitably requires the removal of templates. To avoid complex multiple steps, a simple soft-template approach was developed. The morphology of g-C3N4 can be simply tuned through the selection of soft structure-directing agents (such as ionic liquids, surfactants, amphiphilic block polymers), resulting in g-C3N4 samples with well-designed nanoarchitectures.82–86 A typical example is the worm-like porous g-C3N4 prepared by using a melamine precursor and a Pluronic P123 surfactant as the soft template.82
Furthermore, supramolecular preorganization through linking melamine with triazine derivatives also works for engineering nanostructured g-C3N4.87–89 Different linkages in the complex are determined by the types of solvent, leading to the formation of various g-C3N4 nanoarchitectures, such as rods, tubes, spheres and flowers.88,89

2.3. Synthesis of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids
In the last few years, due to the peculiar properties of graphene and g-C3N4 along with the advantages of 2D/2D layered face-to-face interaction, there have been a growing number of reports on the fabrication of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid nanoarchitectures for promising catalytic applications.90–124,152,155–169,173–176,179–182 Various types of synthesis techniques, including thermal annealing, solvent-thermal treatment, and molecular interaction have been investigated to prepare graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids.

2.3.1. Thermal annealing. 
The thermal annealing method generally uses GO and a nitrogen-rich precursor as the starting materials for graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids. A series of nitrogen-rich precursors including melamine, cyanamide, dicyandiamide, urea, and ethylenediamine have been employed in the synthesis of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids.90–100 Generally, graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids were prepared by an impregnation–chemical reduction method followed by heating.90,91 For example, g-C3N4 was immobilized onto chemically converted graphene sheets by mixing melamine with GO, and then the mixture was reduced by hydrazine monohydrate under stirring.91 Successively, the composite was converted to graphene/g-C3N4 by a heat treatment at 823 K. The visible-light absorption and specific surface area of the composites increased with increasing graphene content.90 Cyanamide, dicyandiamide and urea are alternative candidates for synthesis of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids.92–97 With increasing graphene content, the band gap of rGO/g-C3N4 was reduced.93 An appropriate rGO loading in the rGO/g-C3N4 hybrid causes a positively shifted VB potential, leading to an enhanced oxidation power.
The thermal annealing approach described above usually results in catalysts with low specific areas because of the aggregation of graphene sheets and layered g-C3N4. To overcome this problem, sandwich-like graphene–g-C3N4 (G–g-C3N4) nanosheets were prepared by a nanocasting strategy (Fig. 2a).100 GO-based mesoporous (GOM) silica nanosheets were first synthesized by hydrolysis of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) on the surface of GO with the help of a cationic surfactant (cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, CTAB). Then, the porous G–g-C3N4 hybrid (Fig. 2b) was formed after heating the GOM-based silica nanosheets impregnated with ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride (as precursors) and etching silica. A high specific surface area of up to 542 m2 g−1 is observed for G–g-C3N4 (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  (a) Preparation of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) TEM image of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. Inset is the pore-size distribution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.2. Solvent-thermal treatment. 
Solvent-thermal treatment is a universal approach for constructing graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids with novel functional architectures. A 3D porous graphene/g-C3N4 aerogel was fabricated by the hydrothermal treatment of g-C3N4 nanosheets and GO followed by freeze-drying.101 The graphene/g-C3N4 aerogel possesses a highly interconnected structure with abundant macropores. This 3D porous framework provides multireflection of incident light and numerous pathways for rapid mass transport, whereas the coherent heterointerface between g-C3N4 and graphene nanosheets increases the electron transfer rate, thereby improving the photoredox catalysis. A hollow mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosphere/3D graphene hybrid was further prepared by a nanocasting technology and hydrothermal treatment, which showed a high specific surface area of up to 401 m2 g−1.102 The specific surface area could be increased to 430 m2 g−1 by formation of a macroporous graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid.103 In addition to the well-organized assembly of graphene, the morphological regulation of g-C3N4 is also important for enhancing the catalytic activity of the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid. We have fabricated a 3D architecture of 1D g-C3N4 nanoribbons with 2D graphene nanosheets (g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G) through a hydrothermal treatment by employing exfoliated g-C3N4 and graphene nanosheets as building blocks (Fig. 3a).104 A loose 3D interconnected structure and g-C3N4 nanoribbons randomly attached along graphene basal planes were formed (Fig. 3b and c). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) investigation showed that the thickness of the g-C3N4 nanoribbons was 1.2 nm, indicating only a few layers of g-C3N4 sheets. Because the g-C3N4 nanoribbons were in situ grown on the 3D graphene framework, there was an intimate contact between g-C3N4 nanoribbons and graphene, thus leading to excellent electrical transfer.
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis process of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and (c) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
Furthermore, monoatomic-thick g-C3N4 quantum dots (g-C3N4 QDs) were also coupled with graphene to develop a 3D architecture of g-C3N4 QDs/graphene via a one-step hydrothermal treatment.105 The introduced g-C3N4 QDs had no effect on the morphology of graphene, and were distributed evenly in the interconnected 3D graphene networks. On this basis, we further constructed a dual-mesh of mesoporous g-C3N4 meshes in situ formed on mesoporous graphene meshes (g-C3N4@G MMs).106 Here, urea (U) was used as the g-C3N4 precursor, and mixed with GO mesh (GOM, Fig. 4a). The obtained mixture was hydrothermally treated first, and then freeze-dried to form 3D rGO meshes (rGOM) merged with urea foam (Fig. 4b). This composite was converted to g-C3N4@G MMs by a heat treatment at 600 °C (Fig. 4c). The resultant g-C3N4@G MMs have a density of 5.7 mg cm−3 and are enriched with two types of mesopore structures (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a–c) Scheme of the experimental procedure for fabrication of the g-C3N4@G MMs. (d) TEM images of the g-C3N4@G MMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.3. Intermolecular interaction method. 
By considering the geometric advantages of 2D/2D layered interaction between graphene and g-C3N4, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid can be easily achieved via intermolecular interactions such as electrostatic or π–π stacking.107–113 For example, a 2D/2D hybrid nanostructure was formed by means of electrostatic self-assembly between electronegative rGO and electropositive protonated g-C3N4 (p-g-C3N4) followed by NaBH4− reduction (Fig. 5a).106 The rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrid demonstrated a compact sheet-on-sheet structure through the electrostatic attraction and π–π stacking interaction (Fig. 5b–d). It can be seen that the rGO in the composite showed a six-fold symmetry diffraction pattern belonging to the (1100) crystalline plane (inset in Fig. 5c). Notably, p-g-C3N4 with about 7–15 layers were distributed on the rGO surface, demonstrating a well-contacted 2D/2D structure. Furthermore, rGO/p-g-C3N4 exhibited a significant PL quenching compared to that of rGO/pure g-C3N4, thus leading to effective charge transfer and reducing the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrid driven by surface charge modification. (b) TEM image of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
In addition, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid can be formed through a facile sonochemical method as reported by Ho et al. The dispersed graphene sheets were mixed with mesoporous g-C3N4 obtained using the hard-template method as the “spacer”, which could increase the distance between the graphene nanosheets and then form a graphene/g-C3N4 nanocomposite.110 A similar synthetic process was also achieved by Quan et al.111 and Sun et al.112

2.4. Graphene/g-C3N4 based multicomponent hybrids
The decoration of semiconductors (such as AgBr, CdS, CoO, ZnS and MoS2),114–119 metal materials (such as Co, Pt, Au, etc.) and heteroatoms (such as phosphate, sulfur)120–124 on the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid has been perceived as an appealing strategy to form a multicomponent heterojunction structure through a coherent interface. For example, g-C3N4/nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) was decorated with AgBr nanoparticles to form an AgBr/g-C3N4/NG nanocomposite via an in situ exchange approach.114 In this case, a uniform Ag+/g-C3N4/NG was prepared by mixing g-C3N4/NG and AgNO3 in water, and NaBr solution was added into the above Ag+/g-C3N4/NG mixture with stirring in the dark (Fig. 6a). AgBr nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 20 to 200 nm were observed on g-C3N4/NG (Fig. 6b). Apparently, a well-defined boundary interface among g-C3N4, N-doped graphene and AgBr nanoparticles was developed, leading to effective electronic transfer within the ternary intimate phase, which could be demonstrated by the lowest PL quenching effects and the highest photocurrent density for the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG photocatalysts compared to other samples (Fig. 6c and d). In another study, g-C3N4/CdS/rGO composites were fabricated using a facile sonochemical method.115 rGO, g-C3N4, cadmium sulfate and thiourea were mixed in water with a pH value of 11, followed by annealing. The resulting composite improved light harvesting and decreased the recombination rate of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, taking advantage of CdS and rGO for visible-light response and electron transfer.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG nanocomposite. (b) TEM image of AgBr/g-C3N4/NG, (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectra, (d) time-dependent photocurrent density of (i) g-C3N4, (ii) g-C3N4/NG, (iii) NPs/g-C3N4/NG. The inset in (b) is the HRTEM image of AgBr. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Transition metal–heterocyclic polymer materials with Me-Nx (Me = Co) exhibited high electrocatalytic activities for ORR applications.117,122 In this case, a CoO/Co-doped graphene/g-C3N4 core–shell hybrid was synthesized via a direct polycondensation process.117 CoO at the core and Co-doped g-C3N4 at the shell are evenly distributed across the graphene sheets. Besides the above advantages, the hybrids displayed a self-healing ability. The oxide core functions as a cobalt source to recover the disabled cobalt ion sites, improving the electrocatalytic activity and stability. Apart from that, non-covalent doping of g-C3N4 with ultrathin GO and MoS2 nanosheets was accomplished by simply mixing the three components, g-C3N4, GO, and MoS2.119
Noble metals with excellent electronic and optical characteristics have received noticeable research attention. Construction of noble metal–semiconductor heterojunctions produces a space-charge separation, in which electrons rapidly migrate from one material to the other at the interface. As a consequence, the noble metals act as effective electron trapping sites to inhibit the electron–hole recombination for improved catalytic performance. We loaded Pt nanoparticles onto g-C3N4 quantum dot (g-C3N4 QD) decorated 3D graphene networks by means of solvothermal and green photoreduction of Pt4+ under visible light (Fig. 7a).120 The Pt nanoparticles were evenly distributed across all the graphene sheets with an average diameter of 3.5 nm (Fig. 7b and c). From the high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 7d, clearly defined lattice fringes with spacings of 0.33 and 0.23 nm can be observed corresponding to the (002) and (111) interplanar distances of g-C3N4 and face-centred cubic Pt, respectively. This result illustrates the growth of Pt nanoparticles on g-C3N4 quantum dots. Strong interfacial contacts between Pt and g-C3N4, as well as g-C3N4 and graphene were essential for the electron transfer. In addition, the Pt-decorated 3D architecture built from graphene and g-C3N4 nanosheets (g-C3N4-Pt/3G) was prepared through a polycol process. K2PtCl4 was used as the Pt source, and ethylene glycol was used as the reducing agent. Consequently, Pt nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 3.4 nm were anchored onto the resulting graphene/g-C3N4 nanosheets.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic for the fabrication of g-C3N4-Pt/3G. (b–d) TEM images of g-C3N4-Pt/3G at different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 Spring Link. 
Introduction of additional elements can effectively tune the optical, electronic, luminescence and other physical properties of graphene and g-C3N4. By utilizing phosphoric acid as the phosphate source and melamine as the g-C3N4 precursor, phosphate modified graphene/g-C3N4 was fabricated.123 Firstly, a graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid was synthesized via pyrolysis. Then, it was dispersed in aqueous phosphoric acid solution under stirring to allow the adsorption of phosphate on to its surface. As a result, the introduction of phosphate species decreased the surface reaction between the holes and OH groups, and promoted the reaction of holes with H2O to form OH radicals. In addition, we developed graphene quantum dot (GQD) modified sulphur-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets (S-g-C3N4@GQD).124 S atoms were doped into the g-C3N4 lattice to generate the S–C bonds via ball milling. Successively, the S-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets and GQDs were mixed and hydrothermally reacted at 230 °C to form S-g-C3N4@GQD.
3. Application
By combining the advantageous electrical, optical, mechanical and thermal properties of graphene with the appealing electronic band structure and physicochemical stability of g-C3N4, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids present outstanding electrochemical and photochemical catalytic properties. They can be widely applied to catalyze organic and electro-/photochemical reactions.
3.1. Catalysts for electrochemical reactions

3.1.1. Oxygen reduction reaction. 
A fuel cell is an energy-conversion device that converts chemical energy into electricity by the reaction of fuels with oxidants on an electrode. The cathode catalyst for the ORR is one of the most important factors affecting the performance of a fuel cell. Pt-based materials are the most efficient ORR catalysts. However, the scarcity and high cost, CO poisoning, methanol crossover and agglomeration of noble Pt-based catalysts block their commercialization. To overcome these defects, numerous studies on inexpensive catalysts have been conducted to replace Pt-based electrocatalysts.125–128
G-C3N4 hosts a high amount of nitrogen which does indeed provide sufficient active sites for electrocatalytic reactions. G-C3N4 has exhibited better fundamental catalytic activity than pure carbon for the ORR;129 unfortunately, the current density of g-C3N4 is poor because of its low surface area. To avoid this, an ordered mesoporous g-C3N4 catalyst was prepared by using mesoporous silica SBA-15 as a template, which showed significantly better electrocatalytic activity for the ORR compared to g-C3N4 bulk and ordered mesoporous carbon, due to the increased number of catalytically active nitrogen groups on the mesoporous g-C3N4 catalyst.130 Furthermore, first-principles calculations found that the poor electron transfer efficiency of g-C3N4 led to its low ORR catalytic activity.131 As shown in Fig. 8, without electron participation, the oxygen reduction would not occur spontaneously on the surface of g-C3N4 (path I). In the presence of a certain number of electrons, the first 2e− reduction proceeded spontaneously (e.g., two electrons, path II). Nevertheless, the second 2e− reduction was blocked since there was an obvious barrier, thus resulting in the accumulation of a large number of OOH− intermediates on g-C3N4. When adequate electrons were introduced, the barrier was eliminated. A theoretical study demonstrated that most of the adsorbed O2 molecules on g-C3N4 could be easily reduced to OOH− and then to OH− without any barrier, which was done via a directly efficient 4e− pathway (e.g., four electrons, path III). A further theoretical prediction was that the ORR active sites on g-C3N4 with a carbon-based material support (mesoporous carbon, CMK-3) could widely disperse over the catalyst surface, and then improve the electron accumulation on the surface of g-C3N4, leading to an efficient 4e− ORR process and greatly enhanced catalytic performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Free energy plots of ORR and optimized configuration of adsorbed species on the g-C3N4 surface with zero, two and four electron participation demonstrated as paths I, II and III. (b–d) Schemes of ORR's pathway on g-C3N4 without electron participation, with two electron participation, and with four electron participation, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Graphene with a 2D planar structure is an attractive catalyst support due to its high surface area and excellent conductivity. By combining g-C3N4 with graphene, electrons can be collected on graphene and transferred to g-C3N4 to reduce oxygen.91 Typically, graphene-based carbon nitride (G–g-C3N4) nanosheets were prepared using a nanocasting method, in which individual dispersion of graphene was observed between the nanosheets.100 The G–g-C3N4-800 (G–g-C3N4 annealed at 800 °C) nanosheets with a height of 18 nm (Fig. 9a and b) exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity for the ORR in a basic medium, high selectivity for the 4e− ORR path and superior methanol tolerance as compared to commercial Pt/C (Fig. 9c–f). This significantly enhanced activity of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets for the ORR is undoubtedly ascribed to the incorporation of graphene layers into the nanosheets. Meanwhile, the charge transfer at the graphene/g-C3N4 interface was also investigated by state-of-the-art hybrid density functional theory.132 The result indicated that there was significant charge transfer from graphene to g-C3N4 due to the strong interlayer electron coupling at the graphene/g-C3N4 interface, which altered the electronic properties of the two components and facilitated the ORR activity.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) TEM and AFM images of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of G-CN800 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in O2 (solid line; lower lying curve) and Ar-saturated (solid line; higher lying curve) 0.1 M KOH solution as well as O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with 3 M methanol (dashed line; the two lower lying curves for the two O2-saturated solutions are fully overlapped). (d) Current–time (I–t) chronoamperometric responses at −0.25 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH of G–g-C3N4-800 and Pt/C electrodes followed by introduction of O2 and methanol (0.3 M). (e) Rotating disk electrode (RDE) voltammograms of G–g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 nanosheets at 1600 rpm. (f) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V for G–g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
In order to enhance the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction, mesoporous g-C3N4 was implanted on a nitrogen-doped graphene (g-C3N4/NG) electrode.133 In this case, the synthesized g-C3N4/NG sheets rich in nitrogen active sites exhibited super electrocatalytic activity and durability for the ORR in a neutral electrolyte. In addition, when used as a cathode catalyst for microbial fuel cells, the power density and drop percentage of g-C3N4/NG were much better than those of the pure NG and Pt/C catalysts.
Besides that, the catalytic performance can also be improved by self-assembly of graphene into a 3D architecture. We developed an interconnected 3D network of 0D monoatomic-thick g-C3N4 quantum dots (g-C3N4 QDs) with 2D graphene sheets (called g-C3N4 QDs/G) via a hydrothermal method (Fig. 10a).105 The g-C3N4 QDs/G hybrid has many advantages over the conventional g-C3N4 or physical mixtures of g-C3N4/graphene in the ORR. On the one hand, the high exposure of surface atoms enables the g-C3N4 QD component to provide more active catalytic sites in the ORR and the intimate contact between g-C3N4 and the graphene basal plane improves interfacial charge transfer for the g-C3N4 QDs/G hybrid. On the other hand, the 3D framework of graphene possesses microporous/macroporous channels that can serve as the conductive footstone for the g-C3N4 QDs, giving rise to fast electrolyte penetration and diffusion of guest molecules. As a result, the electrocatalytic activity of the g-C3N4 QDs/G catalyst in the ORR is competitive with that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 10b). Both the g-C3N4 QDs/G and Pt/C catalysts display a distinct two-stage feature (Fig. 10c). The Tafel slope of the g-C3N4 QDs/G catalyst in the low overpotential region (for E > −0.15 V vs. Ag/AgCl), where the ORR is limited by the surface reaction rate on the catalyst, is calculated to be 59 mV per decade, and in the high overpotential region, where the ORR catalytic activity is more dependent on oxygen diffusion, it is calculated to be 240 mV per decade. Those values are comparable with those of the Pt/C catalyst (59 mV and 210 mV per decade, respectively) in the corresponding regions, indicating the effective catalytic ability of g-C3N4 QDs/G for the ORR. Moreover, the g-C3N4 QDs/G catalyst demonstrates no performance loss after operating for 1000 cycles except for a negligible shift in the E1/2 value of 19 mV, indicating its robust stability (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  (a) AFM image and the corresponding height profile along the lines in the AFM image. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves of the g-C3N4 QDs, g-C3N4 QDs/G and Pt/C catalysts with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. The arrows indicate the position of the half-wave potential (E1/2). (c) Tafel plots of the g-C3N4 QDs/G and Pt/C catalysts. (d) Chronoamperometric responses of g-C3N4 QDs/G for 8 h at −0.3 V in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at 1200 rpm. Inset: RRDE curves of the g-C3N4 QDs/G catalyst at cycle 0 (solid line) and cycle 1000 (dashed line) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in an O2-saturated solution at 1200 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A 3D porous architecture from ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets and rGO (g-C3N4/rGO) has also been synthesized by solution self-assembly combined with photoreduction.134 This 3D g-C3N4/rGO showed a multilevel porous structure, high surface area, good electrical conductivity, multipath electron transport and fast charge transfer kinetics at g-C3N4/rGO interfaces, which largely facilitated the diffusion of O2, electrolyte and electron in the pore-hierarchical network during the ORR. Similarly, hollow mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosphere/3D graphene hybrids were prepared via a hydrothermal treatment.102 The resulting nanohybrid showed remarkable ORR catalytic activity, which was attributed to the enhanced density of catalytically active sites enabled by hollow mesoporous g-C3N4 and the high conductivity induced by graphene.


3.1.2. Hydrogen evolution reaction. 
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is an efficient way of hydrogen production through water electrolysis using a favourable catalyst.135,136 Apart from Pt-based HER electrocatalysts,137 strenuous efforts have been devoted to using nonprecious metal and nonmetal carbon-based materials.137–140 However, numerous types of non-noble metal catalysts for the HER suffer inherent corrosion, thus resulting in poor stability. By contrast, carbon-based HER catalysts, especially N-containing carbon-based materials are promising alternatives due to the strong tolerance to acid/alkali environments, and the enhanced π bonding to boost their electron donor/acceptor properties.97,104,141,142
In the past few years, graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids have been successfully employed as effective electrocatalysts for electrocatalytic HER application. Qiao et al. have for the first time demonstrated the application of g-C3N4 coupled nitrogen-doped graphene (g-C3N4@NG) hybrid catalysts for the electrocatalytic HER through theoretical analysis and experiments.98 The mechanism for converting H+ into H2 on the g-C3N4@NG catalysts under acidic conditions has been proposed. As shown in Fig. 11, there are two generally accepted HER reaction pathways: Volmer–Heyrovsky and Volmer–Tafel pathways. DFT calculations reveal that the free-energy difference of the second-step Tafel reaction for the Volmer–Tafel reaction under equilibrium potential is 0.33 eV (Fig. 11a), higher than that of the Heyrovsky reaction (0.19 eV, Fig. 11b). Notably, the difference in free energy for H2 release is eliminated at higher overpotential in the second and third reaction steps (the red line in Fig. 11b). It is found that the pathway selectivity on the g-C3N4@NG catalyst is potential-dependent: the Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction is the rate-limiting step for electrochemical desorption at low overpotential, whereas it becomes the Volmer–Tafel reaction at high overpotential. As a result, the g-C3N4@NG catalyst affords a 10 mA cm−2 HER current density at an overpotential of 240 mV. The electrocatalytic performance is low because of fewer active sites and low specific surface area.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Reaction pathways of the HER on g-C3N4@NG according to the Volmer–Heyrovsky route (a) and Volmer–Tafel route (b). Dashed lines are activation barriers for each reaction step as reported elsewhere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Qiao's groups further integrated porous g-C3N4 nanolayers with NG sheets to form a film, which showed an unbeatable HER activity. It was believed that the defects and edges of g-C3N4 were the catalytic centres for the HER.142 Recently, we fabricated a 3D architecture of 1D g-C3N4 nanoribbons with 2D graphene sheets (g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G), which showed an excellent HER activity with a low-onset overpotential of 80 mV and a Tafel slope of 54 mV dec−1 (Fig. 12a and b).104 The g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G catalyst with good stability under different scan rates exhibited a low overpotential of 207 mV to achieve a 10 mA cm−2 HER current density, smaller than those of g-C3N4@NG hybrids (Fig. 12c). Simultaneously, the resulting nanohybrid showed excellent long-term stability that is required for sustainable hydrogen evolution (Fig. 12d). Though the g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G catalyst exhibited an excellent HER activity, its preparation process is complicated and uses a large amount of organic solvents (e.g., concentrated H2SO4, NaNO3, KMnO4). Thus, we further prepared a dual-mesh of 2D g-C3N4 meshes in situ formed on 2D graphene meshes (g-CN@G MMs) by a straightforward template-free method.106 Due to its highly expanded surface area, abundant hydrogen adsorption sites, multi-electron transport channels and high electron transfer capability, the unique mesh-on-mesh g-C3N4@G MMs catalyst displays a superb HER activity.
 Fig. 12  (a) The HER polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of various catalysts (g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G, Pt wire, N–G and g-C3N4, respectively) with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) The polarization curves of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G with a scan rate from 5 to 100 mV s−1. (d) Time dependence of the current density at 200 mV versus RHE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.3. Oxygen evolution reaction. 
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is an important half-reaction in metal–air batteries and fuel cells, which is also a crucial factor for electrolysis of water.143–145 Precious-metal oxides, such as IrO2 and RuO2, are the most efficient OER catalysts, but they are scarce and of high cost. To date, extensive efforts have been devoted to developing non-noble metal oxides and carbon-based alternatives.146–151 The nitrogen atoms in carbon materials have been proved to be the active sites in water oxidation. Thus, g-C3N4 has been an attractive catalyst for the OER because of its high nitrogen content.
An ultrathin graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid was prepared and applied in the OER.112 The linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) showed that the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid (curve 3) displayed a more positive onset potential for water oxidation (0.58 V) with a large anodic current as compared to other contrast samples (Fig. 13a). For comparison, pure g-C3N4 nanosheets and graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids were deposited on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass electrodes, which acted as water oxidation anodes at 1.0 V (Fig. 13b). It can be seen that the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids produced more bubbles of molecular oxygen than the g-C3N4 nanosheets. Furthermore, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids possessed a smaller Tafel slope of 68.5 mV per log unit than the g-C3N4 nanosheets (120.9 mV per log unit), indicating more favorable OER kinetics for the composites (Fig. 13c). The stability of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids was further tested by continuous cyclic voltammogram (CV) scanning in alkaline medium. As shown in Fig. 13d, the hybrids retained 100% of OER activity after 1000 cycles, illustrating robust stability. Here, g-C3N4 nanosheets can provide the pyridinic N as the active site for the OER, while the similar 2D structure of g-C3N4 and graphene sheets facilitate their effective stacking, leading to good contact. Meanwhile, the conductive graphene sheets can serve as electron transporters, thus resulting in high catalytic performance for oxygen production.
 Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) of bulk g-C3N4 (curve 1), g-C3N4 nanosheets (curve 2), graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids (curve 3) and graphene (curve 4) on glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs) in 0.1 M KOH. (b) Optical photographs of g-C3N4 nanosheets (left) and graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids (right) on ITO coated glass electrodes as water oxidation anodes. (c) Tafel plots of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids and g-C3N4. (d) LSVs for graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids before and after CV testing of 1000 cycles in 0.1 M KOH. Inset: The relationship between current density (expressed as mA cm−2, at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and cycle numbers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.4. Alcohol oxidation. 
As a matter of fact, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids have another potential application in alcohol oxidation. We synthesized g-C3N4 quantum dots-Pt heterogeneous structures on 3D graphene networks (g-C3N4-Pt/3G) and used them as electrocatalysts for high-performance methanol oxidation.120 The CV curves of the g-C3N4-Pt/3G catalyst with peaks related to hydrogen adsorption/desorption displayed a more positive value (range 2) than those of Pt/3G and Pt/C catalysts (range 1), which could be attributed to the lattice expansion from the transition lattice of Pt and adjacent g-C3N4 QDs (Fig. 14a). Consequently, g-C3N4-Pt/3G exhibited much higher current density than 20% Pt/C and Pt/3G electrodes (Fig. 14b), indicating g-C3N4-Pt/3G has superior electrocatalytic activity for direct methanol fuel cells. The enhanced electrocatalytic efficiency of g-C3N4-Pt/3G can be ascribed to three aspects: (1) the conductive 3D graphene network not only facilitates fast transportation of methanol molecules to the electroactive sites, but it also acts as electronic conductive channels. Second, the uniformly dispersed g-C3N4-Pt nanoparticles on the 3D architecture can reduce Pt use. Finally, the existence of g-C3N4 QDs with high nitrogen content plays a key role in stabilizing the Pt nanoparticles, as well as promotes the elimination of CO-like intermediates of the reaction (Fig. 14c). Similarly, Pt-decorated 3D architectures assembled of graphene and g-C3N4 nanosheets were developed and used as anode electrocatalysts for methanol oxidation.152 Because the g-C3N4-Pt heterostructures on the conductive 3D graphene network support could provide large, hierarchical pores for fast transport of reactants to the electroactive sites, the resulting hybrid catalyst showed excellent electrocatalytic activity, tolerance to poisoning, and robust stability.
 Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of g-C3N4-Pt/3G, Pt/3G, and 20% Pt/C catalysts in (a) 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution and (b) 0.5 M H2SO4 + 0.5 M CH3OH aqueous solution. (c) Schematic diagram of the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol molecules over g-C3N4-Pt/3G. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 Springer Link. 


3.1.5. Electrocatalytic I−/I3− redox couple in dye-sensitized solar cells. 
Due to their simple technology process, low cost, and high energy conversion efficiency, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are considered to be one of the effective ways to solve the energy crisis.153 In DSCs, the counter electrode is one of the important components and is used to catalyse the reduction of the I−/I3− redox couple to produce the dye sensitizer.154 As the most efficient catalytic electrode material, noble Pt presents serious challenges due to its high cost and scarcity. Hence developing low-cost alternatives (such as graphene and g-C3N4) to replace Pt-based counter electrodes of DSCs has become a hot topic.155 Benefiting from the high surface area, good electronic conductivity and mechanical strength of graphene, as well as the high nitrogen content and good stability of g-C3N4, graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids have been very interesting materials with great potential in catalyzing the reduction of I3− in DSCs.
In one paper, a porous graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid was prepared through a hydrothermal method and used as the counter electrode of DSCs.155 The porous graphene/g-C3N4 electrode exhibited a charge-transfer resistance of 1.8 Ω cm2 in the I−/I3− redox electrolyte, much lower than those of pure graphene (32.4 Ω cm2) and g-C3N4 (70.1 Ω cm2) counterparts. This improved electrocatalytic activity of the porous graphene/g-C3N4 electrode is beneficial for enhancing the photovoltaic performance of DSCs, thus leading to a conversion efficiency of 7.13%, which is comparable to that of a cell with a conventional Pt counter electrode. The enhanced electrocatalytic performance of the porous graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid can be attributed to the large amount of electrocatalytic active sites from g-C3N4, the efficient electron-transfer “highways” from graphene, and high accessible surface area from the porous structure.


3.1.6. Electrochemical catalytic sensing. 
In addition to catalysis of the ORR, HER, OER, methanol oxidation and redox process of I−/I3− in DSCs as discussed above, graphene/g-C3N4 based catalysts have also been widely applied for fabricating electrochemical catalytic sensors. Electrodes modified with nanohybrids of carboxylated g-C3N4 and graphene (g-C3N4-graphene) have been used as label-free electrochemiluminescence immunosensors. The antibody of squamous cell carcinoma (anti-SCC) was linked onto carboxylated g-C3N4 in the g-C3N4–graphene hybrid to form an electrode for the detection of squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA).156 In this electrocatalytic system, the specific immunoreaction between g-C3N4 and the antibody gave the sensing currents. This immunosensor showed good reproducibility, long-term stability with a linear range of 0.025–10 ng mL−1 and a detection limit of 8.53 pg mL−1, thus suggesting that it has great potential in SCCA detection. In another paper, a kanamycin photoelectrochemical (PEC) aptamer catalytic sensor was fabricated by using a label-free DNA aptamer in cooperation with GO and water-dispersible g-C3N4 (w-g-C3N4) nanohybrids (aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4).157 To prepare the catalytic sensor, the GO/w-g-C3N4 hybrid was synthesized to modify a F-doped SnO2 (FTO) conducting glass substrate via a drop-coating method (Fig. 15a). Therefore, the GO/w-g-C3N4 hybrid with a large specific surface area and a π-conjugated structure could provide an excellent platform for immobilizing the kanamycin-binding DNA aptamer on its surface via π–π stacking interactions. The photocurrent response test showed good linear dependence of the current on kanamycin concentration in the range of 1 nM to 230 nM with a detection limit (3S/N) of 0.2 nM (Fig. 15b). Furthermore, the selective PEC response of aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO toward various antibiotics such as chloramphenicol, erythromycin, doxycycline, chlorotetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin was also evaluated. As shown in Fig. 15c, all these antibiotics exhibited a negligible response with the PEC aptamer catalytic sensor as compared with kanamycin, declaring the high selectivity of the aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO sensor for kanamycin detection, ascribed to the specific interaction between the aptamer and target kanamycin molecules.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of PEC aptasensing using the GO/w-w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode. (b) Photocurrent catalytic responses of aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at a bias potential of +0.8 V (vs. SCE) before and after incubation with different concentrations of kanamycin: (a) 0, (b) 1, (c) 30, (d) 60, (e) 100, (f) 150, (g) 200, (h) 230 nM. Inset: Linear relationship between PEC response of catalytic sensing and kanamycin concentration. (c) PEC catalytic response of aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at a bias potential of +0.8 V (vs. SCE) before and after incubation with 200 nM kanamycin, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, doxycycline, chlorotetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 

3.2. Photocatalytic reactions
Since polymeric g-C3N4 with a band gap of ca. 2.7 eV has good chemical stability, visible-light response, suitable conduction-band and valence-band levels, it is considered to be a promising metal-free photocatalyst for application in solar-energy conversion.35,158 However, the photocatalytic efficiency of pristine g-C3N4 is low due to its wide band gap (lack of absorption above 460 nm), poor conductivity and high recombination rate of charge carriers, thus hindering its practical applications.35,159 In this regard, various strategies have been proposed to optimize the photoactivity including nanoarchitecture design, composite creation, metal or non-metal doping, and synthesis techniques.160–165 The development of g-C3N4-based composite photocatalysts, especially coupling with carbonaceous nanomaterials, is an appealing one to advance the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4. Among the numerous carbon-based materials, graphene is the most suitable choice due to its huge specific surface area, excellent conductivity and high intrinsic carrier mobility, which could serve as a support matrix to promote charge transfer and separation. In recent years, graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid based catalysts have exhibited wide photocatalytic applications in water splitting, degradation of pollutants, photoreduction of CO2 into hydrocarbon fuels.73

3.2.1. Photo-degradation of pollutants. 
Water pollution becomes more and more serious with industrialization and economic development.166 Photo-degradation of contaminants is one of the most prospective environmental purification technologies due to its low cost, non-secondary pollution and ease of processing. In this regard, a graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid, as an environment-friendly visible-light photocatalyst, has attracted considerable research interest because of its promising application in the degradation of pollutants, such as decomposition of organic matter through oxidation, reduction of heavy metal ion, NOx abatement and killing bacteria.119 In general, a photocatalytic degradation reaction through catalytic oxidation of pollutants with O2 under light illumination produces CO2, water or other compounds.
Among the organic pollutants to evaluate the photoactivity, the most widely used pollutants are rhodamine B (RhB), methylene blue (MB) and methyl orange. The band structure of g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrids (g-C3N4/rGO) could have a big influence on the photocatalytic performance93 (Fig. 16a). The electrochemical test results showed that an appropriate rGO ratio in the g-C3N4/rGO hybrid resulted in a positively shifted VB potential, meaning an increased oxidation capability. Furthermore, the presence of rGO led to improved light-harvesting, enhanced electronic conductivity and good electron transport properties. As a result, an appropriate rGO ratio of 2.5% in the g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrid (called g-C3N4/rGO-2.5%) led to almost 3.0 times better efficiency than that of pure g-C3N4 toward photocatalytic degradation of RhB. Besides RhB, the optimal g-C3N4/rGO-2.5% catalyst was also 2.7 times more efficient than pure g-C3N4 in the photocatalytic degradation of 4-nitrophenol (Fig. 16b and c). Liao et al. synthesized a graphene oxide modified g-C3N4 (GO/g-C3N4) using a sonochemical approach. g-C3N4 absorbed visible light and was excited under illumination.111 The photoinduced electrons generated on the VB of g-C3N4 were transferred to the CB, and the GO sheet, which inhibited the electron–hole pair recombination and enhanced the separation efficiency. In this way, the abundant holes left on the VB of g-C3N4 could oxidize RhB and 2,4-dichlorophenol. GO/g-C3N4 showed an enhancement factor of 3.80 and 2.08 toward the degradation of RhB and 2,4-dichlorophenol over pristine g-C3N4. Similar observations were made when the graphene/g-C3N4 based photocatalysts were applied in the photocatalytic degradation of MB and other organic pollutants. A GO/g-C3N4 nanocomposite was successfully prepared via anchoring exfoliated g-C3N4 onto a GO surface.113 This hybrid showed advanced MB degradation performance compared to pure g-C3N4, the photocatalyst formed with a physical mixture of g-C3N4 and GO, and even commercial P25. In another related work by using cyanamide and graphene as precursors, a porous g-C3N4/graphene hybrid was developed by integrating graphene with porous g-C3N4 for the photocatalytic degradation of MB.94 The resulting hybrid exhibited a marked enhancement of photocatalytic degradation of MB, and the efficiency was six times larger than that of pure g-C3N4.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the band structures of pure g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrids. (b) Recycle test of the g-C3N4/rGO-2.5% catalyst towards RhB degradation for 75 min and (c) photocatalytic activities for the g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO photocatalysis system towards 4-nitrophenol degradation for 150 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Apart from the above-mentioned graphene/g-C3N4 binary nanohybrids, graphene/g-C3N4 based ternary heterojunctions have also been exploited. For example, a novel AgBr supported on g-C3N4-decorated N-doped graphene ternary superhybrid (AgBr/g-C3N4/NG-x) was fabricated by a combined polymerization and ion exchange approach.114 The AgBr/g-C3N4/NG-50 catalyst (the content of g-C3N4/NG in AgBr/g-C3N4/NG-x was 50 wt%) showed the highest photocatalytic degradation activity with a kapp of 0.51 min−1 compared to other control samples, and a further increase in g-C3N4/NG content resulted in decreased photocatalytic performance (Fig. 17a and b). This result indicated that the excess of black g-C3N4/NG might shield the active sites on the catalyst surface and reduce the light penetration depth in the reaction solution. The proposed reaction mechanism is shown in Fig. 17c. Since the conduction band energy levels of AgBr and g-C3N4 are at ca. −0.8 and 1.8 eV (vs. normal hydrogen electrode, NHE), and the valence band energy levels of AgBr and g-C3N4 are at ca. −1.3 and 1.4 eV (vs. NHE), they can be excited under visible-light irradiation and they are thermodynamically favorable for a CO2 reduction reaction. Upon light irradiation, both AgBr and g-C3N4 are excited, the photogenerated electrons on the CB of g-C3N4 would be quickly injected into that of AgBr due to the thermodynamic driving force. Meanwhile, the photoinduced holes on the VB of AgBr would transfer to that of g-C3N4. Moreover, it was revealed that the NG in this ternary hybrid can serve as an electron collector and transporter to extend the charge carrier lifetime, where the photoinduced electrons can be quickly transferred to the NG surface. Hence, separation of photogenerated carriers at the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG hybrid interface and suppression of electron–hole recombination can be successfully improved, which leads to excellent photocatalytic activity for reduction of MO.
 Fig. 17  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of MO in the presence of different photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation. (b) The comparison of apparent rate constant (kapp) of the obtained photocatalysts for MO degradation. (c) The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for photodegradation of organic pollutants over the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG nanocomposite photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
In another study, Fe(III) was successfully incorporated into a graphene/g-C3N4 binary composite.167 The introduction into graphene made Fe(III) smaller in size with uniform distribution, which was attributed to the synergistic interaction between the Fe(III) species and graphene. Evidently, the Fe(III)/graphene/g-C3N4 nanohybrid (25%-Fe/G/g-C3N4) exhibited enhanced visible-light absorption, decreased charge recombination because of the presence of graphene for rapid electron transfer (Fig. 18b) relative to the 25%-Fe/g-C3N4 binary composite without graphene (Fig. 18a). In another study, g-C3N4 hybridized with CdS nanoparticles and rGO sheets (g-C3N4/CdS/rGO) were synthesized.115 The g-C3N4/CdS/rGO composite showed superior photocatalytic degradation activity for RhB and Congo red dyes. Importantly, no noticeable change in photodegradation efficiency was detected after three consecutive cycles, inferring that the g-C3N4/CdS/rGO hybrid has good stability for practical benefits. It is believed that graphene and g-C3N4 can serve as supports for noble metal nanoparticles, and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of the loaded noble metals can enhance visible-light absorption. Furthermore, an Au-loaded porous g-C3N4/graphene layered hybrid was also fabricated.107 This ternary plasmonic photocatalyst showed improved photocatalytic activity towards the degradation of MB and ciprofloxacin, which can be ascribed to graphene facilitated separation of photoinduced carriers, and the SPR excitation in Au nanoparticles.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of electron–hole separation over (a) 25%-Fe/G/g-C3N4 and (b) 25%-Fe/g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
NOx is one of the main pollutants in air, and NOx abatement is of importance for human health. As a catalyst, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid opens a new door for this research. A mesoporous g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrid was synthesized by a facial sonochemical method using dicyandiamide and GO as precursors, which demonstrated the photocatalytic oxidation of NO under visible light.168 It was found that the NO removal ratio of mesoporous g-C3N4 (50.3%) exceeds that of g-C3N4 because of the increase in surface area and pore volume. The mesoporous g-C3N4/graphene hybrid displayed a NO removal ratio of 64.9%, which was higher than those of pure g-C3N4 (16.8%) and mesoporous g-C3N4/GO (60.7%), confirming that the synergistic effect between mesoporous g-C3N4 and graphene is vital for the photoactivity. Based on the UV-Vis DRS data, the band edges of mesoporous g-C3N4/G or mesoporous g-C3N4/GO showed an obvious redshift and their CB level shifted to a more negative position compared to that of mesoporous g-C3N4. These results indicated that the introduction of G/GO sheets could improve the visible-light response of mesoporous g-C3N4, and the mesoporous g-C3N4/G hybrid with a higher reduction power of photogenerated electrons was favorable for the active species generation of ˙O2− radicals.
Besides that, two distinctive structures were fabricated by wrapping α-sulfur (α-S8) with rGO and g-C3N4 sheets (g-C3N4/rGO/S8 and rGO/g-C3N4/S8) in different orders for the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation under visible light,169 which displayed dissimilar photocatalytic inactivation efficiency toward E. coli K-12 cells under different aerobic and anaerobic conditions due to their different valence-band maximum and conduction-band minimum (Fig. 19a). As shown in Fig. 19b, g-C3N4/rGO/S8 exhibited much higher photocatalytic bacterial inactivation efficiency than rGO/g-C3N4/S8 under the aerobic atmosphere. However, under anaerobic conditions, g-C3N4/rGO/S8 showed lower bactericidal performance relative to rGO/g-C3N4/S8 (Fig. 19c). These results indicated that the photocatalytic inactivation followed a photocatalytic reductive route in the absence of O2.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation mechanisms of g-C3N4/rGO/S8, rGO/g-C3N4/S8 under aerobic conditions, and anaerobic conditions. Photocatalytic inactivation efficiencies against E. coli K-12 in the presence of the as-prepared samples under aerobic conditions (b) and anaerobic conditions (c) under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 


3.2.2. Photocatalytic water splitting. 
Hydrogen has high energy density (140 MJ kg−1, three times of petrol). The generation of H2 from water by solar photocatalysis is an ideal technology for avoiding environmental pollution and energy deficiency.170–172 To date, g-C3N4 photocatalysts have been widely developed due to their unique electronic and optical properties that can split water into H2 and O2 under visible light. The photocatalytic H2 production efficiency of g-C3N4 can be improved by combining with graphene to form g-C3N4/graphene hybrids. Graphene with the π-conjugated structures has the capability of accepting and transporting photogenerated electrons, which could in turn inhibit the recombination of charge carriers on g-C3N4 and therefore cause an enhancement of the photocatalytic performance.
In one report, g-C3N4 was grown on graphene sheets using a combined impregnation-chemical reduction strategy.90 The obtained graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids were employed for the production of H2 from photocatalytic water splitting in the presence of 1.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst. As shown in Fig. 20a, graphene/g-C3N4 with 1.0 wt% graphene (G/g-C3N4-1.0) displayed a H2 evolution rate of 451 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 3 times greater than that of bare g-C3N4 (G/g-C3N4-0). Fascinatingly, the photocatalytic activity of the hybrids increased with the increase in graphene content (from 0.25 to 1.0 wt%); however, a further increase in graphene content (2.0 and 5.0 wt%) led to a rapid reduction. These results indicate that a suitable graphene content is crucial for optimizing the photocatalytic activity of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids. PL analysis and transient photocurrent response measurement confirmed the role of graphene as a conducting medium for photoinduced electrons, which effectively separated the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhanced H2 generation activity.
 Fig. 20  (a) Photocatalytic H2 production of G/g-C3N4-0, G/g-C3N4-0.25, G/g-C3N4-0.5, G/g-C3N4-1.0 and G/g-C3N4-5.0, and N-doped TiO2 under visible-light irradiation. (b) Proposed mechanism for improved electron transfer over the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 20b shows the proposed mechanism for the enhanced electron transfer in the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids. Upon visible-light illumination, photoinduced electrons are generated in g-C3N4 and excited from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), meanwhile creating holes in the VB. For the pure g-C3N4 system, these charge carriers rapidly recombine, and only a fraction of electrons can be injected into Pt nanoparticles because of a Schottky barrier. However, when g-C3N4 is coupled with graphene, the photogenerated electrons on the CB of g-C3N4 tend to transfer to graphene owing to its excellent electronic conductivity, thus leading to electron–hole separation. Subsequently, the captured electrons will accumulate in the Pt nanoparticles on graphene sheets and then react with water to generate H2.
Using the idea of employing graphene as an electron mediator, a protonated g-C3N4 and rGO hybrid (p-g-C3N4/rGO) was produced by combining porous p-g-C3N4 with rGO via an electrostatic self-assembly strategy and microwave hydrothermal treatment. There is an intimate contact between p-g-C3N4 and rGO due to the electrostatic interaction of the positively charged p-g-C3N4 and negatively charged rGO. The resulting p-GCN/rGO hybrid showed enhanced visible-light absorption and lower charge recombination rate in the presence of graphene due to rapid electron transfer. As a result, its H2 evolution performance was up to 557 μmol h−1 g−1, much better than those of single component samples.173 Similar phenomena were observed for a g-C3N4 and nitrogenated rGO (N-rGO) nanohybrid (g-C3N4/N-rGO).174 DFT elucidates that the g-C3N4/N-rGO composite has a charge transfer from the highest occupied molecular orbital of N-rGO to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of g-C3N4. This calculated magnitude of charge transfer in C3N4-N-rGO is 0.31 e−, higher than those of the corresponding physical mixtures without the cross-linked bonds (0.23 e−), suggesting that cross-linking in the g-C3N4/N-rGO system induces planarity with efficient carrier transfer.
Due to the excellent optical and electrical properties, quantum dot-based photocatalysts have attracted widespread research interest. In one paper, nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQDs) with a diameter of 2–6 nm was incorporated into a g-C3N4 sheet to form a N-GQDs/g-C3N4 composite.175 The N-GQDs were observed to display good upconversion properties when excited with 600–800 nm light, and they produced emissions in the range of 400–600 nm (Fig. 21a). The results indicated that N-GQDs can convert NIR to visible light, which makes the materials useful as energy-transfer components in a photocatalysis reaction system. As shown in Fig. 21b, g-C3N4 absorbed light and generated electrons and holes. Then, the photoinduced electrons transferred to the N-GQDs surface, whereas the holes reacted with a sacrificial reagent. Consequently, the high recombination rate of photogenerated electrons and holes is inhibited, resulting in a high H2 evolution rate of 2.18 mmol h−1 g−1. In another study, a three component system of N-GQDs/ZnNb2O6/g-C3N4 was designed using a hydrothermal reaction for efficient visible-light H2 generation.176 The introduced N-GQDs could act as light absorbers to excite g-C3N4 to produce more electron–hole pairs, and the photogenerated electrons tended to inject into ZnNb2O6, resulting in a maximum H2 evolution rate of 340.9 μmol h−1 g−1.
 Fig. 21  (a) The PL spectra of N-GQDs under 600–800 nm light irradiation. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution for N-GQDs/g-C3N4 under light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
Recently, a multicomponent heterojunction of g-C3N4/rGO/WO3 photocatalysts was synthesized via the hydrothermal method.118 The conduction band and valence band of WO3 were located at ca. +0.41 eV and +3.18 eV, and those of g-C3N4 were at ca. −1.13 eV and +1.57 eV. These results suggested that H2 could be generated from g-C3N4 and O2 evolved from WO3 under irradiation. Briefly, in the presence of a Pt cocatalyst, water is easily reduced by the electrons trapped on Pt from the CB of g-C3N4, and oxidized by photoinduced holes in the VB of WO3. Actually, the electrons on CB of WO3 are easy to combine with the holes in VB of g-C3N4. In this case, the existence of rGO could act as electron mediator due to its good conductivity for electron migration, thus separating the electrons and holes into WO3 and g-C3N4 for the improvement of oxidation and reduction of water into O2 and H2, respectively.
While significant advancements and achievements have been attained for photocatalytic decomposition of water into H2 over the g-C3N4/graphene based catalysts, the current photocatalytic efficiency is still very low for commercial applications. A lot more work is needed to improve the catalyst performance.


3.2.3. CO2 reduction. 
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O is potentially one of the most attractive techniques for CO2-energy conversion to solve the energy crisis and climate change in the future. In the past few years, g-C3N4/graphene-based hybrids have been successfully employed as effective photocatalysts for CO2 photoreduction. CO2 can be converted into HCOOH, CH3OH, CO, CH4, and HCHO during the photocatalytic process.177,178
A graphene/g-C3N4 nanohybrid obtained from direct polymerization of urea in the presence of GO was first reported for the conversion of CO2 to CH4.179 Briefly, graphene plays a key role as an excellent scaffold for electrons significantly prohibiting the electron–hole recombination for enhanced CO2 photoreduction efficiency. As a result, the optimal graphene/g-C3N4 sample exhibited a 2.3-fold storage improvement (5.87 μmol g−1) over its pure g-C3N4 counterpart (2.55 μmol g−1). In order to further improve reduction performance, a 2D/2D heterojunction with intimate interfacial contact between graphene and g-C3N4 was developed.107 They utilized p-g-C3N4 to ease the coupling with rGO to synthesize rGO/p-g-C3N4 samples via electrostatic attraction. Simultaneously, the rGO/pure g-C3N4 (rGO/g-C3N4) sample without the surface charge modification on g-C3N4 was also prepared for comparison. It was found that the rGO/p-g-C3N4 sample with an appropriate rGO ratio of 15% (15rGO/g-C3N4) showed the highest CH4 production of 13.93 μmol g−1, which was 5.4-fold and 1.7-fold higher than those of p-g-C3N4 (2.58μmol g−1) and 15rGO/g-C3N4 (8.29 μmol g−1), respectively (Fig. 22a and b). In addition, it was clarified that the photocatalyst, visible light and reactants (CO2 and H2O) were indispensable for the photoredox process (Fig. 22c). The conspicuously enhanced photocatalytic activity of rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrids over p-g-C3N4 and rGO/g-C3N4 was ascribed to the sufficient interfacial contact between rGO and p-g-C3N4 at the rGO/g-C3N4 heterojunction for efficient charge separation to suppress the electron–hole recombination (Fig. 22d).
 Fig. 22  (a and b) CH4 production of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 photocatalysts with different rGO contents and 15rGO/g-C3N4. (c) Time dependence on the rate of CH4 generation and the control experiments. (d) Schematic illustration of CO2 reduction to CH4 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 

3.3. Catalysts for photoelectrochemical reactions
Graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts have also been used in solar-driven photoelectrochemical water oxidation. Lately, a strongly coupled ternary hybrid aerogel assembled of N-deficient porous g-C3N4 nanosheets (ND-g-C3N4) and NiFe-layered double hydroxide (Ni-Fe-LDH) anchored on a 3D NG skeleton was fabricated via a hydrothermal method.180 The ternary ND-g-C3N4/NG/NiFe-LDH hybrid exhibited a record-high photocurrent density of 162.3 μA cm−2 at 1.4 V (versus the reversible hydrogen electrode, Fig. 23a) with a maximum incident photon-to-current efficiency of 2.5% at 350 nm (Fig. 23b), and prominent photostability under AM 1.5G irradiation. The remarkable photoelectrochemical performance for water oxidation can be attributed to the following aspects: (1) The ND-g-C3N4 hybrid with deficient structures enhances light harvesting. (2) Such a 3D hierarchical structure is beneficial for efficient photogenerated charge separation. (3) The strong coupling effect and interfacial contact among 2D ND-g-C3N4, NG nanosheets, and NiFe-LDH are favorable for charge transfer and photoelectrocatalytic surface reaction kinetics.
 Fig. 23  (a) Transient photocurrents of ND-g-C3N4/NG/NiFe-LDH under AM 1.5G irradiation. (b) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectra of ND-g-C3N4/NG/NiFeLDH, ND-g-C3N4/NG, and ND-g-C3N4 measured at 1.22 V in 0.01 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Catalysts for organic reactions
Graphene/g-C3N4 based nanohybrids are potential catalysts for various organic reactions. In a typical case, a prepared graphene sheets/g-C3N4 nanohybrid (G/g-C3N4) showed high-performance for selective oxidation of secondary C–H bonds of cyclohexane.181,182 In this catalytic system, the high selectivity was ascribed to the fact that the excited electrons from the conduction band (LUMO) of g-C3N4 could reduce molecular oxygen to form ˙O2−, which stays surface-bound to g-C3N4 to compensate for the positive charge of the hole. Simultaneously, the substrates were oxidized by the HOMO (positive hole) of g-C3N4 and then reacted with the surface-bound ˙O2−, thus ensuring the selectivity of the catalytic reaction (Fig. 24). In another paper, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid was prepared for selective oxidation of cyclohexane.182 This kind of composite catalyst exhibited high catalytic activity toward cyclohexane with a total conversion of 6.2% and selectivity of 87%. Furthermore, the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid catalyst can be reused for 5 cycles without apparent loss of catalytic activity.
 Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the oxidation mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Despite the above developments, it is highly desirable to further explore graphene/g-C3N4 based catalysts for various applications, by fully utilizing the unique physical and chemical properties and the aromatic π-conjugated structure functions.
4. Conclusions and perspective
Graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrids indeed present promising catalytic applications in energy conversion, environmental protection, and so on. This review summarized the main synthetic strategies of g-C3N4, graphene, and their hybrids. Besides, the behaviors of the hybrids as multifunctional catalysts for electrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications are also discussed. Graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts provide new opportunities for wide applications, including photo-oxidation, photo- and electro-catalytic hydrogen generation, electrocatalytic OER and sensing, and fuel cells.
Graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts are attractive because of their competitive catalytic activities, dramatically reduced cost, and enhanced stability, which make them feasible alternatives to replace the conventional catalysts. Despite the considerable progress, the exploration of graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts is still in its infancy and there are several challenges to overcome in the near future. First, the catalytic activities of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids depend greatly on their composition and structure. An in-depth study of functional groups, conjugated domains and defective sites of graphene and g-C3N4 can shed new light on the relationship between catalytic kinetics and nanostructure selectivity. Second, the electrical conductivity of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids is low mainly due to their preparation methods. Therefore, advanced techniques for preparing highly conductive graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids with controllable nanostructures are needed to design high-performance catalysts. Third, the catalytic mechanisms of graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts are partly unclear. For instance, the nature of electrocatalytic reactivity of the OER on the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid is controversial. Corresponding theoretical calculations are required for understanding the synergy and OER pathway on the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid. Addressing these issues will lead to full utilization of graphene/g-C3N4 based hybrid catalysts for a wide range of target-specific applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSFC (No. 21325415, 51673026, 51433005), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2152028), National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFB1104300) and Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (Z161100002116022).
Notes and references
C. J. Li and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 68 RSC .
T. Y. Lee and J. Suh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1949 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703 RSC .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Herrmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Schreiner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 289 RSC .
U. Hanefeld, L. Gardossi and E. Magner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 453 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3404 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, R. Luque, V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 481 RSC .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146 RSC .
R. Singh, T. Premkumar, J. Y. Shin and K. E. Geckeler, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Song, K. G. Qu, C. Zhao, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666 RSC .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426 RSC .
X. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666 RSC .
C. C. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848 CAS .
C. Biswas and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3806 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228 RSC .
A. Ambrosi, S. Y. Chee, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 500 Search PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and L. T. Qu, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liebig, Ann. Pharm., 1834, 10, 1 CrossRef .
D. M. Teter and R. J. Hemley, Science, 1996, 271, 53 CAS .
J. E. Lowther, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 11683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, X. F. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. D. Hou, X. Z. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2008, 8, 76 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717 CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. H. Wen, S. M. Cui, X. Guo and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277 RSC .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, J. Ball, C. Mattevi, M. Acik, L. Artiglia, G. Granozzi, Y. Chabal, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11217 RSC .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva and A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7376 RSC .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. H. An, I. W. Jung, R. D. Piner, S. J. An, X. S. Li, A. Velamakanni and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Luo, G. X. Zhang, J. F. Liu and X. M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11327 CAS .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1127 CAS .
J. L. Zhang, H. J. Yang, G. X. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Y. Zhang and S. W. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112 RSC .
X. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Wu, H. Yang, J. Zhang and S. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11957 CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Pei, J. P. Zhao, J. H. Du, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Fan, W. C. Peng, Y. Li, X. Y. Li, S. L. Wang, G. L. Zhang and F. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Dey, S. Hajra, R. K. Sahu, C. R. Raj and M. K. Panigrahi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1787 RSC .
C. Nethravathi and M. Rajamathi, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, G. Q. Qi, K. Ke, Y. Luo, W. Yang, B. H. Xie and M. B. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 5097 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, T. Li, Y. Long, M. Shi, N. Li and M. X. Ye, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2134 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Singh, A. Shukla, M. K. Patra, L. Saini, R. K. Jani, S. R. Vadera and N. Kumar, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2202 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Guo, X. F. Wang, Q. Y. Qian, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Sheng, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, C. B. Cao and H. S. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 1903 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhang, K. Leinenweber, M. Bauer, L. A. J. Garvie, P. F. McMillan and G. H. Wolf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kroke, M. Schwarz, E. Horath-Bordon, P. Kroll, B. Noll and A. D. Norman, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 508 RSC .
H. Montigaud, B. Tanguy, G. Demazeau, I. Alves and S. J. Courjault, Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 2547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cui, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and X. C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, K. Leinenweber, M. Bauer, L. Garvie, P. McMillan and G. Wolf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. X. Guo, Y. Xie, X. J. Wang, S. Y. Zhang, T. Hou and S. C. Lv, Chem. Commun., 2004, 26 RSC .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J. O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jürgens, E. Irran, J. Senker, P. Kroll, H. Müller and W. Schnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10288 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1455 RSC .
K. Kailasam, J. D. Epping, A. Thomas, S. Losse and H. Junge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4668 CAS .
J. Huang, W. Ho and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4338 RSC .
Y. Fukasawa, K. Takanabe, A. Shimojima, M. Antonietti, K. Domen and T. Okubo, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Ying, C. P. Mehnert and M. S. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, K. Sohn and T. Hyeon, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3337 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, C. Anand, S. Varghese, H. Iwai, Q. Ji, K. Ariga, T. Mori and A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3596 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and Y. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, J. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shalom, S. Inal, C. Fettkenhauer, D. Neher and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Arrachart, C. Carcel, P. Trens, J. J. E. Moreau and M. Wong Chi Man, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 6279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, T. J. K. Brenner, Z. Chen, D. Neher, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16481 CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355 CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Yao and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740 RSC .
X. H. Li, J. S. Chen, X. Wang, J. Sun and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Small, 2013, 9, 3336 CAS .
Q. Yu, S. Guo, X. Li and M. Zhang, Mater. Technol., 2014, 29, 172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4517 CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Ou, H. Wang and T. Xu, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 475, 281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, J. Zhu, C. Hu, X. Wu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12555 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, J. Shi, Y. Nan, Y. Sun and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25693 CAS .
Y. Qin, J. Li, J. Yuan, Y. Kong, Y. Tao, F. Lin and S. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 696 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Luo, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, Y. C. Zhai and H. K. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Wang, F. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, S. Chen, G. Shi and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3035 RSC .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao, Z. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. P. Zhang and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Zhang, H. Ma, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, B. Du and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, S. Lee, K. Zhang, J. O. Hwang, J. Han, G. Park, S. O. Kim, J. H. Park and S. Park, Carbon, 2014, 66, 119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, F. Donga and W. K. Ho, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 436, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721 RSC .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, K. A. Alamry and X. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dai, L. Lu, Q. Liu, G. Zhu, X. Wei, J. Bai, L. Xuan and H. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6295 RSC .
H. Y. Li, S. Y. Gan, H. Y. Wang, D. X. Han and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Rajendra, K. Varsha and S. Y. L. Caroline, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12514 RSC .
L. Shao, D. Jiang, P. Xiao, L. Zhu, S. Meng and M. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, X. Fu, Q. Liu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10538 CAS .
G. Zhao, X. Huang, F. Fina, G. Zhang and J. T. S. Irvine, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3416 CAS .
Y. Hou, J. Li, Z. Wen, S. Cui, C. Yuan and J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, Q. Han, F. Zhao, Z. Yuan, N. Chen and L. Qu, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Xue, S. S. Ma, Y. M. Zhou and Q. L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88249 RSC .
Q. Liu and J. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Min, X. F. Qi, Q. J. Xu and Y. C. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1287 RSC .
C. Y. Xu, Q. Han, Y. Zhao, L. X. Wang, Y. Li and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1841 CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nörskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, R. F. Zhou, X. M. Chen, Y. H. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lyth, Y. Nabae, S. Moriya, S. Kuroki, M. Kakimoto, J. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20148 CAS .
K. Kwon, Y. J. Sa, J. Y. Cheon and S. H. Joo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Du, S. Sanvito, Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Jiao, T. Liao, Q. Sun, Y. H. Ng, Z. Zhu, R. Amal and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, R. Ning, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, A. O. A. Youbi and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1011 CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, C. J. Chang and J. R. Long, Nature, 2010, 464, 1329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3571 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shalom, S. Gimenez, F. Schipper, I. Herraiz-Cardona, J. Bisquert and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogasawara, A. D|bart, M. Holzapfel, P. Nov.k and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2009, 324, 1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Singh, V. M. Dhavale and S. Kurungot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 442 CAS .
W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, C. Carlton, M. Risch, Y. Surendranath, S. Chen, S. Furutsuki, A. Yamada, D. G. Nocera and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bajdich, M. Garc.a-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Nørskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Yang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H. Lee, H. Tsao, C. Yi, A. Chandiran, M. Nazeeruddin, E. Diau, C. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Kuang and W. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 11763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Li, X. Y. Zhang, H. M. Ma, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, B. Du and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Li, Y. Liu, L. Cheng, C. Z. Yang and J. D. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang and B. Xing, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Niu, L. C. Yin, Y. Q. Yang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, M. Li, H. Li and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 715 RSC .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Chen, J. S. Zhang, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. R. Datta, B. V. S. Reddy, K. Ariga and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922 CAS .
Y. J. Wang, X. J. Bai, C. S. Pan, J. He and Y. F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11568 RSC .
C. Su, X. Ran, J. Hu and C. Shao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 11562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. R. Guo, Z. H. Chen, Z. G. Zhang and X. M. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Li, Y. J. Sun, F. Dong and W. K. Ho, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 436, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. H. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. C. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Pu, J. Wan, E. Z. Liu, Y. C. Yin, J. Li, Y. G. Ma, J. Fan and X. Y. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 399, 139 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pramoda, U. Gupta, M. Chhetri, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10664 CAS .
J. P. Zou, L. C. Wang, J. Luo, Y. C. Nie, Q. J. Xing, X. B. Luo, H. M. Du, S. L. Luo and S. L. Suib, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yan, Y. Q. Hua, F. F. Zhu, L. Sun, W. Gu and W. D. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 531 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253 CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 353 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858 RSC .
Y. Hou, Z. H. Wen, S. M. Cui, X. L. Feng and J. H. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Li, J. S. Chen, X. C. Wang, J. H. Sun and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Z. G. Chai, C. Li, L. R. Shi, M. X. Liu, Q. Xie, Y. F. Zhang, D. S. Xu, A. Manivannan and Z. F. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine/heptazine structures of g-C3N4.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Preparation of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) TEM image of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. Inset is the pore-size distribution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis process of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and (c) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) Scheme of the experimental procedure for fabrication of the g-C3N4@G MMs. (d) TEM images of the g-C3N4@G MMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrid driven by surface charge modification. (b) TEM image of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG nanocomposite. (b) TEM image of AgBr/g-C3N4/NG, (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectra, (d) time-dependent photocurrent density of (i) g-C3N4, (ii) g-C3N4/NG, (iii) NPs/g-C3N4/NG. The inset in (b) is the HRTEM image of AgBr. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic for the fabrication of g-C3N4-Pt/3G. (b–d) TEM images of g-C3N4-Pt/3G at different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 Spring Link.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Free energy plots of ORR and optimized configuration of adsorbed species on the g-C3N4 surface with zero, two and four electron participation demonstrated as paths I, II and III. (b–d) Schemes of ORR's pathway on g-C3N4 without electron participation, with two electron participation, and with four electron participation, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) TEM and AFM images of G–g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of G-CN800 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in O2 (solid line; lower lying curve) and Ar-saturated (solid line; higher lying curve) 0.1 M KOH solution as well as O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with 3 M methanol (dashed line; the two lower lying curves for the two O2-saturated solutions are fully overlapped). (d) Current–time (I–t) chronoamperometric responses at −0.25 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH of G–g-C3N4-800 and Pt/C electrodes followed by introduction of O2 and methanol (0.3 M). (e) Rotating disk electrode (RDE) voltammograms of G–g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 nanosheets at 1600 rpm. (f) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V for G–g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) AFM image and the corresponding height profile along the lines in the AFM image. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves of the g-C3N4 QDs, g-C3N4 QDs/G and Pt/C catalysts with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. The arrows indicate the position of the half-wave potential (E1/2). (c) Tafel plots of the g-C3N4 QDs/G and Pt/C catalysts. (d) Chronoamperometric responses of g-C3N4 QDs/G for 8 h at −0.3 V in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at 1200 rpm. Inset: RRDE curves of the g-C3N4 QDs/G catalyst at cycle 0 (solid line) and cycle 1000 (dashed line) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in an O2-saturated solution at 1200 rpm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Reaction pathways of the HER on g-C3N4@NG according to the Volmer–Heyrovsky route (a) and Volmer–Tafel route (b). Dashed lines are activation barriers for each reaction step as reported elsewhere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The HER polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of various catalysts (g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G, Pt wire, N–G and g-C3N4, respectively) with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) The polarization curves of g-C3N4 nanoribbon-G with a scan rate from 5 to 100 mV s−1. (d) Time dependence of the current density at 200 mV versus RHE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) of bulk g-C3N4 (curve 1), g-C3N4 nanosheets (curve 2), graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids (curve 3) and graphene (curve 4) on glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs) in 0.1 M KOH. (b) Optical photographs of g-C3N4 nanosheets (left) and graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids (right) on ITO coated glass electrodes as water oxidation anodes. (c) Tafel plots of graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids and g-C3N4. (d) LSVs for graphene/g-C3N4 hybrids before and after CV testing of 1000 cycles in 0.1 M KOH. Inset: The relationship between current density (expressed as mA cm−2, at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and cycle numbers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of g-C3N4-Pt/3G, Pt/3G, and 20% Pt/C catalysts in (a) 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution and (b) 0.5 M H2SO4 + 0.5 M CH3OH aqueous solution. (c) Schematic diagram of the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol molecules over g-C3N4-Pt/3G. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 Springer Link.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of PEC aptasensing using the GO/w-w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode. (b) Photocurrent catalytic responses of aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at a bias potential of +0.8 V (vs. SCE) before and after incubation with different concentrations of kanamycin: (a) 0, (b) 1, (c) 30, (d) 60, (e) 100, (f) 150, (g) 200, (h) 230 nM. Inset: Linear relationship between PEC response of catalytic sensing and kanamycin concentration. (c) PEC catalytic response of aptamer/GO/w-g-C3N4/FTO electrode in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at a bias potential of +0.8 V (vs. SCE) before and after incubation with 200 nM kanamycin, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, doxycycline, chlorotetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the band structures of pure g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrids. (b) Recycle test of the g-C3N4/rGO-2.5% catalyst towards RhB degradation for 75 min and (c) photocatalytic activities for the g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO photocatalysis system towards 4-nitrophenol degradation for 150 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of MO in the presence of different photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation. (b) The comparison of apparent rate constant (kapp) of the obtained photocatalysts for MO degradation. (c) The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for photodegradation of organic pollutants over the AgBr/g-C3N4/NG nanocomposite photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of electron–hole separation over (a) 25%-Fe/G/g-C3N4 and (b) 25%-Fe/g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation mechanisms of g-C3N4/rGO/S8, rGO/g-C3N4/S8 under aerobic conditions, and anaerobic conditions. Photocatalytic inactivation efficiencies against E. coli K-12 in the presence of the as-prepared samples under aerobic conditions (b) and anaerobic conditions (c) under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with the permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Photocatalytic H2 production of G/g-C3N4-0, G/g-C3N4-0.25, G/g-C3N4-0.5, G/g-C3N4-1.0 and G/g-C3N4-5.0, and N-doped TiO2 under visible-light irradiation. (b) Proposed mechanism for improved electron transfer over the graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The PL spectra of N-GQDs under 600–800 nm light irradiation. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution for N-GQDs/g-C3N4 under light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) CH4 production of the rGO/p-g-C3N4 photocatalysts with different rGO contents and 15rGO/g-C3N4. (c) Time dependence on the rate of CH4 generation and the control experiments. (d) Schematic illustration of CO2 reduction to CH4 under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Transient photocurrents of ND-g-C3N4/NG/NiFe-LDH under AM 1.5G irradiation. (b) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectra of ND-g-C3N4/NG/NiFeLDH, ND-g-C3N4/NG, and ND-g-C3N4 measured at 1.22 V in 0.01 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the oxidation mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
