Synthesis and optical properties of II–VI 1D nanostructures   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1NR11612F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1NR11612F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1422-1435Show Chemical TermsSynthesis and optical properties of II–VI 1D nanostructures†

        
          
            Muhammad Iqbal Bakti 
            Utama
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinlong 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dehui 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Handong 
            Sun
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Qihua 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      *ac
aDivision of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371. E-mail: Qihua@ntu.edu.sg
bNational Key Laboratory of Photoelectric Technology and Functional Materials (Culture Base), National Photoelectric Technology and Functional Materials and Application of Science and Technology International Cooperation Base, Northwest University, Xi'an, 710069, People's Republic of China
cDivision of Microelectronics, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
Received 
      29th October 2011
    , Accepted 18th November 2011First published on 3rd January 2012Abstract1D nanostructures from II–VI semiconductors have been demonstrated to exhibit outstanding optical properties with strong promise for novel optoelectronic devices with augmented performance and functionalities. Herein, we present a comprehensive review discussing important topics pertinent to the fundamental properties and applications of II–VI 1D nanostructures. With practical applications in mind, the considerations, principles and experimental techniques on the sample preparation of high quality 1D nanostructures are highlighted. Fundamentals on the optical properties of II–VI materials, along with relevant investigation techniques and recent progress in the field, are also extensively discussed. With the steady development of their synthesis, characterization and device fabrication, it is strongly expected that II–VI 1D nanostructures will assume a unique position in future technology.Handong SunDr Handong Sun obtained his PhD in Physics from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is now working as an assistant professor in the School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. Before he moved to NTU, he had been working in the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Japan, and the Institute of Photonics, The University of Strathclyde, UK. His current research interest is focused on spectroscopic characterization of nanostructured materials (inorganic, organic and hybrid structures), optoelectronic devices, and plasmonics-based physics and devices.Qihua XiongDr Qihua Xiong received his BS degree from Wuhan University and his MS degree from Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received a PhD degree in materials science under the supervision of Prof. Peter Eklund at Pennsylvania State University in 2006. After postdoctoral experience in Prof. Charles Lieber’s group at Harvard University, he joined Nanyang Technological University as a Nanyang assistant professor in 2009. He is a Fellow of the Singapore National Research Foundation. Prof. Xiong’s research focuses on a range of topics in emerging nanomaterials and nanostructures, from fundamental properties and device applications in energy and biosensing.
1. Introduction

Nanostructures, generally defined as systems in possession of at least one dimension with a size between 1 to 100 nm, have garnered immense attention from both curiosity-driven and technologically-motivated research.1–6 Numerous fascinating and groundbreaking advances have been demonstrated on the potential applications of nanostructures, in part due to the unique platform they provide to probe and manifest various size- and structure-dependent material properties where the relevance of quantum confinement effects is greater.
In particular, nanostructures with quasi-one-dimensionality (1D) have been proposed as active components in devices due to their distinguished performance in electronics, photonics, and optoelectronics. Among the examples of 1D nanostructures are carbon nanotubes and semiconductor nanowires—which were originally called “whiskers”—along with the more recent variants such as nanobelts. However, the lack of reliable techniques to produce uniform semiconducting carbon nanotubes has impeded the industrial adoption of carbon nanotube technologies.2 Meanwhile, techniques to prepare high quality semiconducting nanowires with good control and reproducibility have been made available by meticulous studies in the field within the last decade.6 Exciting progress within the last few years in the field of nanowires, as an important research front in nanotechnology, has strengthened the expectation of the pivotal role that nanowires may possibly hold in the future.
II–VI semiconductors (zinc chalcogenides: ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe; cadmium chalcogenides: CdS, CdSe, CdTe) are among a class of materials that has been intensively studied in the field of 1D nanostructures.7–13 II–VI compounds are recognized as promising materials in optoelectronics owing to their high sensitivity and quantum efficiency.7 Additionally, the range of their wide direct band gap implies a flexibility to fabricate optoelectronic devices to work on various wavelengths of choice. Nevertheless, the applications of bulk and films of II–VI semiconductors in industry have been hindered by the strict requirement of epitaxial growth and substrate quality, control of defects, and difficulty in doping as opposed to that of III–V semiconductors. This situation is in direct contrast to 1D nanostructures with good crystallinity and controlled doping which is easier to prepare, facilitating fundamental studies as well as possible device applications of II–VI nanostructures. This review will therefore be focused on the preparation techniques of II–VI 1D nanostructures, the fundamental of optical properties relevant to II–VI materials, and their applications in photonic and optoelectronic devices.
2. Synthesis
The preparation of 1D nanostructures from II–VI semiconductors is a crucial stage for both the study of fundamental properties and applications of the materials toward novel technologies. Thus, as a prerequisite, it is important to develop and utilize reliable methods with the ability to produce well controlled dimensions, morphology, and phase purity of nanostructures with the desired functionality. In this regard, synthesis approaches have been thoroughly explored and proposed as a potential alternative to the production of nanostructures from the more mature top-down fabrication techniques of the semiconductor industry. The advanced lithographic techniques of top-down fabrication have not been able to produce nanomaterials with high throughput, in addition to the escalating production and equipment costs for further structural minimization. Meanwhile, various synthesis techniques, adopting a bottom-up paradigm by constructing structures from smaller building blocks, have been reported to be able to generate 1D nanostructures with high throughput at reasonable cost effectiveness and good reproducibility.2,5 Nevertheless, the capability of top-down processes is not to be depreciated, as the integration of nanostructures into functional and scalable devices may still necessitate the strong organization and spatial control of lithography.
Synthesis of 1D nanostructures is performed by promoting nucleation, crystallization, and growth in only one direction while suppressing the 2D growth. The various strategies that have been demonstrated for the growth of II–VI 1D nanostructures can be categorized according to the reaction media and precursors that are used during the synthesis process, which is either a solution or vapor based technique.3 The great benefits of vapor based techniques lie in their ability to produce very high quality materials due to the high temperature involved in the growth process, which allow the building blocks of the growth to rearrange themselves to develop a long-range ordered crystalline lattice.5,7 Furthermore, the experimental methods and technologies of vapor based techniques are already established, due to their intensive use in semiconductor research and in industry, and thus are compatible with device integration. In comparison, solution based techniques allow a relatively lower temperature (T < 400 °C) to produce nanostructures and is auspicious from the economic standpoint.14,15 However, a major demerit of most of the solution approaches is their difficulty to synthesize well-crystallized nanowires by achieving simultaneously high throughput, well-defined morphology and orientation, and positioning control, thus strongly compromising their integrability into optoelectronic devices and/or productivity.
In the following, we will discuss briefly the growth mechanism and basic principles of the experimental techniques that have been demonstrated to be generally applicable in producing high quality II–VI 1D nanostructures while referring to representative examples, whenever available.
2.1. 
          Growth mechanism
The growth of II–VI 1D nanostructures by the vapor phase typically follows the combination of two possible underlying growth mechanisms: the vapor–liquid–solid and vapor–solid mechanisms. A unique case of self-catalytic growth has also received much attention which warrants further discussion in this review.

2.1.1. Vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth. 
VLS growth16 is well-accepted and among the most widely attributed mechanisms for the growth of nanowires. An in situtransmission electron microscopy (TEM) observation of nanowire growth with the mechanism was demonstrated, which allowed an understanding of the growth stages.17 The kinetics of the growth have also been extensively examined.18–21 A schematic of VLS growth is shown in Fig. 1. VLS growth is promoted by the presence of a metallic particle droplet, whose role resembles the function of a catalyst in a reaction, to direct the 1D growth. Thus, VLS growth is often referred to as “catalytic” growth. The metallic particle then forms a liquid alloy with the supplied vapor species of the materials to be synthesized when the substrate temperature is elevated beyond their eutectic temperature. The alloy thus becomes a preferred adsorption site for vapor since the liquid surface has a high sticking coefficient. Nucleation occurs when the alloy is supersaturated, and the axial growth proceeds by precipitation at the liquid alloy/solid interface. Meanwhile, secondary nucleation events are suppressed due to the higher energy involved than that of crystal step growth, such that precipitation only occurs at the single liquid/solid interface.17 1D growth continues until the delivery of vapor reactant is discontinued or until the temperature is lowered below the eutectic temperature of the catalyst alloy.
 Fig. 1  A schematic of the VLS mechanism for the growth of ME (M = Zn, Cd; E = O, S, Se, Te) nanowires. The growth consists of four stages: (a) formation of metallic catalyst particles, either from intentional introduction to the substrate or due to segregation of the catalyst film at high temperature; (b) formation of alloy with the incorporation of the supplied ME vapor into the catalyst; (c) supersaturation in the alloy, resulting in the precipitation of a nucleation centre of ME crystal; (d) axial elongation, culminating into ME nanowires. The schematic represents a randomly-oriented growth of nanowires, which does not necessitate any chemical or epitaxial relation to the substrate. 
The presence of a metal-rich particle at the tip of the nanowire is generally considered as an evidence of the VLS mechanism.16 However, the particle may also be detached due to interfacial dewetting and thermal strain during the cooling process6 or consumed during the growth.22 Noble metals (Ag, Pt, Ni, and especially Au) are generally used as the catalyst particle, and an appropriate choice of catalyst and growth temperature for the synthesis of a certain II–VI compound can be determined with the aid of pseudo-binary phase diagram.23 The catalyst particle may also be used to control the diameter of the resulting nanowires, owing to the lateral growth confinement it provides.24 However, the metallic catalyst may diffuse from the tip22 and get incorporated into the nanowire as a contaminant, which causes concern, as such metallic contamination may affect the electronic and optical properties of the nanowires.25


2.1.2. Self-catalytic growth. 
A special case of VLS growth called self-catalytic growth arises when the constituent metallic element of a compound serves as the catalyst, such as Zn for the growth of zinc chalcogenides, thus eliminating the need for a foreign catalyst which may evoke undesired contamination.26 To follow the mechanism, the catalyst can be generated by pyrolysis of the source material at high vacuum and temperature or through assisted decomposition by chemical reaction with the carrier gas or additives. Similar to the conventional VLS mechanism, the catalyst particle may remain at the tip, as has been demonstrated for ZnSe nanowire.27 However, the majority of published works on self-catalytic growth reported the absence of catalyst particle or any metal-rich site in the nanowires. Instead, tapered tip is often observed on the otherwise uniform diameter nanowire.28–32 The lack of catalyst site can be ascribed to the conversion of the catalyst into the material of the nanowire as suggested from real-time TEM observation of the GaN nanowires growth.31 In absence of catalyst particle on the nanowire product, the growth of nanowires without the use of foreign metal catalyst can be attributed to self-catalytic growth by consideration of the synthesis condition with regards to the feasibility of catalyst generation and alloying with the vapor reactant to follow VLS growth26–31 and the agreement of experimental results with the kinetics and general characteristics of a catalyzed growth.28 Improvements on the controllability of self-catalytic mechanism, such as rational manipulation of the size and positioning of the synthesized product, are still necessary to fully exploit its demonstrated potential to produce high quality and purity nanowires.


2.1.3. Vapor–solid (VS) growth. 
VS growth is a spontaneous condensation process of vapor into solid material induced by the decrease in Gibbs free energy from crystallization or the decrease in supersaturation.12 VS growth is often invoked to explain the growth of 1D nanostructures without any catalyst. Specifically, the growth mechanism has been associated with the radial thickening and tapering of nanowires, due to direct adsorption of gas to the crystallized nanowires, and the growth of nanobelts.
Nanobelts33—also commonly called nanoribbons—are 1D nanostructures that are subjected to a pronounced lateral growth which accompanies the axial elongation, resulting in rectangular cross sections. Nanobelts are generally conceived in the wurtzite phase and numerous studies on nanobelts have been conveniently performed using II–VI materials, which can assume a stable wurtzite phase under appropriate ambient conditions.34
Competition between surface energy minimization (which favors the formation of nanobelts) and kinetics of crystal growth (which controls the formation of nanowires) determines the prevailing morphology during VS growth.35 When the vapor precursor condensed at the substrate, the cation–anion adatoms form a small nucleus while preserving the balance of local charge and structural symmetry. Due to the difference in the kinetic parameters for each crystal plane, anisotropic growth will result and the nucleus will develop well-defined, low index crystallographic faces.9 However, when the temperature is sufficiently high, accumulation of arriving atoms onto the smooth low-index surface is prevented by the high diffusivity of the adatoms, thus resulting in the expansion of surface area as more molecules stick on the rougher growth front to form the nanobelts. Higher supersaturation of the vapor phase has also been shown to improve the 2D nucleation probability on the surface of a nanowire to facilitate the growth of sheet-like structures,5,35 such that the dimension of a nanobelt can be controlled by adjusting the growth temperature, the supersaturation ratio and the growth time.

2.2. Experimental techniques
According to the setup and route to generate the vapor species, the vapor based techniques commonly employed to synthesize II–VI 1D nanostructures are thermal evaporation, laser-assisted growth, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).
The thermal evaporation technique is the most popular approach by virtue of its simplicity and effectiveness in synthesizing diverse nanostructure morphologies from various materials.29 The technique uses powder or condensed source materials that are vaporized at an elevated temperature, where the resulting vapor phase is transported and deposited onto a substrate within a tube furnace. The growth parameters are carefully chosen to form the intended products: (a) the type of source, which may determine the phase and stoichiometry of the product; (b) the vaporization temperature of the source materials, by considering the volatility of the source; (c) the pressure of the growth chamber, to control the evaporation rate and vapor pressure of the source; (d) the substrate temperature, which will strongly determine the type of product to be obtained; (e) the carrier gas and its flow rate, to allow certain chemical reaction to occur during vapor transportation and to tune the growth rate; and (f) the evaporation time, which will influence the amount and size of the products. Nanowires and nanobelts from all of the zinc chalcogenides27,29,36–43 and cadmium chalcogenides28,44–47 have been produced with thermal evaporation by following the VLS and VS mechanism. A typical schematic of the setup and selection of electron micrograph of 1D nanostructures produced with the method are given in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Typical experimental setup of the thermal evaporation method to synthesize II–VI 1D nanostructures. Scanning electron microscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of (b,c) ZnO nanowires, (d,e) CdSe nanowires, and (f,g) ZnS nanobelts. The single crystallinity demonstrated by the uniform fringes on the HRTEM images exemplified the high crystalline quality that can be produced via the synthesis technique. (Fig. a,d,e are adapted from ref. 28 with permission; Fig. b,c are adapted from ref. 36 with permission; Fig. f,g are adapted from ref. 38 with permission.) 

Laser ablation is a process whereby a laser, either pulsed or continuous wave, ablates a solid target containing the desired elements to construct 1D nanostructures.48 The clusters of vaporized material are thus collected by a cold finger or a wafer inside a growth chamber with a controllable environment, where the nanostructures are formed. The synthesis with laser ablation has since been accomplished with a broader range of material, including ZnO,30 ZnS,49–51ZnSe, CdS, CdSe23 and CdTe,52 demonstrating the general applicability of the technique.

MBE is an epitaxial growth technique of semiconductor compounds involving the reaction of thermal molecular beams on a substrate under ultra-high vacuum conditions.53 When the level of a vacuum is sufficiently high (∼10−8 Pa), the mean free path of molecules may exceed the separation between the source and the substrate. The condition, called the Knudsen regime, allows the generation of the molecular beam to produce structures with great control of precision, stoichiometry and growth rate. Several groups have demonstrated the applicability of the approach for the growth of ZnO,54 ZnS,55ZnSe56 and ZnTe57nanowires. Nevertheless, the issue of low growth rate, impracticality of ultra high vacuum, and the requirement of very high purity sources have to be resolved before MBE can receive wider usages in the industrial production of nanowires.

MOCVD is a deposition technique where at least one of the precursor gases is a metallic atom (such as Zn from ZnO) attached to an organic compound with a sufficiently high vapor pressure. The precursor gas experiences pyrolytic reactions in a furnace at elevated temperatures, where the metallic atom is deposited on the substrate while the organic compound is removed from the reaction chamber. MOCVD-grown nanowires have also been demonstrated for II–VI nanowires.58–63 But as opposed to MBE, MOCVD can accomplish high volume growth with its high intake of precursor gas and possibility to use a large diameter substrate to harvest more nanostructures. Yet, difficulties exist for the MOCVD process, such as the use of highly toxic gases and complicated chemistry, causing undue increases of production cost.
2.3. Epitaxial growth of nanowire arrays
An unique scenario may occur when the II–VI nanowires are grown epitaxially on the surface of the substrate, i.e., when the crystal building block of the II–VI material is arranged in orderly fashion by consistently following a specific orientational relation. When the fast growth plane of the nanowires is the plane to be heterointerfaced with the substrate, the nanowires will grow perpendicularly from the substrate into a nanowire array. Unlike non-heteroepitaxial nanowires which are randomly oriented (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2a), epitaxial nanowire arrays possess strong alignment in the vertical direction (such as Fig. 2b). Such alignment can be utilized to harvest certain orientation-dependent physical properties or phenomena exhibited by each nanowire, which is essential in scalable applications.28 Additionally, in situgrowth in nanowire array structures also enables lattice relaxation in lateral directions, allowing a larger critical height prior to defect nucleations than that of similar lattice-mismatched epitaxial thin films.64,65 Epitaxial nanowire arrays of II–VI materials were first reported in ZnO,66 and have since been extensively studied in a broad range of applications.
Conventional heteroepitaxy creates covalent bonds at the heterointerface, thus requiring a matching of in-plane lattice parameters between the nanowire and the substrate. Otherwise, crystalline defects that are deleterious to the electronic and photonic properties of the nanowires will occur. An epitaxial strategy called van der Waals epitaxy has been proposed in thin film growth67 to relieve the lattice matching requirements by using substrates that promote van der Waals interaction—instead of stronger chemical bonds—to connect the heterojunction. The van der Waals epitaxy has been attributed to the growth of CdS, CdSe (Fig. 2a,b) and CdTe nanowire arrays with excellent crystalline and luminescent qualities on a muscovite mica substrate,28,68 thus also presenting a strong prospect for application to other classes of compounds regardless of the lattice mismatch.
3. Fundamentals of optical properties
3.1. Band structure
Optical transitions in semiconductors occur between the valence and conduction bands. Therefore the studies of optical processes and potential device applications require a complete knowledge of the band structure. For II–VI semiconductors, the band structure of wurtzite, zincblende, and rocksalt polytypes have been theoretically investigated by varying the degree of complexity. For wurtzite-type materials, the valence bands originate from atomic p-like states whose symmetry is lower than that of the diamond and zincblende cases. In comparison, the minimum of the conduction band is s-like state with Γ7 symmetry.69 Spin–orbit coupling and crystal field split the valence band into three sub-bands, resulting in a series of exciton states which are denoted in the decreasing order of energy as A (Γ9, also referred to as “heavy hole”), B (Γ7, or “light hole”), and C (Γ7, or “split-off [SO] band”).70,71 In order to observe different excitonic transitions, one should consider the selection rules of polarization.72 The transition energies of the intrinsic excitons can be measured by employing low-temperature absorption,73 reflection,74 photoreflectance (PR)75 and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy techniques.76,77 For example, the photon energy of free excitons A and B (FX) in wurtzite ZnS nanowires was determined by a low-temperature PL measurement to be 3.778 eV and 3.844 eV, respectively.78
3.2. Exciton and exciton complex
An exciton is a quasi-particle consisting of the bound state of an electron and a hole interacting through the electrostatic Coulombic force. Excitons behave similarly to a bosonic particle freely moving in the crystal lattice of a semiconductor. In comparison to free charge carriers, excitons demonstrate superior characteristics, such as large oscillator strength, narrow energy distribution of optical gain, and more varieties of possible interactions with electrons or phonons. Moreover, excitons have a dynamic electric dipole, which can couple with an electromagnetic wave, or light. In principle, this coupling between a particle (exciton) and a field (electromagnetic cavity mode) can be used to achieve zero threshold laser diodes.79 The exciton–polariton coupling strength in the nanoscale is also significantly enhanced from that in the bulk, as was recently reported with CdS nanowire optical cavities.80 In 1D semiconductor materials, we shall be concerned with Wannier excitons only.
There are two important optical processes which involve emission of radiation from the semiconductors, namely, luminescence and inelastic scattering of light (also known as Raman scattering). In a typical luminescent process, electrons in the ground state are excited to a higher energy state, where after some energy loss (i.e., relaxation) the excited electrons return to the ground state by the emission of photons. There are several categories of transitions that may happen in a PL process, as shown in Fig. 3, depending on the sample and experimental conditions such as temperature and excitation energy. For instance, instead of a free carrier recombination processes, the corresponding exciton recombination processes in the case of a semiconductor with strong Coulombic interaction between the electron and hole are FX, donor-bound excitons, and acceptor-bound excitons.71 The donor or acceptor can be either neutral at low temperature or ionized at high temperatures. The transition energy difference between these excitonic emission and the free carrier recombination processes is defined as the exciton binding energy.
 Fig. 3  Recombination processes in a semiconductor. (a) Band-to-band recombination. (b) Band-to-acceptor transition. (c) Donor-to-valence transition. (d) Donor-to-acceptor-pair transition. (e) Recombination via a deep center. (f) Non-radiative recombination via an intermediate state. (g) Band-to-band Auger recombination. 

3.2.1. Exciton dynamics probed by steady state photo-luminescence. 

            PL is used to study the optical properties of semiconductors. This is because PL provides very rich information on both the intrinsic recombination processes and various radiative recombination processes associated with imperfections of a sample. With low temperature PL spectra, detailed information about the semiconductor properties could be obtained, such as exciton, phonon, and donor binding energy. Those properties are very useful in giving a good picture of the optical quality of semiconductor material.
Due to the difference in their densities of state (DOS), the relative intensity of the defect and FX transition shows a very different trend with the variation of excitation densities. As shown in Fig. 4a, for ZnS nanowires at low temperature, the shallow level emission demonstrates a faster saturation compared with FXs and could not be resolved at moderate excitation density.78 It is necessary to note that the PL emission for II–VI 1D nanostructures may show a gradual red shift with increased excitation density, which can be ascribed to laser heating effect commonly observed in other classes of nanostructures.81
 Fig. 4  (a) Evolution of the PL spectra of ZnS nanowires measured at 10 K under different excitation densities. The dashed vertical lines are a guide for the eyes. (b) Temperature-dependent PL mapping of ZnS nanowires measured at an excitation density ∼9.4 mW cm−2. All data were normalized by FXB intensity and the dashed lines follow the peak positions. (Adapted from ref. 78 with permission.) 
With the change of the temperature of the sample, a thermal shift of the band gap of semiconductors can be observed. The band gap shrinkage is related to the thermal dilation of the crystal lattice as well as electron–phonon interactions. As shown in Fig. 4b, the temperature dependence of the emission can be described by both the Varshni formula82 and the Bose–Einstein expression.83 Furthermore, the temperature dependence of full width at half-maximum (FWHM) can be described by electron–phonon coupling.84 Therefore, the determination of the exciton-longitudinal optical (LO) phonon coupling strength is thus made possible.


3.2.2. Optical absorption and ultrafast spectroscopy. 
Excitons are generated from optical absorption, which are the case for II–VI nanostructures with high exciton binding energies. The non-equilibrium carriers will select channels (either radiative or non-radiative) to return to equilibrium.85 Ultrafast spectroscopy—such as time-resolved PL spectroscopy, optical pump–probe absorption, transmission, reflection or second harmonic generation (SHG) spectroscopy—is a highly sensitive technique that can be used to monitor the processes experienced by those carriers, to measure the time required by the carriers to traverse each channel (i.e., exciton lifetime), and to understand the mechanism of the energy loss from the carriers (e.g. by exciton–exciton, exciton–phonon, electron–exciton, or electron–phonon interactions).
Exciton lifetime is very sensitive to crystal quality, where the lifetime is longer for samples with improved crystal quality. We have reported a bi-exponential decay for high-quality ZnS nanowires grown by pulsed laser vaporization.78 Room-temperature time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements produced decay times of 0.45 and 2.7 ns, most probably representing the non-radiative and the intrinsic radiative lifetime of the free excitons, respectively.
Interestingly, the ultrafast processes of carriers under one-dimensional confinement change dramatically from their bulk counterparts. For example, the lifetime of both electrons and holes decrease with decreasing nanowire diameter, which are attributed to the surface effects.86 Comparison between ZnO nanowires and films also suggests that the decay lifetime of electron in nanowires is half as long as that in films, which results from the increased electron interaction with interfaces and grain boundaries in nanowires.87
The following discussion focuses on the unique physical properties of II–VI 1D nanostructures, especially those of nanowires and nanobelts, for optical absorption and ultrafast phenomena as compared to bulk materials and nanocrystals. Firstly, nanowire absorption showed sizeable absorption cross sections in visible region in the range of 10−12 cm2 μm−1 to 10−10 cm2 μm−1, which is roughly one order larger than those of nanocrystals and is thus valuable for photodetector and photovoltaic applications.88 These 1D materials have intrinsically anisotropic physical properties.89 As an example, polarization-sensitive photodetectors can be fabricated from CdSe nanowires,90 and the origin of this polarization sensitivity stems from the potential dielectric contrast effects as well as from the confinement-induced optical selection rules. By PL spectroscopy from single CdSe and CdSe/CdS core/shell nanowires, Giblin et al. suggested that even though confinement may play a role in determining the magnitude of observed anisotropy values, dielectric contrast influences appear to dominate the overall nanowire anisotropy response.91
Secondly, as compared to bulk materials, II–VI 1D nanostructures have very rich luminescent properties induced by intrinsic defects. For example, during vapor transport chemical vapor deposition synthesis, stoichiometric intrinsic defects such as such as vacancies (VS and VCd), interstitials (SI and SCd), and anti-sites (SCd and CdS) for CdS for CdS nanobelts will be unintentionally formed, as vapor pressures for II and VI group elements are very different at certain temperatures. Fig. 5a shows a PL spectrum measured at 10 K for CdS nanobelts and fitted with multiple Gaussian functions to determine the peak positions and width. The emission peak at 2.543 eV is attributed to neutral donor bound excitons, historically labeled as I2. The peak near 2.531 eV is from I1, referring to excitons bound to a neutral acceptor. A series of peaks between 2.416–2.266 eV demonstrate characteristic multiple phonon replicas with an energy spacing of approximately one LO phonon (i.e. 37 meV). Fig. 5b summarizes the energy levels of all intrinsic defects of interest obtained by first principle method. First principle calculations verify that the shallow donors in CdS are contributed by sulfur vacancies while the acceptors are contributed by cadmium vacancies with a spin imbalance (Fig. 5c).92 Our results suggest that these two vacancy states facilitate the formation of I2 with a fast decay dynamics on the order of tens to hundreds of picoseconds, and a donor–acceptor-pair (DAP) exciton complex with a much slower decay process on the order of hundreds of nanoseconds due to the spin polarization. Fig. 5d depicts the transient PL decay (normalized) of I2 in CdS nanobelts at 10 K with pump power ranging from 1 μW to 20 μW. At low pump power, only one decay lifetime τ1 due to the single exciton decay was observed. As power increases further, a faster decay lifetime τ2 due to multi-exciton interactions appears. Fig. 5e displays three emission decays centered at the three different wavelengths of the zero-phonon DAP PL spectrum. Closer (more energetic) donor–acceptor pairs undergo faster radiative recombination rates, which shows the characteristic of DAP decay. Our results suggest the promise of engineering the luminescent properties in terms of both energy and lifetime of nanomaterials by controlling the species of defects.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL fine structure of CdS nanobelts at 10 K with a 325 nm He-Cd laser excitation. The blue curves are Gaussian line-shape decompositions with each peak clearly labeled. (b) Summary of the band diagram of CdS showing the intrinsic defect levels from the first-principle calculation (units in eV). (c) Calculated electronic density of states (DOS) of CdS with cadmium vacancy (upper panel) and sulphur vacancy (lower panel). The arrows indicate the defect levels, which also reveal a spin imbalance in the case of cadmium vacancy. (d) Transient PL decay (normalized) of I2 in CdS nanobelts at 10 K with pump power ranging from 1 μW to 20 μW. At low pump power, only one decay lifetime τ1 was observed. As power increases further, a faster decay lifetime τ2 due to multiexciton interactions was observed. (e) The normalized transient PL decay dynamics of the DAP emission at three different wavelengths. (Adapted from ref. 92 with permission.) 
Thirdly, the Auger process is an important non-radiative channel, which happens frequently in nanostructures, especially for the nanocrystals. The Auger recombination rates in 1D systems are effectively suppressed, in contrast from those in nanocrystals.93 The strongly reduced Auger decay rates lead to increased optical gain-lifetime and hence efficient light amplification, which will generate amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) or lasing.94 This Auger process is population (pump intensity) dependent in one-dimensional materials. Robel et al. suggested that at high electron–hole pair densities, the dominant process is bimolecular (exciton–exciton) Auger recombination, while a three-carrier Auger relaxation mechanism which usually happens in bulk materials and nanocrystals occurs under low excitation intensity for small-diameter (between 6 and 8 nm) CdSe nanowires.95
Fourthly, ASE or lasing in II–VI semiconductor nanowires or nanobelts has been readily achieved with a threshold power density ranging from several to tens of μJ cm−2 depending on the quality and morphology of the sample.96ASE takes place in the absence of an optical cavity while lasing usually needs a cavity, either formed as a natural cavity by the crystal facets or by a mirror cavity, for further lasing from ASE process. The ultrafast dynamics in the ASE (lasing) region are informative to understand the fundamentals of nanophotonics. Time-resolved SHG and PL spectroscopy were first utilized to probe the dynamics of single ZnO nanowire and nanobelt lasers.97 They observed an 80 ps free exciton decay channel and a less than 10 ps stimulated emission involving a quick channel. Recently, we also observed the ASE process in CdS nanobelts, with stimulated emission on the time scale of 20 ps.92 Dynamic competition between I2 and DAP has been identified, which suggests that compensation of acceptor levels in CdS nanobelts is required to achieve ASE. This ASE process can also be influenced by the band gap renormalization with wavelength-dependent lasing time dynamics, showing different lifetime as the morphology of the sample changes.96,98

3.3. Lasing
A variety of optically pumped stimulated emissions (SE) have been observed by many researchers from II–VI semiconductors. As discussed above, excitonic emission is preferable for decreasing the threshold for lasing. In II–VI semiconductors, the exciton binding energy of ZnO (∼60 meV),76 ZnS (∼40 meV),99 and CdS (∼28 meV)100 is larger than the thermal energy at room temperature, thus enabling the observation of excitonic emission at room temperature. It is well known that the lasing action needs a proper optical cavity to provide positive feedback. In the case of one-dimensional nanowires, this is usually realized by either pumping on a single wire (in Fabry–Pérot or whispering gallery mode lasing) or observing random lasing in an ensemble of densely distributed nanowires, both of which require not only a proper pumping scheme but also a well controlled sample manipulation or fabrication.
The near band emission of ZnO nanowires is located at ∼380 nm at room temperature. The first observation of lasing from ZnO nanowire arrays was reported by Huang et al.66 The sample was pumped by Nd:YAG laser (266 nm, 3 ns pulse width) and the emission was collected in the direction normal to the nanowires, along the c-axis. As shown in Fig. 6a, when the excitation density exceeds the threshold, sharp peaks with linewidths as small as 0.3 nm emerged in the emission spectra. The lasing cavity of these nanowire arrays was ascribed to the natural cavity formed by the two ends of the entire nanowires (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Emission spectra from nanowire arrays below (line a) and above (line b and inset) the lasing threshold. The pump powers for these spectra are 20, 100, and 150 kW cm−2, respectively. The spectra are offset for easy comparison. (b) Integrated emission intensity from nanowires as a function of optical pumping energy intensity. (c) Schematic illustration of a nanowire as a resonance cavity with two naturally faceted hexagonal end faces acting as reflecting mirrors. (Adapted from ref. 66 with permission.) 
It is also possible that the laser cavity is formed by the entire array, leading to lasing in arbitrary pathways with the nanowires as scattering centers. This phenomenon is known as random lasing and was first observed in ZnO powder samples.101 Random lasing in II–VI nanowires was previously more commonly demonstrated in the UV regime with ZnO.102,103 The random lasing in the near IR regime had not been observed until very recently when high quality CdSe nanowire arrays were achieved by the van der Waals epitaxy mechanism. As shown in Fig. 7, near-infrared (NIR) random lasing was observed at room temperature in CdSe nanowire arrays grown on mica.68 Compared with conventional lasers, random lasing from semiconductor NWs exhibits remarkable differences. First of all, the random lasing can be observed from all directions, and the spectrum recorded from a different angle is different. Secondly, the lasing threshold strongly depends on the excitation area. In the case of CdSe nanowires, the pump area (Ath) and pump threshold (Pth) shows a A2/3th ≈ KP−1th relationship, where K is a constant.104,105 This indicates that the vertically aligned CdSe nanowires should behave like a quasi-3D random medium. Based on a similar concept, random lasing in randomly-oriented nanobelts has also been demonstrated in CdS.106
 Fig. 7  The emission spectra from CdSe NWs at room temperature under different excitation densities. The inset shows the dependence of the PL integrated intensity on the laser excitation density. (Adapted from ref. 68 with permission.) 
3.4. Phonons
Phonons are quanta of lattice vibrations. They play a major role in electrical, thermal, and optical properties of solid bulk materials and nanostructures107 as phonons carry energy and interact with electrons via electron–phonon interaction and interact among themselves via phonon–phonon interactions. The importance of phonons are also demonstrated in various interesting phenomena, such as phonon confinement in SNWs,108,109 phonon bottleneck effects in nanowires and quantum dot optoelectronic devices,110 resonant Raman scattering,111 and determination of carriers mobility.107
Theoretically, the frequency and dispersion relation of phonons can be obtained by solving the lattice dynamics equation. The vibrational modes of phonons can be either Raman-active or IR-active. Hence, infrared absorption and Raman spectroscopy are complementary in the experimental measurement and assignment of vibrational modes.
Since the Raman effect was discovered more than 80 years ago,112Raman spectroscopy has become one of the most powerful spectroscopic tools to study phonons and other element excitations in condensed matter physics. Raman spectroscopy is non-destructive and highly sensitive, where it can detect objects on the order of a few nanometres, at a broad excitation energy range (UV-NIR).
The first-order inelastic Raman scattering processes are two-photon events that involve the simultaneous annihilation of an incident photon and the creation of a scattered photon, mediated by electron–photon and electron–phonon interactions.113 In this process, the conservation of energy and momentum must be satisfied simultaneously. In the visible and near infrared regime, the momentum of the photon (wave vector) is less than 106 cm−1. This wave vector is much smaller by about two orders of magnitude than that of phonons, which corresponds to the Brillouin zone boundary of typical crystals. Thus, the first-order processes only access phonons and other elementary excitations at or near the centre of the Brillouin zone, i.e., the well-known q = 0 Raman selection rule.
For one-dimensional nanowires, the shape of phonon dispersion relation can be obtained by folding the Brillouin zone of bulk materials. However, some new modes (e.g. radial breathing modes, RBMs) will emerge when the diameter of the wires is smaller than a certain critical size, apart from the notable confined phonon states in the quantum size regime. Another issue is the interface and surface vibrations, such as surface phonons in nanostructures, which becomes more significant due to the increase of the surface-to-volume ratio with the decrease of size. The observation of surface optical phonons in nanowires usually indicates some type of translational symmetry breaking, since surface optical modes are not generally activated due to momentum conservation.

3.4.1. Radial breathing modes (RBMs). 
The RBMs of a nanowire are similar to the RBMs of carbon nanotubes (CNTs),111 except that the vibration is considered for a solid cylinder instead of a hollow tube. The mode corresponds to the vibration of the atoms in the radial direction, as if the wire/tube were breathing, where the frequency is strongly diameter sensitive.
The frequency of RBMs based on elastic theory for a long isotropic cylindrical nanowire, e.g., in silicon, is given by:114,115 (1)where ν is the longitudinal sound velocity, R is the radius of the nanowire, and r = μ/λ + 2μ, with (λ,μ) being the elastic constant of materials. Eqn (1) indicates that the radial breathing mode frequency follows a 1/R behavior, which is similar to the results of RBMs in CNTs. Recent ab initio calculation shows the frequency evolution of RBM can be fitted by the following empirical power law for silicon nanowires:116,117 (2)where A and B are the fitting parameters. Compared to elemental semiconductor such as silicon, a more rapid progress in the experimental study of RBMs in II–VI nanowires was witnessed due to the wide availability of techniques to prepare nearly monodisperse II–VI nanowires at a small diameter. For instance, the presence of RBMs has been experimentally confirmed in CdSe nanorods as shown in Fig. 8.118 The theoretical and experimental results show that the RBM frequencies follow the elastic theory analysis robustly, i.e. 1/R dependence, in spite of the variation from cylindrical shape in the small diameter limit, and rather independently of the computational technique adopted.
 Fig. 8  Evolution of RBM frequency in CdSe nanorod and core–shell structures as a function of the nanorod diameter. The theoretical calculation results and 1/R fitting are also given. (Fig. 8 is adapted from ref. 118 with permission.) 


3.4.2. Surface optical modes. 
Surface phonon modes, which are localized to the surfaces or propagating only along the interfaces of a structure, are actually solutions of Maxwell's equations with appropriate boundary conditions.119 Surface phonon modes are usually not Raman-active due to the constraint of momentum conservation. They can be Raman-active only if the translational symmetry of the surface is perturbed. Several ways have been tested to break such translational symmetry, such as by surface roughness, by construction of a grating along the surface, or by probing the evanescent wave using a prism.120
Surface modes can now be optically probed in nanostructures as the size modulation can break the translational symmetry along a specific dimension, which provides the momentum in order to activate surface modes in Raman scattering. Usually, Raman scattering only probes optical modes as the momentum of light is close to the wave vector of the optical mode in the centre of the Brillouin zone, such that they are called surface optical (SO) phonons.121,122 The SO modes have been observed in II–VI semiconductor nanostructures such as CdS,123CdSe,124 and ZnS.125
For an infinite dielectric and semiconductor interface, the surface mode frequency can be expressed by the following equation:126 (3)where ε0 and ε∞ are the static and high frequency dielectric constants, respectively, while ωTO is the transverse optical (TO) mode frequency at the zone center, and εm is the dielectric constant of the medium. The surface mode frequency is actually an asymptotic limit of surface polaritons.126 Following eqn (3), we can see that the SO frequency depends on the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium. Therefore, SO phonons can be confirmed by adjusting the εm, or be used as a sensor to specify the surrounding materials. Fig. 9a shows an experimental evidence of SO mode in the Raman spectra from rectangular cross-sectioned w-ZnS NWs carried out in three dielectric media. In addition to a normal Raman band, an SO Raman band is also activated and is seen to downshift as εm is increased.125
 Fig. 9  (a) The Raman spectra of w-ZnS nanowires collected in three different dielectric media. The low frequency mode is the SO mode and the high frequency one is the LO mode. (b) SO phonon dispersions for w-ZnS nanowires with square cross-section in three different media. (Adapted from ref. 125 with permission.) 
In an infinitely long cylindrical nanowire and in the limit where the phonon wave vector q ≫ ω/c, the dispersion relation ωSO for a SO mode can be written as:121 (4)where, p is the screened ion plasma frequency, ωLO is the LO mode frequency at the zone center, and f(x) is the shape factor of the nanowire. This model has been used to explain the experimental observation of SO modes in Raman scattering in GaP nanowires. For infinite diameter cylinders, i.e., r → ∞,f(x) → 1, then eqn (4) is equal to an infinite semiconductor flat surface expressed by eqn (3).
For rectangular cross-sectioned nanowires, the anisotropic boundary conditions result in two branches of SO phonon, i.e., symmetric (S) and asymmetric (AS) SO phonons. Their dispersion relations are as follows:125 (5a) (5b)
For nanowires with an infinite edge length, i.e., L → ∞,tanh(qL/2) → 1,coth(qL/2) → 1, both the symmetric (5a) and asymmetric modes (5b) recover again to the surface phonons of infinite flat semiconductor surface expressed by eqn(3).

Fig. 9b shows the SO phonon dispersion curves, for both symmetric (S) and asymmetric (AS) modes, of a square cross-sectioned w-ZnS nanowire in three different dielectric media εm. The S and AS modes exhibit different dispersions at small qL, but they converge to the same frequency as qL approach very large values. Three horizontal dashed lines represent the experimental SO phonon frequencies in the three dielectric media as shown in Fig. 9b. The three experimental frequencies correspond to approximately the same wave vector q. This is important self-consistent evidence of the validity of dielectric continuum model described in eqn (5a,b).

4. Photonic and optoelectronic applications
II–VI 1D nanostructures offer a wealth of potential applications, especially in photonics and optoelectronics due to their excellent optical properties. This section highlights three of the interesting instances of the applications: II–VI 1D nanostructures as waveguides, light emitting diodes, and photoconductors.
4.1. Waveguides
In photonics, a waveguide is an object that is functionalized to confine and channel electromagnetic waves into specific directions. Several inherent properties of II–VI 1D nanostructures are immediately recognized to be suitable for waveguide applications. II–VI materials have wide band gaps and large dielectric constants, yielding refractive index higher than their surroundings to allow transmission of light via total internal reflection with a low loss. 1D nanostructures are also characterized by their high aspect ratio, which effectively enables them to accomplish their task as light interconnections.127
Various demonstrations of waveguiding using II–VI 1D nanostructures have been accomplished since the surge of interest in the nanowire field in the last decade. Johnson, et al.128 reported the capability of ZnO nanowires in waveguiding, while simultaneously acting as optical cavities, analogous to a Fabry–Perot resonator, in the presence of flat and parallel end faces on the nanowire. Barrelet, et al.129 showed the possibility of CdS nanowires to act as active photonics circuit elements for guiding light at sub-wavelength scales. The nanowires are also observed to experience only moderate loss of light propagation through sharp and acute bends, as shown in Fig. 10. The finding allows further use of nanowire waveguides in manipulating optical signals, as demonstrated by Greytak, et al.130 for CdS nanowire electro-optic modulators. Active waveguiding, when the nanowires are operated near the band edge, was also demonstrated by the Zou group for CdS nanoribbons131 and CdSe nanowires.132 Band edge photoluminescence emission, excited within the body of the nanowires, was transported along the wires to be emitted at its end while no appreciable emission was observed in other region.
 Fig. 10  Characterization of optical waveguiding in straight and bent nanowires. (a) A scheme for scanning optical microscopy (SOM) illustrating a focused laser spot scanned over the sample while monitoring light emission from one end of the nanowire. The intensity at the end indicated by the detector is plotted on a color scale as a function of laser position to generate SOM images. (b) On the left, SOM image of a single CdS nanowire; the reference end is indicated with a detector. Lighter colors correspond to a greater end intensity. The scale bar is 10 μm. On the right, dependence of the end intensity on the distance between the laser spot and the end of the wire for a path that follows the wire. (Adapted from ref. 129 with permission.) 
The development in nanowire waveguides is anticipated to pave the way for a highly integrated and compact photonics circuit, which potentially mitigates the limitation of speed and power dissipation in electronics to revolutionize communication and computing systems. Thus, efficient injection, guiding, and manipulation of light at sub-wavelength scale through 1D nanostructures is evidently an essential research direction to manifest the encouraging potential of II–VI 1D nanostructure waveguides.
4.2. Electroluminescence (EL) and light emitting diodes (LEDs)

          EL is a phenomenon in which electricity drives light emission, including carrier injection and radiative recombination. EL has attracted a great deal of attention due to the fact that it can be easily integrated into electronic devices to provide wide applications including in lighting and displays. Studies are currently being performed to resolve the main challenges in improving the conversion efficiency and device stability.
II–VI semiconducting compound nanowires and nanobelts are ideal candidates for EL because of their inherent properties such as a direct band gap, large band gap coverage, high crystalline quality, large surface area, and small size. A direct band gap is the essential requirement for light emission while large band gap coverage enables them to be utilized at various wavelengths from IR to near UV. High crystalline quality can enhance the radiative recombination rate while large surface area would provide the flexibility to manipulate the surface. Besides, it is possible to create a smaller beam spot due to the small size of the nanowires and nanobelts.
Lieber and co-workers have realized electrically driven light emission on n-CdS nanowire on a p-Si substrate.133 The Fabry–Perot cavity modes formed inside nanowires lead to a series of peaks at the emission spectra. Green light lasing can also be obtained with a further increment of the bias, as shown in Fig. 11. The heterostructure of n-CdS nanowire/p-Si nanowire junctions also has been adopted to realize electrically driven light emission.134 Additionally, multicolored light using the same p-type nanowires can be achieved by changing the choice of n-type nanowire. Hayden et al.135 utilized an n-CdS shell/p-Si core structure to fabricate an LED. In addition, CdSe nanowires136 and nanobelts137 have also been made into devices to investigate their respective EL properties. Besides, flexible single ZnO nanowire light emitting diodes have also been demonstrated.138
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the n-CdS nanowire/p-Si device. (b) Electroluminescence spectra obtained from the device depicted in (a) with injection currents of 120 mA (red) and 210 mA (green). (c) Electroluminescence spectra from the device with injection currents of 200 mA (red) and 280 mA (green) at 8 K. (Adapted from ref. 133 with permission.) 
4.3. Photoconductivity: photodetection and switching
When a beam of light shines on a semiconductor or an insulator, the electrical conductance may either increase (positive photoconductivity) or decrease (negative photoconductivity). Great efforts have been dedicated into this research field to find new photoconducting materials with improved performance due to their wide applications, such as in photodetectors, solar cells and sensors.
Utilizing a material in its nanoscale form has been shown to improve greatly the photoconductivity in both carrier generation and transport, which are the two processes involved in the study of photoconductivity. The high crystalline quality of nanostructures can reduce the scattering during the transport process while the large surface-to-volume ratio can strengthen the significance of surface states, which would enhance the recombination rate and thus increase the response speed. In addition, the large surface-to-volume ratio also improves the trapping of charge carrier to enhance the sensitivity further, due to the more pronounced depletion region near the surface.
Yang and co-workers initiated the research on photoconductivity of II–VI nanowires by studying ZnO,139 where the group reported IV curves with and without illumination and the switching characteristics as shown in Fig. 12. The large photosensitivity and high on–off ratio demonstrates that nanowires are good candidates for photoconductors. Since then, the photoconducting property of a wide variety of nanowires and nanobelts—which is characterized by the sensitivity, spectral response, response speed and switch characteristics—have been studied in great detail, owing to the rapidly developing synthesis techniques of 1D nanostructures. The photoconductivity of II–IV 1D nanostructures such as that from ZnO,139,140 CdS,141–144CdSe,90CdTe, ZnSe,145 and ZnS146,147 have been intensively investigated. Various fascinating phenomena on the photoconducting properties of II–VI 1D nanostructures have also been studied, including the improvement of photosensitivity by exploiting a Fabry–Perot cavity between a nanowire or nanobelt photodetector with the substrate90 and a polarization-dependent sensitivity, as was observed in CdSe90 and CdTe nanowires148 due to the high aspect ratio of nanowires.
 Fig. 12  (a) I–V curves of a single ZnO nanowire under 365 nm, 0.3 mW cm−2 UV light illumination, exhibiting the dark and photocurrent property of the structure. The inset shows an FE-SEM image of a 60 nm ZnO nanowire bridging four Au electrodes. (b) Reversible switching of a ZnO nanowire between low and high conductivity states when the handheld UV-lamp was turned on and off. The bias on the nanowire is 1 V. (Adapted from ref. 139 with permission.) 
5. Conclusions
We have provided an overview of the material preparation techniques, the fundamentals of exceptional optical properties and the promising optoelectronic applications of II–VI 1D nanostructures, along with brief highlights of prominent past research activities in the field. With the rapid progress of the research in the field within only the last decade, it is thus increasingly important to consider the marketability of the promising technological products that II–VI 1D nanostructures can offer. As an important bottom-line, novel technology must be able to achieve lower cost-per-performance than the current equivalent established technology before it can be fully utilized.
Detailed comprehension of material properties and device behavior of II–VI 1D nanostructures are needed, due to their relevance on both to the performance reliability of the produced technology and to the emergence of revolutionary applications from the novel fundamental properties manifested at the nanoscale. In particular, we believe that more intensive research studies should be devoted to gaining deeper understanding of the properties of excitons and phonons within the II–VI 1D nanostructures and their coupling with other quanta such as photons and plasmons, as has been demonstrated to strongly affect the overall optical and emissive properties of the materials.80,149
Several issues in the field of II–VI 1D nanostructures also need to be resolved to actualize a real world impact. Improvements in the preparation techniques are still necessary to achieve more control with simultaneous precision on the composition, physical properties, dimension, location, alignment, and orientation of the nanostructures for massive-scale device integration. Additionally, it is also important to perform studies investigating “better or worse” questions and to address important side issues, such as device endurance and toxicology,150 to support the abundant proof-of-concept oriented studies that are still being the paradigm of the current state of research on II–VI 1D nanostructures.
Acknowledgements
Q. X. acknowledges the strong support from the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF-RF2009-06), generous start-up grant support (M58110061) and the New Initiative Fund (M58110100) from Nanyang Technological University.
Notes and references
C. M. Lieber, Solid State Commun., 1998, 107, 607–616 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, R387–R406 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, Y. Y. Wu and R. Fan, Int. J. Nanosci., 2002, 1, 1–39 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lieber and Z. L. Wang, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. D. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 83–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 313–336 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, H. Yan, S. Mao, R. Russo, J. Johnson, R. Saykally, N. Morris, J. Pham, R. He and H. J. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 323–331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, R829–R858 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Fang and L. D. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2006, 22, 721 CAS .
X. S. Fang, L. M. Wu and L. F. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 585–598 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kar and S. Chaudhuri, Synth. React. Inorg. Met.-Org. Chem., 2006, 36, 289–312 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Zhai, X. S. Fang, L. Li and D. Golberg, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 168–187 RSC .
M. Kuno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 620–639 RSC .
W.-T. Yao and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3357–3366 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Wu and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3165–3166 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Givargizov, J. Cryst. Growth, 1975, 31, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Dubrovskii, N. V. Sibirev, J. C. Harmand and F. Glas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235301 CrossRef .
S. Kodambaka, J. Tersoff, M. C. Reuter and F. M. Ross, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 096105 CrossRef CAS .
W. Seifert, M. Borgstrom, K. Deppert, K. A. Dick, J. Johansson, M. W. Larsson, T. Martensson, N. Skold, C. P. T. Svensson, B. A. Wacaser, L. R. Wallenberg and L. Samuelson, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 272, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Hannon, S. Kodambaka, F. M. Ross and R. M. Tromp, Nature, 2006, 440, 69–71 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, J. F. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2214–2216 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Allen, E. R. Hemesath, D. E. Perea, J. L. Lensch-Falk, Z. Y. Li, F. Yin, M. H. Gass, P. Wang, A. L. Bleloch, R. E. Palmer and L. J. Lauhon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Mohammad, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 094705 CrossRef .
Y. C. Zhu and Y. Bando, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 377, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. B. Utama, Z. Peng, R. Chen, B. Peng, X. Xu, Y. Dong, L. M. Wong, S. Wang, H. Sun and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3051–5057 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yao, Y. F. Chan and N. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 757–759 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, G. M. Fuge and M. N. R. Ashfold, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 396, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Stach, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Kuykendall, J. Goldberger, R. R. He and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 867–869 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Dang, J. Wang and S. S. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 738–741 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yeh, Z. W. Lu, S. Froyen and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 46, 10086–10097 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, Y. Y. Wu, H. Feick, N. Tran, E. Weber and P. D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, D. Moore, J. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. M. Meng, J. Liu, Z. Y. Xie, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Fang, C. H. Ye, L. D. Zhang, Y. H. Wang and Y. C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiang, H. Z. Zhang, G. H. Li, F. H. Yang, F. H. Su, R. M. Wang, J. Xu, G. W. Lu, X. C. Sun, Q. Zhao and D. P. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3330–3332 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, X. Fang, Y. Wang, P. Yan, J. Zhao and L. Zhang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 113–115 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Meng, C. B. Jiang and S. X. Mao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 4481–4486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kong, D. P. Yu, B. Zhang, W. Fang and S. Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 407–409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Wang, G. W. Meng, L. D. Zhang, C. H. Liang and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1773–1777 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Dong, J. Jiao, M. Coulter and L. Love, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 653–658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2635–2639 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Yang, W. J. Wang, B. Song, R. Wu, J. Li, Y. F. Sun, F. Shang, X. L. Chen and J. K. Jian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 2852–2856 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Li, X. N. Wang, Q. H. Xiong and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1982–1986 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Xiong, G. Chen, J. D. Acord, X. Liu, J. J. Zengel, H. R. Gutierrez, J. M. Redwing, L. Voon, B. Lassen and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1663–1668 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Xiong, J. G. Wang, O. Reese, L. Voon and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1991–1996 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neretina, R. A. Hughes, J. F. Britten, N. V. Sochinskii, J. S. Preston and P. Mascher, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 275301 CrossRef .
A. Y. Cho and J. R. Arthur, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1975, 10, 157–191 CrossRef .
Y. W. Heo, B. S. Kang, L. C. Tien, D. P. Norton, F. Ren, J. R. La Roche and S. J. Pearton, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 80, 497–499 CrossRef .
S. K. Chan, S. K. Lok, G. Wang, Y. Cai, N. Wang, K. S. Wong and I. K. Sou, J. Electron. Mater., 2008, 37, 1433–1437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Chan, X. F. Duan, S. K. Chan, I. K. Sou, X. X. Zhang and N. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2665–2667 CrossRef CAS .
E. Janik, J. Sadowski, P. Dluzewski, S. Kret, L. T. Baczewski, A. Petroutchik, E. Lusakowska, J. Wrobel, W. Zaleszczyk, G. Karczewski, T. Wojtowicz and A. Presz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133114 CrossRef .
Y. J. Hsu and S. Y. Lu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 81, 573–578 CrossRef .
W. I. Park, D. H. Kim, S. W. Jung and G. C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4232–4234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Wang, X. D. Liu, J. F. Gong, H. B. Huang, S. L. Gu and S. G. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3911–3913 CAS .
X. T. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. P. Leung, Q. Li and S. K. Hark, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 5533–5535 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Salfi, C. De Souza, P. Sun, S. V. Nair and H. E. Ruda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 063510 CrossRef .
C. X. Shan, Z. Liu and S. K. Hark, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 163108 CrossRef .
E. Ertekin, P. A. Greaney, D. C. Chrzan and T. D. Sands, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114325–114310 CrossRef .
F. Glas, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 121302 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, K. Sunouchi and T. Miyajima, Microelectron. Eng., 1984, 2, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, M. I. B. Utama, Z. Peng, B. Peng, Q. Xiong and H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1404–1408 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mang, K. Reimann and S. Rübenacke, Solid State Commun., 1995, 94, 251–254 CrossRef CAS .
N. O. Lipari, Phys. Rev. B, 1971, 4, 4535 CrossRef .

          C. Klingshirn, Semiconductor Optics, Springer, Berlin,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. L. Birman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1959, 2, 157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Liang and A. D. Yoffe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1968, 20, 59 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Reynolds, D. C. Look, B. Jogai, C. W. Litton, G. Cantwell and W. C. Harsch, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 60, 2340 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Chichibu, A. Tsukazaki, M. Kawasaki, K. Tamura, Y. Segawa, T. Sota and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2860–2862 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Sun, T. Makino, N. T. Tuan, Y. Segawa, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, K. Tamura and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2464–2466 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Sun, T. Makino, N. T. Tuan, Y. Segawa, Z. K. Tang, G. K. L. Wong, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, K. Tamura and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 4250–4252 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, D. Li, B. Liu, Z. Peng, G. G. Gurzadyan, Q. Xiong and H. D. Sun, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4956–4961 CrossRef CAS .
C. Weisbuch, M. Nishioka, A. Ishikawa and Y. Arakawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 3314 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. van Vugt, B. Piccione, C.-H. Cho, P. Nukala and R. Agarwal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Yan, Z. Fu, B. Yang, L. Xia, Y. Xu, J. Zuo and F. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 846–852 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Varshni, Physica, 1967, 34, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lautenschlager, M. Garriga, S. Logothetidis and M. Cardona, Phys. Rev. B, 1987, 35, 9174–9189 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Sun, T. Makino, Y. Segawa, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, K. Tamura and H. Koinuma, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 1993–1997 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Chuang, R. J. Nicholas, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18106–18109 CAS .
R. P. Prasankumar, S. Choi, S. A. Trugman, S. T. Picraux and A. J. Taylor, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1619–1624 CrossRef .
J. B. Baxter and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25229–25239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Giblin and M. Kuno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3340–3348 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Xu, P. Parkinson, K. C. Chuang, M. B. Johnston, R. J. Nicholas and L. M. Herz, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 82, 085441 CrossRef .
A. Singh, X. Li, V. Protasenko, G. Galantai, M. Kuno, H. Xing and D. Jena, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2999–3006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Giblin, V. Protasenko and M. Kuno, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1979–1987 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Zhao, E. J. Sie, Y. Lu, B. Liu, S. A. Ekahana, X. Ju, Q. Jiang, J. Wang, H. Sun, T. C. Sum, C. H. A. Huan, Y. P. Feng and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3660–3669 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 287, 1011–1013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Htoon, J. A. Hollingsworth, R. Dickerson and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 227401 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1344–1349 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurisic, W. M. Kwok, Y. H. Leung, D. L. Phillips and W. K. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19228–19233 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, K. P. Knutsen, H. Q. Yan, M. Law, Y. F. Zhang, P. D. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Song, J. M. Szarko, S. R. Leone, S. H. Li and Y. P. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15749–15753 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Tran, W. Park, W. Tong, M. M. Kyi, B. K. Wagner and C. J. Summers, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 2803–2809 CrossRef CAS .
U. Woggon, K. Hild, F. Gindele, W. Langbein, M. Hetterich, M. Grün and C. Klingshirn, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 12632–12635 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, Y. G. Zhao, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig, Q. H. Wang and R. P. H. Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2278–2281 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Yu, C. Yuen, S. P. Lau, W. I. Park and G.-C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3241–3243 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vanmaekelbergh and L. K. van Vugt, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2783–2800 RSC .
H. Cao, Waves Random Complex Media, 2003, 13, R1–R39 Search PubMed .
S. F. Yu, C. Yuen, S. P. Lau and H. W. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3244–3246 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, R. Chen, X. L. Xu, D. H. Li, Y. Y. Zhao, Z. X. Shen, Q. H. Xiong and H. D. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12826–12830 CAS .

          M. A. Stroscio and M. Dutta, Phonons in Nanostructures (ebrary Inc.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
K. W. Adu, H. R. Gutierrez, U. J. Kim, G. U. Sumanasekera and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. Piscanec, M. Cantoro, A. C. Ferrari, J. A. Zapien, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, S. Hofmann and J. Robertson, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 68, 241312R CrossRef .
A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1–208 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Rao, E. Richter, S. Bandow, B. Chase, P. C. Eklund, K. A. Williams, S. Fang, K. R. Subbaswamy, M. Menon, A. Thess, R. E. Smalley, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1997, 275, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Raman and K. S. Krishnan, Nature, 1928, 121, 501–502 CrossRef CAS .

          W. H. Weber and R. Merlin, ed., Raman Scattering in Materials Science, Springer, Berlin,  2000 Search PubMed .
T. Thonhauser and G. D. Mahan, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 075213 CrossRef .
T. Thonhauser and G. D. Mahan, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71 Search PubMed .
E. Bourgeois, M. V. Fernandez-Serra and X. Blase, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81 Search PubMed .
H. Peelaers, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lange, M. Mohr, M. Artemyev, U. Woggon and C. Thomsen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4614–4617 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Sernelius, Surface Modes in Physics, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .
H. J. Falge, G. Borstel and A. Otto, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1974, 65, 123–132 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gupta, Q. Xiong, G. D. Mahan and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1745–1750 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Adu, Q. Xiong, H. R. Gutierrez, G. Chen and P. C. Eklund, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 85, 287–297 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Scott and T. C. Damen, Opt. Commun., 1972, 5, 410–412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lange, M. Mohr, M. Artemyev, U. Woggon, T. Niermann and C. Thomsen, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 2488–2497 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, J. G. Wang, O. Reese, L. Voon and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1991–1996 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. H. Xiong, Ph.D. Thesis, Pennsylvania State University,  2006 .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, H. Yan, P. Yang and R. J. Saykally, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8816–8828 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrelet, A. B. Greytak and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1981–1985 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Greytak, C. J. Barrelet, Y. Li and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 151103–151103 CrossRef .
A. L. Pan, D. Liu, R. B. Liu, F. F. Wang, X. Zhu and B. S. Zou, Small, 2005, 1, 980–983 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Dai, Q. L. Zhang, Z. W. Peng, W. C. Zhou, M. X. Xia, Q. Wan, A. L. Pan and B. S. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 135301 CrossRef .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2003, 421, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Small, 2004, 1, 142–147 CrossRef .
O. Hayden, A. B. Greytak and D. C. Bell, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 701–704 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Doh, K. N. Maher, L. Ouyang, C. L. Yu, H. Park and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4552–4556 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, P. Wu, T. Sun, L. Dai, Y. Ye, R. Ma and G. Qin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14478–14481 CAS .
A. Nadarajah, R. C. Word, J. Meiss and R. Konenkamp, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 534–537 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kind, H. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158–160 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, E. S. Kwak, J. L. Lensch, J. E. Allen, T. W. Odom and L. J. Lauhon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 043111–043113 CrossRef .
Q. H. Li, T. Gao and T. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 193109–193103 CrossRef .
T. Gao, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 173105–173103 CrossRef .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, Y. Jiang, X. M. Meng, Y. Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS .
U. Philipose, H. E. Ruda, A. Shik, C. F. de Souza and P. Sun, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 066106–066103 CrossRef .
X. J. Zheng, Y. Q. Chen, T. Zhang, C. B. Jiang, B. Yang, B. Yuan, S. X. Mao and W. Li, Scr. Mater., 2010, 62, 520–523 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, M. Liao, T. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, Y. Koide and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, V. Protasenko, D. Jena, H. Xing and M. Kuno, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1352–1357 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Cho, C. O. Aspetti, M. E. Turk, J. M. Kikkawa, S.-W. Nam and R. Agarwal, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 669–675 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, R. Yan and M. Fardy, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1529–1536 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting papers on the ‘Recent Advances in Semiconductor Nanowires Research' from ICMAT 2011.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Handong Sun	Dr Handong Sun obtained his PhD in Physics from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is now working as an assistant professor in the School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. Before he moved to NTU, he had been working in the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Japan, and the Institute of Photonics, The University of Strathclyde, UK. His current research interest is focused on spectroscopic characterization of nanostructured materials (inorganic, organic and hybrid structures), optoelectronic devices, and plasmonics-based physics and devices.
Qihua Xiong	Dr Qihua Xiong received his BS degree from Wuhan University and his MS degree from Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received a PhD degree in materials science under the supervision of Prof. Peter Eklund at Pennsylvania State University in 2006. After postdoctoral experience in Prof. Charles Lieber’s group at Harvard University, he joined Nanyang Technological University as a Nanyang assistant professor in 2009. He is a Fellow of the Singapore National Research Foundation. Prof. Xiong’s research focuses on a range of topics in emerging nanomaterials and nanostructures, from fundamental properties and device applications in energy and biosensing.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic of the VLS mechanism for the growth of ME (M = Zn, Cd; E = O, S, Se, Te) nanowires. The growth consists of four stages: (a) formation of metallic catalyst particles, either from intentional introduction to the substrate or due to segregation of the catalyst film at high temperature; (b) formation of alloy with the incorporation of the supplied ME vapor into the catalyst; (c) supersaturation in the alloy, resulting in the precipitation of a nucleation centre of ME crystal; (d) axial elongation, culminating into ME nanowires. The schematic represents a randomly-oriented growth of nanowires, which does not necessitate any chemical or epitaxial relation to the substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Typical experimental setup of the thermal evaporation method to synthesize II–VI 1D nanostructures. Scanning electron microscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of (b,c) ZnO nanowires, (d,e) CdSe nanowires, and (f,g) ZnS nanobelts. The single crystallinity demonstrated by the uniform fringes on the HRTEM images exemplified the high crystalline quality that can be produced via the synthesis technique. (Fig. a,d,e are adapted from ref. 28 with permission; Fig. b,c are adapted from ref. 36 with permission; Fig. f,g are adapted from ref. 38 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Recombination processes in a semiconductor. (a) Band-to-band recombination. (b) Band-to-acceptor transition. (c) Donor-to-valence transition. (d) Donor-to-acceptor-pair transition. (e) Recombination via a deep center. (f) Non-radiative recombination via an intermediate state. (g) Band-to-band Auger recombination.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Evolution of the PL spectra of ZnS nanowires measured at 10 K under different excitation densities. The dashed vertical lines are a guide for the eyes. (b) Temperature-dependent PL mapping of ZnS nanowires measured at an excitation density ∼9.4 mW cm−2. All data were normalized by FXB intensity and the dashed lines follow the peak positions. (Adapted from ref. 78 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL fine structure of CdS nanobelts at 10 K with a 325 nm He-Cd laser excitation. The blue curves are Gaussian line-shape decompositions with each peak clearly labeled. (b) Summary of the band diagram of CdS showing the intrinsic defect levels from the first-principle calculation (units in eV). (c) Calculated electronic density of states (DOS) of CdS with cadmium vacancy (upper panel) and sulphur vacancy (lower panel). The arrows indicate the defect levels, which also reveal a spin imbalance in the case of cadmium vacancy. (d) Transient PL decay (normalized) of I2 in CdS nanobelts at 10 K with pump power ranging from 1 μW to 20 μW. At low pump power, only one decay lifetime τ1 was observed. As power increases further, a faster decay lifetime τ2 due to multiexciton interactions was observed. (e) The normalized transient PL decay dynamics of the DAP emission at three different wavelengths. (Adapted from ref. 92 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Emission spectra from nanowire arrays below (line a) and above (line b and inset) the lasing threshold. The pump powers for these spectra are 20, 100, and 150 kW cm−2, respectively. The spectra are offset for easy comparison. (b) Integrated emission intensity from nanowires as a function of optical pumping energy intensity. (c) Schematic illustration of a nanowire as a resonance cavity with two naturally faceted hexagonal end faces acting as reflecting mirrors. (Adapted from ref. 66 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 7  The emission spectra from CdSe NWs at room temperature under different excitation densities. The inset shows the dependence of the PL integrated intensity on the laser excitation density. (Adapted from ref. 68 with permission.)	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of RBM frequency in CdSe nanorod and core–shell structures as a function of the nanorod diameter. The theoretical calculation results and 1/R fitting are also given. (Fig. 8 is adapted from ref. 118 with permission.)	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 9  (a) The Raman spectra of w-ZnS nanowires collected in three different dielectric media. The low frequency mode is the SO mode and the high frequency one is the LO mode. (b) SO phonon dispersions for w-ZnS nanowires with square cross-section in three different media. (Adapted from ref. 125 with permission.)	 
	(4)
	(5a)
	(5b)

 	Fig. 10  Characterization of optical waveguiding in straight and bent nanowires. (a) A scheme for scanning optical microscopy (SOM) illustrating a focused laser spot scanned over the sample while monitoring light emission from one end of the nanowire. The intensity at the end indicated by the detector is plotted on a color scale as a function of laser position to generate SOM images. (b) On the left, SOM image of a single CdS nanowire; the reference end is indicated with a detector. Lighter colors correspond to a greater end intensity. The scale bar is 10 μm. On the right, dependence of the end intensity on the distance between the laser spot and the end of the wire for a path that follows the wire. (Adapted from ref. 129 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the n-CdS nanowire/p-Si device. (b) Electroluminescence spectra obtained from the device depicted in (a) with injection currents of 120 mA (red) and 210 mA (green). (c) Electroluminescence spectra from the device with injection currents of 200 mA (red) and 280 mA (green) at 8 K. (Adapted from ref. 133 with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) I–V curves of a single ZnO nanowire under 365 nm, 0.3 mW cm−2 UV light illumination, exhibiting the dark and photocurrent property of the structure. The inset shows an FE-SEM image of a 60 nm ZnO nanowire bridging four Au electrodes. (b) Reversible switching of a ZnO nanowire between low and high conductivity states when the handheld UV-lamp was turned on and off. The bias on the nanowire is 1 V. (Adapted from ref. 139 with permission.)	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting papers on the ‘Recent Advances in Semiconductor Nanowires Research' from ICMAT 2011.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
