Modified deposition process of electron transport layer for efficient inverted planar perovskite solar cells   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CC01483B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CC01483B
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8986-8989Modified deposition process of electron transport layer for efficient inverted planar perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Hua 
            Dong‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoxin 
            Wu‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Xi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuya 
            Ning
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lixin 
            Xiao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Xun 
            Hou
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of Photonics Technology for Information, Key Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: zhaoxinwu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-29-82664867
bState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics and Department of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: lxxiao@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      21st February 2015
    , Accepted 9th April 2015First published on 9th April 2015AbstractA highly-efficient inverted heterojunction perovskite solar cell was prepared. A homogeneous and compact perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layer was prepared via a two-step solution deposition method, and subsequently a double-layer PCBM film was deposited by a sequential spin-coating/vapor deposition process as the electron transport layer. The optimised device could achieve a 12.2% (average 11.09%) efficiency.
Hybrid organometal halide perovskite solar cells have received much attention due to their superior intrinsic properties for solar energy conversion. This type of solar cell was first reported by Miyasaka et al. with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4%,1 and despite only several years elapsing, the efficiency soon evolved to over 19%.2–5 The hybrid perovskite materials exhibit appealing features such as high absorption coefficients, excellent ambipolar charge mobility and appropriate band gaps.6–8 Moreover, the simple cell configuration and low cost fabrication process of this type of solar cell could further address the scalability and applications in the photovoltaic field.9
Recently, typical perovskite solar cells have employed an electron-transport layer (ETL)/perovskite material/hole-transport layer (HTL) structure. Initial meso-superstructured-type solar cells based on a mesoporous TiO2 layer as the electron-transport layer required high-temperature processing (>450 °C), which hinders the commercialization.10–12 Therefore, many approaches have been developed to avoid the high-temperature barrier. One promising approach, a planar-inverted heterojunction device architecture, is particularly interesting due to its simple cell configuration and possible low-temperature fabrication.8,13 The use of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron-transport layer has been investigated by several groups.14,15 However, perovskite films with incomplete and non-homogeneous coverage via one-step spin-coating has usually been observed in planar perovskite solar cells, and these subsequent disadvantages have been regarded as the barrier which results in decreased device performance.16,17
Many efforts have been made to control the morphology of perovskite thin films. Various modified one-step spin-coating deposition methods have been investigated, such as adding DIO and GBL as additives to achieve a high coverage perovskite layer.17,18 However, the bareness and inhomogeneity problems still cannot be completely avoided. Bolink et al. proposed an evaporation/sublimation method, achieving a solar cell with >12% efficiency.4 Those studies demonstrated the great potential of the perovskite–PCBM architecture. However, the complicated and rigorous fabrication process of the perovskite layer may place constraints on its application, and meanwhile the monitoring and control of perovskite layer deposition by vacuum sublimation is difficult.3,4,19
It is known that perovskite film based on a two-step solution process could promise strong light-harvesting, good charge transport and complete coverage, which have been demonstrated in the high-temperature mesoporous devices.18,20 However, such a technology has rarely been applied in planar perovskite–PCBM solar cells, and reported perovskite–PCBM devices based on a two-step solution process only show a less than 8% efficiency.21,22 This is mainly because the two-step solution-processed perovskite layer is quite rough, and the subsequent ETL hardly fills in the undulations and smooths the interface between the ETL and the metal electrode. As a relatively easy-to-fabricate planar perovskite–PCBM solar cell with low-temperature fabricability, it is quite desirable to increase its efficiency.
In this communication, we report a simple and effective method to enhance the performance of perovskite–PCBM solar cells based on a two-step solution-processed perovskite layer. The device configuration is shown in Fig. 1(a). The structure is designed as follows: glass, ITO substrate, HTL PEDOT:PSS, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), ETL PCBM (layer-by-layer) and a Ag electrode.
 Fig. 1  (a) Device structure and energy band diagram of the perovskite–PCBM solar cell. (b) X-ray diffraction profiles of one-step and two-step solution-processed perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films. 
As one type of fullerene derivative, PCBM has been the most pervasive ETL applied in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Considering the membranous nature and solubility of the material, the reported thicknesses of spin-coated PCBM layers are in the range of dozens of nanometers. This range could satisfy the covering requirement of solar cells based on one-step solution or vapor deposition technology, to obtain considerable efficiency.
However, the spin-coating process alone could hardly completely fill in and cover the rough perovskite layer by a two-step solution process, which would lead to charge recombination losses and influence the transport at the interface. Here, we have designed a sequential solution–vapor deposition process for preparing the PCBM layer, the highlight in our study, to solve this problem. The initial spin-coating process could fill in the depressions of the MAPbI3 layer preliminarily, then the sequential vapor deposition process could further smooth the interface and separate the MAPbI3 layer and the Ag electrode. Through optimizing the fabrication process, a final PCBM layer with moderate thickness, good film properties and a planar surface can be obtained. Solar cells based on the sequential PCBM layer achieved high light harvesting efficiencies as well as good charge transport. The best device showed a 12.2% efficiency with Voc = 0.99 V, Jsc = 18.11 mA cm−2 and FF = 0.68; this efficiency is superior to those of the reported perovskite–PCBM devices based on a two-step MAPbI3 layer.21,22 We hope that as an easy-to-fabricate and highly-efficient structure, this modified solution-processed-based perovskite solar cell could provide a new method for promoting the development of this hot solar cell.
In Fig. 1(b), we first compare the X-ray diffraction patterns of films of CH3NH3PbI3 formed by either a one-step or a two-step deposition method. Strong peaks at 14.03° and 27.52°, corresponding to the (110) and (220) planes, confirm the formation of a tetragonal perovskite structure.3 There is only a small signature of a peak at 12.65° (the (001) diffraction peak for PbI2). This indicates that the two MAPbI3 films both presented a high level of phase purity, which is also a precondition for achieving highly-efficient perovskite solar cells.
The top-view SEM images in Fig. 2a and b show the differences between the MAPbI3 film morphologies produced by the two deposition processes. It can be seen that the MAPbI3 film based on a one-step process has a low coverage and large voids. This shapeless perovskite morphology has been identified as being very detrimental to the performance because it not only causes electrical shorting, but also leads to the charge dissociation/transport/recombination.23 However, the cube-like MAPbI3 film with ∼200 nm domain sizes based on a two-step process presents homogeneous and complete coverage on the substrate. It is known that a highly roughened interface strengthens internal light scattering, and that larger crystallites and a larger interface area are also beneficial for charge transport.24 These properties have been demonstrated in mesoporous TiO2-based perovskite solar cells, and we hope to develop these mentioned advantages in planar PCBM–perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 2  SEM top views of the one-step (a) and two-step (b) solution-processed deposited perovskite films. 
As for the planar perovskite solar cell, a high PCE requires both strong light harvesting and good charge transport at the interfaces. So how to effectively fill in and smooth the rough perovskite layer is important; only then can good interface contact for charge transport be achieved, as well as the advantages of the two-step perovskite layer be utilized. Modification of the fabrication process of the PCBM layer has been studied in order to achieve this win–win situation in our study. Here, we designed devices using three PCBM deposition methods in order to develop the most appropriate deposition technique: spin-coating only; vaporing only and sequential spin-vapor deposition. A device based on a one-step MAPbI3 layer was also prepared as a reference. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the schema of the four types of devices. Each type employed a PCBM layer with gradient thickness to find the optimal performance.
Before preparing the devices, all the thicknesses of the PCBM mentioned in the following text were calibrated by an ellipsometer on the same standard planar glass substrates.
To prove the repeatability of the devices, 30 cells of each structure were prepared. The performances of the devices were measured and are shown in Table S1 (ESI†). For structure type A, based on a one-step MAPbI3 layer, the device with 60 nm PCBM exhibited an average performance of PCE = 7.37% (Table S2, ESI†). The absence of material from some regions in the one-step MAPbI3 film (pinholes) will result in direct contact of the ETL PCBM and the HTL PSS:PEDOT, leading to a shunting path that is probably partially responsible for the lower FF and open-circuit voltages in planar heterojunction devices.25
The use of a two-step-based MAPbI3 layer could avoid direct contact between the HTL and the ETL. Before preparing the structures of types B, C and D, the roughness of the two-step MAPbI3 layer was observed, to aid in the design of the devices. Fig. 3a and e show the tilt-angle SEM and 3-dimensional AFM images of the MAPbI3 layer; the root mean square (RMS) roughness is 25.5 nm. This rough surface requires a certain thickness of PCBM to completely fill in and smooth the MAPbI3 layer.
 Fig. 3  Tilt-angle SEM and 3-D AFM images of the MAPbI3 layer (a and e), structure B: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(spin-coating) (b and f), structure C: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(vaporing) (c and g) and structure D: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(spin-coating)/PCBM(vaporing) (d and h). 
We first tried the spin-coating only method for PCBM, shown as structure B, and a series of devices with various thicknesses (60–120 nm) were prepared. It can be seen that devices with 60–80 nm PCBM thickness exhibit a considerable 8.1% efficiency. This efficiency is comparable with the reported record. Fig. 3b and f show the tilt-angle SEM and 3-D AFM images of structure B (PCBM thickness = 60 nm) without Ag. We can see that the rough MAPbI3 layer was relatively covered by the PCBM layer, and the RMS roughness obviously decreased (RMS = 12.4 nm). It is noted that the top of the MAPbI3 crystals can still be observed in some regions, which led to direct contact between the MAPbI3 layer and the Ag electrode when the real cell operated. This problem may have limited the possibility of a higher performance. When the thickness was over 100 nm, the PCE obviously decreased, which was mainly due to the low film-forming quality for excessively thick films. Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the tilt-angle SEM image of structure B (PCBM thickness = 100 nm) without Ag. It was found that the surface changed to become irregular and rough, and the consequent poor interface would have influenced the charge-transport. The study of structure B clarified that the spin-coating process alone could not provide a suitable PCBM film for achieving a highly-efficient device.
Vapor deposition is another practical method to obtain a continuous film with tunable thickness, and devices based on a vapor deposition method only for the ETL are shown as structure C. The results in Table S1 (ESI†) show that with a 100 nm-thickness of PCBM, an average of 7.61% efficiency for the devices was obtained. As we know, films formed via a vapor deposition process just inherit the morphology of the under-layer materials, thus this process could hardly buffer the morphology of the architecture. Fig. 3c and g show the tilt-angle SEM and 3-D AFM images of structure C (PCBM thickness = 100 nm) without Ag. It was found that although the MAPbI3 layer was almost covered by the PCBM, the surface was still rough with a 21.7 nm RMS roughness. Such an asperous and inhomogeneous ETL would be adverse to fluent charge-transport at the interface, and the relatively low FF of the devices directly reflected this. The study of structure C indicated that a PCBM layer with sufficient thickness can be obtained by vapor deposition, but that the roughness of the whole device was hardly decreased.
Based on structures B and C, we designed structure D in order to explore the best performance. 60 nm-thick PCBM was first deposited by spin-coating for initial filling, then a tunable PCBM layer was prepared by vapor deposition for further smoothing the interface and isolating the under-MAPbI3 layer and the metal electrode. Considering that excessively thick PCBM could decrease the conductivity of the film, the range of the vaporing layer is limited to 10–80 nm. A surprising efficiency with an average of 11.09% appeared for the typical structure (ETL thickness: 60 nm + 30 nm). Fig. 3d and h show the tilt-angle SEM and 3-D AFM images of structure D (ETL thickness: 60 nm + 30 nm) without Ag. We can see that this double-layer deposition process could efficiently cover the MAPbI3 layer and obviously decrease the roughness. The rather small RMS roughness (7.8 nm) shows that the surface of the structure was nearly flat, which is the basis of the planar inverted PCBM–MAPbI3 solar cell. The good performance of the Voc, FF and Jsc all clarified that strong light-harvesting as well as good charge-transport were achieved. As the thickness of the PCBM film by vaporing increased, the performance of the device decreased, which was mainly attributed to the low conductivity of the excessively thick PCBM layer.
As a response to the charge transport/recombination to some extent, dark-current was studied to further investigate the performances of different devices. Fig. 4a shows the average J–V characteristics of the devices based on structures B (ETL thickness = 60 nm), C (ETL thickness = 100 nm) and D (ETL thickness = 60 + 30 nm) under illumination and in the dark. The results show that device D has the lowest dark-current, which demonstrated the good performance on reducing the charge recombination loss and benefiting the charge transport. The larger dark-current values of devices B and C was explained as follows: as for the device B, the bare protuberance of the MAPbI3 layer (shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†)) in some regions would be in direct contact with the Ag electrode, which led to interface recombination and was reflected in the low FF and open-voltage values. Coming to device C, the film-forming properties of the PCBM layer were poor and the surface was rough, which reduced the fluency and uniformity of the charge-transport at the MAPbI3/ETL/Ag interface. The low FF of the device was partially a consequence of these disadvantages.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics of the devices B–D under illumination and in the dark. (b) J–V characteristics of device D with the highest efficiency. 
The highest performance of device D is shown in Fig. 4b, exhibiting a performance of Voc = 0.99 V, Jsc = 18.11 mA cm−2, FF = 0.68 and PCE = 12.2% under reverse scanning, and Voc = 0.97 V, Jsc = 18.09 mA cm−2, FF = 0.63 and PCE = 11.04% under forward scanning. The hysteresis between the forward and the reverse J–V scans is the manifestation of a slow response time of the cell to a change in load.26 The relative standard deviations of the parameters was less than 10% (shown in Table S1 (ESI†) and Fig. S3, ESI†), which indicated that the performance of the device was highly reproducible with low variation. The integrated current density derived from the EQE spectra in Fig. S4 (ESI†) was in close agreement with the value measured under simulated sunlight shown in Fig. 4b. Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows a cross-section SEM image of the inverse device D. The cross-section SEM image also depicts a uniform deposition along the length of the device. Finally, the evolution of the PCE for the best device, D, was observed and is shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†); this indicated a considerable stability.
In summary, we have developed a sequential layer-by-layer PCBM deposition method to fabricate planar perovskite solar cells. The solution–vapor process to deposit the ETL could effectively fill in and smooth the rough MAPbI3 layer. The cube-like and homogeneous MAPbI3 layer promised strong light-harvesting and benefited the charge transport. Meanwhile, planar and continuous PCBM film could separate the MAPbI3 layer and the Ag electrode, for reducing recombination loss. With a rather low variation, the best PCE presents a 12.2% efficiency, much higher than the reported PCBM–MAPbI3 solar cells with the same structure.
This work was financially supported by the Basic Research Program of China (2013CB328705), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61275034) and PhD Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grant No. 20130201110065).
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501 Search PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. C. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399 CAS .
D. Bryant, P. Greenwood, J. Troughton, M. Wijdekop, M. Carnie, M. Davies, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. McGehee, Nature, 2013, 501, 323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Ma, L. L. Zheng, Y. H. Chung, S. S. Chu, L. X. Xiao, Z. J. Chen, S. F. Wang, B. Qu, Q. H. Gong, Z. X. Wu and X. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12458 RSC .
J. Y. Jeng, Y. F. Chiang, M. H. Lee, S. R. Peng, T. F. Guo, P. Chen and T. C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. You, Z. R. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, S. R. Lu, Y. S. Liu, H. P. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, C. De Dobbelaere, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jeong, S. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679 RSC .
C. W. Chen, H. W. Kang, S. Y. Hsiao, P. F. Yang, K. M. Chiang and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zheng, Y. Z. Ma, S. S. Chu, S. F. Wang, B. Qu, L. X. Xiao, Z. J. Chen, Q. H. Gong, Z. X. Wu and X. Hou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8171 RSC .
L. Hu, J. Peng, W. W. Wang, Z. Xia, J. Y. Yuan, J. L. Lu, X. D. Huang, W. L. Ma, H. B. Song, W. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 547 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Zhu, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Z. K. Liu, X. Long, Z. H. Wei, Z. L. Wang, L. X. Zhang, J. N. Wang, F. Yan and S. H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12571 CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. C. Shao, Q. F. Dong, Z. G. Xiao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate and J. M. Ball, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc01483b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Device structure and energy band diagram of the perovskite–PCBM solar cell. (b) X-ray diffraction profiles of one-step and two-step solution-processed perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM top views of the one-step (a) and two-step (b) solution-processed deposited perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 3  Tilt-angle SEM and 3-D AFM images of the MAPbI3 layer (a and e), structure B: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(spin-coating) (b and f), structure C: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(vaporing) (c and g) and structure D: ITO/PEDOT/MAPbI3(two-step)/PCBM(spin-coating)/PCBM(vaporing) (d and h).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics of the devices B–D under illumination and in the dark. (b) J–V characteristics of device D with the highest efficiency.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cc01483b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
