α-Cyanostilbene: a multifunctional spectral engineering motif  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP02686D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP02686D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 23049-23075α-Cyanostilbene: a multifunctional spectral engineering motif

        
          
            Paramasivam 
            Mahalingavelar
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Sriram 
            Kanvah
          
          
        
      *b
aCenter for Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, School of Polymer Science and Engineering, The University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi 39406, USA. E-mail: paramasivam.org@gmail.com; Mahalingam.Paramasivam@usm.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, 382055, India. E-mail: sriram@iitgn.ac.in
Received 
      14th June 2022
    , Accepted 24th August 2022First published on 24th August 2022AbstractAggregation-induced emission (AIE) is a unique photophysical phenomenon of organic chromophores, exhibiting a significant emission enhancement in the condensed phase (aggregate/solid/film) than in the solution phase. This remarkable feature offers excellent strategies to obtain molecular materials possessing unique spectral signatures such as high fluorescence intensity, excellent quantum yield, large Stokes shift, and exquisite optoelectronic properties. Unlike a great library of articles with propeller-shaped tetraphenylethene molecular frameworks, reviews based on the mechanistic understandings of α-cyanostilbenes are relatively rare. Considering this, herein, we highlight the structure–property relationship of α-cyanostilbene-based AIE frameworks for tuning the aggregation through molecular displacement with reference to transition dipoles based on the following parameters: (i) positional substitution and orientation of the α-cyano unit, (ii) π-conjugation length (da or db), (iii) molecular size (DAr) of the peripheral substitutions with respect to the α-cyano unit, and (iv) branching effect. In addition, we explain the utility of their unique AIE characteristics for various optoelectronic applications, including self-assembled nanostructures, chemical sensing, organogelation, white light emission, molecular switches, multiphoton absorption, liquid crystals, anion receptors, and biological probes. It is anticipated that organic materials with a cyanostilbene framework will continue to garner attention in the interdisciplinary fields of biology, chemistry, and materials science for diverse applications.
Paramasivam Mahalingavelar
Paramasivam Mahalingavelar received his BSc and MSc from Madurai Kamaraj University, Tamil Nadu, and PhD in materials chemistry from the CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (2014), Hyderabad, India. His post-doctoral research at IIT Gandhinagar mainly focused on the mechanistic understandings of the AIE active α-cyanostilbene derivatives for bioimaging applications. After the post-doctoral stay at South Korea, he moved to Prof. Jason D. Azoulay research group as a post-doctoral research associate and center synthesis lead at the University of Southern Mississippi. His current research involves development of solution processable shortwave infrared (SWIR) small molecular and polymeric materials for multidisciplinary optoelectronic applications including organic photodetectors, phototransistors, organic solar cells, field effect transistors, TADF-OLEDs, and evaluation of their structure-property relationship using various computational and device engineering techniques.
Sriram Kanvah
Sriram Kanvah obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai working with Prof. Anil K Singh. He was a post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Gary Schuster at Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta and worked as a research-intellectual property analyst at General Electric Company Bangalore. After that, he joined IIT-Gandhinagar, Discipline of Chemistry. His groups research interests are in synthesizing and developing photoresponsive systems for organic electronics, biological imaging, and chemosensing applications. So far their research group graduated 7 PhD students and guided dissertation projects of several MSc students. Apart from the research, Sriram gives several lecture-demos to school students and teachers to promote science awareness.
Introduction
α-Cyanostilbenes (CSs) are versatile and multifunctional building blocks, which can be used for various optoelectronic applications such as organic solar cells (OSCs), organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), liquid crystal displays (LCDs), bioimaging, sensing, and multi-stimuli responsive systems.1–5 The optoelectronic characteristic features of α-CSs in the solution state are generally governed by the peripheral donor and acceptor building blocks embedded into the π-conjugated framework.1,3,6 Molecules such as tetraphenylethene (TPE), hexaphenyl silole (HPS), diphenyldibenzo fulvene (DPDBF), distyryl anthracene, hexaphenyl benzene, and 2,3,5,6-tetraphenyl pyrazine derivatives are non-luminescent in solution but become emissive in the condensed phase.7–9 The emission quenching of TPE derivatives in solution is ascribed to the non-radiative deactivation induced by the dynamic intramolecular motions (DIM) of their phenyl rings. The emission enhancement is attributed to the aggregation due to the blocked non-radiative decay pathways through the increased π-framework rigidity. The magnitude of the emission intensity is proportional to the number of rings involved in the DIM process. The six phenyl rings in hexaphenylsilole (HPS) showed intense emission compared to its TPE counterpart possessing four phenyl units (Fig. 1A). This phenomenon is termed the “aggregation-induced emission (AIE)/aggregation-induced enhanced emission (AIEE)” effect.10 The restriction of intramolecular motions (RIM), including rotation and vibration, is typically assessed using the radiative and non-radiative transitions due to geometric, electronic, and morphological effects. Fermi's golden rule (FGR)-supported vibronic coupling calculations have been used for the quantitative evaluation of these radiative (kr) and non-radiative (knr) constant values under the harmonic approximation, which mainly relies on the vibrational wavefunction overlap between the initial (i) and final (f) electronic states.11 However, calculation of knr using the FGR formalism is applicable only for structurally rigid molecular systems, in which the geometrical fluctuations are expected to be small upon photoexcitation, whereas it fails to cover π-frameworks enduring significant structural dislocations. Besides RIM characteristics, other mechanistic findings include E/Z isomerization, excited-state twisting, bond-stretching, ring puckering, and excited-state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT)12–16 also significantly contribute to the aggregate emission. Thus, based on the above-mentioned reasons, it is impossible to disentangle the emission of aggregates only from the RIM mechanism. Planar organic luminophores generally show quenching upon aggregation, where this phenomenon is termed the aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) effect.17–19 In 2013, Gierschner et al. demonstrated the effect of phase morphology on the emission of distyrylbenzene (DSB), where its single crystals were bright but showed dark at the polycrystalline states.20 The electronic ground state (S0) of DSB is planar, but its substantial torsional flexibility at the first singlet excited state (S1) shortens the vinyl−phenyl bond, diminishing its torsional modes, resulting in an intense blue emission in the solution state. Alternatively, the large trap states in the polycrystalline state weaken the emission of DSB through major structural dislocations. The greater structural integrity, low surface-to-volume ratio, and smaller crystal size effectively suppress the non-radiative transitions and contribute to the strong emission in the single crystalline state despite H-aggregation. The small singlet exciton diffusion length diminishes the bulk traps, structural dislocations, and grain boundaries, impeding the exciton migration to the surface.20 Hence, it is not appropriate to confine the quenching attribute to the aggregation characteristics alone, which can be redefined as “trap-controlled emission quenching” (TCQ). The TCQ effect hampers the use of many organic π-conjugated systems in OLED, OFET, and OSCs.21–23 Therefore, understanding the molecular geometries and their structural fluctuations with respect to the nuclear coordinates and vibronic coupling provides valuable information about the ground- and excited-state geometries. In particular, ultrafast deactivation processes, including radiative (fluorescence, phosphorescence) and non-radiative (internal conversion (IC), and intersystem crossing (ISC) should be explored in detail to conceive their underlying mechanisms.
 Fig. 1  (A) Molecular structure of the propeller-shaped TPE, HPS π-frameworks and their SLE efficacy based on the RIM mechanism. (B) Push–pull interactions involved in the para-cyanostilbene framework. (C) SLE activity of α-cyanostilbenes in solution versus condensed state and its tendency to form emissive aggregates through intermolecular non-covalent interactions. 
Restricted access to conical interactions (RACI) approach
The emission characteristics of AIE luminogens in solution and the condensed phase have been well-explained through non-radiative relaxation processes using the conical intersection (CI), which is defined as the intersection between states of the same multiplicity at the non-adiabatic region of the potential energy surface (PES) associated with the sizeable nuclear displacements.24 Although CI was reported in the early 1930s,25,26 Blancafort's research group successfully demonstrated a general theoretical model named “restricted access to conical interactions” (RACI) on the diphenyl dibenzofulvene (DPDBF)27 and dimethyl tetraphenylsilole (DMTPS)28 luminogens. Various multireference quantum-chemical methods, including the complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF), complete active space perturbation theory (CASPT2), cost-effective time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), and spin-flip TDDFT detail the energetically accessible modes that are conducive for radiationless decay from the excited to the ground state in the solution state.29–31 The results predicted using the RACI model follow a consistent trend with the RIM mechanism.
According to the RACI approach, molecules are excited to the Franck–Condon (FC) region upon photoexcitation and relax to the lowest vibrational ladder (V0) of the S1 state. The relative energy difference between the Franck–Condon point (EFC) and the ECI at the PES determines the knr, and thereby ΦF. For instance, if EFC is higher than ECI (EFC ≫ ECI), non-radiative transitions will be promoted through IC along the CI seam toward the ground state. This leads to prominent fluorescence quenching, a dominant process usually occurring in the solution state. Conversely, if a molecule obeys the condition of EFC ≪ ECI, it is more emissive given that its EFC requires more energy to overcome the activation energy barrier to attain the ECI of the S1 state.13 The molecular coordinates at the condensed phase freeze the large amplitude motions for the non-radiative deactivation, increasing the CI energy to a greater extent, yielding strongly fluorescent aggregates. The photophysics of DPDBF modeled using the multi-state (MS)-CASPT2//CASSCF approach predicted that two coordinates, i.e., bond stretching and torsional twist, promote the non-radiative deactivation of DPDBF in the solution state, moving from a highly twisted to a planar structure in the S1 state.27 On the contrary, in DMTPS, the torsional twist of the silole ring and flapping motion of the phenyl substitution contribute to the non-radiative relaxation.28 DMTPS in the S1 state undergoes initial relaxation through planarization of its phenyl units, which lowers the ECI closer to S0. The energy of the activation barrier from ES1,min (0.4 eV) lies within the excess vibrational energy (0.6 eV) levels. This energy difference facilitates the non-radiative deactivation to S0, which explains the weak solution emission. However, this pathway becomes energetically inaccessible upon aggregation due to the blockage of these large amplitude motions, opening up the radiative channels. The proposed RACI models in solution and the single crystalline state for the DMTPS luminogen are shown in Fig. 2A and B, respectively. Subsequently, Prlj et al. revealed the emission quenching mechanism of the TPE luminogen in the gas/solution phase using a mixed quantum-classical trajectory surface hopping method based on Tully's fewest switches scheme.32 The excited-state dynamics of TPE revealed that an interplay between the ethylenic twist and photocyclization pathway majorly contributed to the energetically accessible CIs. The central ethylenic twist of TPE leads to a pronounced destabilization of the ground state and achieves near degeneracy between S1 and S0 after ∼1 ps, generating the CI, an energetically accessible pathway for the non-radiative relaxation through ultrafast IC (Fig. 2C). In addition, the torsion induced by the phenyl rings also aids in attaining the CI through the hexagonal arrangement of carbons proximal to the CC bond. Various research groups in the 1980s used ultrafast (pico- and femto-second scale) pump–probe spectroscopic techniques to investigate the excited state photodynamics of TPE33 by varying the structural rigidity,34 temperature,35 solvent polarity,36 and viscosity.37 The experimental results obtained from these measurements validate the RACI model, where the sub-picosecond dynamics of TPE typically involve the ultrafast elongation of the CC bond and wave packet motion of the phenyl-ring bending modes.38 Considering these studies, the terms AIE/AIEE pave the way for ambiguity,39 and thus Gierschner coined a new phrase, i.e., ‘solid-state luminescence enhancement (SLE)’, for this phenomenon.40 Herein, considering the merits of this argument, we replace AIE/AIEE with SLE.
 Fig. 2  Proposed decay path of DMTPS using the RACI model in (A) solution state and (B) crystalline state; Geometrical parameters and electronic state potential energies of TPE molecule as a function of time with respect to (C) ethylenic twist and (D) photocyclization. (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 28 and 50 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
The SLE characteristics of TPE/HPS derivatives in the condensed phase mainly originate from the torsional twist and rigidity of their π-framework,41,42 which mainly govern their emission intensity but have limited influence on wavelength tuning. Hence, SLE-active NIR luminogens have been developed by incorporating donor/acceptor units into the TPE π-skeleton because ultra-strong electron–acceptors such as benzobisthiadiazole (BBT) and thiadiazoloquinoxaline (TQ) units are known for pushing the spectral region toward the NIR window through LUMO stabilization.43–47 Moreover, the synthesis of these TPE-based D–A chromophores requires multistep synthetic routes and tedious purification. Additionally, their optical profiles generally yield smaller Stokes shifts, hampering their use in biological applications. Therefore, albeit challenging, it is necessary to develop larger Stokes shifted organic chromophores to obtain the advantageous features of minimal spectral overlap and autofluorescence, permitting cellular imaging with a high signal-to-noise ratio.48,49 In this regard, CSs are found to be appropriate π-alternatives owing to their potential to tune both the emission intensity and spectral wavelength based on their unique ‘twist elasticity’ characteristics.50
α-Cyano vs. p-cyano stilbenes
As shown in Fig. 1B, para-cyano substitution directed the overlap of the π-orbitals interactions along the principal axis. The cyano unit helps to improve the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) transitions from the donor at the opposite end due to the push–pull effect and exhibits dual emission due to its twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) characteristics. The presence of donor and acceptor groups triggers a significant excited state dipole moment (μge), rendering them susceptible to micro-environmental variations.3,51 Consequently, their emission characteristics gradually transition from a local excited (LE) to the charge transfer (CT) state upon varying the solvent polarity. These molecules are highly emissive in dilute conditions but encounter severe quenching upon aggregation. On the contrary, vertical α-cyano substitution in the principal axis in the CS π-framework appears like an “anchoring point of a ship”, and is known to regulate the intermolecular non-covalent interactions upon aggregation, a unique feature for the tuning of emission intensity and wavelength (Fig. 1C). This molecular design offers peripheral sites for further molecular functionalization.52 For example, substitution with alkyl/polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains and CF3 units increase the solubility and organogelation tendency, respectively, quaternary ammonium salts increase the water solubility, and steroid motifs enable nanostructured self-assembly and biological applications.5 The substitution of chemical functionalities at the ortho-, meta-, and para-positions of the peripheral aromatic/heteroaromatic building blocks tailor the optoelectronic features.53 The remarkable ortho-hydrogen effect54 induces torsional distortion55 between the α-cyano functionality and proximal aromatic/heteroaromatic substitution plays an additional role in regulating the SLE performance. The combined impact of dynamic IMR and dihedral twist in the solution state activates the non-radiative channels and contributes to a weaker emission. In addition, α-cyano substitution weakens the double bond (rDB) length of the vinylene unit and facilitates the free rotation, which can be easily subjected to cis–trans photoisomerization.56,57 Similar to the TPE and HPS frameworks, DIM58 of CSs rendered them feebly emissive under dilute conditions irrespective of the strength of the electron-accepting/donating substituents at the peripheral positions.59 It is worth noting that this depends on the positional substitution of the cyano units. For instance, α-isomers are nearly non-emissive irrespective of the terminal molecular functionalization, but β-isomers are fluorescent in the solution state, which is further enhanced upon aggregation.60 Another fascinating characteristic is mechanochromism, i.e., fluctuations of the α-cyano functionality orientation change the morphology under external stimuli such as grinding, fuming, pressure, and viscosity.61–66 Various terminal substitutions at the CSs undergo an easy, reversible phase transition between different polymorphs based on the secondary non-covalent interactions, slippage of axes, dipolar and quadrupolar interactions.63
Oelkrug and co-workers demonstrated that introducing cyano substitution in DSB derivatives decreased the ΦF to nearly zero in the solution state. However, ΦF significantly increased to 0.6 due to the formation of J-aggregates, suppressing the non-radiative deactivation.67,68 Shi et al. classified CSs with respect to the positional substitution of the cyano unit, i.e., the location proximal to the central core is termed α-substitution (inner) and proximal to the peripheral substitution is denoted as β-substitution (outer).50 Typically, β-substitution yields a red-shifted spectral wavelength over the α-substituted congeners, implying the importance of positional substitution and orientation of the cyano group on the π–π stacking interactions. Fig. 3A illustrates the possible ways to tune the ΦF of DCS derivatives by varying kr and knr through intra- and inter-molecular rearrangements. The ΦF is weak for the α-series and is unaffected by the terminal and central alkoxy-substitution, whereas the ΦF of β-isomers is strongly dependent on the substitutions involved. Increasing the number of substitutions enhanced the ΦF to a greater extent. α-CSs follow the “energy gap law” (EGL), i.e., the lower the EFC, the higher the knr, whereas β-compounds show the opposite trend, which was well-demonstrated using the RACI model. Hence, to gain deeper insights into the mechanistic findings of α- and β-CSs, it is essential to obtain a greater understanding of the significant geometrical changes of CSs along the PES in terms of orbital changes during photoirradiation.29 The sp-hybridized –CN substitution equalizes the bond length to 1.41 Å from the alternate single (1.48 Å) and double bond (1.33 Å) values of the vinylene unit in the S1 state. Weakening the double bond allows free rotation upon photoexcitation. The consequent geometrical changes generate three primary internal coordinates around the vinyl bond, i.e., torsion (f), elongation (dCC), and pyramidalization (t), around one of the ethylenic carbon atoms in CSs.69 The strong geometry twist of CSs by double bond rotation and pyramidalization induced a localized wavefunction at the vinylene unit with different frontier molecular orbital electron distributions. The energy gap between S0 and S1 and the pathway from the FC region to the CI of the S1 state at the PES determines the non-radiative relaxation. Compared to its α-isomer, CASPT2 and TDDFT calculations predicted a low EFC for β-DMDCS, which is attributed to the pronounced LUMO stabilization induced by the ‘enhanced resonance stabilization’ (ERS) and the large number of zwitterionic resonance structures involved in the former.40 The larger EFC of α-DMDCS can access the pathway to reach the CI and promote the non-radiative deactivation. Alternatively, the well-stabilized EFC of the β-isomers requires more energy to cross the activation energy to attain the CI in the S1/S0 state, contributing to a higher ΦF.60 According to the EGL, a molecule possessing a low EFC undergoes a pronounced non-radiative relaxation, which is expected to reduce the ΦF. The β-isomers adopt the ‘inverted energy gap law’ by following the Bell–Evans–Polanyi principle,70i.e., the lower the EFC, the greater the radiative transition. This study manifested the unique characteristic features of CS derivatives, i.e., most of the α-isomers are non-emissive in solution, whereas β-isomers yield a reasonable ΦF (Fig. 3B).
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustrating how the contribution of intra- and inter-molecular interactions impact the radiative and non-radiative transitions. (B) TD-DFT-simulated rigid torsional scans of the double bond (ϕDB) for α-DBDCS and β-DBDCS using the optimized S0 state in chloroform together with the computed S0, S1, and T1 energies for each data point. The frontier molecular orbitals corresponding to the CI and FC regions and their energies at the S0 and S1 states are computed for the trans–trans vs. cis–trans isomers. (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 40. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
How α(β)-cyano unit helps to tune the SLE activity
According to Kasha's molecular exciton theory, a monomer unit is considered a point dipole with a π-conjugation length and molecular conformation that can be effectively tuned by substituting the aromatic/heteroaromatic building blocks.71 The dipolar −CN unit aligns the monomers with a well-defined π–π stacking distance aided by secondary non-covalent interactions such as H-bonding, N⋯π, and positive σ-hole effect arising from the coupling of N⋯heteroatom functionalities located at the X, Y, and Z position of the terminal substitutions39,72–74 (Fig. 1D). The molecular conformation of the π-framework can be tuned based on the angle of slippage (Sθ), π-conjugation length (da or db), and size (DAr) of the terminal units with respect to the cyano substitution (Fig. 2A). On account of their twist elasticity characteristics, the emission characteristics of CS frameworks are enhanced through torsional-alleviated intramolecular planarization and ameliorated π–π stacking in response to the alignment of their monomeric units.1,58 Besides emission intensity enhancement, α-CSs also exhibit potential for spectral wavelength tuning through aggregation.
The spectral features of molecular aggregates depend on various parameters such as nature of the molecular backbone, substituents, intramolecular rearrangements, π-orbital overlap, and intermolecular electronic interactions. These specific interactions can significantly change the structural energetics of the excited states and their transition probabilities. The fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) of a molecular system can be measured from the contribution of radiative and non-radiative rates using the following equation: (1)where kF is the rate of fluorescence and knr is the combination of non-radiative parameters including the rate of internal conversion (kIC), intersystem crossing (kISC), quenching (kQ·cQ), and photocyclization/photoisomerization (kPR). The fluorescence lifetime (τF) can also be extracted from these parameters, but it should be noted that ΦF and τF can be solvent dependent. The definition of molecular aggregates based on Kasha's exciton theory manifests that the degree of transition dipole alignment and spatial dependencies between the neighboring units enables the formation of different aggregate types such as H-, J-, X-, and Greek cross (+) configurations.75,76 In general, the induced transition dipoles of the aggregates are typically determined from the Coulombic interactions between the non-covalently coupled units and can be defined as follows: EF(k) = ES1 + 2JCoulcosk(2)where k phase parameter; ES1 is the excitation energy corresponding to the first excited state of the monomer; and JCoul is the Coulomb coupling between monomeric species (e.g., 1 and 2). Kasha's molecular exciton model based on the point dipole approximation (PDA) describes that the transition dipoles with a head-to-tail alignment generate a negative excitonic coupling (Jcoul < 0) for J (Jelley or Scheibe) aggregates, where the lowest excitonic band (S1) transitions are optically allowed.75,77 On the contrary, positive excitonic coupling (Jcoul > 0) has been observed for H-aggregates with molecular alignment of side-by-side transition dipoles, with the top of the exciton band for optical transitions preferred78,79 (Fig. 4B). Hence, the optically allowed states in the excitonic combination determine the bathochromic/hypsochromic shift in the spectral wavelength. It should be noted that Kasha's model only applies to the dimer unit, which precludes the electronic interactions induced by the vibration-assisted static/dynamic symmetry breaking effect. According to this model, only ideal H-aggregates possessing kr = 0 (exact parallel transition dipoles) can be non-emissive due to the dipole-forbidden nature of the emitting state. However, in reality, the vibronic coupling-induced asymmetry in the molecular assembly increases the oscillator strength (f) of S1. Gierschner et al. validated this point through weakly coupled H-aggregates of DSB bearing small spectral overlap, which effectively decreased the trapping probability by retarding the exciton motion, enabling strong fluorescence in polycrystalline samples, substantiated from the ultrafast spectroscopy measurements and DFT-TDDFT methods.20 Single crystals bearing H-aggregates with edge-to-face (herringbone) and face-to-face (π-stack) arrangements are more luminescent. Alternatively, optical transitions to the lower excitonic band result in a smaller Stokes shift and bathochromic emission for J-aggregates. Moreover, the PDA model cannot be adopted for dense molecular aggregates because it mostly depends on the intermolecular separation over the length of the transition dipoles corresponding to the optical transitions. Also, this model predicts that increasing the π-conjugation length enhances the excitonic coupling, which is sensitive to the intermolecular separation and oscillator strength.79 Alternatively, the recently developed quantum chemical (QC) model explains that excitonic coupling sharply decreases upon an increase in the number of chains80 because increasing the oligomer length localizes the electronic wavefunction, and gradually diminishes upon increasing the number (n) of chains in the polymer system.81
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation illustrating the molecular tuning of α-cyanostilbenes based on various structural parameters. (B) Exciton splitting diagram showing the tuning of spectral wavelength upon the alignment of monomers based on the energy/transition dipole moment variation. 
The molecular arrangements of oligomer crystals in a 2D layer are generally represented by the slipped face-to-face arrangement (Z = 1). This arrangement mainly relies on the intermolecular separation, which is defined by the distance (z) between the planes of the π-framework and their lateral displacement with reference to the ideal π-stack along the long (xslip, pitch angle) and short (yslip, roll angle) axis. The inversion point defines the molecular rearrangement based on the nearest neighbor distance. More insights about the molecular packing arrangements in 2D and 3D assembly using the QC model have been well-detailed in the literature.4,53xslip = 50% is known as the H/J inversion point in the molecular assembly, which dominantly yields H-aggregates. The transformation of aggregates from H- to J-type relies on the nature of the π-framework and intermolecular separation. This study demonstrated that the molecular assembly can be defined from xslip with reference to the π-stack but not based on the magic angle of 54.7° according to the PDA model. Various aggregate patterns such as X- and Greek-cross (+)-type configurations have been reported based on the cross-dipole stacking,76 where the minimally aligned π–π stacking transition dipoles deteriorate the exciton interactions. Thus, the propensity of the formation of aggregates can be evaluated through the slippage of the pitch and roll angles.82 Here, we briefly describe how to achieve the desired π–π stacking pattern of the aggregates by tuning Sθ using several geometrical parameters, as follows: (1) positional substitution and orientation of the α-cyano unit; (2) π-conjugation length (da or db); (3) molecular (DAr) size (radius) of the terminal units with respect to α-cyano substitution; and (4) functionalization at the terminal aromatic substitution using various chemical functionalities to obtain the desired optoelectronic features (Fig. 4A). For instance, if the π-conjugation length of the terminal substitutions (da≈ db) is nearly identical with respect to the cyano substitution, π–π stacking mostly leads to H-type aggregation, but it can be transformed to J-type when the condition meets the criterion of da > db or db < da. In addition, the molecular size of the peripheral aromatic donor/acceptor substitutions can determine the extent of intermolecular interaction of the −CN functionality. For instance, large molecule peripheral substitution weakens the aggregation characteristics by confining the −CN interactions. Conversely, smaller-sized substituents offer more room for −CN functionality for dominant intermolecular interactions, resulting in enhanced SLE characteristics. The substitution of different chemical functionalities at the ortho-, meta-, and para-positions of the terminal aromatic units significantly impacts the aggregation pattern.83 The intermolecular rearrangement in a molecular assembly plays an inevitable role in regulating the aggregation process, which can be contributed from various processes, including geometrical (flexibility/rigidity and planarization/torsional deviation), electronic (overlap of π-orbital interactions) parameters, excimer and non-covalent electrostatic interactions, polarizability, and morphology variation. Herein, we discuss the mechanistic details of the aggregation process with respect to various geometrical parameters, including π-conjugation length (da or db) and size (DAr) of the terminal unit with respect to the cyano substitution and branching effect, extending their utility for various optoelectronic and biological applications.
Positional substitution and orientation of α-cyano functionality
The development of α-CS derivatives requires straightforward and cost-effective synthetic routes using readily accessible aromatic aldehyde and aromatic/heteroaromatic acetonitrile chemical synthons. The terminal aromatic groups can be further functionalized using the ortho-, meta-, and para-positions using a range of chemical functionalities to obtain the desired optoelectronic characteristics. The positional substitution of the cyano functionality with respect to the central (α-substitution)/terminal (β-substitution) aromatic units plays a crucial role in determining the SLE performance through regulating the intermolecular π–π stacking pattern. For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated distinct mechanochromism for two triphenylamine (TPA)-based CS derivatives by varying the position of the α-cyano functionality.84 The substitution of the cyano unit proximal to the TPA core is denoted as TPA–CNa (α-substitution), where the one closer to the peripheral unit is termed TPA–CNb (β-substitution) (Fig. 5A). The length of π-conjugation between the donor and –CN units for TPA–CNb is comparatively larger than that of its TPA–CNa counterpart, resulting in a bathochromic shift in the absorption and emission with a quantum efficiency (Φf) of 7.7% and 44.9%, respectively.84 The low Φf of TPA–CNb can be attributed to the sizeable structural relaxation upon photoexcitation. TPA–CNa undergoes an efficient fluorescence switching mechanism under mechano- and thermo-chemical conditions, where the α-cyano substitution is highly exposed, due to its outward orientation from the bulky TPA substitution for efficient intermolecular interactions. Alternatively, the inward position of the β-cyano functionality in TPA–CNb renders it less susceptible to multi-stimuli responses.
 Fig. 5  Tuning the spectral intensity and wavelength with reference to the positional substitution of α-cyano functionality (α and β) in different molecular configurations, including (A) triphenylamine,84 (B) 1,4-dimethoxy benzene,85 and (C) 2,5-pyrrole derivatives.86 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2022, Elsevier, ref. 85. Copyright 2022, Wiley; ref. 86. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Yoon and coworkers tuned the photophysical features of a series of 2,5-distyryl-1,4-dimethoxy benzene derivatives using terminal butoxy substitutions and systematically changed the positional substitution of the cyano functionality to inner (α) and outer (β) substitution.85 Principally, β-substituted aggregates red-shifted the emission compared to their α-congeners, implying the advantage of the position and orientation of the cyano unit. The emission wavelength of these molecules in the crystalline state increased in the order (nm) of α-MODCS (495) < α-MODBDCS (542) < β-MODCS (576) < β-MODBDCS (625) (Fig. 5B). This can be ascribed to the extent of Sθ between the pitch (xslip) and roll (yslip) angles, which regulated the overlap of the π–π stacking distance via local dipole coupling and multiple secondary non-covalent C–H⋯N/O interactions. Yokoyama et al. demonstrated the structure–property relationship of two distyrylpyrrole derivatives, which were denoted as i-DCSP and o-DCSP, upon varying the cyano substitution to the inner and outer positions, respectively.86 The identical orientation of the cyano units induced a significant torsional deviation in i-DCSP.
In contrast, a planar configuration was noted in o-DCSP (Fig. 5C). o-DCSP was SLE active but non-emissive under dilute conditions, while the i-DCSP isomer exhibited the opposite trend, i.e., emissive in solution and showed emission quenching upon aggregation. The RACI model explains the non-radiative deactivation through the variation in double bond torsion along the PES. The EFC of o-DCSP was predicted to be higher than that of the i-DCSP isomer, which can easily access the ECI and promote the non-radiative decay in solution. The stabilized EFC of i-DCSP has a high energy barrier to reach the ECI, rendering it more luminescent in solution.87 To gain better insights into the positional substitution and isomerization characteristics of the α-cyano unit, molecular dynamic (MD) simulations were employed on the 1-cyano-1,2-bis-(4′-methylbiphenyl)ethylene (CN-MBE) derivative.57 The potential energy surface (PES) studies demonstrated the fluorescence quenching of the Z- and E-forms in the solution state, which possibly arises from their degeneracy between the electronic ground (S0) and first excited (S1) states with a twisted conformation around the CC bond. The E-form becomes highly emissive as it restricts the CC bond rotation with dense packing upon aggregation and requires high temperature for isomerization. Alternatively, the Z-form is non-emissive even in its crystalline form because of the outward orientation of α-cyano substitution, which maintains sparse π–π stacking with adjacent units, and highly susceptible toward isomerization.
Symmetric α-cyanostilbenes (da ≈ db)
A series of symmetrical α-CS derivatives possessing terminal aromatic units bearing a nearly equal π-conjugation length (da = db) with reference to the cyano substitution was developed. Upamali et al. designed a symmetric SLE luminogen (CN-CPE), where the carbazole-phenyl segments were connected through an acrylonitrile functionality.88 The absorption and emission maxima of CN-CPE monomer measured in acetone were observed at 358 and 518 nm, respectively, and exhibited distinct negative solvatochromism (Fig. 6A). The shorter wavelength absorption corresponding to π–π* transitions are attributed to the ortho-hydrogen effect-induced torsional deviation between the carbazole-phenyl segments. CN-CPE undergoes efficient H-aggregation due to nearly orthogonal Sθ through co-facial π–π stacking, yielding a hypsochromic emission shift (495 nm) compared to its monomeric emission. The single-crystal X-ray analysis revealed strong intermolecular H-bonding interactions between the sp-hybridized N-atom of the CN unit and ortho-hydrogen of carbazole, reinforcing the formation of H-aggregates.
 Fig. 6  Symmetrical cyanostilbenes based on (A) carbazole88 and (B) triphenylamine substitution with a nearly identical π-conjugation length (da ≈ db) showing hypsochromic emission upon aggregation.89 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 66, Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; ref. 64. Copyright 2022, Wiley; ref. 65. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Lv et al. developed a pseudo-symmetric α-CS derivative (BPMT) by flanking MeOTPA-benzothiadiazole (BTD) at one end and phenyl-TPA segment at the other end with a nearly equal π-conjugation length (da ≈ db).89 The strong ICT transitions induced by the electron-deficient BTD substitution pushed the spectral wavelength to the far-red and NIR region (Fig. 6B). The emission maximum of the BPMT monomer was observed at 792 nm with an inferior Φf of 0.4% in THF solution. However, H-aggregates formed in THF–water binary medium showed a blue-shifted emission (733 nm) with an enhanced Φf (8.4%). The single-crystal X-ray structural data revealed multiple intermolecular C–H⋯N/O interactions between the BTD and α-cyano units of BPMT, and strengthening the radiative transition through IMR suppression. DFT predicted a high oscillator strength (f) of 0.89 for BPMT, ensuring enhanced π-orbital overlap through the hybridized local and charge-transfer (HLCT) state. This SLE-active luminogen demonstrated utility as a promising lasing medium due to its distinct emission variation from deep red to the NIR region. In another study, the TPA-based symmetrical bis α-CS derivatives developed by Zhu and coworkers also demonstrated a hypsochromic shift for the aggregates over their monomer emission.90 These experiments clearly evince the common pattern of hypsochromic-shifted emission for symmetrical CS aggregates with reference to their monomer emission.
Asymmetrical α-cyanostilbenes (da > db)
Our group demonstrated the tuning of SLE characteristics and spectral wavelength using four coumarin-based α-CS derivatives, where da > db to the cyano substitution,59 and varied the π-spacers (acceptors) using benzene (phenyl (BB), benzothiazole (BBT)), and thiophene (phenyl (TB) and benzothiazole (TBT)) units, respectively. The fluorescent coumarin donor was used for better color demarcation, its small molecular size and planar conformation are highly beneficial to direct the orientation of the α-cyano unit for effective intermolecular coupling. The hypsochromic absorption of BB and BBT originated from the torsional distortion, but the replacement of the phenyl unit with thiophene in TB and TBT narrowed the band gap by alleviating the torsional distortion. The monomer emission remained nearly identical in THF (Fig. 7A). This trend was manifested in how the dynamic IMRs of the α-cyano functionality weakened the performance of the electron-deficient terminal acceptor units under dilute conditions. Conversely, the emission maximum of the aggregates gradually red-shifted in the order of following (nm): BB (570) < TB (600) < BBT (630) < TBT (670). However, enhancing the planarity of the π-framework using thiophene unit increased the ICT transition, but its closer π–π stacking-induced exciton–vibronic coupling decreased the emission intensity of the aggregates through accelerating the non-radiative channels. The Stokes shift measured for the monomers in 1,4-dioxane was in the range of ∼70 nm but enabled a dramatic variation of 158 to 213 nm for the corresponding aggregates. In general, a smaller Stokes shift has been reported as one of the inherent characteristics for most of the J-aggregates reported. Surprisingly, J-aggregates based on α-CS derivatives yield a large Stokes shift with a high Φf, a promising feature in bioimaging applications. This study manifested an elegant strategy for tuning the emission of the aggregates toward the NIR spectral window through variation of the terminal substituents variation.
 Fig. 7  Asymmetric α-cyanostilbene derivatives (da > db) reported based on various donors, including (A) coumarin59 and (B) triphenylamine frameworks exhibiting a bathochromic shift upon aggregation.91 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 and 69, respectively. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Niu et al. demonstrated the importance of π-conjugation length (da or db) on the aggregation propensity by correlating the symmetric versus asymmetric α-CS derivatives91 using TPA-thiophene-2-carbaldehyde (TPAT) as a common scaffold. Symmetrical 2TPAT-AN comprised of two TPAT segments bridged by a cyanoacrylate unit with an identical π-conjugation length (da= db), and asymmetrical D–A–A skeleton (TPAT-AN-XF) was prepared through the replacement of one of the TPAT units with 3,5-CF3-tethered phenyl substitution (XF). The absorption of 2TPAT-AN displayed a bathochromic shift due to its extended π-conjugation length. On the contrary, the TPAT-AN-XF aggregates showed a red-shift in their emission to 599 nm compared to their 2TPAT-AN counterpart (572 nm). As a result of the enhanced ICT characteristics and intermolecular non-covalent coupling induced by the peripheral CF3 substitution, a large Stokes shift of 160 nm for TPAT-AN-XF was noted, but the absence of ICT transitions lowered the Stokes shift (90 nm) for 2TPAT-AN. This study showed that the effective ICT between the D–A units of asymmetrical TPAT-AN-XF significantly influenced the Stokes shift of the aggregates. The smaller-sized peripheral CF3 substitution channelized the cyano unit for effective molecular displacement. 2TPAT-AN was also utilized as a selective lysosome stain for the in vivo long-term imaging of mouse tumors with a high signal-to-noise ratio, good resolution, excellent biocompatibility, and deep tissue penetration (Fig. 7B).
α-Cyanostilbenes possessing bulky terminal substitutions (DAr)
Besides π-conjugation length (da ≈ db or da > db) molecular size (DAr) of the terminal substitutions also plays a pivotal role in governing the non-covalent intermolecular interactions. Hypothetically, one can premise that sterically crowded terminal substitution does not allow the neighboring units to come closer to the cyano moiety, significantly diminishing the intermolecular coupling. Dong et al. used two bulky imidazole derivatives, i.e., triphenyl imidazole (TPIA) and phenanthroimidazole (PPIA), to construct symmetrical α-CS derivatives whose chemical structures differed by a C–C bond fusion.92 The SLE characteristics of TPIA and PPIA mainly contributed to arresting the DIM of the three free rotating phenyl rings linked to the imidazole core (Fig. 8A). The TPIA aggregates yielded hypsochromic emission shift due to the enlarged π–π stacking distance resulting from the presence of bulkier and twisted 3D conformational imidazole units. The non-doped multilayer electroluminescent devices fabricated using the orange-emissive PPIA demonstrated a slight roll-off and high luminance, current efficiency, power efficiency, and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 11560 cd m−2, 2.24 cd A−1, 1.54 lm W−1 and 1.02%, respectively. Zhang's research group functionalized a series of asymmetrical bis α-CS derivatives by end-capping with two different bulkier substitutions, i.e., TPA unit at one end and triphenyl imidazole at the other end, where the ortho- and para-positions were substituted with –H, –NH2 and –OH functionalities on the triphenyl imidazole unit93 and denoted as TIN, TIO, and TINO, respectively (Fig. 8B). Freezing the IMR effect of the TPA/imidazole rings significantly increased the SLE activity of these luminogens on account of the π-framework rigidification. However, a negligible contribution was noted from the intermolecular non-covalent coupling from the α-cyano moiety. Consequently, observed emission wavelength of the aggregates was nearly identical to the monomer emission. This phenomenon was further corroborated by the single-crystal X-ray data, showing no specific intermolecular contacts from the α-cyano unit.
 Fig. 8  Effect of molecular size of the terminal substitutions on the emission of the monomers vs. aggregates using (A) triphenyl imidazole,92 (B) triphenylamine-triphenyl imidazole combination, (C) tetraphenylethene,93 and (D) various amino donor building blocks.96 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 92, 93 and 96. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 72. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.) 
Similarly, the sterically crowded TPE framework offers a hypsochromic emission shift94 (Fig. 8C) but, replacing the bulky terminal substitution with a smaller CF3 unit exposed the α-cyano functionality to the outward orientation for efficient intermolecular coupling, which pushed the emission wavelength toward NIR spectral window.95 In addition, the CF3 units provide a platform for organogelation through non-covalent C/H/π⋯F interactions.
To explore the geometrical impact on the SLE characteristics, our group utilized a series of donor building blocks, including Nth (C-1) and 3rd (C-3) substitution of carbazole, dimethylamine (DM), julolidine (J-1), and triphenylamine (T-1).96 The tuning of the band gap by each donor was distinctly different, resulting in a greater variation of absorption, following the order of C-1 < C-3 < T-1 < DM < J-1. This study manifested that the SLE of α-CSs is not only dependent on the donating strength but also dependent on other parameters such as the molecular size (DAr), π-conjugation length (da or db), orientation, and position of the α-cyano moiety, flexibility, and rigidity of the π-framework (Fig. 8D). Although the ortho-hydrogen effect-induced torsional deviation between the carbazole-phenyl segment in C-1 decreased the overlap of π-orbital interactions, the outward orientation of the cyano unit enabled better intermolecular coupling, resulting in a blue-shifted aggregated emission with the highest intensity. The SLE activity gradually decreased with respect to the the rigidity of the donor units, following the order of C-1 > DM > C-3 > T-1 > J-1. The lifetime decay studies corroborated this trend, where the flexible cyclic aliphatic chains of J-1 contributed to the weakest SLE activity in the series.
pH fluorescent probes
Our research group demonstrated a series of α-CS derivatives by modulating the π-framework using various donor/acceptor and spacer building blocks and functionalized the terminal substitutions at the ortho-, meta- and para-positions through the covalent fusion of cholesterol, glucose, longer alkyl chains –CF3, –NO2, pyridine, and benzothiazole/benzimidazole units for various optoelectronic and biological applications (Fig. 9). To evaluate the donor-SLE activity relationship, two different series of α-CS derivatives were categorized, i.e., dimethylamine (DM), triphenylamine (TPA), and carbazole (Cz) donors at one end and phenyl units possessing para-hydroxy (SK1, SK2, and SK3) H-substitution (SK4, SK5, and SK6) on the other side.97 The extent of J-aggregation was assessed from the Stokes shift variation measured for the monomers (in dioxane) versus aggregates (in binary solvent medium). The trend of (I/I0) and the Stokes shift values obtained followed the order of DM > TPA > Cz. The data clearly revealed that smaller dimethylamine (DM) donor augment the intermolecular coupling. Consequently, a synergistic enhancement in emission intensity and wavelength was noted with a substantial Stokes shift. Conversely, the bulky, free-rotating TPA units exhibited a moderate SLE performance for SK2. The lowest SLE performing SK3 in this series can be attributed to the poor overlap of its π-orbital interactions. In comparison to the H-substitution, the hydroxy derivatives exhibited superior SLE activity. The single X-ray crystal structure indicated that the hydroxy unit facilitates the head-to-tail arrangement through non-covalent interactions between the C  N⋯H–O units, thereby promoting J-aggregation.98 Owing to its versatile nature, SK1 has been utilized as a reversible pH fluorescence probe under acidic, neutral, alkaline conditions and exhibited dual emissive characteristics with respect to the concentration gradient of various surfactants such as SDS, CTAB, and Triton X100 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 9  Molecular structures of the α-cyanostilbene-based SLE luminogens developed from our research group for multifunctional applications. 
 Fig. 10  (A) Switching mechanism of SK1 under acidic, neutral, and alkaline conditions.97 (B) Color transformation of SK3 through acid adduct formation and gel–sol transformation upon exposure to TFA vapors.99 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 97. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 99. Copyright 2022, Wiley.) 
Self-assembled nanostructures
To further investigate the versatility of SK1 for biological applications, we developed SK7 through the covalent fusion of cholesterol unit to SK1 through oxy substitution. The π-conjugation length of SK7 was extended to generate SK8 by incorporating a diene unit and the impact of conformational flexibility on the SLE activity was correlated.100SK8 demonstrated moderate SLE characteristics because of the increased conformational flexibility by the additional CC bond, which freed the α-cyano unit to undergo dynamic IMR. Hence, the synergistic combination of conformational flexibility from the π-framework and flexible aliphatic chains from the cholesterol unit remarkably quenched the aggregates emission. This study highlighted the contribution of the α-cyano functionality toward forming organized nano-dimensional self-assembled structures in the aqueous sodium cholate matrix. In another study, A series of pyrene derivatized α-CS derivatives (SK10–SK12) was developed by increasing the number of methoxy substitutions at the ortho-, meta-, and para-positions at the peripheral phenyl unit. The number of methoxy units red-shifted the emission of the nanoaggregates.101 To further convert the aggregates into organized assemblies, longer octyl and hexadecyloxy chains were incorporated into the dimethylamino α-CS framework102 to develop SK13 and SK14, respectively. As expected, TEM analysis revealed the formation of nanospheres due to hydrophobic interactions induced by hexadecyl chains, and the subsequent structural rearrangements upon aggregation were further validated using Monte Carlo simulations (Fig. 11A).
 Fig. 11  (A) Coarse-grained model of SK13 and SK14 bearing the longer C8 and C16 alkyl chains, respectively, and their snapshots at the different values of εLJ.102 (B) Molecular structures of L-PyPhG and L-PyG and the distinct self-assembly features of left-handed nanotubes in EtOH with an efficient energy transfer contribution with acridine orange (AO), while the formation of right-handed nanotwists in DMSO possessing poor energy transfer.103 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 102 and 103. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Xu and coworkers functionalized pyridyl-based α-CS derivatives using chiral amphiphilic units, namely L-PyPhG and L-PyG. They investigated various parameters such as the phase, nanostructured self-assembly, supramolecular chirality, and energy transfer (ET) efficiency by varying the solvent medium from polar-aprotic (DMSO) to protic (EtOH).103 Both amphiphiles underwent supramolecular gelation in DMSO and self-assembled into right-handed nanotwists, while they showed a left-handed nanotube morphology in EtOH. In addition, the obtained chiroptical signals were distinct for these molecular structures, revealing their handedness of the self-assembly (Fig. 11B). For the L-PyPhG derivative, both signals were inversed upon changing the solvent medium from EtOH to DMSO, which was consistent with the handedness inversion of the chiral nanostructures. Alternatively, both nanotubes and nanotwists exhibited the same sign in their chiroptical spectra for L-PyG, while their handedness was inversed. This was attributed to the packing pattern of the π-framework induced by the amide hydrogen bonds proximal to the aromatic or peripheral pyridyl units.
Biological probes
Extending our research to the biological field, we developed a water-soluble α-CS glycoconjugate (SK9), showing excellent SLE activity with a substantial Stokes shift of 163 nm in a non-polar binary solvent system (pentane–dioxane).104 The glucose pendant not only induced asymmetry in the π-framework, but also synergistically downshifting the frontier energy levels with a concomitant band gap enlargement. SK9 exhibited better SLE efficiency upon binding with concanavalin A (Con A), bovine serum albumin (BSA), and human serum albumin (HSA). This can be ascribed to the simultaneous interactions of the aromatic and glucose skeletons of SK9 with the respective hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains of the protein structures based on the ‘like dissolves like’ mechanism. The circular dichroism (CD) analysis showed substantial ellipticity changes upon binding with proteins. Continuing this study, two push–pull coumarin–pyridine-based α-CS scaffolds (SK15 and SK16) were synthesized by varying the donor substitution using DM and julolidine, respectively.105 The planar julolidine unit contributed to the strong red-shift in the absorption of SK16 over its DM (SK15) counterpart, implying the donating strength of julolidine. In addition, the enhanced dielectric constant of the glycerol helped to increase the emission intensity of the aggregates protonation of the pyridyl nitrogen quenched the emission to a great extent but shows bathochromic emission shifts. The positive solvatochromic emissive probes exhibited greater specificity toward live-cell lipid droplet imaging in COS-7 and McA-RH7777 cells, and their pronounced interactions with the hydrophobic part of the lipid droplets demonstrated their excellent biocompatibility and photostability.
Chemical sensing
To identify micromolar quantities of SO32− ions, we reported two cost-effective, water-soluble dimethylamino (SK17)- and julolidine (SK18)-based red-emitting coumarin fluorescent probes functionalized with pyridinium quaternary ions. The probes showed strong potential for the exo- and endo-genous detection of SO32− in hepatic McA-RH7777 cells with no cytotoxicity.108 The possible reason for the SO32− detecting mechanism is the strong electron-deficient nature of the pyridinium quaternary cation and the cyano moiety in a single molecular framework makes the CC bond more labile toward the sulfite anions through Michael addition. The sensing mechanism was validated using NMR and mass spectrometry. We also used benzimidazole-based SLE luminogens as chemosensors for the detection of picric acid using dimethylamine (SK19), triphenylamine (SK20), and 3-carbazole (SK21) donors.106 Their specific selectivity for detecting picric acid was demonstrated at the ppm level over the other nitroaromatic explosives and phenolic substrates. This detection led to emission quenching accompanied by a sharp color demarcation (Fig. 12A). 1H NMR analysis was used to validate the sensing mechanism through the downfield shift of aromatic protons upon the addition of picric acid. The intermolecular non-covalent interactions of the –NO2 and –OH of picric acid with the possible reactive sites of SK19 were conducive for its selective detection.
 Fig. 12  (A) Variation in emission intensity for SK19 upon increasing the concentration of picric acid and comparative emission changes upon titrating with various nitro derivatives.106 (B) Molecular structures of the fluorene-based cyanostilbene derivatives used for the detection of the illicit GHB and color variation noted under the naked eye and 365 nm UV lamp. (C) Absorption and emission variation of SK46 upon interaction with GHB.107 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 106 and 107. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.) 
Recently, we reported a series of fluorene-based α-CS derivatives as fluorescence probes for the detection of the sedative γ-hydroxy butyric acid (GHB) using different terminal substitutions ranging from H (SK44), methoxy (SK45), hydroxy (SK46), and nitro (SK47) functionalities. Varying the peripheral substitution from electron-donating (OCH3) to deficient (NO2) units pushed the absorption and emission profiles to a longer wavelength due to the strong ICT characteristics. All the α-CS derivatives exhibited SLE characteristic features in H2O except SK46. SK46 underwent a 110 nm bathochromic shift upon interaction with GHB through intermolecular H-bond-supported ICT transitions (Fig. 12B and C). The color transformation from blue to yellow using the naked eye allows easier identification of spurious samples.107 Also, dye-coated chromatographic strips gave visual demarcation of the solution with GHB in different EtOH–H2O fractions. 1H NMR analysis validated the H-bonding interaction of SK46 with GHB through the upfield shift of the aromatic proton signals.107
Organogelation
Besides aggregation tendency, the strength of the intermolecular non-covalent interactions of α-CS derivatives can be distinctly varied upon heating/cooling conditions. This effect can be extended to their gelation characteristics by enhancing/disrupting the CN⋯π/CN⋯F interactions with the polyaromatic hydrocarbons/fluorine units. Thus, we developed a series of organogelators based on the polyaromatic hydrocarbons such as anthracene (SK22–SK24) and pyrene (SK25–SK27) derivatized α-CS π-frameworks and functionalized the other end with o-, m-, and p-CF3-substituted phenyl units.111,112 Nevertheless, marginal differences were noted in the SLE behavior due to the weak electron-deficient CF3 substitution, where increasing the CF3 count ameliorated the gelation tendency. Upon cooling, these molecules organized into self-assembled nanostructures in t-BuOH through non-covalent F⋯F/H/π and N⋯H/π interactions. Extending the alkoxy chains to branched racemic β-citronellol led to a significant change in the specific rotation of the corresponding pyrenyl acrylonitrile derivatives in SK28–SK30.83 Using the specific rotation of β-citronellol ([α]D: −8.26) as a reference, increasing the chiral racemic branched alkyl chains effectively changed the sign of [α]D from negative to positive for the mono- (+2.09) to di- (+9.88) and tri- (+10.44) units, respectively. The cryo-SEM images revealed the various morphologies of the organogels, including uniform nanoaggregates and twisted ribbon network-like structures (Fig. 11B). The pyrene-citronellol racemic branched arms induced favorable π–π stacking through hydrophobic interactions and tended to form stable organogels in cyclohexane. Later, a series of dimethylamine-based α-CS derivatives SK31–SK33 was synthesized with phenyl, pyridyl, and para-CF3-substituted phenyl units. The strong intermolecular contacts induced by the sp2-hybridized N-atom of the pyridyl unit underwent gelation in EtOH.99 We also demonstrated a two-component organogelation by adding a non-gelating CS component to the CS framework, where the gelating tendency stemmed from the intermolecular F⋯N contacts between the pyridyl and CF3 substitution. Exposure of this xerogel to TFA acidic vapors resulted in a distinct color transformation from yellow to red with a concomitant loss of gelation characteristics (Fig. 10B).
Aparicio and coworkers tuned the gelation characteristics of three tris(dodecyloxy) phenyl units end-capped bis α-CS derivatives by functionalizing the central units (phenyl (BPH) and thiophene (BTH)) and positional substitution of the cyano functionality (α-(APH) and β-(BPH)).109 The hypsochromic shift and reduced radiative rate (kr) of the α-APH aggregates implied its preference for H-type self-assembly configuration (Fig. 13A). However, embedding the β-cyano substitution of BPH typically red-shifted the aggregate emission compared to its α-congener through a cooperative mechanism (Fig. 13B). Thiophene substitution in β-BTH further pushed the emission from 525 to 595 nm. Although the radiative rate of β-cyano substitution was highest in this series, its enhanced planarity leveraged the non-radiative relaxation due to the closer π–π stacking. Domínguez and coworkers demonstrated the contribution of α-cyano functionality toward organogelation by correlating the molecular structures with (DOHS) and without the cyano moiety (DOCS) using bis(styrylbenzene) versus bis(α-cyanostyryl)benzene frameworks.110 In combination with the longer alkyl chains, functionalizing the peripherals using acetamido substitution induced stable gelation through non-covalent interactions. The cyano substitution produced distinct geometry changes, leading to the stabilization of the HOMO (Fig. 13C). Nonetheless, a blue shift in emission was observed for aggregates of DOHS with significant enhancement of the Φf over the DOCS. On the contrary, a bathochromic shift of ∼100 nm was observed upon organogelation. The combination of acetamido-cyano units reinforced the organogelation through intermolecular H-bonding interactions. The quantified values obtained from the reorganization energy and dimensionless Huang–Rhys factors at the low energy region confirmed the significant contribution of the vibrational motions in DOHS. Organogelation effectively blocked the vibrational motions, which consequently activated the radiative channels. Alternatively, the planar-structured DOHS preferred the ACQ pathway. The morphology of the DOCS xerogel exhibited laminar structures, whereas a net of interlocked fiber bundles was found for the DOHS derivatives.
 Fig. 13  (A) Molecular structures of the π-gelators under illumination.109 (B) Xerogel formation in cyclohexane and cryoSEM image of the SK28 aggregates.83 (C) Tuning the SLE effect and organogelation of DOCS and DOHS by the α-cyano substitution.110 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 and 109. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society and ref. 110. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.) 
White light emission
The development of white light-emissive (WLE) organic materials is an ever-increasing demand in the commercial market of display technologies, which typically rely on composite designs involving a mixture of compounds emitting at different wavelength.113 We reported three TPA-based α-CS derivatives (SK34–SK36) possessing a tunable band gap upon increasing the electron acceptor strength and correlated their AIE–ICT–ACQ relationship.114 The band gap narrowing mainly originated from the LUMO stabilization induced by the electron-deficient pyridyl and –NO2 units and yielded the AIE intensity at a different wavelength. For instance, the phenyl derivative exhibited a strong AIE feature at 517 nm. The replacement of phenyl with a pyridyl unit reduced the intensity of the emission peak with a concomitant bathochromic shift. The –NO2 group renders significant quenching but dramatically pushed the AIE peak to 626 nm. The intermolecular interactions between the polar (pyridyl and –NO2) functionalities and solvent dipoles were conducive to the AIE–ACQ balancing effect. Using these SLE luminogens, we successfully demonstrated WLE using different CIE color coordinates (0.39, 0.37) and (0.33, 0.31) for binary and ternary combinations, respectively.
Branching effect
A series of star-shaped TPA-functionalized α-CS derivatives was reported by Gopinath et al., comprised of different terminal substitutions including –NH2, –OH, –Br, –OCH3, and –NO2 at the para-position of the phenyl units and the synthesized molecules were denoted as NTBTAPA, NTBTHPA, NTBTMPA, NTBTBPA, and NTPTNPA, respectively.115 Among these SLE-active luminogens, the electron-deficient –NO2 substitution red-shifted the optical profiles but with simultaneous quenching of Φf and the radiative lifetime. The biocompatibility of NTBTNPA was evaluated using two Gram-positive and two Gram-negative bacteria and a fungus model, i.e., Rhizoctonia solani (Fig. 14A). NTBTNPA was used as a bioimaging probe to identify the existence of nuclei and reveal the occurrence of rapid nuclear movement. The same group demonstrated the influence of α-cyano substitution using a star-shaped skeleton but varying the terminal substitutions with isocyanate functionalities (A3CS and A3SS).117 Embedding the α-cyano substitution red-shifted the optical transitions of A3CS to a longer wavelength but exhibited a large knr in the solution state. The ACQ feature of A3SSversus the distinguished SLE characteristics of A3CS revealed the contribution of the α-cyano unit to the spectral wavelength tuning upon aggregation. Considering this unique feature, A3CS was used as a bio-imaging probe to locate the active sites of mitochondria in zebrafish eggs. To understand the impact of the branching effect on the SLE characteristics, our group used the TPA unit to constitute the branching effect in α-CS derivatives into linear and branched configurations (SK37-SK39) and tuned the SLE properties using a range of acceptor functionalities, i.e., neutral (–H), polar aprotic (–CF3) and protic (–NO2) units.116SK38 yielded a bathochromic shift upon aggregation but show an ACQ behavior, which is attributed to the interaction between the polar protic –NO2 substitution and water solvent dipoles. A closer observation of this analysis empirically indicated that the SLE phenomenon in the conventional push–pull system is inversely proportional to the combination of the ACQ and ICT effects. However, polar protic NO2 substitution on one arm and polar aprotic CF3 unit on the other arm in a single π-framework (SK39) produced pull (strong)–pull (weak) interactions and enabled a distinct change in the aggregation propensity (Fig. 14B). The weak CF3 substitution suppressed the ACQ effect-induced polar protic nature of the –NO2 unit to a significant extent, consequently enhancing the radiative transitions of SK39, which is an elegant approach to develop bright NIR-SLE active luminogens. In another report, to examine the impact of increased branching on the SLE characteristics, we embedded CF3 substitutions in the TPA π-framework, ranging from linear to V- and star-shaped configurations118 (SK40–SK43). The SLE characteristics were more pronounced in the linear derivatives compared to their branched counterparts. Increasing the number of sterically crowded branched arms hampered the intermolecular coupling due to their propeller-shaped skeleton. However, the –CF3 units at the peripherals helped stabilize the gelation through dominant non-covalent interactions.
 Fig. 14  (A) Molecular structures of star-shaped A3-type α-CS derivatives and their band gap tuning using various substitutions and SLE characteristics of NTBTNPA in DMF–water mixture and its nuclear movement in the R. solani mycelium upon binding.115 (B) Subtle balancing of AIE vs. ICT vs. ACQ effect through molecular tuning of SK37–SK39 based on push–pull interactions.116 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 and 94. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Photochromic fluorescence switching
The constitutional exchange of α-cyano substitution, such as bond breaking of the ethylene bridge and the consequent reformation of the aryl moieties via dynamic covalent chemistry (DCC), makes them promising candidates as photoswitches.122 Based on these mechanistic findings, Wu et al. developed two photoinduced reversible fluorescence switching liquid crystalline polynorbornenes containing Z- and E-stereoisomers of α-CS units with different flexible alkoxy tails at the ortho-, meta-, and para-positions119 (Fig. 15A). Generally, the thermally stable Z-isomer appeared like a rod-like shape, and their corresponding Z-polymers exhibited better liquid crystalline morphology, SLE characteristics, and photo-responsive properties. Alternatively, a bent-shaped E-isomer disrupted the morphology of the polymers, resulting in an amorphous nature. Both Z-monomers and polymers demonstrated Z to E isomerization upon UV photoirradiation. The hydrophobic interactions induced by the alkoxy tails governed the photoluminescence behaviors in the bulk. Photoirradiation of the polymer thin films at the non-crystalline state under the UV light of 365 and 254 nm tuned the fluorescence to a different extent based on the photoinduced reversible E/Z isomerization and [2 + 2] dimerization. Qiao and coworkers reported two chiral thienyl α-CS photoswitches (switch 8 and switch 9) bearing chiroptical (S)-(−)-1,1′-bi-2-naphthol entities120 and investigated their photoswitching mechanism. The α-cyano unit is located proximal to thiophene (α-substitution) in switch 8 but closer to the bulky and chiral binaphthyl group (β-substitution) for switch 9 (Fig. 15B). The synthesized switches 8 and 9 are in the trans-configuration. The low steric environment encountered by the α-cyano substitution in switch 8 demonstrated an excellent photoswitching performance with initial helical twisting power, better reversible switching propensity, and faster response in organic and cholesteric liquid crystal (Ch-LC) media. The high exposure and favorably oriented α-cyano substitution in switch 8 are readily available for intermolecular coupling and conducive for high Φf. On the contrary, a bulkier naphthyl unit hampered the interaction of β-cyano substitution, which required greater energy to surmount the activation barrier to attain cis-isomerization. Following this strategy, König et al. developed a library of easily accessible α-cyanodiarylethenes. Their respective mono and dithienyl analogues exhibited three-state thermally stable photochromism as E-isomer formation and its transformation to the Z-isomer upon photoirradiation followed by ring closure using the desired detection wavelength.121 The three-state photoswitching performance was assessed using DCC and UPLC-mass spectrometry (UPLCMS) analysis (Fig. 15C).
 Fig. 15  (A) Chemical structure of the polynorbornene-based α-cyanostilbene photoswitches bearing different dodecyloxy side chains.119 (B) Photoswitching mechanism involved in α-cyanodiarylethene chiral photoswitches.120 (C) Library of screened α-cyanodiarylethene-based three-state photoswitches.121 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society and ref. 99. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Multifunctional features
Charged fluorescent dyes have been reported for the selective staining of mitochondria in living cells through various electronic interactions. α-CS π-frameworks provide the platform for the functionalization using charged molecular fragments at any peripheral substitutions. Zhao et al. reported a series of multifunctional pyridinium-flanked bis α-CS derivatives for multifunctional applications by varying the aromatic/heteroaromatic substitution, such as para-CF3-substituted phenyl (CP1), phenyl (CP2), tolyl (CP3), naphthyl (CP4) and thiophene (CP5) at the 3,5-positions of the central core unit.123 The synthesized SLE-active luminogens were found to have wide color tunability, Stokes shift, and good biocompatibility (Fig. 16A). A strong solid-state emission was noted for CP1–CP5 ranging from 464 to 614 nm. The single crystal X-ray structure revealed multiple C–H⋯F interactions between the cationic part of the α-CS derivatives and PF6− counter anions, which assisted in rigidifying the π-framework. Increasing the donating strength at the 3- and 5-positions of the central core decreased the band gap. Using their merits of excellent biocompatibility and negligible cytotoxicity, these derivatives were utilized as light-up probes in HeLa cells.101 Their excellent mitochondria-targeting specificity was attributed to the suitable interactions between the lipophilicity of mitochondria and the cationic part of the α-CS derivatives. The smaller singlet-triplet (ΔEST) gap obtained from intersystem crossing (ISC) makes them efficient photosensitizing candidates for efficient singlet oxygen generation using the indicator 9,10-anthracenediylbis-(methylene)-di-malonic acid (ABDA). Marzano and coworkers developed an SLE-active luminogen (ASCP), as an appropriate alternative to thioflavin T (ThT), a widely used fluorescent probe for monitoring the amyloid fibril formation.124 The interactions of ASCP with fibrillar α-synuclein red-shifted the absorption on account of the polarization changes induced by the electrostatic solute-solvent interactions. Moreover, ASCP became fluorogenic upon binding with amyloid fibrillar α-synuclein (Fig. 16B). Its large Stokes shift enabled a single excitation source to simultaneously monitor the emission from the fluorescently labeled protein and ASCP-stained aggregates. The unique spectral characteristics of ASCP overcome the limitation encountered by the commercial ThT for the in vitro study of amyloid fibrils in TIRF microscopy.
 Fig. 16  (A) Molecular structures of the pyridinium-flanked bis α-cyanostilbene derivatives and their multifunctional characteristics toward various optoelectronic and biological applications.123 (B) ASCP used to visualize the binding of molecular chaperone under TIRF microscopy and microplate assays exhibiting the separation of soluble monomeric α-synuclein fractions “S” from α-synuclein fibrils.124 (C) Schematic representation of NCSN derivatives demonstrating the multicolor luminescence upon binding with CB[7] and heparin, respectively.120,125,126 (D) Possible interactions of BCPB upon increasing the concentration of CB[7].126 (E) Molecular structures of CS-Py+ and CS-Py+SO3− and the reconstructed 1D and 2D fluorescent microscopy images of CS-Py+.127 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 123 and 124. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; ref. 125 and 126. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry; and ref. 127. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.) 
Bhaumik et al. demonstrated the tunable multicolor luminescence by constructing a supramolecular assembly between the amphiphilic α-CS derivative (12CS12) possessing a dicationic pyridinium ion at the peripherals tethered with two hydrophobic n-dodecyl chains and cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]) in aqueous media.125 The rigid hydrophobic cavity of CB[7] encapsulated the cationic hydrophobic alkyl chain of the guest 12CS12 through hydrophobic and ion–dipole interactions, which transitioned the emission from greenish-yellow to bluish-cyan via near-white light upon aggregation (Fig. 16C). Varying the relative proportions of these two emissive species generated a tunable multicolor emission based on the reversible host–guest interactions. The encapsulation suppressed the non-radiative relaxation induced by 12CS12, and consequently increased the Φf from 0.74% to 3.94%. The same molecular framework was utilized for the detection of bio-polyanion heparin using various flanked alkyl chains ranging from n = 8 (8CS8), 10 (10CS10), and 12 (12CS12).126 The stacked supramolecular nanofibers of dicationic pyridinium-based α-CS derivatives tended to interact with multivalent polyanionic sites of heparin, possessing a high surface area to volume ratio. The rigidified 12CS12 π-framework upon co-assembly activated the turn-on response to yellowish-green in a multivalent fashion and allowed the detection of heparin even at nanomolar concentrations over protamine, a clinically approved antidote of heparin.
Hou et al. reported a water-soluble α-CS derivative (BCPB), where diethylamino phenyl and benzothiazole were used as donor and acceptor units, respectively, and the meta-position of the donor unit was linked to an amphiphilic pyridinium ion through a dodecyl chain.128 The synthesized BCPB showed the monomer emission at 540 nm in MeOH, whereas its aggregates exhibited a red-shifted emission of 660 nm. Excimer formation upon increasing the concentration of BCPB yielded a multiple-fold enhancement in the emission intensity of the aggregates. The initial addition of CB[7] minimized the excimer formation by primarily binding with the pyridinium cationic site, resulting in a hypsochromic shift of 540 nm, identical to the monomer emission. Further increasing the concentration caused the second CB[7] to undergo non-covalent coupling with the N(Et)2 group and red-shifted the emission to 588 nm through partially induced CT between CB[7] and N(Et)2. In addition, blocking the rotation of BCPB by the CB[7] cavity increased the emission intensity via rigidification (Fig. 16D).
Multiphoton absorption
Organic luminophores in the bioimaging field encountered the problem of photobleaching during long-term photoirradiation. Also, the significant Rayleigh scattering and autofluorescence at a shorter wavelength damage biological tissues, limiting the depth access.129 Thus, to circumvent this, the short-pulse multiphoton absorption technique was introduced to translate the excitation toward the NIR-I and II spectral windows, which can provide a deeper photon penetration, excellent optical focusing and sectioning ability, and a unique high signal-to-noise ratio. Niu et al. synthesized two photostable pyridinium-based α-CS derivatives with different counter anions such as PF6− (CS-Py+) and SO3− (CS-Py+SO3−).127 These quaternary substitutions made the α-CS derivatives water-soluble and pushed the spectral window to the NIR region with a significant Stokes shift and high Φf. In combination with excellent biocompatibility, the unique features of CS-Py+SO3− and CS-Py+ exhibited a good two-photon absorption (TPA) cross-section (up to 88 GM) and showed live-cell staining of the plasma membrane and mitochondria, respectively (Fig. 16E). Furthermore, selective two-photon mitochondria visualization in live rat skeletal muscle tissues with deep-tissue penetration was demonstrated using CS-Py+. The strong electron-deficient pyridinium cation and –CN units of CS-Py+ exhibited high resistance to photobleaching under one- and two-photon continuous irradiation.
Zheng et al. developed a series of four α-CS derivatives to enhance the 3PA cross-section based on the concept of better charge separation between the donor and acceptor using benzene (PBT), N-phenyl-carbazole (CPBT), triphenylamine (DPBT), and diphenylamine-carbazol-2-yl (DCBT) with different π-conjugation lengths (Fig. 17A and B). Among them, extensive electron coupling in DCBT enhanced the large 3PA cross-section from 1.57 to 5.61 × 10−78 cm6 s2 photon−2 with a significant penetration depth of 1010 μm under 1550 fs laser excitation.130 The improved colloidal stability and biocompatibility of DCBT dots in combination with Pluronic F127 served as bright contrast agents for the 3PFM imaging of brain vessels through a mouse skull at a depth of >500 μm, allowing the noninvasive 3D reconstruction of the cerebral vasculature (Fig. 17C and D).
 Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic route for the preparation of α-CS derivatives using various donor units. (B) Normalized emission spectra and fluorescent photographs (inset) in the solid state under 365 nm light. (C) Schematic representation demonstrating the fabrication of DCBT dots through nanoprecipitation method. (D) Reconstruction of blood vessels in the mouse brain (0–1010 μm using a 1550 nm fs-laser as the excitation source; scale bar: 100 μm).130 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Liquid crystals
The α-cyano substitution induced nano-segregation enable the formation of supramolecular liquid crystals (LC) through non-covalent interactions. Xiao and coworkers developed a series of SLE-active discotic liquid crystals (DLC) based on the propeller-shaped aromatic cores, including TPE, phenanthroline, fluorenone, and dicyanovinyl fluorene. Connecting them to the terminal 3,4,5-tridecyloxy benzyl substitutions was carried out using the α-CS bridge (Fig. 18). The good reversible phase transition behavior of the TPE-based DLC was evidenced by their endo and exothermic peaks at 166.4 °C and 163.3 °C upon heating and cooling, respectively.132 The TPE core formed a circular disc upon coupling two peripheral decyl chains, and their π–π stacking organized the self-assembly into a columnar mesophase. The same research group synthesized hexacatenars by connecting the central fluorenone with 3,4,5-tris alkoxy benzyl units through two α-CS units (WT/n) and their mesophase sequence was studied upon increasing the chain elongation, ranging from n = 10, 14, and 16.133 The short (n = 10) and long (n = 14 and 16) alkyl chain homologues displayed hexagonal and rectangular columnar phases with a range of narrow and wide temperatures, respectively. The side-by-side aggregation of the decyloxy derivatives required four molecular units to form a disc shape, and further stacking of the columns enabled the generation of the Colhex/p6mm mesophase. The longer tetradecanoxyl and hexadecanoxyl derivatives required only two molecular units to form an oval disc-shaped mesophase, and the elliptical stacked columns produced the Colrec/p2mm mesophase. The intermolecular π–π, dipole–dipole, and H-bonding interactions between the bis α-CS (BEQ/n) and fluorenone (EBJT/n) units dominated the molecular aggregates over the shorter decyloxy chains. A parallel alignment of hydrophobic interactions between the C14 and C16 alkyl chains prevailed the non-covalent contacts, forming oval-shaped discs.131 In another study, 1,10-phenanthroline unit was connected to various terminal 3,4,5-alkoxy (n = 8, 10, and 16) benzyl units through two α-CS units, generating a series of V-shaped hexacatenars (Phe/n) and their self-assembly transformed the morphological states from a disordered plate and winkles to nanofibers and nanosheets upon varying the solvent polarity. The longer alkyl chains helped to form stable fluorescence organogels. Moreover, Phe/n acted as a chemosensor to detect Ag+ ions even at the extremely low detection limit of 50 nM.134
 Fig. 18  Representative molecular framework of the hexacatenars comprised of various donor substitutions including tetraphenylethene, phenanthroline, fluorenone, and dicyanovinyl fluorene units and texture of the columnar mesophases noted in EBJT/8.131 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.) 
Star-shaped cyanostar macrocycles
Inspired by the discovery of crown ether-based macrocycles for molecular recognition and supramolecular self-assembly applications, Dhara et al. developed a fluorophore based on a C5-symmetric α-CS chromophore named the ‘campestarene’ macrocycle, where its cavity contained highly activated inner electropositive C–H units induced by the electron-deficient outer α-cyano substitution.135 They tend to stabilize a series of weakly coordinating anions such as BF4−, ClO4− and PF6− with respect to the size of the receptors. The shallow bowl shape of the synthesized cyanostar helped generate a π-surface, which favored the formation of a 2:1 sandwich complex in mixed polar-aprotic solvents. Coupling with a TPA donor, a charge transfer fluorophore (C-Zero) was synthesized, exhibiting near-zero overlap between the absorption (325 nm) and emission (633 nm) spectra with a significant Stokes shift of 15000 cm−1 (308 nm).136
This is attributed to the inhibited emission from the second local excited (LE) to the ground state, eliminating the spectral overlap between the absorption and emission profiles. The overlap of the π-interactions between the TPA and five outer cyano units produced an emissive CT state as the dominant transition. Experiment-supported DFT studies showed an inner torsional distortion of 67° for the cyanostar macrocycle in the CT state instead of displaying a TICT-like dihedral deviation between the D–A units (Fig. 19). Furthermore, electropositive inner cyclic C–H groups allowed selectivity toward perchlorate anions through effective binding in a 2:1 stoichiometry over salicylate anions using ion-selective electrodes derived from PVC membranes. The 2:1 sandwich complex yielded a blue-shifted emission wavelength. The high selectivity and detection limit of the pentagonal cyanostar sensors could determine ClO4− in contaminated environmental samples.138 Based on the hierarchical co-assembly mechanism between the anion-receptor complexes, the cyanostar macrocycle was utilized in small-molecule ionic isolation lattice-based nanoparticles (SMILES NPs) to alleviate the quenching characteristics of the conventional rhodamine luminophore by increasing the spatial and electronic isolation. Acting like an antenna, this integral structure-directing spacer unit helped the SMILES NPs retain their spectral properties in the condensed state with very high intrinsic brightness.137 Further stabilization of this anion-receptor complex using glycol amphiphiles increased the Φf to 30%, making the SMILES NPs promising candidates for bioimaging applications. The stability enhancement using amphiphilic materials improved the colloidal stability and biocompatibility in the aqueous environment, and their sub-cellular localization revealed their localization on the surface of mitochondria.
 Fig. 19  (A) Molecular structure of C-zero exhibiting the Stokes shift of 15000 cm−1.136 (B) Detection of perchlorate anions through the formation of a sandwich-type complex with the stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. (C) Cyanostar used as an antenna to funnel UV excitation for the photoluminescence enhancement of the conventional rhodamine fluorophore.137 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 136. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; and ref. 137. Copyright 2022, Wiley.) 
Conclusions and future perspectives
In recent years, relentless efforts have been devoted to developing chromophores emitting in the far-red and NIR regions. However, their low Φf and Stokes shift at longer wavelengths hamper their potential utility toward various optoelectronic applications ranging from biosensors to distance sensors, touch panels, non-linear optical response, and solar energy harvesting materials.139–141 Low band gap NIR organic materials generate strong coulombically bound Frenkel excitons, which are difficult to dissociate into free charge carriers at the D–A interface due to the low dielectric constant (εr) medium.142,143 Hence, increasing εr is beneficial to decrease the binding energy of the Frenkel excitons and indeed an advantageous feature for efficient charge transport in organic semiconductors.144–146 Previous studies demonstrated that incorporating cyano functionalities into the π-framework is one of the efficient strategies to enhance εr.147 According to the energy gap law, dominant exciton–vibronic coupling due to the increased overlap between the ground and excited-state vibrational energy levels at the NIR region exponentially increases the non-radiative deactivation pathways.148 One of the innovative strategies to effectively enhance the emission characteristics in the NIR region is to develop a molecular system that aligns the transition dipoles to favor the formation of J-aggregates through interchain ordering.149 Hence, the excitons of J-aggregates are coherently delocalized over the π-repeated units in the form of waves, which decouple the exciton band, corresponding to the high vibrational ladders of the ground state. The decoupled excitonic–vibronic coupling helps to activate the rate of radiative decay transitions. However, its minimized vibrational relaxation narrows the emission band of J-aggregates for conventional NIR luminophores such as squaraines, BODIPYs, and merocyanines, which minimize the spectral coverage in the NIR spectral window.71,78 Unlike these chromophores, the anchoring point of α-cyano substitution maintains a well-governed π–π stacking distance and reinforces the high degree of interchain alignment through effective non-covalent coupling.60 Besides, aggregation-induced planarization also dramatically pushes the emission profiles to a longer wavelength in the condensed phase. To ensure this fact, the CS aggregates reported in this review demonstrated a large Stokes shift without compromising Φf. Hence, functionalizing the peripheral substitutions of α-CS derivatives can be one of the elegant strategies to develop novel fluorophores in diverse spectral regions. Overall, we summarized the multifunctional features of the α-CS motif for various optoelectronic and biological applications. Selective tuning of the SLE characteristics was demonstrated by inducing transition dipoles in α-CS derivatives based on various geometrical parameters, including the positional substitution, orientation of the α-cyano moiety, π-conjugation length (da or db), and molecular size (DAr) of the peripheral blocks with respect to the α-cyano substitution. The mechanistic understandings on the aggregation propensity of the α-CSs reported in this review will provide better insights to the scientific community for spectral wavelength tuning.
Abbreviations

CSCyanostilbene
TPETetraphenyl ethene
HPSHexaphenyl silane
DIMDynamic intramolecular motion
RIMRestriction of intramolecular motion
D–ADonor–acceptor
(T)ICT(Twisted) Intramolecular charge transfer
SLESolid-state luminescence enhancement

Φ
F
Fluorescence quantum yield
HLCTHybridized local and charge transfer
RACIRestricted access to conical interaction
PESPotential energy surface
SDSSodium dodecyl sulfate
CTAPCetrimonium bromide
TRITON X-1004-Octylphenol polyethoxylate
TFATrifluoro acetic acid
Ch-LCCholesteric liquid crystal
CIECommission Internationale de l'Eclairage
UPLCUltra-high performance liquid chromatography
TIRFTotal internal reflection fluorescence
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from various funding agencies, CSIR (01(2487)/11/EMR-II), DST [SR/S1/PC-24/2010(G)], BRNS (37(2)/14/05/2016) and SERB (CRG/2018/004020) India that helped us to achieve the research goals over the years. P. M. thanks Prof. Jason D. Azoulay, School of Polymer Science and Engineering, The University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, for his valuable suggestions and support. S. K. thanks all his students who were instrumental in the research progress. We would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions.
References
B.-K. An, J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 544–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Jimenez and H. Rodríguez, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 1366–1387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1059–1065 RSC .
J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5818–5832 RSC .
M. Martínez-Abadía, R. Giménez and M. B. Ros, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704161 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li and Z. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600484 CrossRef .
J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11718–11940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Ke and B. Z. Tang, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3267–3277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Lou and Y.-W. Yang, Aggregate, 2020, 1, 19–30 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23726–23740 RSC .
Q. Peng, Y. Yi, Z. Shuai and J. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9333–9339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Work, G. Ferraudi, L. Kiefer, G. Liu, M. Grigalunas, A. Bhardwaj, R. Kaur, J. M. Dempsey, D. Wüstner, P. Helquist and O. Wiest, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86, 1612–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suzuki, S. Sasaki, A. S. Sairi, R. Iwai, B. Z. Tang and G.-I. Konishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9856–9867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Z. Tang, X. Zhan, G. Yu, P. P. Sze Lee, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2974–2978 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
X. Y. Shen, Y. J. Wang, H. Zhang, A. Qin, J. Z. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8747–8750 RSC .
Y. Tu, Z. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Matter, 2021, 4, 338–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361–5388 RSC .
J. Mei, Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, Y. Tang and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5429–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierschner, L. Lüer, B. Milián-Medina, D. Oelkrug and H.-J. Egelhaaf, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2686–2697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heo, D. P. Murale, H. Y. Yoon, V. Arun, S. Choi, E. Kim, J.-S. Lee and S. Kim, Aggregate, 2022, 3, e159 CrossRef .
M. Paramasivam, R. K. Chitumalla, S. P. Singh, A. Islam, L. Han, V. Jayathirtha Rao and K. Bhanuprakash, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17053–17064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paramasivam, A. Gupta, A. M. Raynor, S. V. Bhosale, K. Bhanuprakash and V. Jayathirtha Rao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35318–35331 RSC .
B. G. Levine and T. J. Martínez, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 613–634 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zener and R. H. Fowler, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1932, 137, 696–702 Search PubMed .
E. Teller, J. Phys. Chem., 1937, 41, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li and L. Blancafort, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5966–5968 RSC .
X.-L. Peng, S. Ruiz-Barragan, Z.-S. Li, Q.-S. Li and L. Blancafort, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2802–2810 RSC .
R. Crespo-Otero, Q. Li and L. Blancafort, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 700–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Blancafort and M. A. Robb, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 4922–4930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ruiz-Barragan, K. Morokuma and L. Blancafort, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11, 1585–1594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Prlj, N. Došlić and C. Corminboeuf, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11606–11609 RSC .
B. I. Greene, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1981, 79, 51–53 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Shultz and M. A. Fox, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 6311–6320 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Barbara, S. D. Rand and P. M. Rentzepis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 2156–2162 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Shultz and M. A. Fox, Tetrahedron Lett., 1988, 29, 4377–4380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharafy and K. A. Muszkat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. J. Zijlstra, P. T. van Duijnen, B. L. Feringa, T. Steffen, K. Duppen and D. A. Wiersma, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 9828–9836 CrossRef CAS .
P. Politzer, J. S. Murray and T. Clark, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11178–11189 RSC .
J. Shi, L. E. Aguilar Suarez, S.-J. Yoon, S. Varghese, C. Serpa, S. Y. Park, L. Lüer, D. Roca-Sanjuán, B. Milián-Medina and J. Gierschner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23166–23183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kokado, T. Machida, T. Iwasa, T. Taketsugu and K. Sada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, A. J. A. Aquino, F. Siddique, T. A. Niehaus, H. Lischka and D. Nachtigallová, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 1722–1735 RSC .
Y. Xu, C. Li, R. Xu, N. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Jing, Z. Yang, D. Dang, P. Zhang and L. Meng, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8157–8166 RSC .
L. Tu, Y. Xie, Z. Li and B. Tang, SmartMat, 2021, 2, 326–346 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, Y. Duan and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19241–19250 RSC .
Q. Zhao and J. Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10588–10609 RSC .
Z. Sheng, Y. Li, D. Hu, T. Min, D. Gao, J.-S. Ni, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Liu and K. Li, Research, 2020, 4074593 CAS .
L. Zhou, Q. Wang, Y. Tan, M. J. Lang, H. Sun and X. Liu, Chemistry, 2017, 23, 8736–8740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Ren, W. Xu, W. Zhang, X.-X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Wang, Z. Xiang, L. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7716–7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, S.-J. Yoon, L. Viani, S. Y. Park, B. Milián-Medina and J. Gierschner, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700340 CrossRef .
S. Arzhantsev, K. A. Zachariasse and M. Maroncelli, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 3454–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. An, S.-K. Kwon, S.-D. Jung and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410–14415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierschner, J. Shi, B. Milián-Medina, D. Roca-Sanjuán, S. Varghese and S. Park, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2002251 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miller and J. N. Murrell, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1967, 63, 806–811 RSC .
M. Paramasivam, A. Gupta, N. J. Babu, K. Bhanuprakash, S. V. Bhosale and V. J. Rao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 66978–66989 RSC .
N. Yamamoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 1317–1324 RSC .
N. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12434–12440 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. An, D.-S. Lee, J.-S. Lee, Y.-S. Park, H.-S. Song and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10232–10233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Paramasivam and S. Kanvah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10757–10769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, M. A. Izquierdo, S. Oh, S. Y. Park, B. Milián-Medina, D. Roca-Sanjuán and J. Gierschner, Org. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1948–1954 RSC .
J. Zhao, Z. Chi, Y. Zhang, Z. Mao, Z. Yang, E. Ubba and Z. Chi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6327–6353 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Lv, M. Ouyang, F. Cao, G. Pan, L. Pan, G. Fan, W. Yu, C. He, S. Zheng, F. Zhang, W. Wang and C. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 8998–9002 RSC .
Y. Sagara, S. Yamane, M. Mitani, C. Weder and T. Kato, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1073–1095 CrossRef CAS .
H. Traeger, D. J. Kiebala, C. Weder and S. Schrettl, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, 42, 2000573 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Park, I. Cho, J. Gierschner, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. E. Kwon, O. K. Kwon, D. R. Whang, J.-H. Park, B.-K. An and S. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
R. Misra, F. Khan, A. Ekbote and G. Singh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 5024–5064 RSC .
D. Oelkrug, A. Tompert, H.-J. Egelhaaf, M. Hanack, E. Steinhuber, M. Hohloch, H. Meier and U. Stalmach, Synth. Met., 1996, 83, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oelkrug, A. Tompert, J. Gierschner, H.-J. Egelhaaf, M. Hanack, M. Hohloch and E. Steinhuber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1902–1907 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Izquierdo, J. Shi, S. Oh, S. Y. Park, B. Milián-Medina, J. Gierschner and D. Roca-Sanjuán, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 22429–22439 RSC .
W. P. Jencks, Chem. Rev., 1985, 85, 511–527 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Kolář and P. Hobza, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5155–5187 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Murray, P. Lane and P. Politzer, J. Mol. Model., 2009, 15, 723–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. C. Lim and P. D. Beer, Chem, 2018, 4, 731–783 CAS .
E. E. Jelley, Nature, 1936, 138, 1009–1010 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sebastian, A. M. Philip, A. Benny and M. Hariharan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15696–15701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Scheibe, Angew. Chem., 1937, 50, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CAS .
J. Gierschner, Y.-S. Huang, B. V. Averbeke, J. Cornil, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 044105 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Milián-Medina and J. Gierschner, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2012, 2, 513–524 Search PubMed .
S.-J. Yoon, J. W. Chung, J. Gierschner, K. S. Kim, M.-G. Choi, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13675–13683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jana and S. Kanvah, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 2720–2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. Zhuang, M. Ouyang, B. Hu, Q. Song, J. Sun, C. Zhang, C. Gu, Y. Xu and Y. Ma, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 98, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Yoon, S. Varghese, S. K. Park, R. Wannemacher, J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 232–237 CrossRef .
S. Yokoyama and N. Nishiwaki, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 1192–1200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yokoyama, A. Ito, H. Asahara and N. Nishiwaki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 92, 1807–1815 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Upamali, L. A. Estrada, P. K. De, X. Cai, J. A. Krause and D. C. Neckers, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1573–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, W. Liu, Q. Luo, H. Yi, H. Yu, Z. Yang, B. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 4007–4015 RSC .
C. Zhu, C. Li, L. Wen, Q. Song, K. Wang, C. Lv and Y. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 12895–12901 RSC .
G. Niu, X. Zheng, Z. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Wang, X. He, Y. Chen, X. Shi, C. Ma, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, K. S. Wong, P. Wang and B. Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15111–15120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, J. Qian, Y. Liu, N. Zhu, B. Xu, C.-L. Ho, W. Tian and W.-Y. Wong, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1844–1850 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, G. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Kong, X. Tao, Y. Tian and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2971–2978 RSC .
Y. Zhan, Q. Zhao and W. Yang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2021, 73, 153136 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. An, S. H. Gihm, J. W. Chung, C. R. Park, S.-K. Kwon and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3950–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jana, M. Paramasivam, S. Khandelwal, A. Dutta and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 218–230 RSC .
V. Palakollu and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5736–5746 RSC .
V. Palakollu, A. K. Vasu, V. Thiruvenkatam and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 4588–4594 RSC .
J. Katla, A. Shaik, R. Dahiwadkar, V. Thiruvenkatam and S. Kanvah, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 1789–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palakollu and S. Kanvah, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 33049–33057 RSC .
J. Katla, H. R. Bhat, P. C. Jha, P. S. Ghalsasi and S. Kanvah, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1902–1910 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vasu, M. Radhakrishna and S. Kanvah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 22478–22486 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, M. Zhang, X. Zhu, C. Xue, H.-X. Wang and M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 1765–1773 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vasu, M. Paramasivam and S. Kanvah, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 405–414 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jana, A. Siva, V. Soppina and S. Kanvah, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 5608–5616 RSC .
P. Jana, M. Yadav, T. Kumar and S. Kanvah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2021, 404, 112874 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dahiwadkar, H. Kumar and S. Kanvah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2022, 427, 113844 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jana, N. Patel, V. Soppina and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 584–592 RSC .
F. Aparicio, S. Cherumukkil, A. Ajayaghosh and L. Sánchez, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. Domínguez, A. Navarro and J. C. García-Martínez, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 192, 109427 CrossRef .
J. Katla, A. J. M. Nair, A. Ojha and S. Kanvah, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2018, 17, 395–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Katla, A. Ojha, A. J. M. Nair, K. Rangan and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18297–18304 RSC .
B. Kumari, R. Dahiwadkar and S. Kanvah, Aggregate, 2022, 3, e191 Search PubMed .
B. Kumari, M. Paramasivam, A. Dutta and S. Kanvah, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 17376–17385 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopinath, N. Manivannan, S. Mandal, N. Mathivanan and A. S. Nasar, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 6010–6023 RSC .
B. Kumari, M. Paramasivam, T. Mukherjee, S. Khandelwal, A. Dutta and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 4683–4693 RSC .
A. Gopinath, K. Ramamurthy, M. Subaraja, C. Selvaraju and A. S. Nasar, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 10243–10253 RSC .
B. Kumari, S. P. Singh, R. Santosh, A. Dutta, S. S. Mallajosyula, S. Ghosal and S. Kanvah, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 4106–4115 RSC .
Y. Wu, S. Zhang, J. Pei and X.-F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6461–6469 RSC .
J. Qiao, Q. Fan, J. Tian, J. Wang and J. Guo, Liq. Cryst., 2021, 48, 1247–1256 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. König, D. Mutruc and S. Hecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9162–9168 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, X. Zhang, J. Guo and Q. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007957 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, P. Li, J. Zhuang, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, R. Qin and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11227–11237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Marzano, K. M. Wray, C. L. Johnston, B. P. Paudel, Y. Hong, A. van Oijen and H. Ecroyd, ACS Chem. Neurosci., 2020, 11, 4191–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Bhaumik and S. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 655–658 RSC .
S. K. Bhaumik, Y. S. Patra and S. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9541–9544 RSC .
G. Niu, R. Zhang, Y. Gu, J. Wang, C. Ma, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Sung, I. D. Williams, K. S. Wong, X. Yu and B. Z. Tang, Biomaterials, 2019, 208, 72–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hou, S. Min, Y. Zhao, B. Dong, L. Zhang, D. Li, W. Wu, H. Zhu and B. Song, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 180, 108460 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Wang and J. Qian, AIE Luminogens for Three-Photon Fluorescence Bioimaging, in Principles and Applications of Aggregation-Induced Emission, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2019, pp. 425–455 Search PubMed.
Z. Zheng, H. Zhang, H. Cao, J. Gong, M. He, X. Gou, T. Yang, P. Wei, J. Qian, W. Xi and B. Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 6444–6454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, Y. Xiao, X. Liu, R. Zuo, N. Li and Z. Jiang, Tetrahedron, 2021, 96, 132384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, R. Zuo, X. Liu, N. Li, Y. Pang and Z. Jiang, Soft Mater., 2022, 20, 12–23 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Zuo, N. Li, Y. Pang, Z. Jiang and Y. Xiao, Phase Trans., 2021, 94, 245–255 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, B. Shen, R. Zuo, S. Hong and Y. Xiao, J. Mol. Liquids, 2021, 340, 116892 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, C.-H. Chen and A. H. Flood, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 704–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhara, T. Sadhukhan, E. G. Sheetz, A. H. Olsson, K. Raghavachari and A. H. Flood, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12167–12180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. M. A. Fateminia, L. Kacenauskaite, N. Bærentsen, S. Grønfeldt Stenspil, J. Bredehoeft, K. L. Martinez, A. H. Flood and B. W. Laursen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9450–9458 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Zahran, E. M. Fatila, C.-H. Chen, A. H. Flood and L. G. Bachas, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 1925–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7069–7163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yamagata and F. C. Spano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 622–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Eder, J. Vogelsang, S. Bange, K. Remmerssen, D. Schmitz, S.-S. Jester, T. J. Keller, S. Höger and J. M. Lupton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18898–18902 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahalingavelar, Energy Fuels, 2022, 36, 2095–2107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paramasivam, R. K. Chitumalla, J. Jang and J. H. Youk, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22660–22673 RSC .
H. Xu, G. He, S. Chen, S. Chen, R. Qiao, H. Luo and D. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 8195–8206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wudarczyk, G. Papamokos, T. Marszalek, T. Nevolianis, D. Schollmeyer, W. Pisula, G. Floudas, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20527–20535 CrossRef CAS .
G. Papamokos, J. Wudarczyk, R. Graf, D. Schollmeyer, M. Baumgarten, K. Müllen and G. Floudas, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3330–3339 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Yun, J. H. Kim, S. Shin, H. Yang, B.-K. An, L. Yang and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 911–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, P. Mahalingavelar, J. H. Vella, D.-S. Leem, J. D. Azoulay and T. N. Ng, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2021, 146, 100643 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Wei, S. F. Wang, Y. Hu, L.-S. Liao, D.-G. Chen, K.-H. Chang, C.-W. Wang, S.-H. Liu, W.-H. Chan, J.-L. Liao, W.-Y. Hung, T.-H. Wang, P.-T. Chen, H.-F. Hsu, Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 570–577 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

Paramasivam Mahalingavelar
	Paramasivam Mahalingavelar received his BSc and MSc from Madurai Kamaraj University, Tamil Nadu, and PhD in materials chemistry from the CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (2014), Hyderabad, India. His post-doctoral research at IIT Gandhinagar mainly focused on the mechanistic understandings of the AIE active α-cyanostilbene derivatives for bioimaging applications. After the post-doctoral stay at South Korea, he moved to Prof. Jason D. Azoulay research group as a post-doctoral research associate and center synthesis lead at the University of Southern Mississippi. His current research involves development of solution processable shortwave infrared (SWIR) small molecular and polymeric materials for multidisciplinary optoelectronic applications including organic photodetectors, phototransistors, organic solar cells, field effect transistors, TADF-OLEDs, and evaluation of their structure-property relationship using various computational and device engineering techniques.

Sriram Kanvah
	Sriram Kanvah obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai working with Prof. Anil K Singh. He was a post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Gary Schuster at Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta and worked as a research-intellectual property analyst at General Electric Company Bangalore. After that, he joined IIT-Gandhinagar, Discipline of Chemistry. His groups research interests are in synthesizing and developing photoresponsive systems for organic electronics, biological imaging, and chemosensing applications. So far their research group graduated 7 PhD students and guided dissertation projects of several MSc students. Apart from the research, Sriram gives several lecture-demos to school students and teachers to promote science awareness.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Molecular structure of the propeller-shaped TPE, HPS π-frameworks and their SLE efficacy based on the RIM mechanism. (B) Push–pull interactions involved in the para-cyanostilbene framework. (C) SLE activity of α-cyanostilbenes in solution versus condensed state and its tendency to form emissive aggregates through intermolecular non-covalent interactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Proposed decay path of DMTPS using the RACI model in (A) solution state and (B) crystalline state; Geometrical parameters and electronic state potential energies of TPE molecule as a function of time with respect to (C) ethylenic twist and (D) photocyclization. (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 28 and 50 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustrating how the contribution of intra- and inter-molecular interactions impact the radiative and non-radiative transitions. (B) TD-DFT-simulated rigid torsional scans of the double bond (ϕDB) for α-DBDCS and β-DBDCS using the optimized S0 state in chloroform together with the computed S0, S1, and T1 energies for each data point. The frontier molecular orbitals corresponding to the CI and FC regions and their energies at the S0 and S1 states are computed for the trans–trans vs. cis–trans isomers. (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 40. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 
	(1)
EF(k) = ES1 + 2JCoulcosk	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation illustrating the molecular tuning of α-cyanostilbenes based on various structural parameters. (B) Exciton splitting diagram showing the tuning of spectral wavelength upon the alignment of monomers based on the energy/transition dipole moment variation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tuning the spectral intensity and wavelength with reference to the positional substitution of α-cyano functionality (α and β) in different molecular configurations, including (A) triphenylamine,84 (B) 1,4-dimethoxy benzene,85 and (C) 2,5-pyrrole derivatives.86 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2022, Elsevier, ref. 85. Copyright 2022, Wiley; ref. 86. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Symmetrical cyanostilbenes based on (A) carbazole88 and (B) triphenylamine substitution with a nearly identical π-conjugation length (da ≈ db) showing hypsochromic emission upon aggregation.89 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 66, Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; ref. 64. Copyright 2022, Wiley; ref. 65. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Asymmetric α-cyanostilbene derivatives (da > db) reported based on various donors, including (A) coumarin59 and (B) triphenylamine frameworks exhibiting a bathochromic shift upon aggregation.91 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 and 69, respectively. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of molecular size of the terminal substitutions on the emission of the monomers vs. aggregates using (A) triphenyl imidazole,92 (B) triphenylamine-triphenyl imidazole combination, (C) tetraphenylethene,93 and (D) various amino donor building blocks.96 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 92, 93 and 96. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 72. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular structures of the α-cyanostilbene-based SLE luminogens developed from our research group for multifunctional applications.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Switching mechanism of SK1 under acidic, neutral, and alkaline conditions.97 (B) Color transformation of SK3 through acid adduct formation and gel–sol transformation upon exposure to TFA vapors.99 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 97. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 99. Copyright 2022, Wiley.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Coarse-grained model of SK13 and SK14 bearing the longer C8 and C16 alkyl chains, respectively, and their snapshots at the different values of εLJ.102 (B) Molecular structures of L-PyPhG and L-PyG and the distinct self-assembly features of left-handed nanotubes in EtOH with an efficient energy transfer contribution with acridine orange (AO), while the formation of right-handed nanotwists in DMSO possessing poor energy transfer.103 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 102 and 103. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Variation in emission intensity for SK19 upon increasing the concentration of picric acid and comparative emission changes upon titrating with various nitro derivatives.106 (B) Molecular structures of the fluorene-based cyanostilbene derivatives used for the detection of the illicit GHB and color variation noted under the naked eye and 365 nm UV lamp. (C) Absorption and emission variation of SK46 upon interaction with GHB.107 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 106 and 107. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Molecular structures of the π-gelators under illumination.109 (B) Xerogel formation in cyclohexane and cryoSEM image of the SK28 aggregates.83 (C) Tuning the SLE effect and organogelation of DOCS and DOHS by the α-cyano substitution.110 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 and 109. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society and ref. 110. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Molecular structures of star-shaped A3-type α-CS derivatives and their band gap tuning using various substitutions and SLE characteristics of NTBTNPA in DMF–water mixture and its nuclear movement in the R. solani mycelium upon binding.115 (B) Subtle balancing of AIE vs. ICT vs. ACQ effect through molecular tuning of SK37–SK39 based on push–pull interactions.116 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 and 94. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Chemical structure of the polynorbornene-based α-cyanostilbene photoswitches bearing different dodecyloxy side chains.119 (B) Photoswitching mechanism involved in α-cyanodiarylethene chiral photoswitches.120 (C) Library of screened α-cyanodiarylethene-based three-state photoswitches.121 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society and ref. 99. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Molecular structures of the pyridinium-flanked bis α-cyanostilbene derivatives and their multifunctional characteristics toward various optoelectronic and biological applications.123 (B) ASCP used to visualize the binding of molecular chaperone under TIRF microscopy and microplate assays exhibiting the separation of soluble monomeric α-synuclein fractions “S” from α-synuclein fibrils.124 (C) Schematic representation of NCSN derivatives demonstrating the multicolor luminescence upon binding with CB[7] and heparin, respectively.120,125,126 (D) Possible interactions of BCPB upon increasing the concentration of CB[7].126 (E) Molecular structures of CS-Py+ and CS-Py+SO3− and the reconstructed 1D and 2D fluorescent microscopy images of CS-Py+.127 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 123 and 124. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; ref. 125 and 126. Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry; and ref. 127. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic route for the preparation of α-CS derivatives using various donor units. (B) Normalized emission spectra and fluorescent photographs (inset) in the solid state under 365 nm light. (C) Schematic representation demonstrating the fabrication of DCBT dots through nanoprecipitation method. (D) Reconstruction of blood vessels in the mouse brain (0–1010 μm using a 1550 nm fs-laser as the excitation source; scale bar: 100 μm).130 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Representative molecular framework of the hexacatenars comprised of various donor substitutions including tetraphenylethene, phenanthroline, fluorenone, and dicyanovinyl fluorene units and texture of the columnar mesophases noted in EBJT/8.131 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Molecular structure of C-zero exhibiting the Stokes shift of 15000 cm−1.136 (B) Detection of perchlorate anions through the formation of a sandwich-type complex with the stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. (C) Cyanostar used as an antenna to funnel UV excitation for the photoluminescence enhancement of the conventional rhodamine fluorophore.137 (Reprinted with permissions from ref. 136. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society; and ref. 137. Copyright 2022, Wiley.)	 
CS	Cyanostilbene
TPE	Tetraphenyl ethene
HPS	Hexaphenyl silane
DIM	Dynamic intramolecular motion
RIM	Restriction of intramolecular motion
D–A	Donor–acceptor
(T)ICT	(Twisted) Intramolecular charge transfer
SLE	Solid-state luminescence enhancement

Φ
F
	Fluorescence quantum yield
HLCT	Hybridized local and charge transfer
RACI	Restricted access to conical interaction
PES	Potential energy surface
SDS	Sodium dodecyl sulfate
CTAP	Cetrimonium bromide
TRITON X-100	4-Octylphenol polyethoxylate
TFA	Trifluoro acetic acid
Ch-LC	Cholesteric liquid crystal
CIE	Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage
UPLC	Ultra-high performance liquid chromatography
TIRF	Total internal reflection fluorescence
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
