Advances in nanostructures fabricated via spray pyrolysis and their applications in energy storage and conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00904J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00904J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3015-3072Advances in nanostructures fabricated via spray pyrolysis and their applications in energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Jin 
            Leng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhixing 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiexi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Hong-Hui 
            Wu
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Guochun 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinhai 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huajun 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qiaobao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zaiping 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *de
aSchool of Metallurgy and Environment, Central South University, Changsha 410083, P. R. China. E-mail: wangjiexikeen@csu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangqiaobao@xmu.edu.cn
cState Key Laboratory for Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, Changsha 410083, P. R. China
dInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, Australian Institute for Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong, Innovation Campus, North Wollongong 2522, Australia. E-mail: zguo@uow.edu.au
eSchool of Mechanical, Materials and Mechatronics Engineering, University of Wollongong, North Wollongong, Australia
fDepartment of Chemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588, USA
Received 
      28th January 2019
    First published on 17th May 2019AbstractFunctional nanostructured materials have attracted great attention over the past several decades owing to their unique physical and chemical properties, while their applications have been proven to be advantageous not only in fundamental scientific areas, but also in many technological fields. Spray pyrolysis (SP), which is particularly facile, effective, highly scalable and suitable for on-line continuous production, offers significant potential for the rational design and synthesis of various functional nanostructured materials with tailorable composition and morphology. In this review, we summarize the recent progress in various functional nanostructured materials synthesized by SP and their potential applications in energy storage and conversion. After a brief introduction to the equipment, components, and working principles of the SP technique, we thoroughly describe the guidelines and strategies for designing particles with controlled morphology, composition, and interior architecture, including hollow structures, dense spheres, yolk–shell structures, core–shell structures, nanoplates, nanorods, nanowires, thin films, and various nanocomposites. Thereafter, we demonstrate their suitability for a wide range of energy storage and conversion applications, including electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, highly active catalysts for hydrogen production, carbon dioxide reduction and fuel cells, and photoelectric materials for solar cells. Finally, the potential advantages and challenges of SP for the preparation of nanostructured materials are particularly emphasized and discussed, and several perspectives on future research and development directions of SP are highlighted. We expect that this continuous, one-pot, and controllable synthetic technology can serve as a reference for preparing various advanced functional materials for broader applications.
Jin Leng
Jin Leng received his bachelor's and master's degrees from Central South University in 2015 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate with Prof. Zilong Tang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. His research mainly focuses on electrode materials and solid electrolytes for LIBs.
Jiexi Wang
Jiexi Wang is currently an Associate Professor of metallurgy and material physical chemistry at Central South University (CSU). He received his PhD degree in Metallurgical Physical Chemistry from CSU in 2015. Then, he joined Prof. T. S. Zhao's group as a visiting scholar at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. After that, he was a postdoctoral research associate in the laboratory of Prof. X. Y. Li and K. Shih at The University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the design and fabrication of nonferrous-based functional materials, and material-oriented utilization of corresponding resources for rechargeable batteries, efficient catalyses and supercapacitors. He has published about 80 papers in Advanced Energy Materials, Nano Energy, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, etc., which attracted more than 2600 citations with an h-index of 33.
Qiaobao Zhang
Qiaobao Zhang is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Materials, at Xiamen University. He obtained his PhD degree from the Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering at City University of Hong Kong in 2016. He joined Prof. Meilin Liu's group as a visiting PhD student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology in 2015. His current research includes developing nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage devices such as Li/Na/K ion batteries and supercapacitors and investigating their energy storage mechanism by in situ SEM/TEM. His research results have been published in Progress in Materials Science, Energy & Environmental Science, Nature Communications, Science Advances, Advanced Energy Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, ACS Nano, Nano Letters, Nano Energy, ACS Catalysis, Energy Storage Materials, etc.
Zaiping Guo
Zaiping Guo is a distinguished Professor and the group leader of the Energy Storage Research Group at the University of Wollongong, Australia. She received a PhD in Materials Engineering from the University of Wollongong in 2003. She was an APD Fellow at the University of Wollongong, where she continued as a group leader from 2007. She was awarded an ARC Queen Elizabeth II Fellowship in 2010 and an ARC Future Fellowship (FT3) in 2015. Her research focuses on the design and application of functional materials for energy storage and conversion, including rechargeable batteries, hydrogen storage, and fuel cells. She has published more than 350 papers, which attracted more than 18600 citations with an h-index of 74. She has supervised 35 PhD students and more than 30 postdoctoral and visiting fellows.
1. Introduction
With the growth of world population and the ever increasing development of modern industry, how to acquire enough sustainable clean energy has sparked worldwide interest.1,2 The current worldwide consumption of energy is mainly dominated by fossil fuels (above 80%), such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas. Combustion of these fuels emits an enormous amount of CO2, which has been considered as the main greenhouse gas that causes global warming.3–6 Public concerns over global warming and limited fossil-fuel supplies have inevitably stimulated widespread interests in developing renewable sources of energy. Moreover, the abundant and economical renewable sources such as solar, tidal, wind, and geothermal energy are variable in time and diffuse in space.7,8 The associated energy storage and conversion devices are in great demand to achieve a sustainable energy supply. Thus, developing high-efficiency, low-cost, and environmentally friendly energy storage and conversion technologies has become a worldwide imperative issue.9,10 Although many advanced energy storage and conversion devices, such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, and solar cells, have thus been developed by researchers,11,12 the widely commercialized applications of these technologies still require improved performance and reduced costs.
The performance of devices has been demonstrated to be highly dependent on the structure of the active materials. In particular, to enhance the performance of these devices, developing nanostructured electrodes or catalysts with high activity, fast responses, and robust operational stability has attracted tremendous interest.13 For instance, porous/hollow structures have been demonstrated to exhibit improved electrochemical performance due to their intrinsic features, such as large specific surface area, high loading capacity, shortened ion- and charge-transport paths, and robust structure.5,14–16 Among these, the large specific surface area can increase the power/energy density of active materials by providing abundant active sites for interface-related electrochemical processes such as surface redox reactions, insertion/deinsertion, adsorption/desorption, and heterogeneous catalysis. Meanwhile, the open pore structure and vast void space can greatly relieve the volume changes of the electrode, recombine guest species, and facilitate ion- and charge-transport.17,18 Hierarchical hollow structures can be flexibly assembled from secondary subunits, which support each other and improve their structural stability.19
The structural properties of nanomaterials, such as their morphology, particle size, porosity, and specific surface area, are mainly determined by the synthetic methods and conditions. In recent years, many excellent review articles have been published that focus on various synthetic routes such as the hydrothermal method,20,21 template method,14,15,22 and chemical/physical vapor deposition23 to fabricate diverse nanostructured materials. In general, these methods enable the laboratory-scale design and construction of nanostructures, but they usually need rigorous synthesis conditions, tedious operational procedures, and lengthy reaction times, so that they are of limited use for practical mass production.24 Consequently, in order to further commercialize advanced energy storage and conversion devices, facile, efficient, and industrially viable synthesis techniques for mass production of functional nanostructured materials are imperative.
Spray pyrolysis (SP) was recognized in the 1980s as an important technology to synthesize powder materials and thin films from solution via a one-pot method. It has been demonstrated as a scalable and facile method to produce homogeneous composites and various nanostructured functional materials.25 With nearly 40 years of development, SP has come into wide use for producing semiconductor thin films, superconductor powders, multicomponent ceramics, catalysts, and electrode materials (Fig. 1). In particular, SP has been implemented in the industrial production of Co3O4 as precursor for LiCoO2 cathode materials by Umicore Co., Ltd (Belgium) and Huayou Cobalt Co., Ltd (China).26 Based on the previous work, its advantages can be summarized as follows: (1) due to the great mixing of the precursors at the molecular level in the spray solution, SP is an effective method for preparing homogeneous multicomponent materials and composites with precisely controlled stoichiometric ratios; (2) the rapid evaporation of the solvent and decomposition of the solute contribute to the formation of porous and hollow structures; (3) the flexible assembly of the primary subunits contributes to the versatile design of nanostructures; (4) only simple apparatus is required for SP, and it can be easily scaled up for mass-production; (5) as a continuous synthetic technique, the on-line modulation of material properties (stoichiometric ratio, phase composition, particle size, specific surface area, etc.) is much more convenient than the traditional synthesis techniques for materials such as the solid state reaction, sol–gel, and hydrothermal techniques.
 Fig. 1  Development and application history of the SP technique in different fields. Data from Web of Science. 
Note that a number of early-stage review articles addressing advances in the synthetic process for various applications, including metallic particles,27 thin films,28–30 and ceramic powders,31,32 have been very helpful in our efforts to understand the essence of SP. For example, in 1993, Prof. Messing et al. discussed the process parameters that may influence the formation of particles with controlled morphology and composition.33 Moreover, they proposed a model incorporating solvent evaporation and solute diffusion, which has been of importance for explaining the formation mechanism of nanostructures prepared by SP. In recent years, such research focusing on nanostructured materials and energy-related devices has attracted tremendous attention, but there are few articles reviewing the widespread application of SP in these very important fields. Furthermore, even though the progress in SP for energy storage and conversion has been included, these articles have usually covered only a few fields, such as lithium ion batteries (LIBs), sodium ion batteries (SIBs), and supercapacitors.34–36 At the same time, the general strategies of nanostructured design and control were not sufficiently addressed. Therefore, a comprehensive review of SP, focusing on the preparation of nanomaterials and applications in energy storage and conversion, is needed to pull all of the scattered data together and provide a basis for future research.
In this review, we systematically summarize the synthetic strategies for various nanostructures prepared by SP and their applications in energy storage and conversion (Fig. 2). First, we briefly introduce SP technology, including its operating equipment, working principles, and control parameters. Then, we provide an overview of typical nanostructures prepared by SP. Furthermore, the principles and strategies for designing nanomaterials are systematically discussed. These nanostructures include hollow structures, dense spheres, yolk–shell structures, core–shell structures, nanoplates, nanorods, nanowires, thin films, and various nanocomposites. In addition, we discuss their potential uses as key components in a wide range of energy storage and conversion applications, including electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, highly active catalysts for hydrogen production, carbon dioxide reduction, fuel cells, and photoelectric materials for solar cells. Finally, we end this review with our perspectives on urgent challenges and future development directions for SP.
 Fig. 2  Overview of the topic covered in this paper. 
2. Spray pyrolysis
SP is a versatile process for synthesizing powder particles or thin films with various structures. Nanomaterials that are hard to synthesize by other ways may be obtained by SP, as their morphology is controlled by metastable phase formation, and thermodynamics does not occupy the leading role.35 Furthermore, these powder materials prepared by SP inherit the identical stoichiometric ratio of the precursor solution without adulteration by other by-products or impurities. Thus, SP is especially suitable for producing mixed metal oxides, metal powders, composite particles, and even semiconductor thin films.
2.1 SP equipment
Compared with the traditional synthetic methods such as the co-precipitation, hydrothermal, and sol–gel methods, SP is a continuous production process, which only needs a set of relatively low-cost devices, making mass production easy. Fig. 3 shows a schematic diagram of a typical high-capacity SP device, which consists of five subunits, including the intake system, feeding system, nebulizer, pyrolytic chamber, and powder collector (or substrate for depositing thin films).37 (1) The intake system provides continuous air flow for the delivery of droplets. The corresponding equipment includes a blower, air compressor, and gas flowmeter. (2) The feeding system is employed to send the precursor solution to the nebulizer for atomization. The main devices are a liquid feed pump, flowmeter, and liquid storage tank. (3) The nebulizer is adopted to atomize the precursor solution and generate a large quantity of droplets. According to their working principles, nebulizers can be classified into three types: ultrasonic, pneumatic (pressure, two-fluid), and electrostatic (Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.2). (4) The pyrolytic chamber provides space and power for the conversion reaction of the droplets that are being transformed from solution to solid particles or deposited as a thin film on a substrate, and such pyrolytic chambers can be classified into vertical and horizontal pyrolysis chambers, according to the placement mode, as well as one-zone and multi-zone pyrolytic chambers according to the reaction interval. (5) The powder collection device includes wet-type, cyclone-type, electrostatic-type, or bag-type powder collector. Because the powder particles of products prepared by SP are ultrafine (usually less than 2 μm), wet-type and bag-type powder collectors are often used to collect these materials. On the other hand, the substrates used for the deposition of thin films include indium-tin oxide, modified glass, metallic matrix, and ceramic chips.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of typical apparatus for the SP technique. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
2.2 SP process
SP technology refers to the process in which the precursor solution is first atomized into aerosol droplets by a nebulizer. Then, the droplets are brought into the reaction chamber by a carrier gas. Each droplet effectively acts as an individual microreactor, which undergoes a series of physical and chemical reactions, including solvent evaporation, precipitation, drying, and decomposition. Finally, the particles are collected by filters.32,33 The schematic diagram in Fig. 4 (outer circle) summarizes the various stages of a typical SP process for the preparation of powder particles. Other spray pyrolysis techniques, such as spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) and flame spray pyrolysis (FSP), however, have some differences in their working principles (Sections 3.6 and 4.3).
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the controllable parameters for the powder preparation from solution to particle via one-pot SP. 

2.2.1 Nebulization. 
Splitting the precursor solution into fine droplets in a gas phase is called atomization. Here, we will discuss the working principles of the three types of atomizers: ultrasonic, pneumatic (pressure, two-fluid), and electrostatic atomizers (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram (left side) and digital photograph (right side) of an ultrasonic fountain and the mist produced at 1.7 MHz. (b) Cross-sectional views of pneumatic atomizers. (c) Photograph of an electroatomizer. (a) Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. 
2.2.1.1 Ultrasonic atomizer. 
Ultrasonic atomization was invented by Wood and Loomis in 1927. They observed that, when a thin liquid layer was subjected to severe disturbances by high frequency ultrasonic waves, fine droplets would be produced on the solid–liquid interface.41Fig. 5a illustrates the principle of ultrasonic atomization and presents a digital photograph of an ultrasonic fountain with the mist produced at 1.7 MHz.38 The mechanism of ultrasonic atomization is not yet fully understood, but there are two methodologies that can partially explain the phenomenon. The first is based on cavitation theory. It believes that when the liquid layer is disturbed by ultrasonic waves, microbubbles as cavities are generated by the hydraulic vibration. The pressure difference makes the cavities break up and causes the energy of the sound field to be released. Fine droplets are ejected from the liquid surface by the shock waves generated by cavity collapse.42 The second is based on capillary wave theory. When an ultrasonic wave propagates vertically with respect to the surface of a liquid, capillary waves are generated on the surface of the liquid layer.43,44 Capillary waves consist of peaks and troughs, and their amplitude depends on the intensity of vibration. When the vibration is strong enough, the amplitude reaches a critical value and causes the peaks of the capillary waves to be stripped from the liquid layer. Based on the capillary wave theory, Lang put forward a correlation, as shown in eqn (1):45 (1)where dp is the droplet size, σ is the surface tension (dyne cm−1), ρ is the density (g mL−1), and f is the excitation frequency (Hz). Nevertheless, this correlation does not clarify the relationship that holds among the droplet size, the viscosity, and the volumetric liquid flow rate, which is not sufficiently consistent with the experimental observations. Furthermore, Rajan and Pandit proposed a correlation accounting for the physicochemical properties (surface tension (σ), density (ρ), viscosity (μ), and volumetric liquid flow rate) and the ultrasonic properties (amplitude, frequency (f)), as follows:46 (2)where A is the surface area of the droplet (m2), NWe is the modified Weber number , NOh is the modified Ohnesorge number , and NIn is the intensity number . Q is the volumetric flow rate (m3 s−1), μ is the liquid viscosity (Pa s), m is the mass of the droplet (kg), and C is the velocity of sound in the liquid medium (m s−1).
2.2.1.2 Pneumatic atomizer. 
Pneumatic atomization refers to the process in which compressed air is mixed with the precursor solution ejected at high speed from the nozzle and then the liquid is dispersed into an aerosol by the strong shear force between the air and the liquid.47 It is also called two-fluid atomization because two kinds of fluid are involved in this process. According to the contact area between the air and the liquid, pneumatic atomization can be divided into two categories: on the one hand, if the contact area is within the nozzle head, it is called internal mixing; on the other hand, if the contact area is outside the nozzle head, it is called external mixing (Fig. 5b).39 The mechanism of pneumatic atomization is that the high frictional forces created by the high relative velocity between the liquid and the gas tear the liquid into spray droplets.48 The literature relating to the deduction of droplet size correlations is sparse. Some researchers have summed up correlations applicable to their own system, although they are usually limited to a narrow parameter range.49 Developing a universal correlation relating to the mean droplet size is an important research direction in pneumatic atomization.
2.2.1.3 Electrostatic atomizer. 
Electrostatic atomization has been used in laboratory applications since 1914.50 Nowadays, it is commonly used in emerging technologies such as nanoparticle synthesis, surface coating, and two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) printing. An electrostatic atomizer consists mainly of two parts: the capillary nozzle and the extractor electrode (Fig. 5c). The capillary nozzle is supplied with high voltage (HV), and the extractor electrode is reliably earthed. Otherwise, the extractor electrode is supplied with high voltage, while the capillary nozzle is earthed. The voltage ranges from 1 kV to ∼20 kV. The liquid flowing from the nozzle forms a meniscus. Then, a liquid jet is expelled from the meniscus under the force of the electric field and finally disintegrates into droplets.


2.2.2 Evaporation and precipitation. 
In the evaporation stage, the processes of heat transfer, mass diffusion, vapor diffusion, and droplet shrinkage occur simultaneously. The solvent evaporates from the droplet surface and diffuses into the surrounding gas. The droplets shrink as the amount of solvent decreases. The solute diffuses from the droplet surface to the droplet center. Among these processes, solute diffusion and surface shrinkage are considered as the controlling steps. As a result, on the one hand, the concentration of solute near the surface is higher than the inner concentration of the droplet. Then, with the surface concentration increasing further, the solute will be supersaturated and precipitate on the surface. On the other hand, the solute that precipitates first will gradually assemble into a complete solid-phase spherical shell covering the surface of the droplet, which retards the droplet shrinkage process. Especially at this moment, if the solute concentration at the center of the droplet is lower than the equilibrium saturation, precipitation will sequentially take place on the surface where the concentration is higher than the equilibrium saturation. That is to say, there is surface precipitation, which leads to the formation of a hollow particle. In contrast, at the moment when the surface of the droplet forms a complete spherical shell, if the solute concentration at the center of the droplet is higher than or equal to the equilibrium saturation, the crystal nucleus on the surface of the droplet will catalyze the crystallization throughout the whole droplet, namely, volume precipitation contributes to the formation of a solid particle.51,52 Therefore, we can obtain solid particles by extending the evaporation time below the boiling temperature of the solvent. In some specific situations, however, the processes in the aforementioned discussion do not work. For example, if the concentration of the precursor solution is very low, all of the crystal nuclei may not touch each other, leading to porous particles. In addition, modifying the precursor solution properties and adjusting other process parameters can also achieve morphological control (Section 2.3).


2.2.3 Drying and decomposition. 
The pyrolysis process is conducted at a relatively high temperature (above 300 °C), and thus, the drying and decomposition processes are often accompanied by off-gas generation (solvent vapor and pyrolysis gas), which may increase the inner pressure of the intermediate hollow particle formed at the precipitation stage (Section 2.2.2). If the permeability of the shell is poor, the spherical shell will shatter to form fractured nanoplates. In addition, because the collision probability of particles in the pyrolytic chamber is small, each droplet can act as an individual microreactor, preventing the generated nanoparticles from being sintered into block materials. The particles obtained after thermolysis usually have high chemical activity, which makes them suitable for in situ treatment immediately. For most SP devices, drying, decomposition, and further crystallization processes are carried out in a short single-chamber furnace, making these processes overlap. Sometimes, further heat treatment is needed in other furnaces to optimize the crystallinity or morphology of the particles. In fact, it is better to conduct different individual processes in separate reactors by using multi-zone pyrolytic chambers, so that every step can be more precisely controlled.

2.3 Morphology control strategies
SP technology has been widely demonstrated for the synthesis of nanostructured materials by changing the precursor solution composition and controlling the process parameters. The properties of the precursor solution, such as concentration, solubility, density, viscosity, and surface tension, will directly affect the size of the atomized droplets. The process parameters such as the working temperature, residence time, and atmosphere can greatly influence the solute precipitation conditions in the evaporation process. Note that, in some cases, a small number of organic additives in the precursor solution may also have a great impact on the formation of nanostructures by changing the precipitation process of metal salts. In addition, in the preparation of nanocomposites, the in situ formation of the composite phase will also affect the morphology of the product. Therefore, a suitable solution composition and precise control of the process parameters are the key principles for the design of various nanomaterials via SP.

2.3.1 Precursor solution composition. 
2.3.1.1 Metal salt. 
In principle, any metal salt can be used as a precursor component for fabricating nanostructured materials via SP techniques provided that the corresponding parameters (decomposition temperature, solubility, and solvent) can be determined. In some circumstances, however, in order to guarantee production efficiency, metal salts are usually required to have good solubility and relatively low decomposition temperature. Thus, not only inorganic metal salts such as chlorides,53 nitrates,54 and carbonates,55 but also metalorganics including oxalates,56 citrates,57 and acetates58 have been extensively used as precursor components of target materials. Inorganic salts are the most commonly used precursors because of their low cost and aqueous solubility. Metalorganics, by contrast, are unstable, toxic and relatively expensive. These precursors are versatile, however, for thin film deposition or high-rate production of nanoparticles at relatively low temperatures.
The different salts have discrepant solute precipitation and decomposition processes, resulting in the formation of variant morphologies. For example, our group compared the morphologies of three Co3O4 particles prepared under the same synthetic conditions from different metal salt solutions.59 We obtained hollow, dense, and plicated particles from cobalt nitrate, cobalt chloride, and cobalt acetate solutions, respectively. This phenomenon can be properly explained based on the spray pyrolysis mechanism mentioned above. The solubility of the nitrate and acetate is lower than that of the chloride, so that the solute is more easily precipitated on the surface of the droplet due to higher supersaturation, forming a single-layer hollow shell in the evaporation process. During the subsequent drying and decomposition process, however, the nitrate shell has a higher melting temperature and better permeability than the acetate. The generated Co3O4 completely inherits the single-shell hollow structure of the nitrate shell. In contrast, because the acetate shell has a low melting temperature and poor permeability, the following decomposition of the hydrated cobalt acetate causes the internal gas pressure to increase, so that the acetate shell will expand like a balloon. Then, at the material-collection stage, the internal pressure decreases due to the low temperature, and the hollow structure of cobalt acetate shrinks to form a dried-plum-like plicated morphology. Moreover, the greater solubility of the cobalt chloride causes volume precipitation in whole droplets (Section 2.2.2) and forms a dense secondary spherical particle assembled from numerous primary granules. Subsequently, the precipitated chloride goes through a hydrolyzation reaction and forms a porous but still dense Co3O4 sphere.
2.3.1.2 Additives. 
The excellent chemical and physical flexibility of precursor solution offers numerous opportunities for SP to achieve the synthesis of various multicomponent composite materials by varying the precursor components. Simple operation, short residence time, high purity and uniformity are the unique advantages of SP in the preparation of various materials, including multi-component oxides,60,61 sulfides,62,63 selenides,56,64 and their carbon-based (graphene, amorphous carbon, carbon nanotube)65–68 composites. The presence of the composite phases can affect the morphology of the materials. For instance, Park and coworkers prepared a CoOx-decorated reduced graphene oxide (RGO) composite from a colloidal precursor solution consisting of cobalt nitrate and graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets.67 Ultrafine hollow CoOx nanospheres with diameters of several nanometers were homogeneously distributed on the RGO shell. In this case, the influence of graphene on the morphology of the material is mainly attributed to two aspects. On the one hand, the addition of GO nanosheets changes the properties of the spray solution, thus affecting the size of the atomized droplets. On the other hand, the composite component modifies the precipitation process of the cobalt nitrate. The assembled GO nanosheets formed the skeleton of the composite. All the cobalt nitrate nanoparticles were uniformly deposited on the surfaces of the GO nanosheets, which was different from what was obtained from the pure cobalt nitrate solution.
The use of organic additives to adjust the properties of the solution or modify the pyrolysis process is a facile strategy for designing various nanostructures.65 These additives usually play the role of complexing agents, surfactants, carbon sources, and functional templates. Kang and coworkers employed citric acid, ethylene glycol, and N,N-dimethlyformamide (DMF) as drying control chemical additives in the synthesis of fully filled spherical particles from a solution containing nickel nitrate, cobalt nitrate, and manganese acetate at a molar ratio of 0.8:0.15:0.05, respectively.69 In comparison, the particles prepared by SP under the same conditions except that the additive was omitted from the precursor solution exhibited a hollow structure. This is because the cross-linking esterification reaction between ethylene glycol and citric acid produces interlaced polymers, which increase the viscosity of the solution during the drying process. Moreover, DMF as a polar solvent possesses a higher boiling point than that of water, extending the evaporation time of the solvent. The DMF and the generated polymer influenced the rate of drying and decomposition of the multi-metal nitrate. In particular, a low evaporation rate of the solvent contributes to the volume deposition (Section 2.2.2) and forms a dense structure.
2.3.1.3 Solvent. 
Solvents used for SP must possess an appropriate vapor pressure, viscosity, and surface tension and facilitate high solubility of the solute. These properties directly affect droplet formation and further determine the quality and yield of target materials. Water is the most commonly used solvent, as with other traditional liquid-phase methods, because of its safety, low cost, easy handling, and wide adaptability to various water-soluble metal salts. Increasingly, organic solvents such as ethanol,70 propanol,71 hexane,72 di-methyl sulfoxide (DMSO),73 and N,N-dimethlyformamide (DMF)74 have been studied for the preparation of nanostructured materials and composites. The role of these organic liquids usually is multiple, such as fuel, solvent, carbon source, or template.75 For example, Wang's group synthesized Sn/C nanocomposite microspheres with nano-sized Sn particles uniformly embedded in the in situ generated carbon matrix.76 SnCl2 and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) were dissolved in ethanol and acted as Sn and C sources, respectively. This precursor solution was atomized by a pneumatic nebulizer and subsequently dried and decomposed at 900 °C under an atmosphere of argon/5% hydrogen. Thermal decomposition and reduction of the tin salt along with carbonization of the PVP formed the porous nano-Sn/C composite microspheres.


2.3.2 Process parameters. 
2.3.2.1 Atomizer. 

Tables 1 and 2 compare the characteristics of ultrasonic, pneumatic (pressure, two-fluid), and electrostatic atomizers. Different nebulizers cause differences in droplet size, atomization efficiency, and the initial velocity of droplets.33 The size of droplets is an important parameter because it can greatly influence the size of the ultimate powder particles. The initial velocity of the droplets leaving the nebulizer has an effect on the residence time in the pyrolytic chamber during the SP process. Moreover, the efficiency of atomization is a decisive factor for mass production because it directly determines the yield of target materials.
Table 1 Working characteristics of the atomizers commonly used for SP33,83




Type
Droplet size (μm)
Atomization rate (cm3 min−1)
Droplet velocity (m s−1)
Scalability




Ultrasonic atomizer
1–100
<2
0.2–0.4
0.1–100 kg per day


Pneumatic atomizer
10–100
3–no limit
5–20
>5 tons per day


Electrostatic atomizer
0.1–10
0.01–1
0.01–0.2
<1 kg per day




Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of the various types of atomizers39,84,85




Type
Advantages
Disadvantages




Ultrasonic atomizer
Low cost
Relatively low productivity


High stability
Can’t treat high viscosity solution


Pneumatic atomizer
High productivity
Large droplet size (∼50 μm)


High adaptability
Nonuniform size distribution


Electrostatic atomizer
Highly controllable
Low productivity


Tiny droplet size
Can’t treat insulating liquid




An ultrasonic atomizer is similar to a home humidifier, which generates droplets from solution by the high-speed vibration of a piezoelectric ceramic sheet. The concentration of droplets in an aerosol stream is controlled by varying the flow rate of carrier gas and the number of vibrators. According to the correlation (eqn (2)), the droplet characteristics depend on the physicochemical properties of the precursor solution (surface tension (σ), density (ρ), viscosity (μ), and volumetric liquid flow rate) and the ultrasonic properties (amplitude and frequency (f)). The droplet size decreases with increasing ultrasonic frequency. Precursor solutions with low surface tension and high mass density will be conducive to small droplet size. The ultrasonic atomizer has been demonstrated as the most convenient laboratory-scale droplet generator. The major advantages of ultrasonic atomization as opposed to the other types include the low cost, simple construction, robust stability, uniform size distribution, and high sphericity of the droplets.44 Because of the low energy of ultrasonic vibration, however, ultrasonic atomization is hindered by low productivity, and it cannot treat high viscosity solutions or slurries.
A pneumatic atomizer is similar to a pressurized atomizer except that the liquid is entrained into the high-speed carrier gas so that the shear force acting on the liquid is stronger than in a pressurized atomizer. The entire process is tightly bound to the liquid properties and airflow properties such as surface tension, density, and viscosity. The average aerosol droplet size decreases with increasing relative velocity between the gas and the liquid.77 Pneumatic atomization is a promising method for large-scale industrial production applications because of its high droplet yield and high adaptability for high-concentration solutions, colloidal solutions, emulsions, and sols. This viewpoint has been confirmed in practical application of the spray-drying technique.78,79
An electrostatic atomizer relying on an electric field disintegrates the liquid and produces droplets. The physical parameters of the liquid (conductivity, dielectric constant, surface tension, and viscosity) and the bias voltage between the needle and the substrate determine the droplet size. Aerosol droplets generated by electrostatic atomization can be smaller than 1 μm.80 The size distribution is narrower than that of the droplets created by other atomization methods. Furthermore, charged droplets are self-dispersing in space, leading to no reunion of particles. Nevertheless, there are a few notable limitations of this approach. The precursor solution should be electrically conductive. The sprayed liquid is fed to the nozzle at a constant flow rate, which is typically in the range of 0.01 to 1 mL min−1, leading to relatively low productivity.81,82
2.3.2.2 Carrier gas and flow rate. 
The role of the carrier gas is to deliver the droplets generated by the atomizer to a high-temperature pyrolytic chamber. The flow rate of the carrier gas determines the residence time of the droplets in the pyrolytic chamber, which will influence the properties of materials, such as their morphology, crystallinity, porosity, and specific surface area. Furthermore, the carrier gas can act as a reactant. This is because different carrier gases form discrepant atmospheres, and may cause different chemical reactions between the solute molecules and ambient during the pyrolysis and crystallization processes (Section 2.2.3), such as oxidation, combustion, and reduction. The type of carrier gas is usually selected according to the requirements of the reaction atmosphere to achieve the correct material composition and morphology. Air and oxygen can be selected to create an oxidizing atmosphere, and argon or nitrogen can create an inert atmosphere. Hydrogen or a hydrogen–argon/nitrogen mixture can be selected to create a reducing atmosphere. For example, our group synthesized fully filled CoO–NiO–C spherical particles from a solution of nickel nitrate, cobalt nitrate, and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) under an Ar atmosphere, whereas the particles prepared under an O2 atmosphere had a yolk–shell structure.86 This is because O2 creates favorable conditions for the carbon combustion reaction. The amorphous carbon generated by PVP acts as a self-sacrificing template and undergoes a stratified combustion reaction under the O2 atmosphere, resulting in the formation of the yolk–shell structure.
2.3.2.3 Pyrolytic chamber and working temperature. 
The pyrolytic chamber provides space and a heat source for the transformation of the droplets from solution to solid particles or the deposition of a thin film on the substrate. The structural parameters of the pyrolysis chamber, along with the flow rate of the carrier gas, determine the residence time of the particles in the SP process, which ranges from a few seconds to tens of seconds. Pyrolytic chambers can be classified into vertical and horizontal types according to their placement mode. For the horizontal chamber, a relatively high flow rate is required to prevent heavy particles from being deposited on the inner wall due to gravity. The vertical pyrolysis furnace, however, can efficiently avoid this problem under the action of the rising flow of hot gas. Unlike other nanomaterial synthesis methods, the residence time of particles is short, which means that the composition or crystallinity of the prepared material cannot meet the requirements for functional materials, and an additional annealing process is often required. To this end, researchers have developed multi-zone SP reactors to improve the quality of the target nanomaterials.33,87,88 Different heating sections can work at different temperatures and under variant atmospheres to individually complete the unit processes of evaporation, decomposition, and sintering as one unit. This modification endows the SP technique with greater flexibility and controllability.
In principle, the working temperature of the pyrolytic chamber is above the decomposition temperature of the solute. The heating sources used in SP include electric heating, flame, microwave, and plasma. Electric heating is the most commonly used heating source because of its low cost, simple construction, and high controllability. Heat is transferred from the furnace wall to the droplets through convection and radiation. Flame is another popular heating source due to its convenience in obtaining ultra-high temperatures (above 2000 °C) compared with electric heating. The aerosol generated by the atomizer is injected into the pyrolysis chamber along with liquefied fuel or hydrogen, and a drastic combustion reaction instantaneously occurs, forming a high temperature field that helps to obtain a material with high crystallinity. Some experience is required, however, to control the flame temperature and temperature field. The vaguely defined reaction zone and lack of in situ observations make it very difficult to model this process. We will provide a more detailed discussion on the application of this method when dealing with flame spray pyrolysis (Section 4.3).
There is another process very similar to SP, spray drying (SD). As another important aerosol technique, SD has been widely used for the fabrication of ceramic powders, foods, and industrial chemicals.89,90 The most remarkable difference between the SP and the SD techniques is the working temperature. As the name suggests, the working temperatures for SP are usually above the decomposition temperature of the solute, which are relatively higher than those of SD. However, the working temperatures of a spray drying tower are generally lower than 300 °C, so that the process only amounts to solvent evaporation and drying without pyrolysis.91,92
To sum up, the key principle of the control strategy for SP is the adjustment of the precursor solution composition and process parameters. Because of the overlapping relevance and systematization of these parameters, however, accurate description of how each parameter affects the formation of a specific nanostructure is usually difficult. Thus, it is necessary to adequately consider the influence of multiple factors, and optimize parameters based on the experimental results to achieve control. A mix-and-match strategy based on these factors produces a variety of nanostructured particles for a wide range of potential applications.

3. Nanostructures designed for production by spray pyrolysis
As a versatile synthetic technology for powdered materials and thin films, SP has been widely used to produce a variety of nanostructured products (Fig. 6), such as hollow spheres, dense spheres, yolk–shell structures, core–shell structures, thin films, composite materials, etc.
 Fig. 6  Various nanostructures prepared by SP. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
3.1 Hollow spheres
Hollow nanostructures, an important family of functional materials, with structures consisting of a single-layer shell around a large inner void, possess unique properties in terms of large surface area, low density, and reduced path lengths for mass and charge transport.5,93 These advantages ensure that the hollow structured powders can alleviate volume changes, sustain the stability of the structure, and help the ions and electrons to diffuse in a shorter time. Therefore, this type of material has been considered by the energy storage and conversion community as a potential functional architecture for extensive applications in secondary batteries (LIBs and SIBs), supercapacitors, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), photocatalysis, and fuel cells. Hollow structures are usually prepared by templating methods working on surface-compatible colloidal precursor particles. The morphology of the hollow structures is mainly determined by the templates, although the complex operations of template synthesis and removal would lead to additional problems for material quality and production costs.94
The formation mechanism for hollow structures prepared by the SP process is completely different from those in the templating methods (Fig. 7a). The former relies on adjusting the properties of the solution and controlling the solute so that surface precipitation occurs during the evaporation–precipitation process (Section 2.2.2). Following this synthetic strategy, in the past decade, many articles have reported the use of SP to synthesize hollow-structured powder particles. Single or hybrid nitrates have been demonstrated as ideal precursor components for the preparation of hollow nanomaterials.95–97 During the evaporation and precipitation stage, the solvent quickly evaporates from the surface of the droplet, and the salts are also rapidly deposited on the surface to form a M(NO3)2·6H2O shell, where M is a metal, due to their relatively low solubility. Then, when the evaporation of the solvent is completed, M(NO3)2·6H2O will lose its crystal water and finally decompose into a single-shelled hollow MxOy particle. For example, our group prepared hollow NiCo2O4 spheres from a precursor solution containing pure nickel nitrate and cobalt nitrate with a Ni/Co mole ratio of 1:2.86 The powder particles were hollow structures with a narrow size distribution, superior morphological uniformity, and homogeneous element distributions (Fig. 7b–e). As another example, Yang and coworkers reported single-shelled spherical Li4Ti5O12–SnO2 composite powders with different Li4Ti5O12/SnO2 ratios.98 The precursor solution consisted of stoichiometric lithium nitrate, titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP), and tin oxalate in distilled water. Furthermore, excess nitric acid was added into the prepared solution. The powder particles directly prepared by SP were further heat-treated at 800 °C for 3 h in air to improve the crystallinity of the composite. After heat treatment, the particles still had an unbroken spherical shape and a hollow structure (Fig. 7f and g). The dot-mapping images (Fig. 7h and i) revealed the presence of two separate phases, with SnO2 nanocrystals tens of nanometers in size that were uniformly distributed in the Li4Ti5O12 matrix.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of typical single-shell hollow spheres prepared by SP. (b) SEM image, TEM images (c and d) and elemental mappings (e) of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 spheres. (f and g) TEM images and (h and i) elemental mappings of the Li4Ti5O12–SnO2 hollow composite. (j and k) SEM images and (l and m) TEM images of the SnO2 hollow spheres. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f–i) Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2013, ESG. (j–m) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Lee's group used tin chloride solution as a precursor component to prepare single-layer hollow SnO2 powder particles. Citric acid was added into the precursor solution to obtain a hollow morphology during the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis process.99 The diameter of the SnO2 spheres ranged from 0.05 to 3 μm, and hollow structures were frequently observed (Fig. 7j). The surfaces of the particles after heat-treatment at 500 °C for 2 h (Fig. 7k) became relatively rough, whereas their sizes and morphologies remained similar. The single-shelled hollow structure of the SnO2 spheres after heat-treatment was further confirmed by transmission electron microscope (TEM) images (Fig. 7l). The thickness of the thin shell was about 30–40 nm (Fig. 7m).
3.2 Dense spheres
Here, we define the dense spheres prepared by SP as solid particles assembled from numerous ultrafine primary nanoparticles. In fact, the dense or “solid” secondary particle is nanoporous, owing to the evaporation of the solvent and decomposition of the salts and additive. The dense spherical structure is the most common structure when SP is used to prepare spherical particles and is widely used in energy storage devices. Dense spheres have a high tap density, and the interlacing channels between the nanoscale primary particles facilitate the permeation of the electrolyte and expose more active sites.
A vast amount of research work has been conducted to obtain solid particles instead of hollow spheres or broken particles,69,74,100,101 and some favorable conditions to preferentially form solid particles can be identified: (1) the metal salts should have high solubility, and the solution should have relatively low saturation; (2) the evaporation rate of the solvent should be kept as low as possible; (3) the pyrolysis temperature should be close to the melting point of the solute; and (4) in exceptional cases, the gel solution should be used as the precursor solution. The purpose of all these operations is to make sure that the concentration at the center reaches the saturated equilibrium concentration before the shell is formed.
SP is well-suited for producing solid particles with homogeneous chemical compositions and narrow size distributions. Recently, our group prepared a Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 microsphere nanocomposite from metal chlorides.102 The Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 microspheres could serve as an anode material for LIBs as well as a precursor for LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode material on mixing them with lithium salt and sintering. The equilibrium concentration of chloride resulting in surface precipitation was achieved simultaneously with the internal precipitation of the droplet (Fig. 8a). Therefore, solid spherical secondary particles were formed by assembly from numerous nanosized primary particles (Fig. 8b and c). The equilibrium concentrations of acetate and nitrate were lower than that of chloride, which led to the precipitation taking place on the surface, so that the shell quickly formed. Meanwhile, the solute inside the droplet did not reach the precipitated saturation concentration and would not precipitate, thus forming a hollow structure. We also prepared nickel-foam-supported metal oxide as a binder-free anode for LIBs by SP.103 The obtained Co3O4 microspheres, which had ample pores distributed on the surface and assembled from an enormous number of closely packed primary nanoparticles, were uniformly deposited on the nickel foam substrate (Fig. 8d–h). Kang's group found that the Ni–Co–Al–O particles with a dense inner structure could be obtained by using N,N-dimethylformamide as a drying control chemical additive (DCCA) to extend the drying time and provide enough time for solute diffusion.69
 Fig. 8  (a) Formation mechanism for the porous Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 powder prepared by SP from chloride solution. (b) SEM images and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the porous Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 powder particles. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the nickel-foam supported Co3O4 microspheres. (e–g) SEM images of the nickel-foam-supported Co3O4 microspheres. (h) TEM image of the Co3O4 microspheres. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d–h) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3 Yolk–shell structure
Yolk–shell structures have a characteristic core@void@shell framework and possess many advantages as electrode materials and catalysts. For instance, the void space between the functional core and the shell can serve as buffering space to accommodate the volume changes during charge/discharge processes for high-capacity electrodes in LIBs and SIBs.104–108 In addition, owing to their advantage of high specific surface area and hierarchical pores, which shorten the mass- and charge-diffusion lengths, yolk–shell structured powders also exhibit outstanding performance in terms of high catalytic activity and rate capability when they are used as energy storage materials.109–112 In the past several years, the yolk–shell structure has been extensively applied to produce energy storage materials, and many methods have been proposed to prepare them, such as selective etching, Ostwald ripening, soft or hard templating, Kirkendall diffusion, and ion exchange. Because of their structural complexity, however, the synthesis and construction of yolk–shell structures are more challenging than those of other hollow or porous structures. Compared with these conventional strategies, one-pot SP is a straightforward but robust method for the large-scale synthesis of yolk–shell structured materials.
In 2013, Kang's group first used SP to prepare yolk–shell-structured SnO2 (Fig. 9a–c) from a precursor solution consisting of sucrose and tin oxalate.113 Although the residence time of droplets was only 22 s throughout the whole SP process (1000 °C), a double-shelled SnO2 yolk–shell powder was formed even without post-treatment, while the SnO2 particles prepared without PVP presented a dense spherical morphology. In this study, the researchers discovered that sucrose was the most suitable carbon source, which mainly determined the formation of the yolk–shell structure (Fig. 9d). Firstly, microsized carbon–SnO2 composite particles with a dense and spherical structure were generated by the decomposition of sucrose and tin oxalate. The exposed carbon on the surfaces of the composite particles immediately underwent a combustion reaction with the circumambient air. Because of the insufficient supply of oxygen, however, the insides of the particles could not combust. The crystalline SnO2 shell on the particle surface had a higher mechanical strength and showed low shrinkage characteristics, whereas the C–SnO2 core exhibited some shrinkage at high temperature. Consequently, the phase separation process formed the initial core–shell-structured C–SnO2/SnO2. Subsequently, a similar second combustion of the interior core occurred when there was sufficient oxygen in the voids and finally formed the double-shelled SnO2@SnO2@SnO2 yolk–shell-structured particles.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image, TEM image (b), and elemental mappings (c) of the yolk–shell SnO2 spheres. (d) The mechanism for the formation of the double-shelled SnO2 powders. (e) The mechanism for the formation of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 powders. (f) SEM image, TEM images (g and h), and elemental mappings (i) of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 spheres. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e–i) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the following two years, the same group reported a series of yolk–shell single- or multi-metal oxides obtained by SP, including Fe2O3,114 Co3O4,115 WO3,116 V2O5,117 NiO,118 ZnFe2O4,119 CoMn2O4,120 CoMn2O4,121 Li4Ti5O12,122 LiMn2O4,123 and LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4.124 Three main factors have contributed to the widespread preparation of yolk–shell structures via SP: the easily decomposable nature of the metal salts, the carbon sources, and the oxidizing atmosphere. Based on these principles, our group recently employed ultrasonic SP technology and successfully synthesized a multi-shell yolk–shell nickel–cobalt oxide from a solution consisting of nickel–cobalt nitrate and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) with O2 as carrier gas (Fig. 9e–i).86 The PVP was chosen as a surfactant and the carbon source, playing a key role in the formation of the yolk–shell structure. The number of external shells could be accurately controlled by adding a certain amount of PVP into the precursor solution. When used as the anode for Li-ion batteries, this electrode material improved their electrochemical performance in contrast to the one composed of hollow microspheres.
3.4 Core–shell structure
The core–shell structure consists of an active core and an exterior functional shell. The most significant difference between it and the yolk–shell structure is that the shell is in intimate contact with the core, and there are no voids. It is well known that the construction of a core–shell structure is a common surface-modification strategy to improve the performance of target materials by alleviating interface side-reactions, or improving their ionic/electronic conductivity and structural stability.125–130 The electrochemical performance of the modified electrode materials is affected by the type of coating material as well as the method. In the general case, conventional wet-chemical methods typically require a number of synthetic steps due to the complexity of the composition and structure between the matrix and the coating materials.131,132 Meanwhile, due to the agglomeration of coating layers, it is hard to obtain a uniform and complete coating.
In recent studies, many researchers have demonstrated that SP is a facile and effective synthetic process to prepare core–shell materials, which can spontaneously form a homogeneous coating layer in one step. For example, Hong et al.37 fabricated a spherical carbon-coated core–shell composite material by one-pot SP from an aqueous solution containing tin oxalate and PVP (Fig. 10a). The powder particles completely inherited the spherical shape of the atomized droplets. In this composite, the SnOx nanocrystals were uniformly embedded in the amorphous carbon matrix and covered with a homogeneous coating layer on the surface (Fig. 10b and c). The amorphous carbon matrix and coating layer were generated by the carbonization of PVP, while SnO and SnO2 were formed by the decomposition of tin oxalate. In another example, the same group reported the synthesis of core–shell structured ZnO/SnO2@C composite materials in a similar way (Fig. 10d and e).133 Besides carbon-based composites, Hong's group also attempted to synthesize other heterostructured core–shell-structured materials. For example, they prepared Li2O–2B2O3 glass-modified LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4 cathode materials by using one-pot SP. Similar to carbon, the glassy Li2O–2B2O3 phase spontaneously formed a uniform coating layer on the surface of the cathode electrode material.134,135
 Fig. 10  (a) Formation mechanism of the SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of the SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (d) SEM image and (e) TEM image of the ZnO/SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (f) Schematic diagram of the large-scale in situ SP process for TiO2-coated LiMn2O4. (g) SEM image and (h) TEM image of the TiO2-coated LiMn2O4 powders. (i) SEM image and (j) TEM image of the Zr-coated LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 cathode. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (i and j) Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2012, The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
The formation mechanism of the core–shell structure is similar to that of the yolk–shell structure. The phase separation process plays a key role in the formation of this structure. During the formation of core–shell structures in SP, however, the amorphous phase naturally migrates to the surface and forms the shell, while the crystalline phase spontaneously migrates to the inside of the droplets. In contrast, the phase separation process of yolk–shell structures in which the interior core and the exterior shell separate from each other and generate void space is mainly attributed to the combustion reaction of carbon.
The above method of spontaneously forming a core–shell structure by SP is only suitable for synthesizing composite materials with a thick coating layer. If the salt content producing the coating material is too low, a uniform coating layer is difficult to obtain. However, in the synthesis of cathode materials for the Li-ion battery, the amount of coating is often small (<5%). Therefore, borrowing an idea from fluidized bed coating, some researchers have improved this method and made some progress. For instance, Hong and coworkers successfully prepared LiMn2O4 cathode materials with a uniform TiO2 coating layer by using a modified SP apparatus (Fig. 10f).136 The initial droplets were generated by an ultrasonic nebulizer from a precursor solution containing Li and Mn components. In the first stage of pyrolysis, the drying and decomposition of droplets generated composite particles consisting of Li and Mn components. Titanium tetraisopropoxide vapor was continuously injected into the inside of a furnace to produce TiO2 particles. In the second stage, the composite particles flowed in the gas phase with TiO2 vapor and were gradually wrapped by TiO2. The reaction between the Li and Mn components to form the LiMn2O4 cathode invariably occurred in all stages of the SP process. Consequently, the TiO2-coated LiMn2O4 cathode was directly prepared by using large-scale SP technology (Fig. 10g and h). Similarly, Song et al. prepared ZrO2-coated LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 using a modified flame SP method.137 The precursor salts of LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 were dissolved in aqueous solution to form a LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 matrix, while the Zr precursor was mixed with the oil phase to generate the ZrO2 coating layer. The morphological characterization showed a uniform ZrO2 coating layer 5–8 nm in thickness on the surface of each core particle (Fig. 10i and j).
3.5 Nanoplates
Recently, many researchers have demonstrated the construction of two-dimensional (2D) layered nanostructures for use in the field of energy storage and conversion devices.138–140 The term “2D materials” refers to an ultrathin layer structure with a thickness that is usually at the atomic or molecular level. 2D materials have advantages over other structures such as larger reaction area, abundant active sites, and short ion diffusion paths, resulting in improved electrochemical performance, making them competitive candidates for electrode materials and catalysts.141
Park et al.64 synthesized 2D tin selenide nanoplates by SP using a tin(II) oxalate and selenous acid solution as the raw material (Fig. 11a). The precursor solution was transformed into SeO2 and SnO2 after a drying and decomposition process. SnSe nanocrystals were generated after reduction and were grown, ultimately forming micron-sized particles. Excess amounts of metalloid Se were removed by forming H2Se gas, leading to aggregation-free SnSe nanoplates. The obtained SnSe nanoplates had a high aspect ratio and aggregation-free characteristics, with the elements distributed uniformly in the particles (Fig. 11b–f). Park's group also synthesized SnO2 hollow nanoplates by the Kirkendall effect using the SnSe–C powders synthesized by SP.56 The SnSe–C composite powders were prepared by SP with PVP as an additive, and subsequently oxidized into SnO2 hollow nanoplates by heat-treatment under an air atmosphere (Fig. 11g–i). The different diffusion rates of Sn and Se ions and of O2 gas resulted in various intermediate products during the oxidation process, resulting in the formation of the SnO2 hollow nanoplates with thin shells. In addition, Park's group also prepared ultrafine TiO2-doped α-MoO3 nanoplates by a flame SP process with water-soluble ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate as precursor.142 Amanda et al.143 obtained single-crystalline Bi2WO6 nanoplates by incorporating a solid-state metathesis reaction. Cho et al.144 prepared MoO3 nanoplates by SP followed by a heat treatment.
 Fig. 11  (a) Formation mechanism of SnSe nanoplates from the precursor solution containing tin oxalate and H2SeO3. (b) SEM image, (c and d) TEM images, (e) selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, and (f) elemental mapping images of the SnSe nanoplates. (g–i) TEM images of SnSe–C composite powders, as-sprayed followed by post-treatment at temperatures of (g) 400, (h) 500, and (i) 600 °C. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
3.6 Thin film
The use of thin film materials in current energy storage and conversion applications is widespread, such as in supercapacitors, photocatalysis, solar cells, and fuel cells. Compared with some common thin film deposition techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),145 atomic layer deposition (ALD),146 sol–gel spin coating,147 and sol–gel drain coating,148 SP possesses some unique advantages. For example, SP produces spherical nanoparticles at moderate temperatures under an ambient atmosphere, whereas other techniques usually require pressure or vacuum. Substrate preparation is an important process affecting the adhesive strength, while there is almost no requirement for substrates in SP. The deposition can be simultaneously carried out on non-flat areas by using a hand-held sprayer, which is restricted in dip/spin coating. In addition, by modifying the process parameters and solution composition, the components and morphology of target materials will be precisely controlled. Researchers have been using SP for fabricating various films since the 1980s. So far, the SP deposition (SPD) technique has been demonstrated to be a facile, effective, scalable, and well-established method to synthesize thin film materials, and it is promising for future industrial applications.149,150 A wide variety of semiconductor thin films assembled from nanoparticles such as TiO2, ZnO, WO3, Fe2O3, CdS, and PbS have shown superior catalytic activity and optical properties compared to the corresponding bulk phase materials.
The SPD technique involves atomizing a precursor solution into small droplets and spraying these droplets onto a heated substrate (Fig. 12a). Just like the model for the preparation of powder particles, the film formation is also described by using several separate individual processes, including atomization, aerosol transport, and decomposition of the precursor (Fig. 12b).30 The properties and quality of the films are also determined by the properties of the spray solution and process parameters. Regardless of the effects of the solution, the substrate properties are considered to be the most important process parameters. This is due to the fact that the pyrolysis reaction principally occurs on the surface of the heated substrate. This is a notable difference from all the other thin film deposition techniques, and also imposes significant heat tolerance requirements on the substrate. Particularly, the substrate temperature is a crucial factor affecting the morphology and crystal growth of the particles.151,152 With a higher substrate temperature, the deposited films are rougher and more porous. If the temperature is too low, the film will be cracked. Moreover, the deposition temperature also influences the texture, crystallinity, phase composition, and other properties of the thin films prepared by SP. For instance, Hsu and coworkers introduced two sets of spray pyrolysis apparatus for preparing thin film materials: for pneumatic spray deposition (PSD) and for electrostatic spray deposition (ESD).153 The PSD and ESD setups respectively utilized a twin-fluid atomizer and an electrostatic atomizer for the generation and spraying of droplets (Section 2.2.1). Fig. 12c shows the cross-section of a samaria-doped ceria (SDC) thin film deposited on a NiO–SDC substrate using the SPD technique. The image demonstrates that the deposited SDC thin film was uniform, dense, and crack-free. No visible voids or interface between the SDC film and the substrate can be observed in the high-magnification SEM image (Fig. 12d). This indicates that the adhesion between the film and the substrate is very good.
 Fig. 12  (a) Spray pyrolysis apparatus to prepare thin films. (b) Film formation by the spray pyrolysis technique. (c and d) SEM images of the polished cross-section of an SDC film deposited on the NiO–SDC/NiO–YSZ substrate (YSZ = yttrium stabilized zirconia) by electrostatic spray deposition. (a) Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2017, Springer. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society. 
3.7 Nanowires, nanorods, and nanotubes
One-dimensional nanostructured materials such as nanowires, nanorods, and nanotubes have attracted researchers’ attention in recent years due to their potential applications in nanoscale electronic and optoelectronic devices.156,157 To render these devices commercially viable, economical synthetic techniques favorable for mass production are still required. Some wet chemical techniques such as the hydrothermal method and solution deposition have been demonstrated as promising options for the massive fabrication of one-dimensional nanostructured materials. However, without proper pretreatment of the substrates, high quality one-dimensional materials will not be obtained. In addition, various deposition techniques, including vapor–liquid–solid deposition (VLS), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), and metal–organic CVD (MOCVD), have been used to grow well-aligned one-dimensional materials on different substrates, but such methods always require a tremendous investment in equipment and rigorous preparation conditions. In this section, we will present the SPD technique as an economically viable route for the growth of high quality one-dimensional nanostructured materials.
Htay's group reported the fabrication of one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO materials via SP (Fig. 13a).158 Ultrasonic vibrators operating at 2.4 MHz atomized the precursor solution. Pure nitrogen gas adjusted by a flowmeter conveyed the droplets generated in the atomization chamber and fed them into the pyrolyzing furnace. In particular, the researchers creatively used a liquid trap to filter large-size droplets so that only a fine mist could be transported to the substrate where one-dimensional ZnO was being fabricated. The soda-lime glass substrate where ZnO crystal growth took place was heated by a specially designed graphite susceptor. The distance between the nozzle and the substrate was fixed at 8 mm. Based on this experimental system, the authors presented a possible growth mechanism for one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO (Fig. 13b). Initially, the first-arrived precursor droplets might decompose and form a vapor consisting of an active species due to the high temperature of the substrate. Then, the vapor might participate in a CVD-like process and form a seeding layer (SL). The subsequent aggregation of tiny crystal seeds forms the seed crystallites (SCs) on the SL surface. Finally, the growth of SCs into one-dimensional single crystals mainly depends on the growth conditions.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis system for preparing one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO. (b) Possible steps in the growth mechanism of one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO: (1) evaporation and decomposition of vapor, (2) formation of SL, (3) formation of SCs, and (4) growth of crystalline structures. (c) SEM images of ZnO nanowires, (d) ZnO nanorods, and (e) carbon nanotubes. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2007, Japan Society of Applied Physics. (c) Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2008, Springer. (d) Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. 
Htay and coworkers prepared single-crystal ZnO nanowires from a precursor solution composed of zinc acetate, indium(III) nitrate, and ammonium acetate. Indium salt used as catalyst played a key role in the single-crystal growth, and ammonium acetate was used as a buffering agent to control the pH value of the solution.151 In addition, the substrate temperature was another main factor affecting crystal growth. At a growth temperature of 300 °C, interlaced single-crystal ZnO nanowires 10–30 nm in thickness and 1.5–2.0 mm in length were obtained with an areal density of about 1.5 billion platelets per square centimeter (Fig. 13c).
Krunks et al.158 reported ZnO nanorods obtained by pneumatic spray deposition (PSD) using zinc chloride aqueous solution sprayed onto an indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate in the temperature range of 400–580 °C. Such a growth temperature resulted in well-aligned hexagonal ZnO nanorods 100–150 nm in diameter and about 1 μm in length (Fig. 13d). X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization and photoluminescence (PL) measurements revealed that ZnO rods prepared by SP were of high crystalline and optical quality.
Alonso et al.99 produced multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) by spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) of a mixture of ferrocene/benzene under argon flow. CNTs 200 μm in length were synthesized within 10 min (Fig. 13e). Quartz tubing exposed to pyrolysis vapor was used as the substrate for growing CNTs. The diameter of the CNTs was influenced by the size of the droplets, and the length was mainly determined by the argon gas flow and ferrocene concentration. Simultaneously, temperature was considered as a critical variable, and ferrocene was a necessary factor to produce CNTs.
4. Applications in energy storage and conversion
A search using “spray pyrolysis” as a key phrase in the Web of Science returned 14746 articles from 1978 to January 7, 2019. The applications of SP have shown rapid growth in recent years, and more than 1000 research articles were published in 2018 (Fig. 14a), which covered related topics, including batteries, solar cells, fuel cells, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, water treatment, drug delivery, ceramics, sensors, and displays. Among all of these research areas, the fields associated with energy storage and conversion have become important due to the depletion of fossil fuels and advancing environmental pollution. So far (from 1978 to January 7, 2019), the number of published articles associated with “Batteries”, “Supercapacitors”, “Catalysis” and “Solar cells” is 1049, 200, 853, and 2313, respectively, and the sum accounts for 30% of the total articles on SP. This ratio even reached 43% in 2018, which indicates that the application of SP in these fields is becoming important. The number of published papers on the topics of “Batteries”, “Supercapacitors”, “Catalysis”, and “Solar cells” based on “Spray pyrolysis” from 2009 to 2018 has been rapidly increasing year by year (Fig. 14b). In this section, we will introduce the application of SP in the above four areas.
 Fig. 14  (a) The number of published research papers on SP in the years from 1978 to 2018. (b) Number of research papers on the topics of “Batteries”, “Supercapacitors”, “Catalysis”, and “Solar cells” based on “Spray pyrolysis”, published from 2009 to 2018. (c) The top countries and (d) institutions ranked by their number of SP patents (as of January 7, 2019). (a and b) Data from Web of Science. (c and d) Data from the World Intellectual Property Organization. 
SP is a continuous aerosol synthetic technique requiring simple apparatus, and can be easily scaled up with a high productivity of tons per day.34,83 Industrial implementation of SP in the preparation of commercial iron oxide (Fe2O3) particles from acid waste has been accomplished by pickling the surface of heated steel sheets with hydrochloric acid. Also, Merck (Germany), SCC (U.S.), and Scimarec (Japan) have produced high quality ceramic powders by SP.35 The number of patents focusing on its practical application has also increased year by year, indicating that the huge commercial value of SP has attracted great attention from research institutes and enterprises. China ranks first with 375 patents, accounting for 34% of the total patents (1117). The United States, South Korea, the European Union, and Japan registered 170, 152, 83, and 68 patents, respectively (Fig. 14c). The top five countries hold 76% of all the patents on SP. Fig. 14d shows the top nine institutions according to their number of patent applications. The Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology applied for 33 patents and ranks first among all the institutions. These patents involve ultrafine Ni metal nanoparticles for multilayer ceramic capacitors, porous TiO2 nanoparticles for quantum-dot-sensitized photovoltaic cells, multicomponent fluorescent ceramic powders, and strontium titanate nanoparticle catalysts for hydrogen generation. In addition, BASF (Badische Anilin-und-Soda-Fabrik, Germany) applied for more than a dozen patents on SP to prepare multi-metal mixed oxides for oxygen storage components, catalysts, and/or catalyst supports.
4.1 Rechargeable batteries
Rechargeable batteries, the most important energy storage devices in modern society, have been expected to supplant the gasoline industry in the coming decades to power increasingly diverse applications, from small portable electronics to large automobiles.161 Among them, the lithium-ion battery, due to its high energy and power density, has been used in advanced electrical vehicles and portable electronics.162,163 Since their introduction into the commercial market by Sony in 1991, the working principle and system composition of LIBs have not undergone an obvious change.164 They are still based on exchanging Li+ ions between the graphite anode and a lithium intercalation compound cathode. Besides LIBs, other novel rechargeable battery systems have also been proposed, such as sodium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, multivalent-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, etc. We will discuss various composites and nanostructures generated by SP and their applications in LIBs, SIBs, and Li–S batteries in this section, with an emphasis on how each composite and structure enhances the electrochemical performance of electrodes. Fig. 15 depicts the working principles of these three types of rechargeable batteries.
 Fig. 15  (a–c) The working principles of (a) Li-ion batteries, (b) Na-ion batteries, and (c) Li–sulfur batteries. (a) Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.1.1 Li-ion batteries. 
With the rapid development of electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), the LIBs to power them are required to possess high energy and power densities.168 In order to develop promising candidates for replacing current commercial electrode materials, many research groups have reported various high-capacity electrode materials, including alloying-type (such as Li, Si, Sn, and Ge) and conversion-type anode materials (such as oxides and sulfides),169–171 as well as nickel-rich or lithium-rich layered lithium transition-metal oxide cathode materials. High-capacity electrode materials have been considered as a breakthrough for next-generation high-energy-density LIBs.172,173 Nevertheless, these materials suffer from large volume variation, side-reactions, and structural collapse, as well as high cost for practical application. Consequently, a facile, efficient, and industrially viable synthesis technique for mass production of high-performance nanostructured electrode materials is imperative.
4.1.1.1 Anodes for LIBs. 
To enhance the performance of high-capacity anode materials for LIBs, designing nanostructures and fabricating conductive composites have been verified to be two effective strategies by many researchers.174,175 In the previous section, we have meticulously introduced a variety of nanomaterials prepared by SP. For instance, guided by the SP-derived template-free method, yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles with two or more shells have been prepared from a solution containing Fe nitrate and sucrose.176 When evaluated as an anode material for LIBs, the yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles exhibited superior electrochemical performance compared with dense Fe2O3 particles (Fig. 16a and b). After cycling, the dense Fe2O3 particles were broken into several pieces during the Li+ insertion/extraction process (Fig. 16c), while the yolk–shell particles maintained their initial structure (Fig. 16d). The void spaces of the hierarchical yolk–shell structure provided buffer space for the enormous volume changes caused by Li-ion insertion/extraction, thus improving the stability of the structure, leading to outstanding electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 16  (a) Initial charge–discharge curves of the Fe2O3 yolk–shell electrodes cycled at 300 mA g−1. (b) Rate performance of electrodes made of dense and yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles prepared at 1000 °C at various discharge rates. (c and d) TEM images of (c) dense and (d) yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles after 80 cycles at 300 mA g−1. (e) Graphical representation of the construction of the Si–SiOx–C composite prepared by SP. (f) First charge–discharge profiles of Si–SiOx–C depending on the NaOH etching duration. (g) Direct comparison between the Si–SiOx–C-30 min sample and commercial SiOx in terms of cyclability and coulombic efficiency. (h) TEM image of the perforated SnO2@CNT composite microspheres. (i) Rate performance of the bare SnO2 and SnO2@CNT composite microspheres with perforated and filled structures at six discharge rates. (j) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the composite microspheres at the 10C rate. (a–d) Reproduced with permission. 176 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Various carbon materials, such as amorphous carbon,65 graphene,67 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),177 have been considered as desirable matrices for high-capacity anode materials due to their excellent electrical conductivity and effective buffering capacity. SP can efficiently synthesize composite electrode materials with a controllable morphology and homogeneous composition. For example, Choi et al.178 employed SP to prepare a Si@SiOx@C composite from an aqueous solution containing Si nanoparticles, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and citric acid. NaOH as an additive etched Si and generated [SiO4]4−. Consequently, composite materials with different Si and SiOx ratios were prepared by controlling the etching time. Citric acid acted as the carbon source and decomposed into a uniform carbon coating layer on the surfaces of the spherical particles. In the unique composite structure (Fig. 16e), Si nanoparticles were homogeneously embedded in the SiOx matrix with a uniform carbon coating layer. The amorphous SiOx matrix accommodated the huge volume changes of silicon during electrochemical cycling, while the uniform carbon coating layer prevented breakage and agglomeration of particles and increased the electronic conductivity of the composite material. With optimal proportions of ingredients and 30 min of etching time, the prepared sample exhibited enhanced electrochemical properties, with a high initial coulombic efficiency of 80.2% (Fig. 16f) and a capacity of 1034 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at the 1C rate (Fig. 16g).
Similarly, composites containing graphene or CNTs prepared by SP also exhibited enhanced electrochemical performance. For example, Kang et al.67 prepared a CoOx@RGO composite from a solution containing cobalt nitrate hexahydrate and graphene oxide nanosheets (GO). The RGO spheres were compactly decorated with hollow cobalt oxide nanoparticles. As an anode material for LIBs, the composite exhibited excellent electrochemical performance with a high reversible capacity of 1156 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a current density of 2 A g−1. In addition, the same group reported the synthesis of SnO2@CNT hollow microspheres via SP.179 The SnO2 nanospheres were uniformly dispersed in a carbon nanotube network (Fig. 16h). The porous hollow structure could shorten the Li-ion diffusion pathways and accommodate the volume expansion. In addition, the conductive and pliable CNT network improved the electron transport between SnO2 and the current collector, and buffered the volume changes of the electrode. The as-prepared SnO2@CNT composite was an excellent lithium storage material in terms of high reversible capacity (about 796 mA h g−1 at a current density of 4 A g−1), good cycling performance (up to 1000 cycles), and superior rate capability (437 mA h g−1 at 13 A g−1) (Fig. 16i and j).
As presented in Table 3, most nanostructures prepared by SP possess superior lithium ion storage capability due to their advanced structural characteristics, such as reduced Li+ ion diffusion pathways, enlarged exposed active sites, effective buffer space, and improved electronic conductivity, demonstrating that SP, as a simple, efficient, continuous, scalable, and low-cost technique, can be widely used in the design and construction of nanostructured electrode materials for LIBs.
Table 3 Nanostructured anode materials fabricated via SP and their performance in LIBs




Anode materials
Precursor solution composition
Morphological features
Electrochemical performance


Average particle size, specific surface area
Current density (mA g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)




SnO2 hollow nanoplates56
SnC2O4 + H2SeO3 + PVP
200 nm, 41.5 m2 g−1
5000
600
500


Co3O4 hollow nanopowders54
Co(NO3)2 + NaCl
1 μm, 33.7 m2 g−1
1000
150
775


Co3O4 dense microspheres53
CoCl2
2 μm, 7.8 m2 g−1
200
100
1011


NiCo2O4 plicated spheres58
Ni(CH3COO)2 + Co(CH3COO)2
1 μm, 50.9 m2 g−1
100
50
801


NiO yolk–shell microspheres180
Ni(NO3)2 + sucrose
0.4 μm, 8 m2 g−1
700
150
951


Co3O4 yolk–shell particles181
Co(NO3)2 + sucrose
1 μm, 4 m2 g−1
10000
100
548


SnO2 yolk–shell microspheres113
SnC2O4 + sucrose
1 μm, 13 m2 g−1
625
40
678


Fe2O3 yolk–shell spheres176
Fe(NO3)2 + sucrose
1.5 μm, 21 m2 g−1
300
80
848


NiCo2O4 yolk–shell spheres86
Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + PVP
0.6 μm, 7.9 m2 g−1
400
100
1064


ZnO–Mn3O4 yolk–shell balls182
Zn(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose
1.2 μm, 22 m2 g−1
700
100
912


Sn–C yolk–shell microspheres133
SnC2O4 + Ni(NO3)2 + PVP
0.8 μm, 448 m2 g−1
1000
500
691


Sn–MnO–Mn2SnO4–C yolk–shell microspheres183
Mn(NO3)2 + SnC2O4 + PVP
1 μm, 48 m2 g−1
1000
100
784


SnOx–C core–shell balls37
SnC2O4 + PVP
770 nm, 3 m2 g−1
2000
500
1033


NiO–TiO2 core–shell particles184
Ni(NO3)2 + C12H28O4Ti + ethyl alcohol
34 nm, 24.6 m2 g−1
300
80
970


Zn2SnO4–C core–shell microspheres185
SnC2O4 + Ni(NO3)2 + PVP
2 μm, 36 m2 g−1
1000
120
770


Co3O4–C multiroom spheres66
Co(NO3)2 + (C6H10O5)n
1.5 μm, 17 m2 g−1
3000
150
1243


Si–SiOx–C composite186
Si (70 nm) + NaOH + citric acid
1.6 μm, 214 m2 g−1
1C
200
1035


Ni7S6–NixS6–C microspheres187
Ni(NO3)2 + thiourea + sucrose
0.6 μm, 2.8 m2 g−1
1000
500
472


SnO2–CNT microspheres179
SnC2O4 + CNTs + polystyrene
0.6 μm, 83.1 m2 g−1
4000
1000
796


Fe3O4–graphene microballs24
FeCl3 + graphene oxide
0.8 μm, 130 m2 g−1
7000
1000
690


COx–rGO composite67
Co(NO3)2 + graphene oxide
1 μm, 47 m2 g−1
2000
200
932


SnOx–C–rGO nanoparticles188
SnC2O4 + graphene oxide + sucrose
0.5 μm, 103 m2 g−1
1000
175
844


ZnS–rGO nanoparticles189
ZnCl2 + thiourea + graphene oxide
0.6 μm, 46 m2 g−1
4000
700
437


Co2(OH)3Cl–rGO particles190
CoCl2 + graphene oxide
1.5 μm, 17 m2 g−1
5000
600
833


NiO–MnCo2O4 microspheres60
NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2
1 μm, 10.2 m2 g−1
800
300
687


Li4Ti5O12 powders191
LiNiO3 + TTIP + ethylene glycol
1.4 μm, 2.3 m2 g−1
170
80
170


Li2TiO3–LiCrO2 powders192
LiNiO3 + TTIP + Cr(NiO3)3 + HNO3
0.92 μm, no data
15
30
195


Co2(OH)3Cl powders193
CoCl2
1.5 μm, 6 m2 g−1
5000
1000
609


SnO2–CuO nanorods57
SnSO4 + Cu(NO3)2 + citric acid
20 nm, no data
3000
50
394




4.1.1.2 Cathodes for LIBs. 
Cathodes for LIBs are in the form of a series of ceramic powders that can contain a number of different metal elements. One of the most important advantages of SP is that uniform multicomponent particles can be fabricated rapidly in a single step. With the simultaneous development of LIBs and SP in the past three decades, many research institutes have developed a variety of strategies to prepare cathode materials by SP (Table 4), such as layered lithium transition metal oxides (LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2,194,195 LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2,196,197 LiNi0.4Co0.2Mn0.4O2,198 LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2,199 LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2,69 Li1.2Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13O2,200,201), spinel oxides (LiMn2O4,202,203 LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4204,205), and silicates and phosphates (LiFePO4,206 LiMnPO4,207 Li2MnSiO4,208 Li2FeSiO4,209 Li3V2(PO4)3210). For instance, Choi et al.211 prepared a core–shell LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode material by SP (Fig. 17a). The yolk–shell LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 powders showed excellent rate performance at high discharge rates (100 to 600C) and superior long-term cycling performance (108 mA h g−1 at 10C after 1000 cycles) between 2.4 and 5 V (Fig. 17b and c). The superior rate capability of the yolk–shell LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 electrode was associated with its unique structure, consisting of the porous shell and the yolk-like core. The open pores distributed across the shell and core not only provided a large interface for storing lithium ions, but also enhanced the penetration of the electrolyte and shortened the Li+ ion diffusion length, which eventually contributed to the excellent rate performance.
Table 4 Nanostructured cathode materials fabricated via SP and their performance in LIBs




Cathode materials
Synthetic conditions
Electrochemical performance


Precursor solution composition
Process parameters
Current density (mA g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)




LiCoO2 particles219
Li2CO3 + Co(NO3)2 + citric acid + ethylene glycol
900 °C, air
0.1C
50
124


LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 powder220
Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + LiOH
500 °C, air
0.1C
50
163


LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 particles55
NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2 + Li2CO3
850 °C, O2
1C
100
161


LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 particles102
NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2 + Li2CO3
850 °C, O2
1C
100
173


LiNi0.8Co0.15Mn0.05O2 particles74
Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + citric acid + ethylene glycol + DMF + LiOH
900 °C, air
0.5C
30
174


LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 particles69
Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Al(NO3)3 + citric acid + ethylene glycol + DMF + LiOH
900 °C, air
0.1C
40
158


LiMn2O4 microspheres221
LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2
800 °C, air
1C
100
109


LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 powder222
LiNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose
500 °C, air
0.1C
50
139


LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell microspheres211
LiNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose
700 °C, air
10C
1000
108


LiFePO4/C porous spheres223
LiNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + NH4H2PO4 + citric acid
700 °C, 5% H2/N2
0.125C
100
153


LiMnPO4–C composite224
LiH2PO4 + Mn(NO3)2 + citric acid + sucrose
400 °C, air
0.5C
50
129


LiCoPO4–C composite225
LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + acetylene black
300 °C, air
0.5C
25
127


LiCoxMn1−xPO4–C nanocomposites226
LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2
300 °C, 3% H2/N2
0.5C
100
66


LiCo1/3Mn1/3Fe1/3PO4–C nanocomposite227
LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + Fe(NO3)3 + acetylene black
300 °C, 3% H2/N2
0.5C
50
124


LiV3O8 yolk–shell particles228
LiNO3 + V2O5 + HNO3 + sucrose
1000 °C, N2
1000
100
194


V2O5 dense microspheres229
V2O5 + HNO3
1000 °C, air
0.5C
20
263


V2O5 yolk–shell powders230
V2O5 + HNO3 + sucrose
1000 °C, N2
1C
50
222


C-Coated LiFePO4 particles231
Li(HCOO) + FeCl2 + H3PO4
500 °C, N2
1C
100
153


TiO2-Coated LiMn2O4232
LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + TTIP + alcohol
900 °C, air
1C
170
109


ZrO2-Coated LiNi0.8Co0.2O2137
LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + (C5H7O2)4Zr
Propane, O2
0.1C
10
145


Li2O–B2O3 modified LiCoO2233
LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + H3BO3
Propane, O2
70
50
123


Zr-Doped LiCoO2 powder234
LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + ZrO(NO3)2
400–800 °C, air
1C
50
108



xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)Li(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)O2 particles235
LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2
450 °C, air
28
100
240


Li1.167Ni0.18Mn0.548Co0.105O2–graphene nanocomposite236
LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + graphene oxide
800 °C, air
100
90
175




 Fig. 17  (a) TEM image of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell cathode post-treated at 750 °C. (b) Rate performance of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell cathode at seven discharge rates. (c) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency at a rate of 10C. (d) SEM image of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 powders prepared by SP. (e) Rate capability in the rate range of 0.1–5C and (f) cycling performance at 1C of the as-prepared LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode. (g) Cross-sectional SEM images of the Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1(OH)2@Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1Ox precursor. (h) Cycling performance at 1C and (i) rate capability in the rate range of 0.1–10C of spherical LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, our group has efficiently prepared high-performance LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode materials for LIBs by SP.102 Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 microspheres were rapidly synthesized from a precursor solution of multi-metal chlorides by SP. After mixing with lithium salt and sintering, LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 was obtained. The submicron-sized LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 particles (around 0.5–0.8 μm), characterized by necked structures and irregular shapes (Fig. 17d), delivered a high discharge capacity of 204 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and exhibited a high capacity retention of 95.6% after 100 cycles at 1C (Fig. 17e and f). We attributed their outstanding electrochemical performance to their excellent atomic-scale uniformity, their porous structure, and the Ni3+-rich surface.
Even though SP is a facile technique for the production of hollow or porous nanomaterials, their practical applications for LIBs with high-energy density are hampered by the relatively low tap density of as-sprayed materials. The tap density can be enhanced through the addition of various additives or by improving the size of secondary particles. For instance, Ju et al.69 obtained solid spherical LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 by adding N,N-dimethylformamide as a drying control agent (DCCA) to the precursor solution. DCCA extended the drying time and provided enough time for the crystals to grow. Lengyel et al.200 first prepared hollow particles by using SP. The powder was then ball milled and mixed with a precursor solution of the same composition to form the slurry. The tap density of the material increased from 0.5 g cm−3 to 1.05 g cm−3via a secondary SP. The above method was able to improve the tap density of the cathode material to some extent, but it still failed to meet the requirements for practical application. Our group introduced a novel hierarchical architecture for Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1Ox@Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1(OH)2 by depositing dense Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1(OH)2 nanoflakes onto spray-pyrolyzed Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1Ox microspheres.212 The Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1(OH)2 layer was able to protect the Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1Ox microspheres from fragmenting during the sintering process and improved the tap density of the products (from 1.57 to 1.91 g cm−3). The core of the particle was assembled from numerous nanoparticles, and its surface was decorated with abundant nanoflakes, forming a layer about 0.8 μm in thickness (Fig. 17g). The microspheres displayed a high rate capability of 129 mA h g−1 at 10C (Fig. 17h) and a discharge capacity of 169 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 1C, with a capacity retention of 90.5% (Fig. 17i).
Moreover, the SP technique has been demonstrated to be a suitable method for the modification of cathode materials via element doping, because the elements dissolved in the precursor solution are dispersed with atomic-scale uniformity. For example, Taniguchi et al.213–217 published a series of reports on the synthesis of LiMn2O4 cathode material doped with Ti, Fe, Al, Ni, and Co via SP to improve the electrochemical performance of the material. Ju et al.218 successfully synthesized Al-doped nickel-rich LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 cathode materials by using ultrasonic SP.
All in all, nanotechnology is an important strategy to enhance the performance of LIBs. This is because nanostructured materials exhibit higher activity, faster mass/charge transport, and superior operational stability compared to bulk materials. Many preparation strategies, such as the hydrothermal, template, and vapor deposition methods, however, only enable the laboratory-scale fabrication of nanostructured materials, and they also require rigorous synthesis conditions, tedious operational procedures, and long reaction times, limiting their suitability for practical mass production. In contrast, SP is a facile and continuous aerosol synthetic technique requiring relatively simple apparatus, and can be easily scaled up. However, current commercial electrode materials for LIBs, such as graphite, LiFePO4, LiCoO2 and LiNi1−x−yCoxMnyO2, still have a huge cost advantage, as compared with the materials prepared by SP. Developing more efficient and advanced atomization devices and decreasing energy consumption are the imperative engineering problems that must be solved.


4.1.2 Sodium-ion batteries. 
Rechargeable sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have been considered as a promising substitute for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) due to the natural abundance and the low cost of sodium.237–241 Nevertheless, the large ionic radius (0.102 nm for Na+ and 0.076 nm for Li+) and the relatively high molar mass (22.99 g mol−1 for Na vs. 6.94 g mol−1 for Li) of sodium lead to problems/challenges in SIBs, including slow ion diffusion kinetics, high structural stress, and difficult coordination in the host lattice.238 For example, graphite has been widely used as the anode material in commercial LIBs, but Na+ cannot effectively intercalate into graphite due to its large size and the small interlayer spacing of graphite.240 Novel Na-storage materials such as metal oxides, phosphates, graphene, amorphous carbon, and metal sulfides have been explored as electrode materials for rechargeable SIBs. The larger volume changes in these materials during electrochemical cycling, however, require more robust structures than those of LIBs. In this section, we will introduce the application of SP in the preparation of nanostructured electrode materials for SIBs.
4.1.2.1 Anodes for SIBs. 
Layered materials such as MoS2 and graphene have been regarded as potential anode materials for rechargeable batteries due to their superior thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties.242–244 Kang and co-workers reported a novel 3D MoS2–graphene nanocomposite in which the 3D graphene microspheres were coated with MoS2 nanostructures (Fig. 18a). These were synthesized via SP from a precursor solution containing graphene oxide (GO) and ammonium tetrathiomolybdate ((NH4)2MoS4).245 The obtained composite had a uniform spherical morphology with an average diameter of 700 nm, and the MoS2 layers were coated over the graphene backbone (Fig. 18b). The thickness of the graphene backbone and the MoS2 coating layers could be flexibly adjusted by modifying the content of GO and ammonium tetrathiomolybdate. When applied as the anode material for SIBs, this 3D MoS2–graphene nanocomposite showed excellent electrochemical properties, with a reversible capacity of 234 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 10 A g−1 (Fig. 18c). In terms of long-cycling performance, the composite electrode maintained a capacity of 322 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles at a current density of 1.5 A g−1 (Fig. 18d). The excellent sodium ion storage capability of this MoS2–graphene nanocomposite was attributed to its ingenious structure with reduced stacking of MoS2 coating layers and 3D porous graphene nanospheres. The reduced stacking of MoS2 lowered the barrier for Na+ insertion, while the porous graphene nanospheres provided vast buffer space for volume expansion of the electrode. Furthermore, the numerous open pores provided fast pathways for Na+ transfer during the repeated cycling.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and description of the Na+ insertion process for the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres prepared by one-pot SP. (b) TEM image of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres. (c and d) Electrochemical properties of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite and the crumpled MoS2–graphene composite microspheres: (c) rate performances at different current densities ranging from 0.2 to 10 A g−1 and (d) long-term cycling properties and coulombic efficiency of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres at a current density of 1.5 A g−1. (e) Cycling performances of 5-Fe2O3@C, 20-Fe2O3@C, and γ-Fe2O3 at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (f) Rate performances of 5-Fe2O3@C and 20-Fe2O3@C at different current densities. (g) Long-term cycling stability of 5-Fe2O3@C at a current density of 2000 mA g−1. (h) TEM image of the 5-Fe2O3@C composite after 200 discharge/charge cycles at 200 mA g−1. (i) HRTEM image of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge. (j) Ex situ Raman spectra of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge (red line) and full charge (blue line). (k) Ex situ XRD patterns of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge (blue line) and full charge (black line). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e–k) Reproduced with permission.248 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Nanostructured transition-metal oxide-based composites have been proposed as advanced anode materials for SIBs due to their high theoretical capacity.246,247 Among them, Fe2O3 is considered as the most promising one due to its abundance, low cost, and nontoxic nature. Chen's group introduced a synthetic strategy for a 3D porous γ-Fe2O3@C nanocomposite via a one-pot SP technique.248 The Fe2O3 nanograins were homogeneously encapsulated in porous carbon microspheres. The size of the γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles and the content of the carbon matrix were controlled by adjusting the concentration of precursor components in the spray solution. In particular, the sample 5-Fe2O3@C (where the average size of Fe2O3 nanograins was 5 nm) exhibited the best performance, delivering a high discharge capacity of 317 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1 and maintaining 78% capacity (358 mA h g−1) after 1400 cycles at 2 A g−1 (Fig. 18e–g). The excellent rate performance and long-term cycling properties of 5-Fe2O3@C were considered to be associated with three unique characteristics. First, the nanosized Fe2O3 nanoparticles could largely mitigate the absolute stress/strain during repeated cycles. Second, the flexible carbon matrix could effectively accommodate the volume changes of the nanoparticles. Third, the 3D interlaced nanochannels could facilitate mass transfer between the electrolyte and the electrode, thus improving rate capability. The 5-Fe2O3@C electrode material also retained its uniformly embedded spherical morphology after 100 cycles (Fig. 18h). The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the 5-Fe2O3@C anode after full discharging exhibited lattice fringes with a spacing of 0.2 nm, corresponding to the (110) planes of Fe (Fig. 18i). The Raman spectra (Fig. 18j) and XRD patterns (Fig. 18k) demonstrate that the reversible electrochemical conversion reaction of the composite electrode proceeds as follows: Fe2O3 + 6Na+ + 6e− ↔ 2Fe + 3Na2O(3)
4.1.2.2 Cathodes for SIBs. 
Up to the present, research focusing on the application of SP for the preparation of SIB cathode materials has been relatively scarce compared with that for LIB cathode materials, due to the difficulty in developing cathode materials that are suitable for intercalation/deintercalation of large-sized Na-ions. Some researchers, however, have explored a few cathode materials, such as Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2, Na2/3Fe1/3Mn2/3O2, Na0.44MnO2, Na2FePO4F, and Na3V2(PO4)3. Among them, particle size reduction and carbon coating have been demonstrated as effective strategies to enhance both rate performance and cycling stability. For example, Wang's group, using one-pot ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP), prepared carbon-coated porous hollow Na2FePO4F (Na2FePO4F/C) microspheres from a precursor solution consisting of sodium nitrate, sodium fluoride, iron nitrate, phosphoric acid, and sucrose.249 The thus-prepared Na2FePO4F/C composite microspheres possessed a typical hollow structure with an average diameter of 500 nm (Fig. 19a and b). When evaluated as a cathode material for SIBs (Fig. 19c and d), the Na2FePO4F/C composite microspheres exhibited high reversible capacity (about 89 mA h g−1 at 0.1C), good cycling performance (reversible capacity of 60 mA h g−1 after 750 cycles), and superior rate capability (30 mA h g−1 at 9C). With a similar scheme, the same group, using citric acid as the carbon source and stoichiometric NH4VO3, NH4H2PO4, and Na2CO3 as starting materials, prepared carbon coated hollow Na3V2(PO4)3/C composites.250 The Na3V2(PO4)3/C composites showed a higher initial discharge capacity and better cycling performance compared to Na3V2(PO4)3/C composites with the same components prepared by the traditional sol–gel method. The advanced electrochemical performance of the as-sprayed materials was attributed to the porous hollow structure, which promoted the penetration of the electrolyte into the hollow microsphere, so that the electrochemical reaction could simultaneously take place both inside and on the surface of the particle. In addition, the in situ carbon coating layer could effectively improve the electronic conductivity and reaction kinetics.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the hollow C/Na2FePO4F particles prepared by SP. (c and d) The electrochemical performance of the hollow C/Na2FePO4F particles as a cathode material for SIBs: (c) discharge and charge capacity retention performance at a rate of 0.1C, and (d) rate capability of C/Na2FePO4F. (e and f) SEM images of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 precursor powders directly prepared by the SP process at 800 °C. (g) SEM and (h) TEM images of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode material. (i) Cycling performance and (j) rate capability of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode material. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e–j) Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The layered sodium transition-metal oxides (e.g. Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 and Na2/3Fe1/3Mn2/3O2) with high theoretical capacity have also been synthesized through SP. For instance, Seung et al. succeeded in preparing P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanoplates via SP from a solution of NaNO3, Ni(NO3)2, and Mn(NO3)2.251 P3-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 precursor powders with rhombohedral structure were initially prepared and further post-treated in a furnace to obtain P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode materials. The spherical shape of the precursor particles (Fig. 19e and f) completely disappeared after annealing, and they were transformed into regular plates when the post-treatment temperature was above 700 °C (Fig. 19g and h). Phase transformation from the rhombohedral structure to the hexagonal structure was the main reason for the change in the morphology during the post-treatment process. The P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanoplates prepared at 900 °C showed excellent electrochemical performance with a discharge capacity of 80 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.1C (Fig. 19i), as well as a high reversible capacity of 80 mA h g−1 at 1C even after 40 cycles (Fig. 19j). The regular morphology, component homogeneity, and fast Na+ mobility of the P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 nanoplate cathode contributed to its excellent Na-ion storage performance.
The remarkable structural design capability combined with excellent raw material adaptability makes the SP technique a very promising synthesis technique for practical application in the preparation of electrode materials with regular morphologies and complex compositions for Na-ion batteries (Table 5). In comparison with the application of SP for LIBs, however, where numerous electrode materials have been fabricated, the research aimed at developing advanced electrode materials for SIBs via SP is just emerging. Therefore, there is still vast room to explore the power and versatility of SP in emerging energy storage devices such as SIBs, K-ion batteries, Zn-ion batteries, Mg-ion batteries, Al-ion batteries, etc.
Table 5 Nanostructured anode and cathode materials fabricated via SP and their performance in SIBs




Anode materials
Synthetic conditions
Electrochemical performance


Precursor solution composition
Process parameters
Current density (mA g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)




SnSe nanoplates64
SnC2O4 + H2SeO3
900 °C, 10% H2/Ar
300
50
558


CoSe2 hollow microspheres252
Co(NO3)2 + Se
400 °C, 10% H2/Ar
500
40
467


Sb–C microspheres253
SbCl3 + sucrose
700 °C, N2
300
100
372


Sn–C microspheres254
SnCl2 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol
800 °C, Ar
1000
500
415


Sb–C nanocomposite255
SbCl3 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol
800 °C, Ar
100
500
385


CuO/C porous spheres256
Cu(NO3)2 + resorcinol + formaldehyde
800 °C, Ar
200
600
402


γ-Fe2O3–C porous spheres248
FeCl3 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol
800 °C, Ar
2000
1400
358


SnS–C microspheres257
SnC2O4 + CH4N2S + PVP
900 °C, 10% H2/Ar
500
50
433


MoS2–C microspheres258
Na2MoO4 + thiourea + resorcinol + formaldehyde
800 °C, Ar
1000
2500
390


FeS2–C porous spheres259
Fe(NO3)3 + sucrose + sulfur
700 °C, Ar
60
100
450


Co9S8–C nanoparticles260
Co(NO3)2 + thiourea + PVP
900 °C, 10% H2/Ar
500
50
404


Sn4P3–C microspheres261
SnSO4 + sucrose + H2SO4 + NaH2PO2
600 °C, Ar
100
120
700


MoS2–graphene spheres262
(NH4)2MoS4 + graphene + polystyrene
800 °C, N2
1500
600
323


CoSex–rGO nanoparticles263
Co(NO3)2 + H2SeO3 + graphene oxide
800 °C, H2/Ar
300
50
420


FeTe2–rGO microspheres264
Fe(NO3)3 + graphene oxide + H2Te
600 °C, Ar
200
80
493


FeS–rGO crumpled spheres265
Fe(NO3)3 + graphene oxide + thiourea
600 °C, Ar
500
50
547


MoSe2–CNTs porous balls266
(NH4)2MoO4 + CNTs + polystyrene + H2Se
700 °C, Ar
1000
250
296






Cathode materials
Synthetic conditions
Electrochemical performance


Precursor solution composition
Process parameters
Current density (mA g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)




Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 plates251
NaNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2
800 °C, air
0.1C
200
80


Na0.44MnO2 nanorods267
NaNO3 + Mn(NO3)2
575 °C, —
0.33C
30
110


Na2FePO4F C-Coated spheres249
NaF + NaNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + H3PO4 + sucrose
500 °C, N2
1C
750
60


Na3V2(PO4)3-C hollow microspheres250
NH4VO3 + NH4H2PO4 + Na2CO3 + citric acid
600 °C, Ar
20
300
89


Croconic acid disodium salt–graphene oxide268
Croconic acid disodium salt + graphene oxide
200 °C, N2
20
100
150


Na2/3Fe1/3Mn2/3O2 spheres269
NaNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + Mn(NO3)2
600 °C, air
0.1C
20
135






4.1.3 Lithium–sulfur batteries. 
To meet the requirements for higher gravimetric energy density, many research institutes have invested efforts towards developing new chemistry to substitute for the Li-ion insertion/extraction reactions. Lithium–sulfur batteries are one of the most promising devices, due to the high theoretical capacity of sulfur (1675 mA h g−1), their ultrahigh energy density (2600 W h kg−1), and other advantages such as abundant raw materials, low cost, and environmental friendliness.270,271 Despite these advantages, however, Li–S batteries have to face the challenge of insufficient cycle life, which is mainly due to the poor conductivity of sulfur and the shuttling process of lithium polysulfides.
Carbon-based materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),272 graphene,273 and amorphous carbon,274 have been considered as outstanding sulfur hosts, which not only enhance the electronic conductivity of the sulfur cathodes but can also absorb the soluble lithium polysulfides to prolong the cycle life of devices (Table 6). For example, encapsulating the sulfur cathode in hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) structures has been demonstrated to be one of the most effective approaches.275,276 It is difficult to prepare HPC in large quantities using common wet-chemistry methods, but SP has advantages in this matter. For instance, Jung et al.277 succeeded in direct synthesis of HPC microspheres by one-pot SP from an aqueous solution containing sucrose and sodium carbonate as precursors. The residence time of each droplet as it passed through the pyrolytic furnace was only five seconds. In this unique HPC structure, the interior was rich in meso- and macropores, and was surrounded by outer micropores. Due to the size effect, active sulfur mainly infiltrated into the inner meso- and macroporous structures, whereas the outer micropores remained empty (Fig. 20a). When used as a cathode material for Li–S batteries, the HPC–S composite with 46% sulfur showed enhanced initial discharge capacity (Fig. 20b) and higher capacity retention (90% after 100 cycles) (Fig. 20c) than the bare S cathode. In terms of long-term cycling performance, the HPC–S composite electrode delivered a high reversible capacity of 650 mA h g−1 (= 1412 mA h gsulfur−1) at 2.4C, and the corresponding capacity retention was 77% after 500 cycles (Fig. 20d). This excellent electrochemical performance of HPC–S originated from its hierarchical porous structure. The micropores uniformly distributed on the outer shell could restrain the shuttling process of the soluble long-chain lithium polysulfides. The functional mechanisms of the micropores were summarized as follows: (1) a strong adsorption effect towards lithium polysulfides; (2) a solvent-free environment due to desolvation; and (3) the generation of insoluble fine sulfur allotropes.
Table 6 Nanostructured cathode materials fabricated via SP and their performance in Li–sulfur batteries




Materials
Sulfur content (%)
Electrochemical performance


Current density (1C = 1675 mA g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)




Carbon–graphite–S particles283
62
0.1C
200
480


Co–CNTs–S yolk–shell spheres282
81
1C
400
700


Carbon–S porous spheres284
46
2.4C
500
539


Carbon–S porous spheres285
63.9
1C
100
904


Carbon–S porous spheres286
59
0.1C
50
823


Carbon–CNTs–S microspheres287
55.4
1C
300
535


Carbon–polyacrylonitrile–S spheres288
72
0.5C
100
576


Carbon–Nb2O5–S porous spheres289
60
0.5C
200
913




 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and the electrochemical processes for the hierarchical porous carbon electrode prepared by SP. (b) First discharge/charge curves of HPC–S and bare S electrodes at the 0.06C rate (1C = 1675 mA h g−1). (c) Cycling performance of HPC–S and AC1600-S at a current rate of 0.3C. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of HPC–S at 2.4C; inset: SEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of a HPC–S particle after 500 cycles. (e) Schematic illustration of the discharge and charge mechanism of Co@BNCNTs YS microspheres. (f) CV curves, (g) rate capabilities, and (h) cycling properties of Co@BNCNTs YS/S microspheres and Co@NCNTs/S. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.282 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, 3D hierarchical yolk–shell structures have been considered as promising hosts for Li–S batteries, not only due to their large surface area for sulfur loading, but also due to their unique physicochemical properties from different building blocks.278,279 Heteroatom-doped carbon or metal nanoparticles have been proposed as ideal host materials for blocking the shuttling process of lithium polysulfides.280,281 Inspired by these viewpoints, Kang's group, using SP, prepared hierarchical yolk–shell (YS) composite microspheres, which consisted of one-dimensional (1D) bamboo-like N-doped carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with encapsulated Co nanoparticles (Co@BNCNTs YS microspheres) (Fig. 20e), as a cathode host material for Li–S batteries.282 The hierarchical microspheres were fabricated via a two-step process involving the generation of Co3O4@MgO microspheres through SP and the growth process for N-doped CNTs, forming Co@BNCNTs. When the Co@BNCNTs YS microspheres were used as the cathode material for Li–S batteries, there was a slight negative shift of the oxidation peak in the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of Co@BNCNTs YS/S (Fig. 20f), revealing facilitation of the conversion reaction from short-chain lithium polysulfides to long-chain, which accounted for the improvement in sulfur utilization. The discharge capacity of the Co@BNCNTs YS/S composite was 752 mA h g−1 at 2C (Fig. 20g). Furthermore, the Co@BNCNTs YS/S composite delivered a high reversible capacity of 700 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles at 1C (Fig. 20h). The systematic design of Co@BNCNTs YS microspheres had several advantages for Li–S battery application: first, the porous hierarchical structures not only provided sufficient space for sulfur loading, but also facilitated electrolyte penetration; second, the nanosized metallic Co and N-doped CNTs had a strong chemical affinity for sulfur and contributed to lithium polysulfide capture; lastly, the conductive CNT networks improved sulfur utilization and facilitated the transfer of electrons and ions.
There are only a few research groups who have reported the application of SP in the preparation of electrode materials for Li–S batteries (Table 6). Their studies mainly focused on using the advantages of SP to prepare porous carbon microspheres and to further fabricate carbon–S composites with high sulfur loading as cathode materials for Li–S batteries.

4.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs), also known as electrochemical capacitors, are an emerging type of energy storage devices, filling the gap between conventional capacitors and batteries.290,291 SCs possess the advantages of both traditional capacitors and batteries, such as high power density (>10 kW kg−1), long cycle life (>100000 cycles), convenient maintenance, safety, and freedom from pollution.292–294 SCs store energy by forming an electrical double layer at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte, or due to charge transfer at the interface through reversible faradaic redox reactions (Fig. 21). According to the means of storing energy, the electrode materials for SCs can be classified into three types: electronic double layer capacitor (EDLC)-type materials, pseudocapacitor-type materials, and hybrid-type materials.295,296 Because the mechanism of charge storage and release for EDLC materials is only associated with a simple physical transfer of charge, the electrode materials in EDLCs usually have ultra-long cycle life. In contrast, the capacitance of pseudocapacitor materials is mainly attributed to reversible faradaic redox reactions.297 As a result, the pseudocapacitors usually possess higher energy density, but at the price of lower rate capability and shorter cycle life than EDLCs. As for the hybrid-type materials, the charge storage mechanisms of both electrical double-layer and faradaic redox reactions take place simultaneously, and display the advantages of long cycle life and high energy density. Regardless of the electrode material, an appropriate pore-size distribution and large surface area, as well as high conductivity, are crucial to achieve large capacitance.298 SP, due to its inherent advantages in the synthesis of various nanostructured materials with high porosity and large surface area, has been considered as an effective technique to solve the problems of the lower specific energy density and higher cost of SCs compared to that of batteries.
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the energy storage mechanism for supercapacitors: (a) EDLC type and (b) pseudocapacitor type. Reproduced with permission.295 Copyright 2013, American Society of Civil Engineers. 

4.2.1 EDLC-type materials. 
As the most important EDLC electrode materials, carbon-based materials possess a number of advantages, such as good chemical stability, great mechanical strength, and superior electrical/thermal conductivity.299 The high surface area and tailorable porosity of carbon nanostructures, such as nanospheres, nanotubes, and graphene, play a key role in their electrochemical performance.300 Unfortunately, it is still difficult and expensive to synthesize nanostructured carbon materials on a large scale due to the irreversible agglomeration and restacking that occur in the preparation process. The excellent dispersion of the precursor (e.g. graphene or carbon nanotubes) in spray solution combined with the rapid solvent evaporation process can alleviate this problem. For example, Jang's group reported a three-dimensional (3D) graphene architecture fabricated by SP from a precursor solution composed of 2D graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets.301 The particle size, shell thickness, and pore structure could be tuned by modifying the initial GO concentration in the precursor solution. A maximum specific surface area of 222 m2 g−1 was obtained when the concentration of graphene oxide was 0.01 wt%. When used as the electrode materials in EDLCs, the 3D crumpled graphene microspheres showed a maximum capacitance of 156 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 with KOH solution (5 M) as the electrolyte.
In applications of EDLCs, the preparation of the carbon nanotube electrode by the conventional wet-chemical method restricts its inherent advantages such as large specific surface area, and fast ion and electron transport, due to the serious agglomeration and entanglement of the CNTs during the preparation process, which prevents the transfer of ions and electrons to each individual CNT. The homogeneous distribution of CNTs or their well-ordered alignment can effectively improve the utilization of CNTs as well as their performance in EDLCs. Spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) techniques have been demonstrated to produce various one-dimensional materials, such as metal oxide nanowires and nanorods, and carbon nanotubes (Section 3.7). For example, Unalan et al.302 cleverly fabricated vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VACNTs) on aluminum foil as flexible electrodes for EDLCs (Fig. 22a). The oriented growth of CNTs on Al foil effectively reduced the internal resistance of the EDLCs and further decreased the charge transfer resistance between the electrode and the electrolyte. The as-prepared flexible VACNT electrode exhibited a superior specific capacitance of 2.61 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 800 mV s−1 (Fig. 22b). The strategy used for direct growth of aligned CNTs on flexible substrates is facile and cost-effective, and could be suitable for large scale production.
 Fig. 22  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of the CNTs grown on aluminum foil. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the VACNT electrodes at different scan rates. (c) TEM image of the hollow carbon nanospheres prepared by SP. (d) Specific capacitance of hollow and solid carbon nanospheres at different current densities. (e) Schematic diagram of the formation of hierarchical porous carbon spheres from coal. (f) TEM image of hierarchical porous carbon spheres. (g) Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms at 77 K. (h) CV curves of samples at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 and (i) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of samples at a specific capacitance of 1 A g−1. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.307 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (e–i) Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC) materials with tunable pore architecture including micropores, mesopores, and macropores have been considered as potential electrode materials for EDLCs due to their large surface area, abundant active sites, and rapid ionic transfer rate, leading to a relatively large capacitance and high energy density.303–305 As mentioned above, SP has inherent advantages in the preparation of porous materials, but how to achieve precise modulation of the pore structure is still a challenge. The introduction of templates or metal salts has been demonstrated to be an effective strategy for regulating the electrode pore structure. For example, Li et al.306 prepared porous carbon microspheres from a precursor solution containing chitosan as the carbon source and SiO2 nanoparticles as the hard template. These porous carbon microspheres showed a high specific surface area of 1011 m2 g−1 and a hierarchical porous structure with macro-/meso-/micro-sized pores. The EDLCs assembled from porous carbon microspheres exhibited a specific capacitance as high as 250 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Note that this approach still involves the usage of templates. However, the preparation and removal of the templates increases production costs and may have a negative impact on the properties of the material. Wang et al.307 reported a vastly simpler strategy based on the SP technique to prepare porous hollow carbon microspheres from a precursor solution consisting of sucrose and Zn(NO3)2 (Fig. 22c). The resultant carbon microspheres were endowed with solid, porous, and hollow morphologies by controlling the Zn(NO3)2 to sugar ratio. Furthermore, different annealing processes were applied to control the pore structure. The hollow carbon microspheres had a maximum specific surface area of 1106 m2 g−1 and showed good electrochemical reversibility (89 F g−1 at 10 A g−1) (Fig. 22d) for EDLCs. Similarly, Yang and coworkers prepared porous carbon spheres with a high specific surface area, up to 1837 m2 g−1, using glucose and KOH as the carbon source and pore former, respectively. This porous carbon electrode material exhibited a high capacitance of 240 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1 with KOH solution (6 M) as the electrolyte.
In principle, all soluble organics can act as carbon sources to prepare porous carbon microspheres as electrode materials by SP. Compared to other organic carbon sources, coal is the cheapest and most abundant material. In particular, Guo's group introduced a novel strategy for the preparation of hierarchical porous carbon microspheres by using coal as the raw material (Fig. 22e).308 Firstly, the bulky coal was dissociated with a highly concentrated mixture of nitric acid and sulfuric acid, which introduced a large number of functional groups, such as –OH, –CO, –NH2, –SO3H, and –NO2. Subsequently, the as-prepared coal oxide could be easily dissolved in alkaline water to obtain a clear precursor solution. The pyrolytic temperature had a great influence on the pore architecture and the surface area of the synthetic carbon microspheres (Fig. 22f). The carbon microspheres prepared at 1000 °C possessed the highest specific surface area of 949 m2 g−1 (Fig. 22g) with an average pore size of 2.18 nm (Fig. 22h). The sample prepared under optimized conditions exhibited a high capacitance of 227 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in a three-electrode system using 6 M KOH as the electrolyte (Fig. 22i).


4.2.2 Pseudocapacitor-type materials. 
Carbon materials storing charge based on the electrical double layer mechanism suffer from limited capacitance, which is within the range of 10–50 mF cm−2 for a real electrode surface.295 Faradaic pseudocapacitor-type materials such as metal oxides, sulfides, and hydroxides, and conducting polymers are considered as alternative electrode materials for SCs because their specific capacitance is 10–100 times larger than that of carbon materials.309 The electrochemical performance of these materials is mainly determined by their inherent properties such as particle size, porosity, crystallinity, and surface area. Among these active species, metal oxides have attracted researchers’ attention as promising electrode materials because of their high energy density and great electrochemical stability.310,311 A variety of nanostructured metal oxide powders can be efficiently prepared by the one-pot SP method in a few seconds. For instance, Kundu's group directly synthesized hollow NiCo2O4 microspheres (∼300–500 nm) by SP from a solution consisting of Ni(NO3)2 and Co(NO3)2 (Fig. 23a).312 The presence of a pair of redox peaks at all scan rates (Fig. 23b) was mainly due to the following faradaic redox reactions: NiCo2O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ NiOOH + 2CoOOH + 2e−(4) CoOOH + OH− ↔ CoO2 + H2O + e−(5)
 Fig. 23  (a) TEM image of a hollow NiCo2O4 nanosphere prepared by SP. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the SP derived hollow NiCo2O4 at scan rates of 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 mV s−1. (c) Charge/discharge voltage profiles of the SP derived hollow NiCo2O4 at 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 A g−1. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of a thin film electrode by SPD. (e) Two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) AFM images of tin oxide thin films prepared by SPD from SnCl4 solution. (f) AFM image of the RuO2 thin film prepared by SPD. (g) Variation in CV curves under different scan rates for the RuO2 thin film electrode. (h) Charge–discharge curves for the RuO2 thin film electrode in 1 M KOH. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.315 Copyright 2017, Springer. (e) Reproduced with permission.314 Copyright 2016, Springer. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2017, Springer. 
The observed nonlinear nature of the curves at all current densities (Fig. 23c) suggests pseudocapacitance behavior of the hollow NiCo2O4 electrodes. The hollow NiCo2O4 nanosphere electrodes delivered a high reversible specific capacitance of 793 F g−1 at a current density of 40 A g−1. Such good electrochemical performance mainly originated from the hollow interior structure with a porous outer shell, which allowed fast transport of ions and adequate electrolyte contact.
Apart from various transition metal oxide powders that can be prepared by SP and used as electrode materials for supercapacitors, many metal oxide thin films prepared by SPD also exhibited high capacitance. The excellent adaptability and low cost of the SPD technique make it a promising fabrication method for large-scale production, which may promote the commercialization of SCs. The SPD process (Fig. 23d) can be simply carried out by using a hand-held sprayer under an ambient atmosphere.313 By adjusting the solution composition and process parameters, the properties of the target materials can be precisely controlled (Section 3.6). For example, Yadav et al.314 fabricated tin oxide (SnO2) thin films from a precursor solution of 0.5 M SnCl4 (Fig. 23e). The surface roughness of the SnO2 thin films was directly determined by the metal salt concentration. The porous structure originated from the growth of three-dimensional crystallites, and it was associated with the working temperature of the substrate. The pores in the oxide thin film were very favorable for improving capacitance. When used as an electrode for pseudocapacitors, the SnO2 thin film exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 150 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.
Among the various metal oxides, RuO2 has been demonstrated to be the most promising pseudocapacitor-type material because of its excellent capacitive properties and high electrochemical activity. Inspired by the advantages of RuO2, Ingole and coworkers fabricated nanoporous RuO2 thin films on stainless steel substrates by SPD from a slurry consisting of ruthenium trichloride hydrous powder.155 The 3D atomic force microscope (AFM) image of the deposited RuO2 thin film clearly presents an interconnected nano-granular and porous morphology (Fig. 23f). The surface roughness measured from 3D AFM was approximately 1546 nm. When used as a free-standing electrode for pseudocapacitors, the RuO2 thin film electrode exhibited an ultra-high specific capacitance of 1429 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 (Fig. 23g). The charge–discharge curve at 8 mA cm−2 appears very symmetrical, which revealed that this free-standing RuO2 thin film could be used as a promising electrode material for supercapacitors regardless of the cost (Fig. 23h).


4.2.3 Hybrid-type materials. 
Generally, hybrid-type materials for SCs are composed of carbon-based materials and metal oxides, and they possess the advantages of both EDLC-type materials and pseudocapacitor-type materials such as long cycle life and high energy density. Graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon fibers, and amorphous carbon have been considered as desirable matrices for pseudocapacitor-type materials due to their excellent electrical conductivity and chemical stability.298,316,317 In particular, composites of nanosized metal oxides embedded in hollow porous carbon microspheres have many unique structural characteristics and potential applications in hybrid supercapacitors. SP is a simple and template-free method for the preparation of various hollow porous carbon microspheres and nanocomposites, and has exhibited its versatility for preparing hybrid-type electrode materials. For example, Kang's group reported the synthesis of high-performance SC electrode materials consisting of nickel oxide nanoparticles (<10 nm) uniformly embedded in hollow porous carbon microspheres (Fig. 24a).318 Melamine-formaldehyde (MF) resin was selected as the carbon source and pore creator. During the SP process, the nickel salt and organic additives underwent drying and pyrolysis, and were transformed into a porous hollow NiO@C@MF resin composite precursor. Subsequently, a post-treatment process was applied to produce a series of composite microspheres with different nanostructures. The MF resin played a key role in the formation of the pores inside the shell, while the thickness of the shell could be adjusted by controlling the amount of nickel salt. The sample prepared at 873 K and heat-treated at 773 K under N2 (sample 8NH2) exhibited a high specific surface area of 249 m2 g−1 and showed a maximum capacitance of 157 F g−1 in a full asymmetric capacitor (Fig. 24b). The excellent electrochemical performance of 8NH2 might be attributed to its high surface area and advanced porous hollow structure. In particular, the high surface area increased the density of active sites for EDLC capacitance, while the porous and hollow structures enhanced the surface faradaic redox reactions for pseudocapacitance. Moreover, in the hollow porous 8NH2 sample, the active NiO nanoparticles were accessed by redox ions from the outside and inside, whereas the common dense porous structure only offered sites on the outside surface because of its closed pore structure (Fig. 24c). This work can be recognized as one of typical cases showing the multitudinous advantages of SP.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the SP process for the synthesis of nickel-encapsulated hollow porous nitrogen-rich carbon spheres. (b) Voltage profiles of the NiO–carbon hollow sphere based asymmetric capacitor at various scan rates. (c) TEM images and proposed pathways of redox ions for 8NH2 and 7NH. (d) TEM image of a MnO2/CNT core–shell particle. (e and f) Electrochemical properties of the MnO2/CNT core–shell particles and bare MnO2 particles: (e) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g−1 and (f) cycling performance at a constant current density of 2 A g−1. (g) Illustration of direct spraying of MnO2 microspheres on carbon fiber paper. (h) SEM image of MnO2 microspheres directly sprayed on carbon fiber paper. (i) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the MnO2@carbon fiber composite at different scan rates. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.318 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.321 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
CNTs and graphene, with typical 1D and 2D structures, have been introduced (Section 4.2.1) as promising EDLC materials for SCs. Their unavoidable agglomeration and entanglement in the preparation process, however, lead to poor capacitive performance. High cost and cumbersome preparation also hinder their practical application. Interestingly, hybrid-type materials, consisting largely of metal oxides with a low ratio of CNT or graphene content, have attracted great interest from researchers because they offer a combination of high energy density and long cycle life. For example, Pan et al.319 investigated supercapacitors assembled from graphene–ZnO composite films prepared by ultrasonic SP. Since the composite material not only contributed pseudocapacitance to the total capacitance, but also could deliver double-layer capacitance from the graphene matrix, it exhibited enhanced capacitive behavior, better structural stability, and higher specific capacitance than both bare graphene and ZnO electrodes. In another case, Gueon et al. introduced MnO2-nanoflake-shelled spherical particles composed of CNTs.320 They first used SP to synthesize the spherical CNT particles from a precursor solution containing dispersed CNTs and then deposited the MnO2 nanoflakes onto the surfaces of the spherical CNT particles by a chemical precipitation method. TEM images (Fig. 24d) demonstrated that the core particle was completely coated by MnO2 nanoflakes. The MnO2 nanoflake-shelled spherical CNT particles exhibited superior electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance of 370 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 (Fig. 24e), and displayed a capacitance retention of approximately 100% up to 4000 cycles (Fig. 24f). This excellent performance was attributed to the high pseudocapacitance of the compact MnO2 nanoflakes and the high electrical conductivity of the CNT particles with compact packing.
The SPD technique is a facile, effective, scalable, and well-established method to deposit various thin film materials on different substrates (e.g. glass, ceramics, and metals). Suslick et al. creatively developed a SPD strategy to directly deposit MnO2 microspheres onto conductive carbon fiber paper (Fig. 24g). The porous MnO2 microspheres formed a well-adhering, dense, and uniform coating on the carbon fiber substrate (Fig. 24h). The as-deposited composite thin film was used as a high-performance hybrid-type supercapacitor electrode (320 F g−1 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, Fig. 24i). The excellent capacitive performance was attributed to the numerous porous MnO2 microspheres uniformly deposited on carbon fibers, which provided a vast available surface for redox reactions, and the carbon fiber substrate, which enhanced the conductivity of the composite and contributed to the excellent rate capability.
We further summarize the composition, morphology, and electrochemical performance of the electrode materials prepared by SP. As shown in Table 7, SP is a powerful synthetic method and has the ability to customize various nanostructured electrode materials for SCs. However, not more than 200 research papers have been published on the application of SP for SCs, and there is still plenty of room for exploration in this field.
Table 7 Nanostructured electrode materials fabricated via SP and their performance in supercapacitors




Materials
Electrolyte
Voltage window (V)
Current density or scan rate
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Ref.





a Type I and II refer to symmetric and asymmetric SCs, respectively. SCE: saturated calomel electrode.





Carbon nanospheres
6 M KOH
−0.5 to 0.5
0.1 A g−1
112 (type I)a

307



Carbon microspheres
6 M KOH
−1.0 to 0 (vs. Hg/HgO)
0.5 A g−1
251 (three electrodes)

306



Graphene crumpled balls
5 M KOH
−0.2 to 0.8
0.1 A g−1
156 (type I)a

301



Carbon porous spheres
6 M KOH
−1.0 to 0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
10 A g−1
240 (three electrodes)

322



Carbon porous spheres
6 M KOH
0–1.0
0.2 A g−1
180 (type I)a

308



NiCo2O4 hollow spheres
3 M KOH
0–0.45 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 A g−1
1007 (three electrodes)

312



V2O5 microspheres
1 M LiNO3
−1.0 to 1.0 (vs. SCE)
1 A g−1
126 (three electrodes)

323



Co3O4–Mn3O4 thin film
1 M KOH
−0.4 to 0.4 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
1 mV s−1
485 (three electrodes)

324



Co3O4 thin film
2 M KOH
−0.8 to 0.1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
425 (three electrodes)

325



Mn3O4 thin film
1 M Na2SO4
−0.8 to 1.1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
1 mV s−1
804 (three electrodes)

326



V2O5 thin film
1 M KCl
0.055–1.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
428 (three electrodes)

154



NiMn2O4 thin film
2 M KOH
−0.2 to 0.4 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
460 (three electrodes)

313



RuO2 thin film
1 M KOH
−1.30 to 0.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
1 mV s−1
1429 (three electrodes)

155



a-Fe2O3 thin films
2 M KOH
−1.0 to 0.2 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
539 (three electrodes)

327



V2O5 thin films
1 M KCl
0.055–1.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
307 (three electrodes)

328



SnO2 thin films
1 M KOH
−0.2 to 0.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
150 (three electrodes)

314



RuO2–Co3O4 thin films
2 M KOH
−0 to 0.4 (vs. SCE)
0.2 A g−1
690 (three electrodes)

329



Co3O4 B-doped thin films
6 M KOH
−0.4 to 0.4 (vs. SCE)
5 mV s−1
482 (three electrodes)

330



MnO2–CNT core–shell particles
1 M Na2SO4
0–1.0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
0.5 A g−1
370 (three electrodes)

320



Graphene–CNT–polyaniline
5 M KOH
−0.2 to 0.8
0.1 A g−1
456 (type I)a

331



V2O5–Carbon microspheres
2 M KCl
−0.2 to 0.8 (vs. SCE)
5 mV s−1
295 (three electrodes)

332



NiO–Carbon hollow spheres
1 M KOH
0–1.5
1 A g−1
157 (type II)a

318



NiO–rGO microspheres
1 M NaOH
−0.2 to 0.5 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
5 mV s−1
656 (three electrodes)

333



Fe–Co oxides–graphene
5 M KOH
0–1.0
0.1 A g−1
325 (type I)a

334



ZnO–CNT thin films
Gel polymer
−0.5 to 0.5
50 mV s−1
126 (type I)a

335






4.3 Highly active catalysts
Heterogeneous catalysis is an important research field for energy conversion and has led to great progress in the environment and energy fields in the past few decades. The inherent properties of the catalysts, such as surface area, pore structure, particle size, and geometrical shape, greatly influence their catalytic properties.336,337 The design and fabrication of various nanostructured catalytic materials are the key issues for achieving excellent catalytic efficiency. SP possesses a number of unique advantages over conventional fabrication methods in the synthesis of catalysts, including a simple but robust synthetic process, and uniform size distribution and morphology, homogeneous composition, and high specific surface area of the target product. Catalytic materials prepared by SP have been attracting more and more attention, leading to rapid advances towards developing more sophisticated catalysts.338,339
Among all the applications of heterogeneous catalysis in the energy conversion field, there are three very valuable but challenging areas currently under intensive research: the hydrogenation of CO2 into fuels, the catalytic splitting of water to release oxygen and hydrogen, and high-performance fuel cells.340–342 In the following we will discuss applications of the SP technique for synthesizing various nanocatalysts in these fields. Fig. 25 shows schematic representations of the working principles of hydrogen production (HR, Fig. 25a), carbon dioxide reduction (CDR, Fig. 25b), and proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs, Fig. 25c).
 Fig. 25  (a and b) Schematic representations of photocatalysis for (a) water splitting and (b) CO2 reduction. (c) Working principles of proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. (a) Reproduced with permission.343 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission.345 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 

4.3.1 Hydrogen production. 
Hydrogen, as one of the most renewable and clean fuels, has been expected to play a critical role in the future energy landscape due to its high energy density and environmental friendliness.346 Currently, hydrogen is still mainly generated from fossil fuels, such as natural gas, petroleum, and coal, with large carbon emission and energy consumption.347 In the past few decades, many studies focused on how to develop advanced techniques to produce hydrogen economically from clean and sustainable resources. Among those various methodologies, photoelectrochemical catalysis and electro-catalysis for water splitting have been considered as the two most promising solutions for producing hydrogen with less carbon emission.
Photoelectrochemically catalyzed water splitting was discovered by Fujishima and Honda in 1972, who used n-type semiconductor TiO2 photoanodes under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation to decompose H2O into H2 and O2.348 This research marks the beginning of a new era of multiphase photocatalysis, from fundamental research to application. Although TiO2 is believed to be promising in the area of photoelectrochemical catalysis, it suffers from the main drawback of fast recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Fortunately, this recombination effect can be effectively suppressed by modifying TiO2 with noble metal nanoparticles, such as Pt, Au, Ru, Ag, and Pd, which promote the separation of electron–hole pairs, thus leading to the improved conversion efficiency. The SP technique enables efficient and continuous synthesis of TiO2-supported noble metal catalysts with uniform composition and high surface area. The specific surface area, crystallinity, anatase content, and metal dispersion can be tuned by properly modifying the SP operation parameters. For example, Forni et al. prepared gold-modified titanium dioxide (Au/TiO2) composite catalysts by SP and investigated their catalytic performance towards water splitting. The Au/TiO2 samples exhibited a maximum surface area of 106 m2 g−1 and superior catalytic performance compared with the commercial Au/TiO2 composite catalyst.
Spinel zinc ferrite (ZnFe2O4) has been considered as a potential photoanode material for solar water splitting. Nevertheless, it suffers from poor charge carrier transport. To obtain a better ZnFe2O4 photoanode, modifying the band gap and designing nanostructures are practicable strategies to achieve a wide-spectrum response and high light-harvesting efficiency. Introducing heteroatoms is a common and fruitful strategy to increase the charge carrier concentration and promote charge carrier transport.349 SP exhibits its unique advantage in the synthesis of uniform multicomponent nanostructured materials via a fast and continuous production process. For instance, Li et al. doped Ti4+ by SP to facilitate the charge carrier transport of the ZnFe2O4 photoanode (Fig. 26a).350 The thickness of the Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 film was approximately 300 nm (Fig. 26b and c). The 6% Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 photoanode exhibited the highest solar water-splitting photocurrent of 0.35 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) (Fig. 26d), which was attributed to the improvement in the charge carrier concentration and electron transfer efficiency induced by Ti4+ ions entering the Fe3+ sites. (Fig. 26e and f). Similarly, Kim et al. produced CaCuxTi1−xO3 (0 < x < 0.02) photocatalysts by SP.351 CaCu0.01Ti0.99O3 (x = 0.01) had the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 295 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible-light irradiation (λ > 415 nm), while the undoped material showed no hydrogen generation. This visible-light photocatalytic activity might originate from the formation of a new donor energy level in the CaTiO3 electronic structure as a result of Cu2+ doping. Meanwhile, the use of polymeric additives (C6H8O7 and C2H6O2) led to the formation of nanoplates with a large surface area, which increased the number of active sites and the contact area between the photocatalyst and the methanol solution.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image and (c) TEM image of the 6% Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 thin film. (d) Current–potential curves of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes with different Ti doping concentrations measured in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution under air mass (AM) 1.5 global (G) illumination (100 mW cm−2). (e) Mott–Schottky plots of pure ZnFe2O4 and Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 photoanodes. (f) Nyquist plots of pure ZnFe2O4 and Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 from the raw data and fitting curves. (g) Schematic illustration of the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis approach for preparing MoSx/CNTs hybrid nanospheres. (h) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer direction in MoSx/CNTs during the HER process. (i) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves and (j) the corresponding Tafel slopes of MoSx/CNTs-300, MoSx-300, CNTs-300, and Pt/C catalysts. (k) EIS Nyquist plots and (l) long-term stability tests at a constant potential over 10 h for MoSx/CNTs-300 and MoSx-300. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.350 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–l) Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Electrocatalytic water splitting is another strategy for scalable and efficient production of hydrogen, in which an electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is indispensable to decrease the energy barrier and improve the overall energy conversion efficiency.352,353 Generally, a high-performance HER electrocatalyst should provide abundant active sites, enable efficient electron transfer, and possess an appropriate Gibbs free energy for H adsorption.354 Noble metal catalysts are still the most active materials for the electrocatalyzed hydrogen evolution reaction because of their low overpotentials and high reaction rates. Nevertheless, the noble metals suffer from high cost and low abundance. A variety of noble-metal-free catalysts prepared by SP techniques have been applied in hydrolysis for the production of H2 from water. For instance, MoS2-based materials have demonstrated their potential as catalysts for the HER due to their abundant active sites and defects in their layered structure. Xu and coworkers introduced a SP strategy for preparing an amorphous MoSx and carbon nanotube (CNT) composite (Fig. 26g).355 When the MoSx/CNTs composite electrode had a negative potential applied, the electron transfer process from the electrode to the CNTs and subsequently to MoSx could be facilitated by the internal electric field, rapidly accumulating an excess negative charge density on active sites (Fig. 26h). As a result, the polarized electrons could promote HER performance in the corresponding electrochemical processes. At the same current densities, the MoSx/CNTs-300 catalyst delivered the lowest overpotentials compared to those of solid MoSx nanospheres and CNTs (Fig. 26i). In addition, it exhibited a low Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1 (Fig. 26j), which was very close to the value for Pt/C catalyst (30 mV dec−1). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements revealed that the radius of the semicircle in the EIS spectrum was sharply reduced when amorphous MoSx was hybridized with CNTs (Fig. 26k). Compared with solid MoSx, the MoSx/CNTs-300 sample showed improved long-term electrochemical stability during the HER process (Fig. 26l).


4.3.2 Carbon dioxide reduction. 
Unrestrained fossil fuel combustion is considered to be the main cause of the increased concentration of CO2 in the ambient atmosphere. Recently, a strong correlation has been developed linking the increased CO2 concentration with adverse climate change, such as global warming.356,357 Therefore, CO2 utilization has great practical significance, in which the hydrogenation of CO2 is an important approach to reduce CO2 emission via the conversion of excess CO2 to value-added fuels such as methane, methanol, and carbon monoxide.358,359 CO2 reduction is considered much more difficult than water splitting, however, due to the high thermodynamic stability of CO2 and the kinetic limitations of the multi-electron processes (e.g., six-electron processes to form methanol and eight-electron processes to form methane). High-efficiency catalysts are necessary for such conversion processes due to the inertia of CO2 and the limitations of the reaction kinetics. To date, most research has been focused on CO2 hydrogenation over noble metal catalysts. Despite their excellent hydrogenation performance, the noble metal catalysts still face challenges in large-scale application because of their high cost. For a catalyst to be applied on an industrial scale, it should be selective, active, stable, and economically viable. Low-cost noble metal composites, base metal catalysts, and metal oxide (semiconductor) catalysts have proven to be promising alternatives to single noble metal catalysts.360 For example, Li and coworkers prepared a mesoporous Ag/TiO2 composite catalyst for simultaneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction accompanied by hydrogen production using TiO2 and AgNO3 as the precursors (Fig. 27a).361 Compared with the Ag/TiO2 composite prepared by a wet-impregnation (WI) method, the samples prepared by the SP method had a good dispersion of Ag nanoparticles on the TiO2 matrix (Fig. 27b), a large specific surface area, and a uniform size distribution with an average particle size of 0.9 μm. The optimal 2% sample showed an improved production rate compared with the 2% Ag/TiO2-WI sample. The superior activity of the SP sample was attributed to its better dispersion of Ag nanoparticles and larger specific surface area. It was a viable strategy for using Ag/TiO2-SP composite catalysts to produce syngas (a mixture of CO and H2) from CO2 and water.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram of the SP process and the formation of Ag/TiO2 nanoparticle composites. (b) TEM image of 2% Ag/TiO2-SP prepared by SP. (c) Schematic diagram of the FSP system. (d) Schematic diagrams of single nozzle FSP and two-nozzle FSP. (e1) Twenty-four hour stability tests of methane conversion over 5% Ni supported by 3-, 5-, and 7-SiO2; (e2) the carbon content and (e3) a TEM image of spent 3-SiO2. (f) High resolution ZnO/CeO2 heterojunctions. (g) Transient photocurrent response. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.361 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.364 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.365 Copyright 2015, Molecular Diversity Preservation International. (c, f and g) Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Usually, the crystallinity of materials prepared by general SP techniques means that they cannot meet the requirements for catalysts, and a subsequent heat-treatment process is required. In addition, the inability to use highly viscous colloids or suspensions as precursors also limits the application of ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP) and electrostatic spray pyrolysis (ESP) in the preparation of catalysts. Fortunately, flame spray pyrolysis (FSP), a high-temperature SP technique, has been demonstrated as a highly efficient method for catalyst preparation.362 FSP utilizes a similar methodology to those previously mentioned SP techniques. The aerosol precursors used in FSP can be true solutions, emulsions, sols, and colloidal dispersions. In the FSP process (Fig. 27c), the precursor is first atomized into an aerosol stream via a nebulizer (pneumatic nebulizer or pressure nebulizer) and then passes through an ultrahigh-temperature (>2000 K) methane or hydrogen-fueled flame, accelerating combustion, evaporation, and pyrolysis reactions, and endowing the particles with various nanostructures.363 The properties of the catalysts, such as composition, specific surface area, and degree of crystallinity, can be conveniently controlled by tuning the combustion conditions and precursor solution composition. For instance, Büchel et al. prepared Rh/Al2O3 catalysts with preferential deposition of 1 wt% Rh on an alumina support using two-nozzle FSP (Fig. 27d).364 Additional components (K and Ba) incorporated into catalysts for CO2 capture had a great effect on hydrogenation behavior. In particular, Ba-doped catalysts exhibited a highly selective conversion reaction from CO2 to CH4 below 500 °C, with the maximum yield at about 400 °C, while the K-doped catalysts produced no CH4, and all the CO2 was directly converted to CO in the temperature range of 300–800 °C.
Besides noble metals, base metal catalysts, such as Ni, Co, Cu, Zn, and Fe, provide economically viable solutions in some cases for CO2 reduction. For example, Ni–SiO2 nanocomposites were prepared by Scott et al. as catalysts for carbon dioxide hydrogenation to produce methane.365 Silica particles were first prepared by FSP as a mesoporous support for nickel catalysts. The precursor feed rate affected the catalytic efficiency (Fig. 27e1) and behavior (Fig. 27e2) towards methane production from CO2. The sample prepared with a feed rate of 3 mL min−1 demonstrated that the main solid-state species of catalytic by-product was carbon nanotubes (Fig. 27e3).
Binary metal oxide nanocomposite catalysts could simultaneously possess the advantages of two metal oxides due to the synergistic effects. FSP, as a simple, efficient, and continuous method, allows facile control over these structural characteristics and a stoichiometric ratio of mixed metal oxides. For example, Zhao and coworkers, employing one-step FSP, prepared ZnO/CeO2 nanocatalysts with different Zn/Ce molar ratios and investigated their photocatalytic activities towards CO2 reduction.344 The presence of CeO2 improved the specific surface area and enhanced the response to the visible light region. The addition of ZnO enhanced the interaction between the nanocatalysts and CO2. In addition, numerous ZnO/CeO2 heterojunctions (Fig. 27f) uniformly dispersed in the composite catalysts promoted the separation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs. Because of their novel composition and nanostructure, the ZnO/CeO2 composite nanocatalysts showed progressive photocatalytic activity (Fig. 27g) towards CO2 reduction under ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) light irradiation.


4.3.3 Fuel cells. 
Fuel cells in particular have been considered as the optimal solution to current environmental and energy problems, based on their direct energy conversion from the chemical energy of a fuel gas into electrical work without a combustion reaction or carbon emission.291,366 Among all the fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) have been considered as the most promising energy technology for transportation, portable, and stationary applications, mainly due to their high-power density, energy efficiency, and moderate working temperature.367 The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), the kinetically sluggish cathode reaction, is the dominant factor that results in energy efficiency loss compared to the anodic hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR).368 In the effort to develop high-performance catalysts, the catalyst synthetic strategy plays an important role, and SP has been demonstrated to be a feasible technique. For example, Park et al.369 used ultrasonic SP to synthesize crumpled reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-supported Pt–Ir catalysts. The crumpled morphology remained unchanged during heat treatment in a tube furnace for 3 h (Fig. 28a). The elemental mapping image (Fig. 28b) showed that the Pt–Ir alloy nanoparticles were homogeneously distributed throughout the rGO sheets. Electrochemical measurements of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity of the catalysts were carried out to test their suitability for PEMFC applications (Fig. 28c and d). The synthesized Pt–Ir/rGO composite catalysts had higher ORR mass activity and stability compared to the commercial Pt/C catalyst and home-made Pt–Ir/rGO catalyst. The crumpled reduced graphene oxide matrix enhanced the electronic conductivity of the composite, and the homogeneous rGO support improved the catalyst durability, both contributing to its excellent electrochemical properties.
 Fig. 28  (a) TEM image and (b) elemental mapping image of Pt–Ir/rGO-P600. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt–Ir/rGO-NP, Pt–Ir/rGO-P600, and commercial Pt/C. (d) Electrochemical surface area (ESA) loss of Pt–Ir/rGO_P600 and Pt/C during pressure–concentration–temperature (PCT) measurements. (e) SEM micrographs of a cross-section of the LSCF–CGO cathode before and (f) after CGO coating. (g) Evolution of the impedance spectra for uncoated and (h) CGO-coated cathodes at an isothermal temperature of 800 °C; inset: equivalent circuit. (i) Current–voltage and power density curves of LSCF–CGO/CGO/NiO–CGO cells with uncoated and (j) CGO-coated cathodes. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.369 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e–j) Reproduced with permission.372 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Carbon-based supports possess excellent chemical stability, high electronic conductivity, high surface area, and porosity, and are effective for uniformly dispersing noble metal catalyst nanoparticles. The corrosion by carbon oxidation under the conditions at the cathode leads to an irreversible degradation of cell performance during long-term operation. Therefore, metal oxides as support materials could be more stable than carbon materials in terms of preventing the degradation of the electrocatalysts. SP has shown its versatility in the synthesis of noble metal electrocatalysts with metal oxide support. For instance, Ota et al. synthesized the sulfated-zirconia supported platinum (Pt/S-ZrO2) composite as a cathode electrocatalyst in PEMFCs.370 The particle size of the S-ZrO2 matrix was 50–100 nm. Pt nanoparticles (5 nm) were highly dispersed on the S-ZrO2 surface. The Pt/S-ZrO2 (Pt: 53 wt%) composite showed sufficient electron conductivity and exhibited superior cell performance compared to that of the Pt/C cathode.
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), another kind of fuel cells, have gradually become a necessary part of the energy supply due to their high energy conversion efficiency, easy maintenance, and low operating cost.371 They will be used like PEMFCs in the future. The SPD process has been demonstrated in electrode and electrolyte fabrication for application in fuel cells. This new approach can efficiently produce thin cathode or electrolyte films for SOFCs in a single deposition and thermal process, reducing fabrication costs. For example, Lopez et al.372 reported the preparation of the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−d–Ce0.8Gd0.2O1.9 (LSCF–CGO) composite cathode via a simple and economical SPD technique (Fig. 28e and f). The CGO coated film exhibited good stability and low impedance (Fig. 28g and h). The cell with the uncoated cathode generated a maximum power density of 0.56 W cm−2 at 650 °C (Fig. 28i and j). In comparison, under the same operating conditions, the cell with the CGO-coated cathode achieved a higher maximum power density of 0.72 W cm−2 at 650 °C. The improved fuel cell performance might be attributed to the homogeneous CGO coating layer, which served as a barrier layer to enhance the resistance of the cathode against chromium poisoning from the interconnector material and improved the stability of the anode materials against carbon deposition and sulfur poisoning when hydrocarbon fuels were used. Similarly, Hsu's group used two kinds of SP deposition strategies, electrostatic spray deposition and pneumatic spray deposition, to synthesize samaria-doped ceria (SDC) electrolytes and NiO–SDC anodes, respectively. 153 The SDC electrolytes and NiO–SDC anodes deposited by SP exhibited superior cell performance with peak power density values of 0.23, 0.39, and 0.42 W cm−2 at 550, 600, and 650 °C, respectively.
Since the mid-1980s, SP techniques have been used to synthesize various catalysts such as single/multi-metal oxide semiconductors, doped metal oxides, and carbon material or metal oxide supported metal/alloy catalysts. In Table 8, we further summarize some typical catalysts prepared by three different SP techniques, including spray pyrolysis (SP), spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD), and flame spray pyrolysis (FSP). The common technical features of the aerosol-pyrolysis process make them all very versatile for the preparation of tailored heterogeneous catalysts. The properties of the target materials such as stoichiometric ratio, phase composition, particle size, specific surface area, and degree of crystallinity can be easily tuned by modifying the composition of the precursor solution and process parameters, including pyrolytic conditions, deposition conditions, or combustion conditions for SP, SPD, and FSP, respectively.
Table 8 Nanostructured catalysts fabricated via SP and their application in CDR, HR, and FCs




Catalysts
Methods
Characteristic properties
Application
Ref.





a MC fuel cells refer to melted carbonate fuel cells.





Ag/TiO2 particles
SP
Uniform Ag nanoparticle dispersion and large specific surface area
CO2 reduction

361



TiO2–rGO particles
SP
Core–shell nanostructure, high surface area, high CO2 adsorption
CO2 reduction

373



Rh/Al2O3 particles
FSP
Ba/K-doped, Rh clusters (1 nm) well distributed on 2–15 nm Al2O3
CO2 reduction

364



Ru/CeO2 particles
FSP
Uniform composition, high thermal stability, high CH4 selectivity
CO2 reduction

374



Pt–Co/Al2O3 particles
FSP
Low Pt contents (0.03–0.43 wt%), tight chemical contact
CO2 reduction

375



Au/TiO2 particles
FSP
Au nanoparticles (3–5 nm) uniformly dispersed on the TiO2 matrix
CO2 reduction

376



Pd–Cu–Zn/MCM-41
FSP
Multicomponent composites, synergistically promoted reduction rate
CO2 reduction

377



ZnO/CeO2 particles
FSP
Homogeneous component, heterojunctions promote performance
CO2 reduction

344



Fe/Al2O3 particles
FSP
Ce-Doped, promoted activity, long chain hydrocarbon selectivity
CO2 reduction

378



CuO–ZrO2 particles
FSP
High specific surface area, small particle sizes (<10 nm)
CO2 reduction

379



ZnFe2O4 thin films
SPD
Ti-Doped, uniform size distribution, improved charge carrier transfer
Hydrogen production

372



Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films
SPD
Well-grown crystallites, high light absorption, and good stability
Hydrogen production

380



ZnIn2S4 thin films
SPD
Dense and uniform, good visible region absorption and fine stability
Hydrogen production

381



Cu–Pt/TiO2 particles
FSP
High TiO2 content and surface area, and excellent metal dispersion
Hydrogen production

382



Pt/TiO2−xFx particles
FSP
F-Doped, good crystallinity, high surface area, high light absorption
Hydrogen production

383



WSe2–rGO particles
SP
High specific surface area and structural stability, fine crystallite size
Hydrogen production

384



NaTaO3–C microspheres
SP
High effective surface, and enhanced photocatalytic activity
Hydrogen production

385



MoSx–CNTs nanospheres
SP
Promoted charge transfer, and enhanced stability of active sites
Hydrogen production

355



Fe/SixAl1−xOy particles
SP
Well dispersed elements, high surface area and structural stability
Hydrogen production

386



CaTiO3:Cu powder
SP
Spherical porous morphology, improved photocatalytic activity
Hydrogen production

387



SrTiO3:Cr/Ta powder
SP
Multicomponent co-dopant, and wrinkled and furrowed surface
Hydrogen production

388



CuO nanoparticles
FSP
Spherical nanoparticles (15 nm), increased photocurrent density
Hydrogen production

389



Pt/C porous nanospheres
SP
3D porous structures, high Pt loading, large active surface area
PEM fuel cells

390



PtRu/C microspheres
SP
Porous carbon microsphere support, efficient mass transport
PEM fuel cells

391



FeTMPP/C microspheres
SP
High surface area and thermal stability, superior ORR activity
PEM fuel cells

392



CoTMPP/C microspheres
SP
Honeycomb-like microspheres, uniform nanosized pores
PEM fuel cells

393



Pt–Fe/CNTs composites
SP
Pt–Fe alloy clusters uniformly dispersed on the 3D CNT network
PEM fuel cells

394



Pt–Ni/CNTs composites
SPD
Pt–Fe alloy clusters uniformly dispersed on the 3D CNT network
PEM fuel cells

395



Pt/BCNRs thin film
SPD
Boron doped carbon nanorods grown on carbon paper as support
PEM fuel cells

396



Pt/graphene nanosheets
SP
Thin sheet structure (1.4 nm) of several graphitic layers as support
PEM fuel cells

397



Fe/PPy porous spheres
SP
Fe-Polypyrrole mesoporous sphere, high volumetric surface area
PEM fuel cells

398



Pt/S-ZrO2 particles
SP
Highly resistant oxidation ability, high surface area and stability
PEM fuel cells

370



Ru–Ni nanoparticles
SPD
Core (Ru)–shell (Ni) structure, high catalytic activity and stability
PEM fuel cells

399



Sr0.98Fe1−xTixO3−δ film
SPD
High ionic conductivity, extended active sites for redox reactions
SO fuel cells

400



La1.8Al0.2O3 thin film
SPD
Block-like structure, good adhesive property, moderate particle size
SO fuel cells

401



La0.8Sr0.2CrO3−δ powder
SP
High phase purity, hollow spheres, homogeneous composition
SO fuel cells

402



Ni/Al2O3 microspheres
SP
Multi-shelled yolk–shell structure, excellent thermal stability
MC fuel cellsa

403






4.4 Solar cells
With the exhaustion of fossil fuels and increasingly grave environmental problems, renewable energy sources are urgently required for current human society.404 In particular, among all the renewable energy sources such as wind, sea waves, bio-energy, geothermal, and nuclear energy, solar energy has been considered as the most important one because of its practically inexhaustible supply, convenient utilization, high safety, and lack of pollution.405–407 Solar cells are promising energy conversion devices that work by directly converting the solar energy from light into electrical energy through the photovoltaic effect. Generally, each solar cell must contain an active semiconductor layer and several buffer layers to separate and selectively transfer the electron–hole pairs, and all the packing layers are sandwiched between two current collectors. When the device is exposed to light, the active layer will absorb energy from photons and generate electron–hole pairs, which are separated and migrate from one layer to another, generating a photovoltaic current.408 Nowadays, researchers are used to dividing the solar cells into three generations (Fig. 29), depending on the working principles and structural characteristics of these various devices, including crystalline silicon solar cells (CSSCs), thin-film solar cells (TFSCs), and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) or perovskite solar cells (PSSCs).409 In this section, we will discuss the application of SP for the preparation of various thin film materials for different SCs, including CSSCs (1st generation), TFSCs (2nd generation), DSSCs, and perovskite solar cells (3rd generation).
 Fig. 29  (a) Simplified schematic cross-section of a commercial monocrystalline silicon solar cell. (b) Schematic illustration of a thin film chalcopyrite (CIGS) and kesterite (Cu2(Zn,Fe)SnS4, CZTSSe) solar cell. (c) Schematic illustration of a dye-sensitized solar cell. (a and c) Reproduced with permission.408 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. (b) Reproduced with permission.410 Copyright 2016, Springer. 

4.4.1 Crystalline silicon solar cells. 
The first-generation solar cells were CSSCs, which are made of relatively thick silicon films (several hundreds of micrometers) because of the restricted absorption coefficient of crystalline silicon. These initially commercialized devices currently account for about 90% of the solar cell market and exhibit maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) above 20%.411 Such wide use of CSSCs is attributed to the satisfactory development of Si preparation technology, the large natural abundance of the raw material, and the ecological safety of devices.412
For CSSCs, increasing the photoelectric conversion efficiency is the most important issue in photovoltaic research. More than 10% of the light energy is lost on the surface of the package glass of the CSSC, however, due to reflection. Preparation of an anti-reflection film on the glass surface can enhance the penetration effect. ZnO possesses not only high optical transparency in the visible and near-infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, but also a high optical refractive index. These unique properties have thus made ZnO thin films an important semiconductor material for use in antireflective coatings and a transparent conducting material for solar cells. Currently, great efforts have been made toward the fabrication of high-quality ZnO thin films by SP so as to avoid the large loss of light energy on the surface of the package glass of the CSSCs. For example, Barrado and coworkers prepared pure ZnO thin films on silica substrates and simultaneously studied the influence of deposition time and substrate temperature on their structural, optical, and electrical properties.152 The properties of the films presented strong correlations with the substrate temperature. In addition, Kaur et al. studied both the nanocrystallinity and the morphology of ZnO thin films deposited by the ultrasonic SP technique on different substrates, including polished Si(100) and amorphous glass.413 The films deposited on glass substrates exhibited c-axis orientated columnar grains perpendicular to the substrate with a mean grain size of 120 nm. The films grown over glass showed smaller grain sizes compared to the films grown over silicon substrates. The results of in situ high-temperature XRD (Fig. 30a) revealed that the crystallite size of the ZnO film increased with increasing temperature, and a systematic shift of peak positions towards a lower angle occurred because of changes in the lattice parameters. The AFM image (Fig. 30b) of the film deposited on the glass shows hexagonal columnar structures. The powders prepared by SP exhibited good optical transmittance with a band gap (Eg) of 3.43 eV (Fig. 30c).
 Fig. 30  (a) XRD patterns of the ZnO nanopowder prepared at different temperatures. (b) AFM image of the ZnO film deposited on Si. (c) Optical band gap of the ZnO nanopowder and ZnO thin films deposited on glass at different temperatures. (d) Band diagram of the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells. (e) Schematic models for the fabrication of the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells. (f) I–V curves under illumination for the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells prepared under different conditions. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.413 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.414 Copyright 1991, American Institute of Physics. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.415 Copyright 1993, American Institute of Physics. 
Generally, CSSCs can be divided into p–n junction-type single CSSCs and heterojunction solar cells (HSCs). The p–n junction-type single CSSCs have achieved high device efficiencies of over 20%, but they also suffer from tedious fabrication processes and high manufacturing costs. Heterojunction solar cells (HSCs) made of a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layer and a single crystal silicon wafer have several potential advantages, including a superior blue response, simple manufacturing steps, and moderate processing temperatures. The working principle of typical HSCs is shown in Fig. 30d.414 For large-scale production, the SPD technique, combining the advantages of low cost, simplicity, and low waste emission, can directly yield high-quality pure or doped TCO layers on Si substrates. For example, Nakato and coworkers fabricated HSCs consisting of indium tin-oxide (ITO)/silicon oxide/n-Si with a high energy conversion efficiency of 15% via SPD.415 A detailed schematic model for the fabrication of the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells is shown in Fig. 30e. Before the deposition of the ITO layer, the mat-textured Si surface was first oxidized at 450 °C in an oxygen atmosphere for 5 min and subsequently annealed at 800 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere for 5 min to obtain an ultrathin silicon oxide buffer layer. The ITO deposition was carried out via SP from a solution containing indium chloride and tin chloride (weight ratio of 30:1) at 450 °C with N2 as the carrier gas. The as-prepared cells showed a high open circuit photovoltage (Voc) of 540 mV (Fig. 30f). The excellent photoelectric performance of this heterojunction could be attributed to the decreased thermionically assisted tunneling current, which was induced by an increase in the barrier height in the silicon oxide layer. In addition, the recombination current density was also alleviated by the modified interface states, accounting for the improvement in the fill factor.
In addition, the interface between the crystalline Si and the TCO layer is a critical part of the HSCs. Researchers have proposed a variety of models to simulate the behavior of the interface and explain the carrier transport properties across the heterojunction. The models include tunneling current,416 thermionic emission,417 carrier injection,418 and space charge recombination,419 arising from different fabrication techniques for various HSCs. For instance, after fabricating high-efficiency HSCs composed of indium-doped tin-oxide (ITO)/silicon oxide/n-Si, Nakato's group further fabricated ZnO/n-Si HSCs using a similar SP method.420 The highest short-circuit photocurrent and photovoltage could be obtained by optimizing the parameters of the deposition and the following heat-treatment. Consequently, a high energy conversion efficiency of 8.5% was obtained. Moreover, Barrado et al. systematically studied the structural, compositional, and photoelectrical properties of ZnO/c-Si HSCs prepared by SPD on n-type and p-type monocrystalline silicon surfaces.421 The ZnO/Si heterojunctions exhibited a height barrier that was consistent with the difference in work functions between ZnO and Si.


4.4.2 Thin-film solar cells. 
Thin-film solar cells can be made from a variety of thin-film semiconductor materials such as amorphous or polycrystalline Si, and multicomponent A3B5 (GaP, InP, GaAs),422,423 A3B6 (CdTe),424 CIS (CuInS2),425 CIGS (Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2),426 and CZTS (Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4) type semiconductors.427 The second-generation cells have attracted widespread attention since they were developed in the 1980s because of their potential to produce cost-effective solar cells.
Sb2Se3 photovoltaics recently emerged as a promising non-toxic candidate to replace CdTe due to their similar key properties. Sb2Se3 photovoltaics still suffer, however, from low device efficiency, the toxicity of the CdS buffer layer, and performance degradation under continuous operation, hindering their potential application. Tang et al. prepared non-toxic and stable ZnO thin films as a substitute for the CdS buffer layer from a zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2) aqueous solution in ambient air.428 In this work, a crack- and pinhole-free ZnO film with a thickness of 120 nm and an average grain size of 20 nm was obtained by SP deposition (Fig. 31a). The atomic force micrograph (Fig. 31b) demonstrates that the ZnO film prepared by SP had a uniform surface with a surface roughness of approximately 4 nm. After completion of the ZnO layer, the Sb2Se3 semiconductor layer on the top was generated by using the rapid thermal deposition (RTD) method. Unlike the previously reported results, which claimed that the orientation of thin films grown on a substrate was greatly determined by the deposition temperature, the Sb2Se3 layer showed a strong interaction with the properties of the ZnO substrate during the RTD process (Fig. 31c). It had been confirmed by the observed phenomena and the theoretical model that the orientation of the deposited ZnO film could induce Sb2Se3 to show preferred growth in a [221] orientation. The results of scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) characterization indicated that the interface was homogeneous, and demonstrated the good adhesion between the [221] Sb2Se3 layer and the ZnO film substrate (Fig. 31d). These Sb2Se3 photovoltaics exhibited a certified device efficiency of 5.93%. Moreover, this unencapsulated solar cell maintained high device efficiencies of 6.22%, 5.74%, 5.82%, and 5.79%, even after stringent tests of thermal cycling (−40 to 85 °C for 60 cycles), damp-heat (85 °C, 85% humidity, 1100 h), ultraviolet preconditioning (300 to 450 nm ultraviolet light, 62 h), and light-soaking (50 °C, 1.3 sun, 1100 h), respectively (Fig. 31e–h). The excellent device performance originated from good adhesion and the combination of the orientated Sb2Se3 layer and the ZnO film, which decreased interfacial defects and enhanced photoexcitation stability. This strategy for fabricating Sb2Se3/ZnO photovoltaics has many advantages in terms of high conversion efficiency, robust stability, abundant constituents, and low-cost manufacturing, highlighting the great potential of Sb2Se3 as an alternative to CdTe solar cells.
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of the spray pyrolysis apparatus. (b) Atomic force micrograph of the ZnO film prepared by SP. (c) HRTEM images of the Sb2Se3 film grown on the ZnO substrate. (d) STEM image and element mapping of the Sb2Se3/ZnO device. (e–h) Device stability under (e) thermal cycling (−40 to 85 °C for 60 cycles), (f) damp-heat (85 °C, 85% humidity, 1100 h), (g) ultraviolet preconditioning (300 to 450 nm ultraviolet light, 62 h), and (h) light-soaking (50 °C, 1.3 sun, 1100). (a–h) Reproduced with permission.428 Copyright 2017, Nature. 
Among all the commercialized photovoltaics, Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 thin film solar cells achieved superior PCE in excess of 20%.429 The state-of-the-art devices with the highest device efficiency, however, are produced by co-evaporation of components under high vacuum conditions.430 As the price of silicon decreases, a non-vacuum technique is urgently required for decreasing capital expenditure and reducing manufacturing costs. SPD is considered to be one of the most viable strategies. Wong et al. developed a direct SPD strategy for preparing CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) thin films on the molybdenum (Mo) substrate in an air environment.431 The precursor CuInS2 (CIS) thin film was initially prepared by SPD from an aqueous solution containing CuCl2, InCl3, and SC(NH2)2. Gradual heating during the SP process combined with excess thiourea added into the spray solution effectively avoided the generation of molybdenum oxide, which was considered to make it difficult to obtain a uniform absorber layer and degraded the carrier transport efficiency. The selenization of CIS/Mo/glass was conducted at 480–500 °C in Se vapor in a quartz tube. The photovoltaics made of the CISSe film exhibited a device efficiency of 5.9%.


4.4.3 Dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells. 
In 1991, Grätzel's research group initially reported a DSSC with a conversion efficiency of 7.9% using a ruthenium pyridine complex dye as a photosensitizer and TiO2 film as the photoanode.432 The reason for the high efficiency is considered to be that the mesoporous TiO2 film has a large specific surface area to adsorb sufficient dye to improve the light-trapping efficiency, while the close bond between the monomolecular dye and the semiconductor film increases the efficiency of electron injection and finally improves the PCE of the cell. A typical DSSC is usually constructed on a transparent conductive substrate (Fig. 29c). First, a dense TiO2 layer (hole blocking layer) and a mesoporous TiO2 layer (electron transport layer) are sequentially deposited on the conductive substrate as a photoanode. Then, dye molecules are adsorbed and the device is subsequently filled with the electrolyte. Finally, a noble metal counter electrode is deposited on the conductive substrate. The photoanode is an important component of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Increasing the electron transport efficiency of the electron transport layer and simultaneously enhancing the blocking effect for holes can effectively improve the device energy conversion efficiency. The photoanodes frequently used in the previous literature include TiO2,433,434 CeO2,435 ZnO,436 NiO,437etc. As mentioned above, SP has many advantages for the fabrication of metal oxide films. Here, we will introduce the research progress in the application of SP in the preparation of photoanodes for dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells.
So far, the TiO2 thin film is still regarded as an optimal photoanode material. This is because the TiO2 film possesses excellent optical properties and has the ability to absorb ultraviolet light. Therefore, TiO2 nanomaterials have broad applications in photocatalysts and solar cells. For instance, Huang and coworkers used the SP technique to prepare TiO2 thin films on the surface of ITO glass slides as a blocking layer for DSSCs.438 The TiO2 was composed of mixed rutile and anatase phases, and the thickness could be controlled by the deposition time. The TiO2-modified ITO film exhibited a significant increase in performance with approximately a fourfold improvement in the photocurrent density (114.22 mA cm−2) and 25% enhancement of DSSC device efficiency (4.63%). Dwivedi et al. first prepared TiO2 hollow spheres by SP from a spray solution consisting of TTIP as the precursor component and ethanol as solvent.439 The hollow spheres had fine crystallinity, a uniform size distribution, and a completely hollow structure, with an average size of 170–300 nm and 55–60 nm thickness for the hollow shells (Fig. 32a). Then, the TiO2 hollow spheres were screen-printed onto the surface of the TiO2 transparent layer as a scattering layer. The photovoltaic measurements demonstrated that the modified DSSC had a high device efficiency of 7.46% (Fig. 32b). The plots of incident photon to charge carrier efficiency (IPCE) as a function of wavelength revealed that the DSSC with the hollow TiO2 sphere (HS) scattering layer featured enhanced light conversion efficiency (Fig. 32c). This could be caused by the TiO2 hollow sphere layer itself, which played a role in light scattering and enhanced the light-harvesting properties, leading to an improvement in the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, Peter et al. employed SP to deposit a TiO2 thin film onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass to a thickness ranging from 56 to 118 nm.440 The impedance analysis revealed that the TiO2 thin film interface possessed a similar distribution of surface states to the one seen in mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2 layers. The influence of the deposited TiO2 layers on the transport of electrons to the triiodide ions was investigated by open-circuit photovoltage attenuation. The results confirmed that the TiO2 blocking film was able to prevent the back reaction between triiodide ions and electrons in the electrolyte under short-circuit conditions. This effect was limited under open circuit conditions, and replaced by electron accumulation at the surface of the TiO2 blocking layer.
 Fig. 32  (a) SEM image of hollow microspheres prepared by SP (inset: magnified image). (b) J–V characteristics and (c) IPCE plot of TiO2 DSSCs with and without a scattering layer. (d) AFM image of the spray deposited NiO thin film. (e) Particle size distribution of the spray deposited NiO thin film. (f) Direct band gap estimation of Li (0–5 wt%) doped NiO thin films from the Tauc relation. (g–i) J–V curves of various PSCs. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.439 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.441 Copyright 2008, IOP Publishing. (g) Reproduced with permission.444 Copyright 2017, Nature. (h) Reproduced with permission. 446 Copyright 2016, Nature. (i) Reproduced with permission.447 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from TiO2, other wide-band-gap metal oxide semiconductors such as NiO, WO3, Co3O4, Fe2O3, and ZnO can also be used as photoanodes to improve solar cell performance. For example, Joseph and coworkers prepared transparent conducting Li-doped NiO films with oriented (111) planes on glass substrates by SPD from nickel nitrate and lithium chloride solution at 500 °C in air.441 The AFM images (Fig. 32d) of the deposited 4% Li-doped thin film show prolate and spherical nanoparticles. These particles had a fine size distribution (Fig. 32e). From the (αhν)2versus hν (Tauc relation) plot, where α is the absorption coefficient, h Planck's constant, and ν the frequency of light, the intercept is obtained by the extrapolation of the linear region to α = 0, given the direct band gap of Li doped NiO (Fig. 32f).
After DSSCs, the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cell (PSC) has become another emerging high-efficiency solar cell. Within a few years, the PCE of PSCs increased dramatically from 3.8% to over 22%. This outstanding photovoltaic performance is attributed to the unique properties of these materials, such as large absorption coefficients, small exciton binding energy, high charge transport mobility, and relatively long charge carrier diffusion distance. As a device derived from all-solid-state dye-sensitized cells, PSCs have a similar structure and working principle. A typical structure for PSCs consists of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/HTL/metal electrode, where HTL is the hole transport layer.442 The TiO2 layer acts as a substrate for the growth of perovskite crystals and simultaneously accounts for the transport of electrons, while the hole transport layer enables the transport of holes. Under illumination, the perovskite generates photoinduced electron–hole pairs, and then, the electrons and holes are transported into the electron transport layer (TiO2 film) and HTL, respectively. In a typical process for the fabrication of PSCs, a TiO2 electron conductor layer can be deposited on a FTO substrate by the SPD method. Subsequently, perovskite thin films and the hole transport layer are successively deposited by a spin-coating method. Finally, the metal counter electrode is deposited by thermal evaporation. Using the TiO2 thin film prepared by SP as a dense blocking layer, the researchers fabricated advanced PSCs with high conversion efficiencies of 12%,443 14.6% (Fig. 32g),444 16.2%,445 and 19% (Fig. 32h)446 Furthermore, researchers using a similar SPD method prepared a NiO-based hole selective extraction layer, achieving high device efficiencies of 13% (Fig. 32i)447 and 16.2%.448
In the past few decades, the advances in solar cells were mainly focused on how to improve the PCE of solar cells, and they simultaneously addressed objectives such as low cost, long service life, and robust operation stability. The SPD technique has been demonstrated to be effective for the deposition of a variety of components (anti-reflection coating, absorber layer, compact layer, counter electrode layer, and transparent conductive oxide layer) on various substrates (glass, Si wafers, and semiconductor film) for different solar cells (Table 9). In comparison with many other deposition methods for the preparation of thin film materials for solar cells, the SPD technique just requires some simple instruments and a moderate operation temperature under an ambient atmosphere, while it enables mass production of films with high quality.
Table 9 Nanostructured materials fabricated via SP and their application in solar cells




Materials
Synthetic conditions
Function
Application
PCE (%)
Ref.


Deposition conditions
Precursor solution composition




TiO2 thin films
Si wafers, 450 °C
Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4 + acetylacetone
Anti-reflection coating
CSSCs
17.51

449



Al2O3 thin films
Si wafers, 450 °C
Al(C5H7O2)3
Anti-reflection coating
CSSCs
15.5

450



ZnO thin films
Porous Si, 500 °C
Zn(NO3)2
Anti-reflection coating
CSSCs
12

451



ZnO nanorod film
Si wafers, 850 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2
Anti-reflection coating
CSSCs
n.r.

452



ZnO thin films
Glass, 350 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2 + InCl3
In-Doped TCO layer
CSSCs
n.r.

453



ZnO thin films
Glass, 370 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2 + In(CH3COO)3
In-Doped TCO layer
CSSCs
8.4

454



ZnO thin films
Si wafers, 400 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2 + Ga(C5H7O2)3
Ga-Doped TCO layer
CSSCs
15.7

455



In2O3 thin films
Si wafers, 375 °C
InCl3 + SnCl4; InCl3 + NH4F
In/F-doped TCO layer
CSSCs
18.9

456



ZnO thin films
Si wafers, 350 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2 + AlCl3
ZnO/p-Si heterojunctions
CSSCs
n.r.

457



CuPc thin films
Si wafers, 170 °C
Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)
p-Type semiconductor
CSSCs
n.r.

458



In2Se3 thin films
FTO glass, 350 °C
InCl3 + H2NC(Se)NH2
Active photoelectrode
TFSCs
0.71

459



CdS thin films
n-Type InP, 350 °C
CdCl2 + CH4N2S
p-Type semiconductor
TFSCs
12

460



ZnO thin films
Glass, 470 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2 + AlCl3
Al-Doped TCO layer
TFSCs
12.1

461



Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 thin films
Mo-Coated glass, 330 °C
Cu(NO3)2 + In(NO3)3 + Ga(NO3)3 + 1-methylthiourea
Absorber film
TFSCs
8.7

462



Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film
Mo-Coated glass, 160 °C
Cu(CH3COO)2 + Zn(CH3COO)2 + Sn octylate + S
Absorber film
TFSCs
0.94

463



Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 thin films
Mo-Coated glass, 300–350 °C
CuCl2 + InCl3 + GaCl3 + SC(NH2)2
Absorber film
TFSCs
10.5

464



Cu(In,Al)(S,Se)2 thin films
Mo-Coated glass, n.r.
CuCl2 + AlCl3 + InCl3 + SC(NH2)2
Absorber film
TFSCs
5.3

465



CuInS2/In2S3 thin films
ITO glass, 300 °C
CuCl2 + InCl3 + SC(NH2)2
Both absorber and buffer layers
TFSCs
9.5

466



SnO2 thin films
Glass, 500 °C
SnCl4 + NH4F
In-Doped TCO layer
DSSCs
3.06

467



SnO2 thin films
Glass, 500 °C
Dibutyltin diacetate + NH4F
F-Doped TCO layer
DSSCs
7.6

468



Nb2O5 thin films
FTO glass, 400 °C
Nb(OEt)5
Blocking layer
DSSCs
5.1

469



ZnO thin films
FTO glass, 350 °C
Zn(CH3COO)2
Blocking layer
DSSCs
7.03

470



FeS2 thin films
FTO glass, 330 °C
FeCl3 + NH2CSNH2
Counter electrode layer
DSSCs
8

471



Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films
FTO glass, 350 °C
CuCl + ZnCl2 + SnCl2 + thiourea
Counter electrode layer
DSSCs
7.67

472



TiO2 nanoparticles
SP, 600 °C
Titanium isopropoxide
Photoelectrode
DSSCs
7.76

473



TiO2 thin films
FTO glass, 450 °C
Ti(i-OPr)2(acac)2
Compact layer
PSSCs
10.26

474



TiO2–ZnO thin films
FTO glass, 350 °C
Zn(OAc)2 + Ti(i-OPr)2(acac)2
Compact layers
PSSCs
15.1

475



TiO2 thin films
FTO glass, 350 °C
Di-iso-propoxy titanium bis
Compact layers
PSSCs
8.76

476



TiO2 thin films
FTO glass, 450 °C
Titanium diisopropoxide bis
Compact layers
PSSCs
17.26

477



TiO2 thin films
FTO glass, 450 °C
Titanium diisopropoxide bis
Compact layers
PSSCs
19

446



NiO thin films
FTO glass, 500 °C
Nickel acetylacetonate
Compact layers
PSSCs
13

447



NiO thin films
FTO glass, n.r.
Nickel acetylacetonate
Compact layers
PSSCs
16.2

448





To sum up, SP demonstrates its versatility in the preparation of various nanostructured materials for energy storage and conversion. The performance of these devices is highly dependent on the inherent properties of the active materials, such as their crystallinity, morphology, particle size, porosity, and specific surface area. In principle, nanostructured materials may improve mass/charge transport and structural stability (especially against volume change), but not all the concepts are really beneficial to the practical application of the material. Therefore, when using SP to synthesize nanomaterials, researchers should adequately consider the particular practical application, and then design and fabricate appropriate nanostructures. For example, in the case of batteries, small particle size and porosity can improve the kinetics but sacrifice coulombic efficiency and energy density. The relatively low tap density of the nanostructured cathode materials (hollow, porous or yolk–shell structures) has greatly hindered their practical application in high-energy density LIBs, and thus, the preparation of dense micrometer-size cathode materials for LIBs will be a meritorious research direction for SP, although these design objectives are the opposite of those for catalysts and supercapacitor materials.

5. Conclusion and perspectives
5.1 Conclusion
In this review, we have introduced a facile, continuous, and economically viable synthetic method, spray pyrolysis (SP), for the preparation of various nanostructured materials and reviewed their recent progress in energy storage and conversion applications. Fig. 33 shows the topics covered in this review, specifically focusing on the strategies for designing various nanostructures via SP and how these nanostructures influence the device performance. SP enjoys unparalleled advantages for the rapid synthesis of homogeneous multicomponent materials (oxides, sulfides, carbon materials, and hybrid nanocomposites), as well as high versatility for designing various unique nanostructures. Firstly, we have briefly introduced the equipment and working principles of the various SP techniques, including conventional SP, spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD), and flame spray pyrolysis (FSP). Table 10 shows a comparison of the characteristics of these three SP techniques. Thereafter, we have described in detail the influence of the properties of the precursor solution (solvents, metal salts, additives, and concentration) and process parameters (nebulizer, temperature, atmosphere, and residence time) on the properties of the final materials in terms of morphology, composition, and interior architecture (hollow spheres, dense spheres, plicated spheres, yolk–shell structures, core–shell structures, nanoplates, nanorods, nanowires, thin films, and various nanocomposites). Furthermore, the literature search results have demonstrated that the number of research articles associated with SP techniques has been increasing dramatically in recent years, so that it is gradually becoming a research hotspot. In particular, we have demonstrated the potential applications of these important techniques in the energy storage and conversion fields, including rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, catalysis for hydrogen- and carbon dioxide-related energy conversion reactions, fuel cells, and solar cells. The SP techniques represent an important breakthrough, which will lead the industrially viable synthesis of functional materials for the development of high-performance energy storage and conversion devices in the future.
 Fig. 33  Topics covered in this review: advanced nanostructures fabricated via SP and their applications in energy storage and conversion. 
Table 10 Characteristics of the three spray pyrolysis techniques and their applications in the preparation of various nanostructures




Spray pyrolysis techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages
Nanostructures
Ref.







 Continuous process
⊠ Low tap density
• Hollow/plicated/porous/dense spheres

34, 35, 75 and 478



 Robust scalability
⊠ Low crystallinity
• Core–shell/yolk–shell


 One-pot synthesis


• Nanoplates


 High efficiency


• Nanocomposites


 Low cost









 Low production cost
⊠ Low crystallinity
• Nanorods/nanowires/nanotubes

29, 30, 154 and 479



 Low investment
⊠ Low accuracy
• Thin films


 High efficiency


• Nanocomposites


 No vacuum









 Uniform composition
⊠ Low controllability
• Ultra-fine nanoparticles

362 and 480



 Continuous process
⊠ Low consistency
• Nanocomposites


 High temperature






 High crystallinity








Compared with traditional wet-chemistry methods, we can find numerous intrinsic advantages of SP for the preparation of functional nanostructured materials that originate from its unique aerosol-pyrolysis process, moving from the precursor solution to the final materials in one step. Because of the thorough mixing of the precursor components at the molecular level in the spray solution, SP is an effective method for preparing homogeneous multicomponent materials and composites with precisely controlled stoichiometric ratios. In principle, only if appropriate precursor components and process parameters can be found any corresponding nanostructured materials can be designed and fabricated via SP techniques. Due to its versatility and scalability, SP has been widely applied in the synthesis of many functional materials, as presented above. Meanwhile, during the SP process, each atomized droplet acts as an individual microreactor where the particle formation is constrained, so that the powder particle can closely inherit the shape of the droplet without agglomeration. Note that the particle formation processes are accompanied by rapid evaporation of the solvent and decomposition of the solute, contributing to the formation of mesoporous and hollow structures. The properties of the target materials, such as their stoichiometric ratio, phase composition, particle size, pore structure, and specific surface area, can be flexibly tuned by adjusting the precursor properties and process parameters, as we have mentioned above. Appropriate properties of these materials account for the improved performance (e.g. larger energy/power density and higher energy conversion efficiency) of energy and conversion devices. In addition, among all the subunit processes (including atomization, evaporation, precipitation, drying, and decomposition) for SP, the solute precipitation conditions greatly influence the final morphology and structure of the products. This is because each secondary particle prepared by SP is assembled from numerous primary nanoparticles generated by the solute precipitation process. In accordance with this viewpoint, we can adequately take advantage of these two dimensions of both primary nanoparticles and secondary particles to design various nanostructures.
5.2 Perspectives
As reviewed in this article, SP possesses many advantages and has made fascinating achievements in preparing various nanostructured electrode materials and catalysts for the energy storage and conversion field, because of its excellent scalability and versatility. Nevertheless, there are still numerous challenges and valuable directions that need to be addressed, and research needs to be conducted for further improvements in future commercial applications and fundamental research. Some of these challenges for SP are as follows:
(1) The difficulty in the preparation of high tap density electrode materials for rechargeable batteries. The materials prepared by SP usually possess porous and hollow structures, which improve the mass-ratio of the powder and the energy density, but sacrifice the volumetric energy density of the device, limiting its application in some important fields such as electrode materials for rechargeable batteries. The tap density of the cathode materials prepared by SP (<1 g cm−3) is much lower than for the cathode materials prepared by the conventional co-precipitation method (>2 g cm−3). Further efforts towards optimization of the growth process (e.g., using organic additives and modifying the solute precipitation conditions) in combination with other advanced techniques to achieve improved tap density of these electrode materials are required.
(2) The challenge for modeling the SP reaction mechanism. In principle, the formation of each particle during the SP process occurs in only one micron-sized droplet. This means that, in each second, there are millions of droplets that are synchronously undergoing a series of rapid physical and chemical reactions. This makes it extremely difficult to observe the transformation processes of each particle in the time and space dimensions. Therefore, there are many articles reporting the application of SP to prepare various materials, but few of them have focused on investigating the particle formation mechanisms. For precise detection of the development from precursors to the formation of the final morphology, real-time observations by in situ characterization techniques and the development of theory to explain the formation processes are necessary.
(3) Challenges still exist in precisely controlling the properties of target materials. We have presented several comprehensive morphology control strategies for SP in Section 2.3, but it is very difficult to directly achieve theoretical structure designs, especially when the choices of multiple components and additives are involved. In fact, there many factors that must be considered, while numerous optimization experiments are often necessary, because each property of a material can be affected by several parameters. Therefore, future efforts should be focused on establishing more detailed relationships between the parameters and the material properties by using more advanced characterization technologies and mathematical models.
(4) To achieve significant enhancement of the device performance, controlled SP synthesis of functional nanostructured materials with optimized dimensions, shapes, and orientations, as well as smart hybridization with other functional nanomaterials to form hybrid structures, is of great significance.
(5) The combination of SP with other material synthesis methods to extend application fields is important. When subjected to the one-step processing and short residence times (<10 s) of SP, properties of materials such as composition or crystallinity sometimes cannot meet the requirements for the target materials, which can be modified by secondary treatment, including heat-treatment, sulfuration, phosphorization, selenylation, oxidation, reduction, etc. In addition, SP shows good compatibility for integration into other techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition and aerosol combustion technologies, as do its derived spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD) and flame spray pyrolysis (FPD) techniques. Readers wanting to learn more about these technologies can refer to other reviews in the literature.150,362,479
(6) For industrial application, scalable fabrication of functional nanostructured materials via SP and maintaining good uniformity in performance among different devices are required. Moreover, a recycling system for reusing waste heat and tail gas should be established. Tail gas generated from the metal salts and additives usually contains NOx, HCl, NH3, SOx, etc., which are harmful to the environment. Hence, recovery or treatment devices are needed to fulfill emission regulations, although the waste heat utilization can decrease the energy consumption.
All in all, given the many advantages of SP for fabricating various functional nanostructured materials, more novel nanostructures fabricated by SP with interesting properties will certainly be available in the near future for a wide range of applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51874360, 51674296, 51704332, 51574287, 21703185), the National Basic Research Program of China (2014CB643406), the National Key Research Program of China (2016YFA0202602), the Innovation-Driven Project of Central South University (2018CX006), the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX201700290), the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of China (2018M630911), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Xiamen University: 20720170042).
References
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Macwan, P. N. Dave and S. Chaturvedi, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 3669–3686 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, H. Zhao, M. Lin, D. Zhao and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602914 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
A. B. Stambouli and E. Traversa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 433–455 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, X. Chen, J. Zhang and J. W. Schwank, Catal. Today, 2014, 225, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 28–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Xue and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8344–8364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 35, 4271–4301 CrossRef .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Guan, X. Y. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703614 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
S. Rashidi, J. A. Esfahani and A. Rashidi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 1198–1210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jafarzadeh, C. S. Sipaut, J. Dayou and R. F. Mansa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 64, 543–568 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Y.-S. Ding, C.-H. Chen, L. Zhao, C. Rimkus, R. Joesten and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 308–316 CrossRef .
H. H. Ou and S. L. Lo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 58, 179–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Studart, U. T. Gonzenbach, E. Tervoort and L. J. Gauckler, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 1771–1789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maier, Angew. Chem., 2013, 52, 4998–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Carbon, 2014, 79, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Messing, S. C. Zhang and G. V. Jayanthi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 76, 2707–2726 CrossRef .
H. U. Lei and Z. H. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng. Powder Metall., 2008, 4, 195–200 Search PubMed .
P. S. Patil, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 59, 185–198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, H. Kim and Y. Roh, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, 2423–2428 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Sawant and D. R. B. Kale, Int. J. Eng. Res. Gen. Sci., 2014, 3, 533–542 Search PubMed .
D. Perednis and L. J. Gauckler, J. Electroceram., 2005, 14, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Xu, R. Q. Chu, G. R. Li and Q. R. Yin, J. Inorg. Mater., 2004, 19, 1240–1248 CAS .
A. Gurav, T. Kodas, T. Pluym and Y. Xiong, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1993, 19, 411–452 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Messing, S. C. Zhang and G. V. Jayanthi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 2707–2726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. H. Choi, X. Fan, J. Shin, Z. Ma, M. R. Zachariah, J. W. Choi and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601578 CrossRef .
D. S. Jung, Y. N. Ko, Y. C. Kang and S. B. Park, Adv. Powder Technol., 2014, 25, 18–31 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nie, G. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Dou, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Shi, R. Fu and X. Zhang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700272 CrossRef .
Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 88, 262–269 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Suh and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12007–12010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Hede, P. Bach and A. D. Jensen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2008, 63, 3821–3842 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaworek and A. T. Sobczyk, J. Electrost., 2008, 66, 197–219 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Fogler and K. D. Timmerhaus, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1966, 39, 515–518 CrossRef .
H. Kobara, M. Tamiya, A. Wakisaka, T. Fukazu and K. Matsuura, AIChE J., 2010, 56, 810–814 CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Li, X. He, J. Wang, D. Sun and J. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7165–7168 RSC .
B. Avvaru, M. N. Patil, P. R. Gogate and A. B. Pandit, Ultrasonics, 2006, 44, 146–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Peskin and R. J. Raco, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1963, 35, 1378–1381 CrossRef .
R. Rajan and A. B. Pandit, Ultrasonics, 2001, 39, 235–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gretzinger and W. R. Marshall, AIChE J., 1961, 7, 312–318 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirose and H. Kimoto, J. Acoust. Soc. Jpn., 1972, 28, 335–345 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhou, Y. Wu and E. J. Lavernia, Int. J. Non-Equilib. Process., 1997, 10, 95–183 CAS .
T. Ciach, Int. J. Pharm., 2006, 324, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Lin and J. W. Gentry, J. Aerosol Sci., 1996, 27, 375–376 CrossRef .
S. Che, O. Sakurai, K. Shinozaki and N. Mizutani, J. Aerosol Sci., 1998, 29, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Q. Hu and W. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Ju, J. S. Cho, J. H. Kim, Y. J. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31988–31994 RSC .
T. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, W. Peng and K. Zeng, Mater. Lett., 2015, 159, 39–42 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 27, 1603399 CrossRef .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4662–4668 RSC .
T. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11970–11975 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo and T. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 836–843 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Q. Hu and W. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 392–400 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, S. K. Park, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Jeon, J. S. Cho and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Small, 2014, 10, 474–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Park, J. H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11889–11896 RSC .
Y. N. Ko, S. B. Park, K. Y. Jung and Y. C. Kang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5462–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Cho, J. M. Won, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 466–478 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park, J. S. Cho and Y. C. Kang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, Y. N. Ko, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1780–1788 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ju, H. C. Jang and Y. C. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7286–7292 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Ng, J. Wang, D. Wexler, K. Konstantinov, Z.-P. Guo and H.-K. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6896–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Doi, A. Fukuda, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe, Z. Ogumi, K. Nakagawa and T. Ando, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Guo, S. Xu, Y. Yu, H. D. Abruna and L. A. Archer, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 28, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valvo, U. Lafont, L. Simonin and E. M. Kelder, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ju and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jung, S. B. Park and Y. C. Kang, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 27, 1621–1645 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, A. Langrock, M. R. Zachariah and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Juslin, O. Antikainen, P. Merkku and J. Yliruusi, Int. J. Pharm., 1995, 123, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Patel, J. K. Patel and S. Chakraborty, Recent Pat. Drug Delivery Formulation, 2014, 8, 63–78 CrossRef CAS .
P. Walzel, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2011, 34, 1039–1048 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Patel, Engineering in Agriculture, Environment and Food, 2016, 9, 92–100 CrossRef .
W. Deng, C. M. Waits, B. Morgan and A. Gomez, J. Aerosol Sci., 2009, 40, 907–918 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Salata, Curr. Nanosci., 2005, 1, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and K. S. Suslick, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1039–1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Stryckers, L. D'Olieslaeger, J. V. M. Silvano, C. K. Apolinario, A. C. G. Laranjeiro, J. Gruber, J. D'Haen, J. Manca, A. Ethirajan and W. Deferme, Phys. Status Solidi, 2016, 213, 1441–1446 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Fu and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1803408 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Leng, Z. Wang, X. Li, H. Guo, H. Li, K. Shih, G. Yan and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14996–15001 RSC .
D. A. Konopka, S. Pylypenko, P. Atanassov and T. L. Ward, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Song and S. B. Park, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 122–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gharsallaoui, G. Roudaut, O. Chambin, A. Voilley and R. Saurel, Food Res. Int., 2007, 40, 1107–1121 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vehring, Pharm. Res., 2008, 25, 999–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Gohel, R. K. Parikh, S. A. Nagori, A. V. Gandhi, M. S. Shroff, P. K. Patel, C. S. Gandhi, V. P. Patel, N. Y. Bhagat and S. D. Poptani, Pharm. Rev., 2009, 7, 1–20 Search PubMed .
R. Vehring, W. R. Foss and D. Lechuga-Ballesteros, J. Aerosol Sci., 2007, 38, 728–746 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, H. Hu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604563 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604–5618 RSC .
M. Kundu, G. Karunakaran, E. Kolesnikov, V. E. Sergeevna, S. Kumari, M. V. Gorshenkov and D. Kuznetsov, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 59, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, K. Huang, M. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, M. Yu and B. Geng, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 1490–1499 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo and T. Li, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 14565–14572 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Yang, C. K. Yun, M. J. Sang, J. C. Yun and S. K. Yang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 11972–11983 CAS .
Y. H. Cho, X. Liang, Y. C. Kang and J.-H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 207, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurav, T. Kodas, T. Pluym and Y. Xiong, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1993, 19, 411–452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Wang, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 21, 4593–4607 CrossRef .
T. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, J. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Guo, Y. Li and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13469–13474 RSC .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. Mcdowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Pan and D. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10380–10382 RSC .
Z. Cai, L. Xu, M. Yan, C. Han, L. He, K. M. Hercule, C. Niu, Z. Yuan, W. Xu and L. Qu, Nano Lett., 2014, 15, 738–744 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, P. Kopold, C. Wu, P. A. V. Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3531–3538 RSC .
H. Geng, J. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, H. Yu, H. Wang, Z. Luo, Y. Guo and Y. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603490 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, C. P. Ji and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lee, J. B. Joo, Y. Yin and F. Zaera, Angew. Chem., 2011, 50, 10208–10211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, R. Zhou, D. W. Wang, S. P. Jiang, Y. Yamauchi, S. Z. Qiao, M. J. Monteiro and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2518–2521 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Feng, Y. Song, W. Li, W. Gao, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Aldhayan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Catal. Today, 2015, 243, 199–208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, M. Y. Son and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2279–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Son, Y. J. Hong, J. K. Lee and K. Y. Chan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11592–11597 RSC .
M. Y. Son, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5678–5680 RSC .
C. M. Sim, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1320–1325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Ko, K. Y. Chan and S. B. Park, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8899–8903 RSC .
S. H. Choi and C. K. Yun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2312–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Won, S. H. Choi, Y. J. Hong, Y. N. Ko and Y. C. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, Y. Hong and Y. Kang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13110–13114 RSC .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2111–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Yang, N. K. You, J. Y. Yun and Y. C. Kang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 443–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Sim, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5978–5980 RSC .
S. H. Choi, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7867–7871 RSC .
H. Li and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2012, 43, 1201–1217 RSC .
G. Li, Z. Yang and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 741–748 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. And and P. Stroeve, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 3314–3324 CrossRef .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 4329–4335 CrossRef .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H. J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466–11467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3967–3983 RSC .
Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Small, 2015, 11, 2157–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, J. H. Kim, N. K. You, K. M. Yang and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, J. H. Kim, N. K. You, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 210, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, M. Y. Son, J. K. Lee, H. B. Lee, S. H. Lee and C. K. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 625–630 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Song, S. B. Park and J. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 5202 Search PubMed .
M. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 598–618 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, L. Peng, D. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Wang and G. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 816–823 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
J. W. Seo, Y. W. Jun, S. W. Park, H. Nah, T. Moon, B. Park, J. G. Kim, Y. J. Kim and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 8828–8831 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D. Park, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 17382–17386 RSC .
A. K. P. Mann and S. E. Skrabalak, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1017–1022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Cho, N. K. You, Y. C. Kang, I. D. Kim and J. H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Crowell, ChemInform, 2004, 35, S88–S95 CrossRef .
J. Sheng, K. L. Han, T. H. Hong, W. H. Choi and J. S. Park, J. Semicond., 2018, 39, 011008 CrossRef .
M. B. Tahir, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 2017, 55, 716–721 Search PubMed .
C. D. Hahm and B. Bhushan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 3339–3349 CrossRef CAS .
V. Salles and S. Bernard, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2016, 6, 1 CrossRef .
M. S. Tomar and F. J. Garcia, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact., 1981, 4, 221–248 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Htay, Y. Tani, Y. Hashimoto and K. Ito, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2008, 20, 341–345 CrossRef .
R. Ayouchi, F. Martin, D. Leinen and J. R. Ramos-Barrado, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 247, 497–504 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, R. Neagu, C.-S. Hsu, X. Zhang and C. Deces-Petit, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B407–B410 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ingole and B. Lokhande, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2016, 120, 434–440 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ingole, B. Y. Fugare and B. J. Lokhande, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 16374–16383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682–2699 RSC .
M. T. Htay, Y. Hashimoto and K. Ito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 440–448 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dedova, M. Krunks, M. Grossberg, O. Volobujeva and I. Oja Acik, Superlattices Microstruct., 2007, 42, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aguilar-Elguézabal, W. Antúnez, G. Alonso, F. P. Delgado, F. Espinosa and M. Miki-Yoshida, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 1329–1335 CrossRef .
R. Hausbrand, G. Cherkashinin, H. Ehrenberg, M. Gröting, K. Albe, C. Hess and W. Jaegermann, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2015, 192, 3–25 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, M. J. Lee, W. Cho, S. Chae, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 4440–4457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
S. Zhang, K. Zhao, T. Zhu and J. Li, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 479–521 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
M. Wild, L. O'Neill, T. Zhang, R. Purkayastha, G. Minton, M. Marinescu and G. J. Offer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3477–3494 RSC .
H. Yang, H.-H. Wu, M. Ge, L. Li, Y. Yuan, Q. Yao, J. Chen, L. Xia, J. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. Duan, K. Kisslinger, X. C. Zeng, W.-K. Lee, Q. Zhang and J. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808825 CrossRef .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Reed and G. Ceder, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4513–4534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. An, B. Gao, S. Mei, B. Xiang, J. Fu, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1447 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Luo, B. Zhao, H. Luo, X. Han, J. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Yang, T. Zhu and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 669–681 RSC .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11414–11443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, B. Liu, J. Zheng, C. Geng, K. Zhong, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2509–A2528 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, H.-H. Wu, C. Yang, Q. Zhang, G. Zhong, Z. Zheng, H. Chen, J. Wang, K. He, B. Wang, T. Zhu, X. C. Zeng, M. Liu and M.-S. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12597–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Son, Y. J. Hong, J. K. Lee and Y. Chan Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11592–11597 RSC .
S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, Z. X. Chen, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Lee, H. J. Kim, T. H. Hwang, S. Choi, S. H. Park, E. Deniz, D. S. Jung and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1870–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, J.-H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10173–10185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2312–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Son, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5678–5680 RSC .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 3014–3018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Ju, Y. J. Hong, J. S. Cho and Y. C. Kang, Carbon, 2016, 100, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, J. H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12645–12650 RSC .
Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 701–707 RSC .
S. J. Lee, H. J. Kim, T. H. Hwang, S. Choi, S. H. Park, E. Deniz, D. S. Jung and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1870–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Son, J. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 15203–15207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Park, S. H. Choi, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 12183–12189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Park, J.-H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 84, 14–23 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ju and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4327–4331 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko, S. H. Choi, Y. C. Kang and S. B. Park, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 336–343 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park, Y. N. Ko and Y. C. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Oh, H. P. Sang, C. W. Park and Y. K. Sun, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 171, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, Y. S. Lee, Y. Sato and Y. K. Sun, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 1169–1173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oljaca, B. Blizanac, A. Du Pasquier, Y. Sun, R. Bontchev, A. Suszko, R. Wall and K. Koehlert, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 729–738 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Wu, Z.-Z. Guo, M.-H. Yang, C.-H. Lu, T.-Y. Wu and I. Taniguchi, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1398–1399 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Oh, S. H. Park, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 558–562 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. Z. Hu, H. Chen, M. Vijayakumar, J. Zheng, H. Pan, E. D. Walter, M. Hu, X. Deng, J. Feng, B. Y. Liaw, M. Gu, Z. D. Deng, D. Lu, S. Xu, C. Wang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3309–3316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lengyel, D. Elhassid, G. Atlas, W. T. Moller and R. L. Axelbaum, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lengyel, G. Atlas, D. Elhassid, P. Y. Luo, X. Zhang, I. Belharouak and R. L. Axelbaum, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 286–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sim, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5978–5980 RSC .
I. Taniguchi, C. K. Lim, D. Song and M. Wakihara, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 146, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park and Y. K. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 434–439 Search PubMed .
S. W. Oh, S. H. Park, J. H. Kim, Y. C. Bae and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 464–470 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1029–1035 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. L. Doan and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1399–1408 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Abe and I. Taniguchi, Powder Technol., 2013, 235, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 278–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko, H. Y. Koo, J. H. Kim, J. H. Yi, Y. C. Kang and J.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6682–6687 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7867–7871 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, T. Li, K. Meng and J. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1822–1828 RSC .
I. Taniguchi, D. Song and M. Wakihara, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 333–339 CrossRef CAS .
I. Taniguchi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 92, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
I. Taniguchi and Z. Bakenov, Powder Technol., 2005, 159, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bakenov and I. Taniguchi, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Yabu and I. Taniguchi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ju and Y. C. Kang, Ceram. Int., 2009, 35, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Kim, S. H. Ju and Y. C. Kang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 362–370 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, C. S. Yoon, S. G. Kang, H.-S. Kim, S.-I. Moon and Y. K. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 557–563 CrossRef CAS .
I. Taniguchi, N. Fukuda and M. Konarova, Powder Technol., 2008, 181, 228–236 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park and Y. K. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 431–434 CAS .
J. Liu, T. E. Conry, X. Song, M. M. Doeff and T. J. Richardson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 885–888 RSC .
S. M. Oh, S. W. Oh, C. S. Yoon, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3260–3265 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. L. Doan and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5679–5684 CrossRef CAS .
I. Taniguchi, T. N. L. Doan and B. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7680–7685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akimoto and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 627–630 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2013, 19, 17305–17309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. You, J. H. Kim, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 211, 84–91 CrossRef .
Y. N. Ko, K. Y. Chan and S. B. Park, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8899–8903 RSC .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3661–3667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hong, M. Y. Son, J.-K. Lee, H. B. Lee, S. H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 625–630 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, J. H. Kim, Y. N. Ko, K. M. Yang and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim and C. S. Kim, J. Electroceram., 2009, 23, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lengyel, X. Zhang, G. Atlas, H. L. Bretscher, I. Belharouak and R. L. Axelbaum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1338–A1349 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Lim, W. Ahn, S.-H. Yeon and S. B. Park, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 2946–2952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, ChemInform, 2015, 46, 3431–3448 Search PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 RSC .
H. Pan, Y. S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, Z. Ao, D. Su, J. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1393–1403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Luo, T. Gao, A. Langrock, A. C. Mignerey and C. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 472 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, Y. N. Ko, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1780–1788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tepavcevic, H. Xiong, V. R. Stamenkovic, X. Zuo, M. Balasubramanian, V. B. Prakapenka, C. S. Johnson and T. Rajh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 530–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, Y. G. Lim, M. S. Park, S. L. Chou, J. H. Kim, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and Y. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 2, 529–534 RSC .
N. Zhang, X. Han, Y. Liu, X. Hu, Q. Zhao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401123 CrossRef .
A. Langrock, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Ehrman, A. Manivannan and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 62–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, C. Luo, T. Gao, X. Fan and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10378–10385 RSC .
S. Y. Lee, J. H. Kim and Y. C. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko, S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6449–6456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Ko and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12322–12324 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Han, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3384–3393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, N. Zhang, Q. Zhao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2770–2776 RSC .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1595–1603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Q. Zhao, N. Zhang, K. Lei, F. Li and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, L. Suo, T. Gao, X. Fan, F. Han and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 54, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko and Y. C. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, T. Gao, C. Luo, F. Wang, J. Hu and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, Y. N. Ko, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1780–1788 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 4140–4146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Cho, S. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21343–21349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 2769–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4209–4216 RSC .
K.-Y. Shen, M. Lengyel, L. Wang and R. L. Axelbaum, MRS Commun., 2017, 7, 74–77 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, T. Gao, J. Wang and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 250, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodera and T. Ogihara, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2014, 122, 483–487 CrossRef .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, W. Zhu, X. B. Cheng, J. Q. Huang, H. J. Peng, S. H. Yang and Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 75, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1008–1012 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 3651–3655 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, G. Xu, X. Zhang, S. Wang, C. Li and G. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 695, 2246–2252 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, F. Pei, J. Peng, A. Fu, J. Cui, X. Fang and N. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jung, T. H. Hwang, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Koo, R. A. Shakoor, R. Kahraman, Y. N. Jo, M.-S. Park and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4418–4425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3061–3070 RSC .
X. A. Chen, Z. Xiao, X. Ning, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, C. Zou, S. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Chen and S. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301988 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Ding, P. Kopold, K. Hahn, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1112–1119 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Li, X. Ge, J. Ma, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Park, J.-K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1705264 CrossRef .
X. Liang, M. R. Kaiser, K. Konstantinov, R. Tandiono, Z. Wang, C. Chen, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25251–25260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Jung, T. H. Hwang, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Koo, R. A. Shakoor, R. Kahraman, Y. N. Jo, M. S. Park and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4418–4425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, L. Liu, H. Zhao, A. Krall, Z. Wen, J. Chen, P. Hurley, J. Jiang and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 882–888 RSC .
H. Sohn, M. L. Gordin, T. Xu, S. Chen, D. Lv, J. Song, A. Manivannan and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7596–7606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Huang, D. Wang, J. Tian and Z. Shan, J. Power Sources, 2017, 355, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sohn, M. L. Gordin, M. Regula, H. K. Dong, Y. S. Jung, J. Song and D. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, Y. Wei, Y. Liu, J. Wang, W. Qiao, L. Ling and D. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3230–3239 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, ChemInform, 2004, 35, 4245 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vangari, T. Pryor and L. Jiang, J. Energy Eng., 2013, 139, 72–79 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, E. Goikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P. L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin and P. Simon, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 419–436 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, P. J. G. Chen and P. J. Q. Xiao, ChemInform, 2013, 52, 1882–1889 CAS .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2012, 5, 72–88 RSC .
X. Li and B. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 159–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Peigney, C. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. R. Bacsa and A. Rousset, Carbon, 2001, 39, 507–514 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jo, J.-H. Choi, S.-R. Park, C. M. Lee, H. Chang and H. D. Jang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 58–63 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Dogru, M. B. Durukan, O. Turel and H. E. Unalan, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2016, 26, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Long, W. Chen, H. Xu, X. Xiong, Y. Jiang, F. Zou, X. Hu, Y. Xin, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2497–2504 RSC .
F. Xu, R. Cai, Q. Zeng, C. Zou, D. Wu, F. Li, X. Lu, Y. Liang and R. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1970–1976 RSC .
Y. S. Yun, C. Im, H. H. Park, I. Hwang, Y. Tak and H. J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Liu, B. Sun, H. Zhou, A. Fu, Y. Wang, Y.-G. Guo, P. Guo and H. Li, Carbon, 2018, 130, 680–691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Graser, R. Zhao, F. Gao and M. J. O'Connell, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11156–11165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, J. Guo, F. Tong, D. Jia, W. Jia, J. Wu, L. Wang and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45363–45368 RSC .
C.-C. Hu, C.-C. Wang and K.-H. Chang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2691–2700 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal and O. S. Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 255–270 CrossRef .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kundu, G. Karunakaran, E. Kolesnikov, V. E. Sergeevna, S. Kumari, M. V. Gorshenkov and D. Kuznetsov, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 59, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
U. J. Chavan and A. A. Yadav, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 28, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. A. Yadav, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 6985–6991 CrossRef CAS .
P. More, P. Jadhav, S. Ingole, Y. Navale and V. Patil, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 707–714 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak, V. Khomenko, K. Jurewicz, K. Lota and F. Béguin, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Kwon, I. W. Ock, W. H. Suh, G. D. Stucky and J. K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 188–194 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gueon and J. H. Moon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2445–2453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. A. Huff, A. A. Gewirth and K. S. Suslick, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 899–906 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, S. Jiang, S. Shen and J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 13987–14000 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, J. Xu, Y. Ge, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Sun, S. Hou, Y. Shang and Y. Zhang, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 036306 CrossRef .
R. Ambare, S. Bharadwaj and B. Lokhande, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 1582–1590 CrossRef .
A. A. Yadav and U. J. Chavan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 232, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Ambare and B. J. Lokhande, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 1–7 CrossRef .
A. A. Yadav, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 1–8 CrossRef .
R. Ingole and B. Lokhande, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 1363–1369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Huang, D. Zeng, S. Liu and Z. Yao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1205–1211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kerli, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2016, 30, 1650343 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jo, H. D. Jang, H. Chang, S. K. Kim, J.-H. Choi and C. M. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2210–2217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Konstantinov, D. Wexler, H. Liu and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chidembo, S. H. Aboutalebi, K. Konstantinov, M. Salari, B. Winton, S. A. Yamini, I. P. Nevirkovets and H. K. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5236–5240 RSC .
C. Lee, S. K. Kim, J.-H. Choi, H. Chang and H. D. Jang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2030–2037 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Sun, L. Pan, H. Li, Z. Sun, C. Sun and B. K. Tay, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 480, L17–L19 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rodríguez-Reinoso, Carbon, 1998, 36, 159–175 CrossRef .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, S. Bahn, L. B. Hansen, M. Bollinger, H. Bengaard, B. Hammer, Z. Sljivancanin and M. Mavrikakis, J. Catal., 2002, 209, 275–278 CrossRef .
D. P. Debecker, S. Le Bras, C. Boissiere, A. Chaumonnot and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4112–4155 RSC .
W. Y. Teoh, Materials, 2013, 6, 3194–3212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
A. Gomis-Berenguer, L. F. Velasco, I. Velo-Gala and C. O. Ania, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 490, 879–901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. G. Edwards and J. A. Davies, Sol. Energy, 1994, 52, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiong, Z. Lei, Z. Xu, X. Chen, B. Gong, Y. Zhao, H. Zhao, J. Zhang and C. Zheng, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. S. Chen, J. Mishler, S. C. Cho and X. C. Adroher, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 981–1007 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, X.-J. Shi, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11119–11124 RSC .
Y. Guo, N. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Qian, S. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7571–7577 RSC .
S. N. Lim, S. A. Song, Y.-C. Jeong, H. W. Kang, S. B. Park and K. Y. Kim, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 6096–6103 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, Y. Wang, Q. Hu, J. Zhou, R. Feng, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, F. Chen, N. Han, Y. Li, C. Jin, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
Z. Ye, J. Yang, B. Li, L. Shi, H. Ji, L. Song and H. Xu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. C. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. Dekrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abildpedersen, C. F. Elkjær, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, K. Zhang, R. Shi and A. Tang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 1370–1374 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, A. Kroll, H. Zhao, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9967–9976 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal and L. Madler, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1324–1347 RSC .

          A. Purwanto, W. N. Wang and K. Okuyama, Flame Spray Pyrolysis, Springer, US,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Büchel, A. Baiker and S. E. Pratsinis, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 477, 93–101 CrossRef .
E. C. Lovell, J. Scott and R. Amal, Molecules, 2015, 20, 4594–4609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rowe and X. Li, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 82–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Kim, I. W. Nah, I.-H. Oh and S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 215–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Suzuki, A. Ishihara, S. Mitsushima, N. Kamiya and K.-I. Ota, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B105–B107 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ormerod, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 17–28 RSC .
L. dos Santos-Gomez, J. M. Porras-Vazquez, E. R. Losilla, F. Martin, J. R. Ramos-Barrado and D. Marrero-Lopez, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nie, W.-N. Wang, Y. Jiang, J. Fortner and P. Biswas, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6187–6196 RSC .
J. A. H. Dreyer, P. Li, L. Zhang, G. K. Beh, R. Zhang, P. H. L. Sit and W. Y. Teoh, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 715–726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schubert, S. Pokhrel, A. Thome, V. Zielasek, T. M. Gesing, F. Roessner, L. Maedler and M. Baeumer, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7449–7460 RSC .
E. Bahadori, A. Tripodi, A. Villa, C. Pirola, L. Prati, G. Ramis and I. Rossetti, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 430 CrossRef .
K. Siriworarat, V. Deerattrakul, P. Dittanet and P. Kongkachuichay, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 142, 1234–1243 CrossRef CAS .
K. Piriyasurawong, S. Piticharoenphun and O. Mekasuwandumrong, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2018, 916, 134–138 Search PubMed .
S. Tada, K. Larmier, R. Buchel and C. Coperet, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2056–2060 RSC .
K. Wang, D. Huang, L. Yu, H. Gu, S. Ikeda and F. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 9–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Su and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 2891–2896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernareggi, M. V. Dozzi, L. G. Bettini, A. M. Ferretti, G. L. Chiarello and E. Selli, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 301 CrossRef .
G. L. Chiarello, M. V. Dozzi, M. Scavini, J.-D. Grunwaldt and E. Selli, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160, 144–151 CrossRef .
J. S. Cho, S.-K. Park, K. M. Jeon, Y. Piao and Y. C. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kang and S. B. Park, Adv. Powder Technol., 2010, 21, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
L.-h. Song, H. W. Kang and S. B. Park, Energy, 2012, 42, 313–320 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Lim, S. A. Song, Y.-C. Jeong, H. W. Kang, S. B. Park and K. Y. Kim, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 6096–6103 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kang and S. B. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 9496–9504 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chiang, K. Aroh, N. Franson, V. R. Satsangi, S. Dass and S. Ehrman, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15519–15526 CrossRef CAS .
R. Balgis, W. Widiyastuti, T. Ogi and K. Okuyama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23792–23799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Bang, K. Han, S. E. Skrabalak, H. Kim and K. S. Suslick, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10959–10964 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Kim, E. Dy, S. Ban, K.-C. Tsay, H. Kawai, Z. Shi and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 480–485 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, C. Song, Y. Tang, J. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4532–4538 CrossRef CAS .
V. Baglio, A. Di Blasi, C. D'Urso, V. Antonucci, A. S. Arico, R. Ornelas, D. Morales-Acosta, J. Ledesma-Garcia, L. A. Godinez, L. G. Arriaga and L. Alvarez-Contreras, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B829–B833 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Valenzuela-Muniz, G. Alonso-Nunez, M. Miki-Yoshida, G. G. Botte and Y. Verde-Gomez, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 12640–12647 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, M. I. Ionescu, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18195–18198 RSC .
B. Zou, X. X. Wang, X. X. Huang and J. N. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 741–744 RSC .
H. Liu, Z. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 468–470 RSC .
K. C. Pingali, S. Deng and D. A. Rockstraw, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2007, 194, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .
L. dos Santos-Gomez, J. M. Porras-Vazquez, E. R. Losilla and D. Marrero-Lopez, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107889 RSC .
K. K. Moe, T. Tagawa and S. Goto, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1998, 106, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vernoux, E. Djurado and M. Guillodo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 2289–2295 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Jang, Y. J. Hong, H. M. Kim, J.-O. Shim, H.-S. Roh and Y. C. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 RSC .
J. Gong, J. Liang and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5848–5860 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Chamberlain, Sol. Cells, 1983, 8, 47–83 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Milichko, A. S. Shalin, I. S. Mukhin, A. E. Kovrov, A. A. Krasilin, A. V. Vinogradov, P. A. Belov and C. R. Simovskii, Phys.-Usp., 2016, 59, 801–852 CrossRef .

          A. Khan, M. Mondal, C. Mukherjee, R. Chakrabarty and D. De, Advances in Optical Science and Engineering, Springer,  2015, pp. 135–140 Search PubMed .
M. Eslamian, Nano-Micro Lett., 2016, 9, 3 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. S. Ginley, D. Cahen and M. Society, Fundamentals of materials for energy and environmental sustainability, Cambridge University Press,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. A. Ibrahim and A. Ashour, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2006, 17, 835–839 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, A. Kumar and D. Kaur, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 306, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, T. Ishida, Y. Nakato and H. Tsubomura, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 69, 1736–1743 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, Y. Kogetsu, T. Ishida and Y. Nakato, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 4756–4761 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Saim and D. S. Campbell, Sol. Energy Mater., 1987, 15, 249–260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, J. Fujimoto, T. Ka, A. Yoshida and T. Arizumi, Phys. Status Solidi, 2010, 32, 255–261 CrossRef .
U. R. Chaudhuri, K. Ramkumar and M. Satyam, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 66, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Varma, K. V. Rao and S. Kar, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 56, 2812–2822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, H. Mori, T. Ishida and Y. Nakato, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
R. Romero, M. C. López, D. Leinen, F. Martín and J. R. Ramos-Barrado, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2004, 110, 87–93 CrossRef .
K. J. Bachmann, E. Buehler, J. L. Shay and S. Wagner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 121–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kikkawa and D. D. Awschalom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4313–4316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Britt and C. Ferekides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 2851–2852 CrossRef CAS .
R. Scheer, T. Walter, H. W. Schock, M. L. Fearheiley and H. J. Lewerenz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 3294–3296 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Islam, S. Ishizuka, A. Yamada, K. Sakurai, S. Niki, T. Sakurai and K. Akimoto, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 970–972 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pawar, B. S. Pawar, A. V. Moholkar, D. S. Choi, J. H. Yun, J. H. Moon, S. S. Kolekar and J. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4057–4061 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D.-B. Li, K. Li, C. Chen, H.-X. Deng, L. Gao, Y. Zhao, F. Jiang, L. Li, F. Huang, Y. He, H. Song, G. Niu and J. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17046 CrossRef CAS .
K. Emery, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 17, 320–326 Search PubMed .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. Dehart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235–239 CAS .
J. C. Ho, T. Zhang, K. K. Lee, S. K. Batabyal, A. I. Tok and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6638–6643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, W. Shu, K. Chen and W. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 586, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
K. Usha, B. Mondal, D. Sengupta and P. Kumbhakar, Measurement, 2015, 61, 21–26 CrossRef .
H. Steenfos, S. Partoft, S. Timshel, E. Balslev, A. Turkovic and O. C. Crnjak, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 45, 275–281 CrossRef .
T. H. Lee, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Lim, N. M. Huang, H. N. Lim and M. Mazhar, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 8045–8052 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dwivedi, V. Dutta, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Procedia, 2013, 33, 223–227 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14394–14400 CrossRef CAS .
D. Paul Joseph, M. Saravanan, B. Muthuraaman, P. Renugambal, S. Sambasivam, S. Philip Raja, P. Maruthamuthu and C. Venkateswaran, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 485707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song, H. J. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, D. Kim, H. W. Shin, T. K. Ahn, C. Wolf, T. W. Lee and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3424–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Liu, C. Qin, X. Yang, A. Islam, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 629–640 RSC .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Gratzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Uzum, H. Kanda, H. Fukui, T. Izumi, T. Harada and S. Ito, Photonics, 2017, 4, 42 CrossRef .
H. Kanda, A. Uzum, N. Harano, S. Yoshinaga, Y. Ishikawa, Y. Uraoka, H. Fukui, T. Harada and S. Ito, Energy Sci. Eng., 2016, 4, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salem, Z. Y. Alami, B. Bessais, A. Chahboun and M. Gaidi, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 137 CrossRef .
H. Dhasmana and V. Dutta, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 1244–1250 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Goyal, C. Agashe, M. G. Takwale, B. R. Marathe and V. G. Bhide, J. Mater. Sci., 1992, 27, 4705–4708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wienke, B. van der Zanden, M. Tijssen and M. Zeman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 884–890 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Untila, T. N. Kost, A. B. Chebotareva, A. N. Ryabinkin and M. A. Timofeyev, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 8038–8045 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Chebotareva, G. G. Untila, T. N. Kost, A. S. Stepanov, S. N. Salazkin and V. V. Shaposhnikova, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 165, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chabane, N. Zebbar, M. Kechouane, M. S. Aida and M. Trari, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 605, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tatar, D. Demiroglu and M. Urgen, Microelectron. Eng., 2014, 126, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Yadav and S. D. Salunke, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 640, 534–539 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Riad, S. Darwish and H. H. Afify, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 391, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Crossay, S. Buecheler, L. Kranz, J. Perrenoud, C. M. Fella, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 283–288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kurihara, W. Septina, T. Hirano, Y. Nakajima, T. Harada and S. Ikeda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 091203 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka, M. Kato and H. Uchiki, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 616, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hossain, T. Zhang, L. K. Keat, X. Li, R. R. Prabhakar, S. K. Batabyal, S. G. Mhaisalkar and L. H. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4147–4154 RSC .
M. A. Hassan, M. Mujahid, L. S. Woei and L. H. Wong, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 035506 CrossRef .
T. T. John, M. Mathew, C. S. Kartha, K. P. Vijayakumar, T. Abe and Y. Kashiwaba, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 89, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Icli, B. C. Kocaoglu and M. Ozenbas, J. Photonics Energy, 2018, 8, 015501 Search PubMed .
M. Okuya, K. Ohashi, T. Yamamoto and J. Madarasz, Electrochemistry, 2008, 76, 132–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 188, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shaban, M. H. M. Ara, S. Falahatdoost and N. Ghazyani, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2016, 16, 131–134 CrossRef .
S. Shukla, L. Nguyen Huu, P. P. Boix, T. M. Koh, R. R. Prabhakar, H. K. Mulmudi, J. Zhang, S. Chen, C. F. Ng, C. H. A. Huan, N. Mathews, T. Sritharan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10597–10605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Swami, N. Chaturvedi, A. Kumar and V. Dutta, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Oh, S. A. Song, K. Y. Jung, Y.-W. Chang, K. Kim, S. N. Lim and Y.-C. Jeong, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 390–395 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, Y. Guo, Z. Xue, P. Xu, M. He and B. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1997–2003 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, Z. Xu, Y. Guo, P. Xu and M. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29580–29587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, H. Chen, K. Zhang, C. Qin, J. Liu, W. Peng, A. Islam, E. Bi, F. Ye, M. Yin, P. Zhang and L. Han, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 052301 CrossRef .
J. H. Heo, M. S. You, M. H. Chang, W. Yin, T. K. Ahn, S.-J. Lee, S.-J. Sung, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Messing, S. C. Zhang and G. V. Jayanthi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 76, 2707–2726 CrossRef .
C. Guild, S. Biswas, Y. Meng, T. Jafari, A. M. Gaffney and S. L. Suib, Catal. Today, 2014, 238, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
R. Strobel, A. Alfons and S. E. Pratsinis, Adv. Powder Technol., 2006, 17, 457–480 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Jin Leng
	Jin Leng received his bachelor's and master's degrees from Central South University in 2015 and 2018, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate with Prof. Zilong Tang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. His research mainly focuses on electrode materials and solid electrolytes for LIBs.

Jiexi Wang
	Jiexi Wang is currently an Associate Professor of metallurgy and material physical chemistry at Central South University (CSU). He received his PhD degree in Metallurgical Physical Chemistry from CSU in 2015. Then, he joined Prof. T. S. Zhao's group as a visiting scholar at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. After that, he was a postdoctoral research associate in the laboratory of Prof. X. Y. Li and K. Shih at The University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the design and fabrication of nonferrous-based functional materials, and material-oriented utilization of corresponding resources for rechargeable batteries, efficient catalyses and supercapacitors. He has published about 80 papers in Advanced Energy Materials, Nano Energy, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, etc., which attracted more than 2600 citations with an h-index of 33.

Qiaobao Zhang
	Qiaobao Zhang is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Materials, at Xiamen University. He obtained his PhD degree from the Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering at City University of Hong Kong in 2016. He joined Prof. Meilin Liu's group as a visiting PhD student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology in 2015. His current research includes developing nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage devices such as Li/Na/K ion batteries and supercapacitors and investigating their energy storage mechanism by in situ SEM/TEM. His research results have been published in Progress in Materials Science, Energy & Environmental Science, Nature Communications, Science Advances, Advanced Energy Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, ACS Nano, Nano Letters, Nano Energy, ACS Catalysis, Energy Storage Materials, etc.

Zaiping Guo
	Zaiping Guo is a distinguished Professor and the group leader of the Energy Storage Research Group at the University of Wollongong, Australia. She received a PhD in Materials Engineering from the University of Wollongong in 2003. She was an APD Fellow at the University of Wollongong, where she continued as a group leader from 2007. She was awarded an ARC Queen Elizabeth II Fellowship in 2010 and an ARC Future Fellowship (FT3) in 2015. Her research focuses on the design and application of functional materials for energy storage and conversion, including rechargeable batteries, hydrogen storage, and fuel cells. She has published more than 350 papers, which attracted more than 18600 citations with an h-index of 74. She has supervised 35 PhD students and more than 30 postdoctoral and visiting fellows.

 	Fig. 1  Development and application history of the SP technique in different fields. Data from Web of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of the topic covered in this paper.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of typical apparatus for the SP technique. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the controllable parameters for the powder preparation from solution to particle via one-pot SP.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram (left side) and digital photograph (right side) of an ultrasonic fountain and the mist produced at 1.7 MHz. (b) Cross-sectional views of pneumatic atomizers. (c) Photograph of an electroatomizer. (a) Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2008, Elsevier.	 
	(1)
	(2)

Ultrasonic atomizer	1–100	<2	0.2–0.4	0.1–100 kg per day
Pneumatic atomizer	10–100	3–no limit	5–20	>5 tons per day
Electrostatic atomizer	0.1–10	0.01–1	0.01–0.2	<1 kg per day

Ultrasonic atomizer	Low cost	Relatively low productivity
High stability	Can’t treat high viscosity solution
Pneumatic atomizer	High productivity	Large droplet size (∼50 μm)
High adaptability	Nonuniform size distribution
Electrostatic atomizer	Highly controllable	Low productivity
Tiny droplet size	Can’t treat insulating liquid

 	Fig. 6  Various nanostructures prepared by SP. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of typical single-shell hollow spheres prepared by SP. (b) SEM image, TEM images (c and d) and elemental mappings (e) of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 spheres. (f and g) TEM images and (h and i) elemental mappings of the Li4Ti5O12–SnO2 hollow composite. (j and k) SEM images and (l and m) TEM images of the SnO2 hollow spheres. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f–i) Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2013, ESG. (j–m) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Formation mechanism for the porous Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 powder prepared by SP from chloride solution. (b) SEM images and (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the porous Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O1.1 powder particles. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the nickel-foam supported Co3O4 microspheres. (e–g) SEM images of the nickel-foam-supported Co3O4 microspheres. (h) TEM image of the Co3O4 microspheres. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d–h) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image, TEM image (b), and elemental mappings (c) of the yolk–shell SnO2 spheres. (d) The mechanism for the formation of the double-shelled SnO2 powders. (e) The mechanism for the formation of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 powders. (f) SEM image, TEM images (g and h), and elemental mappings (i) of the multi-shelled NiCo2O4 spheres. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e–i) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Formation mechanism of the SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of the SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (d) SEM image and (e) TEM image of the ZnO/SnOx/carbon core–shell-structured composite powder. (f) Schematic diagram of the large-scale in situ SP process for TiO2-coated LiMn2O4. (g) SEM image and (h) TEM image of the TiO2-coated LiMn2O4 powders. (i) SEM image and (j) TEM image of the Zr-coated LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 cathode. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (i and j) Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2012, The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Formation mechanism of SnSe nanoplates from the precursor solution containing tin oxalate and H2SeO3. (b) SEM image, (c and d) TEM images, (e) selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, and (f) elemental mapping images of the SnSe nanoplates. (g–i) TEM images of SnSe–C composite powders, as-sprayed followed by post-treatment at temperatures of (g) 400, (h) 500, and (i) 600 °C. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Spray pyrolysis apparatus to prepare thin films. (b) Film formation by the spray pyrolysis technique. (c and d) SEM images of the polished cross-section of an SDC film deposited on the NiO–SDC/NiO–YSZ substrate (YSZ = yttrium stabilized zirconia) by electrostatic spray deposition. (a) Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2017, Springer. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis system for preparing one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO. (b) Possible steps in the growth mechanism of one-dimensional single-crystal ZnO: (1) evaporation and decomposition of vapor, (2) formation of SL, (3) formation of SCs, and (4) growth of crystalline structures. (c) SEM images of ZnO nanowires, (d) ZnO nanorods, and (e) carbon nanotubes. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2007, Japan Society of Applied Physics. (c) Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2008, Springer. (d) Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2006, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The number of published research papers on SP in the years from 1978 to 2018. (b) Number of research papers on the topics of “Batteries”, “Supercapacitors”, “Catalysis”, and “Solar cells” based on “Spray pyrolysis”, published from 2009 to 2018. (c) The top countries and (d) institutions ranked by their number of SP patents (as of January 7, 2019). (a and b) Data from Web of Science. (c and d) Data from the World Intellectual Property Organization.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a–c) The working principles of (a) Li-ion batteries, (b) Na-ion batteries, and (c) Li–sulfur batteries. (a) Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Initial charge–discharge curves of the Fe2O3 yolk–shell electrodes cycled at 300 mA g−1. (b) Rate performance of electrodes made of dense and yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles prepared at 1000 °C at various discharge rates. (c and d) TEM images of (c) dense and (d) yolk–shell Fe2O3 particles after 80 cycles at 300 mA g−1. (e) Graphical representation of the construction of the Si–SiOx–C composite prepared by SP. (f) First charge–discharge profiles of Si–SiOx–C depending on the NaOH etching duration. (g) Direct comparison between the Si–SiOx–C-30 min sample and commercial SiOx in terms of cyclability and coulombic efficiency. (h) TEM image of the perforated SnO2@CNT composite microspheres. (i) Rate performance of the bare SnO2 and SnO2@CNT composite microspheres with perforated and filled structures at six discharge rates. (j) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the composite microspheres at the 10C rate. (a–d) Reproduced with permission. 176 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 


SnO2 hollow nanoplates56	SnC2O4 + H2SeO3 + PVP	200 nm, 41.5 m2 g−1	5000	600	500
Co3O4 hollow nanopowders54	Co(NO3)2 + NaCl	1 μm, 33.7 m2 g−1	1000	150	775
Co3O4 dense microspheres53	CoCl2	2 μm, 7.8 m2 g−1	200	100	1011
NiCo2O4 plicated spheres58	Ni(CH3COO)2 + Co(CH3COO)2	1 μm, 50.9 m2 g−1	100	50	801
NiO yolk–shell microspheres180	Ni(NO3)2 + sucrose	0.4 μm, 8 m2 g−1	700	150	951
Co3O4 yolk–shell particles181	Co(NO3)2 + sucrose	1 μm, 4 m2 g−1	10000	100	548
SnO2 yolk–shell microspheres113	SnC2O4 + sucrose	1 μm, 13 m2 g−1	625	40	678
Fe2O3 yolk–shell spheres176	Fe(NO3)2 + sucrose	1.5 μm, 21 m2 g−1	300	80	848
NiCo2O4 yolk–shell spheres86	Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + PVP	0.6 μm, 7.9 m2 g−1	400	100	1064
ZnO–Mn3O4 yolk–shell balls182	Zn(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose	1.2 μm, 22 m2 g−1	700	100	912
Sn–C yolk–shell microspheres133	SnC2O4 + Ni(NO3)2 + PVP	0.8 μm, 448 m2 g−1	1000	500	691
Sn–MnO–Mn2SnO4–C yolk–shell microspheres183	Mn(NO3)2 + SnC2O4 + PVP	1 μm, 48 m2 g−1	1000	100	784
SnOx–C core–shell balls37	SnC2O4 + PVP	770 nm, 3 m2 g−1	2000	500	1033
NiO–TiO2 core–shell particles184	Ni(NO3)2 + C12H28O4Ti + ethyl alcohol	34 nm, 24.6 m2 g−1	300	80	970
Zn2SnO4–C core–shell microspheres185	SnC2O4 + Ni(NO3)2 + PVP	2 μm, 36 m2 g−1	1000	120	770
Co3O4–C multiroom spheres66	Co(NO3)2 + (C6H10O5)n	1.5 μm, 17 m2 g−1	3000	150	1243
Si–SiOx–C composite186	Si (70 nm) + NaOH + citric acid	1.6 μm, 214 m2 g−1	1C	200	1035
Ni7S6–NixS6–C microspheres187	Ni(NO3)2 + thiourea + sucrose	0.6 μm, 2.8 m2 g−1	1000	500	472
SnO2–CNT microspheres179	SnC2O4 + CNTs + polystyrene	0.6 μm, 83.1 m2 g−1	4000	1000	796
Fe3O4–graphene microballs24	FeCl3 + graphene oxide	0.8 μm, 130 m2 g−1	7000	1000	690
COx–rGO composite67	Co(NO3)2 + graphene oxide	1 μm, 47 m2 g−1	2000	200	932
SnOx–C–rGO nanoparticles188	SnC2O4 + graphene oxide + sucrose	0.5 μm, 103 m2 g−1	1000	175	844
ZnS–rGO nanoparticles189	ZnCl2 + thiourea + graphene oxide	0.6 μm, 46 m2 g−1	4000	700	437
Co2(OH)3Cl–rGO particles190	CoCl2 + graphene oxide	1.5 μm, 17 m2 g−1	5000	600	833
NiO–MnCo2O4 microspheres60	NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2	1 μm, 10.2 m2 g−1	800	300	687
Li4Ti5O12 powders191	LiNiO3 + TTIP + ethylene glycol	1.4 μm, 2.3 m2 g−1	170	80	170
Li2TiO3–LiCrO2 powders192	LiNiO3 + TTIP + Cr(NiO3)3 + HNO3	0.92 μm, no data	15	30	195
Co2(OH)3Cl powders193	CoCl2	1.5 μm, 6 m2 g−1	5000	1000	609
SnO2–CuO nanorods57	SnSO4 + Cu(NO3)2 + citric acid	20 nm, no data	3000	50	394


LiCoO2 particles219	Li2CO3 + Co(NO3)2 + citric acid + ethylene glycol	900 °C, air	0.1C	50	124
LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 powder220	Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + LiOH	500 °C, air	0.1C	50	163
LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 particles55	NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2 + Li2CO3	850 °C, O2	1C	100	161
LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 particles102	NiCl2 + CoCl2 + MnCl2 + Li2CO3	850 °C, O2	1C	100	173
LiNi0.8Co0.15Mn0.05O2 particles74	Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + citric acid + ethylene glycol + DMF + LiOH	900 °C, air	0.5C	30	174
LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 particles69	Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + Al(NO3)3 + citric acid + ethylene glycol + DMF + LiOH	900 °C, air	0.1C	40	158
LiMn2O4 microspheres221	LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2	800 °C, air	1C	100	109
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 powder222	LiNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose	500 °C, air	0.1C	50	139
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell microspheres211	LiNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + sucrose	700 °C, air	10C	1000	108
LiFePO4/C porous spheres223	LiNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + NH4H2PO4 + citric acid	700 °C, 5% H2/N2	0.125C	100	153
LiMnPO4–C composite224	LiH2PO4 + Mn(NO3)2 + citric acid + sucrose	400 °C, air	0.5C	50	129
LiCoPO4–C composite225	LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + acetylene black	300 °C, air	0.5C	25	127
LiCoxMn1−xPO4–C nanocomposites226	LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2	300 °C, 3% H2/N2	0.5C	100	66
LiCo1/3Mn1/3Fe1/3PO4–C nanocomposite227	LiNO3 + H3PO4 + Co(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2 + Fe(NO3)3 + acetylene black	300 °C, 3% H2/N2	0.5C	50	124
LiV3O8 yolk–shell particles228	LiNO3 + V2O5 + HNO3 + sucrose	1000 °C, N2	1000	100	194
V2O5 dense microspheres229	V2O5 + HNO3	1000 °C, air	0.5C	20	263
V2O5 yolk–shell powders230	V2O5 + HNO3 + sucrose	1000 °C, N2	1C	50	222
C-Coated LiFePO4 particles231	Li(HCOO) + FeCl2 + H3PO4	500 °C, N2	1C	100	153
TiO2-Coated LiMn2O4232	LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + TTIP + alcohol	900 °C, air	1C	170	109
ZrO2-Coated LiNi0.8Co0.2O2137	LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + (C5H7O2)4Zr	Propane, O2	0.1C	10	145
Li2O–B2O3 modified LiCoO2233	LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + H3BO3	Propane, O2	70	50	123
Zr-Doped LiCoO2 powder234	LiNO3 + Co(NO3)2 + ZrO(NO3)2	400–800 °C, air	1C	50	108

xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)Li(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)O2 particles235	LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2	450 °C, air	28	100	240
Li1.167Ni0.18Mn0.548Co0.105O2–graphene nanocomposite236	LiNO3 + Mn(NO3)2 + Ni(NO3)2 + Co(NO3)2 + graphene oxide	800 °C, air	100	90	175

 	Fig. 17  (a) TEM image of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell cathode post-treated at 750 °C. (b) Rate performance of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 yolk–shell cathode at seven discharge rates. (c) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency at a rate of 10C. (d) SEM image of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 powders prepared by SP. (e) Rate capability in the rate range of 0.1–5C and (f) cycling performance at 1C of the as-prepared LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 cathode. (g) Cross-sectional SEM images of the Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1(OH)2@Ni0.8Co0.1Mn0.1Ox precursor. (h) Cycling performance at 1C and (i) rate capability in the rate range of 0.1–10C of spherical LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and description of the Na+ insertion process for the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres prepared by one-pot SP. (b) TEM image of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres. (c and d) Electrochemical properties of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite and the crumpled MoS2–graphene composite microspheres: (c) rate performances at different current densities ranging from 0.2 to 10 A g−1 and (d) long-term cycling properties and coulombic efficiency of the 3D MoS2–graphene composite microspheres at a current density of 1.5 A g−1. (e) Cycling performances of 5-Fe2O3@C, 20-Fe2O3@C, and γ-Fe2O3 at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (f) Rate performances of 5-Fe2O3@C and 20-Fe2O3@C at different current densities. (g) Long-term cycling stability of 5-Fe2O3@C at a current density of 2000 mA g−1. (h) TEM image of the 5-Fe2O3@C composite after 200 discharge/charge cycles at 200 mA g−1. (i) HRTEM image of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge. (j) Ex situ Raman spectra of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge (red line) and full charge (blue line). (k) Ex situ XRD patterns of the 5-Fe2O3@C electrode after full discharge (blue line) and full charge (black line). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e–k) Reproduced with permission.248 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 
Fe2O3 + 6Na+ + 6e− ↔ 2Fe + 3Na2O	(3)

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the hollow C/Na2FePO4F particles prepared by SP. (c and d) The electrochemical performance of the hollow C/Na2FePO4F particles as a cathode material for SIBs: (c) discharge and charge capacity retention performance at a rate of 0.1C, and (d) rate capability of C/Na2FePO4F. (e and f) SEM images of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 precursor powders directly prepared by the SP process at 800 °C. (g) SEM and (h) TEM images of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode material. (i) Cycling performance and (j) rate capability of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 cathode material. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e–j) Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


SnSe nanoplates64	SnC2O4 + H2SeO3	900 °C, 10% H2/Ar	300	50	558
CoSe2 hollow microspheres252	Co(NO3)2 + Se	400 °C, 10% H2/Ar	500	40	467
Sb–C microspheres253	SbCl3 + sucrose	700 °C, N2	300	100	372
Sn–C microspheres254	SnCl2 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol	800 °C, Ar	1000	500	415
Sb–C nanocomposite255	SbCl3 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol	800 °C, Ar	100	500	385
CuO/C porous spheres256	Cu(NO3)2 + resorcinol + formaldehyde	800 °C, Ar	200	600	402
γ-Fe2O3–C porous spheres248	FeCl3 + resorcinol + formaldehyde + ethanol	800 °C, Ar	2000	1400	358
SnS–C microspheres257	SnC2O4 + CH4N2S + PVP	900 °C, 10% H2/Ar	500	50	433
MoS2–C microspheres258	Na2MoO4 + thiourea + resorcinol + formaldehyde	800 °C, Ar	1000	2500	390
FeS2–C porous spheres259	Fe(NO3)3 + sucrose + sulfur	700 °C, Ar	60	100	450
Co9S8–C nanoparticles260	Co(NO3)2 + thiourea + PVP	900 °C, 10% H2/Ar	500	50	404
Sn4P3–C microspheres261	SnSO4 + sucrose + H2SO4 + NaH2PO2	600 °C, Ar	100	120	700
MoS2–graphene spheres262	(NH4)2MoS4 + graphene + polystyrene	800 °C, N2	1500	600	323
CoSex–rGO nanoparticles263	Co(NO3)2 + H2SeO3 + graphene oxide	800 °C, H2/Ar	300	50	420
FeTe2–rGO microspheres264	Fe(NO3)3 + graphene oxide + H2Te	600 °C, Ar	200	80	493
FeS–rGO crumpled spheres265	Fe(NO3)3 + graphene oxide + thiourea	600 °C, Ar	500	50	547
MoSe2–CNTs porous balls266	(NH4)2MoO4 + CNTs + polystyrene + H2Se	700 °C, Ar	1000	250	296


Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 plates251	NaNO3 + Ni(NO3)2 + Mn(NO3)2	800 °C, air	0.1C	200	80
Na0.44MnO2 nanorods267	NaNO3 + Mn(NO3)2	575 °C, —	0.33C	30	110
Na2FePO4F C-Coated spheres249	NaF + NaNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + H3PO4 + sucrose	500 °C, N2	1C	750	60
Na3V2(PO4)3-C hollow microspheres250	NH4VO3 + NH4H2PO4 + Na2CO3 + citric acid	600 °C, Ar	20	300	89
Croconic acid disodium salt–graphene oxide268	Croconic acid disodium salt + graphene oxide	200 °C, N2	20	100	150
Na2/3Fe1/3Mn2/3O2 spheres269	NaNO3 + Fe(NO3)3 + Mn(NO3)2	600 °C, air	0.1C	20	135


Carbon–graphite–S particles283	62	0.1C	200	480
Co–CNTs–S yolk–shell spheres282	81	1C	400	700
Carbon–S porous spheres284	46	2.4C	500	539
Carbon–S porous spheres285	63.9	1C	100	904
Carbon–S porous spheres286	59	0.1C	50	823
Carbon–CNTs–S microspheres287	55.4	1C	300	535
Carbon–polyacrylonitrile–S spheres288	72	0.5C	100	576
Carbon–Nb2O5–S porous spheres289	60	0.5C	200	913

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure and the electrochemical processes for the hierarchical porous carbon electrode prepared by SP. (b) First discharge/charge curves of HPC–S and bare S electrodes at the 0.06C rate (1C = 1675 mA h g−1). (c) Cycling performance of HPC–S and AC1600-S at a current rate of 0.3C. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of HPC–S at 2.4C; inset: SEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of a HPC–S particle after 500 cycles. (e) Schematic illustration of the discharge and charge mechanism of Co@BNCNTs YS microspheres. (f) CV curves, (g) rate capabilities, and (h) cycling properties of Co@BNCNTs YS/S microspheres and Co@NCNTs/S. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.282 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the energy storage mechanism for supercapacitors: (a) EDLC type and (b) pseudocapacitor type. Reproduced with permission.295 Copyright 2013, American Society of Civil Engineers.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of the CNTs grown on aluminum foil. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the VACNT electrodes at different scan rates. (c) TEM image of the hollow carbon nanospheres prepared by SP. (d) Specific capacitance of hollow and solid carbon nanospheres at different current densities. (e) Schematic diagram of the formation of hierarchical porous carbon spheres from coal. (f) TEM image of hierarchical porous carbon spheres. (g) Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms at 77 K. (h) CV curves of samples at a scanning rate of 10 mV s−1 and (i) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of samples at a specific capacitance of 1 A g−1. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.307 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (e–i) Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
NiCo2O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ NiOOH + 2CoOOH + 2e−	(4)
CoOOH + OH− ↔ CoO2 + H2O + e−	(5)

 	Fig. 23  (a) TEM image of a hollow NiCo2O4 nanosphere prepared by SP. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the SP derived hollow NiCo2O4 at scan rates of 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 mV s−1. (c) Charge/discharge voltage profiles of the SP derived hollow NiCo2O4 at 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 A g−1. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of a thin film electrode by SPD. (e) Two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) AFM images of tin oxide thin films prepared by SPD from SnCl4 solution. (f) AFM image of the RuO2 thin film prepared by SPD. (g) Variation in CV curves under different scan rates for the RuO2 thin film electrode. (h) Charge–discharge curves for the RuO2 thin film electrode in 1 M KOH. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.315 Copyright 2017, Springer. (e) Reproduced with permission.314 Copyright 2016, Springer. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2017, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of the SP process for the synthesis of nickel-encapsulated hollow porous nitrogen-rich carbon spheres. (b) Voltage profiles of the NiO–carbon hollow sphere based asymmetric capacitor at various scan rates. (c) TEM images and proposed pathways of redox ions for 8NH2 and 7NH. (d) TEM image of a MnO2/CNT core–shell particle. (e and f) Electrochemical properties of the MnO2/CNT core–shell particles and bare MnO2 particles: (e) charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g−1 and (f) cycling performance at a constant current density of 2 A g−1. (g) Illustration of direct spraying of MnO2 microspheres on carbon fiber paper. (h) SEM image of MnO2 microspheres directly sprayed on carbon fiber paper. (i) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the MnO2@carbon fiber composite at different scan rates. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.318 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.321 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 


Carbon nanospheres	6 M KOH	−0.5 to 0.5	0.1 A g−1	112 (type I)a	
307

Carbon microspheres	6 M KOH	−1.0 to 0 (vs. Hg/HgO)	0.5 A g−1	251 (three electrodes)	
306

Graphene crumpled balls	5 M KOH	−0.2 to 0.8	0.1 A g−1	156 (type I)a	
301

Carbon porous spheres	6 M KOH	−1.0 to 0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	10 A g−1	240 (three electrodes)	
322

Carbon porous spheres	6 M KOH	0–1.0	0.2 A g−1	180 (type I)a	
308

NiCo2O4 hollow spheres	3 M KOH	0–0.45 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 A g−1	1007 (three electrodes)	
312

V2O5 microspheres	1 M LiNO3	−1.0 to 1.0 (vs. SCE)	1 A g−1	126 (three electrodes)	
323

Co3O4–Mn3O4 thin film	1 M KOH	−0.4 to 0.4 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	1 mV s−1	485 (three electrodes)	
324

Co3O4 thin film	2 M KOH	−0.8 to 0.1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	425 (three electrodes)	
325

Mn3O4 thin film	1 M Na2SO4	−0.8 to 1.1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	1 mV s−1	804 (three electrodes)	
326

V2O5 thin film	1 M KCl	0.055–1.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	428 (three electrodes)	
154

NiMn2O4 thin film	2 M KOH	−0.2 to 0.4 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	460 (three electrodes)	
313

RuO2 thin film	1 M KOH	−1.30 to 0.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	1 mV s−1	1429 (three electrodes)	
155

a-Fe2O3 thin films	2 M KOH	−1.0 to 0.2 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	539 (three electrodes)	
327

V2O5 thin films	1 M KCl	0.055–1.35 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	307 (three electrodes)	
328

SnO2 thin films	1 M KOH	−0.2 to 0.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	150 (three electrodes)	
314

RuO2–Co3O4 thin films	2 M KOH	−0 to 0.4 (vs. SCE)	0.2 A g−1	690 (three electrodes)	
329

Co3O4 B-doped thin films	6 M KOH	−0.4 to 0.4 (vs. SCE)	5 mV s−1	482 (three electrodes)	
330

MnO2–CNT core–shell particles	1 M Na2SO4	0–1.0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	0.5 A g−1	370 (three electrodes)	
320

Graphene–CNT–polyaniline	5 M KOH	−0.2 to 0.8	0.1 A g−1	456 (type I)a	
331

V2O5–Carbon microspheres	2 M KCl	−0.2 to 0.8 (vs. SCE)	5 mV s−1	295 (three electrodes)	
332

NiO–Carbon hollow spheres	1 M KOH	0–1.5	1 A g−1	157 (type II)a	
318

NiO–rGO microspheres	1 M NaOH	−0.2 to 0.5 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	5 mV s−1	656 (three electrodes)	
333

Fe–Co oxides–graphene	5 M KOH	0–1.0	0.1 A g−1	325 (type I)a	
334

ZnO–CNT thin films	Gel polymer	−0.5 to 0.5	50 mV s−1	126 (type I)a	
335


 	Fig. 25  (a and b) Schematic representations of photocatalysis for (a) water splitting and (b) CO2 reduction. (c) Working principles of proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. (a) Reproduced with permission.343 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission.345 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image and (c) TEM image of the 6% Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 thin film. (d) Current–potential curves of ZnFe2O4 photoanodes with different Ti doping concentrations measured in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution under air mass (AM) 1.5 global (G) illumination (100 mW cm−2). (e) Mott–Schottky plots of pure ZnFe2O4 and Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 photoanodes. (f) Nyquist plots of pure ZnFe2O4 and Ti-doped ZnFe2O4 from the raw data and fitting curves. (g) Schematic illustration of the ultrasonic spray pyrolysis approach for preparing MoSx/CNTs hybrid nanospheres. (h) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer direction in MoSx/CNTs during the HER process. (i) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves and (j) the corresponding Tafel slopes of MoSx/CNTs-300, MoSx-300, CNTs-300, and Pt/C catalysts. (k) EIS Nyquist plots and (l) long-term stability tests at a constant potential over 10 h for MoSx/CNTs-300 and MoSx-300. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.350 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–l) Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram of the SP process and the formation of Ag/TiO2 nanoparticle composites. (b) TEM image of 2% Ag/TiO2-SP prepared by SP. (c) Schematic diagram of the FSP system. (d) Schematic diagrams of single nozzle FSP and two-nozzle FSP. (e1) Twenty-four hour stability tests of methane conversion over 5% Ni supported by 3-, 5-, and 7-SiO2; (e2) the carbon content and (e3) a TEM image of spent 3-SiO2. (f) High resolution ZnO/CeO2 heterojunctions. (g) Transient photocurrent response. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.361 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.364 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) Reproduced with permission.365 Copyright 2015, Molecular Diversity Preservation International. (c, f and g) Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) TEM image and (b) elemental mapping image of Pt–Ir/rGO-P600. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt–Ir/rGO-NP, Pt–Ir/rGO-P600, and commercial Pt/C. (d) Electrochemical surface area (ESA) loss of Pt–Ir/rGO_P600 and Pt/C during pressure–concentration–temperature (PCT) measurements. (e) SEM micrographs of a cross-section of the LSCF–CGO cathode before and (f) after CGO coating. (g) Evolution of the impedance spectra for uncoated and (h) CGO-coated cathodes at an isothermal temperature of 800 °C; inset: equivalent circuit. (i) Current–voltage and power density curves of LSCF–CGO/CGO/NiO–CGO cells with uncoated and (j) CGO-coated cathodes. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.369 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e–j) Reproduced with permission.372 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 


Ag/TiO2 particles	SP	Uniform Ag nanoparticle dispersion and large specific surface area	CO2 reduction	
361

TiO2–rGO particles	SP	Core–shell nanostructure, high surface area, high CO2 adsorption	CO2 reduction	
373

Rh/Al2O3 particles	FSP	Ba/K-doped, Rh clusters (1 nm) well distributed on 2–15 nm Al2O3	CO2 reduction	
364

Ru/CeO2 particles	FSP	Uniform composition, high thermal stability, high CH4 selectivity	CO2 reduction	
374

Pt–Co/Al2O3 particles	FSP	Low Pt contents (0.03–0.43 wt%), tight chemical contact	CO2 reduction	
375

Au/TiO2 particles	FSP	Au nanoparticles (3–5 nm) uniformly dispersed on the TiO2 matrix	CO2 reduction	
376

Pd–Cu–Zn/MCM-41	FSP	Multicomponent composites, synergistically promoted reduction rate	CO2 reduction	
377

ZnO/CeO2 particles	FSP	Homogeneous component, heterojunctions promote performance	CO2 reduction	
344

Fe/Al2O3 particles	FSP	Ce-Doped, promoted activity, long chain hydrocarbon selectivity	CO2 reduction	
378

CuO–ZrO2 particles	FSP	High specific surface area, small particle sizes (<10 nm)	CO2 reduction	
379

ZnFe2O4 thin films	SPD	Ti-Doped, uniform size distribution, improved charge carrier transfer	Hydrogen production	
372

Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films	SPD	Well-grown crystallites, high light absorption, and good stability	Hydrogen production	
380

ZnIn2S4 thin films	SPD	Dense and uniform, good visible region absorption and fine stability	Hydrogen production	
381

Cu–Pt/TiO2 particles	FSP	High TiO2 content and surface area, and excellent metal dispersion	Hydrogen production	
382

Pt/TiO2−xFx particles	FSP	F-Doped, good crystallinity, high surface area, high light absorption	Hydrogen production	
383

WSe2–rGO particles	SP	High specific surface area and structural stability, fine crystallite size	Hydrogen production	
384

NaTaO3–C microspheres	SP	High effective surface, and enhanced photocatalytic activity	Hydrogen production	
385

MoSx–CNTs nanospheres	SP	Promoted charge transfer, and enhanced stability of active sites	Hydrogen production	
355

Fe/SixAl1−xOy particles	SP	Well dispersed elements, high surface area and structural stability	Hydrogen production	
386

CaTiO3:Cu powder	SP	Spherical porous morphology, improved photocatalytic activity	Hydrogen production	
387

SrTiO3:Cr/Ta powder	SP	Multicomponent co-dopant, and wrinkled and furrowed surface	Hydrogen production	
388

CuO nanoparticles	FSP	Spherical nanoparticles (15 nm), increased photocurrent density	Hydrogen production	
389

Pt/C porous nanospheres	SP	3D porous structures, high Pt loading, large active surface area	PEM fuel cells	
390

PtRu/C microspheres	SP	Porous carbon microsphere support, efficient mass transport	PEM fuel cells	
391

FeTMPP/C microspheres	SP	High surface area and thermal stability, superior ORR activity	PEM fuel cells	
392

CoTMPP/C microspheres	SP	Honeycomb-like microspheres, uniform nanosized pores	PEM fuel cells	
393

Pt–Fe/CNTs composites	SP	Pt–Fe alloy clusters uniformly dispersed on the 3D CNT network	PEM fuel cells	
394

Pt–Ni/CNTs composites	SPD	Pt–Fe alloy clusters uniformly dispersed on the 3D CNT network	PEM fuel cells	
395

Pt/BCNRs thin film	SPD	Boron doped carbon nanorods grown on carbon paper as support	PEM fuel cells	
396

Pt/graphene nanosheets	SP	Thin sheet structure (1.4 nm) of several graphitic layers as support	PEM fuel cells	
397

Fe/PPy porous spheres	SP	Fe-Polypyrrole mesoporous sphere, high volumetric surface area	PEM fuel cells	
398

Pt/S-ZrO2 particles	SP	Highly resistant oxidation ability, high surface area and stability	PEM fuel cells	
370

Ru–Ni nanoparticles	SPD	Core (Ru)–shell (Ni) structure, high catalytic activity and stability	PEM fuel cells	
399

Sr0.98Fe1−xTixO3−δ film	SPD	High ionic conductivity, extended active sites for redox reactions	SO fuel cells	
400

La1.8Al0.2O3 thin film	SPD	Block-like structure, good adhesive property, moderate particle size	SO fuel cells	
401

La0.8Sr0.2CrO3−δ powder	SP	High phase purity, hollow spheres, homogeneous composition	SO fuel cells	
402

Ni/Al2O3 microspheres	SP	Multi-shelled yolk–shell structure, excellent thermal stability	MC fuel cellsa	
403


 	Fig. 29  (a) Simplified schematic cross-section of a commercial monocrystalline silicon solar cell. (b) Schematic illustration of a thin film chalcopyrite (CIGS) and kesterite (Cu2(Zn,Fe)SnS4, CZTSSe) solar cell. (c) Schematic illustration of a dye-sensitized solar cell. (a and c) Reproduced with permission.408 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. (b) Reproduced with permission.410 Copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) XRD patterns of the ZnO nanopowder prepared at different temperatures. (b) AFM image of the ZnO film deposited on Si. (c) Optical band gap of the ZnO nanopowder and ZnO thin films deposited on glass at different temperatures. (d) Band diagram of the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells. (e) Schematic models for the fabrication of the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells. (f) I–V curves under illumination for the ITO/silicon oxide/n-Si junction solar cells prepared under different conditions. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.413 Copyright 2007, Elsevier. (d) Reproduced with permission.414 Copyright 1991, American Institute of Physics. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.415 Copyright 1993, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of the spray pyrolysis apparatus. (b) Atomic force micrograph of the ZnO film prepared by SP. (c) HRTEM images of the Sb2Se3 film grown on the ZnO substrate. (d) STEM image and element mapping of the Sb2Se3/ZnO device. (e–h) Device stability under (e) thermal cycling (−40 to 85 °C for 60 cycles), (f) damp-heat (85 °C, 85% humidity, 1100 h), (g) ultraviolet preconditioning (300 to 450 nm ultraviolet light, 62 h), and (h) light-soaking (50 °C, 1.3 sun, 1100). (a–h) Reproduced with permission.428 Copyright 2017, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) SEM image of hollow microspheres prepared by SP (inset: magnified image). (b) J–V characteristics and (c) IPCE plot of TiO2 DSSCs with and without a scattering layer. (d) AFM image of the spray deposited NiO thin film. (e) Particle size distribution of the spray deposited NiO thin film. (f) Direct band gap estimation of Li (0–5 wt%) doped NiO thin films from the Tauc relation. (g–i) J–V curves of various PSCs. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.439 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.441 Copyright 2008, IOP Publishing. (g) Reproduced with permission.444 Copyright 2017, Nature. (h) Reproduced with permission. 446 Copyright 2016, Nature. (i) Reproduced with permission.447 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


TiO2 thin films	Si wafers, 450 °C	Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4 + acetylacetone	Anti-reflection coating	CSSCs	17.51	
449

Al2O3 thin films	Si wafers, 450 °C	Al(C5H7O2)3	Anti-reflection coating	CSSCs	15.5	
450

ZnO thin films	Porous Si, 500 °C	Zn(NO3)2	Anti-reflection coating	CSSCs	12	
451

ZnO nanorod film	Si wafers, 850 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2	Anti-reflection coating	CSSCs	n.r.	
452

ZnO thin films	Glass, 350 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2 + InCl3	In-Doped TCO layer	CSSCs	n.r.	
453

ZnO thin films	Glass, 370 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2 + In(CH3COO)3	In-Doped TCO layer	CSSCs	8.4	
454

ZnO thin films	Si wafers, 400 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2 + Ga(C5H7O2)3	Ga-Doped TCO layer	CSSCs	15.7	
455

In2O3 thin films	Si wafers, 375 °C	InCl3 + SnCl4; InCl3 + NH4F	In/F-doped TCO layer	CSSCs	18.9	
456

ZnO thin films	Si wafers, 350 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2 + AlCl3	ZnO/p-Si heterojunctions	CSSCs	n.r.	
457

CuPc thin films	Si wafers, 170 °C	Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)	p-Type semiconductor	CSSCs	n.r.	
458

In2Se3 thin films	FTO glass, 350 °C	InCl3 + H2NC(Se)NH2	Active photoelectrode	TFSCs	0.71	
459

CdS thin films	n-Type InP, 350 °C	CdCl2 + CH4N2S	p-Type semiconductor	TFSCs	12	
460

ZnO thin films	Glass, 470 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2 + AlCl3	Al-Doped TCO layer	TFSCs	12.1	
461

Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 thin films	Mo-Coated glass, 330 °C	Cu(NO3)2 + In(NO3)3 + Ga(NO3)3 + 1-methylthiourea	Absorber film	TFSCs	8.7	
462

Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film	Mo-Coated glass, 160 °C	Cu(CH3COO)2 + Zn(CH3COO)2 + Sn octylate + S	Absorber film	TFSCs	0.94	
463

Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 thin films	Mo-Coated glass, 300–350 °C	CuCl2 + InCl3 + GaCl3 + SC(NH2)2	Absorber film	TFSCs	10.5	
464

Cu(In,Al)(S,Se)2 thin films	Mo-Coated glass, n.r.	CuCl2 + AlCl3 + InCl3 + SC(NH2)2	Absorber film	TFSCs	5.3	
465

CuInS2/In2S3 thin films	ITO glass, 300 °C	CuCl2 + InCl3 + SC(NH2)2	Both absorber and buffer layers	TFSCs	9.5	
466

SnO2 thin films	Glass, 500 °C	SnCl4 + NH4F	In-Doped TCO layer	DSSCs	3.06	
467

SnO2 thin films	Glass, 500 °C	Dibutyltin diacetate + NH4F	F-Doped TCO layer	DSSCs	7.6	
468

Nb2O5 thin films	FTO glass, 400 °C	Nb(OEt)5	Blocking layer	DSSCs	5.1	
469

ZnO thin films	FTO glass, 350 °C	Zn(CH3COO)2	Blocking layer	DSSCs	7.03	
470

FeS2 thin films	FTO glass, 330 °C	FeCl3 + NH2CSNH2	Counter electrode layer	DSSCs	8	
471

Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films	FTO glass, 350 °C	CuCl + ZnCl2 + SnCl2 + thiourea	Counter electrode layer	DSSCs	7.67	
472

TiO2 nanoparticles	SP, 600 °C	Titanium isopropoxide	Photoelectrode	DSSCs	7.76	
473

TiO2 thin films	FTO glass, 450 °C	Ti(i-OPr)2(acac)2	Compact layer	PSSCs	10.26	
474

TiO2–ZnO thin films	FTO glass, 350 °C	Zn(OAc)2 + Ti(i-OPr)2(acac)2	Compact layers	PSSCs	15.1	
475

TiO2 thin films	FTO glass, 350 °C	Di-iso-propoxy titanium bis	Compact layers	PSSCs	8.76	
476

TiO2 thin films	FTO glass, 450 °C	Titanium diisopropoxide bis	Compact layers	PSSCs	17.26	
477

TiO2 thin films	FTO glass, 450 °C	Titanium diisopropoxide bis	Compact layers	PSSCs	19	
446

NiO thin films	FTO glass, 500 °C	Nickel acetylacetonate	Compact layers	PSSCs	13	
447

NiO thin films	FTO glass, n.r.	Nickel acetylacetonate	Compact layers	PSSCs	16.2	
448


 	Fig. 33  Topics covered in this review: advanced nanostructures fabricated via SP and their applications in energy storage and conversion.	 



	 Continuous process	⊠ Low tap density	• Hollow/plicated/porous/dense spheres	
34, 35, 75 and 478

 Robust scalability	⊠ Low crystallinity	• Core–shell/yolk–shell
 One-pot synthesis	
	• Nanoplates
 High efficiency	
	• Nanocomposites
 Low cost	
	



	 Low production cost	⊠ Low crystallinity	• Nanorods/nanowires/nanotubes	
29, 30, 154 and 479

 Low investment	⊠ Low accuracy	• Thin films
 High efficiency	
	• Nanocomposites
 No vacuum	
	



	 Uniform composition	⊠ Low controllability	• Ultra-fine nanoparticles	
362 and 480

 Continuous process	⊠ Low consistency	• Nanocomposites
 High temperature	
	

 High crystallinity	
	


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
