Dominant {100} facet selectivity for enhanced photocatalytic activity of NaNbO 3 in NaNbO 3 /CdS core/shell heterostructures    - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CY02098D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CY02098D
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 481-495Dominant {100} facet selectivity for enhanced photocatalytic activity of NaNbO3 in NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures†‡

        
          
            Sandeep 
            Kumar
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Parthasarathy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aadesh P. 
            Singh
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Björn 
            Wickman
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Meganathan 
            Thirumal
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Ashok K. 
            Ganguli
          
        
      *ae
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India. E-mail: ashok@chemistry.iitd.ernet.in;  Fax: +91 11 26854715;   Tel: +91 11 26591511
bDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India
cDivision of Chemical Physics, Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi 110007, India
eInstitute of Nano Science & Technology, Mohali, Punjab-160062, India
Received 
      4th October 2016
    , Accepted 15th December 2016First published on 9th January 2017AbstractDesign and engineering of crystalline advanced photocatalysts with specific facets is one of the most challenging tasks to enhance the photocatalytic performance. The surface energy of different facets is different in a crystal which leads to a corresponding change in their photocatalytic behaviour. The present study provides an experimental as well as theoretical understanding of the role of different facets of NaNbO3 in cubic and orthorhombic phases with crystals showing cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies in enhancing the photocatalytic activity of NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures. Herein, we discuss the importance of the approach of facet-selective synthesis and trace the origin of enhanced photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting and photocatalytic dye degradation activity for calculated surface energies of the {100} family of facets of the cubic phase and the (110) and (114) facets of the orthorhombic phase of NaNbO3. We propose that different mechanisms contribute to the enhancement of catalytic activity in these two phases. In the prepared core/shell heterostructures containing NaNbO3 as the core material, the presence of highly reactive facets of the cubic phase contributes to higher photocatalytic activity as compared to the orthorhombic phase which has a spatial charge separation assisted inter-facet charge transfer mechanism.
1. Introduction
The ever-increasing demand for energy and rapid depletion of fossil fuels triggered massive research efforts oriented towards finding alternative methods for obtaining abundant and sustainable energy.1,2 Photocatalysis has been developed as a suitable technique that can help in generating renewable and environmentally friendly energy. There have been numerous studies aimed towards enhancement of photocatalytic activity of the commonly used materials by using various approaches.3–5 These include investigations into the mechanism of photocatalysis on the nanoscale,6,7 engineering the energy-band structure of the materials,8,9 optimization of the crystal structure of the material10–13 and crucially control of the size and shape of the crystals, etc.14–17 Although such studies have been carried out on a wide variety of materials ranging from oxides to chalcogenides such as TiO2, BiVO4, WO3, Fe2O3, Ag3PO4, CdS, Ag2S, CdSe, In2S3etc.,18–25 there are only a few reports on interesting perovskite materials such as NaNbO3 and even fewer on core/shell heterostructures based on NaNbO3.26–30 Nevertheless, facet engineering of binary oxides as well as perovskites has been a challenging problem studied by a number of groups in the recent past. Nanocrystals of these materials with various morphologies ranging from nanorods to cubes, cuboctahedra and octahedra etc. have been synthesized. Asymmetric binary nanocrystals comprising two sections involving c-axis elongated anatase TiO2 and spherical γ-Fe2O3 attached to each other have been reported.31 Recently, facet dependent disorder in pristine Li(LiyNix−yMnxCo1−2x)O2 has been observed wherein a strong segregation tendency of defects to prefer open facets rather than closed facets is reported.32 New insights into the role of binary oxides such as MnO2 and perovskites such as LaMnO3 have been gained and these insights can help in identifying key parameters that influence catalysis in oxygen reduction reactions (ORR). Further, such studies will help in developing design guides for highly active ORR catalysts and gain new knowledge about their molecular mechanism as well.33 On site-selective substitution in perovskite oxides such as Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−d (BSCF), it has been shown that structural optimization is possible following molecular orbital principles.34 For overall water splitting, the synthesis of (111)-layered perovskite nanofibers of Ba5Ta4O15, Ba5Ta2Nb2O15 and Ba5Nb4O15 has been achieved.35 In perovskite solar cell materials based on organometal halide light absorbers, power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been increasing steadily due to structural optimization through facet engineering approaches.36 The rapid strides taken in facet engineering of some of these perovskites have shown us not only the energy harvesting potential of these materials but also further possibilities of exploring materials such as NaNbO3 in the present study.
NaNbO3 has been found to be a highly efficient photocatalyst in the UV region which facilitates water splitting leading to H2 and O2 evolution.37–40 Structurally, NaNbO3 is one of the most complex materials as it is known to exhibit a series of structural phase transitions from a rhombohedral structure at low temperatures (∼27 °C) to a cubic structure at high temperatures (above 630 °C).41,42 Between these two temperatures, NaNbO3 exists in a variety of orthorhombic phases as well as in the tetragonal phase.43,44 The structural complexities become all the more intriguing in NaNbO3 at the nanocrystalline level.45 In this size regime, it is possible, albeit not facile, to synthesize and stabilize the cubic perovskite phase of NaNbO3 only at high temperatures above 600 °C whereas the orthorhombic phase forms at lower temperatures. Since the past decade, many researchers are working on the surface chemistry of nanocrystals and the mechanism of surfactant ligand modification for the growth of the crystal.46 Zhang et al. also successfully reported facet activity of triangular pyramidal and cubic morphologies of NaNbO3 in photocatalytic reactions for 2,4-dichlorophene and rhodamine B degradation under full arc irradiation of a Xe lamp.47,48
The stable morphology of a crystal depends on the surface energies and growth rates of different competing facets arising out of the inherent anisotropy in such materials. Generally, in the synthesis of nanocrystals, the commonly used surfactants, e.g. cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and polyacrylic acid (PAA), tend to modify the energy of specific facets through preferential adsorption, which influences the relative growth rate of different facets, thereby resulting in different morphologies of the crystal. Three of the most important facets that determine the crystal's geometric shape having Miller indices (100), (110) and (111) are low index facets. For a given volume of the crystal, its shape or morphology depends on the surface energy and is determined by the construction arrived using Wulff's theorem.49–51 For most lattice types, the increasing order of surface energies (γ) of low index planes follow the order γ(100) > γ(111) > γ(110).52,53 The surface energy of a given facet increases with increasing number of dangling bonds and the magnitude of bond energies of these bonds.54,55 Therefore, the fundamental requirement is to understand the role of various facets of the core material NaNbO3 in such heterostructures and trace the origin of efficient photocatalysis to the surface energy of various facets responsible for enhanced catalytic activity.
In the present work, we aim to understand the structure–morphology correlations of NaNbO3 to design a core/shell heterostructure with CdS for efficient facet-dependent photocatalytic activity under the visible region. The morphology of the crystals is controlled by a set of synthetic conditions such as temperature, processing duration and type of surfactant used in each case. Different surfactants show different adsorption on to various crystal facets during the growth are depending on both the surfactant as well as of certain facets and suppression of others thereby enabling control of the morphology of the crystal. In the present case, the CTAB surfactant has been found to show preferential adsorption onto the {100} facets of the cubic phase, whereas PAA shows preferential adsorption onto the (110) and (114) facets of the orthorhombic phase of NaNbO3 crystals. These results are helpful in the development of cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies of crystal growth in the two synthesis procedures followed in this study as shown in Scheme 1. We have stabilized the cubic NaNbO3 with a well-defined cubic morphology at a much lower temperature than previously reported.56 Gu et al. also reported a modified solvothermal strategy where the inherent temperature fluctuations of the autoclaving process was utilized for crystal growth of NaNbO3 cubic phase nanowires.57 Herein, we were able to design NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, based on the mechanism of crystallization of NaNbO3, with stable cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies driven by surface energy and surfactant ligand dynamics. Hence, these semiconductor core/shell heterostructures show enhanced photocatalytic efficiency based on their morphologies.
 Scheme 1  Growth procedure of NaNbO3 cubic and cuboctahedral crystals. 
2. Experimental section
2.1 Synthesis of NaNbO3 crystals
All chemicals used in the synthesis of NaNbO3 are of analytical grade and used without further purification. NaNbO3 cubes and cuboctahedra were synthesized via a hydrothermal method. In materials synthesis, 2 g of niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5) (≥99.90%, Aldrich) was dispersed in double distilled water. The solution was mixed with 10 N NaOH (98%, Fisher Scientific) solution with continuous stirring for 2 h at room temperature, and then 500 mg of CTAB was added and the solution was stirred further for 4 h. Finally, the reaction mixture was then transferred to a 100 mL Teflon autoclave with the heating temperature maintained at 170 °C for 48 h (forming a cubic morphology); further, the same experimental conditions are used where 500 mg of PAA and 2 g of Nb2O5 were mixed at 120 °C for 60 h (forming a cuboctahedron morphology). The final product was collected by centrifugation and washed with double distilled water and absolute ethanol several times, and finally, the samples were dried at 80 °C for 6 h.
2.2 Synthesis of CdS nanoparticles
The hydrothermal method is used for the synthesis of CdS nanoparticles as well, using cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O, ≥98%, Aldrich) and sodium sulphide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O, ≥98%, Aldrich) as precursors. In the reaction method, Cd(NO3)2·4H2O and Na2S·9H2O were dissolved separately in 60 mL of ethylene glycol. Afterwards, both solutions were mixed properly and loaded in a 100 mL Teflon autoclave. Reaction temperature was maintained at 175 °C for 2 h, and then, the autoclave was naturally cooled down. Finally, the samples was separated and collected by centrifugation and washed with double distilled water and absolute ethanol repeatedly.
2.3 Synthesis of NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures
For the fabrication of NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures by the growth of a CdS shell onto NaNbO3 cubes and cuboctahedra, we used 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) as the surface functionalizing agent. 25 μL of MPA was added to the bare NaNbO3 (cube and cuboctahedron) nanoparticles dispersed in double distilled water, and the reaction mixture was stirred for 6 h at room temperature for functionalization of the surface of the NaNbO3 crystals. Subsequently, 25 mL of 0.1 M cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O) solution was added slowly to the above reaction mixture using a burette with constant magnetic stirring at room temperature. In the second step, 25 mL of 0.1 M sodium sulphide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O) solution was added gradually to the reaction mixture and stirred constantly. The final yellow colored product was extracted by centrifugation and washed continually with double distilled water and absolute alcohol and finally dried overnight at 50 °C.
2.4 Materials characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) was carried out to characterize the phase composition and crystalline nature and also revealed the purity of the resulting synthesized products formed during the experimental process. An Advance Bruker D8 diffractometer equipped with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) in the 2θ range of 10−70° at a scan rate of 0.02° per second is used for PXRD analysis. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM-FEI QUANTA 3D FEG) is carried out to determine the surface morphologies of the samples. Instrument equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector for elemental mapping operated at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV was also used. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and HRTEM studies were carried out to gain detailed insights into the morphology and interface between core and shell materials, by using a TEM (FEI Technai G2 20) operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) system equipped with a TEM instrument performing point EDS of core/shell heterostructures can individually from the edge and the centre of the materials to further validate the core/shell morphology establishment in NaNbO3/CdS heterostructures. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements were performed using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS-90 (Malvern Instruments) instrument. The band gaps of the synthesized samples are determined by UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2450 spectrometer, employing BaSO4 as a reflectance standard and the measurements are carried out over a wavelength range of 200–800 nm. A Quanta chrome (nova 2000e) surface area analyzer was used to obtain the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the as-synthesized samples. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption measurements were performed at the temperature of liquid nitrogen (∼77 K).
2.5 Photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic studies
For photoelectrochemical (PEC) measurements, a NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure electrode was prepared by mixing 20 mg of photocatalyst in powder form with 80 μL of solution comprising anhydrous isopropanol used as a dispersant and Nafion in a 3:1 ratio. The prepared suspension was spread on a 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 ITO glass (SnO2:In) substrate with an active area of about 1 × 1 cm2 by the doctor-blade method using scotch tape as the spacer. Silver paste and copper wire are used for the undeposited area of the conducting glass substrate for fabrication of ohmic electrical contacts. Non-transparent and non-conducting epoxy resin was used to cover the undeposited area of the electrode. Three-electrode photoelectrochemical cell was used to obtain the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics, electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and Mott–Schottky plots. CIMPS-2 (Controlled Intensity Modulated Photospectroscopy) was carried out using a photoelectrochemical system consisting of a Zennium electrochemical workstation (X-Pot Potentiostat). Linear sweep voltammetry scans were executed under dark and visible light irradiation using a xenon lamp (150 W) fitted with a filter that cuts light with wavelengths ≥380 nm with an output illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Mott–Schottky measurements were performed under dark conditions in the potential range of −1.0 to +1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 7). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were also carried out under open bias conditions (frequency range: 100 kHz–100 MHz) at an AC signal amplitude of 10 mV. The improvement in photoelectrochemical response in the PEC cell for NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures was investigated at 0.62 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.23 V vs. RHE) via incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements in the wavelength range of 350–550 nm. Chronoamperometric measurements were scrutinized for 3 h in 0.5 M Na2SO4 under visible light irradiation at an applied potential of 1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl to optimize the stability of the material.
To evaluate the degradation efficiency of methylene blue (MB) dye, photocatalytic measurements were carried out. MB was utilized as a representative organic pollutant. The whole measurement was carried out under simulated visible irradiation induced by a 500 W xenon arc lamp equipped with an ultraviolet 420 nm cutoff filter used as the light source.
During visible-light photocatalytic experiments, 40 mg of catalyst was dispersed in a 100 mL aqueous solution of 1 × 10−5 M MB dye and the resulting solution was further stirred for 2 h under dark conditions to ensure adsorption/desorption equilibrium between the organic dye and the catalyst. The catalyst suspension was subsequently irradiated to initiate the photocatalytic reaction using a xenon arc lamp as the light source. Aliquots (2 mL) of the suspension were taken out at an interval of 5 min and centrifuged. To ensure that the degradation of the dye is solely driven by a photocatalytic process, control experiments were carried out in the absence of a catalyst and under dark conditions. The photodegradation efficiency was optimized by the decrease in intensity of the characteristic absorbance of MB (664 nm) using a Shimadzu UV-2450 spectrometer. A plausible mechanism for photocatalytic dye degradation using c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures is proposed from the analysis of the active species involved in photocatalysis such as electrons, hydroxyl radicals, holes and superoxide radical anions (O2˙−) during the photodegradation process utilizing various active species scavengers.
3. Results and discussion
X-ray diffraction patterns of cubic and orthorhombic NaNbO3 samples crystallizing with cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies, respectively, with the corresponding reflections indexed are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). The insets of Fig. 1(b) show the peaks splitting at specific 2θ values for the orthorhombic phase which is absent for the cubic phase. The XRD patterns of the core/shell heterostructures, namely, c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS, are shown in Fig. S1.‡ The lattice planes corresponding to both NaNbO3 and CdS shell materials are properly indexed in the patterns which obviously reveals the composition of the core/shell heterostructures.
 Fig. 1  Powder XRD patterns of (a) c-NaNbO3 with a cubic morphology and (b) o-NaNbO3 with a cuboctahedron morphology; FE-SEM images of (c) a cube and (d) an cuboctahedron; TEM images of (e) a cube and (f) a cuboctahedron; HRTEM images of (g) a cube and (h) a cuboctahedron; and SAED images of the samples with (i) cubic and (j) cuboctahedron morphologies. 
Using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), we observed well-faceted cubic and cuboctahedral crystals for the cubic and orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d). The dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiment provides a more direct measurement for the particle sizes, and hence, we recorded the parameter z-average which is the hydrodynamic diameter of NaNbO3 crystals as shown in Table S1 and Fig. S2.‡ The homogenous nature of the cubic and cuboctahedral particles with respect to their size and shape is clearly authenticated by DLS histograms and low magnification FESEM images (Fig. S2 and S3‡). The diameters obtained from DLS measurements are the hydrodynamic diameters and are slightly larger than those determined by TEM measurements, as expected. For the characterization of core/shell heterostructures, FESEM analysis for both phases (cubic and orthorhombic) of the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell was carried out as shown in Fig. S4(a) and (b).‡ In Fig. S4,‡ the morphology of the core material NaNbO3 is clearly visible over which the CdS shell deposition takes place. After the growth of the CdS shell, the surface of NaNbO3 was observed to be decorated with nanoparticles of CdS which was also confirmed by FESEM elemental mapping (Fig. S4‡).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of the bare c-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3 samples further revealed the crystals to be of average size 1.722 μm and 4.815 μm, respectively (Fig. 1e and f).
The high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of these samples show lattice fringes corresponding to the (001) plane of the cubic phase with inter-planar spacing d = 0.3898 nm and (110) and (114) planes of the orthorhombic phase with d values of 0.3908 and 0.2766 nm (Fig. 1(g) and (h)), respectively. The angle between the two sets of planes corresponding to these fringes was found to be 70.54°. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) images obtained from the same region for the two samples revealed the electron diffraction spots corresponding to these planes (Fig. 1(i) and (j)).
Further, confirmation of core/shell formation was also procured by utilizing TEM which clearly reveals the core/shell nature of the heterostructures apart from the cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies of the crystals (Fig. S5‡). The HRTEM images undoubtedly indicate the boundary between the NaNbO3 core and the CdS shell with lattice fringes corresponding to the (111) plane of CdS and the (001) plane of c-NaNbO3 in the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell (Fig. S5 (a)‡), as well as the (220) and (110) planes of CdS and o-NaNbO3, respectively, in the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure (Fig. S5 (b)‡).
By utilizing energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis, convincing evidence of the formation of a core/shell heterostructure was obtained. Fig. 2(c)–(f) illustrate a comparison of TEM point-EDS data acquired by positioning the electron beam through the centre (core) and only through the edge (shell) of the core/shell heterostructure. Positioning the electron beam through the centre of the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure resulted in significantly intense signals of Na, Nb, and O and weaker signals of Cd and S elements in the core and vice versa in the shell regions, respectively. Point-EDS analysis unequivocally confirms the composition of NaNbO3/CdS cubic and cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures with NaNbO3 as the core and CdS as the shell material.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell of (a) c-NaNbO3 cubic crystals and (b) o-NaNbO3 cuboctahedral crystals. TEM-EDS analysis of the marked region corresponding to the (c) c-NaNbO3/CdS core region, (d) c-NaNbO3/CdS shell region, (e) o-NaNbO3/CdS core region and (f) o-NaNbO3/CdS shell region of the cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures. 
The optical properties of the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures were explored by UV–visible diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) as shown in Fig. 3. The band gaps of the bare NaNbO3 samples and core/shell heterostructures were also calculated using the DRS spectra. The materials band gap can be calculated by a variant of the Tauc equation as given below: (hν·F(R∞))l/n = A(hν − Eg)(1)where h and ν are the Planck constant and the frequency of vibration, respectively, A is the proportionality constant, F(R∞) is the Kubelka–Munk function and Eg is the band gap of the synthesized photocatalytic materials. The exponent n = 2 for an indirect allowed transition and n = 1/2 for a direct allowed transition; therefore, the Tauc plot (inset of Fig. 3a) could be utilized to determine the band gap of the semiconductor materials.
 Fig. 3  Absorbance spectra of (a) bare NaNbO3 (c- for cubic and o- for orthorhombic). The inset shows the Tauc plot for NaNbO3 (b) c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and (c) o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures, respectively. The black curves in (b) and (c) are the observed DRS spectra of the NaNbO3/CdS heterostructures, while the red curves correspond to deconvoluted fits for the NaNbO3 energy band gap spectra. 
The estimated band gap from the DRS spectra of bare NaNbO3 clearly shows that the observed band gap of c-NaNbO3 (cubic) is slightly higher (Eg = 3.46 eV) than that of the o-NaNbO3 (orthorhombic) phase (Eg = 3.43 eV) as shown in the inset of Fig. 3a. The difference in band gap of the material between the two phases can be attributed mainly to the difference in their crystal structure, size, and morphology. In NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, the DRS spectra validate the generation of a new energy level, compared with the bare NaNbO3 where an obvious red shift in the absorption edge was observed (Fig. 3b and c). The band gap of the core/shell heterostructures is found to shift towards the visible region of the spectrum which is advantageous for visible light photocatalysis. In both cubic and orthorhombic core/shell heterostructures, two energy bands are observed, one represents CdS and the other represent NaNbO3 which clearly evidences the formation of core/shell composite heterostructures. The characteristic absorption spectrum with the fundamental absorption stopping edge at ∼505 nm lies within the visible light region. The calculated band gap energies of c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures from the DRS spectra corresponding to NaNbO3 and CdS are 2.81 and 2.40 eV, respectively, and the corresponding values for the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures are 2.95 and 2.42 eV as shown in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. Thus, the DRS results mirror the visible light photoactive behaviour of core/shell heterostructures.
The chemical composition of the c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell samples was examined by XPS, as shown in Fig. S6.‡ All the five elements, Na1s, Nb3d, O1s, Cd3d and S2p, were detected in the survey XPS spectra, and the core level XPS lines for these elements for both samples are given in Fig. S6(a)–(e),‡ respectively. The binding energy peaks of Nb3d5/2 are observed at 206.7 and 207.1 eV for the c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell samples, respectively. Similarly, the Na1s peak is also shifted by 0.3 eV towards a higher binding energy in the o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral sample. The shift of the corresponding Nb3d and Na1s peaks toward higher binding energies is probably due to the change in the morphology and structure of the NaNbO3. Importantly, the Cd3d5/2 peak and S2p peak positions in both samples are the same and not affected due to the inner core structure (Fig. S6d and e‡).
3.1 Photoelectrochemical activity
To study the photoelectrochemical (PEC) performances of the bare c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3 crystals, and c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, the prepared photoelectrodes were used in the PEC cell and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements were performed in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under dark and visible light illumination conditions with an output intensity of 100 mW cm−2 in a three-electrode PEC system with the NaNbO3 based photoelectrode as the working electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and Pt mesh as the counterelectrode (Fig. 4(a)). The PEC activities of the different phases of NaNbO3 crystals were measured to evaluate the facet dependent performance. In c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, the dark current from 0 V to 1.0 V (versus Ag/AgCl) was almost zero. However, in the case of c-NaNbO3/CdS heterostructures, the dark current onset potential shifts to 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl and the current density increased up to 0.4 mA cm−2 (inset of Fig. 4a). The photocurrent onset for all the samples was obtained at around −0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl. The obtained photocurrent density [(current under light − current under dark)/electrode area] for the o-NaNbO3 cuboctahedron is very low, ∼0.13 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl. The photocurrent of c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell is significantly enhanced when compared with the bare NaNbO3 samples. The c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell photoanode exhibited superior PEC performance in terms of an increased photocurrent density of ∼2.05 ± 0.05 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl and a decreased onset potential from 0.3 to −0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl under visible light illumination. Further, the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell photoanode also showed much higher photocurrent than the bare NaNbO3 which suggests that the CdS shell promotes light harvesting efficiency and encourages photogenerated charge carrier separation. The result reveals for the first time that the catalytic properties of NaNbO3 crystals are highly facet dependent. The {100} facet with a higher surface energy of the c-NaNbO3 with a cubic morphology has played a very important role in enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency of c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures compared to the (110) and (114) facets in o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures. Additionally, the solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of the samples was calculated for water splitting reaction under visible light irradiation of 150 mW cm−2 by employing standardized protocols and following the equation η = Jp[(1.23 − Vapp)/Io] × 100,58 where Jp is the photocurrent density at the measurement applied bias, Vapp is the applied bias (vs. RHE), and Io is the incident light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. In a 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution, the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) potential can be converted from the Ag/AgCl reference electrode as RHE = V (Ag/AgCl) + 0.61 V and this potential was used to calculate the STH conversion efficiency. The STH efficiency is plotted as a function of applied potential (V versus Ag/AgCl) and is shown in Fig. S8.‡ The c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell photoanode exhibits an optimal conversion efficiency of ∼0.06% at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl, whereas the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell photoanode exhibits a low conversion efficiency of ∼0.01% at a low bias of 0 V versus Ag/AgCl.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photoelectrochemical performances in terms of current–potential curves, (b) Mott–Schottky plots under dark conditions, (c) Nyquist plots for c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3, c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic, and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell. The EIS was measured at open circuit potential (versus Ag/AgCl) under dark conditions. (d) IPCE curves for c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell measured at 0.62 V versus Ag/AgCl (1.23 V vs. RHE). 
To understand the underlying mechanism for the electrical conduction properties in the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterojunctions, Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots and electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained. The Mott–Schottky curves (1/C2versus electrode potential) obtained for c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3, c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures under dark conditions are shown in Fig. 4(b). To estimate the flat band potential (VFB), the following equation was used: 1/c2 = (2/qε0εNd)(Vapp − VFB − kT/q)(2)where ε, ε0, Nd, Vapp, and VFB represent the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, the permittivity of the vacuum, the donor density, the applied potential and the flat band potential, respectively. kT/q indicates the temperature-dependent term in the Mott–Schottky equation. The value of the intercept of the linear plot at 1/C2 = 0 gives the flat band potential. A positive slope in the Mott–Schottky plots was observed for the c-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3 samples at a flat band potential of −0.6 V, which indicates that c-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3 are n-type semiconductors with electrons as the majority carriers. The prepared c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures clearly displayed an apparent reversed “V-shaped” p–n heterojunction characteristic with co-existence of positive and negative slopes corresponding to the positive and negative charge carriers with two flat band potential values (Fig. 4(b)).59 A slightly higher slope in Mott–Schottky curves for c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures than bare NaNbO3 (Fig. 4(b)) indicates low donor density. This implies that CdS exhibits p-type characteristics in the PEC cell which is also confirmed by the slope of the Mott–Schottky curve as it has an inverse relationship with the electron density of n-type c-NaNbO3. The c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure electrode shifts the conduction band edge to a more negative value, −0.92 V versus Ag/AgCl as compared to −0.57 V versus Ag/AgCl for the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell. This indicates that deposition of CdS on c-NaNbO3 offers better kinetics for water oxidation. In the case of o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, although the thickness of the CdS shell was the same as it was for the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, co-existence of positive and negative slopes for the p–n junction was not clearly visible (Fig. 4(b)). This p–n junction characteristic in the Mott–Schottky plot of c-NaNbO3/CdS helps in the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Holes are extracted out of NaNbO3 which oxidizes water to oxygen. This is due to the fact that the electrons and holes were trapped in the depletion layer of the p–n junction under dark conditions.
We also propose that the existence of CdS coating over NaNbO3 decreases the reaction barriers for water oxidation and facilitates the transfer of holes to the electrode/electrolyte interface accounting for the greatly improved PEC performance. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis has been utilized to explore the interfacial properties of electrodes.60 The diameter of the semicircle in EIS indicates the electron transfer resistance, which reveals the electron transfer kinetics of the redox probe at the interface of the electrodes.61Fig. 4c shows the typical EIS curves for bare c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3 crystals, c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures measured in 0.5 M Na2SO4 under visible light illumination. A smaller diameter as observed in EIS curves of c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shells relative to bare c-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3 implies that the resistance between CdS/electrolyte interfaces is much smaller than the NaNbO3/electrolyte interface. The results clearly shows the conducting effect of the CdS on the charge-transfer process resulting in a decrease in the charge transfer barrier at the electrode interface.62–64 A cathodic shift appeared in the onset potential due to the decreased reaction barrier.
Further, the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was measured with the help of a Zennium electrochemical workstation (X-Pot Potentiostat) in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution. The photocurrent was measured at an external applied voltage of 0.62 V versus Ag/AgCl (1.23 V vs. RHE) in the 350–550 nm wavelength range with a 10 nm step and a 5 s time per step. The IPCE values at each wavelength was calculated by employing the following formula: (3)where Iλ is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), Pλ is the incident power density (mW cm−2), λ (nm) is the incident wavelength, and 1240 (J nm C−1) = h·c/e (h: Planck constant, c: speed of light and e: charge of a single electron). As compared to the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure, the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure showed substantially enhanced IPCE values in the wavelength range of 350–550 nm (Fig. 4d). At 350 nm, the maximum IPCE achieved for the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure sample was around ∼4.2 fold higher than that of the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure. At low wavelengths, large enhancement of the IPCE was observed, which can be attributed to the high surface/facet energy of the c-NaNbO3 system as compared to o-NaNbO3, improved carrier migration ability as well as advantageous utilization of charge carriers at low energy induced by CdS coating over NaNbO3 cubes.
We have calculated the dark current for all four samples in the ESI‡ (Fig. S7). The dark current scan for all the samples exhibits semiconducting behavior in the scan range of −0.5 V/Ag/AgCl to +1.0 V/Ag/AgCl. However, at the more negative current scan, the reduction of the semiconducting surface occurs (CdS or NaNbO3). As we carried out water oxidation on the surface of NaNbO3/CdS, therefore the positive potential scan provides significant insights into the water oxidation performance on the NaNbO3/CdS surface.
Finally, the CdS coated c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructure was checked for its stability in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution for long term application in PEC cells. For this purpose, CdS coating over a c-NaNbO3 photoanode with an area of ∼1 × 1 cm2 was utilized to check the stability under visible light irradiance with an output intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Irradiation of light gives rise to a spike in the photoresponse upon power excitation. However, the photocurrent returned to the steady state value within a few minutes. Fig. S9‡ shows the total current under illumination (dark + light) of the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell over a long time to confirm the photo-stability of the prepared catalyst. It shows that under illumination with visible light, the photocurrent of c-NaNbO3/CdS was almost steady during 3 h of operation at an applied potential of 1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl, and the photocurrent was 2.44 mA cm−2. The achieved high efficiency and good stability indicate that the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell photoanode still retains the original structure after long term PEC water splitting reactions. It was found that during the experimental procedure the photoelectrode was stable even after multiple scans. There was no change in the physical appearance as well as in photocurrent of the sample. These findings validate the stability of the given photoelectrode in water splitting reactions.
3.2 Photocatalytic activity
Visible-light induced photocatalytic degradation of the aqueous MB dye solution led to a significant reduction in the MB concentration when the NaNbO3 based core/shell was used as a photocatalyst. Fig. 5a shows the comparative degradation study of c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures under visible light irradiation. For a better comparison of the photocatalytic efficiency of the synthesised photocatalysts, kinetic analysis of the degradation of the MB dye under visible light irradiation was carried out. The rate constant for dye degradation efficiency with respect to irradiation time is plotted and given in Fig. 5b. The apparent rate constants (Kapp, min−1), determined from regression curves of ln(C0/C) versus irradiation time, are 2.12 × 10−1 and 1.57 × 10−1 min−1 for c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdScore/shell heterostructures, respectively (Fig. 5b). The photodegradation efficiency curve (Fig. S10‡) revealed the degradation of 98.5% of the MB dye in the presence of c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, whereas around 86.4% degradation was observed in the presence of o-NaNbO3/CdS, after 25 min. The above results corroborate that the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell exhibits higher photocatalytic activity than o-NaNbO3/CdS under visible light irradiation. We observe that {100} facets of c-NaNbO3 have been shown to be more photocatalytically active than the (110) and (114) facets of o-NaNbO3 due to their higher surface energy of c-NaNbO3 crystals. Charge separation at the core/shell interface and the large BET surface area (Fig. S11‡) obtained in c-NaNbO3/CdS are also accountable for enhanced catalytic activity. We briefly discuss below the photocatalytic mechanism of the NaNbO3/CdS interface in the core/shell heterostructures. We also observed the role of active species in photocatalytic dye degradation using various scavengers (Fig. S12‡).
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic performances and (b) plot of ln(C0/C) as a function of visible light irradiation time for the degradation of MB solution containing NaNbO3, CdS, c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures. 
A mechanism has been proposed to understand the photodegradation of the MB dye over c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructuresCdS + hν → CdS(e−CB,h+VB)CdS(e−) + c-NaNbO3 → CdS + c-NaNbO3(e−CB)O2 + c-NaNbO3(e−CB) → O2˙− + c-NaNbO3O2˙− + H2O → HO2˙ + OH−HO2˙ + H2O → OH˙ + H2O2H2O2 → 2OH˙Dye(MB) + OH˙ → CO2 + H2OMB + CdS(h+) → degradation productswhere e−CB and h+VB represent the electron in the conduction band and the hole in the valence band, respectively.
The key factors of any catalyst are their stability and reusability for practical applications. To investigate the usability of c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures (the most efficient among the materials studied here), the photodegradation experiments for MB were repeated five times using the same sample (c-NaNbO3/CdS). The reusability results are shown in Fig. S13.‡ It can be observed that there is no significant change after five repeat cycles. These results confirm that as-prepared core/shell heterostructures exhibit satisfactory reusability and stability during the dye photodegradation test.
The mechanism following the enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting and photocatalytic dye degradation activity of the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell compared with bare c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3 and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures can be explained by looking at the energy band edge positions at the heterojunction. In the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures, the conduction band (CB) edge of the CdS sensitizer lies above the CB of NaNbO3. When NaNbO3 and CdS come into mutual contact, the p–n heterojunction forms at the interface in the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell leading to a rise in the Fermi level of CdS. This shifts the whole energy band of CdS up and that of NaNbO3 down until a new stable equilibrium is achieved. In the modified structure, the conduction band (CB) edge of CdS exceeds that of NaNbO3. Hence, upon visible light irradiation, the p–n heterojunction causes effective charge separation and quick transportation of the photogenerated charge carriers,65 in c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures as illustrated in Fig. 6. Under visible light irradiation, photons of higher energy than the band gap energy resulted in the photoexcitation of electrons from the VB to the CB of CdS and left holes in the VB. Due to the lower potential energy of NaNbO3, electrons transfer from the CB of CdS to the CB of NaNbO3 and, conversely, hole transfer from the VB of NaNbO3 to the VB of CdS. Consequently, the photogenerated charge carriers are separated at the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell interfaces, which reduces their recombination probability and allows them to migrate effectively to the surfaces of NaNbO3 and CdS. These photogenerated charge carriers (e− and h+) are directly involved in the redox reactions and result in the formation of active species, which participate in the photocatalytic activity. However, in the o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell, an n–n type junction is formed and efficient charge separation is not favourable as compared to the c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell hetero-interface. The formation of an n–n type junction between the o-NaNbO3 core and the CdS shell interface was revealed by the Mott–Schottky plot shown in Fig. 4b. Thus, the above mechanism involving extended light absorption in the visible region and further higher surface energy of the facets and large surface area taken together result in enhanced photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic activity of c-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram for the energy band of p-type CdS and n-type NaNbO3 before and after contact. 
3.3 Calculation of the surface energy of the facets
To trace the origin of enhanced photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical performance of the NaNbO3/CdS photocatalysts, we have calculated the surface energy of different facets that contribute to catalytic activity by taking into consideration the structural differences between the cubic and orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3, the atomic arrangement in the corresponding unit cells, the coordination geometry of different atoms in the respective facets and the density of dangling bonds at each of these facets. The surface energy of different facets depends on various factors such as crystal structure, type of atoms present, surface atom density, dangling bonds present at the surface and the bond energies of the broken bonds. From this dependence of surface energy on the density of dangling bonds, it becomes obvious that it is difficult to achieve faceting of {hkl} on the fcc cubic metal oxide crystal where {hkl} represents high index planes with at least one Miller index larger than 1. Using a combination of techniques such as X-ray diffraction, high resolution TEM and TEM-SAED, we have been able to investigate the facets responsible for efficient catalysis in the cubic and orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3. We find that in the cubic phase of NaNbO3 leading to a cubic morphology of the crystal, all the six equivalent facets result from the {100} planes, whereas for the cuboctahedron morphology, the (114) and (110) planes of orthorhombic NaNbO3 contribute to the faceting of the crystal as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  The crystal structure and atomic arrangement of different planes of c- and o-NaNbO3 phases. The shaded (001) plane of c-NaNbO3 and (110) and (114) planes of o-NaNbO3 contribute to the faceting of the corresponding cubic and cuboctahedral crystals. 
Cubic and orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3 show different catalytic activities depending on the surface energies of the different facets involved in these two structures. We have seen that in the cubic phase only the {100} family of planes are involved in faceting the crystal whereas in the orthorhombic phase a combination of both (110) and (114) planes are involved in faceting resulting in NaNbO3 cuboctahedral crystals. Now, we estimate the surface energies of these facets to better understand their effect on the catalytic activity of these samples. Following Mackenzie et al.,66 it is known that the number of atoms per unit area of the surface with broken u-bonds is given by (4) n(u) = 0 if h·u ≤ 0(5)where h is the Miller index of the plane with respect to the x-direction, u is the chosen crystallographic direction and Ω is the volume of the crystal per atom with an associated u-bond. Only those dangling bonds that obey the above conditions are to be counted for calculation as they only contribute to the surface energy. For each of the planes, we calculated the number of broken bonds based on the procedure adopted in the Mackenzie theorem.67 The dangling bond density calculated in this way depends on the number of atoms and their coordination within the plane under consideration.68
The cubic and the orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3 have different atomic arrangements in their unit cells. The coordination geometry of various atoms, the bond lengths and the bond energies differ between these two structures. Here, it is important to consider the crystallization of NaNbO3 into crystals having cubic and cuboctahedron morphologies arising from the fundamental difference in the crystal structure with cubic and orthorhombic symmetries.
We could trace the origin of enhanced photocatalytic activity in the c-NaNbO3 core/shell heterostructure to the highly reactive facets of the c-NaNbO3. Catalytic reactions on the free surface of the crystal are initiated on illumination with photon flux during photocatalysis. The catalytic activity depends on the surface energy of various exposed facets of the crystal.69–71 Usually, highly reactive facets contribute to higher photocatalytic activity which results from the atomic arrangement on the surface and the density of the dangling bonds. But, the real problem stems from the fact that during the crystallization process, the growth of highly reactive facets is suppressed owing to the principle of minimization of energy.72,73 Commonly used surfactant ligands tend to cling onto these highly reactive surfaces thereby impeding their rapid growth resulting in crystals with more of low energy facets. Various approaches have been adopted earlier in order to achieve crystals with favourable facets to achieve high photocatalytic activity such as optimizing synthesis conditions such as temperature or pressure, using chemical agents to control the morphology, using ligands that adhere to specific atoms on the surface thereby inhibiting growth of selective facets while allowing stabilization of the crystal with desired facets, etc.74–79
The surface energies of the {100} family of facets of the cubic phase and the (110) and (114) facets of the orthorhombic phase have to be compared to determine their contribution towards the photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic properties of the material. The surface energy of a faceted crystal surface is given by the following equation: (6)where γhkl is the surface energy of the facet, Nb is the number of broken or dangling bonds, ε is the bond energy and ρA is the surface atomic density.
Thus, the number of dangling bonds for each of the three facets, namely, the {100} set of facets of the cubic crystals and the (110) and (114) facets of the cuboctahedral crystals, was calculated.65,66 The bond energies were calculated by structural optimization from density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the VASP code as we reported earlier.80 The cubic structure has a Na–O bond length of 2.7620 Å and a Nb–O bond length of 1.9530 Å. The corresponding bond energies were calculated as 1923.24 kcal mol−1 and 471.984 kcal mol−1. Similarly, the bond energies of various Na–O and Nb–O bonds for the orthorhombic phase were calculated. However, for the orthorhombic phase, a variety of Na–O and Nb–O bond lengths have to be considered owing to the atomic arrangement and coordination geometry of the structure. From the calculated dangling bond number, bond energies and surface areas, the surface energies of the three planes were calculated (using eqn (5)) as γ100 = 6.83 eV Å−2 for the {100} planes in the cubic phase and γ110 = 2.11 eV Å−2 and γ114 = 0.074 eV Å−2 for the (110) and (114) planes in the orthorhombic phase. This is shown schematically above (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the cubic and cuboctahedral crystals of c- and o-NaNbO3 crystals with their corresponding facets. The surface energy of different facets and the spatial charge separation within the facets leading to inter-facet charge transfer in the cuboctahedral crystal are depicted. 
From the calculated surface energies of the facets, we understand that among the three facets considered in the present work, the {100} family of facets of the cubic NaNbO3 possesses the highest surface energy, and hence, it is the most reactive of the three facets. Since all the six facets in the cube are equivalent, all of them would show the same reactivity and there is no scope for internal charge transfer among the facets. However, in the case of orthorhombic NaNbO3, the wide gap between the surface energies of the (110) and (114) facets results in spatial electron–hole charge separation and internal charge transfer occurring among the two facets.81,82 Such a charge transfer creates suitable oxidation and reduction sites on the facets which would assist in enhanced photocatalytic activity in the orthorhombic phase. However, for the cubic phase, the presence of six equivalent highly energetic facets results in substantial enhancement of photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic dye degradation activity over the orthorhombic phase.
4. Conclusions
We have demonstrated the possibility of facet engineering of crystals leading to higher photocatalytic activity in core/shell heterostructures based on the surface energy of different facets. We have shown that it is possible to achieve enhanced and stable current density over long duration in photoelectrochemical water splitting and efficient photocatalytic dye degradation by facet-selective synthesis of the NaNbO3 core material in NaNbO3/CdS core/shell heterostructures where the contribution of different facets between the cubic and orthorhombic phases of NaNbO3 has been studied for such a selection. The results suggest that the highly reactive {001} facets of the cubic phase contribute better towards improved catalytic activity when compared to the (110) and (114) facets of the orthorhombic phase where the spatial charge separation assisted inter-facet charge transfer mechanism plays a crucial role. This study on facet-selective synthesis based on the surface energy of facets brings out the importance of stabilizing the core material with suitable structure and morphology to achieve significant improvement in its activity. The findings of the involvement of highly reactive facets in the cubic phase and efficient charge transfer between different facets in the orthorhombic phase are significant advancements in the understanding of the mechanism of photocatalytic reactions and design of highly efficient photocatalysts that operate in the visible region.
Acknowledgements
A. K. G. thanks DeitY, Govt. of India for financial support. S. Kumar and R. Parthasarathy thank the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India for fellowship. A. P. S. is grateful to DST, Govt. of India for financial support through INSPIRE faculty award number IFA12-PH-16.
References
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, A Review and Recent Developments in Photocatalytic Water-Splitting using TiO2 for Hydrogen Production, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Combinatorial Approaches for the Identification and Optimization of Oxide Semiconductors for Efficient Solar Photoelectrolysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 197–210 RSC .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and S. M. A. El, Chemistry and Properties of Nanocrystals of Different Shapes, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. George, M. Ammann, B. D'Anna, D. J. Donaldson and S. A. Nizkorodov, Heterogeneous Photochemistry in the Atmosphere, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4218–4258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Construction of One-dimensional Nanostructures on Graphene for Efficient Energy Conversion and Storage, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559–2579 CAS .
H. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, J. Zhao, C. Guo, T. Xie and D. Wang, Mechanism of Supported Gold Nanoparticles as Photocatalysts under Ultraviolet and Visible Light Irradiation, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7524–7526 RSC .
A. L. Linsebigler, L. Guangquan and J. T. Yates Jr, Photocatalysis on TiO2 Surfaces: Principles, Mechanisms, and Selected Results, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Structure, Properties, and Band Gap Engineering, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vortman, O. Ben-dor, S. Yochelis, Y. Amit and Y. Paltiel, Mapping the Energy Band Structure of Nanocrystal Monolayers under Ambient Conditions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22245–22249 CAS .
F. Wang, J. H. Ho, Y. Jiang and R. Amal, Tuning Phase Composition of TiO2 by Sn4+ Doping for Efficient Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23941–23948 CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Visible-Light Photocatalysis in Nitrogen-Doped Titanium Oxides, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Nalbandian, K. E. Greenstein, D. Shuai, M. Zhang, Y. H. Choa, G. F. Parkin, N. V. Myung and D. M. Cwiertny, Tailored Synthesis of Photoactive TiO2 Nanofibers and Au/TiO2 Nanofiber Composites: Structure and Reactivity Optimization for Water Treatment Applications, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 1654–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Jang, J. H. Won, S. J. Hwang and J. H. Choy, Fine Tuning of the Face Orientation of ZnO Crystals to Optimize their Photocatalytic Activity, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3309–3312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Synthesis of TitaniaNanosheets with a High Percentage of Exposed (001) Facets and Related Photocatalytic Properties, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mclaren, T. V. Solis, G. Li and S. C. Tsang, Shape and Size Effects of ZnO Nanocrystals on Photocatalytic Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12540–12541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kar, S. Sain, S. Kundu, A. Bhattacharyya, S. K. Pradhan and A. Patra, Influence of Size and Shape on the Photocatalytic Properties of SnO2 Nanocrystals, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1017–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, Quantum Dot Solar Cells. Tuning Photoresponse through Sizeand Shape Control of CdSe–TiO2 Architecture, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kapilashrami, Y. Zhang, Y. S. Liu, A. Hagfeldt and J. Guo, Probing the Optical Property and Electronic Structure of TiO2 Nanomaterials for Renewable Energy Applications, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9662–9707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Synthesis of Bismuth Vanadate Nanoplates with Exposed {001} Facets and Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalytic Properties, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893–1895 RSC .
J. S. Jang, K. Y. Yoon, X. Xiao, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, Development of a Potential Fe2O3-Based Photocatalyst Thin Film for Water Oxidation by Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy: Effects of Ag-Fe2O3 Nanocomposite and Sn Doping, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4803–4810 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, H. Cui, Y. Li, J. Qin, R. Zhang and H. Tang, Fabrication of Ag3PO4Graphene Composites with Highly Efficient and Stable Visible Light Photocatalytic Performance, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, Highly Efficient Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production of CdS-Cluster-Decorated Graphene Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khanchandani, P. K. Srivastava, S. Kumar, S. Ghosh and A. K. Ganguli, Band Gap Engineering of ZnO using Core/Shell Morphology with Environmentally Benign Ag2S Sensitizer for Efficient Light Harvesting and Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalysis, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 8902–8912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, J. He, N. Rosenzweig and Z. Rosenzweig, Superparamagnetic Fe2O3 Beads-CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dots Core–Shell Nanocomposite Particles for Cell Separation, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 409–413 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, L. Yi, N. Zhao, A. Tang, M. Gao and Z. Tang, Synthesis and Shape-Tailoring of Copper Sulfide/Indium Sulfide-Based Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13152–13161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, N. Yang, W. Wang and W. F. Zhang, Synthesis, Photophysical and Photocatalytic Properties of N-Doped Sodium Niobate Sensitized by Carbon Nitride, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14829–14833 CAS .
S. Kumar, S. Khanchandani, M. Thirumal and A. K. Ganguli, Achieving Enhanced Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysis Using Type-II NaNbO3/CdS Core/Shell Heterostructures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13221–13233 CAS .
M. Fan, B. Hu, X. Yan, C. Song, T. Chen, Y. Feng and W. Shi, Excellent Visible Light-driven Photocatalytic Performance of Cu2O Sensitized NaNbO3 Heterostructures, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6171–6177 RSC .
K. Saito and A. Kudo, Niobium-Complex-Based Syntheses of Sodium Niobate Nanowires Possessing Superior Photocatalytic Properties, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2017–2019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saito and A. Kudo, Fabrication of Highly Crystalline SnNb2O6 Shell with a Visible-Light Response on a NaNbO3 Nanowire Core, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 5621–5623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, M. L. Curri, C. Innocenti, C. Sangregorio, K. Achterhold, F. G. Parak and A. Agostiano, 
            et al., Seeded Growth of Asymmetric Binary Nanocrystals Made of a Semiconductor TiO2 Rodlike Section and a Magnetic gama-Fe2O3 Spherical Domain, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16953–16970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dixit, W. Zhou, J. C. Idrobo, J. Nanda and V. R. Cooper, Facet-Dependent Disorder in Pristine High-Voltage Lithium–Manganese Rich Cathode Material, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12710–12716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, B. Han and Y. S. Horn, Recent Insights into Manganese Oxides in Catalyzing Oxygen Reduction Kinetics, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6021–6031 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. S. A. Horn, Perovskite Oxide Optimized for Oxygen Evolution Catalysis from Molecular Orbital Principles, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Hildebrandt, J. Soldat and R. Marschall, Layered Perovskite Nanofibers via Electrospinning for Overall Water Splitting, Small, 2015, 11, 2051–2057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Perovskite Solar Cells: From Materials to Devices, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, G. Chen, Z. H. Li and Z. G. Zhang, Hydrothermal Synthesis and Photocatalytic Properties of ATaO3 and ANbO3 (A = Na and K), Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2269–2272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, Z. Zou and J. Ye, NaNbO3 Nanostructures: Facile Synthesis, Characterization, and their Photocatalytic Properties, Catal. Lett., 2009, 132, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, G. Li and W. Zhang, Effect of Synthesis Atmosphere on Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production of NaNbO3, Phys. B, 2014, 447, 12–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Katsumata, C. E. J. Cordonier, T. Shichi and A. Fujishima, Photocatalytic Activity of NaNbO3 Thin Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3856–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tomeno, Y. Tsunoda, K. Oka, M. Matsuura and M. Nishi, Lattice Dynamics of Cubic NaNbO3: An Inelastic Neutron Scattering Study, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 104101–104112 CrossRef .
S. K. Mishra, R. Mittal, V. Y. Pomjakushin and S. L. Chaplot, Phase Stability and Structural Temperature Dependence in Sodium Niobate: A High-Resolution Powder Neutron Diffraction Study, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 134105–134114 CrossRef .
M. D. Peel, S. P. Thompson, A. D. Aladine, S. E. Ashbrook and L. Philip, New Twists on the Perovskite Theme: Crystal Structures of the Elusive Phases R and S of NaNbO3, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6876–6889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiratori, A. Magrez, J. Dornseiffer, F. H. Haegel, C. Pithan and R. Waser, Polymorphism in Micro-, Submicro-, and Nanocrystalline NaNbO3, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20122–20130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiratori, A. Magrez, W. Fischer, C. Pithan and R. Waser, Temperature-induced Phase Transitions in Micro-, Submicro-, and Nanocrystalline NaNbO3, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18493–18502 CAS .
R. A. Sperling and W. J. Parak, Surface Modification, Functionalization and Bioconjugation of Colloidal Inorganic Nanoparticles, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 1333–1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yua, F. Zhanga, G. Lia and W. Zhanga, Preparation and photocatalytic activity of triangular pyramid NaNbO3, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 166–169 CrossRef .
G. Li, Z. Yi, Y. Bai, W. Zhang and H. Zhang, Anisotropy in photocatalytic oxidization activity of NaNbO3 photocatalyst, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 10194–10198 RSC .
G. Wulff, Z. Kristallogr. Mineral., 1901, 34, 449–530 CAS .

          J. W. Gibbs, Collected Works,  1928 Search PubMed .

          B. Mutaftschiev, The Atomistic Nature of Crystal Growth, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. K. Wallace and K. P. Mckenna, Facet-Dependent Electron Trapping in TiO2 Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1913–1920 CAS .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Crystal Facet Engineering of Semiconductor Photocatalysts: Motivations, Advances and Unique Properties, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhou, N. Tian, Z. Z. Huang, D. J. Chen and S. G. Sun, Nanoparticle Catalysts with High Energy Surfaces and Enhanced Activity Synthesized by Electrochemical Method, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 140, 81–92 RSC .
S. B. Zhang and S. H. Wei, Surface Energy and the Common Dangling Bond Rule for Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 086102–086106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, S. Ouyang, G. Xi, T. Kako and J. Ye, The Effects of Crystal Structure and Electronic Structure on Photocatalytic H2 Evolution and CO2 Reduction over Two Phases of Perovskite-Structured NaNbO3, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7621–7628 CAS .
Q. Gu, K. Zhu, N. Zhang, Q. Sun, P. Liu, J. Liu, J. Wang and Z. Li, Modified Solvothermal Strategy for Straight forward Synthesis of Cubic NaNbO3 Nanowires with Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25956–25964 CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Hydrogen-Treated TiO2 Nanowire Arrays for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Meng, S. Suri, W. Ding, F. Huang and N. Wu, Photoelectrochemical Performance Enhanced by a Nickel Oxide–Hematite p–n Junction Photoanode, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8213–8215 RSC .
J. F. Zang, S. J. Bao, C. M. Li, H. Bian, X. Cui, Q. Bao, C. Q. Sun, J. Guo and K. Lian, Well-Aligned Cone-Shaped Nanostructure of Polypyrrole/RuO2 and Its Electrochemical Supercapacitor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14843–14847 CAS .
A. D. Fabio, A. Giorgi, M. Mastragostino and F. Soavi, Carbon-Poly (3-methylthiophene)Hybrid Supercapacitors, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A845–A850 CrossRef .
S. C. Riha, B. M. Klahr, E. C. Tyo, S. Seifert, S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, T. W. Hamann and A. B. F. Martinson, Atomic Layer Deposition of a Submonolayer Catalyst for the Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Performance of Water Oxidation with Hematite, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2396–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Steier, I. H. Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. F. Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Understanding the Role of Underlayers and Overlayers in Thin Film Hematite Photoanodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681–7688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, F. Ning, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Hierarchical Nanowire Arrays Based on ZnO Core-Layered Double Hydroxide Shell for Largely Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 580–586 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Zhao, Z. Liu, S. Shan, W. W. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Y. Ma, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Bismuthoxyiodide Nanoflakes/Titania Nanotubes Arrayed p–n Heterojunction and Its Application for Photoelectrochemical Bioanalysis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. K. Mackenzie, A. J. W. Moore and J. F. Nicholas, Bonds Broken at Atomically Flat Crystal Surfaces—I, Face centred and Body centred Cubic Crystals, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1962, 23, 185–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Mackenzie and J. F. Nicholas, Bonds Broken at Atomically Flat Crystal Surfaces—II, Crystals Containing many Atoms in a Primitive Unit Cell, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1962, 23, 197–205 CrossRef .
L. M. Falicov and G. A. Somorjai, Correlation between Catalytic Activity and Bonding and Coordination Number of Atoms and Molecules on Transition Metal Surfaces: Theory and experimental evidence, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1985, 82, 2207–2211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, N. Li, D. Zeng, H. Li, G. Tang, A. Pang, C. Xie and X. Zhao, Hierarchical ZnO Hollow Microspheres with Exposed (001) Facets as Promising Catalysts for the Thermal Decomposition of Ammonium Perchlorate, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8689–8696 RSC .
Q. Xiang, G. Chen and T. C. Lau, Effects of Morphology and Exposed Facets of α-Fe2O3 Nanocrystals on Photocatalytic Water Oxidation, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52210–52216 RSC .
B. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Hou, S. Yang, X. H. Yang, J. H. Zhong, J. Liu, H. F. Wang, P. Hu and H. J. Zhao, 
            et al., Facet-Dependent Catalytic Activity of Platinum Nanocrystals for Triiodide Reduction in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Sci. Rep., 2013, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. Ming, W. Feng, Q. Tang, F. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang and C. Yan, Growth of Tetrahexahedral Gold Nanocrystals with High-Index Facets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16350–16351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, C. Li, L. D. Sun, H. Wu, T. Ming, J. Wang, J. C. Yu and C. H. Yan, Heteroepitaxial Growth of High-Index-Faceted Palladium Nanoshells and their Catalytic Performance, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1106–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, F. Li, Q. Xiao and H. Lin, Conformation of Capping Ligands on Nanoplates: Facet-Edge-Induced Disorder and Self-Assembly-Related Ordering Revealed by Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2170–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Min, G. D. Moon, C. E. Kim, J. H. Lee, H. Yang, A. Soon and U. Jeong, Solution-based Synthesis of Anisotropic Metal Chalcogenide Nanocrystals and their Applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6222–6248 RSC .
K. R. Kort and S. Banerjee, Ligand-Mediated Control of Dislocation Dynamics and Resulting Particle Morphology of GdOCl Nanocrystals, Small, 2015, 11, 329–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhou and L. Guo, Toward Facet Engineering of CdS Nanocrystals and their shape-Dependent Photocatalytic Activities, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20555–20560 CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Xiao and L. Zhang, Synthesis and Facet-Dependent Photoreactivity of BiOCl Single-Crystalline Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, Nonaqueous Synthesis of TiO2 Nanocrystals using TiF4 to EngineerMorphology, Oxygen Vacancy Concentration, and PhotocatalyticActivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. P. Singh, C. Bera, M. Thirumal, B. R. Mehta and A. K. Ganguli, Visible Light Driven Photoelectrochemical and Photocatalytic Performance of NaNbO3/Ag2S Core/Shell Heterostructure, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Spatial Separation of Photogenerated Electrons and Holes among {010} and {110} Crystal Facets of BiVO4, Nat. Commun., 2013, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu, Z. Liu, W. R. Córdoba and T. Lian, Ultrafast Charge Separation and Long-Lived Charge Separated State in Photocatalytic CdS–Pt NanorodHeterostructures, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10337–10340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† The authors declare no competing financial interest.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Powder XRD of core/shell heterostructures (Fig. S1), DLS size distribution image of c- and o-NaNbO3 samples (Fig. S2), FESEM magnified image (Fig. S3), FESEM elemental mapping of the core/shell structures (Fig. S4), TEM and HRTEM images of core/shell heterostructures (Fig. S5), XPS data (Fig. S6), dark current plot (Fig. S7), solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency plot (Fig. S8), chronoamperometry plot (Fig. S9), photodegradation efficiency plot (Fig. S10), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area plot (Fig. S11), role of different scavengers data (Fig. S12) and reusability test for degradation of MB dye (Fig. S13). See DOI: 10.1039/c6cy02098dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Growth procedure of NaNbO3 cubic and cuboctahedral crystals.	 

 	Fig. 1  Powder XRD patterns of (a) c-NaNbO3 with a cubic morphology and (b) o-NaNbO3 with a cuboctahedron morphology; FE-SEM images of (c) a cube and (d) an cuboctahedron; TEM images of (e) a cube and (f) a cuboctahedron; HRTEM images of (g) a cube and (h) a cuboctahedron; and SAED images of the samples with (i) cubic and (j) cuboctahedron morphologies.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of the NaNbO3/CdS core/shell of (a) c-NaNbO3 cubic crystals and (b) o-NaNbO3 cuboctahedral crystals. TEM-EDS analysis of the marked region corresponding to the (c) c-NaNbO3/CdS core region, (d) c-NaNbO3/CdS shell region, (e) o-NaNbO3/CdS core region and (f) o-NaNbO3/CdS shell region of the cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures.	 
(hν·F(R∞))l/n = A(hν − Eg)	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Absorbance spectra of (a) bare NaNbO3 (c- for cubic and o- for orthorhombic). The inset shows the Tauc plot for NaNbO3 (b) c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and (c) o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures, respectively. The black curves in (b) and (c) are the observed DRS spectra of the NaNbO3/CdS heterostructures, while the red curves correspond to deconvoluted fits for the NaNbO3 energy band gap spectra.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photoelectrochemical performances in terms of current–potential curves, (b) Mott–Schottky plots under dark conditions, (c) Nyquist plots for c-NaNbO3, o-NaNbO3, c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic, and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell. The EIS was measured at open circuit potential (versus Ag/AgCl) under dark conditions. (d) IPCE curves for c-NaNbO3/CdS and o-NaNbO3/CdS core/shell measured at 0.62 V versus Ag/AgCl (1.23 V vs. RHE).	 
1/c2 = (2/qε0εNd)(Vapp − VFB − kT/q)	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic performances and (b) plot of ln(C0/C) as a function of visible light irradiation time for the degradation of MB solution containing NaNbO3, CdS, c-NaNbO3/CdS cubic and o-NaNbO3/CdS cuboctahedral core/shell heterostructures.	 
CdS + hν → CdS(e−CB,h+VB)
CdS(e−) + c-NaNbO3 → CdS + c-NaNbO3(e−CB)
O2 + c-NaNbO3(e−CB) → O2˙− + c-NaNbO3
O2˙− + H2O → HO2˙ + OH−
HO2˙ + H2O → OH˙ + H2O2
H2O2 → 2OH˙
Dye(MB) + OH˙ → CO2 + H2O
MB + CdS(h+) → degradation products

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram for the energy band of p-type CdS and n-type NaNbO3 before and after contact.	 

 	Fig. 7  The crystal structure and atomic arrangement of different planes of c- and o-NaNbO3 phases. The shaded (001) plane of c-NaNbO3 and (110) and (114) planes of o-NaNbO3 contribute to the faceting of the corresponding cubic and cuboctahedral crystals.	 
	(4)
n(u) = 0 if h·u ≤ 0	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the cubic and cuboctahedral crystals of c- and o-NaNbO3 crystals with their corresponding facets. The surface energy of different facets and the spatial charge separation within the facets leading to inter-facet charge transfer in the cuboctahedral crystal are depicted.	 
Footnotes
† The authors declare no competing financial interest.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Powder XRD of core/shell heterostructures (Fig. S1), DLS size distribution image of c- and o-NaNbO3 samples (Fig. S2), FESEM magnified image (Fig. S3), FESEM elemental mapping of the core/shell structures (Fig. S4), TEM and HRTEM images of core/shell heterostructures (Fig. S5), XPS data (Fig. S6), dark current plot (Fig. S7), solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency plot (Fig. S8), chronoamperometry plot (Fig. S9), photodegradation efficiency plot (Fig. S10), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area plot (Fig. S11), role of different scavengers data (Fig. S12) and reusability test for degradation of MB dye (Fig. S13). See DOI: 10.1039/c6cy02098d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
