Atomic Spectrometry Update—Advances in Atomic Absorption and Fluorescence Spectrometry and Related Techniques  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/JA991060187R View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/JA991060187R
(Review Article)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1991, 6, 187R-220RAtomic Spectrometry Update—Advances in Atomic Absorption and Fluorescence Spectrometry and Related Techniques(Note: The full text of this document is currently only available in the PDF Version )Steve J. Hill, John B. Dawson, W. John Price, Ian L. Shuttler and Julian F. TysonAbstractIn previous years, the third and fourth ASU reviews in JAAS have been devoted to ‘Instrumentation’ and ‘Atomization and Excitation’, covering developments in equipment-procedures and fundamental processes, respectively. Many of the advances in analytical atomic spectrometry reported in the ASU references concern research in both of these areas and duplication of coverage was becoming difficult to avoid. As a separate ASU deals with all aspects of XRF and atomic mass spectrometry, it has been decided to create two new reviews on ‘Atomic Emission Spectrometry’ and ‘Atomic Absorption Spectrometry, Atomic Fluorescence Spectrometry and Related Techniques’. The review on ‘Atomic Emission Spectrometry’ may be found in JAAS, Volume 6, Issue 4. The present review describes developments in all aspects of atomic absorption spectrometry, atomic fluorescence spectrometry and related techniques, including fundamental processes and instrumentation, reported in the Atomic Spectrometry Updates References in JAAS, Volume 5 (90/1159–90/4179) and Volume 6 (91/1–91/2702). The full references, names and addresses of authors can be readily found from the Atomic Spectrometry Update References in the relevant issues of JAAS. However, as an additional service to readers an abbreviated form of each literature reference quoted (except for those to Conference Abstracts) is given at the end of the review. Comments on the new format of the reviews are welcome.
Table Content:
