Light powered molecular machines   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B806328C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B806328C
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1542-1550Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLight powered molecular machines†

        
          
            Vincenzo 
            Balzani
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Alberto 
            Credi
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Margherita 
            Venturi
          
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Chimica “G. Ciamician”, Università di Bologna, via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: vincenzo.balzani@unibo.it; alberto.credi@unibo.it; margherita.venturi@unibo.it;  Fax: +39 051 2099456
Received 
      19th December 2008
    First published on 18th March 2009AbstractThe bottom-up construction and operation of mechanical machines of molecular size is a topic of high interest for nanoscience, and a fascinating challenge of nanotechnology. Like their macroscopic counterparts, nanoscale machines need energy to operate. Although most molecular motors of the biological world are fueled by chemical reactions, light is a very good choice to power artificial molecular machines because it can also be used to monitor the state of the machine, and makes it possible to obtain systems that show autonomous operation and do not generate waste products. By adopting an incrementally staged design strategy, photoinduced processes can be engineered within multicomponent (supramolecular) species with the purpose of obtaining light-powered molecular machines. Such an approach is illustrated in this tutorial review by describing some examples based on rotaxanes investigated in our laboratories.
Vincenzo Balzani
Vincenzo Balzani is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna. He is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. His scientific activity is documented by three monographs and more than 550 papers in the fields of photochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, molecular devices and machines, and solar energy conversion. He is one of the 100 most cited scientists in the field of Chemistry according to the ISI classification. In 2003, together with A. Credi and M. Venturi, he co-authored a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”, the second edition of which was released in 2008.
Alberto Credi
Alberto Credi has held the position of Associate Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna since 2001. His research is focused on the design and investigation of molecular devices and machines. He has received several scientific awards, including the IUPAC Prize for Young Chemists and the Grammaticakis-Neumann international prize for photochemistry, and he is a member of the Advisory Board of the European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry. He is the co-author of more than 150 scientific papers dealing with the photophysics, photochemistry and electrochemistry of molecular and supramolecular species, and of a handbook of photochemistry.
Margherita Venturi
Margherita Venturi is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna. She started her career in 1972 at the National Research Council in Bologna, where she used radiolytic techniques to study the electron-transfer processes involved in model systems for the conversion of solar energy. In 1992 she became Professor at the University of Bologna. Her present research interests are in the field of supramolecular photochemistry and electrochemistry. She is the co-author of more than 170 publications in international journals, including several reviews.
1. Introduction
1.1 Nanomachines
Nowadays the miniaturization race leads scientists to investigate the possibility of designing and constructing machines and motors at the nanometre scale, that is, at the molecular level. Many fields of technology, in particular information processing, have benefited from progressive miniaturization of the components of devices in the last fifty years. A common prediction is that further progress in miniaturization will not only decrease the size and increase the power of computers, but could also open the way to new technologies in the fields of medicine, environment, energy and materials.
A molecular machine can be defined as an assembly of a discrete number of molecular components (that is, a supramolecular structure) designed to perform specific mechanical movements as a consequence of appropriate external stimuli.1 The extension of the concept of machine to the molecular level is important not only for the sake of basic research, but also for the growth of nanoscience and the development of a bottom-up approach to nanotechnology. Chemists, by the nature of their discipline, are already at the bottom, since they are able to manipulate molecules (i.e., the smallest entities with distinct shapes and properties) and are therefore in the ideal position to develop bottom-up strategies for the construction of nanoscale machines.
Much of the inspiration to construct molecular devices and machines comes from the outstanding progress of molecular biology that has begun to reveal the secrets of the natural nanomachines which constitute the material base of life.2–5 Surely, the supramolecular architectures of the biological world are themselves the premier, proven examples of the feasibility and utility of nanotechnology, and constitute a sound rationale for attempting the realization of artificial molecular machines. The bottom-up construction of systems as complex as those present in Nature is a prohibitive task. Therefore chemists have tried (i) to construct much simpler systems, without mimicking the complexity of the biological structures, (ii) to understand the principles and processes at the basis of their operation, and (iii) to investigate the challenging problems posed by interfacing artificial molecular machines with the macroscopic world, particularly as far as energy supply and information exchange are concerned.
In the last few years the development of powerful synthetic methodologies, combined with a device-driven ingenuity evolved from the attention to functions and reactivity, has led to remarkable achievements in this field. Several excellent reviews6–10 and a monograph1 dealing with artificial molecular machines and motors are available.
1.2 Light opportunities
All living organisms rely on sunlight as the primary energy source. Photosynthetic processes convert solar energy into high-energy chemicals,11 which are subsequently processed and used to power all biological functions, including those involving mechanical movements. For example, motor proteins like myosin and kinesin are powered by ATP hydrolysis.5 As a matter of fact, the direct conversion of light energy into motion in biological systems is quite rare. One example is bacteriorhodopsin, in which a photoisomerization event triggers conformational changes that ultimately lead to the transfer of protons across a membrane.12
Chemical ‘fuels’ are particularly convenient to satisfy the everyday energy needs of living organisms because (i) exergonic reactions are a most straightforward means to supply energy to a chemical system, and (ii) fuels allow a convenient storage, transport and delivery of energy. However, a device that utilizes chemical energy will need addition of fresh reactants at any step of its working cycle, with the concomitant formation of waste products. Accumulation of these ‘exhaust’ species will compromise the operation of the device unless they are removed from the system, as happens in our bodies as well as in macroscopic internal combustion engines. It is clear that the need to remove waste products introduces noticeable limitations in the design and construction of artificial molecular machines based on chemical fuel inputs.
On the other hand, it is well known that inputs of light energy can cause the occurrence of endergonic, reversible and ‘clean’ reactions. In the last two decades, the outstanding progress made by supramolecular photochemistry13 has led to the design and construction of photochemically driven molecular devices and machines which work without formation of waste products.
In the context of artificial nanomachines, light energy supply possesses a number of further advantages compared to chemical (or electrochemical) stimulation. First of all, the amount of energy conferred on a chemical system by using photons can be carefully controlled by the wavelength and intensity of the exciting light, in relation to the absorption spectrum of the targeted species. Such an energy can be transmitted to molecules without physically connecting them to the source (no ‘wiring’ is necessary), the only requirement being the transparency of the matrix at the excitation wavelength. Other properties of light, such as polarization, can also be utilized. Lasers provide the opportunity of working in very small spaces and extremely short time domains, and near-field techniques allow excitation with nanometre resolution. Conversely, the irradiation of large areas and volumes enables the parallel (or even synchronous) addressing of a very high number of individual nanomachines.
Because molecules are extremely small, the observation of motions at the molecular level, which is crucial for monitoring the operation of a molecular machine, is not trivial. In general, the motion of the component parts should cause readable changes in some chemical or physical properties of the system. Photochemical methods are also useful in this regard. As a matter of fact, photons can play with respect to chemical systems the dual role of writing (i.e., causing a change in the system) and reading (i.e., reporting the state of the system).13 This is primarily true in Nature, where sunlight photons are employed both as energy quanta in photosynthetic processes and as information elements in vision and other light-triggered processes. For example, luminescence spectroscopy is a valuable method because it is easily accessible and offers good sensitivity and selectivity, along with the possibility of time- and space-resolved studies. In particular, flash spectroscopic techniques with laser excitation allow the study of extremely fast processes.
The use of light to power nanoscale machines is relevant for another important reason. If and when a nanotechnology-based industry is developed, its products will have to be powered by renewable energy sources, because it has become clear that the problem of energy supply is a crucial one for human civilization for the years ahead.14 In this framework, the construction of nanomachines, including natural–artificial hybrids15 that harness solar energy in the form of visible or near-UV light, is an important possibility.
1.3 Autonomous operation
An important feature of a molecular machine is its ability to exhibit autonomous behavior, i.e., to operate without external intervention (in other words, in a constant environment) as long as the energy source is available. Hence, autonomous molecular machines are free-running systems that do not require controlled and repeated addition of chemicals or other environmental changes. Natural motors are autonomous, in most cases acting as catalyzers for the fueling reaction. Except for some recent work on DNA-based nanomachines,9 the chemically powered artificial molecular machines reported so far are not autonomous because after the mechanical movement induced by a given input they need another, opposite input to reset.
The design of autonomous nanomachines can take advantage of reversible photochemical processes. For instance, the operation of the machine could be based on a photoinduced sequence of processes that lead the system through transient electronic and nuclear (mechanical) states; the final deactivation of the system to the ground state provides an automatic reset and closes the cycle of operation. Alternatively, the mechanical motion could be related to the light-triggered switching between two stable states as happens in photochromic systems. These approaches will be more conveniently discussed in the examples illustrated in the next section.
1.4 
          Rotaxane-type structures as molecular machines
In principle, molecular machines can be designed starting from several kinds of molecular and supramolecular systems, including DNA.1,6–10 However, for the reasons mentioned below, most of the systems constructed so far are based on interlocked molecular species such as rotaxanes and related species.
The names of these compounds derive from the Latin words rota and axis for wheel and axle, respectively. Rotaxanes16 are minimally composed (Fig. 1a and b) of a dumbbell-shaped molecule surrounded by a macrocyclic compound (the ‘ring’) and terminated by bulky groups (‘stoppers’) that prevent disassembly. If the stoppers are not present, the assembled species is denoted as a pseudorotaxane and in solution it equilibrates with the separated axle-type and ring components (Fig. 1c). Important features of these systems derive from noncovalent interactions between the components that contain complementary recognition sites. Such interactions are responsible for the self-assembly of pseudorotaxanes and efficient template-directed syntheses of rotaxanes, and include: electron donor–acceptor ability, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic–hydrophilic character, π–π stacking, electrostatic forces and, on the side of the strong interaction limit, metal–ligand bonding.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (a) ring shuttling and (b) ring rotation in rotaxanes, and (c) the threading–dethreading equilibrium involving the axle-type and ring components of a pseudorotaxane. 
Rotaxanes are appealing systems for the construction of molecular machines because (i) the mechanical bond makes possible a large variety of mutual arrangements of the molecular components while conferring stability on the system, (ii) the interlocked architecture limits the amplitude of the intercomponent motion in the three directions, (iii) the stability of a specific arrangement (co-conformation) is determined by the strength of the intercomponent interactions, and (iv) such interactions can be modulated by external stimulation. Two interesting molecular motions can be envisaged in rotaxanes, namely translation, i.e., shuttling of the ring along the axle (Fig. 1a), and rotation of the ring around the axle (Fig. 1b). Hence, rotaxanes are good prototypes for the construction of both linear and rotary molecular machines. Systems of the first type, termed molecular shuttles, constitute indeed the most common implementation of the molecular machine concept with rotaxanes.‡ Interestingly, the dumbbell component of a molecular shuttle exerts on the ring motion the same type of directional restriction imposed by the protein track for linear biomolecular motors (an actin filament for myosin and a microtubule for kinesin and dynein).5
A very interesting development of rotaxane chemistry is the synthesis of doubly interlocked rotaxane ‘dimers’ embedding the features of molecular shuttles (Fig. 2).17 These compounds are designed to perform contraction and extension movements in response to external stimulation,18,19 and are referred to as ‘molecular muscles’ because the executed mechanical motion is reminiscent of the shortening and lengthening of the functional elements (sarcomeres) present in muscle fibers.
 Fig. 2  A ‘molecular muscle’ based on the stimuli-induced interconversion between ‘extended’ and ‘contracted’ forms of a doubly interlocked rotaxane dimer. 
As already noted, pseudorotaxanes are systems strictly related to rotaxanes. Like rotaxanes, they can behave as molecular machines, indeed, the assembly–disassembly of their axle-type and ring components (Fig. 1c) is reminiscent of the threading–dethreading of a needle and can be controlled by external stimulation.1 Studies on switchable pseudorotaxanes have been, and still are, of noticeable importance for the development of less trivial unimolecular machines based on rotaxanes and related interlocked compounds.
2. Examples
2.1 Threading–dethreading motions activated by cis–transphotoisomerization

cis–transPhotoisomerization reactions involving –NN–, –CN– or –CC– double bonds are well known processes.20 In general, they are extremely clean and reversible reactions, the prototypical case being the cis–transisomerization of azobenzene.21 These are ideal processes to obtain light-driven operation of molecular machines because they bring about evident structural changes that can be exploited to cause large amplitude motions in suitably designed molecular and supramolecular systems. As a matter of fact, molecular tweezers based on the azobenzene unit were the first examples of light-driven molecular machines reported in the literature.22 The photoisomerization about a –CC– bond is the basis of an extremely interesting class of molecular rotary motors based on sterically hindered alkenes.23 Molecular shuttles24–26 and muscles19 relying on the photoisomerization of azobenzene or stilbene units have also been reported.
An example of a pseudorotaxane whose threading–dethreading can be controlled by means of a photoisomerization process is shown in Fig. 3.27 The thread-like species trans-1, which contains a π-electron rich azobiphenoxy unit, and the π-electron deficient macrocycle 24+ self-assemble very efficiently to give a pseudorotaxane, stabilized by electron donor–acceptor interactions. From fluorescence titrations an association constant Ka = 1.5×105 M−1 was determined in MeCN at room temperature. In the pseudorotaxane structure, the intense fluorescence characteristic of free 24+ (λmax = 434 nm, Fig. 4) is completely quenched by the donor–acceptor interaction.
 Fig. 3  Threading–dethreading of 1 and 24+ as a consequence of the cis–transphotoisomerization of the azobenzene-type unit contained in the thread-like component 1. 
 Fig. 4  
Fluorescence spectrum of a 1 : 1 mixture (1.0 × 10−4 M) of trans-1 and 24+ in MeCN at room temperature (full line), and fluorescence spectrum of the same mixture after irradiation at 365 nm until a photostationary state is reached (dashed line). The inset shows the changes in intensity of the fluorescence of the free ring 24+ upon consecutive trans→cis (irradiation at 365 nm, gray areas) and cis→trans (irradiation at 436 nm, white areas) photoisomerization cycles involving component 1. 
Irradiation of a MeCN solution containing 1.0 × 10−4 M trans-1 and 24+ (ca. 80% complexed species) with 365-nm light—almost exclusively absorbed by the trans-azobiphenoxy unit—causes strong absorption spectral changes, as expected for the well known trans→cisphotoisomerization of the azobenzene-type moiety. Such spectral changes are accompanied by a parallel increase in the intensity of the fluorescence band characteristic of free 24+ (Fig. 4). This behavior shows that photoisomerization is accompanied by dethreading (Fig. 3), a result which is confirmed by the finding that the association constant of 24+ with cis-1 is 15 times smaller than that with trans-1. On irradiation at 436 nm or by warming the solution in the dark the trans isomer of 1 can be regenerated. This process is accompanied by a parallel decrease in the fluorescence intensity at λmax = 434 nm, indicating that the trans-1 species rethreads through the macrocycle 24+.27
This system is no more than a primitive attempt towards the construction of light-driven molecular machines; nevertheless it exhibits a number of valuable features. Firstly, threading–dethreading is controlled exclusively by light energy, without generation of waste products. Furthermore, owing to the reversibility of the photoisomerization process, the light-driven dethreading–rethreading cycle can be repeated at will (Fig. 4, inset). Another relevant feature of this system is that it exhibits profound changes of a strong fluorescence signal.
2.2 Threading–dethreading motions activated by photoinduced proton transfer
As will be shown by the examples described in the next paragraph, modular construction of light-driven molecular machines pursued by integrating photoactive and mechanically switchable systems in a molecular assembly is a quite demanding task. In fact, the majority of artificial molecular machines reported so far are powered by chemical energy, most typically supplied by acid–base reactions.6–10 It would therefore be interesting to identify viable strategies for using light to operate ‘stand alone’ pH-driven molecular machines. Recently it has been shown28 that the acid–base controlled threading–dethreading of a pseudorotaxane in solution can be operated by light-induced intermolecular proton transfer with a photochromic switch.
The tris(N-phenylureido)calix[6]arene 3 (Fig. 5a) forms fairly stable pseudorotaxane structures with 4,4′-bipyridinium derivatives in apolar solvents.29 Therefore, it was expected that compound 4-H2+, obtained by protonation of the pyridyl nitrogen of the 4,4′-pyridylpyridinium thread-like 4+ (Fig. 5a), could thread into the cavity of 3 as well. In fact, spectrophotometric titrations and voltammetric experiments showed that a very stable pseudorotaxane is formed between 3 and 4-H2+ in CH2Cl2. Deprotonation of 4-H2+ with a base (e.g., tributylamine) in CH2Cl2 leads to dethreading of the pseudorotaxane (Fig. 5a).
 Fig. 5  (a) The acid–base controlled threading–dethreading of pseudorotaxane [3⊃4-H]2+. (b) The acid–base and light controlled interconversion between spiropyran 5 and protonated merocyanine 6-H+. 
In order to trigger the self-assembly and disassembly of this pseudorotaxane by light, a species has been identified (Fig. 5b) that occurs in two forms, interconvertible into one another by light irradiation, exhibiting smaller and larger pKa than that of 4-H2+, respectively.30 In the presence of an acid, the colorless spiropyran 5 is converted into the yellow protonated merocyanine form 6-H+; upon irradiation with visible light, 6-H+ releases a proton, isomerizing back to 5 (Fig. 5b).30
The system was characterized by performing repeated photochemical and thermal equilibration experiments and using UV–Vis absorption spectroscopy to monitor its state.28 The observed behavior can be interpreted in terms of the mechanism shown in Fig. 6. Starting from a mixture of the complex [3⊃4-H]2+ and 5 in a 1 : 1 ratio, a thermal proton transfer occurs from 4-H2+ to the photochrome, yielding 6-H+ and the deprotonated guest 4+, which escapes from the cavity of 3. Subsequent light irradiation of 6-H+ in the visible region causes an opposite proton transfer, converting 4+ into 4-H2+; the latter species then rethreads into the calixarene macrocycle.
 Fig. 6  Scheme of threading–dethreading processes in pseudorotaxane [3⊃4-H]2+ controlled by means of photoinduced proton exchange with the photochromic system 5/6-H+. 
Thermal equilibration–light irradiation cycles were performed on the same solution without loss of signal, showing that the overall switching process is reversible. As the reset of the system occurs thermally, its operation under continuous light irradiation can give rise to autonomous behavior. In practice, because of the large difference in the time scale of the dark and light parts of the cycle, the photostationary state is strongly displaced towards the [3⊃4-H]2+/5 mixture, unless irradiation is carried out with very low intensity and/or the temperature is increased. Nevertheless, such a behavior could be employed to implement a memory effect in the system.31 The main value of this study is to provide a general principle for the operation of photoinactive acid–base controllable molecular machines with light.
2.3 Molecular shuttles activated by photoinduced electron transfer
Photoinduced electron-transfer reactions are of primary importance both in natural photosynthetic devices and in artificial systems.32 The first attempts aimed at exploiting photoinduced electron transfer to bring about large-amplitude controllable molecular motions involved the light-driven threading–dethreading of pseudorotaxane-type structures33,34 using ruthenium(II) polypyridine complexes as photosensitizers.35 Another very interesting approach to obtain light-driven molecular machines based on transition-metal compounds takes advantage of the dissociative character of ligand-field excited states in Ru–diimine complexes.36–38
On the basis of the experience gained with some of these model systems,35 the bistable rotaxane 76+ (Fig. 7) was specifically designed39 to achieve photoinduced ring shuttling in solution. This compound has a modular structure; its ring component R is a π-electron-donating bis-p-phenylene-34-crown-10, whereas its dumbbell component is made of several covalently linked units. They are a Ru(II) polypyridine complex (P2+), a p-terphenyl-type rigid spacer (S), 4,4′-bipyridinium (A12+) and 3,3′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium (A22+) π-electron-accepting stations, and a tetraarylmethane group as the terminal stopper (T). The Ru-based unit plays the dual role of a light-fueled power station and a stopper, whereas the mechanical switch consists of the two electron-accepting stations and the electron-donating macrocycle. Six PF6− ions are present as the counteranions of the positively charged rotaxane. The stable translational isomer of rotaxane 76+ is the one in which the R component encircles the A12+ unit, in keeping with the fact that this station is a better electron acceptor than the other one.
 Fig. 7  Structure formula and cartoon representation of rotaxane 76+. 
The strategy devised in order to obtain the photoinduced shuttling movement of R between the two stations A12+ and A22+ is based on a ‘four stroke’ synchronized sequence of electron-transfer and molecular rearrangement processes, as illustrated in the central part of Fig. 8.39,40 Light excitation of the photoactive unit P2+ (process 1) is followed by the transfer of an electron from this unit to A12+ (process 2) which competes with the intrinsic decay of the P2+ excited state (process 3). After the reduction of A12+, with the consequent ‘deactivation’ of this station, the ring moves (process 4) by 1.3 nm to encircle A22+, a step that is in competition with the back electron transfer from A1+ (still encircled by R) to the oxidized unit P3+ (process 5). Eventually, a back electron transfer from the ‘free’ reduced station A1+ to the oxidized unit P3+ (process 6) restores the electron acceptor power to this radical cationic station. As a consequence of the electronic reset, thermally activated back movement of the ring from A22+ to A12+ takes place (process 7).
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the photochemically driven ring shuttling in rotaxane 76+. Left: shuttling assisted by two sacrificial fuels. Centre: autonomous operation based on intramolecular processes. Right: autonomous operation assisted by an electron relay. 
By means of steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopic experiments complemented by electrochemical measurements in acetonitrile solution, it has been shown40 that the absorption of a visible photon by 76+ can cause the occurrence of a forward and backward ring movement, that is, a full mechanical cycle according to the mechanism illustrated in the central part of Fig. 8.41 The key issues of this mechanism are the competition between processes 2 (photoinduced electron transfer) and 3 (intrinsic excited-state deactivation), and between processes 4 (ring displacement from the reduced A1+ station) and 5 (back electron transfer). From luminescence measurements it has been found39 that the time constants of processes 2 and 3 at 303 K are 4.0 and 0.9 μs, respectively, corresponding to a quantum yield of 0.16 for the electron-transfer process. Transient absorption experiments made it possible to determine39,40 the time constants of processes 4 and 5, which are 47 and 6.7 μs, respectively, at 303 K. Hence, the efficiency of ring displacement from the photo-reduced A1 station amounts to 0.12; because all the successive processes have no competitors, the overall shuttling quantum yield is simply 0.16 × 0.12 = 0.02. This somewhat disappointing result is compensated by the fact that the investigated system gathers together the following features: (i) it is powered by visible light (in other words, sunlight); (ii) it exhibits autonomous behavior, like motor proteins; (iii) it does not generate waste products; (iv) its operation can rely only on intramolecular processes, allowing in principle operation at the single-molecule level; (v) it can be driven at a frequency of about 1 kHz; (vi) it works in mild environmental conditions (i.e., fluid solution at ambient temperature); and (vii) it is stable for at least 103 cycles.
A thorough computational investigation on 76+ has revealed42 that the rate limiting step for the shuttling motion (process 4 in Fig. 8) could be related to the detachment of the PF6− counteranions from the station that has to receive the ring (A22+). If such a station were not hindered by anions, the shuttling motion would be almost barrierless (Fig. 9) and occur with a time constant as fast as 20 ns at 300 K. Hence, the shuttling quantum yield could be substantially improved by adopting weakly coordinating counteranions for 76+, or by changing the solvent. The latter choice, however, would also affect the energetics and kinetics of the electron-transfer processes. Unfortunately, experiments in these directions are not easy because of difficulties related to counteranion exchange for 76+, and solubility issues.
 Fig. 9  Free energy profile computed for the electronic ground state (blue curve) and the electron-transfer state afforded by photoexcitation (red curve) of 76+ as a function of the position of the ring along the axle of the dumbbell. Points a–d correspond to the structures shown in the central part of Fig. 8. The forward shuttling motion corresponds to the b→c transition. For more details see ref. 42. 
The molecular shuttle 76+ can also be operated, with a higher quantum yield, by a sacrificial mechanism39 based on the participation of external reducing (triethanolamine, tea) and oxidizing (O2) species (Fig. 8, left), and by an intermolecular mechanism40 involving the kinetic assistance of an external electron relay (phenothiazine, ptz), which is not consumed (Fig. 8, right). However, operation by the sacrificial mechanism does not afford an autonomous behavior and leads to consumption of chemical fuels and formation of waste products. On the other hand, the assistance by an electron relay affords autonomous operation in which only photons are consumed, but the mechanism is no longer based solely on intra-rotaxane processes.
We have also investigated systems related to 76+ in which either the position of the A12+ and A22+ stations is exchanged with respect to the P unit,43 a different Ru-based moiety is employed,44 or the photosensitizer is connected noncovalently to an electron-accepting station.45
Recently, a second-generation molecular shuttle was designed and constructed.46 The formula of rotaxane 84+ and its operation scheme, which is similar to that of 76+ (Fig. 8), are shown in Fig. 10. The system is composed of a cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) electron-accepting ring (R4+) and a multicomponent dumbbell comprising a light-harvesting porphyrin (P) which acts as an electron donor in the excited state, a C60electron acceptor (A), and tetrathiafulvalene (TTF, D1) and dioxynaphthalene (DON, D2) electron-donating stations. In the stable translational isomer the electron-accepting ring, which is confined in the region of the dumbbell delimited by the two stoppers T1 and T2, encircles the better electron-donor TTF station. In solution, excitation of the porphyrin unit with visible light (process 1 in Fig. 10) should cause an electron transfer to C60 (process 2); then, an electron shift from TTF to the oxidized porphyrin (process 4) should destabilize the original structure, causing the displacement of R4+ from D1+ to D2 (process 5). Subsequent back electron transfer (process 7) and macrocycle replacement (process 8) regenerate the starting isomer.
 Fig. 10  Structure formula of rotaxane 84+ and schematic representation of its operation as an autonomous molecular shuttle driven by visible light. 

Rotaxane
84+ is expected to exhibit a better performance as a light-driven autonomous molecular shuttle compared with the first-generation compound 76+ for the following three reasons. First, by using a triad approach,47 a relatively long lived charge-separated state should be obtained with a high efficiency. Second, the electrostatic repulsion between the photo-oxidized D1+ station and the R4+ ring is expected to speed up the displacement of the latter (process 5 in Fig. 10). Third, the hampering effect of the counteranions discussed for 76+ is not expected to be dramatic in the case of 84+ because the stations are originally uncharged.
UV–Vis–NIR absorption spectroscopic investigations and voltammetric experiments revealed46 remarkable electronic interactions between the various units of 84+, pointing to the existence of folded conformations in solution. Interestingly, the TTF unit can be electrochemically oxidized only in a limited fraction of the rotaxane molecules; in these species, removal of one electron from the TTF unit causes the shuttling of the R4+ ring away from this station. Most likely, rotaxane 84+ occurs as conformations in which the TTF unit is buried inside a complex molecular structure and is therefore protected against oxidation performed by an electric potential applied externally. Such a behavior limits the efficiency for the operation of 84+ as a redox-driven molecular shuttle. The possibility of achieving TTF oxidation by an electric potential generated internally through intramolecular photoinduced electron transfer is currently under investigation. In general terms, these results indicate that, as the structural complexity increases, the overall properties of the system cannot be easily rationalized solely on the basis of the type and sequence of the functional units incorporated in the molecular framework—that is, its ‘primary’ structure. Higher-level conformational effects, which are reminiscent of those related to the secondary and tertiary structure of biomolecules,2 have to be taken into consideration. The comprehension of these effects constitutes a stimulating scientific problem, and a necessary step for the design of novel artificial molecular devices and machines.
Finally, it should be recalled that molecular shuttles like those described in this section could not perform net mechanical work in a full cycle of operation48 because—as for any reversible molecular shuttle—the work done in the ‘forward’ stroke would be cancelled by the ‘backward’ stroke. To reach this goal, more advanced molecular machines and/or a better engineering of their operating environment (e.g., a surface or a membrane) are required.
3. Conclusion
The results described show that compounds capable of performing large amplitude, non-trivial and controlled mechanical movements upon light stimulation can be obtained by utilizing careful incremental design strategies, the tools of modern synthetic chemistry, and the paradigms of supramolecular chemistry, together with some inspiration from natural systems. Such achievements enable the development of more sophisticated artificial molecular machines showing complex motions and better performances in terms of stability, speed, switching, and so forth.
However, it should be recalled that the function performed by a molecular machine represents its most important feature, as for any device invented and constructed for a specific purpose. Indeed, Nature uses molecular machines to perform a large number of important functions, including energy conversion, cell division, intracellular displacement and muscle contraction. Despite the remarkable progress of the field in the past 15 years, artificial nanomachines have found no technological applications until now. The reason is that, while chemists have reached a good understanding of the design principles and can master efficient synthetic methodologies, they are still in the process of learning how these (admittedly complicated) chemical systems can be brought to the next level of structural complexity.
Extensive efforts involving multiple disciplines (chemistry, physics, biology, materials science, engineering, etc.) must be undertaken to investigate how molecular machines can be transferred from fluid solutions to more organised and sophisticated environments, in order to operate them with some degree of control in space and in time, and possibly coordinate their performance on larger scales.1,6–10,49,50 Stimulating challenges involve the use of molecular machines for processing and storing information,51–53 operating drug delivery systems,54–56 transporting and sorting nanoobjects,57 directing flows in microfluidic networks,58 and controlling chemical59 and biochemical60 processes. Surely, the marriage of structurally and functionally complex materials with the versatility of light stimuli can pave the way to valuable—and still unforeseen—applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all their collaborators and coworkers whose names appear in the reference list. Financial support from Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca, Regione Emilia-Romagna (PROMINER), and Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio in Bologna is gratefully acknowledged.
References

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines—Concepts and Perspectives for the Nanoworld, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2–17 CrossRef .

          D. S. Goodsell, Bionanotechnology—Lessons from Nature, Wiley, Hoboken,  2004 Search PubMed .

          R. A. L. Jones, Soft Machines—Nanotechnology and Life, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2005 Search PubMed .

Molecular Motors, ed. M. Schliwa, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1377–1400 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 25–35 Search PubMed .
E. R. Kay, D. A. Leigh and F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 72–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bath and A. J. Turberfield, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 275–284 Search PubMed .
B. Champin, P. Mobian and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 358–366 RSC .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
S. Subramaniam and R. Henderson, Nature, 2000, 406, 653–657 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 459–476 RSC .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Steinberg-Yfrach, J.-L. Rigaud, E. N. Durantini, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Nature, 1998, 392, 479–482 CrossRef CAS .

Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots, ed. J.-P. Sauvage and C. Dietrich-Buchecker, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. C. Jiménez-Molero, C. Dietrich-Buchecker and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3284–3287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, K. C.-F. Leung, D. Benitez, J.-Y. Han, S. J. Cantrill, L. Fang and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7470–7474 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Dawson, S. F. Lincoln and C. J. Easton, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3980–3982 RSC .

Photochromism: Molecules and Systems, ed. H. Dürr and H. Bouas-Laurent, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. Cembran, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, L. Gagliardi and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3234–3243 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
S. Shinkai, T. Nakaji, T. Ogawa, K. Shigematsu and O. Manabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 111–115 CrossRef .
M. Klok, N. Boyle, M. T. Pryce, A. Meetsma, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10484–10485 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Qu, Q.-C. Wang, X. Ma and H. Tian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 5929–5937 CrossRef CAS .
H. Murakami, A. Kawabuchi, R. Matsumoto, T. Ido and N. Nakashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15891–15899 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Dawson, S. Maniam, S. F. Lincoln and C. J. Easton, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1814–1821 RSC .
V. Balzani, A. Credi, F. Marchioni and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1860–1861 RSC .
S. Silvi, A. Arduini, A. Pochini, A. Secchi, M. Tomasulo, F. M. Raymo, M. Baroncini and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13378–13379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Credi, S. Dumas, S. Silvi, M. Venturi, A. Arduini, A. Pochini and A. Secchi, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5881–5887 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Raymo, S. Giordani, A. J. P. White and D. J. Williams, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 4158–4169 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Raymo, R. J. Alvarado, S. Giordani and M. A. Cejas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2361–2364 CrossRef CAS .

Electron Transfer in Chemistry, ed. V. Balzani, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001, vols. 1–5 Search PubMed .
A. C. Benniston, A. Harriman and D. S. Yufit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 2356–2358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, E. Johansson, A. H. Flood, H.-R. Tseng, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 6846–6858 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, E. C. Constable, A. Credi, O. Kocian, S. J. Langford, J. A: Preece, L. Prodi, E. R. Schofield, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart and S. Wenger, Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 4, 2413–2422 CrossRef CAS .
A.-C. Laemmel, J.-P. Collin, J.-P. Sauvage, G. Accorsi and N. Armaroli, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2003, 467–474 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mobian, J.-M. Kern and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2392–2395 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bonnet, J.-P. Collin and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10520–10533 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, A. Credi, R. Dress, E. Ishow, C. J. Kleverlaan, O. Kocian, J. A. Preece, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart, M. Venturi and S. Wenger, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3558–3574 CrossRef .
V. Balzani, M. Clemente-León, A. Credi, B. Ferrer, M. Venturi, A. H. Flood and J. F. Stoddart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 1178–1183 CrossRef CAS .
For a related example of a photochemically driven molecular shuttle, see:   A. M. Brouwer, C. Frochot, F. G. Gatti, D. A. Leigh, L. Mottier, F. Paolucci, S. Roffia and G. W. H. Wurpel, Science, 2001, 291, 2124–2128 Search PubMed .
P. Raiteri, G. Bussi, C. S. Cucinotta, A. Credi, J. F. Stoddart and M. Parrinello, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3536–3539 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, M. Clemente-León, A. Credi, M. Semeraro, M. Venturi, H.-R. Tseng, S. Wenger, S. Saha and J. F. Stoddart, Aust. J. Chem., 2006, 59, 193–206 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. E. Davidson, S. J. Loeb, P. Passaniti, S. Silvi and A. Credi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3233–3242 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ferrer, G. Rogez, A. Credi, R. Ballardini, M. T. Gandolfi, V. Balzani, Y. Liu, H.-R. Tseng and J. F. Stoddart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 18411–18416 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, A. H. Flood, J. F. Stoddart, S. Impellizzeri, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12159–12171 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Kay and D. A. Leigh, Nature, 2006, 440, 286–287 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 202–220 CrossRef .
S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009 10.1039/b818609j .
V. Balzani, A. Credi, S. J. Langford and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2679–2681 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Leigh, M. A. F. Morales, E. M. Pérez, J. K. Y. Wong, C. G. Saiz, A. M. Z. Slawin, A. J. Carmichael, D. M. Haddleton, A. M. Brouwer, W. J. Buma, G. W. H. Wurpel, S. Leon and F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3062–3067 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Green, J. W. Choi, A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, E. Johnston-Halperin, E. DeIonno, Y. Luo, B. A. Sheriff, K. Xu, Y. S. Shin, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Nature, 2007, 445, 414–417 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koçer, M. Walko, W. Meijberg and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2005, 309, 755–758 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, K. C.-F. Leug, T. D. Nguyen, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 685–693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Vögtle, L. De Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589–6592 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. L. van den Heuvel, M. P. de Graaff and C. Dekker, Science, 2006, 312, 910–914 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Bachand, S. B. Rivera, A. Carroll-Portillo, H. Hess and M. Bachand, Small, 2006, 2, 381–385 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pijper and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3693–3696 CrossRef .
D. W. Wendell, J. Patti and C. D. Montemagno, Small, 2006, 2, 1324–1329 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Dedicated to Professor Jean-Pierre Sauvage on the occasion of his 65th birthday.‡ The cartoons shown in Fig. 1, while providing a simple structural and topological representation, are somewhat misleading because they give the impression that rotaxanes are made of rigid molecular components, which is not the case for the vast majority of the systems reported so far. However, in order to obtain clear-cut mechanical movements the molecular components should exhibit at least some stiffness. This feature of molecular machines is most commonly fulfilled by utilizing molecular components that possess rigid subunits in their structures.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

Vincenzo Balzani
	Vincenzo Balzani is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna. He is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. His scientific activity is documented by three monographs and more than 550 papers in the fields of photochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, molecular devices and machines, and solar energy conversion. He is one of the 100 most cited scientists in the field of Chemistry according to the ISI classification. In 2003, together with A. Credi and M. Venturi, he co-authored a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”, the second edition of which was released in 2008.

Alberto Credi
	Alberto Credi has held the position of Associate Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna since 2001. His research is focused on the design and investigation of molecular devices and machines. He has received several scientific awards, including the IUPAC Prize for Young Chemists and the Grammaticakis-Neumann international prize for photochemistry, and he is a member of the Advisory Board of the European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry. He is the co-author of more than 150 scientific papers dealing with the photophysics, photochemistry and electrochemistry of molecular and supramolecular species, and of a handbook of photochemistry.

Margherita Venturi
	Margherita Venturi is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna. She started her career in 1972 at the National Research Council in Bologna, where she used radiolytic techniques to study the electron-transfer processes involved in model systems for the conversion of solar energy. In 1992 she became Professor at the University of Bologna. Her present research interests are in the field of supramolecular photochemistry and electrochemistry. She is the co-author of more than 170 publications in international journals, including several reviews.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (a) ring shuttling and (b) ring rotation in rotaxanes, and (c) the threading–dethreading equilibrium involving the axle-type and ring components of a pseudorotaxane.	 

 	Fig. 2  A ‘molecular muscle’ based on the stimuli-induced interconversion between ‘extended’ and ‘contracted’ forms of a doubly interlocked rotaxane dimer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Threading–dethreading of 1 and 24+ as a consequence of the cis–transphotoisomerization of the azobenzene-type unit contained in the thread-like component 1.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Fluorescence spectrum of a 1 : 1 mixture (1.0 × 10−4 M) of trans-1 and 24+ in MeCN at room temperature (full line), and fluorescence spectrum of the same mixture after irradiation at 365 nm until a photostationary state is reached (dashed line). The inset shows the changes in intensity of the fluorescence of the free ring 24+ upon consecutive trans→cis (irradiation at 365 nm, gray areas) and cis→trans (irradiation at 436 nm, white areas) photoisomerization cycles involving component 1.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The acid–base controlled threading–dethreading of pseudorotaxane [3⊃4-H]2+. (b) The acid–base and light controlled interconversion between spiropyran 5 and protonated merocyanine 6-H+.	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme of threading–dethreading processes in pseudorotaxane [3⊃4-H]2+ controlled by means of photoinduced proton exchange with the photochromic system 5/6-H+.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure formula and cartoon representation of rotaxane 76+.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the photochemically driven ring shuttling in rotaxane 76+. Left: shuttling assisted by two sacrificial fuels. Centre: autonomous operation based on intramolecular processes. Right: autonomous operation assisted by an electron relay.	 

 	Fig. 9  Free energy profile computed for the electronic ground state (blue curve) and the electron-transfer state afforded by photoexcitation (red curve) of 76+ as a function of the position of the ring along the axle of the dumbbell. Points a–d correspond to the structures shown in the central part of Fig. 8. The forward shuttling motion corresponds to the b→c transition. For more details see ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure formula of rotaxane 84+ and schematic representation of its operation as an autonomous molecular shuttle driven by visible light.	 
Footnotes
† Dedicated to Professor Jean-Pierre Sauvage on the occasion of his 65th birthday.
‡ The cartoons shown in Fig. 1, while providing a simple structural and topological representation, are somewhat misleading because they give the impression that rotaxanes are made of rigid molecular components, which is not the case for the vast majority of the systems reported so far. However, in order to obtain clear-cut mechanical movements the molecular components should exhibit at least some stiffness. This feature of molecular machines is most commonly fulfilled by utilizing molecular components that possess rigid subunits in their structures.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
