Photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells: fabrication, properties, and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TC02121A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TC02121A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10665-10686Photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells: fabrication, properties, and applications

        
          
            Keyu 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Guo
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Haitao 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing and Center for Nano Energy Materials, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, P. R. China. E-mail: nwpuxky@163.com
bDepartment of Applied Physics and Materials Research Center, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: aphhuang@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      14th July 2015
    , Accepted 14th September 2015First published on 15th September 2015AbstractThe surging of photovoltaics has witnessed the boost of numerous fascinating approaches to the enhancement of power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of the devices. Coupling photonic crystals (PCs) to photovoltaics is regarded to be effective in photon management and thus PCE enhancement. This review summarizes the recent progress in the fabrication strategies, optical properties, and application fundamentals of PCs for sensitized solar cells, with an emphasis on the relatively new and promising developments. It focuses on the fabrication methods of several major types of PCs that are applicable to sensitized solar cells and their optical properties, as well as the fundamental insights on the role played by the PCs in these solar cells. Also, the advancements in the applications of different types of PCs in various sensitized solar cells, such as liquid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum-dot sensitized solar cells, and perovskite solar cells, are reviewed. Finally, the future perspectives of PC-based sensitized solar cells are discussed.
Keyu Xie
Dr Keyu Xie received his PhD degree in 2012 from Central South University, China. From 2010 to 2013, he stayed in Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a Research Assistant and Postdoctoral Research Associate successively. He is currently an Associate Professor at the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing and the Center for Nano Energy Materials in Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. His research interests include nano-materials and their application in energy storage and conversion devices, such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and solar cells.
Min Guo
Dr Min Guo received her PhD degree in 2015 from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. She is currently a lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering and the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing in Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. Her research interests include nanomaterials and nanostructures for energy conversion and high-temperature materials.
Haitao Huang
Dr Haitao Huang received his PhD in Materials Science from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2000. He is currently the Associate Professor in the Department of Applied Physics, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He has published over 160 refereed journal papers on energy materials (supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and dye-sensitized solar cells) and ferroelectric materials. He is currently on the editorial board of Scientific Reports and the advisory board of Journal of Materials Chemistry C.
1 Introduction
One of the greatest challenges in the 21st century is undoubtedly the energy scarcity. It was predicted by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) that the total world energy consumption would rapidly grow from 505 quadrillion Btu in 2008 to 619 quadrillion Btu in 2020 and 770 quadrillion Btu in 2035.1 More seriously, the worldwide demand for energy is predicted to double by 2050 and triple by 2100.2,3 Fortunately, harvesting nature’s energy to meet the worldwide energy demand provides us a great option to overcome this dilemma. Renewable energies, such as hydroelectric, wind, biomass, geothermal, marine tidal and solar energy, are generally acknowledged as alternative energy sources for sustainable development of human society. Increasing the share of renewable energies in the world energy matrix will help prolong the existence of fossil fuel reserves, address the threats posed by climate change, and enable better security of energy supply on a global scale.4
Among the above-mentioned renewable energy sources, the solar energy has the potential to provide our planet with about 10000 times more energy than our global daily consumption.5 Due to the abundance of solar energy, photovoltaic technology that converts sunlight to electricity, has attracted lots of research interest.6,7 Aiming at boosting the efficiency of photovoltaic energy conversion, great efforts have been made to develop advanced solar energy materials and photovoltaic manufacturing technologies.8,9
The concept of photon management has recently emerged as a hot research topic in an effort to enhance light harvesting efficiency in photovoltaics. Nanostructured materials, such as photonic crystals (PCs), large particle aggregation scattering layers, and plasmonic nanometals have opened unprecedented opportunities for light management, notably in the third generation thin-film solar cells.10–14 PCs, with periodic dielectric nanostructures, show great ability to achieve a new level of control of light propagation and light energy distribution in photovoltaic devices.15 By coupling PCs to photovoltaic devices, photons will have a greater probability to be absorbed, resulting in increased light harvesting efficiency in these devices via various mechanisms, such as (1) photon localization and enhanced red light absorption near the red edge of a photonic bandgap,16 (2) light reflection within the photonic bandgap at various angles,17 and (3) formation of photon resonance modes within the solar cell.18 Generally, an improved light harvesting efficiency is likely to result in a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the cell and/or lower usage of absorbing material.19 Therefore, high-efficiency photovoltaic devices with low-cost are expected.
Currently, sensitized solar cells, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and quantum-dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs), are promising low-cost alternatives to traditional photovoltaic devices based on materials such as Si and CdTe,20,21 due to their lower material cost, simpler fabrication process, and even lower investment cost. The first demonstration of the light absorption enhancement effect of PC integrated sensitized solar cells in 2003 has encouraged more and more attempts to design PCs with different structural and optical properties that allow for light management in cells.16 Meanwhile, with the continuous development of nanotechnology, the ability to tailor the optical properties of PCs, and hence the performances of photovoltaic devices, has improved a lot within the last decade. Isolated reports on the experimental and/or theoretical research studies have sprung up in recent years, which call for a comprehensive overview of synthesis strategies, optical properties, and application fundamentals of PCs for sensitized solar cells.
The aim of this review is to provide a comprehensive view with a focus on the new and promising developments in the above-mentioned areas. Firstly, we will briefly introduce several major types of PCs that are applicable to sensitized solar cells and their fabrication methods. Secondly, we will lay emphasis on the understanding of the optical properties of these PCs and the role played by the PCs in sensitized solar cells. Thirdly, we will summarize the advances in the applications of PCs in sensitized solar cells. Finally, we will point out future research directions for further exploration of PC coupled sensitized solar cells.
2 Photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells and their fabrication strategies
PCs can be obtained through periodic arrangements of different dielectric materials and are periodically modulated at a sub-wavelength scale in one, two or three dimensions to form a forbidden gap in the photonic band structure within a specific range of frequencies.22,23 The photonic bandgap of a PC is mainly governed by the micro-/nano-spatial structure of the constituting dielectric materials and their refractive index contrast, which endow a PC with the ability to manipulate and control the propagation of light.
According to the periodic dimensionality, PCs can be broadly classified into three categories: one dimensional (1D), two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) PCs (Fig. 1). Among them, 1D PCs, also known as Bragg stacks or Bragg reflectors, consisted of alternating layers of two different materials,23,24 where the refractive index is periodically varied in only one dimension but homogeneous in the other two dimensions.23 For 2D PCs (with columns arranged in a plane crystal lattice structure), the refractive index is varied in two spatial dimensions and constant in the third. For 3D PCs, the most complicated in structures among all three types of PCs, the refractive index is varied in all the three dimensions.23,25
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of three kinds of photonic crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. 
Since the publication of the pioneering theoretical work by Yablonovitch and John in the late 1980s,26,27 there has been much interest in exploring new strategies to fabricate artificial PCs and applying them to solar cells, sensors, lasers, light emitting diodes, optical fibers and displays. Some of the typical fabrication techniques, such as evaporation, sputtering, dip/spin-coating, anodic etching, lithography, atomic layer deposition (ALD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and so on, can be found in several excellent reviews.23,25,28–31 Herein, we only focus on those PCs that are applicable to sensitized solar cells: (1) 1D multilayer PCs, (2) 3D inverse opal (IO) PCs, and (3) TiO2 nanotube (NT) PCs. The recent development of techniques to integrate these PCs into sensitized solar cells will also be highlighted.
2.1 1D multilayer photonic crystals
Layer-by-layer deposition of alternating materials is one of the simplest strategies to fabricate 1D multilayer PCs. The first successful application of 1D multilayer PCs to DSSCs was demonstrated by Míguez and coworkers via coupling a 1D SiO2/TiO2 multilayer PC to a conventional mesoporous TiO2 layer as the photoanode.32 The schematic illustration of the fabrication of such a 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC coupled photoanode is shown in Fig. 2a. The typical fabrication procedure includes the following steps: (1) a mesoporous TiO2 transparent electrode is made by the conventional doctor-blade method; (2) a very thin TiO2 overlayer is first spin-coated on the mesoporous TiO2 film; (3 and 4) alternate layers of SiO2 and TiO2 colloidal particles are then spin-coated onto the mesoporous TiO2 layer; and (5) the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC coupled photoanode is calcined. It is worth noting that, in this fabrication process, two key points should be carefully addressed. The first is the formation of a smooth and uniform TiO2 thin film on the top surface of the mesoporous TiO2 layer as mentioned in step (2). In order to achieve resonant modes in DSSCs, which usually play an important role in increasing light harvesting efficiency, an intimate physical contact between the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs and the mesoporous TiO2 layer is stringently required.33,34 A flat TiO2 overlayer is the prerequisite for the formation of high-quality 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs on the mesoporous TiO2 layer. The second is the precise control of the microstructure of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs by modulating the concentration of each colloidal suspension and the processing parameters of spin-coating.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process and the SEM images of the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC coupled photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. (b) SEM images of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs with different pore sizes: normal one (top) and larger one (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2012) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Structure of a 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC with multi-periodicity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using the same technique, Míguez et al. fabricated a 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC with enlarged average pore size for better electrolyte diffusion.35 Polymeric porogenes were incorporated into the TiO2 colloidal suspension to create larger pores after annealing (Fig. 2b). This structural modification of the photoanode further boosts the PCE of the DSSC. Later, a multi-periodicity 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC has also been integrated to the mesoporous TiO2 layer to form a photoanode.36 As shown in Fig. 2c, the novel hierarchical PC is constructed by three 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs of different periodicities, each with four SiO2/TiO2 bilayers. The thickness of the bilayer was modulated by the concentration of SiO2 and TiO2 in the precursor suspensions. This multi-periodicity 1D PC shows a panchromatic reflection in the whole visible range for highly efficient light harvesting in DSSCs. In addition, the layer-by-layer spin-coating method has also been successfully introduced to couple the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC to the photoanode and the counter-electrode, respectively, for solid-state DSSCs.37,38 Due to its simplicity, this spin-coating method shows great potential for fabricating 1D multilayer PCs for sensitized solar cell applications.
Another strategy to fabricate a novel and conducting 1D SiO2/ITO PC as the counter-electrode for sensitized solar cells is reported by Heiniger et al.39 In their work, the SiO2 and ITO multilayer is fabricated by alternating spin-coating and RF magnetron sputtering. Firstly, a SiO2 nanoparticle (NP) layer is spin-coated on the FTO-glass substrate. Secondly, after annealing, an ITO layer is then deposited on the SiO2 layer by RF magnetron sputtering. The above two steps are repeated several times and the as-prepared 1D SiO2/ITO PC is further annealed in air for counter-electrode application. Apart from the high conductivity of the 1D SiO2/ITO PC due to the infiltration of ITO into SiO2, the PC also shows strong reflectance within a certain visible range while preserving semi-transparency in other ranges.
In addition to the fabrication strategies, more attention should be paid to the development of 1D PCs with new materials, which are suitable for sensitized solar cell applications. In most of the above-mentioned cases, the insulating SiO2 will no doubt prohibit the charge transport and make the PC merely a porous reflector. Hence, how to design a new 1D PC with appropriate alternative materials is another fruitful research topic for future work in this area.
2.2 3D inverse opal photonic crystals
3D IO PCs are the most widely used PCs in sensitized solar cells. As early as 2003, Nishimura et al. demonstrated the first 3D IO PC coupled sensitized solar cell.16 Later, many efforts have been made to identify suitable fabrication strategies to obtain 3D IO PCs with high optical quality for integration into either the photoanode or counter-electrode of sensitized solar cells. The most well-developed fabrication strategy for 3D IO PCs is the inversion of a self-assembled colloidal crystal template using the target material. A typical synthesis scheme including relatively straightforward steps is shown in Fig. 3: (1) the self-assembly of colloidal crystals; (2) the infiltration of a fluid into the gaps between the templating spheres; (3) the conversion of the fluid into a solid skeleton; and (4) the removal of the original template.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a typical fabrication process of a 3D TiO2 IO PC coupled photoanode. 
In the above-mentioned bilayer configuration, enhanced light harvesting is observed only under back side illumination, where the intensity of incident light is greatly reduced due to strong absorption by the electrolyte. Mihi et al. modified the photoanode to allow front side illumination by simply depositing the TiO2 NP absorbing layer on the FTO glass first, followed by the deposition of the 3D TiO2 IO PC layer.33
Modifications of the fabrication technologies have been exploited to achieve high quality IO PCs via modification of the key processes of self-assembly and infiltration, where the vertical deposition method is the most widely employed technology in this research realm.13,16,40–49 However, it is time consuming and requires several hours or even a few days to achieve high quality colloidal crystals on a small scale substrate. To scale-up, spin/dip-coating or the doctor blade method is used.50–54 Different infiltration methods, such as liquid-phase deposition (LPD),48,54,55 dip/spinning-coating,41,45 ALD,13,40,42 and CVD,42,43,53 have been employed to infiltrate the precursor or target materials into the pores of the opaline structures. The past decade has seen the combination of many self-assembly and infiltration technologies to fabricate 3D IO PCs for sensitized solar cells (Table 1), which provides us with more freedom to design in order to best suit a particular application.
Table 1 Typical fabrication technologies of a 3D IO PC based sensitized solar cell




Photoanode
Assembly method + infiltration method
Ref.


3D IO PCs layer
Absorbing layer




Single layer
Vertical deposition + LPD
—

44, 47 and 49



Vertical deposition + spinning/dip coating
—

41



Vertical deposition + ALD/CVD
—

13, 40 and 43



Spinning/dip coating + LPD
—

50–52



Doctor blade + LPD
—

54







Bilayer
Vertical deposition + LPD
+ Doctor blade

16, 46 and 48



Vertical deposition + spinning/dip coating
+ Doctor blade

45



Vertical deposition + ALD/CVD
+ Doctor blade/hydrothermal

42



Spinning/dip coating + LPD
+ Doctor blade

53





It is worth mentioning that, in an effort to rapidly obtain large colloidal crystals (centimeter-scale) with relatively low defect levels, a physical confinement method is also developed.55 In this procedure, the colloidal suspension is first injected into a sandwich type cell with a small positive pressure via a tube. High quality colloidal crystals are then self-assembled on an FTO substrate with the help of sonication (Fig. 4). After LPD of the titanium precursor and calcination, an anatase 3D TiO2 IO PC is formed on an FTO substrate as the photoanode for a DSSC. Nevertheless, the PCE of the 3D TiO2 IO PC coupled DSSC is only 0.6%. The low PCE is mainly attributed to the partial infiltration of the titanium precursor into the voids of the opal structure and the volume contraction of the TiO2 film after calcination. Recently, by filling the voids of self-assembled opals with non-aggregated and highly crystallized TiO2 NPs, a great improvement in the packing density of the interstitial volumes of the opal structure was achieved to minimize the volume shrinkage of the TiO2 IO PC during calcination.56 The key point here is the introduction of the organic-layer-coated and highly crystallized TiO2 NPs. The organic coating layer benefits the good dispersion of TiO2 NPs in solution, which results in a dense filling of the interstitial volumes among the polystyrene (PS) particles.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of a fabrication procedure of a 3D TiO2 IO PC with physical confinement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2013) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As described above, the fabrication procedures for IO PCs involve multisteps and are time-consuming. To conquer this challenge, the doctor blade deposition method, which is frequently used to fabricate conventional TiO2 nanocrystal films, is used to co-deposit the PS template with precursor solution or target materials,57,58 and thus, significantly reduce the number of processing steps and time. Combined with the aforementioned physical confinement method, a co-deposition process involving the PS template and TiO2 NPs in a sandwich type cell allows the fabrication of centimeter-scale 3D TiO2 IO PCs within half an hour (Fig. 5a–c).59 However, the degree of ordering of the IO structure decreases accordingly. A randomly packed structure of the bottom layer is found to attach the well-ordered structure of the upper layers (Fig. 5d–f), which is common in the rapid co-deposition process.60 Hence, how to achieve a delicate balance between the fabrication efficiency and the ordering of the IO structure is a challenge.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Schematic representation of the co-deposition process of PS templates and TiO2 NPs, combined with the physical confinement method. (d–f) The obtained structures with a randomly packed bottom layer and a well-ordered upper layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. 
2.3 TiO2 nanotube photonic crystals
Anodic TiO2 nanotube (NT) arrays, as one of the one-dimensional nanostructures, have become an attractive photoanode material, due to their potential to considerably accelerate the one-dimensional electron transport along the wall of the NT which has reduced grain boundaries compared with the random pathway in a TiO2 NP layer. In addition, it is believed that NTs will be superior to nanorods or nanowires because of the availability of inner and outer walls of tubes for dye adsorption.61
Our group pioneered in developing a new strategy to couple a TiO2 NT PC to the DSSC photoanode.62,63 The novel TiO2 NT PC structure is actually TiO2 NTs with periodicities along the axial direction of NTs fabricated by a periodic current-pulse anodization process (Fig. 6a and b). Fig. 6a displays the current pulse used in the anodization process, where alternating high current (HC) and low current (LC) was adopted to obtain TiO2 NTs with different periodicities. The number of pulses and the pulse duration determine the number of periods and the lattice constant, respectively, of the PC layer, and hence the optical properties. The obtained TiO2 NT PC has great potential for application in sensitized solar cells, because this PC structure and its fabrication method can avoid many drawbacks of the conventional PC structures, such as the embedded insulating layer and clogging channels. Apart from the fast electron transport in the NT structure, the TiO2 NT PC is attractive for its freely tunable photonic bandgap which can be easily adjusted by the anodic current pulse duration. The lattice constant of the TiO2 NT PC layer is almost linearly dependent on the HC pulse duration (Fig. 6c), and PC membranes of various colors covering the whole visible spectrum can be obtained (Fig. 6d). The freely adjustable bandgap of the TiO2 NT PC allows us to best match the absorption range of any dye molecule or quantum dots for optimized efficiency in sensitized solar cell applications.
 Fig. 6  (a) Typical voltage–time (V–t) transient to fabricate the PC layer. Inset: An enlarged V–t curve. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cross-sectional image of the fabricated PC layer. The scale bar measures 1 μm. Inset: The PC layer transferred onto a FTO substrate showing a green color. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Linear dependence of the lattice constant of the PC on the HC pulse duration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photographs of PC samples (in ethanol) of various colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. 
Nevertheless, a normal PC with a periodic structure only shows a strong reflection of light in a relatively narrow range. To maximize the light harvesting for sensitized solar cells, a strong light reflection over a broader range is preferred. From the structural point of view, this requires a spatial variation of the periodicity where the PC can be called an aperiodic PC (APC).64 A study on APCs with aperiodic sequences, such as, Fibonacci, Cantor, Thue-Morse, and Rudin-Sphapiro, were originally driven by mathematical motivations and previous work was mainly theoretical.65 Experimentally, due to the lack of an efficient fabrication technique to deal with the extremely complex spatial structure, the existence of a large amount of structural defects makes the APCs difficult to accurately display the desired properties.57,64,66,67
Recently, the successful fabrication of TiO2 NT APCs (NT APCs) has been demonstrated by using a time-diminishing current-pulse anodization process by our group.68 During the anodization process, the time duration of the HC pulse is decreased gradually, following an arithmetic sequence (Fig. 7a). As a result, the TiO2 NT APC with a gradually decreasing lattice constant from ∼230 nm on the top to ∼180 nm in the middle and ∼110 nm on the bottom, respectively, is fabricated (Fig. 7b). Compared with the TiO2 NT PC, the TiO2 NT APC shows a broader peak within nearly the full-visible-spectrum from purple to red.
 Fig. 7  (a) The time-diminishing current-pulse anodization process for a TiO2 NT APC. (b) FESEM image showing the cross-section of a TiO2 NT APC with 35 periods (left, the scale bar measures 500 nm). Magnified views of the TiO2 NTAPC (right, from the top to bottom, the scale bars measure 200 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group. 
In short, it is believed that, with the simple, highly controllable and versatile properties, anodization is a powerful tool to fabricate TiO2 NT PC/APCs, and this fabrication strategy offers multi-degrees of freedom in the design of nanostructures for the exploration of a plethora of fascinating properties of PCs/APCs for practical applications in photonics.
2.4 2D photonic crystals
In view of the fairly easy fabrication of 2D PCs with a full photonic bandgap in the visible range by using lithography, various TiO2 2D PCs (i.e., TiO2 slabs with cylindrical, square and hexagonal columns connected with/without walls and filled with acetonitrile) were proposed by Matsushita et al.69,70 According to their simulation results, the authors experimentally demonstrated the fabrication of a full-photonic-bandgap structure of a (001) rutile TiO2 substrate by deep reactive ion etching using SF6 plasma.71 Nevertheless, the 2D TiO2 PC coupled sensitized solar cells as well as the PCE of these solar cells have not been reported yet and more effort should be made to explore the applications of 2D PCs.
3 Fundamentals of photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells
3.1 Optic properties of photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells
The light propagation in PCs can be described by an electromagnetic wave equation, derived from Maxwell's equations,28 (3.1)where H and ε represent the magnetic field and the relative dielectric constant of the media, respectively. The optical response of PCs can be derived by the eigenvalues on the right hand side after the introduction of the spatial dependence of ε which corresponds to the periodic structure of PCs. As a result, the periodicity of the refractive index in PCs leads to an opening of a gap in the photonic band structure, known as the photonic bandgap, just like Bragg-conditions for X-ray diffraction, but in optical wavelengths. Photons with frequencies in the bandgap are forbidden, and the unique band structure of PCs will strongly influence the light propagation in PCs. Usually, optical reflection and transmission spectra are employed as tools to characterize the bandgap of PCs, in which light beams are reflected leading to a dip in transmittance and a peak in reflectance.
The optical properties of 1D multilayer PCs depend on the refractive index contrast of alternative layers of different materials/structures and the total number of layers. To attain an intense and wide reflection peak, a large refractive index contrast is required. SiO2 and TiO2 are typically preferred due to their very different refractive indices and easy fabrication of uniform thin films. The position of the reflection peak (under normal incidence) is determined by the optical thickness of the unit cell,72 λmax = 2nd(3.2)where λmax and d are the central wavelength of the reflection peak and the lattice constant of the 1D PC, respectively. n is the effective refractive index of the multilayer structure,73 (3.3)where t1 and t2, n1 and n2 present the thicknesses and refractive indices of the two neighbouring layers, respectively.
As a result, the Bragg reflection peak blue-shifts as the optical thickness decreases (Fig. 8a and b).74,75 Theoretical prediction of the evolution of reflection peak vs. optical thickness is shown in Fig. 8c, in good agreement with the experimental results,76 and is also verified by the naked eye (Fig. 8d).77 Increasing the total number of unit cells gives rise to a more intense and narrower reflection peak, but without any shift in the position (Fig. 9a).74Fig. 9b shows the panchromatic reflection spectrum, which is obtained by building 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs with multiple periodicities whose fabrication process is described in the above section.36
 Fig. 8  (a) Experimental reflectance spectra of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs deposited by spin-coating. In all cases, three unit cells of the alternating layers are stacked. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Evolution of the Bragg peak position with the final rotation speed and ramp stage acceleration used in the spin-coating process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (c) Theoretical specular reflectance for a 14-layer 1D PC with different layer thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (d) Photos of 1D PCs with different colors obtained by varying the layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Experimental reflectance spectra of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs with the different number of deposited layers (N). Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Experimental panchromatic reflection spectrum of a 1D PC built on a triple-period structure (black line), compared with that of a 1D PC with a single period (grey dashed line) and a traditional diffuse scattering layer (grey dashed-dotted line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The Bragg position of the IO film originated from the refractive index contrast between the background medium (air/electrolyte) and the target material, where the spherical cavities are ordered in a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice. Therefore, the IO structure is called a 3D PC with a varied refractive index in all three spatial dimensions. The optical properties of this 3D PC structure are highly dependent on the periodic size and shape. The position of the Bragg reflection peak can be estimated using the modified Bragg equation when the incident light is normal to the {111} plane,59 (3.4)where d111 is the {111} plane spacing of the fcc structure, D is the diameter of the spherical cavity (or the PS microsphere template used in the fabrication process), and m is the order of reflections (usually the first order reflection m = 1 is considered). neff is the effective refractive index of the IO film, which can be calculated using the refractive indices of the target material and the cavities, n1 and n2, respectively, and their volume filling factors, f1 and f2, respectively. TiO2 is regarded as the most promising material to build 3D IO PCs for sensitized solar cells due to its relatively high refractive index and compatible electronic band structure. Thus, the position of the Bragg reflection peak can only be varied by the diameter of the cavity of the IO film, which is mainly determined by the diameter of the PS used. Fig. 10 shows the evolution of the reflectance spectra with the sphere diameter, where a linear relationship is observed.78 It should be noted that due to the shrinkage of the film during calcination for the removal of PS, the peak position may shift to a shorter wavelength than the calculated one according to eqn (3.4). Increasing the thickness of the IO film leads to an obvious increase in reflectance intensity due to multiple reflections and interferences.79 Specifically, a slight red-shift of the reflection peak is also observed with increasing film thickness, due to the finite-size of the PC and the substrate effect.79 Due to the different wavelengths covered by the photonic stop band, various colors of the IO films, spanning from violet to red, are obtained.59 Moreover, by integrating two IO films of different Bragg positions in a tandem structure, Míguez et al. have also broadened the spectral reflection range of the IO PC (Fig. 11a).53
 Fig. 10  Experimental reflectance spectra of IO PCs made of different diameters of template spheres. The inset shows the linear dependence of the peak position on the sphere diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2001) John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Specular reflectance spectrum of a photoanode containing two IO structures with different cavity diameters (black line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Different reflectance spectra obtained from both sides of the IO film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. 
Compared with the 1D multilayer PCs, the IO PCs normally show a high reflectance at shorter wavelengths due to the inevitable cracks in the films which form the sources of scattering. Other scattering sources for IO films result from the lower level of ordering than desired. The disorders also lead to a thinner effective thickness than the actual one since only certain layers of the IO structure contribute to the PC effect. For example, due to the disordered pore layers near the substrate, Lee et al. observed a much lower reflection peak from the back side (substrate side) than that from the front side (Fig. 11b).59 As disorders cause unwanted scattering, additional efforts to reduce disorders in the IO structure should be made to obtain good spectrally selective reflection.80
For TiO2 NT PCs, the Bragg position can be tuned by changing the lattice constant of the PC through adjusting the anodization parameters. Taking the current-pulse anodization as an example, Fig. 6c shows that the lattice constant can be controlled by the duration of the high current pulse, resulting in different colors of the TiO2 NT PC films (Fig. 6d).81 The experimental results agree well with the simulated reflectance spectra of the TiO2 NT PC in terms of peak position. As shown in Fig. 12a, the reflectance spectra sweeps from less than 400 to 730 nm when the axial lattice constant is increased from 110 to 210 nm, showing good tunability to cover the whole visible range. Besides the peak position, the width of the reflection peak slightly increases while the peak intensity slightly decreases with increasing lattice constant, mainly due to the reduced number of unit cells in an NT PC layer when the total thickness of the PC layer is fixed.
 Fig. 12  (a) Calculated reflectance spectra of TiO2 NT PC layers (thickness fixed at 4.5 μm) with different axial lattice constants. (b) Calculated reflectance spectra of TiO2 NT PC layers with different diameters of NTs. The axial lattice constant is fixed at 150 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
In the NT PC structure, the diameter of the TiO2 NTs also plays a key role in determining the photonic band structure of the NT PCs. Fig. 12b displays the calculated reflectance spectra of TiO2 NT PC layers with different diameters of NTs, which can also be easily controlled by the anodization voltage in practice.82 Interestingly, the position and width of the Bragg peak show noticeable changes with the diameter of the TiO2 NTs, leaving plenty of opportunities in design and optimization of the TiO2 NT PC for sensitized solar cells via fine tuning of the nanostructures. In particular, when the TiO2 NT diameter decreases from 190 to 70 nm, the Bragg reflection peak red-shifts from 495 to 555 nm, and its width is dramatically broadened twice, which is believed to have resulted from the increased effective refractive index of the TiO2 NT PC layer. The easily tunable Bragg peak (in terms of position, width and intensity) offers great opportunities for the optimization of sensitized solar cells.
3.2 Functionalities of PCs in sensitized solar cells
The aim of light trapping strategies for solar cells is to improve the photo-generated current by prolonging the light–material interaction time and hence efficiently utilize the solar spectrum. The increased photo-generated current actually originates from the enhanced light harvesting efficiency (LHE), which is defined as the fraction of light intensity absorbed by the sensitizer at a certain wavelength,83,84 LHE = A = IA/I0(3.5)where A is the absorptance, IA is the absorbed intensity and I0 is the incident one.
Among the various optical designs for sensitized solar cells, a conventional approach is to increase the optical path length by using a simple back-side mirror (Fig. 13a). This geometrical optic method almost equally reflects the light of different wavelengths back to the mesoporous TiO2 layer. Employing PCs, as one of the wave optic approaches, can reflect or diffract unabsorbed photons only in a desired wavelength range (Fig. 13b). A key advantage of wavelength-selective PC reflectors, compared with the traditional metallic reflectors, is their transparency or semi-transparency outside the stop bands of PCs.85 In addition, PCs can be designed to diffract the incoming light into highly oblique angles, which also lengthens the optical path in cells. When the angle of the diffracted beam is larger than the critical angle, the beam will also be totally internally reflected in the cells.17,86
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of solar cells with (a) a back-side mirror, (b) a back-side PC, and (c) a bilayer-architectured PC coupled photoanode. 
PCs for sensitized solar cells are typically made of porous nanostructures, unlike the geometrical optic reflectors which are commonly dense, making them suitable for direct integration to the photoanode for the permissive electrolyte transport through the PC films (Fig. 13c).87,88 By doing so, a significant photon intensity loss due to the absorption by the electrolyte and probably the reduction of the counter-electrode can be observed, as compared with the use of a metallic back mirror (Fig. 13a). A bilayered architecture of a photoanode, consisting of an absorbing layer and a PC reflecting layer, has been demonstrated to be the most beneficial route for achieving high efficiency DSSCs.43,62,89 In particular for TiO2 NT PC coupled DSSCs,82 the simulated reflectance of the TiO2 NT PC, the absorptance of the PC coupled DSSC and the wavelength dependent electric field distribution in the integrated photoanode (Fig. 14) show that the enhancement effect of a NT PC is mainly attributed to strong localization of the electric field in the absorbing film caused by back-reflection from the PC in the stop band and a Fabry–Perot cavity like behavior of the PC, resulting in a huge field envelope in the NT PC layer at two band edges (Fig. 14c). Míguez et al. studied the functional mechanism of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs and 3D TiO2 IO PCs in DSSCs with a bi-layer architecture. Similar mechanisms of the absorption amplification in PCs' stop band were found by spectral simulation and electric field distribution analysis.76,83 The position of the absorptance peak was found to match the dip in the reflectance curve, which was due to the optical resonant modes localized in the absorbing layer.83,90
 Fig. 14  (a) Design of the DSSC based on a bi-layered photoanode, consisting of an absorbing layer (normally TiO2 NT layer) and a TiO2 NT PC layer. (b) Calculated reflectance, absorptance of the PC layer and an integrated DSSC, respectively. (c) The spatial distribution of the squared amplitude of the electric field of the photoanode at four selected wavelengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Near the blue and red edges of a photonic bandgap, the group velocity (dω/dk) of a photon is significantly reduced (Fig. 15a).16,44,63 These ‘heavy’ or ‘slow’ photons will contribute to the LHE enhancement due to the increased matter–photon interaction time. Light localization in the high refractive index part (for photons at the red edge of the bandgap) or the low refractive index part (for photons at the blue edge of the bandgap) was also proposed to be one of the mechanisms for increased LHE in particular for the TiO2 NT PC coupled DSSC, due to its semiconducting nature (Fig. 15b).41,63,79 Moreover, the diffuse light scattering caused by cracks and/or disorders in real PCs and multiple internal reflection/scattering may also give rise to the LHE increase (Fig. 15c).44,62
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Simplified optical band structure of a PC and the schematic representation of the standing wave formed in the PC for light located at the edge of the stop band. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic illustration of Bragg reflection, diffuse scattering and multiple internal reflection/scattering in IO PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
There are extra benefits brought about by the coupling of PC structures. According to Bragg's law, λpeak = 2d × neff × sinθ (where d is the lattice constant of a PC, neff is the effective refractive index, and θ is the angle between the incident light and the periodic planes), the Bragg peak position λpeak should blue-shift as the incident angle increases (incident angle = 90° − θ).91 This feature can be used for reducing the angular dependence of a sensitized solar cell.73,87 As illustrated in our previous work, by coupling the photoanode with the TiO2 NT PC, the reduced angular dependence of the power output can be achieved through two strategies: (1) purposely choose the Bragg position to be located at the longer wavelength side of the dye absorption peak. When the incident light is tilted, the Bragg peak will blue-shift, having more overlap with the dye absorption peak, and hence more efficiently harvest the incident light. This partially compensates for the reduced photon flux due to light inclination; and (2) when the incident light is tilted, the photons will encounter more interfaces between the walls of NTs and be scattered. The enhanced light scattering also compensates the power loss due to the reduced photon flux.87
Apart from the above-mentioned light trapping functionality, PCs have also been used to provide other functionalities, such as the direction-selective filter on top and intermediate layers in tandem cells.85 To explore more functionalities of PCs for applications in sensitized solar cells, continuous effort should be made to design novel PC structures and cell architectures and understand the underlying mechanisms.
4 Application of PCs in sensitized solar cells
4.1 Liquid-state DSSCs
As mentioned before, the successful integration of a PC structure in DSSCs was first exploited by Mallouk et al. in 2003.16 In their work, a 3 μm thick TiO2 IO PC layer was used as an additional underlayer coupled to a conventional 10 μm thick TiO2 NP layer for DSSCs based on a traditional ruthenium sensitizer (N719) and an iodide/triiodide containing liquid electrolyte, resulting in photocurrent enhancement of 26%, compared with a reference cell without the PC layer. They attributed the increased absorbance in the red spectral range to the slow photons at the red edge of the stop band.16 Later, resonant modes localized in the TiO2 NP layer in the stop band were thought to play the major role according to the simulation results (detailed explanation in Section 3.2), which implied that the light harvesting capability and conductivity of the PC itself were not necessary, allowing flexibilities in the selection of a PC (such as 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC) and the design of PC based DSSCs.83 Subsequently, experimental work on various configurations of TiO2 IO PC coupled DSSCs confirmed the formation of standing waves in the TiO2 NP layer of the bi-layer structured photoanodes (Fig. 16a), as evidenced by the increased external quantum efficiency (EQE) in the stop band region (Fig. 16b).43 Combined with the light scattering from defects or disorders in the PC film, the PCE of DSSC was increased from 6.5% to 8.3%.46,53
 Fig. 16  (a) Morphology of the bi-layer structured photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) EQE and normalized EQE of DSSCs coupled with TiO2 IO PCs of three different cavity diameters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. From left to right, the template diameter for fabricating IO PCs is 240, 260, and 350 nm, respectively. 
In conjunction with these efforts, studies on the bi-layer photoanodes have been expanded to improve the performance of the PC and consequently the devices. Hu et al. analyzed the effect of IO PC geometric structure and its optical properties on the photovoltaic performance of the IO PC coupled DSSCs. It was proposed that the optimized PC structure should has its stop band matched with the absorption peak of the dye.41 Modified TiO2 IO structures, including TiO2 quasi-IO60 and mesoporous IO PC films,102 were also fabricated to improve the scattering effect and the surface area of the PC films. By coupling the TiO2 quasi-IO layer, the PCE was increased from 3.0% to 5.7% for an ∼4.1 μm thick TiO2 NP layer and from 4.0% to 6.1% for an ∼10 μm thick TiO2 NP layer. However, the open circuit voltage (Voc) showed a decrease after the introduction of the IO PC, as a result of the increased number of recombination sites in IO PC layers.60 Compared to the normal TiO2 IO PC, 10% higher PEC was also achieved by coupling a 5 μm thick TiO2 mesoporous IO PC to a 10 μm thick TiO2 NP layer, leading to a PEC of 6.51%.92 An interesting work introduced by Hu et al. was the coupling of the IO PC structure with the plasmonic nanoparticle array, by loading Au nanoparticles on the TiO2 IO PC film.93 As a result, an increase of 60% in absorption and 41% in PCE were achieved in bi-layer DSSCs with a 6 μm thick TiO2 NP absorbing layer. This work demonstrated that the coupling of a PC and plasmonic nanoparticles induces synergetic modulation of the incident light for resonant enhancement in light harvesting of DSSCs, which is meaningful not only in DSSCs, Si, organic and quantum dot solar cells, but also in other photoelectronic devices.
The TiO2 IO PC structure has also been investigated as a sinlge layer photoanode for DSSCs, mainly due to its connected network for electron transport, fully connected pores for electrolyte infiltration and flexible optical design opportunities. Although the efficiency is limited by the low surface area, several attempts involving the optimization of the structure and fabrication process have been made to improve the cell performance, providing guidance and new strategies for future applications. For example, the ALD technique was employed to fabricate high quality IO films and due to the high filling fraction, a PCE of 2.22% was obtained by using D149 dye and an iodine based liquid electrolyte.13,94 It is worth noting that an interesting bi-layer IO structure was proposed by Sorge and Moon et al. who used a co-deposition method (mentioned in Section 2.2) to obtain a PCE of 4.5%, using N535 dye and the iodolyte electrolyte (Fig. 17a).57 Post-treatment of prepared TiO2 IO films by TiCl4 or TiO2 precursor solutions to form mesoporous TiO2 films into macroporous IO networks resulted in a dual size-scale IO structure with PCE of 4.6% and 4%, respectively, (Fig. 17b).51,67 Higher PCEs of 6.9% and 7.23% were achieved by further modification of this dual size-scale TiO2 IO structure through building twined IO films and coating with Nb2O5, respectively.50,95,96
 Fig. 17  Structure and J–V curves of DSSCs based on a dual size-scale TiO2 IO structure made by (a) co-deposition and (b) post-treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Based on the aforementioned theoretical prediction on the possibility of using insulating or non-absorbing PC structure in bi-layer DSSCs, porous 1D multilayer PCs were introduced to replace the IO PC, in an attempt to avoid the disadvantages of IO PC coupled DSSCs, such as poor charge transport and high recombination of thick IO PC films and poor transparency caused by scattering of the IO PC.32,35,89 The porous 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC is highly reflective within the stop band, preserving the transparency of the cell outside of the stop band (Fig. 18b and d). Its porous structure also enables electrolyte diffusion. Consequently, by coupling a ∼500 nm thick 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC layer, whose stop band matches the absorption peak of a dye, to a 7.5 μm thick TiO2 NP layer, a PCE of 4.6% (increased by 18%) was achieved (Fig. 18a).32 The PCE can be further increased by 45% if the porosity was enhanced (Fig. 18c) or if a multi-period TiO2/SiO2 PC layer (described in previous section) was integrated.36,89 However, incomplete penetration of an electrolyte due to the alternating dense nanoparticle layers is the reason for relatively low PCEs.
 Fig. 18  (a) Photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves (inset: reflectance spectra) and (b) transmittance spectra of DSSCs coupled with a 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. (c) The photocurrent and PCE enhancements obtained by using a highly porous 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC and (d) photos of assembled transparent DSSCs showing different colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We have designed two novel architectures of TiO2 NT PC-based photoanodes for DSSCs (Fig. 19a and b).62,63 The first one is a seamlessly coupled TiO2 NT PC layer and a TiO2 NT absorbing layer (TiO2 NT/PC membrane) which was fabricated by a single-step anodization approach with the PC layer anodized under periodic current pulses, followed by a smooth-walled TiO2 NT layer anodized under constant current. The bi-layered TiO2 NT/PC based photoanode efficiently get rid of the following possible intrinsic drawbacks of 1D multilayer PC- and 3D IO PC-based photoanodes:63 (1) poor physical contact between the PC layer and the TiO2 absorbing layer; (2) a nonconductive PC layer that hinders the charge transport (leading to poor fill factor); (3) the electrolyte being easily clogged at the interface; (4) the photonic bandgap being impossible to be continuously tuned for the optimization of light harvesting; and (5) the thickness of the absorbing layer having to be very thin to satisfy the stringent requirement on interface flatness. When the stop band of the TiO2 NT PC best matches that of the dye absorption peak, the DSSCs equipped with this bi-layer structure showed a significantly enhanced PCE (5.61%), an increase of over 50% compared with the cells without a PC layer (3.66%) (Fig. 19c).
 Fig. 19  (a and b) The SEM image of two types of TiO2 NT PC based photoanodes; (c and d) the corresponding I–V curves of DSSCs coupled with the two TiO2 NT PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, the PCE is still low as compared with the state-of-the-art nanoparticle-based counterpart due to the relatively lower surface area of the NT-based photoanode. A new design was proposed by replacing the TiO2 NT absorbing layer with a thick TiO2 nanoparticle layer to enhance the surface area for dye absorption (Fig. 19b). To preserve the transparency of DSSCs, only a thin TiO2 NT PC layer was coupled to the photoanode.62 The combined effects of a PC and light-scattering yield the maximum enhancement in PCE (39.5%) when the stop band of the TiO2 NT PC best matches the dye (N719) absorption peak, leading to a high PCE of 6.96% of the TiO2 NT PC-based DSSCs (Fig. 19d).
There are also several pieces of work on a PC coupled counter-eletrode, which reflects light in the selective spectrum that ranges back to the absorbing layer. Cho et al. attached a 1D multilayer PC consisting of alternating polymeric films of different refractive indices to the back side of the counter-electrode, leading to 10% higher efficiency than the reference cell without the PC outside layer.97 Recently, a 1D organic–inorganic multilayer PC, built up of photo-crosslinkable PS-b-P4VP (denoted S4VP) and PS-b-PEO (denoted SEO) containing TiO2, has also been fabricated on the opposite side of a platinum sputtered FTO glass. Compared with reference devices, an enhancement of up to 11% of the DSSCs containing a 1D S4VP-SEO/TiO2 multilayer PC was achieved.98 More interestingly, the use of a conductive PC structure deposited on FTO or ITO to replace the Pt-coated FTO counter-electrode, such as IO carbons and 1D multilayer PC with an alternating SiO2 NP layer and a sputtered ITO layer, has also been demonstrated to increase the efficiency, taking advantage of the fast electron transport in the highly interconnected structure and selective reflection from the PC.39,99
4.2 Solid-state DSSCs
Although the state-of-the-art DSSCs that use a liquid electrolyte still show the highest PCE, solid-state DSSCs (ss-DSSCs) using a solidified or quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte and solid-state hole transport materials have attracted a lot of interest in an attempt to replace the liquid electrolyte, which is corrosive, volatile, photoreactive and unstable. The early attempt to use a 3D IO PC in ss-DSSCs was based on the concept of utilizing large interconnected pores for efficient infiltration of a solid-state electrolyte and at the same time making use of the multiple internal scattering of 3D IO PCs.49,55,58 In many cases, the 3D IO PC film was assembled as a single layer photoanode. However, the efficiency was low. Hwang et al. constructed a double-layered ss-DSSC consisting of a conventional TiO2 NP layer and a TiO2 IO PC underlayer.40 After loading of the N719 dye and infiltrating a (P1,4I)-doped succinonitrile solid electrolyte, a high PCE of 8.2% was obtained when a 4 μm thick TiO2 NP layer was coupled to a 20 μm thick TiO2 IO PC layer, about 50% higher than that of the ss-DSSC with only a 8 μm thick TiO2 NP layer. They also attributed the efficiency increase to a combination of the effects, such as, back reflection in the stop band of the IO PC, multiple scattering from the cracks in the IO films and the resonant modes confined in the TiO2 NP layer, similar to the case of the 3D IO PC in liquid-state DSSCs.
The application of a 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC in ss-DSSCs, as an underlayer in the photoanode or a back layer attached to the counter-electrode, was also proposed by Kim et al.37,38 An interesting three-layer ss-DSSC, composed of a 500 nm thick organized mesoporous TiO2 layer on the top, a 10 μm thick TiO2 NP layer in the middle and a 2 μm thick porous 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC layer at the bottom (Fig. 20a and b), was constructed layer by layer through sol–gel, doctor-blade, and spin-coating methods.38 The solid-state polymerized ionic liquid (PIL) electrolyte was added and deeply infiltrated by three steps: (1) dissolving the PIL in acetonitrile, (2) casting the PIL solution on the photoelectrode, and (3) superimposing and pressing with a counter-electrode to slow down the evaporation of the solvent. In this hetero-structured photoanode, the top mesoporous TiO2 layer deposited on the FTO glass increases the visible light transmittance by decreasing the effective roughness of the FTO glass and also facilitates the easy electron transport to the FTO (Fig. 20c). Simultaneously, the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC layer at the bottom offers spectral reflection at wavelengths near the dye absorption peak and the scattering effect from the thick dielectric layers in the PC (Fig. 20d). As a result, the short circuit current (Jsc) of the cell was increased from 13.7 mA cm−2 to 18.3 mA cm−2, with enhanced IPCE in the whole visible range, leading to the final PCE of 6.6%. The same value of PCE could also be obtained after moving the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC layer to the back side of the counter-electrode.37
 Fig. 20  Structure and the performance of the three-layer photoanode and the corresponding ss-DSSCs: (a) a sketch of the structure of the device, (b) SEM images of the photoanode, (c) photographs of the device at different stages, and (d) reflectance spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright (2013) John Wiley and Sons. 
A novel 1D TiO2/TiO2 PC, which comprises organized mesoporous TiO2 layers of high (2.0) and low (1.7) refractive indices, was recently constructed via a sol–gel process using two copolymer templates with different graft ratios. With an optimized structure of the PC-based photoanode, consisting of a 400 nm thick organized mesoporous TiO2 interfacial layer, 7 μm thick nanocrystal TiO2, and a 1.2 μm thick 1D TiO2/TiO2 PC, an excellent efficiency of 7.5% was achieved in the polymerized ionic liquid based ss-DSSC, which is much higher than that of the nanocrystal TiO2 photoanode (3.5%).100
Very recently, by using SiO2 opal films as templates and subsequent template etching, a polymer gel electrolyte with an IO structure (gel electrolyte IO PC) was first applied in ss-DSSCs (Fig. 21).101 By tailoring light propagation in the ss-DSSCs, a maximum average PCE of 3.85% was achieved for the gel electrolyte IO PC with a photonic bandgap around 690 nm, which was about 10% higher than that of the reference gel electrolyte (3.48%) (Fig. 21). The gel electrolyte IO PC gives rise to random back scattering and back reflection of photons and thus enhances the PCE of the ss-DSSCs. In addition to the optical effects of the IO structure, other main factors affecting the PCE of the device are the diffusion resistance of the electrolyte and the interfacial charge transport resistance.102,103 A lower Warburg impedance of the gel electrolyte also contributes to the PCE enhancement of an IO PC coupled device.102 This study offers a new strategy and a new insight into the coupling of a PC to a solar cell for light management.
 Fig. 21  Typical I–V curves for the DSSCs composed of different gel electrolyte IO PCs. The gel electrolyte IO PCs possess photonic band gaps around 530 nm (IOS1), 690 nm (IOS2), and 770 nm (IOS3). The inset shows a photograph of a typical gel electrolyte IO PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2015) Elsevier. 
4.3 Quantum-dot sensitized solar cells
Quantum-dots (QDs) used in solar cells are usually inorganic nano-sized semiconductor particles, whose bandgaps and relevant optical properties are size-dependent. In addition to their unique tunable bandgap, which enables a tunable absorption spectrum for device performance optimization, QDs possess the advantages of photostability, high extinction coefficients, large intrinsic dipole moments and low cost. Thus, QD-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), using QDs as the light harvesting materials in lieu of organic dyes, have become a popular research topic as third generation solar cells in recent years. Moreover, a multiple exciton generation phenomenon (exciting multiple electron–hole pairs per photon) has been demonstrated in QDs, leading to a predicted PCE of up to 44% for QDSSCs.104 Actually, the construction and operation mechanism of QDSSCs is very similar to that of DSSCs, where the QDs play the role of dye molecules to generate photo-excited electrons, which are subsequently injected into a nanostructured semiconductor (typically TiO2) photoanode. However, the different fabrication processes and properties of QDs give rise to new requirements for the materials, structures and configurations used in the QDSSCs. For example, the commonly used mesoporous TiO2 NP (size ∼10–15 nm) photoanodes with large surface areas are not suitable for QDSSCs, due to the difficulties encountered in the loading of nanosized QDs and also the electrolyte infiltration into the films. In addition, the high extinction coefficient of QDs lowers the requirement of a large surface area for the photoanode. Thus, a TiO2 IO PC structure was proposed to be used as a single layer photoanode for QDSSCs due to its large interconnected pores, interconnected network for electron transport and great potential for optical design.
Diguna et al. contructed CdSe QDSSCs by chemical deposition on TiO2 IO films made by templates of different diameters of 309 nm and 394 nm.47 Good infiltration of the Cd/Se precursors and the electrolyte into the TiO2 IO structure contributed to the relatively high PCE of 2.7% for QDSSCs. Moreover, it was also demonstrated that TiO2 IO with larger pores gave rise to higher fill factor (FF) and PEC than smaller pores with larger surface area, which showed the difference, as described above, between QDSSCs and DSSCs.
Recently, Toyoda found highly increased Voc in CdS/CdSe QDSSCs fabricated by a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method based on both TiO2 and SnO2 IO films, as compared with the NP or mircosphere based cells (Fig. 22a and b).54,105 Red-shifting of the reflection peak after the depositon of QDs (CdS and CdSe) was also observed (Fig. 22c), which was caused by the increased effective refractive index, and led to a slightly enhanced IPCE in the red wavelength range (≥600 nm, Fig. 22d).54 Due to the less amount of deposited QDs and the front reflection of the PC structure, the IPCE values over the whole spectrum and the Jsc of the SnO2 IO PC based QDSSCs were still similar to the mircosphere based cells, but smaller than the conventional NP based ones. Nonetheless, higher efficiencies of 3.5% (TiO2 IO) and 4.37% (SnO2 IO) could be achieved as a result of the remarkably improved Voc (Fig. 22a and b), which was attributed to the reduced charge recombination rate in the IO structure.
 Fig. 22  (a and b) J–V curves and photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs based on 3D IO single layer photoanodes made of (a) SnO2 and (b) TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 and 105. Copyright (2014 and 2012) American Chemical Society. (c) The reflectance spetra of SnO2 IO films before and after QD deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d) IPCE of the QDSSCs using SnO2 IO and mircosphere single layer photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Although enhanced PCE values have been obtained in the above-mentioned work, photonic effects of the IO PC structure in QDSSCs and how to fully utilize its optical properties were not thoroughly studied. In constrast, Halaoui et al.demonstrated noticeable enhancements in the photocurrent efficiency caused by optical effects of the TiO2 IO PC film in a 3-electrode quartz photoelectrochemical cell system using CdS or CdSe QDs.44,106Fig. 23a displays the relationship between the absorption edges of the CdS QDs and the stop band peaks of the IO PC films. By using CdS QDs with the absorption edge at 410 nm, a much higher blue-edge gain of IPCE was obtained in the TiO2 IO PC with the stop band at 450 nm (4.7 ± 2.6, measured at 420 nm), compared with the red-edge gain of 1.4–1.8 measured at the same wavelength using a TiO2 IO PC with the stop band at 390 nm (Fig. 23b and c). The observed larger blue-edge enhancement factor than the red-edge one in IO PC coupled QDSSCs implies that the photon localization mechanism may be different from the situation in DSSCs.44 Novel design and further optimization of the PC configurations are highly desirable for the future application of PCs in QDSSCs.
 Fig. 23  (a) Absorption spectra of CdS QD solution and the stop band position of IO PCs. (b and c) Average normalized IPCE and the gain of QDSSCs based on TiO2 IO PC with stop bands at (b) 390 nm and (c) 450 nm. The enhancement factor (EF, ratio of normalized IPCE of TiO2 IO PC to that of nanocrystalline TiO2) is shown in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
As early as 2012, Toyoda et al. pointed out that the morphology of the TiO2 photoanode was one of the main factors for the satisfactory assembly of QDSSCs with improved PCE.105 It is believed that the breakthrough in the PCE for next-generation QDSSCs will come from two types of photoanode morphologies, namely, (a) the TiO2 NT photoanode and (b) the TiO2 IO PC photoanode. The advantage of employing TiO2 NT as the photoanode is its low recombination probability of photogenerated electrons and holes while the TiO2 IO PC photoanode is advantageous to light harvesting. Fortunately, the TiO2 NT PC has both the characteristics at the same time and is therefore worthy of exploration.
4.4 Perovskite solar cells
Studies on perovskite solar cells have recently emerged from the field of DSSCs by employing organic–inorganic perovskite materials as absorbers.107,108 There have been many breakthroughs and rapid evolution in the field of emerging perovskite solar cells, with the realization of both high efficiency and low cost.109–112
In 2012, the work by Kanatzidis et al. triggered the research on perovskite sensitized solar cells.6 In this work, an inorganic perovskite, CsSnI3, was first used as a solid-state hole transport material (HTM) to replace the liquid electrolyte (Fig. 24a). Due to its p-type nature, a direct bandgap of 1.3 eV, high hole mobility, suitable conduction band position (3.62 eV), and remarkably high PCE of 9.28% were achieved for N719 sensitized ss-DSSCs after doping CsSnI3 with F and SnF2 (Fig. 24b). The PCE was further improved to 10.2% by coupling two layers of the ZnO 3D IO PC to the counter-electrode (Fig. 24c). The double layered ZnO IO PC films were fabricated by ALD using PS templates and diethyl zinc and water as precursors, which have also been successfully utilized in traditional liquid-state DSSCs to obtain a PCE of 12.5%, 15% higher than that of the one without the ZnO IO PC.6,86 This work has boosted intense research interest on perovskite material based solar cells and, nowadays, an extremely high PCE, far beyond that of DSSCs, has been achieved in perovskite solar cells.109,110,113–116
 Fig. 24  (a) Perovskite crystal structure and photograph, and (b) optical absorptance and electrical conductivity of CsSnI3. (c) J–V curves of the DSSCs based on the CsSnI3 ss-electrolyte. To improve the PCE, a ZnO 3D IO PC was used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Due to the very high extinction coefficient of perovskite and excellent light absorption in almost the whole visible range, perovskite solar cells can easily achieve a PCE far beyond that of a DSSC, which enables the use of a PC no longer necessary in a perovskite solar cell. Nevertheless, for practical applications, factors other than efficiency should be considered. For example, building integrated photovoltaics should usually be aesthetically versatile, being both colorful and semitransparent. In order to achieve efficient and color-tunable perovskite solar cells, Míguez and Snaith integrated the cells with a 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC (Fig. 25a).117 By optimizing the microstructures of the TiO2 and SiO2 layers to achieve a balance between minimization of the PC layer thickness and preservation of its high reflectance (Fig. 25b), the fabricated devices show intense colors across the visible spectrum, from blue to red (Fig. 25c). Under back-side illumination, the best PCE of blue, blue-green, green, orange and red cells is 8.8%, 7.0%, 6.7%, 6.6% and 4.5%, respectively, indicating the great potential for making efficient perovskite solar cells with vivid and tunable colors. It can be seen from this example that the coupling of a PC will render perovskite solar cells with more functionalities for wider applications.
 Fig. 25  (a) Scheme of a PC-based perovskite solar cell. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a PC-based perovskite solar cell. (c) Colors (from blue to red) displayed by devices integrated with different PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
5 Summary and outlook
In summary, the recent development of photonic crystals for sensitized solar cells, including their fabrication methods, functionalities of the devices and the photovoltaic characteristics of PC based sensitized solar cells, were reviewed. Compared with other geometric optic components for solar cell applications, such as metallic mirror and a large particle scattering layer, PCs possess the advantages of (1) selective spectral response which maintains high efficiency and transparency of the devices at the same time, (2) porous structure that allows the infiltration of an electrolyte, (3) an incident angle dependent Bragg position to enable the compensation of cosine loss under titled light, and (4) many other functionalities that are specific to the type of PC. Some successful examples of the utilization of 1D multilayer PC, 3D IO PC, and TiO2 NT PC in sensitized solar cells (including liquid-state DSSCs, solid-state DSSCs, quantum-dot sensitized solar cells, and perovskite solar cells) have been highlighted in this review.
As an alternative, integrating plasmonic metallic nanoparticles into sensitized solar cells, which are characterized by a strong interaction with resonant photons through the excitation of surface plasmon resonance, is another option to manage photons for enhancing the PCE of the solar cells.118,119 Nevertheless, in most of the early work, the photoanodes were fabricated by incorporating Ag and Au nanocrystals into the TiO2 matrix using chemical methods,120–123 and only improved light absorption was observed without any improvement in the PCE of the liquid-state DSSCs. This phenomenon was attributed to the corrosion of the metal nanocrystals by liquid electrolytes, as well as the recombination and back reaction of photogenerated charge carriers, leading to decreased PCE and instability of DSSCs. A general strategy to overcome the above-mentioned problems is to coat a thin SiO2 or TiO2 layer on the metal nanocrystals.124,125 For example, the PCE of an N719 DSSC (9.3%) was increased to 10.2% and 9.8% with the incorporation of Au@SiO2 and Au@TiO2 NPs, respectively.125 However, the percentage enhancement of PCE is still far below the theoretically predicted value. It seems that, at present, the use of plasmons in sensitized solar cells is no better than its PC counterpart.126 But we believe that there is still plenty of room in coupling the PC and plasmons for the enhanced performance of sensitized solar cells.
As for PC itself, it is difficult to say which type of PC is the best. Each type of PC has its own advantages and disadvantages. The selection of the correct type of PC depends on the application purpose. Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of typical PC-based sensitized solar cells. It should be noted that, although large improvements continue to be made in this specific area, which are benefitted from the progress of the PC fabrication techniques as well as the design and optimization of structural configurations in these solar cells, it is still a long way for PC-coupled sensitized solar cells to be commercialized.
Table 2 Comparison of the characteristics of typical PC-coupled sensitized solar cells




Types of PCs
Position
Methods

η
1 (%)

η
2 (%)
Ref.




Note: η1 is the PCE of solar cells without a PC and η2 is the PCE of solar cells with a PC.




Liquid-state DSSCs


1D SiO2/TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Spin-coating
6.8
7.0

35



1D SiO2/TiO2 PC
Counter-electrode
Spin-coating
7.6
7.9

39



1D S4VP/SEO-TiO2 PC
Backside of counter-electrode
Spin-coating
—
—

98



3D IO TiO2 PC
Backside of counter-electrode
Template-assisted
10.9
12.5

87



3D IO TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Template-assisted
2.0
1.8

43



3D IO TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Template-assisted
3.0
5.7

60



TiO2 NT PC
Photoanode
Anodization
3.7
5.6

63



TiO2 NT PC
Photoanode
Anodization
5.0
7.0

62



TiO2 NT APC
Photoanode
Anodization
6.2
7.9

68







Solid-state DSSCs


1D TiO2/TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Spin-coating
3.5
7.5

100



1D SiO2/TiO2 PC
Backside of counter-electrode
Spin-coating
3.5
6.4

38



1D SiO2/TiO2 PC
Counter-electrode
Spin-coating
5.4
6.6

37



3D IO TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Template-assisted
5.5
7.2

40



3D IO gel electrolyte
Electrolyte
Template-assisted
3.5
3.9

101







QDSSCs


3D IO SnO2 PC
Photoanode
Template-assisted
2.4
4.4

54



3D IO TiO2 PC
Photoanode
Template-assisted
2.4
3.5

105







Perovskite solar cells


3D IO ZnO PC
Counter-electrode
Template-assisted
9.28
10.2

6



1D SiO2/TiO2 PC
Interlayer
Spin-coating
10.5
8.8

117





The fruitful future of PCs in the application of sensitized solar cells and other types of irradiance sensitive photonic devices relies on (1) the design of novel PC structures with the help of powerful computer simulations, (2) the development of novel fabrication techniques for large scale and mass production of PCs, (3) a deep understanding on the light propagation and material–light interaction in devices, (4) exploration of new functionalities of PC-coupled devices, and (5) the study of the novel plasmonic enhanced PC effect in devices. The bright future of this exciting area also relies on the close multidisciplinary collaboration among physicists, chemists, and material scientists.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. PolyU5163/12E, PolyU5159/13E and PolyU152057/14E). KYX is grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51302219).
References

          P. H. J. Conti, International Energy Outlook 2011, the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2011.
K. Xie and B. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3592–3617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Goldemberg, Science, 2007, 315, 808–810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Z. Long, B. Sun and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2783–2796 RSC .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 174–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Mallick, N. P. Sergeant, M. Agrawal, J.-Y. Lee and P. Peumans, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vynck, M. Burresi, F. Riboli and D. S. Wiersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1017–1022 CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, Z. Liu, J. Theiss, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4650–4655 CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 2436–2440 CrossRef PubMed .
E. T. Yu and J. van de Lagemaat, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bermel, C. Luo, L. Zeng, L. C. Kimerling and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 16986–17000 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. O'Brien, N. P. Kherani, A. Chutinan, G. A. Ozin, S. John and S. Zukotynski, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1577–1582 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. Wehrspohn and J. Üpping, J. Opt., 2012, 14, 024003 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 183–189 CAS .
L. Kranz, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 278–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1492–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Nair and R. Vijaya, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2010, 34, 89–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fenzl, T. Hirsch and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3318–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furumi, Polym. J., 2013, 45, 579–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059–2062 CrossRef CAS .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486–2489 CrossRef CAS .
G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528–2554 RSC .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. Ibisate, R. Sapienza, L. S. Froufe-Pérez, A. Blanco and C. López, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 30–69 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Moon and S. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 547–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Häggman, M. Ocaña, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764–770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, H. Míguez, I. Rodríguez, S. Rubio and F. Meseguer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125131 CrossRef .
F. García-Santamaría, E. Nelson and P. Braun, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 075132 CrossRef .
S. Colodrero, A. Forneli, C. López-López, L. Pellejà, H. Míguez and E. Palomares, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1303–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. López-López, S. Colodrero and H. Míguez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 663–668 RSC .
J. T. Park, J. H. Prosser, D. J. Kim, J. H. Kim and D. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 856–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, J. H. Prosser, S. H. Ahn, S. J. Kim, J. H. Kim and D. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2193–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Heiniger, P. G. O'Brien, N. Soheilnia, Y. Yang, N. P. Kherani, M. Grätzel, G. A. Ozin and N. Tetreault, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5734–5741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Hwang, B. Lee and D.-H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3017–3023 RSC .
H. Li, Q. Tang, F. Cai, X. Hu, H. Lu, Y. Yan, W. Hong and B. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 3430–3437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, C. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5712–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. El Harakeh and L. Halaoui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2806–2813 CAS .
C.-H. Yip, Y.-M. Chiang and C.-C. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8735–8740 CAS .
S.-H. A. Lee, N. M. Abrams, P. G. Hoertz, G. D. Barber, L. I. Halaoui and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14415–14421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef PubMed .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Somani, C. Dionigi, M. Murgia, D. Palles, P. Nozar and G. Ruani, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 513–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Kim and J. H. Moon, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 841–845 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Shin and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6311–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Shin, J.-H. Kang, W.-M. Jin, J. H. Park, Y.-S. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 856–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CAS .
J. Xiao, Q. Huang, J. Xu, C. Li, G. Chen, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4007–4015 CAS .
C. L. Huisman, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 115–124 CAS .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qi, J. D. Sorge and D. P. Birnie III, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 1921–1925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ruani, C. Ancora, F. Corticelli, C. Dionigi and C. Rossi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 537–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Han, S. Lee, H. Shin and H. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
M. Guo, K. Xie, J. Lin, Z. Yong, C. T. Yip, L. Zhou, Y. Wang and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9881–9888 CAS .
C. T. Yip, H. Huang, L. Zhou, K. Xie, Y. Wang, T. Feng, J. Li and W. Y. Tam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Macia, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 036502 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Arie and N. Voloch, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 355–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Endo and Y. Iye, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 085311 CrossRef .
B. Mandlmeier, J. M. Szeifert, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, H. Amenitsch and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17274–17282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, K. Y. Xie, Y. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsushita, O. Suavet and H. Hashiba, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matsushita, M. Hayashi, T. Isobe and A. Nakajima, Crystals, 2012, 2, 1483–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Matsutani, M. Hayashi, Y. Morii, K. Nishioka, T. Isobe, A. Nakajima and S. Matsushita, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 098002 Search PubMed .
M. E. Calvo, S. Colodrero, N. Hidalgo, G. Lozano, C. López-López, O. Sánchez-Sobrado and H. Míguez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4800–4812 Search PubMed .
C. López-López, S. Colodrero, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1260–1266 Search PubMed .
S. Colodrero, M. Ocana and H. Míguez, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Calvo, O. Sánchez-Sobrado, S. Colodrero and H. Míguez, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2443–2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lozano, S. Colodrero, O. Caulier, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3681–3687 CAS .
S. Guldin, M. Kolle, M. Stefik, R. Langford, D. Eder, U. Wiesner and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3664–3668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Subramania, K. Constant, R. Biswas, M. M. Sigalas and K. M. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 443–446 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Yip, Y. M. Chiang and C. C. Wong, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2010, 27, 920–926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peters, J. C. Goldschmidt, P. Löper, B. Groß, J. Üpping, F. Dimroth, R. B. Wehrspohn and B. Bläsi, Energies, 2010, 3, 171–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, K. Liu and X. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 1784–1789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, Z. Yong, K. Xie, J. Lin, Y. Wang and H. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13022–13028 CAS .
A. Mihi and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15968–15976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, F. J. López-Alcaraz and H. Míguez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 193110 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Narasimhan and Y. Cui, Nanophotonics, 2013, 2, 187–210 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, D. K. Hwang, P. Guo, S. T. Ho, D. B. Buchholtz, C. Y. Wang and R. P. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14582–14591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, K. Xie, X. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13060–13067 RSC .
K. Y. Xie, M. Guo, X. L. Liu and H. T. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 170–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Colonna, S. Colodrero, H. Lindstrom, A. Di Carlo and H. Míguez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8238–8243 CAS .

          A. Mihi, S. Colodrero, M. Calvo, M. Ocana and H. Míguez, in Active Photonic Crystals, ed. S. M. Weiss, G. S. Subramania and F. G.-Santamaria, Proceedings of SPIE,  2007, vol. 6640, art no. 664007 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .
M. Jin, S. S. Kim, M. Yoon, Z. Li, Y. Y. Lee and J. M. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 815–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Hu, W. Hong, F. Cai, Q. Tang, B. Zhao, D. Zhang and P. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14334–14339 RSC .
J.-H. Choi, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-K. Jeong, I. Kim and K.-H. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B749–B753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9372–9377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5821–5825 CAS .
J. Y. Lee, S. Lee, J. K. Park, Y. Jun, Y. G. Lee, K. M. Kim, J. H. Yun and K. Y. Cho, Opt. Express, 2010, 18(Suppl 4), A522–A527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jang and D. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4204–4210 RSC .
D.-Y. Kang, Y. Lee, C.-Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7033–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, W. S. Chi, S. J. Kim, D. Lee and J. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5505 CAS .
S. Zhang, G.-Y. Dong, B. Lin, J. Qu, N.-Y. Yuan and J.-N. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kato, C. Nishiyama, T. Yabuta, M. Miyauchi, T. Hashimoto, T. Isobe, A. Nakajima and S. Matsushita, J. Porous Mater., 2014, 21, 165–176 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Park, Y. Jeong, T. PremKumar and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14399–14404 CAS .
H. K. Jun, M. A. Careem and A. K. Arof, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 22, 148–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Toyoda and Q. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1885–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bayram and L. Halaoui, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 706–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C. S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 487–492 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Nie, H. H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4794–4808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 219–231 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wen, K. Ishikawa, M. Kishima and K. Yamada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 339–351 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2596–2600 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lai, Y. H. Su, L. G. Teoh and M. H. Hon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 195, 307–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Qi, X. N. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, W. T. Chen and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4418–4427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Smith, J. A. Faucheaux and P. K. Jain, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 67–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Keyu Xie
	Dr Keyu Xie received his PhD degree in 2012 from Central South University, China. From 2010 to 2013, he stayed in Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a Research Assistant and Postdoctoral Research Associate successively. He is currently an Associate Professor at the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing and the Center for Nano Energy Materials in Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. His research interests include nano-materials and their application in energy storage and conversion devices, such as rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and solar cells.

Min Guo
	Dr Min Guo received her PhD degree in 2015 from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. She is currently a lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering and the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing in Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. Her research interests include nanomaterials and nanostructures for energy conversion and high-temperature materials.

Haitao Huang
	Dr Haitao Huang received his PhD in Materials Science from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2000. He is currently the Associate Professor in the Department of Applied Physics, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He has published over 160 refereed journal papers on energy materials (supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and dye-sensitized solar cells) and ferroelectric materials. He is currently on the editorial board of Scientific Reports and the advisory board of Journal of Materials Chemistry C.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of three kinds of photonic crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process and the SEM images of the 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC coupled photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. (b) SEM images of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs with different pore sizes: normal one (top) and larger one (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2012) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Structure of a 1D SiO2/TiO2 PC with multi-periodicity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a typical fabrication process of a 3D TiO2 IO PC coupled photoanode.	 


Single layer	Vertical deposition + LPD	—	
44, 47 and 49

Vertical deposition + spinning/dip coating	—	
41

Vertical deposition + ALD/CVD	—	
13, 40 and 43

Spinning/dip coating + LPD	—	
50–52

Doctor blade + LPD	—	
54



Bilayer	Vertical deposition + LPD	+ Doctor blade	
16, 46 and 48

Vertical deposition + spinning/dip coating	+ Doctor blade	
45

Vertical deposition + ALD/CVD	+ Doctor blade/hydrothermal	
42

Spinning/dip coating + LPD	+ Doctor blade	
53


 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of a fabrication procedure of a 3D TiO2 IO PC with physical confinement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2013) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Schematic representation of the co-deposition process of PS templates and TiO2 NPs, combined with the physical confinement method. (d–f) The obtained structures with a randomly packed bottom layer and a well-ordered upper layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Typical voltage–time (V–t) transient to fabricate the PC layer. Inset: An enlarged V–t curve. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cross-sectional image of the fabricated PC layer. The scale bar measures 1 μm. Inset: The PC layer transferred onto a FTO substrate showing a green color. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Linear dependence of the lattice constant of the PC on the HC pulse duration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photographs of PC samples (in ethanol) of various colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The time-diminishing current-pulse anodization process for a TiO2 NT APC. (b) FESEM image showing the cross-section of a TiO2 NT APC with 35 periods (left, the scale bar measures 500 nm). Magnified views of the TiO2 NTAPC (right, from the top to bottom, the scale bars measure 200 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(3.1)
λmax = 2nd	(3.2)
	(3.3)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Experimental reflectance spectra of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs deposited by spin-coating. In all cases, three unit cells of the alternating layers are stacked. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Evolution of the Bragg peak position with the final rotation speed and ramp stage acceleration used in the spin-coating process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (c) Theoretical specular reflectance for a 14-layer 1D PC with different layer thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (d) Photos of 1D PCs with different colors obtained by varying the layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Experimental reflectance spectra of 1D SiO2/TiO2 PCs with the different number of deposited layers (N). Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Experimental panchromatic reflection spectrum of a 1D PC built on a triple-period structure (black line), compared with that of a 1D PC with a single period (grey dashed line) and a traditional diffuse scattering layer (grey dashed-dotted line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(3.4)

 	Fig. 10  Experimental reflectance spectra of IO PCs made of different diameters of template spheres. The inset shows the linear dependence of the peak position on the sphere diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2001) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Specular reflectance spectrum of a photoanode containing two IO structures with different cavity diameters (black line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) Different reflectance spectra obtained from both sides of the IO film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Calculated reflectance spectra of TiO2 NT PC layers (thickness fixed at 4.5 μm) with different axial lattice constants. (b) Calculated reflectance spectra of TiO2 NT PC layers with different diameters of NTs. The axial lattice constant is fixed at 150 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 
LHE = A = IA/I0	(3.5)

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of solar cells with (a) a back-side mirror, (b) a back-side PC, and (c) a bilayer-architectured PC coupled photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Design of the DSSC based on a bi-layered photoanode, consisting of an absorbing layer (normally TiO2 NT layer) and a TiO2 NT PC layer. (b) Calculated reflectance, absorptance of the PC layer and an integrated DSSC, respectively. (c) The spatial distribution of the squared amplitude of the electric field of the photoanode at four selected wavelengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Simplified optical band structure of a PC and the schematic representation of the standing wave formed in the PC for light located at the edge of the stop band. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic illustration of Bragg reflection, diffuse scattering and multiple internal reflection/scattering in IO PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Morphology of the bi-layer structured photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) EQE and normalized EQE of DSSCs coupled with TiO2 IO PCs of three different cavity diameters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. From left to right, the template diameter for fabricating IO PCs is 240, 260, and 350 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structure and J–V curves of DSSCs based on a dual size-scale TiO2 IO structure made by (a) co-deposition and (b) post-treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves (inset: reflectance spectra) and (b) transmittance spectra of DSSCs coupled with a 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. (c) The photocurrent and PCE enhancements obtained by using a highly porous 1D TiO2/SiO2 PC and (d) photos of assembled transparent DSSCs showing different colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) The SEM image of two types of TiO2 NT PC based photoanodes; (c and d) the corresponding I–V curves of DSSCs coupled with the two TiO2 NT PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure and the performance of the three-layer photoanode and the corresponding ss-DSSCs: (a) a sketch of the structure of the device, (b) SEM images of the photoanode, (c) photographs of the device at different stages, and (d) reflectance spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright (2013) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  Typical I–V curves for the DSSCs composed of different gel electrolyte IO PCs. The gel electrolyte IO PCs possess photonic band gaps around 530 nm (IOS1), 690 nm (IOS2), and 770 nm (IOS3). The inset shows a photograph of a typical gel electrolyte IO PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2015) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) J–V curves and photovoltaic performance of QDSSCs based on 3D IO single layer photoanodes made of (a) SnO2 and (b) TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 and 105. Copyright (2014 and 2012) American Chemical Society. (c) The reflectance spetra of SnO2 IO films before and after QD deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (d) IPCE of the QDSSCs using SnO2 IO and mircosphere single layer photoanodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Absorption spectra of CdS QD solution and the stop band position of IO PCs. (b and c) Average normalized IPCE and the gain of QDSSCs based on TiO2 IO PC with stop bands at (b) 390 nm and (c) 450 nm. The enhancement factor (EF, ratio of normalized IPCE of TiO2 IO PC to that of nanocrystalline TiO2) is shown in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Perovskite crystal structure and photograph, and (b) optical absorptance and electrical conductivity of CsSnI3. (c) J–V curves of the DSSCs based on the CsSnI3 ss-electrolyte. To improve the PCE, a ZnO 3D IO PC was used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright (2012) American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Scheme of a PC-based perovskite solar cell. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a PC-based perovskite solar cell. (c) Colors (from blue to red) displayed by devices integrated with different PCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 


Liquid-state DSSCs
1D SiO2/TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Spin-coating	6.8	7.0	
35

1D SiO2/TiO2 PC	Counter-electrode	Spin-coating	7.6	7.9	
39

1D S4VP/SEO-TiO2 PC	Backside of counter-electrode	Spin-coating	—	—	
98

3D IO TiO2 PC	Backside of counter-electrode	Template-assisted	10.9	12.5	
87

3D IO TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Template-assisted	2.0	1.8	
43

3D IO TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Template-assisted	3.0	5.7	
60

TiO2 NT PC	Photoanode	Anodization	3.7	5.6	
63

TiO2 NT PC	Photoanode	Anodization	5.0	7.0	
62

TiO2 NT APC	Photoanode	Anodization	6.2	7.9	
68



Solid-state DSSCs
1D TiO2/TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Spin-coating	3.5	7.5	
100

1D SiO2/TiO2 PC	Backside of counter-electrode	Spin-coating	3.5	6.4	
38

1D SiO2/TiO2 PC	Counter-electrode	Spin-coating	5.4	6.6	
37

3D IO TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Template-assisted	5.5	7.2	
40

3D IO gel electrolyte	Electrolyte	Template-assisted	3.5	3.9	
101



QDSSCs
3D IO SnO2 PC	Photoanode	Template-assisted	2.4	4.4	
54

3D IO TiO2 PC	Photoanode	Template-assisted	2.4	3.5	
105



Perovskite solar cells
3D IO ZnO PC	Counter-electrode	Template-assisted	9.28	10.2	
6

1D SiO2/TiO2 PC	Interlayer	Spin-coating	10.5	8.8	
117


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
