Paired electrolysis for simultaneous generation of synthetic fuels and chemicals  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NJ06133A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ06133A
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 5617-5637Paired electrolysis for simultaneous generation of synthetic fuels and chemicals

        
          
            Natalia P. 
            Martínez
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mauricio 
            Isaacs
          
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Kamala Kanta 
            Nanda
          
          
        
      *a
aFacultad de Química, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 7820436 Macul, Santiago, Chile. E-mail: kamala.nanda@uc.cl
bCentro de Investigación en Nanotecnología y Materiales Avanzados CIEN-UC, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
cUC-Energy Research Center, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
Received 
      11th December 2019
    , Accepted 7th March 2020First published on 9th March 2020AbstractCentralized production of fuels and platform chemicals from non-fossil fuel resources using renewable energy is indispensable to curb the ever increasing global warming. To realise this vision, a distributed model based on small scale reactors needs to be constructed. In this context, electrolysers performing water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction to produce sustainable fuels carry paramount industrial importance. All these electrolysers use water oxidation as anodic half-reaction which produces oxygen having a low economic value and a higher overpotential requirement. This increases the input voltage of electrolysers. The product value and energy efficiency of these electrolysers can be further enhanced if the electrochemical hydrogen evolution and carbon dioxide reduction can be paired with alternative oxidation reactions such as biomass oxidation, electro-organic synthesis, etc., which are thermodynamically more favorable than water oxidation. This review summarizes the importance of these paired electrolysis processes for simultaneous production of fuels and value-added platform chemicals from hybrid electrolysers along with a discussion of optimization of process parameters for paired electrolysis.
Natalia P. Martínez
Dr Natalia P. Martínez received her BS degree in Chemistry from Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana in 2013. In 2019, she received her PhD degree in Chemistry under the supervision of Professor Mauricio Isaacs from Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. At present, she is pursuing her postdoctoral studies in the same research group. Her research interest is focused on hybrid materials based on earth-abundant coordination compounds for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical transformation of small molecules.
Mauricio Isaacs
Prof. Mauricio Isaacs received a BS degree in Chemistry from Universidad de Santiago de Chile in 1996. He then pursued graduate studies in the same university with Prof. Juan Costamagna and Maria Jesus Aguirre, working in electrochemical activation of carbon dioxide by macrocyclic complexes receiving his PhD degree in 2002. Subsequently, he joined the group of Prof. Silvia Ronco at University of South Dakota, USA, for postdoctoral studies. In 2004, he joined Universidad de Chile as Assistant Professor. He moved to Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile in 2011 where he is a Full Professor now. His main research interests are focused on the electrochemistry of carbon dioxide and its activation on metallic nanostructured electrodes and its related electrochemistry in ionic liquids.
Kamala Kanta Nanda
Dr Kamala Kanta Nanda received both his BS degree (2007) and MSc degree (2009) in Chemistry from Utkal University, India. He received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yatendra S. Chaudhary from Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, New Delhi, India. He then pursued a postdoctoral research in Prof. Srinivasan Sampath's research group at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Subsequently, he started his independent research career as a FONDECYT postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Mauricio Isaacs’ research group at Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. His research interest includes (photo)electrochemical energy conversion and biomass upgrading.
1. Introduction
Sustainable production of chemicals and fuels is the need of the hour to curb the ever increasing environmental pollution and global warming which result from excessive use of fossil fuels. This necessitates the reduction of the dependence of fossil fuels for the generation of transport fuels and industrially important chemicals. The Electrochemical (EC)/Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting and CO2 reduction in modern-day electrolysers are regarded as one of the most promising approaches for centralized production of clean fuels and chemicals utilizing renewable energy.1–5 In most of these electrolysers, the anodic half-reaction is the Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER) and the product oxygen gas is vented rather than captured for any useful purposes.6 Yet, this reaction requires a very large overpotential to overcome its sluggish kinetics, which increases the energy input of the electrolysers (∼45 kW h per kg−1 H2 or higher).7 Simultaneous production of hydrogen and oxygen may involve a possibility of gas crossover even when a separator or membrane is used in an electrolyser in long term operation. This may be a safety concern along with a reduction in energy conversion efficiency due to their back recombination into water (acidic) or hydroxide ion (alkaline) media.8 Further presence of oxygen gas may lead to the production of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) which may degrade the membrane and thus shorten the operation time of modern-day electrolysers. Therefore, the amount of energy and material input required to operate these electrolysers, where the water oxidation is the anodic half reaction, is becoming costlier than the hydrogen produced by these electrolysers in the long run which impedes their large scale commercialization.8 To address these shortfalls it is necessary to construct hybrid electrolysers which integrate water/CO2 electrolysis with thermodynamically more favorable oxidation reactions satisfying the industrial demand for chemicals of global importance. These electro-oxidation reactions such as electro-organic synthesis, biomass upgrading, etc. occur at a lower potential than water oxidation and produce economically viable products at the anode which will reduce the energy input of the electrolysers and is also a value addition. Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of these hybrid electrolysis systems maximizing the return of energy investments. There are only a handful of reviews highlighting only the integration of hydrogen production with some of the organic oxidation reactions. However, they lack a more fundamental discussion of the principle, operation, and key parameters for these paired electrolysis reactions along with paired electrolysis of CO2 reduction.9–11
This review discusses hybrid electrolysers performing water splitting and CO2 reduction paired with alternative oxidation reactions other than OER for simultaneous production of clean fuels and industrially important chemicals. Here, a discussion on the fundamentals of electrochemical and photoelectrochemical oxidation processes, criteria to choose alternative oxidation reactions, working and key parameters of this paired electrolysis and the principle of the use of redox mediators for indirect electrolysis is presented. Further, this review also discusses the principle of two-electrode vs. three-electrode measurements and provides a brief discussion of the standard procedures of reporting potentials in them, measuring the efficiency of electrolysers that could be confusing in some of the papers reporting paired electrolysis processes.
There are four types of paired electrolysis reactions, namely, parallel, convergent, divergent, and linear paired electrolysis. This review discusses only the parallel paired electrolysis from which fuels and chemicals can be simultaneously collected from both anode and cathode compartments. A more detailed account of paired electrolysis processes can be found elsewhere.12–14
1.1 Fundamentals of electrochemical and photoelectrochemical conversion of small molecules
In an electrochemical cell, oxidation occurs at the anode compartment to generate an oxidation product, protons, and electrons (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of water electrolysis: (a) electrochemical cell with a metal anode, (b) semiconductor–electrolyte interface before equilibrium, (c) semiconductor–electrolyte interface after equilibrium, (d) photoelectrochemical water splitting upon illumination; Ec = conduction band edge, Ev = valence band edge, EF = Fermi level, Eapp = applied potential, Eph = photovoltage, W = depletion region,  = redox potential of H2O or the electrolyte. 
The proton is transferred (via a Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM), which is used to prevent product crossover between anodic and cathodic compartments) to the cathode to supplement proton consumption (Fig. 1a). The electrons are transferred via an external circuit to participate in the reduction process. Most of the electrolysers for hydrogen production or CO2 reduction use water oxidation/OER as an anodic reaction which requires a theoretical applied voltage of E° = 1.23 V vs. RHE. But in practice, owing to the concentration and kinetic overpotentials needed to drive the OER, a practical voltage closer to 2.0 V is required for overall water splitting.8,15 The sluggish kinetics of the four-electron transfer process of OER and the large energy barrier of dioxygen formation limit the overall reaction rate of these electrolysers. Further, the water splitting electrolysers have a high electrical energy input of the order of 45 kW h per kg−1 H2 or higher.8 Therefore, OER should be replaced with alternative anodic oxidation reactions which are thermodynamically and kinetically more favorable than water oxidation leading to a substantial decrease in the energy input.
A photoelectrochemical cell can directly convert solar energy to chemical energy stored in energy-rich molecules or carry out organic oxidation reaction of small molecules with lesser electrical energy input. The PEC uses semiconductors as photoelectrodes. For simplicity of understanding of the readers, water splitting is taken as the reaction of interest and the process is explained with an n-type semiconductor as the photoanode (Fig. 1b). When an n-type semiconductor which has a higher chemical potential (determined by its Fermi level) than that of the redox potential of the electrolyte is brought in contact with the electrolyte, electrons will flow from the semiconductor to the electrolyte solution until equilibrium is established. This charge transfer creates a positive depletion/space charge region with an interfacial electric field whose electrostatic potential balances the initial difference in electrochemical potentials between the solution and the semiconductor (Fig. 1c). Upon illumination with photons of appropriate energy, a non- equilibrium population of photogenerated charge carriers is created in the valence band and conduction band of the semiconductors. This leads to the formation of electron (EF,n) and hole quasi Fermi levels (EF,p). The photovoltage (Eph) generated by the junction under illumination is given by the potential difference between these levels which drives the desired oxidation reaction (Fig. 1d).16 However, an external bias (Eapp) is still required for better separation of charge carriers by altering the interfacial electric field and aiding the transport of electrons produced in the anodic reaction to the cathode by an external circuit. But this is much smaller than that required in an electrochemical cell. In water splitting, water is oxidised at the photoanode by minority charge carriers (holes), generating protons and electrons, and reduced at the cathode to produce hydrogen.
1.2 Key parameters for paired electrolysis systems and cell design
In principle, all electrochemical processes are paired, i.e. an oxidation half-reaction is always paired with a reduction half-reaction. The oxidation process completes the electrochemical circuit and supplies electrons and provides protons to compensate for H+ consumption in reduction. In most of the electrochemical CO2 reduction or water splitting systems, the anodic product oxygen gas is vented. Yet, this OER has large overpotential requirement. The active species generated in the course of this reaction affects the long term stability of proton exchange membrane and the anode material in aqueous media. This issue becomes more serious in photoelectrochemical water splitting because the photoanode compartment uses concentrated alkali solutions that dissolve the photoelectrode within hours of PEC electrolysis leading to loss of activity.17 Therefore, it is indispensable to choose alternative anodic oxidation reactions for these fuel-forming electrochemical reactions that address the above concerns using earth-abundant electrocatalysts.
An alternative to OER is electrochemical oxidation of organic substrates which is thermodynamically more favourable and economically more viable than OER. These organic substrates must be soluble in water at room temperature and have a lower positive onset potential compared to that of water oxidation to avoid competition with the latter. The transformation of these organic molecules should lead to value-added products which would be otherwise more difficult or expensive when the same reaction is performed by other conventional chemical processing. The electro-oxidation of alcohols, amines, urea, hydrazine, etc. fulfills all the above criteria and can be used as an alternative oxidation half-reaction. However, the most appropriate is the biomass upgrading or oxidation of biomass derivatives to obtain platform chemicals. This will reduce the dependence on fossil fuels which are generally used to get these chemicals of industrial importance. Traditional approaches to biomass oxidation which use severe conditions, such as alkaline aqueous solution, high oxygen/air pressure (3–20 bar), and elevated temperature (up to 130 °C), are not economically viable as they use precious metals as catalysts, such as Pd, Pt, and Au or their bimetallic alloys. Even then, the conversion is not 100% and the selectivity is low.18,19
Further, to effectively catalyse these reactions, anodic electrocatalyst materials should be chosen carefully. These electrocatalysts should be thermodynamically and kinetically more favourable toward these alternative oxidation reactions compared to OER, have higher stability and must be earth-abundant. In this regard, we have to consider both the cost of raw materials to synthesize these catalysts and the cost involved in the synthesis/electrode fabrication process. Typical examples include oxides or oxy-hydroxides, phosphates, etc. of transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni) and Bismuth, which can be used as the anode or photoanode for these alternative oxidation reactions making them economically more viable.
To date, several paired electrochemical/photoelectrochemical reactions for simultaneous production of fuels and platform chemicals have been accomplished as discussed in this review. However, they remain limited in scope and greatly underutilized by the scientific community and none of these strategies are inducted in modern-day electrolysers.
Professor Moeller attributes this neglect to the desire to carefully choose half-reactions based on their complementarity, specific product compatibility or demand for voltage minimization.20,21 This doubt arises when we operate paired electrochemical devices under potentiostatic conditions where a current matching may be necessary. However, if these devices are operated galvanostatically like the present electrolysers used for water splitting, the working potential of both anode and cathode automatically adjusts to the potential of the substrate in the solution. Hence, by the principle of galvanostatic operation, any oxidation reaction may be paired with any reduction reaction or vice versa keeping specific synthetic needs in mind. The energy required to run the paired electrolysis cell is determined by the energetics of constituent redox reactions which can be tuned by optimizing individual reactions w.r.t. the nature and pH of the electrolyte, modification of photoanodes with a co-catalyst and using a redox mediator.
Paired electrolysis experiments must be conducted in a two-compartment cell in which the anode and cathode compartments should be separated by an anion exchange membrane (AEM; such as Fumasep FAA-3-PK-130) or PEM (such as Nafion 115, Nafion 117, etc.) or a fine glass frit to prevent product crossover (Fig. 2a). An iR compensation must be applied in all experiments to account for the voltage drop between the reference and working electrodes. Further, to prevent mass transport limitation a flow cell with two compartments may be adapted (Fig. 2b).22,23 In this cell, two separated electrolyte circuits should be used for the anode and the cathode compartment. A peristaltic pump may be used to pump the electrolyte.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of (a) the electrochemical H-cell,1 (b) the flow cell reactor.2 1Copyright 2018, ref. 54, American Chemical Society. 2Copyright 2018, ref. 22, Beilstein-Institut. 
The identification and quantification of gaseous products may be performed by Gas Chromatography (GC), whereas liquid products may be determined by HPLC or NMR measurements. The conversion yield (%) and faradaic efficiency (FE) may be calculated using eqn (1)–(3): (1) (2) (3)where n is the number of electrons transferred for each product formation and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1).
1.3 Redox mediators
An electrochemical reaction occurs by a heterogeneous transfer of electrons/holes from the semiconductor surface to the substrate in the electrolyte. The kinetics of this electron transfer depends on the nature of the semiconductor, the electrochemical process, and the electrolyte. In photoelectrochemical oxidation occurring on the surface of a photoanode, the transfer of minority charge carriers (holes) is a kinetically slower process. Also, in some direct electrolysis processes, higher energy input is required due to the higher redox potential of the substrate which in turn can also compete with the redox reaction of the electrolyte itself. To address these shortfalls, a redox mediator can be used, which facilitates the transfer of charge carriers (electrons/holes) between the electrode and the organic substrate. This is indirect electrolysis which combines a heterogeneous step (the production and regeneration of the redox mediator in its active form) with the homogeneous redox reaction of the activated mediator intermediate and the substrate (Fig. 3). For example, 2,2′,6,6′-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) is widely used as a mediator in the photoelectrochemical oxidation of 5-hydroxyl methylfurfural (HMF) to 2,5-furandicarboxylicacid (FDCA). In the first heterogeneous electron transfer step, TEMPO is oxidized to TEMPO+ (activated mediator intermediate) which in turn oxidises HMF to FDCA. The mediator for a particular electro-organic reaction can be chosen based on its redox potential. The redox potential of the mediator and more particularly the onset potential (Eon) of the electrochemical process when a mediator is used must be lower than that of the substrate alone. Further, there should not be a too high potential difference between the redox potential of the mediator (Emed) and that of the substrate as it could make the reaction rate slower to generate an appreciable yield of products. Therefore, a mediator having a redox potential 0.5–1.5 V lower than that of the substrate may be selected. By selecting a potential between the onset potential of mediator oxidation and substrate oxidation, the electrochemical oxidation of the substrate can be performed with a decreased overpotential and without competing with the possible electrolyte oxidation.
 Fig. 3  General principle of indirect electrolysis using a mediator. 
According to Francke et al., indirect electrolysis using mediators has several advantages over the direct electrolysis process: reduces the overpotential requirement for the anodic oxidation by eliminating kinetic inhibition of electron transfer to the substrate; imparts stability by avoiding passivation of the electrode from redox reaction of the substrate on the electrode surface; can tune the selectivity of the oxidation and also eliminate the competitive water oxidation in the case of biomass or organic oxidation reaction performed in aqueous electrolytes.24 Further, the use of mediators enables electrolysis to be performed in mild conditions with lesser energy input, which makes it commercially more viable.
1.4 Two-electrode vs. three-electrode measurements
There is some confusion while reporting the performance of paired electrolysis as noted in various articles. Particularly, in the case of biomass oxidation, most of the authors performed the electrolysis first in a three-electrode setup and then used a bifunctional electrocatalyst (the same electrocatalyst as both anode and cathode electrode) in a two-electrode setup operated under potentiostatic conditions. This may lead to confusion while reporting the potential in two-electrode and three-electrode measurements. Therefore, this section tries to give some fundamentals about both two- and three-electrode measurements in an electrochemical cell which can also be applied to photoelectrochemical cell measurements. It is important for the scientific community to understand these measurements and to report these potentials properly.
In an electrochemical system, the working electrode (WE) is the electrode where the desired electrochemical conversion takes place and the counter electrode is the auxiliary electrode that allows the current flow (Fig. 4). The reference electrode (RE) is for the reference of the potential and takes control over the potential applied at the WE in a three-electrode system. It is very important to choose the best suitable RE which depends on the type of the electrochemical test to be performed and the pH and nature of the electrolyte used. To minimize the change of potential at the CE, it is advisable to use a CE with at least five times the surface area of the working electrode.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation and the principle of determining potentials: (a) three-electrode system, (b) two-electrode system. 
A three-electrode measurement is performed using a reference electrode and a potentiostat which sets the working electrode at a fixed potential vs. RE and the current is measured at this potential between WE and CE (Fig. 4a). The current (I) vs. voltage (V) plot of the WE is obtained by scanning potential versus the RE and the current is monitored as a function of this potential scan. The use of the RE eliminates the effect of polarization occurring at the CE. In the three-electrode setup, the potentiostat maintains the potential of the WE at the applied potential and gives the current output at that potential by supplying the voltage difference that would occur due to CE polarization between WE and CE to maintain that current. As long as the potentiostat supplements that voltage loss, the counter electrode passes the needed current. The I–V plot shows the real potential applied and can be reported vs. the RE used.
In two-electrode measurements, the potential is applied between WE and RE and the current is measured between them (Fig. 4b). CE polarization affects the electrochemical performance and hence the electrolysis process. The potential applied in the potentiostatic electrolysis process is not equal to the potential shown in the I–V curve; rather it is the cell potential that takes the voltage loss into account. The voltage scale in the I–V plots may be represented as potential relative to the electrolyte potential or the cell voltage obtained from the electrode reactions occurring at both WE and CE.
In conclusion, three-electrode measurements don’t give cell efficiency; rather they show the efficiency of the WE. On the other hand, in the two-electrode system the potential shown is the cell voltage. The real efficiency of an electrochemical system should be calculated using two-electrode measurements only.
2. (Photo)electrochemical organic oxidation coupled with HER
The production of hydrogen gas (H2) by electrochemical water splitting is a good option for sustainable fuel production.25–27 The efficiency of this process is limited by the anodic reaction corresponding to the oxygen evolution reaction. The electrosynthesis and degradation of organic compounds emerge as an alternative to decouple H2 production from the OER and produce value-added chemicals or find new alternatives to the process of degradation of organic compounds. The majority of organic reactions via electrolysis occur at lower overpotential compared to that of OER (below 1.23 V vs. RHE; ΔG = −474.71 kJ mol−1 at 298.15 K for 1 mole of oxygen molecule).9,28,29 The desirable products can be obtained with better yield and purity compared to conventional synthesis involving strong conditions such as high pressure, higher temperature, and use of strong oxidants, among others.30,31 There are many electrochemical and photoelectrochemical H2 production reactions in the literature that are paired with the oxidation of alcohols,7,28,29,32–36 amines,37,38 urea,39–41 and hydrazine,42,43 among others.44,45
Alcohol oxidation reaction
Alcohol oxidation reaction (AOR) appears as the more common organic reaction used in paired electrolysis because it involves lower potentials, i.e. primary alcohols can be oxidized at the potential between 0.5 and 1.3 V vs. SCE, producing aldehydes or carboxylic acids.9,10,46 Vizza et al. reported the electrochemical H2 production paired with the oxidation of biomass-derived alcohols such as ethanol (E), ethylene glycol (EG), glycerol (G) and 1,2-propandiol (P).7 The anode consisted of Pd nanoparticles deposited onto 3D nanostructured TiO2 nanotube arrays (Pd/TNTA-web) and Pt/C on carbon cloth was used as the cathode. The paired electrolysis was performed in a PEM-type electrolyser. The analyte was composed of 2.0 M bio-alcohol in 2.0 M NaOH aqueous solution. The reactions were studied at 25, 50 and 80 °C, where an enhancement in the kinetics of oxidation was observed as the temperature was increased gradually. All the electrolysis of alcohol showed cell potential values lower than 1.00 V [0.69 V (E), 0.70 V (EG), 0.76 V (G and P)] compared to 1.76 V without alcohol at 80 °C and 1 A cm−2 of current density. These results indicate saving of a great deal of power input in these paired electrolysers; i.e. pure water electrolysis in similar conditions (at 80 °C and 1 A cm−2 of current density) consumes 47.17 kW h per kg of H2 produced, whereas alcohol electro-oxidation coupled HER consumes only ∼19.5 kW h per kg of H2 produced.
Sun et al. showed an HER paired with AOR, using Benzyl Alcohol (BA).30 The electrolyser consisted of a 3D hierarchically porous nickel-based electrocatalyst (hp-Ni) (Fig. 5a) as both anode and cathode electrode in the undivided electrochemical cell, the Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode and 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution as the electrolyte with 10 mM benzyl alcohol and other alcohols as the substrate. As shown in Fig. 5b, the EC response with BA showed a lower overpotential compared to that without BA, indicating that the oxidation is thermodynamically more favorable than OER. Initially, benzaldehyde (Ph-CHO) was formed as an intermediate, which was electrochemically oxidized to benzoic acid (Ph-COOH) (Fig. 5c and d). After five cycles, the faradaic efficiency of Ph-COOH production was maintained between 96 and 98% demonstrating the good stability of the hp-Ni electrode (Fig. 5e). In the same fashion, derivatives of BA with an electron-withdrawing group such as 4-nitrobenzyl alcohol (NBA) and an electron-donating group such as 4-methylbenzyl alcohol (MBA) were investigated to observe the effects of the substituent group on electrochemical oxidation (Fig. 5f), but no changes in the onset potential were observed. The authors propose that the catalytic onset potential of these three alcohol oxidation reactions (BA, NBA, and MBA) is principally determined by the oxidation state of the electrocatalyst and not by their intrinsic thermodynamics which is different in the case of molecular electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of hp-Ni at different magnifications, (b) linear sweep voltammograms of hp-Ni at 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH containing 0 and 10 mM benzyl alcohol (BA), (c) conversion or yield (%) dependence of BA and its oxidation products on the charge passed during electrochemical oxidation at 1.423 V vs. RHE in 10 mL of 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA (Ph-CHO, benzyl aldehyde; Ph-COOH, benzoic acid), (d) pathway of benzyl alcohol (BA) oxidation to benzoic acid, (e) faradaic efficiency of benzoic acid production for controlled-potential electrolysis with hp-Ni in 10 mL of 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA at 1.423 V vs. RHE under five successive cycles, (f) LSV curves of hp-Ni at 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA, 4-methylbenzyl alcohol (MBA), or 4-nitrobenzyl alcohol (NBA), (g) chemical structures of MBA and NBA. Adapted with permission from ACS Catal. 2017, 7, 4564–4570. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Zhong, Wang et al. also reported H2 production paired to BA oxidation in alkaline media.34
The bifunctional electrocatalyst was self-supported on 3D CuCoNx-based porous nanosheet arrays grown on carbon fibres with a conductive nitrogen-doped carbon shell (NC@CuCo2Nx/CF), which showed a low onset potential for both HER and AOR. The Tafel slope for HER was 76 mV dec−1 which confirms that the reaction occurs through a Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism.
The oxidation reaction displayed a high yield for the corresponding benzaldehyde product and a good selectivity (≥95%) at a constant current of 15 mA. Besides, a two-electrode electrolyser cell was constructed for paired HER and AOR reactions, which could achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage below 1.55 V, suggesting a new alternative to energy-saving electrolytic hydrogen generation.
Zhang et al. described the use of non-precious metal Co0.83Ni0.17 alloy nanoparticles anchored on activated carbon (AC) for HER paired with benzyl alcohol oxidation.29 The electrocatalyst was prepared by the thermal-treatment method and its behavior for HER and AOR was tested in a three-electrode system. The catalyst deposited on carbon paper functioned as a working electrode, that on carbon cloth as a counter electrode and Hg/HgO is used here as a reference electrode [converted to RHE through E(vs. RHE) = E(vs. Hg/HgO) + 0.925 V]. The LSV curves and Tafel plots of Co0.83Ni0.17 in comparison with other materials (carbon paper, AC, Co/AC, Ni/AC, and Pt mesh) were evaluated in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution (Fig. 6a and b). Co0.83Ni0.17 displays the least overpotential among all at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 126 mV dec−1, indicative of good reaction kinetics. Also, the catalyst showed good stability and durability, with a current density of ∼15 mA cm−2 for over 7 h at a constant potential of −0.215 V vs. RHE and a stability of 1000 cyclic voltammetry (CV) cycles without a decrease of the current density value compared to the initial cycle (Fig. 6c and d). The thermodynamic favourability of alcohol oxidation over OER can be deduced from the decrease of Eon from 1.48 V vs. RHE to 1.28 V vs. RHE for the AOR process (Fig. 6e).
 Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of carbon paper, AC, Co/AC, Ni/AC, Co0.83Ni0.17/AC and Pt mesh at a scanning rate of 5.0 mV s−1, (c) and (d) HER durability test for the Co0.83Ni0.17/AC electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH, (e) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (f) GC (gas chromatography) tests of the products after electrocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol by Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at 1.425 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (g) 1H NMR spectra of the products after electrocatalytic oxidation of 10 mM benzyl alcohol by Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at 1.425 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH after passing a charge of 40C, (h) faradaic efficiency of cycling using the same Co0.83Ni0.17/AC in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM benzyl alcohol for each cycle, (i) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC with (black) and without (red) 10 mM benzyl alcohol in 1.0 M KOH solution using a two-electrode system, (j) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at a scanning rate of 5.0 mV s−1 with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (k) the dependence of H2 generation from water splitting on reaction time in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (l) the dependence of O2 generation from water splitting on reaction time in 1.0 M KOH without 10 mM benzyl alcohol. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The benzaldehyde intermediary and the benzoic acid product were quantitatively determined by GC and 1H NMR (Fig. 6f and g respectively). The faradaic efficiency for benzoic acid production was near 93–96% during all 4 cycles, indicating the robust stability of the electrocatalyst (Fig. 6h). Finally, paired electrolysis was performed in a two-electrode electrolyser using Co0.83Ni0.17 as a bifunctional electrocatalyst in a 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution containing 10 mM BA. The CV and polarization curves (Fig. 6i and j) appeared at a lower onset potential for BA oxidation (1.46 V) compared to OER (1.58 V) indicating that AOR is a thermodynamically more favorable reaction. For example, to achieve 10 mA cm−2 of current density value, a voltage of only 1.54 V was necessary for BA oxidation instead of 1.74 V as in the case of OER. Additionally, this work corroborated that the addition of BA to the system did not affect HER performance (Fig. 6j and k).
Recently, Chen et al. reported the first isopropanol oxidation reaction (IOR) on Rh nanostructures paired to HER in alkaline medium.28 The ultrathin Rh nanosheets with atomic thickness (Rh-NSs) were evaluated for IOR and HER by cyclic voltammetry in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution. There was an increase in peak current density at 0.3 V vs. RHE when 1.0 M isopropanol was added to the electrolyte. A significant electrocatalytic activity was observed in both reactions (HER/IOR) when Rh-NSs were used as a bifunctional electrocatalyst in a membrane-free electrolyser containing 1.0 M alcohol in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution. Upon constant potential electrolysis at 0.4 V, H2 was obtained at the cathode and acetone at the anode.
Wang, D., Wang, P., Wang, S. et al. reported the electro-oxidation of alcohols to carbonyl compounds (such as aldehydes or ketones) paired with H2 production using a continuous-flow cell without the use of mediators or catalysts in neutral media (Fig. 7).32Fig. 7a shows the schematic of the electrolyser, with carbon paper as the anode and a nickel plate as the cathode. The electrolyte was 2.0 mM alcohols in CH3CN/H2O (1:1) as solvent media containing 0.2 mM nBu4NBF4 as the supporting electrolyte. A peristaltic pump was used to circulate the electrolyte. Initially, benzyl alcohol (BA) was converted to benzaldehyde with a 37% yield upon constant current electrolysis at 100 mA for 1 h. On improving some parameters such as media and time of reaction, benzaldehyde was obtained with a 93% yield in similar conditions of electrolysis. Finally, the reaction was increased 5000 times in order to test their scalability. Parameters such as magnitude of the current (10 mA to 1000 mA), time of reaction, and electrolyte flow rate were modified obtaining similar results as the first assay proving the potential applicability of this new method (Fig. 7b). Other alcohols with different substituents were employed as substrates. Good yields (96–99%) were obtained for electron-rich benzylic alcohols with ortho, meta and para substitution and halogenated benzylic alcohols, medium yields (64%) for allylic alcohols and poor yield (35%) for electron-deficient benzylic alcohols. Secondary alcohols were also used, with no significant differences in the reactivity of alcohols in the continuous flow reactor (Fig. 7c and d).
 Fig. 7  (a) Alcohol oxidation using a continuous-flow set-up. (b) Slow flow rate of electrochemical oxidation of benzyl alcohol (1aa): (i) the amount of 1aa is 2.0 mmol, (ii) the amount of 1aa is 100.0 mmol. (c) Substrate scope of electrochemical oxidation of primary alcohols. Reaction conditions: carbon paper (93 × 93 × 0.2 mm) anode (contact area 1.6 cm2), Ni plate (93 × 93 × 0.3 mm) cathode (contact area 1.6 cm2), constant current = 800 mA, flow rate = 0.10 mL s−1, 10 min, 1a (2.0 mmol), nBu4NBF4 (0.20 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (1:1, 30 mL), N2, room temperature, flow cell (2.49 F mol−1), isolated yield. a10 mA, 10 h. b10 mA, 20 h. (d) Substrate scope of electrochemical oxidation of secondary alcohols. Reaction conditions: carbon paper (93 × 93 × 0.2 mm) anode (contact area 1.6 cm2), Ni plate (93 × 93 × 0.3 mm) cathode (contact area 1.6 cm2), constant current = 800 mA, flow rate = 0.10 mL s−1, 10 min, 1b (2.0 mmol), nBu4NBF4 (0.20 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (1:1, 30 mL), N2, room temperature, flow cell (2.49 F mol−1), isolated yield. a10 mA, 20 h. b10 mA, 10 h. (c) 2be: benzoin used as the starting material. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Amine oxidation reaction
Amine oxidation reaction (AmOR) is another kind of organic reaction that can be coupled with HER. Similar to alcohols, the amines also show lower oxidation potential than water.9 Depending on the amine substrate, catalyst, reaction conditions, and applied potentials, different amine derivatives can be generated via electrochemical oxidation, such as oximes, imines, amides, nitriles, amine oxides, and azo compounds.9
Zhang et al. reported the conversion of aromatic primary amines with electron-withdrawing/donating groups on the aryl ring and aliphatic primary amines into nitriles with good yields and lower potentials at the anode.38 The earth-abundant catalyst consisted of a NiSe nanorod, synthesized by direct selenization of commercial nickel foam in a two-electrode electrolyser. These reactions showed yields higher than 93%, without using oxidants and organic solvents and easy scalability, and the hydrophobic nitrile product was easy to separate because it floats onto the surface of the electrolyte used (1.0 M KOH aqueous solution).
Zhou and He et al. reported simultaneous production of 3-pyridinecarboxylic acid (3-PA) and H2 photoelectrochemically using a WO3 photoanode. This process is more convenient in view of the strong synthesis conditions used in the conventional production of 3-PA from 3-methylpyridine (3-MP).37 The PEC synthesis was performed in a dual-compartment quartz cell, with WO3 film as the working electrode (WE), saturated calomel (SCE) as the reference electrode [converted to RHE E(vs. RHE) =  + ESCE + 0.05915 pH ( = 0.2415 V vs. RHE, 298 K)], both in the anode chamber, and Pt wire as the counter electrode in the cathode chamber using 1.5 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte. The anode and cathode compartments were separated by a proton exchange membrane. A xenon lamp (300 W with AM 1.5 G filter) was used as a light source (150 mW cm−2). The oxidation of 3-MP into 3-PA was thermodynamically and kinetically more favorable relative to the conventional PEC water splitting, as can be seen from the decrease in the onset potential for electro-oxidation by 170 mV (Fig. 8a). The PEC response in the presence of 3-PM shows a higher photocurrent for the WO3 film compared to the electrolyte without 3-PM (Fig. 8a). The constant potential photoelectrolysis at 1.23 V vs. RHE shows high selectivity for 3-PA and the photoanode is stable for at least 8 h of photoelectrolysis (6.33 ± 0.2 μM W by ICP-MS) (Fig. 8b). The amount of H2 registered by GC shows better kinetics in the presence of 3-PA, indicative of an improved kinetic and thermodynamic behavior compared to water splitting (Fig. 8c). In both experiments (with and without 3-PA) the faradaic efficiency of H2 evolution is close to 99% (Fig. 8d). When these kinds of reactions are performed in aqueous solution, the water oxidation is a competitive parallel reaction in the oxidation of the other compound (3-PM into 3-PA in this case). For this reason, the faradaic efficiency in the anode compartment is limited (∼45% in this work for 3-PA production). To improve the anode reaction, a common oxidant is added to the solution, Cr2O72−, which is usually used in the oxidation of organic compounds, such as oxidation of alcohols into aldehydes, carboxylic acids and ketones where Cr(VI) is reduced to Cr(III). In this work, Cr3+ added as Cr(NO3)3 showed an improvement in the conversion efficiency from 45% to 69% (Fig. 8e). The polarization curves in H2SO4 with and without Cr3+ show a slight decrease of the photocurrent which is attributed to the Cr3+ chromophore (Fig. 8f); however, an increment of current density is observed in the presence of both 3-PM and Cr3+, and also the onset potential is better compared to that without Cr3+ (Fig. 8g). The selectivity was similar with and without Cr3+, but was always better in the presence of the Cr(VI)/Cr(III) redox pair (Fig. 8h).
 Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 and 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP aqueous solution under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. The scan rate was 15 mV s−1. (b) The photocurrent of WO3 film in a 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP electrolyte under chopped illumination at 1.23 V vs. RHE, and the formation amount of 3-PA with the PEC reaction time at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (c) The amount of H2 evolution in two kinds of PEC cells at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (d) Faradaic efficiency of the Pt wire cathode for H2 evolution in two kinds of PEC cells. (e) Faradaic efficiency of the WO3 photoanode for 3-PA synthesis in 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP aqueous solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+. (f) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+ under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. Inset of (f), UV-vis absorbance spectra of 1.5 M H2SO4/6 mM Cr3+ solution before and after PEC reaction. (g) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 2 mM 3-MP–6 mM Cr3+ under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. Inset of (g), i–t curves of the WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 2 mM 3-MP–6 mM Cr3+ under chopped illumination at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (h) The formation amount of 3-PA in 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+. Inset of (h), the conversion, yield, and selectivity data of photoelectrochemical oxidation of 3-MP into 3-PA by the WO3 photoanode in the 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP electrolyte with and without 6 mM Cr3+ after 8 hours of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Electrochemical Society, Inc., copyright 2019. 
Urea oxidation reaction
Another alternative for anodic oxidation to pair with HER could be urea oxidation reaction (UOR). Urea (CO(NH2)2) has a theoretical thermodynamic potential of ΔE° = 0.37 V, which is a lower value than the potential for OER. The slower kinetics and the multi-electron transfer (6 electrons) for urea oxidation [CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− → N2 + 5H2O + CO2 + 6e−] necessitate robust catalysts to promote the reaction at an appreciable rate, generally based on expensive noble-metal catalysts.9,39 Wu et al. reported highly efficient and economical catalysts for UOR oxidation.39 Earth-abundant NiMoO4 nanosheets with rich oxygen vacancies (r-NiMoO4) grown on a Ni foam substrate generated more active sites and offered better electron transport capacity and optimal adsorption energy, which enhanced UOR performance. Lee et al. recently reported the study of HER/UOR on materials based on a metal–organic framework on nickel foams (NF).40 The best electrode investigated, FexCo2−xP/NF, was used as a bifunctional electrocatalyst. This system showed a cell potential (Ecell = Eanode − Ecathode) of 1.60 V for OER to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 compared to other materials studied for HER/OER. Moreover, when UOR replaces OER, the FexCo2−xP/NF electrode takes only 1.41 V to obtain the same current density value (Fig. 9a and b). Also, the water splitting activity was studied using a 1.5 AAA battery (Fig. 9c) where it was possible to observe the gas production on each electrode surface (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Cell potential determination from iR-corrected LSV curves of OER/UOR and HER of FeCo-PBA/NF, FexCo3−xO4/NF, and FexCo2−xP/NF electrode materials at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, (b) LSV curves of FeCo-PBA/NF(+)||FeCo-PBA/NF(−), FexCo3−xO4/NF(+)||FexCo3−xO4/NF(−), and FexCo2−xP/NF(+)||FexCo2−xP/NF(−) electrolysers in comparison with electrolysers constructed from the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts RuO2/NF(+)||Pt/C/NF(−) and RuO2/NF(+)||RuO2/NF(−), and (c) optical image of the FexCo2−xP/NF(+)||FexCo2−xP/NF(−) electrolyser driven by a 1.5 V AAA battery generating O2 and H2 gas bubbles at the anode and cathode in a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014. Wiley and sons, copyright 2018. 
Hydrazine oxidation reaction
Another example as an alternative to OER is hydrazine oxidation (HzOR): N2H4 + 4OH− → N2 + 4H2O + 4e−, which could be considered as an aqueous contaminant. Sun et al. highlighted some advantages for this reaction: (1) electro-oxidation of hydrazine only releases nitrogen and water without greenhouse gases, (2) it has no carbon atoms, thereby avoiding the generation of catalyst-poisoning species and (3) hydrazine is a stronger reducing agent lowering the oxidation potential.42
The His group reported about Ni2P nanoarrays on nickel foam (NF) as the electrocatalyst for H2 production and HzOR in alkaline media. The electrochemical behavior of Ni2P/NF avoids the use of it as a bifunctional electrocatalyst in a two-electrode system with 0.5 M hydrazine in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution.
Using a cell voltage of 1.0 V, it was possible to generate a current density of 500 mA cm−2 which is much higher compared to OER where the cell voltage was 1.6 V delivering only 20 mA cm−2. The Ni2P/NF catalyst showed durability and unit faradaic efficiency for HER.
Wang, Hen, Xia et al. recently reported the H2 production paired with HzOR using a bifunctional, earth-abundant, tubular cobalt perselenide (CoSe2) nanosheet electrode.43 The electrochemical behavior of the CoSe2 electrode was investigated in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution using a three-electrode system. For CoSe2, the overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope were only 79 mV and 84 mV dec−1, respectively. These parameters under similar conditions was found to be much lower compared to that of cobalt precursor and nickel foam substrate which have overpotential/Tafel slope values of 193 mV/106 mV dec−1 and 241 mV/121 mV dec−1, respectively, revealing good thermodynamics and kinetics for H2 generation in the case of CoSe2 (Fig. 10a and b). Also, the CoSe2 electrode showed good electrochemical and chemical stability as the catalytic current remained stable at least for 50 hours at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 as observed by Raman spectroscopy and SEM (Fig. 10c and d). The H2 evolution with the CoSe2 electrode showed no changes in the current density when different quantities of hydrazine were added, indicating that hydrazine concentration does not affect the kinetics of HER (Fig. 10e). However, with LSV experiments for HzOR, an increment in current density and a decrease in overpotential were observed when hydrazine concentration was increased (Fig. 10f). The CoSe2 electrode was compared with the platinum/carbon (Pt/C) electrode which is considered as a good catalyst for HER, and it was found to exhibit an activity comparable to or greater than Pt/C in the presence of 0.5 M hydrazine. Also, the overall water electrolysis in alkaline media with and without hydrazine was compared (Fig. 10g and h). The faradaic efficiency for H2 production with the CoSe2 electrode was 98.3%.
 Fig. 10  (a) iR-corrected linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel slopes of CoSe2, Pt/C on a Ni substrate, nickel foam substrate, and cobalt precursor, (c) a 50 hour stability test of CoSe2 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, (d) LSV curves before and after a 50 hour stability test. All the experiments were carried out in a 1.0 M KOH solution, (e) H2 evolution and (f) hydrazine oxidation LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 in 1.0 M KOH containing different hydrazine concentrations, (g) LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 and Pt/C for the HER/HzOR couple in 1.0 M KOH with 0.5 M N2H4 solution, (h) a comparison of LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 for water electrolysis with and without hydrazine anodic oxidation assistance, (i) faradaic efficiency of H2 production, (j) a cell stability test based on the CoSe2/CoSe2 couple at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH with 0.5 M hydrazine solution. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014. Wiley and sons, copyright 2018. 
Finally, in a two-electrode HER/HzOR electrolyser using CoSe2 as the anode and cathode electrode, the reactions required only 0.164 V to generate a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and exhibited continuous H2 production for about 14 hours (Fig. 10j). The commercialization of this technology for future applications was demonstrated by the use of a 1.55 V AA battery to drive this paired electrolysis process.
3. (Photo)electrochemical biomass upgrading coupled HER
In the past few decades, petroleum has been the most important primary feedstock for industrial production of organic chemicals and fuels. The use of fossil fuels as raw material should be avoided due to their adverse effects on the environment. Hence, all the chemical industries are moving closer to sustainable development by minimizing the use of fossil fuel feedstock. Biomass seems to be a promising alternative as a renewable and sustainable feedstock for producing fuels and chemicals.47,48 Electrochemical oxidation of biomass and biomass-derived platform molecules can enable the production of value-added chemicals under mild conditions and can be coupled with hydrogen production in a single electrolyser.
The electrochemical oxidation of 5-hydroxyl methyl furfural (HMF) is a significant alternative to water oxidation because HMF oxidation is thermodynamically more favorable than water oxidation and hence improves the energy efficiency of hydrogen production.49,50 Hence, this can be combined with hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode in the modern-day electrolysers. Further, this process carries significant economic importance as HMF is a platform chemical, which can be converted to various compounds with important industrial applications such as plastics, polymers, and fuels; thus it is a value addition to the electrolysers.51,52
There are many reports on coupling HMF oxidation to 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) as an anodic process for HER.21,22,49,53–55 This oxidation is a 5 electron oxidation process which proceeds via various intermediates to yield the final product as FDCA (Fig. 11a).
 Fig. 11  (a) Scheme for possible pathways of HMF oxidation, (b) LSV curves of Ni2P NPA/NF at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH with and without HMF in a 3 electrode cell, (c) SEM image of Ni2P NPA/NF, (d) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.423 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM HMF, (e) LSV curves in a 2 electrode cell, (f) comparison of the overpotentials to achieve benchmark current densities (10, 20, and 50 mA cm−2) for a Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM HMF, (g) GC-measured H2 quantity compared with theoretically calculated H2 quantity assuming a 100% faradaic efficiency for H2 evolution catalyzed by a Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH solution with 10 mM HMF, (h) faradaic efficiency of the Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple for simultaneous H2 and FDCA generation in 1.0 M KOH solution with 10 mM HMF for three successive electrolysis cycles. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and sons, Inc. 
The Sun group reported simultaneous hydrogen generation and HMF oxidation to FDCA catalyzed by Ni2P nanoparticle arrays on a nickel foam (Ni2P NPA/NF) bifunctional electrocatalyst (Fig. 11c).21 Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) studies in the presence of HMF clearly show a cathodic shift of 150 mV in the onset potential (and hence a decrease in the overpotential) and a less than 200 mV voltage input to reach the same current density of 100 mA cm−2 compared to that of pure water electrolysis. The faster increase of current in the case of HMF oxidation compared to oxygen evolution reaction and shifting of the onset potential to a less positive value indicate that the former process is more favorable kinetically and thermodynamically than OER catalyzed by Ni2P NPA/NF. Post oxidation analysis of the electrocatalyst by XRD and XPS revealed that the in situ generated oxidized Ni species is the catalytic site for the HMF oxidation reaction.
The analysis from HPLC shows FDCA as the major product with nearly 100% conversion efficiency. When a two-electrode electrolyser was constructed using the Ni2P NPA/NF electrocatalyst as both anode and cathode coupling HMF oxidation with HER, nearly 200 mV of voltage could be saved to reach benchmark current density values of 10, 20 and 50 mA cm−2 compared to that of pure water splitting (Fig. 11f). Long term constant potential electrolysis shows 100% faradaic efficiency for HER and 98% FE for HMF oxidation with a linear increase in product formation without a decrease in the activity or selectivity of the catalyst (Fig. 11g and h). These results show the robustness of Ni2P NPA/NF electrocatalysts towards simultaneous HER and HMF oxidation. The same group also further reported electrodeposited Co–P as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for HMF oxidation to FDCA at the anode paired with HER at the cathode in alkaline media (1 M KOH) with nearly unity FE for hydrogen evolution and 100% conversion of HMF.49 This paired electrolyser achieved 20 mA cm−2 current density at 1.44 V which is 150 mV lower than that of overall water splitting. They also reported an earth-abundant porous Ni3S2/Ni foam bifunctional electrocatalyst for paired electrolysis. Due to the higher thermodynamic favorability of HMF oxidation over OER, the cell voltage for the integrated H2 production and HMF oxidation was significantly reduced by about 200 mV relative to pure water splitting to achieve a current density of 100 mA cm−2 with nearly unity FE for HER and FDCA production.55 The anodic oxidation process on metal or metal sulfide/phosphide electrodes in a strongly oxidizing environment proceeds via transforming to hydroxides/oxyhydroxides under electrocatalytic reaction conditions which in turn oxidize the substrates in the solution and cycle back to a lower oxidation state.56 This inspired Huber and Jin et al. to use NiFe Layered Doubled Hydroxide (NiFe LDH) on a carbon paper anode to oxidize HMF into FDCA pairing it with HER. This paired electrolysis employed NiFe LDH as a bifunctional electrocatalyst and had an onset potential of 1.25 V vs. RHE and required 1.32 V to reach a benchmark current density of 20 mA cm−2 which is 210 mV lower than that of pure water splitting. The electrochemically active surface area determined from double-layer capacitance measurements for HMF oxidation (18.4 mF cm−2) was 6 times more than that of pure water splitting.54 These results indicate that HMF oxidation is much favored over water oxidation at the lower applied potentials.
A recent report by Fu and Luo shows that by facilitating charge/mass transfer with CuxS core NiCo-LDH shell nanostructures and tuning the electronic structure of Ni and Co, a higher current density of 87 mA cm−2 can be obtained at 1.3 V vs. RHE with a 100% FE for both HER and FDCA production.53 The electrolyser consisting of CuxS@Ni0.75Co2.5OmHn as a bifunctional electrocatalyst requires 1.58 V to reach the benchmark current density of 100 mA cm−2 which is 270 mV less than that for the overall water splitting.
Photoelectrochemical oxidation processes require lesser overpotential than the corresponding electrochemical process because of the use of semiconductors. Here an n-type semiconductor is used as a photoanode that absorbs photons to generate electron–hole pairs. After separation, the minority charge carriers (holes) are transported to the surface of the photoanode to perform oxidation of the substrate (in this case HMF and water) and the majority charge carriers (electrons) are transported to the counter electrode for the corresponding reduction reaction (HER). The photogenerated holes in the valence-band edge (Ev) of semiconductors already possess sufficient overpotential for the oxidation of the substrate before application of the external bias (Eapp). It is important to note that the external bias for anodic oxidation does not alter the overpotential for the oxidation process, which is determined by Ev and is independent of Eapp. This is different from the electrochemical oxidation process where Eapp alters the overpotential available for the oxidation process (Fig. 12a and b).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of (a) photoelectrochemical TEMPO-mediated HMF oxidation, (b) electrochemical TEMPO-mediated HMF oxidation. CB, conduction band; EF, Fermi energy, (c) LSVs of an Au electrode obtained in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution (pH 9.2) (black line), a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF (blue line) and a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO (orange line). Scan rate, 10 mV s−1, (d) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.54 V vs. RHE in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO, (e) LSVs of a BiVO4 photoanode obtained under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (orange line) and a Au electrode in the dark (black line) in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution (pH 9.2) containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO. Scan rate, 10 mV s−1, (f) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during TEMPO-mediated photo-oxidation of HMF at 1.04 V vs. RHE in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
Utilizing this concept, the Choi research group found that the overpotential required for HMF oxidation can be reduced considerably by using BiVO4 as the photoanode and introducing TEMPO as a redox mediator.18 The initial study on the role of TEMPO was performed with Au working electrodes. The LSV curve shows a shift in the onset potential of 710 mV from 1.8 V vs. RHE in borate buffer solution (pH = 9.2) when 7.5 mM TEMPO was added to the electrolyte containing 5 mM HMF (Fig. 12c). When constant potential electrolysis was performed at 2.05 V vs. RHE without TEMPO in the electrolyte, only 1% of HMF was converted to DFF which suggests that the majority of current was due to water oxidation. It was suggested that by using TEMPO as a mediator as well as the catalyst and by choosing oxidation potential between the onset potential of TEMPO oxidation and water oxidation, HMF oxidation could be realized with much lower overpotential requirement without competing with water oxidation. Hence, when TEMPO is added and electrolysis was performed at 1.54 V vs. RHE, a complete conversion of HMF to FDCA occurred when 40C charge was passed with >99% conversion efficiency (Fig. 12d). When the BiVO4 photoanode was used as a working electrode instead of Au, there was a further anodic shift of ∼700 mV in the onset potential of TEMPO mediated HMF oxidation to 0.32 V vs. RHE (Fig. 12e). This shift in onset potential was due to the high positive Ec of BiVO4 located at 2.4 V vs. RHE and therefore, photogenerated holes already possess sufficient overpotential for TEMPO oxidation before Eapp. Therefore, the potential of electrolysis was reduced to 1.04 V vs. RHE (500 mV lesser compared to the Au electrode) which was carried out in 0.5 M borate buffer solution in similar conditions; >99% conversion efficiency was obtained for HMF to FDCA when the same 40C charge was passed (Fig. 12f). However, it was also possible to perform TEMPO mediated HMF oxidation at very low Eapp, i.e. 0.6 V vs. RHE, on BiVO4 photoanodes although a longer time was needed. This study shows that the oxidation potential for HMF oxidation could be brought down to a significantly lower value when an electron mediator and a semiconductor photoanode are used in the photoelectrochemical oxidation process simultaneously.
Surface modifications of semiconductor photoanodes are essential to mitigate charge recombination losses and faster charge injection efficiency at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface.57 Choi et al. in the paper discussed previously presumed that such modifications of photoanodes such as BiVO4 would promote OER instead of TEMPO mediated HMF oxidation. In contrast, Panthani and Li et al. recently reported that thicker cobalt phosphate (CoPi) over-layer (obtained by 30 minutes of electro-deposition) modified BiVO4 photoanodes facilitate TEMPO mediated selective oxidation of HMF to FDCA at 0.64 V vs. RHE which is much lower (∼500 mV) compared to that observed with the bare BiVO4.23 This is due to the decrease in solution-mediated recombination losses resulting from the back reduction of oxidized TEMPO in CoPi modified BiVO4 as confirmed from transient photocurrent measurements. Back recombination of electrons with accumulated holes on the photoanode surface results in transient current spikes upon light on–off measurements in pure electrolytes. When a redox mediator is present in the electrolyte, these spikes become more prominent due to electro-back reduction of the oxidized state of the mediator accumulated in the illumination period. This behavior can be seen in Fig. 13a, where BiVO4 is used as the photoanode in the electrolyte with and without TEMPO, with more pronounced spikes in the former. The authors also observed large negative current spikes with the TEMPO containing borate buffer electrolyte around 0.6 V which continued up to 1.2 V along with decay of anodic potential to a lower current value than that of the pure borate buffer electrolyte. This is due to electrochemical back reduction of oxidized TEMPO accumulated during illumination. When transient photocurrent measurement was performed using BiVO4 and BiVO4/CoPi-30 photoanodes at 1.04 V vs. RHE, solution mediated charge recombination and slower kinetics of TEMPO oxidation were observed without CoPi modification (Fig. 13b and c). In BiVO4, quasi steady state photocurrent was smaller in the TEMPO containing electrolyte compared to that of the pure electrolyte, suggesting poor TEMPO oxidation. Further, larger negative currents in off-illumination mode and the very slow decay of negative transient current not reaching steady state support this fact. In contrast, BiVO4–CoPi-30 shows nearly 6 times higher anodic steady state photocurrent in the TEMPO containing electrolyte with a faster decay to 0 on switching off the illumination. Also, a sharp negative dark current (back recombination of electrons with oxidized CoPi species), decaying rapidly to 0, confirms improved TEMPO redox kinetics on CoPi modified BiVO4 photoanodes. This in turn hastens oxidation of HMF and reduces the overpotential requirement.
 Fig. 13  Transient photocurrent measurements with chopped AM1.5 illumination. (a) LSVs for BiVO4 in the pure electrolyte and the electrolyte with 5.0 mM TEMPO, (b and c) transient photocurrents at 1.04 V vs. RHE for BiVO4 and BiVO4/CoPi-30, respectively. For clarity, the traces in (b) and (c) are offset with respect to time. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission; Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
In addition to HMF, furfural is one of the important biomass-derived intermediates for the synthesis of many highly valuable chemical feedstocks, such as 2-furoic acid (2 electron oxidation), maleic acid (8-electron oxidation), etc.58–60 Sun et al. coupled electrochemical oxidation of furfural to 2-furoic acid with HER in basic medium using Ni2P derived from the Ni foam (Ni2P/Ni/NF) bifunctional electrocatalyst (Fig. 14a).19 The cathodic shift of the catalytic onset potential to 1.34 V vs. RHE upon addition of 30 mM furfural in the electrolyte from 1.41 V indicates thermodynamic favorability of furfural oxidation over water oxidation (Fig. 14b). When Ni2P/Ni/NF is used as the anode and cathode in an electrolyser, separated by an anion exchange membrane for the pure water electrolysis, an input voltage of 1.59 V was required to produce a catalytic current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 14c). However, upon paired electrolysis of furfural oxidation coupled with HER, a 110 mV voltage could be saved and the same current density was obtained at an applied potential of 1.48 V. In various cycles of electrolysis there was 97–99% yield of 2-furoic acid along with unity faradaic efficiency for the cathodic H2 evolution reaction (Fig. 14d).
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of Ni2P/Ni/NF, (b) the cathodic scans of cyclic voltammograms of Ni2P/Ni/NF with (red) and without (black) 30 mM furfural at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH in a 3 electrode system, (c) comparison of the current densities of the Ni2P/Ni/NF couple at 1.50, 1.55, and 1.60 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with (red) and without (black) 30 mM furfural in a 2 electrode electrolyser, (d) GC-measured H2 quantity (red) compared with the calculated H2 quantity (black) based on the charge passed during electrocatalysis with a Ni2P/Ni/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH solution. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2017. 
Hence, the integrated HER and furfural oxidation paired electrolyser shows better efficiency and economic viability relative to those of only water splitting electrolysis with improved voltage return.
Choi et al. reported 8 electron oxidation of furfural to maleic acid on PbO2, MnO2 and Pt anodes in acidic media coupled with HER.61 PbO2 was found to be a better electrocatalyst with a 250 mV decrease in the catalytic onset potential compared to that of overall water splitting. The oxidation proceeds via a 2-furanol intermediate with a 65.1% yield of maleic acid along with current density enhancement. Further optimization of process parameters and catalyst engineering are needed to enhance the selectivity and yield of maleic acid along with current density enhancement.
Overall integrating this biomass derivative transformation with HER not only avoids the generation of reactive oxygen species and explosive hydrogen/oxygen mixture but is also a value addition to the electrolysers with lower voltage input and maximization of energy conversion efficiency. Table 1 lists the electrochemical performance of various electrocatalysts for paired electrolysis coupling biomass derivative oxidation with HER.
Table 1 Comparison of electrocatalytic activity towards biomass derivative oxidation for recently reported electrocatalysts in paired electrochemical processes




Electrode
Electrolyte

E
on (V vs. RHE)
Current density (mA cm−2)
HMF conversion
FE (%)
Ref.




Ni Fe LDH/CF
10 mM HMF/1 M KOH
1.25 V (3)
20@1.32 V vs. RHE
99%, 1.23 V vs. RHE
99.4 FDCA

54



Co–P/CF
50 mM HMF/1 M KOH
1.30 V (3)
20@1.44 V vs. RHE
∼90% 1.44 V vs. RHE
∼90 FDCA, 100 H2

49



Ni3S2/NF
10 mM HMF/1 M KOH
1.40 V (2), 1.35 V (3)
20@1.52 V, 100 @1.64 V
∼100, 1.423 V vs. RHE
∼98 FDCA, 100 H2

55



CoB/NF
10 mM HMF/1 M KOH
∼1.3 V (3)
55@1.45 V
∼100%, 1.45 V vs. RHE
∼100 FDCA

22



CuxS@Ni0.75Co2.5OmHn
10 mM HMF/1 M KOH
1.23 V (3)
80@1.4 V vs. RHE, 180.6@1.35 V vs. RHE, 100, 1.58 V (2)
∼99%, 1.32 V vs. RHE
∼99, FDCA, ∼100 H2

43



BiVO4, photo-electrochemical
5 mM HMF, 0.5 M borate buffer, 7.5 mM TEMPO
0.32 V (3)
—
≥99%, 1.04 V vs. RHE
≥93, FDCA

18



BiVO4/CoPi-30, photo-electrochemical
5 mM HMF, 0.5 M borate buffer, 5 mM TEMPO
—
—
88%, 0.64 V vs. RHE
—

23



Ni oxide/hydroxides
5 mM HMF, 1 M NaOH
—
1.6 V vs. RHE
∼71, 1.6 V
84%

76



Ni2P/Ni/NF
30 mM furfural, 1 M KOH
1.34 V (3), 1.4 V (2)
200, 1.41 V vs. RHE (3), 190, 1.6 V (2)
100%, 1.5 V (2)
100% H2, 98% furoic acid

19



PbO2
pH 1 H2SO4, 10 mM furfural
1.60 V (3)
—
100%, 2 V vs. RHE
65.1% maleic acid

61





4. Electrochemical reduction of CO2 coupled with the alternative oxidation reaction
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 is a useful tool to transform this greenhouse gas into a large spectrum of value-added products such as synthesis gas (CO + H2) or cyclic carbonates; fuels such as methane, methanol, and formic acid – the last two products can be used in fuel cells; and other products containing C2 or C3 hydrocarbons.62–67 In the last few decades, the research on electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 (EC-CO2R) has been markedly increased due to the concern of the scientific community regarding climate change. Integration of renewable energies, whether solar or wind, in this process makes EC-CO2R more sustainable. However, the energy cost of this process remains high to be fully adopted by the large producers of CO2 (CO2 recycling), such as thermoelectric, steel and cement industries.
In this scenario, paired electrolysis methodology becomes attractive as the cell potential decreases by incorporating an anodic process of lower energetic value than OER. Moreover, this methodology is useful to re-enforce the concepts of a circular economy where, for example, fuel would be obtained in the cathodic process and an organic compound in the anodic process. This part of the review will emphasize the oxidation of organic compounds in the anode compartment coupled with CO2 reduction, leaving only the latest advances in the electro-carboxylation process as it is a convergent paired electrolysis process, out of the scope of this review. A more comprehensive account of electro-carboxylation can be found elsewhere.68–71
Kubiak, Moeller et al. described an example where the anodic synthesis of benzimidazole derivatives was paired with the cathodic production of carbon monoxide from electrochemical reduction of CO2 in an H-type cell with shared headspace where anode and cathode compartments were separated by a fine glass frit.20 The anodic process utilized a Ce(IV/III) mediator to facilitate the oxidative condensation between syringaldehyde derived from lignin sawdust and 2-amino aniline to obtain 2-(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)-benzimidazole. In the cathodic compartment, a rhenium polypyridine complex [Re(4,4′-ditert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine)(CO)3Cl] was employed to reduce CO2 to CO. It is worth mentioning that this reaction was carried out in an acetonitrile:tetrahydrofuran:methanol (8:3:1) mixed solvent system containing 0.8 M Et4NBF4 as the supporting electrolyte. The FE for CO2 reduction to CO was close to 100% and the yield for the production of benzimidazole was 65%. This cell was subsequently connected to a commercial photovoltaic cell demonstrating that its operation can be carried out in real conditions using renewable power input.
The EC-CO2R paired with ethanol oxidation was investigated in a Membrane Electrode Assembly (MEA) configuration consisting of a Tokuyama A-201 anion exchange-membrane sandwiched between two catalyst-coated electrodes – copper phthalocyanine on the gas diffusion electrode as the cathode and nanostructured Pd@Tiweb as the anode.72 This paired electrolysis system has been proposed by Bevilacqua and coworkers as a part of the research involving the design of a new kind of electrolyser – depolarised anode alkaline membrane CO2 electrolyser (DAAM-CE), which is a combination of the direct alcohol fuel cell and a polymer electrolyser for H2 production (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of different alcohol-fueled electrochemical devices: (a) direct alcohol fuel cell (DAFC), (b) polymer electrolyser (PME), (c) modified polymer electrolyser for CO2 conversion. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014. 
The authors compared the cell voltage between two configurations of DAAM-CE; in one configuration OER was chosen for the anodic half-reaction of EC-CO2R, where a classical Ni anode was used. In another configuration, ethanol oxidation replaced OER, where the Pd@Tiweb anode was used keeping all other conditions similar. Upon replacing OER with ethanol oxidation, there was an appreciable decrease in the cell potential to ∼1.65 V with a current density of about 12.5 mA cm−2. On the other hand, in DAAM-CE with OER, the initial cell potential of 2.7 V increased to 4 V with the progress of the experiment. This led to a net reduction in energy input from 130 to 77 kW h kg−1 of a hydrocarbon produced compared to that of the cell operating with OER, which can decrease the installation cost of the paired electrolyser. The major product in the cathode compartment was hydrogen (FE = 88.6%) along with hydrocarbons such as CH4 (FE = 7.7%), C2H4, and HCOOH, and the product in the anode compartment was CH3COO−.
In another report, EC-CO2 reduction to CO was paired with alcohol oxidation in a dual compartment cell separated by a Nafion membrane.73 This electrolyser used Cu2In on the Ti substrate as the cathode and a platinum mesh as the anode and 0.5 M NaHCO3 solution as the electrolyte for both redox reaction. Four different alcohols (0.25 mmol) involving structural characteristics such as benzylic/aliphatic and primary/secondary, 4-methoxybenzylalcohol, 1-phenyl ethanol, and ethanol, isopropanol, were added to the anodic compartment. The electrochemical oxidation was mediated by TEMPO. In the optimized conditions, Cu2In working at a current density of 3.7 mA cm−2 gave a FE of >70% for CO production. The yield of the corresponding alcohol oxidation in the anode compartment on the platinum anode was >75%. However, the authors did not clarify the product distribution in this alcohol conversion process, leaving an unexplored field in terms of selectivity and separation technologies for this kind of organic substrates.
In an attempt to carry out carbon dioxide reduction to formic acid coupled with wastewater treatment in a paired electrolysis configuration, Scialdone et al. used a tin cathode and a boron-doped diamond anode to oxidize aqueous Acid Orange 7 (AO7) as a model molecule in a dual compartment electrolysis cell separated by a Nafion 117 membrane.74 The effect of various process parameters such as current density, mixing rate, and pH of the electrolyte (0.1 M Na2SO4 in aqueous H2SO4) on both CO2 reduction and wastewater treatment was investigated. The paired electrolysis was performed at 110 mA current intensity (corresponding to current density 24 mA cm−2) in the electrolyte having pH = 4. This resulted in a complete diminution of the Total Organic Content (TOC) in the anodic chamber combined with the production of 24 mM formic acid at the cathode, having ∼40% current efficiency for the generation of formic acid (CEFA) in 120 minutes. Application of a current intensity of about 80 mA (18 mA cm−2) led to the best condition for the production of formic acid (concentration 45 mM, CEFA 55%, in 240 minutes), but the TOC was lower (∼50%) at this current value. The best pH condition for formic acid production was found to be 4 and that for AO7 degradation was between 3 and 7.
The EC-CO2 reduction to CO paired with the electro-oxidation of 1,2-propanediol to lactic acid has been recently reported by Goetheer and co-workers.75 The system worked in a flow regime, where a gold plate or gold nanoparticles on carbon cloth were used as the cathode, the carbon felt as the anode and 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution as the electrolyte. The anode and cathode compartments were separated by an AEM. The anodic oxidation of 1,2-propanediol was performed using 4-acetamido-(2,2′,6,6′-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxidanyl as a mediator (a TEMPO derivative). The authors demonstrated that replacing oxygen evolution anodic half-reaction by alcohol oxidation decreases energy consumption by ∼35%, increases the total product value of the system, and results in a combined FE of up to 160% (summation of the faradaic efficiency for cathodic and anodic processes) when compared to the CO2 reduction reaction in which oxygen is formed at the anode. A preliminary economic evaluation of this methodology was performed by analyzing OPEX (operational expenditure) and CAPEX (capital expenditure) cost indicators (Fig. 16). According to this analysis, the amount of energy needed to produce 1 kg of CO in a non-paired electrolysis regime is 1.5 times higher than the energy consumption per kilogram of CO produced in the paired electrolysis process. This difference is mainly because the cell voltage required to carry out the paired electrolysis (with alcohol oxidation) is 1.4 V lower than that of the non-paired process (with OER). A decrease in the OPEX indicator also established that the product value is more by 1500 € per ton when lactic acid is obtained instead of oxygen (under non-pressure conditions) at the anode. In terms of CAPEX, the Pt electrodes which are used commonly in the OER process instead of carbon felt increase the capital expenditure in the value of the anode by 1000 € per m2 of used catalytic surface. The other component is the membrane where the use of AEM, used in the paired process, is half cheaper than the non-paired process that commonly uses PEM. This shows that paired electrolysis using alcohol oxidation instead of OER is more favourable in terms of CAPEX and OPEX parameters and hence can be commercialized.
 Fig. 16  Technoeconomical comparison of paired and nonpaired electrolysis. (a) Energy consumption per kg of CO produced, (b) product value per kW h of CO (green) and lactic acid minus the cost of the reactant 1,2-propanediol (blue), (c) CAPEX cost per kg of CO depending on the anode material used (platinum in green and carbon felt in red) as a function of the current density, (d) CAPEX cost per kg of CO depending on the exchange membrane used (cation exchange membrane in green and anion exchange membrane in red). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
To conclude this part of the review, an interesting work by Kenis et al. on co-electrolysis of glycerol and CO2 in a microflow electrolyser using the aqueous KOH electrolyte along with its technical-economic analysis is cited.76 Glycerol was chosen because it is a cheap byproduct of the biodiesel and soap industry. The electro-oxidation of glycerol on a platinum black-coated GDL anode paired with the electroreduction of CO2 on a silver nanoparticle-coated GDL cathode showed a significant decrease (anodic shift) in the onset cell potential from −1.6 V for OER to −0.75 V for glycerol oxidation. Further, a higher partial current density of CO production jCO = 88.44 mA cm−2 with production rate = 0.462 kg CO m2 h−1 at a cell potential of −1.5 V was obtained for the glycerol oxidation coupled CO2 reduction electrolysis process. This satisfies the Vmax(CO2emission) criteria for several process conditions listed in Table 1 of the same paper, unlike using OER at a cell potential of −1.6 V as anodic half-reaction for EC-CO2R. The authors also used different cathodes under similar conditions to evaluate electro-reduction of CO2 to other reduction products such as HCOO− (Sn coated GDL as the cathode), C2H4 and C2H5OH (copper coated GDL as the cathode) (Fig. 17). In these electrolysers an IrO2 anode was used for OER to compare the electrocatalytic activity. A similar lowering of the onset cell potential was observed for the co-electrolysis process using glycerol oxidation at the anode; electroreduction of CO2 to HCOO− showed an onset cell potential of −0.9 V compared to −1.75 V with anodic OER, and for generation of C2H4 and C2H5OH an onset cell potential of −0.95 and −1.3 V was observed, respectively, compared to that of −1.8 and −2.1 V, respectively, with anodic OER. This also improved the process economics by fulfilling the Vmax(gross margin) criteria at realistic electricity prices of US$ 0.04 and US$ 0.06 kW h−1. Further economic analysis presented by the authors explains that co-electrolysis with glycerol is a thermodynamically and economically viable alternative, lowering the cost of electricity consumed by 53%. However, they also establish that the amount of glycerol produced worldwide is not equivalent to the amount of CO2 emitted, so this particular methodology would only transform only 0.1% of the CO2 released worldwide. The authors emphasize the need to conduct further extensive research in this area, considering the co-electrolysis of CO2 and glycerol as a model to improve the economic viability and thermodynamic feasibility of the EC-CO2R process.
 Fig. 17  Electrochemical performances for the electroreduction of CO2 to HCOO− on tin, and C2H4 and C2H5OH on copper, coupled to O2 evolution or glycerol electro-oxidation at the anode. jHCOO− (a), jC2H4 (b) and jC2H5OH (c) as a function of cell potential for the electroreduction of CO2 on 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 tin or copper nanoparticle-coated GDL cathodes. The anode was a 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 IrO2-coated GDL electrode for O2 evolution and a 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 platinum black-coated GDL electrode for glycerol electro-oxidation. The catholyte was 2.0 M KOH. The analyte was 2.0 M KOH for O2 evolution and 2.0 M KOH + 2.0 M glycerol for glycerol electro-oxidation. All data were collected under ambient conditions of 1 atm and 293 K. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Oh and Lee et al. conducted detailed technoeconomic analysis for paired electrolysis by coupling carbon dioxide reduction with organic oxidation reactions (OOR).77 They performed an economic feasibility study across 295 electrochemical paired electrolysis processes in a proton exchange membrane (PEM)-type electrolyser with 16 cathodic reduction (all CO2 and H+ reduction) and 18 anodic OOR. For this, they also presented a superstructure which includes every process design of pairing CO2 reduction and OOR along with product separation, and recycling options. They concluded that coupling the CO2 reduction process which leads to the production of formic acid, n-propanol, acetaldehyde, allyl alcohol, glycolaldehyde, and ethylene glycol with alternative anodic oxidation reactions such as oxidation of biomass or its derivatives to FDCA, 2-furoic acid and with other OOR that leads to the formation of ethyl acetate, lactic acid, formic acid, glycolic acid, and oxalic acid, are excellent candidates at both wide range and limited range of technology levels (i.e., FE, current density, and overpotential). A more detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this review and can be found in this paper which is discussed above.77
5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we have summarized all the recent advances in the development of divergent paired electrolysis processes and a very brief techno-economic analysis of the paired electrochemical CO2 reduction process. This hybrid process replaces the sluggish anodic OER in (photo)electrochemical H2O/CO2 reduction with thermodynamically more favorable and higher product value electro-organic synthesis/oxidation (alcohol, amine and urea oxidation), biomass up-gradation and wastewater treatment. This co-electrolysis process not only avoids the generation of ROS and the explosive hydrogen/oxygen mixture but is also a value addition to the electrolysers with lower voltage input and maximization of energy conversion efficiency. In the case of micro-flow electrolysers performing paired electrolysis, there was a 48.6% drop in cell voltage and hence a 53% decrease in input power consumption, which makes this industrially more viable than conventional electrolysis processes.
However, it should be noted that the paired electrolysis process is at its infancy of technological development and industrial integration. Several critical challenges in the development of stable electrocatalysts, efficient electrolysers, product selectivity, separation-isolation of mediators and detailed investigation of anodic reaction mechanisms are still needed to be addressed. Further research is needed for its commercialization. Future research on paired electrolysis should focus on the following important aspects.
Development of stable electrocatalysts
Earth-abundant and stable electrocatalysts need to be developed by cost-effective synthesis methods for commercialization of the paired electrolysers. Recent research in catalyst development has demonstrated some bifunctional electrocatalysts made from earth-abundant non-noble elements like Ni, Co, Fe, etc. However, more efforts are still needed to make their performance competitive with the existing state-of-the-art electrocatalysts like Pt and IrO2. Most of the anodic oxidation reactions are performed using highly concentrated alkali solutions to minimize ionic losses and for ease of oxidation. These stringent conditions are detrimental to catalyst stability in long term operation due to the slow dissolution of the catalysts. Further, some important platform chemicals such as maleic acid from biomass derivatives require acidic media. Thus, the exploration of efficient earth-abundant electrocatalysts which show stability and high catalytic performance at all pH is needed.
Product selectivity, separation, and purification
Alternative anodic oxidation reactions reported till now have focused on three potentially high-value classes of reactions: (i) alcohol, amine, urea oxidation, (ii) biomass upgrading and (iii) electro-organic coupling of hydrocarbon compounds. Despite the most researched alternative oxidation reactions, the alcohol oxidation in tandem with HER or CO2 reduction is still in the early stage and currently far from being economically competitive with petroleum-derived hydrogen on an industrial scale. In some cases, the separation and purification of the as-synthesized product from the electrolytes requires complicated procedures and high-cost techniques. Further development of optimal reaction conditions to tackle the problem of product selectivity and purification in complex alcohol oxidation is needed to completely realize its commercialization. Alternatively, electrochemical C–H activation of hydrocarbon feedstocks can be further investigated for functionalizing them into various oxygenated platform molecules.
Improvement in the photo-electro-oxidation of organic substrates is required to address the scale-up challenges of these hybrid photo-electrolysers concerning the development of stable, high light-absorbing photoanodes that can generate high photocurrent densities. Another problem in these cells is the use of higher concentration (equimolar with substrate concentration) of mediators which are also organic compounds. The isolation and separation of mediators are very challenging when these photo-electro-oxidation processes are scaled-up. The use of inorganic metal complexes containing multivalent metal ions instead of organic mediators may solve this problem to some extent.
Mechanism investigation
A comprehensive understanding of electrochemical oxidation along with the change/reconstruction of the catalytic surface during the electrochemical process at both cathode and anode needs to be achieved by operando techniques. The change in the composition and coordination number of the metal atom of the electrocatalyst needs to be investigated by spectroelectrochemistry techniques to understand the nature and structure of the active site and adsorption/desorption of reaction intermediates. Modern advanced in situ techniques such as operando FTIR, Raman, XRD, XPS, and Differential Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry can be used to investigate the detailed electro-oxidation mechanism and change in catalyst surface. The results from these in situ experiments can guide in the design of efficient electrocatalysts, finding suitable electrolytes and application of optimum potential or current density for these paired electrochemical reactions.
Designing advanced micro-flow electrolysers
Most of these alternative oxidation reactions and paired electrolysis are still in the stage of bench-top scale laboratory research using dual-compartment cells. Intensifying the paired process toward an industrial scale needs higher production rates, either by simply increasing the total area of the electrocatalyst coated electrode in the hybrid electrolyser or by increasing the reaction rate (current density) for a given area of the catalyst leading to large scale production of the order of >100 tons product per day. The only way forward is increasing current densities to those needed for commercial operation (e.g., >200 mA cm−2) as electrode areas cannot be increased beyond a certain limit. This requires the use of hybrid electrolysers in the microflow cell design that can supply enough substrate to the catalyst layer for the progress of the reaction without mass transport limitation, as opposed to traditional H-cell reactors. For these reasons, more and more researchers have begun using catalyst-coated gas-diffusion layers (GDLs), where high concentrations of the substrate can be maintained close to the catalyst layer even at high reaction rates using a sustained electrolyte flow with the help of a peristaltic pump. GDLs stabilized the triple-phase boundary between the solid catalyst–liquid electrolyte and CO2 gas in the case of EC-CO2R which helps in reducing the overall cell potential by directly improving catalytic activity. Therefore, the rational design of micro-flow cell reactors and optimizing the cell parameters such as the ratio between electrode area and electrolyte flow can lead to higher productivity in the paired electrolysis process.
In conclusion, we recommend the integration of paired electrolysis within the existing electrolyser infrastructure, by replacing OER with biomass derivatives and alcohol oxidation which can be performed with a little more optimization of process parameters. Technological advances and accelerated research in the paired electrolysis process can make this new approach much more affordable than conventional electrolysers. This will encourage distributed and centralized production of fuels and chemicals using new hybrid electrolysers operated by renewable energy power input from the societal and environmental standpoints.
Author contributions
KKN conceptualized the review content, contributed to the writing of the biomass upgrading coupled HER part and supervised the preparation of the manuscript. NPM contributed to the writing of the electro-organic synthesis/transformation coupled with HER and M. I. contributed to the writing of EC-CO2R coupled with alternative oxidation reactions. The manuscript is revised and finalized with input from all other co-authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support of Comisión Nacional de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica and Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico, FONDECYT POSTDOCTORADO-3190310 (KKN) CONICYT Doctoral Fellowships 21140356 (NPM), FONDECYT REGULAR 1181226 (MI).
Notes and references
I. Vincent and D. Bessarabov, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1690–1704 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hernández, M. Amin Farkhondehfal, F. Sastre, M. Makkee, G. Saracco and N. Russo, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2326–2346 RSC .
J. Eppinger and K.-W. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
T. Li, T. Kasahara, J. He, K. E. Dettelbach, G. M. Sammis and C. P. Berlinguette, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 390 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Chen, A. Lavacchi, H. A. Miller, M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, M. Innocenti, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser, L. Wang and F. Vizza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and B. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3214–3226 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Reid, T. Li, Y. Cao and C. P. Berlinguette, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1905–1927 RSC .
B. You, G. Han and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5943–5955 RSC .

          N. Aust and A. Kirste, Encyclopedia of Applied Electrochemistry, ed. G. Kreysa, K. Ota and R. F. Savinell, Springer, New York, NY,  2014, pp. 1505–1510 Search PubMed .
J. G. Ibanez, B. A. Frontana-Uribe and R. Vasquez-Medrano, J. Mex. Chem. Soc., 2016, 60, 247–260 CAS .
T. Wu, B. H. Nguyen, M. C. Daugherty and K. D. Moeller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3562–3565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, X. Liu, J. Dong, B. You, X. Liu and Y. Sun, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Llorente, B. H. Nguyen, C. P. Kubiak and K. D. Moeller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15110–15113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weidner, S. Barwe, K. Sliozberg, S. Piontek, J. Masa, U. P. Apfel and W. Schuhmann, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2018, 14, 1436–1445 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Chadderdon, L.-P. Wu, Z. A. McGraw, M. Panthani and W. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3387–3392 CrossRef CAS .
R. Francke and R. D. Little, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2492–2521 RSC .
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya, K. Ocakoglu and R. van de Krol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10426–10437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802877 CrossRef .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Xing, X. Meng, J. Zeng, S. Yin, X. Li and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9319–9326 RSC .
G. Liu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao, Q. Xiong, W. Gong, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6381–6388 RSC .
B. You, X. Liu, X. Liu and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4564–4570 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoshida, K. Kataoka, R. Horcajada and A. Nagaki, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2265–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, P. Wang, S. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, H. Zhang and A. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2796 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-F. Chen, Y. Luo, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 526–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, X. Chen, X. Zhong, S. Li, T. Liu, G. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Deng, D. Mei and J.-G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704169 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, L. Dai, Q. Qin, F. Pei, C. Hu and N. Zheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1602970 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, X. Liu and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4564–4570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, B. Wu, H. He, C. Fu, J. Wang, K. Liu, G. Ke and Y. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, H662–H668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Chong, C. Liu, Y. Liang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13163–13166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, P. Chen, M. Zhang, T. Zhou, L. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1–7 CrossRef .
T. I. Singh, G. Rajeshkhanna, S. B. Singh, T. Kshetri, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4810–4823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, G. Zhang, J. Qu and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10297–10303 RSC .
C. Tang, R. Zhang, W. Lu, Z. Wang, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 842–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Tian, Y. Yan, Q. Xue, T. He, H. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Chen and B. Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7649–7653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vitse, M. Cooper and G. G. Botte, J. Power Sources, 2005, 142, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Koo, X. Chen, K. Cho, T. An and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 9926–9936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, A. Liao, W. Guo, W. Luo, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Nano Today, 2019, 28, 100763 CrossRef .
B. E. Dale, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2003, 78, 1093–1103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zirbes and S. R. Waldvogel, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2018, 14, 19–25 CrossRef .
N. Jiang, B. You, R. Boonstra, I. M. Terrero Rodriguez and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 386–390 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kuehnel and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3290–3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, M. W. Nolte and B. H. Shanks, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 548–572 RSC .

          T. Werpy and G. Petersen, Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: Volume I - Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas, USA,  2004 Search PubMed .
X. Deng, X. Kang, M. Li, K. Xiang, C. Wang, Z. Guo, J. Zhang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1138–1146 RSC .
W.-J. Liu, L. Dang, Z. Xu, H.-Q. Yu, S. Jin and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5533–5541 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, X. Liu, N. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13639–13646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fleischmann, K. Korinek and D. Pletcher, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 31, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681–7688 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wojcieszak, F. Santarelli, S. Paul, F. Dumeignil, F. Cavani and R. V. Gonçalves, Sustainable Chem. Processes, 2015, 3, 9 CrossRef .
R. Mariscal, P. Maireles-Torres, M. Ojeda, I. Sádaba and M. López Granados, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1144–1189 RSC .
A. Halasa, L. Lapinski, I. Reva, H. Rostkowska, R. Fausto and M. J. Nowak, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 1037–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kubota and K.-S. Choi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9596–9600 CrossRef CAS .
K. Calfumán, J. Honores, D. Guzmán, M. Ohlbaum, F. Armijo, R. Del Río and M. Isaacs, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 3314–3321 CrossRef .
P. Dreyse, J. Honores, D. Quezada and M. Isaacs, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3897–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guzmán, M. Isaacs, I. Osorio-Román, M. García, J. Astudillo and M. Ohlbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19865–19869 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Honores, D. Quezada, M. García, K. Calfumán, J. P. Muena, M. J. Aguirre, M. C. Arévalo and M. Isaacs, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1155–1162 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
E. Landaeta, Z. D. Schultz, A. Burgos, R. Schrebler and M. Isaacs, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2356–2364 RSC .
S. Mena, I. Gallardo and G. Guirado, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 413 CrossRef CAS .
H. Senboku and A. Katayama, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2017, 3, 50–54 CrossRef .
H. Senboku, K. Sakai, A. Fukui, Y. Sato and Y. Yamauchi, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4158–4164 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cherubini-Celli, J. Mateos, M. Bonchio, L. Dell’Amico and X. Companyó, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3056–3070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, A. Lavacchi, A. Marchionni, H. A. Miller, W. Oberhauser, E. Vesselli and F. Vizza, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 522–525 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Y. Cao, J. He and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sabatino, A. Galia, G. Saracco and O. Scialdone, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 150–159 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pérez-Gallent, S. Turk, R. Latsuzbaia, R. Bhardwaj, A. Anastasopol, F. Sastre-Calabuig, A. C. Garcia, E. Giling and E. Goetheer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 6195–6202 CrossRef .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
Table Content:

Natalia P. Martínez
	Dr Natalia P. Martínez received her BS degree in Chemistry from Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana in 2013. In 2019, she received her PhD degree in Chemistry under the supervision of Professor Mauricio Isaacs from Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. At present, she is pursuing her postdoctoral studies in the same research group. Her research interest is focused on hybrid materials based on earth-abundant coordination compounds for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical transformation of small molecules.

Mauricio Isaacs
	Prof. Mauricio Isaacs received a BS degree in Chemistry from Universidad de Santiago de Chile in 1996. He then pursued graduate studies in the same university with Prof. Juan Costamagna and Maria Jesus Aguirre, working in electrochemical activation of carbon dioxide by macrocyclic complexes receiving his PhD degree in 2002. Subsequently, he joined the group of Prof. Silvia Ronco at University of South Dakota, USA, for postdoctoral studies. In 2004, he joined Universidad de Chile as Assistant Professor. He moved to Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile in 2011 where he is a Full Professor now. His main research interests are focused on the electrochemistry of carbon dioxide and its activation on metallic nanostructured electrodes and its related electrochemistry in ionic liquids.

Kamala Kanta Nanda
	Dr Kamala Kanta Nanda received both his BS degree (2007) and MSc degree (2009) in Chemistry from Utkal University, India. He received his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yatendra S. Chaudhary from Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, New Delhi, India. He then pursued a postdoctoral research in Prof. Srinivasan Sampath's research group at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Subsequently, he started his independent research career as a FONDECYT postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Mauricio Isaacs’ research group at Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. His research interest includes (photo)electrochemical energy conversion and biomass upgrading.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of water electrolysis: (a) electrochemical cell with a metal anode, (b) semiconductor–electrolyte interface before equilibrium, (c) semiconductor–electrolyte interface after equilibrium, (d) photoelectrochemical water splitting upon illumination; Ec = conduction band edge, Ev = valence band edge, EF = Fermi level, Eapp = applied potential, Eph = photovoltage, W = depletion region,  = redox potential of H2O or the electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of (a) the electrochemical H-cell,1 (b) the flow cell reactor.2 1Copyright 2018, ref. 54, American Chemical Society. 2Copyright 2018, ref. 22, Beilstein-Institut.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  General principle of indirect electrolysis using a mediator.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation and the principle of determining potentials: (a) three-electrode system, (b) two-electrode system.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of hp-Ni at different magnifications, (b) linear sweep voltammograms of hp-Ni at 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH containing 0 and 10 mM benzyl alcohol (BA), (c) conversion or yield (%) dependence of BA and its oxidation products on the charge passed during electrochemical oxidation at 1.423 V vs. RHE in 10 mL of 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA (Ph-CHO, benzyl aldehyde; Ph-COOH, benzoic acid), (d) pathway of benzyl alcohol (BA) oxidation to benzoic acid, (e) faradaic efficiency of benzoic acid production for controlled-potential electrolysis with hp-Ni in 10 mL of 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA at 1.423 V vs. RHE under five successive cycles, (f) LSV curves of hp-Ni at 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM BA, 4-methylbenzyl alcohol (MBA), or 4-nitrobenzyl alcohol (NBA), (g) chemical structures of MBA and NBA. Adapted with permission from ACS Catal. 2017, 7, 4564–4570. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of carbon paper, AC, Co/AC, Ni/AC, Co0.83Ni0.17/AC and Pt mesh at a scanning rate of 5.0 mV s−1, (c) and (d) HER durability test for the Co0.83Ni0.17/AC electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH, (e) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (f) GC (gas chromatography) tests of the products after electrocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol by Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at 1.425 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (g) 1H NMR spectra of the products after electrocatalytic oxidation of 10 mM benzyl alcohol by Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at 1.425 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH after passing a charge of 40C, (h) faradaic efficiency of cycling using the same Co0.83Ni0.17/AC in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM benzyl alcohol for each cycle, (i) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC with (black) and without (red) 10 mM benzyl alcohol in 1.0 M KOH solution using a two-electrode system, (j) LSV curves of Co0.83Ni0.17/AC at a scanning rate of 5.0 mV s−1 with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (k) the dependence of H2 generation from water splitting on reaction time in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM benzyl alcohol, (l) the dependence of O2 generation from water splitting on reaction time in 1.0 M KOH without 10 mM benzyl alcohol. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Alcohol oxidation using a continuous-flow set-up. (b) Slow flow rate of electrochemical oxidation of benzyl alcohol (1aa): (i) the amount of 1aa is 2.0 mmol, (ii) the amount of 1aa is 100.0 mmol. (c) Substrate scope of electrochemical oxidation of primary alcohols. Reaction conditions: carbon paper (93 × 93 × 0.2 mm) anode (contact area 1.6 cm2), Ni plate (93 × 93 × 0.3 mm) cathode (contact area 1.6 cm2), constant current = 800 mA, flow rate = 0.10 mL s−1, 10 min, 1a (2.0 mmol), nBu4NBF4 (0.20 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (1:1, 30 mL), N2, room temperature, flow cell (2.49 F mol−1), isolated yield. a10 mA, 10 h. b10 mA, 20 h. (d) Substrate scope of electrochemical oxidation of secondary alcohols. Reaction conditions: carbon paper (93 × 93 × 0.2 mm) anode (contact area 1.6 cm2), Ni plate (93 × 93 × 0.3 mm) cathode (contact area 1.6 cm2), constant current = 800 mA, flow rate = 0.10 mL s−1, 10 min, 1b (2.0 mmol), nBu4NBF4 (0.20 mmol), CH3CN/H2O (1:1, 30 mL), N2, room temperature, flow cell (2.49 F mol−1), isolated yield. a10 mA, 20 h. b10 mA, 10 h. (c) 2be: benzoin used as the starting material. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 and 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP aqueous solution under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. The scan rate was 15 mV s−1. (b) The photocurrent of WO3 film in a 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP electrolyte under chopped illumination at 1.23 V vs. RHE, and the formation amount of 3-PA with the PEC reaction time at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (c) The amount of H2 evolution in two kinds of PEC cells at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (d) Faradaic efficiency of the Pt wire cathode for H2 evolution in two kinds of PEC cells. (e) Faradaic efficiency of the WO3 photoanode for 3-PA synthesis in 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP aqueous solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+. (f) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+ under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. Inset of (f), UV-vis absorbance spectra of 1.5 M H2SO4/6 mM Cr3+ solution before and after PEC reaction. (g) LSV curves for the same WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 2 mM 3-MP–6 mM Cr3+ under illumination with 150 mW cm−2 simulated solar light. Inset of (g), i–t curves of the WO3 film in 1.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with and without 2 mM 3-MP–6 mM Cr3+ under chopped illumination at 1.23 V vs. RHE. (h) The formation amount of 3-PA in 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP solution with and without 6 mM Cr3+. Inset of (h), the conversion, yield, and selectivity data of photoelectrochemical oxidation of 3-MP into 3-PA by the WO3 photoanode in the 1.5 M H2SO4/2 mM 3-MP electrolyte with and without 6 mM Cr3+ after 8 hours of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Electrochemical Society, Inc., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cell potential determination from iR-corrected LSV curves of OER/UOR and HER of FeCo-PBA/NF, FexCo3−xO4/NF, and FexCo2−xP/NF electrode materials at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, (b) LSV curves of FeCo-PBA/NF(+)||FeCo-PBA/NF(−), FexCo3−xO4/NF(+)||FexCo3−xO4/NF(−), and FexCo2−xP/NF(+)||FexCo2−xP/NF(−) electrolysers in comparison with electrolysers constructed from the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts RuO2/NF(+)||Pt/C/NF(−) and RuO2/NF(+)||RuO2/NF(−), and (c) optical image of the FexCo2−xP/NF(+)||FexCo2−xP/NF(−) electrolyser driven by a 1.5 V AAA battery generating O2 and H2 gas bubbles at the anode and cathode in a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014. Wiley and sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) iR-corrected linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel slopes of CoSe2, Pt/C on a Ni substrate, nickel foam substrate, and cobalt precursor, (c) a 50 hour stability test of CoSe2 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, (d) LSV curves before and after a 50 hour stability test. All the experiments were carried out in a 1.0 M KOH solution, (e) H2 evolution and (f) hydrazine oxidation LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 in 1.0 M KOH containing different hydrazine concentrations, (g) LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 and Pt/C for the HER/HzOR couple in 1.0 M KOH with 0.5 M N2H4 solution, (h) a comparison of LSV polarization curves of CoSe2 for water electrolysis with and without hydrazine anodic oxidation assistance, (i) faradaic efficiency of H2 production, (j) a cell stability test based on the CoSe2/CoSe2 couple at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH with 0.5 M hydrazine solution. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014. Wiley and sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Scheme for possible pathways of HMF oxidation, (b) LSV curves of Ni2P NPA/NF at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH with and without HMF in a 3 electrode cell, (c) SEM image of Ni2P NPA/NF, (d) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.423 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with 10 mM HMF, (e) LSV curves in a 2 electrode cell, (f) comparison of the overpotentials to achieve benchmark current densities (10, 20, and 50 mA cm−2) for a Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mM HMF, (g) GC-measured H2 quantity compared with theoretically calculated H2 quantity assuming a 100% faradaic efficiency for H2 evolution catalyzed by a Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH solution with 10 mM HMF, (h) faradaic efficiency of the Ni2P NPA/NF catalyst couple for simultaneous H2 and FDCA generation in 1.0 M KOH solution with 10 mM HMF for three successive electrolysis cycles. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of (a) photoelectrochemical TEMPO-mediated HMF oxidation, (b) electrochemical TEMPO-mediated HMF oxidation. CB, conduction band; EF, Fermi energy, (c) LSVs of an Au electrode obtained in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution (pH 9.2) (black line), a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF (blue line) and a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO (orange line). Scan rate, 10 mV s−1, (d) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.54 V vs. RHE in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO, (e) LSVs of a BiVO4 photoanode obtained under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (orange line) and a Au electrode in the dark (black line) in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution (pH 9.2) containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO. Scan rate, 10 mV s−1, (f) conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during TEMPO-mediated photo-oxidation of HMF at 1.04 V vs. RHE in a 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 13  Transient photocurrent measurements with chopped AM1.5 illumination. (a) LSVs for BiVO4 in the pure electrolyte and the electrolyte with 5.0 mM TEMPO, (b and c) transient photocurrents at 1.04 V vs. RHE for BiVO4 and BiVO4/CoPi-30, respectively. For clarity, the traces in (b) and (c) are offset with respect to time. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission; Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of Ni2P/Ni/NF, (b) the cathodic scans of cyclic voltammograms of Ni2P/Ni/NF with (red) and without (black) 30 mM furfural at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH in a 3 electrode system, (c) comparison of the current densities of the Ni2P/Ni/NF couple at 1.50, 1.55, and 1.60 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH with (red) and without (black) 30 mM furfural in a 2 electrode electrolyser, (d) GC-measured H2 quantity (red) compared with the calculated H2 quantity (black) based on the charge passed during electrocatalysis with a Ni2P/Ni/NF catalyst couple in 1.0 M KOH solution. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2017.	 

Ni Fe LDH/CF	10 mM HMF/1 M KOH	1.25 V (3)	20@1.32 V vs. RHE	99%, 1.23 V vs. RHE	99.4 FDCA	
54

Co–P/CF	50 mM HMF/1 M KOH	1.30 V (3)	20@1.44 V vs. RHE	∼90% 1.44 V vs. RHE	∼90 FDCA, 100 H2	
49

Ni3S2/NF	10 mM HMF/1 M KOH	1.40 V (2), 1.35 V (3)	20@1.52 V, 100 @1.64 V	∼100, 1.423 V vs. RHE	∼98 FDCA, 100 H2	
55

CoB/NF	10 mM HMF/1 M KOH	∼1.3 V (3)	55@1.45 V	∼100%, 1.45 V vs. RHE	∼100 FDCA	
22

CuxS@Ni0.75Co2.5OmHn	10 mM HMF/1 M KOH	1.23 V (3)	80@1.4 V vs. RHE, 180.6@1.35 V vs. RHE, 100, 1.58 V (2)	∼99%, 1.32 V vs. RHE	∼99, FDCA, ∼100 H2	
43

BiVO4, photo-electrochemical	5 mM HMF, 0.5 M borate buffer, 7.5 mM TEMPO	0.32 V (3)	—	≥99%, 1.04 V vs. RHE	≥93, FDCA	
18

BiVO4/CoPi-30, photo-electrochemical	5 mM HMF, 0.5 M borate buffer, 5 mM TEMPO	—	—	88%, 0.64 V vs. RHE	—	
23

Ni oxide/hydroxides	5 mM HMF, 1 M NaOH	—	1.6 V vs. RHE	∼71, 1.6 V	84%	
76

Ni2P/Ni/NF	30 mM furfural, 1 M KOH	1.34 V (3), 1.4 V (2)	200, 1.41 V vs. RHE (3), 190, 1.6 V (2)	100%, 1.5 V (2)	100% H2, 98% furoic acid	
19

PbO2	pH 1 H2SO4, 10 mM furfural	1.60 V (3)	—	100%, 2 V vs. RHE	65.1% maleic acid	
61


 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of different alcohol-fueled electrochemical devices: (a) direct alcohol fuel cell (DAFC), (b) polymer electrolyser (PME), (c) modified polymer electrolyser for CO2 conversion. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from John Wiley and sons, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 16  Technoeconomical comparison of paired and nonpaired electrolysis. (a) Energy consumption per kg of CO produced, (b) product value per kW h of CO (green) and lactic acid minus the cost of the reactant 1,2-propanediol (blue), (c) CAPEX cost per kg of CO depending on the anode material used (platinum in green and carbon felt in red) as a function of the current density, (d) CAPEX cost per kg of CO depending on the exchange membrane used (cation exchange membrane in green and anion exchange membrane in red). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 17  Electrochemical performances for the electroreduction of CO2 to HCOO− on tin, and C2H4 and C2H5OH on copper, coupled to O2 evolution or glycerol electro-oxidation at the anode. jHCOO− (a), jC2H4 (b) and jC2H5OH (c) as a function of cell potential for the electroreduction of CO2 on 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 tin or copper nanoparticle-coated GDL cathodes. The anode was a 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 IrO2-coated GDL electrode for O2 evolution and a 1 ± 0.1 mg cm−2 platinum black-coated GDL electrode for glycerol electro-oxidation. The catholyte was 2.0 M KOH. The analyte was 2.0 M KOH for O2 evolution and 2.0 M KOH + 2.0 M glycerol for glycerol electro-oxidation. All data were collected under ambient conditions of 1 atm and 293 K. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
