Single-crystal N-doped SiC nanochannel array photoanode for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00061E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00061E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3173-3180Single-crystal N-doped SiC nanochannel array photoanode for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Shanliang 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lianfu 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fengmei 
            Gao
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Weiyou 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Institute of Materials, Ningbo University of Technology, Ningbo City, 315016, P. R. China. E-mail: fmgao@163.com; weiyouyang@tsinghua.org.cn;  Fax: +86-574-87081221;   Tel: +86-574-87080966
Received 
      4th January 2019
    , Accepted 20th February 2019First published on 22nd February 2019AbstractWe report, for the first time, the exploration of an efficient photoanode based on an N-doped 4H-SiC nanochannel array for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, which is fabricated through an anodic oxidation approach. The SiC photoanode yields a high photocurrent density of 2.41 mA cm−2 at 1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 1.5G simulated sunlight. Meanwhile, the as-constructed photoanode presents a fast photoresponse and wide photoresponse wavelength range. The high orientation of SiC nanochannel arrays, the single-crystal nature of the whole SiC film and the incorporated N dopants are responsible for the enhanced PEC performance, with the benefits of substantially improving the light capability and extending the optical absorption edges, as well as promoting transport and separation of photoexcited charge carriers.
1. Introduction
The production of hydrogen by utilizing solar water splitting is considered one of the most promising solutions for meeting the growing power demands of our society, through conversion of sustainable solar energy into chemical energy.1–5 Beginning with the ground-breaking work performed by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,6 extensive investigations of stable and highly active catalysts for the PEC splitting of water have been carried out.7 One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures (for instance, nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes) have been widely studied because they are capable of facilitating the charge transfer, by reducing recombination of electron–hole pairs through provision of a direct conduction pathway with regard to the photogenerated electrons.8–10 Nonetheless, 1D nanostructure-based photocatalysts typically suffer from insufficient surface area, numerous interfaces and poor light-harvesting performance. As a result, three-dimensional (3D) nanoarray photoelectrodes have now attracted much attention because of their unique advantages; for instance, extensive surface area, effective charge separation and elevated carrier mobility, which are beneficial for PEC water splitting.5,11–13 Besides the configuration of selected nanostructures, the light absorption ability of the photoelectrode materials is another key factor in designing PEC water splitting systems.14,15 Recently, there has been a lot of work done to expand the light absorption spectrum of wide band semiconductors into the visible region.14,16 Both non-metal doping and dye-sensitization are among the most frequently utilized methodologies.17–19
Of the different semiconductor photocatalysts, SiC is considered to be a good candidate owing to its high chemical stability, high carrier conduction capability, strong thermostability, non-toxicity, etc.20–22 Moreover, SiC has a band gap of about 2.3–3.2 eV, which, theoretically, is expected to be particularly suitable for water splitting owing to the overpotentials for anodic as well as cathodic reactions; in addition, thermodynamic restrictions demand that the energy separation between the excited carriers is higher compared with the theoretical value, amounting to 1.23 eV. Bulk, 1D nanostructures, films, composite structures, as well as various polytypes of SiC have been investigated as the photoelectrode for PEC water splitting.22,23 For instance, investigation of the photoelectrochemical behavior of 4H-, 6H-, and 3C-SiC was carried out for a self-driven water splitting cell, and confirmed that these polytypes were capable of splitting water, and the photocurrents of the epitaxially grown samples were observed as being larger compared with the bulk samples.24 The Pd-treated p-type 4H-SiC electrode generated a current density peak and stabilized at −0.16 mA cm−1 within 33 min in 0.3 M KOH.23 The Ni/Ni–Mo dual-catalyst coated amorphous SiC composite manifested a photocurrent density of about −14 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in 1 M KOH.25 Nevertheless, regardless of the advances made in using SiC photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting, several important problems still need to be addressed.
(i) Fabrication of photoelectrodes based on large-scale and highly ordered SiC nanoarrays, which is crucially important and extremely desirable for realizing high-performance PEC electrodes.
(ii) Photoelectrodes established with single-crystalline SiC nanostructures with perfect structure and negligible defects.
(iii) Exploration of innovative SiC photoanodes.
To the best of our knowledge, the majority of reported SiC electrodes have focused on photocathodes,20,21,23,26,27 and few studies, so far, have shed light on SiC nanostructured photoanodes.28
In this communication, we report the exploration of N-doped SiC nanochannel arrays with high order and single-crystalline nature, which were fabricated by the anodic oxidation process at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, with the aim of synergistically improving the orientation, crystalline nature, surface characteristics as well as doping to offer a SiC nanostructured photoanode with excellent PEC water splitting performance. The etched SiC nanoarray film was detached and transferred onto the indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate for fabrication of the SiC photoanode. Interestingly, the as-constructed SiC nanoarray photoelectrode presented a high photocurrent density of ∼2.41 mA cm−2, fast photoresponse, as well as wide range of spectrum response. Our findings are likely to provide assistance in designing excellent SiC photoelectrodes for further improving their PEC water splitting performance.
2. Experimental procedures
2.1 Fabrication of SiC nanochannel arrays by electrochemical anodic oxidation process
N-Doped 4H-SiC(0001) wafers (Taiyuan Yixing Technology Co., Ltd, Taiyuan, China) were utilized as the raw material, and were cut into small sheets of 0.5 × 1.5 cm2. These small SiC sheets were washed by ultrasonic treatment in acetone, ethanol and deionized water for 15 min, respectively, then immersed into a solution of 1:1 (volume ratio) HF (40% purity):C2H5OH (99% purity) to eliminate oxides. Preparation of 4H-SiC nanoarrays was performed in an open Teflon cell though the anodic oxidation process. HF (≥40%, AR), C2H5OH (99%, AR) and H2O2 (30%, AR) with a volume ratio of 6:6:1 was used as the etching solution. The graphite wafer and small SiC sheet were employed as the cathode and anode, respectively, with a distance of 2 cm. Etching was executed in potentiostatic mode. The pulsed voltage was preset at 17 V with a cycle time of 0.8 s (T) and a pause time of 0.4 s (Toff). In addition, a constant voltage (17 V) was applied to make the etched nanostructure array fall away from the SiC sheet naturally, without any external force.
2.2 Preparation of SiC nanoarray photoelectrode
The SiC photoelectrode was established by attaching the etched SiC film onto the ITO substrate. The conductive silver paste film was primarily spun onto the conductive surface of the ITO, then the epoxy resin adhesive was painted around the silver paste. Next, the etched SiC film was attached on top of the conductive silver paste and epoxy resin adhesive.
2.3 Characterization and measurement
The samples obtained were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, S-4800, Hitachi, Japan), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100F, JEOL, Japan), X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, AXIS ULTRA DLD, Japan) with the help of 150 W Al-Kα radiation.
Evaluation of the PEC performance of the electrode was performed in a three-electrode configuration. The 1 M Na2SO4 solution (pH buffered to ∼6.8) was employed as the electrolyte. The reference electrode was Ag/AgCl; in addition, a Pt sheet was utilized as the counter electrode. The experiments were carried out using a 150 W Xe lamp with an AM1.5 filter, and the illumination intensity near the photoelectrode facade was almost 100 mW cm−2. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was recorded with the help of an electrochemical analyser (CHI 760e Instruments). The impedance versus frequency spectrum was executed at the open circuit potential over the frequency range from 10000 kHz to 0.1 Hz. Measurement of the incident photo to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was carried out under illumination at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl with respect to a calibrated silicon diode.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows the SEM image of the obtained SiC nanostructures under low magnification, and suggests that the large-scale SiC nanostructure is homogeneously distributed on the whole wafer. Besides, the etched film with established SiC nanostructures could be exfoliated from the original SiC sheets without structure damage and the area could be up to ∼0.5 cm2, as shown in the inset in Fig. 1(a). Furthermore, the exfoliated film presented high transparency, which would contribute to the PEC water splitting. Close observation of the resultant SiC nanostructures under high magnification is also shown, in Fig. 1(b) and (c), and clearly reveals that large-scale preparation of uniform nanochannel arrays with well-defined structures has been completed. Moreover, the average wall thickness of the nanochannel is typically ∼15 nm, which is expected to allow convenient charge transfer to the electrode/electrolyte interface, wherein oxidation of water molecules takes place, owing to the short transmission distance. Fig. 1(d) presents a typical cross-sectional SEM image, where it seems that the nanochannels are vertical to the surface of the etched film, further indicating the fabrication of highly oriented nanoarrays. The mean length of the SiC nanoarrays is typically ∼17 μm. Fig. 1(e) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the product under high magnification for clearer observation of the morphology and microstructures of the wall surface. It illustrates that the wall of the nanochannels possesses a gourd-shaped morphology with a regular undulating surface. In comparison with walls having smooth surfaces, these novel nanoarrays with this fascinating wall surface could provide a large surface area, and possibly contribute to PEC water splitting as a result increased interface with the electrolyte that benefits light harvesting. Furthermore, as evident from the enlarged SEM image in Fig. 1(e), it can be clearly observed that all the nanochannels are open, without interruption. This unique configuration of SiC nanochannel arrays with large surface area and penetrative channels is capable of facilitating the electrolyte poured into the whole nanochannels and providing a large reaction surface between the electrolyte and SiC nanoarrays, which is significant for improving the efficiency of PEC water splitting. Fig. 1(f) shows a typical TEM image of a part of the wall of the nanochannel under low magnification, further confirming the gourd-shape of the wall surface, which is in agreement with the SEM observations (Fig. 1(e)). Fig. 1(g) shows the typical HRTEM image recorded from the marked area (A) in Fig. 1(f), and reveals the perfect structure without defects. Moreover, the oxide layer around the wall surface could be disregarded. The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (see inset in Fig. 1(g)) is identical over the entire wall, making it clear that the nanochannel still has a single-crystalline nature even after the anodic oxidation approach.
 Fig. 1  (a–c) Top-view SEM images of SiC nanoarrays under different magnifications. Inset in (a) is the digital photo of the etched film exfoliated from the SiC wafer substrate. (d and e) Cross-sectional SEM images under different magnifications. (f) Typical TEM image of a part of the wall of the SiC nanoarray. (g) The corresponding HRTEM image of the wall body. Inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern. 
To further confirm the chemical and phase composition of the product attained, investigation of the etched nanoarray film was carried out with the help of XPS and XRD. XPS spectra recorded from the N-doped SiC nanoarray demonstrate that it mainly consists of Si, C, N and O, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The O peak is mainly from the oxygen absorbed on the wall surfaces of the SiC nanoarray. The binding energies of the XPS spectra are standardized for the specimen charging by utilizing C 1s energy at 284.6 eV as the reference. Two typical peaks at binding energies of ∼100.4 and 101.1 eV are recorded in the XPS spectrum of Si 2p, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In general, the peak at 100.4 eV is assigned to the Si–C bond. The peak located at 101.1 eV reveals the existence of Si–O bonding, which is ascribed to the SiOx on the nanochannel surface. Fig. 2(c) corresponds to the XPS spectrum of C 1s, which exhibits four peaks with values of ∼282.8, 284.8, 286.3 and 288.6 eV. The peak at 284.8 eV is ascribed to contaminated carbon, which is always inevitable in XPS measurement.29 The peak at 282.8 eV could be attributed to the Si–C bond.30 The binding energies at 286.3 and 288.6 eV represent the existence of C–O bonding that could be attributed to complex intermediates generated in the etching process, such as C6H5CF3 and (–C4H2O–)n,31,32 which are adsorbed onto the SiC nanochannel surface. Furthermore, the typical binding energy spectrum of N 1s recorded from the SiC film obtained is shown in Fig. 2(d). The N 1s peak at ∼399.6 eV was detected, which indicates that the N dopants within the etched films and the obtained products could be ascribed to n-type SiC nanochannels. The concentration of the N dopants is measured at about 0.6 at%. Evidence for the chemical composition of the etched nanochannel was studied by XRD, as presented in Fig. 2(e). The diffraction peaks of the obtained film manifest good agreement with 4H-SiC (JCPDS card No. 29-1127). Furthermore, it also confirms that the etching process did not influence the phase composition of the SiC sheet anode, which would contribute to efficient water splitting due to no newly generated contaminant inhibiting the PEC process in the SiC photoelectrode surface. The sharp and strong diffraction peaks reveal that the products possess good crystallinity.
 Fig. 2  (a) Survey XPS spectra, along with spectra of (b) Si 2p, (c) C 1s, and (d) N 1s. (e) Typical XRD pattern recorded from the etched SiC film. 
To explore the solar water splitting activity of the N-doped SiC nanochannel arrays, the SiC photoanode was established by sticking the etched SiC nanoarray film onto the ITO substrate, as presented in Fig. 3(a). We employed the PEC cell to measure the photocurrent densities of the as-constructed SiC photoanode in neutral electrolyte solutions, with the use of a standard three-electrode configuration subjected to chopped AM1.5G irradiation at room temperature (as in the schematic shown in Fig. 3(b)), wherein, it is possible to examine the dark as well as the light currents simultaneously. Fig. 3(c) illustrates the band-energy and corresponding mechanism diagram of the PEC process for the SiC photoanode. The conduction-band edges of the 4H-SiC are situated above the energy that corresponds to the H2O/H2 redox couple, as well as the valence-band edge of the redox energy of the O2/H2O couple. It is evident that 4H-SiC readily caters to the requirements for production of hydrogen. Fig. 3(d) presents the typical LSV of the pure SiC wafer and N-doped SiC wafer without etching, as well as the N-doped SiC nanochannel array photoanode. The curves were obtained subsequent to extension of the voltage several times for degassing and eliminating contaminants of the photoelectrode. It can be clearly seen that the dark scans for the samples of both pure and N-doped SiC wafer only present negligible current densities, of nearly 0, and that the SiC nanochannel array shows a rather small current density. When subjected to simulated sunlight, the photocurrent of both the pure and N-doped SiC wafer could still be ignored; however, the photocurrent density of the N-doped SiC nanochannel array photoanode increases significantly. The results clearly suggest that the novel nanochannel array structure plays a positive role in enhancing the activity of the SiC photoanode. The constant and smooth photocurrent density curve of the nanochannel arrays reveals the fact that a reliable interface between the SiC nanoarray film and ITO substrate was established and the photogenerated charge carriers could be transferred quickly to the counter electrode for hydrogen evolution. The photocurrent density of the SiC photoanode at 1.4 V could be up to ∼2.41 mA cm−2. It is very impressive that the photocurrent density of the SiC nanoarray photoanode is superior or comparable to that of previously reported SiC photoanodes with other typical configurations, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, as suggested by the curves, it is evident that the dark current of the SiC photoanode is quite low. Significantly different from previously reported SiC nanostructures, the dark current of the established SiC electrode in our case could hold steady despite the increase in the bias potential. The low and steady dark current further illustrates that the as-constructed SiC electrode is robust enough against electrolyte erosion as well as against the applied bias potential. To further investigate the photoresponse of the SiC nanoarrays, the transient photocurrent density under light chopping was investigated, which is presented in Fig. 3(e). It indicates that the rise and fall of the photocurrents provides a good response to illumination that switches on and off. The spikes in the photocurrents upon initiating illumination are mainly attributed to recombination of part of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs within the photoanode.33 In addition, the SiC electrode behaves with a fast-paced photoresponse when subjected to chopped illumination, which illustrates that charge transport within the photoanode is quite rapid.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the process for fabrication of the SiC nanoarray photoanode. (b) Schematic representation of the PEC cell. (c) Band-energy and mechanism diagram of the PEC process of the SiC photoanode. (d) LSV curves of pure SiC wafer, N-doped SiC wafer, and N-doped SiC nanoarray photoanode. (e) Current–potential characteristics of the photoanode under illumination with chopped simulated sunlight. 
Table 1 List of photocurrent densities of reported SiC photoanodes




SiC photoanodes
Reference electrode
Photocurrent densities at 1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (mA cm−2)
Ref.




N-Doped SiC nanochannel arrays
Ag/AgCl
2.41
This work


n-Type 6H-SiC wafer
Ag/AgCl
∼0.13

34



n-Type 3C-SiC with Pt nanoparticles
Ag/AgCl
∼1.6–5.4

28



Si-Doped 3C-SiC
Ag/AgCl
∼0.7 at 1 V

35



n-Type 4H-SiC
SCE
∼2.32

36





To investigate the charge separation and transmission behavior of the photogenerated charge carriers within the N-doped SiC nanochannel arrays, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed under AM1.5G illumination, and is presented in Fig. 4(a). The EIS Nyquist plot manifests only one semicircle, which reveals that the faradaic charge transfer on the photoelectrode interface is the only limiting step for PEC water splitting. Therefore, the EIS data can also be fitted by the equivalent circuit, which is presented in the inset of Fig. 4(a). Furthermore, as we know, a small arc in the Nyquist plot represents low resistance of the charge transfer at the electrode interface; accordingly favoring fast interfacial charge transfer and effective separation of the photo-induced electron–hole pairs. These findings show that the SiC nanochannel array electrode significantly boosts charge mobility through limiting recombination of holes and electrons, which is in agreement with its faster photoresponse. To quantify photoactivity as a function of wavelength, the IPCE was measured on irradiance of SiC nanoarray, as depicted in Fig. 4(b). The photoresponse is over 1% for wavelengths between 310 nm and 560 nm, with a maximum IPCE of ∼15.6% at 330 nm. The increased harvesting of solar light is primarily attributed to the incorporated N dopants. Doping with metallic or non-metallic elements has been extensively used to overcome the lack of visible light response of ZnO and TiO2.37–40 N dopants have also been proven to extend the optical absorption edges of wide band gap semiconductor nanostructures to the visible light region, eventually inducing a visible light response for SiC nanochannel arrays.9,17,41 An investigation of the stability of the SiC nanoarray photoanode was carried out by subjecting the nanoarray to on–off illumination cycles at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, with the average time interval fixed at 20 s. Fig. 4(c) shows the photoresponse of the nanoarrays measured by turning the light on and off. It demonstrates that there is a drop of peak photocurrent values between the first cycle and the following ones (∼41%). Nonetheless, the repeated stable peak values of the photocurrents subsequent to the first cycle always present similar values (∼1.1 mA cm−2), implying high stability and fast photoresponse, as well as excellent reproducibility of the established SiC photoanode. Moreover, this plot also sheds light on the fact that the photocurrent manifests a rise first to approximately 1.1 mA cm−2, subsequently decreasing to its initial value (∼12.9 μA cm−2) on turning the light off, additionally indicating the elevated sensitivity of the photoanode with a photo–dark current ratio of up to 88. Fig. 4(d) shows the current–time transient photocurrent response of the SiC photoanode over 5000 s under the on–off illumination cycle, which suggests its high durability, with only 10% attenuation of the current density, which clarifies its satisfactory photoelectrochemical stability.
 Fig. 4  (a) EIS spectra of the SiC nanoarray under AM1.5G illumination. (b) IPCE spectra of the SiC nanoarray. (c) Transient photocurrent response of the SiC electrode in the dark and in simulated solar light. (d) Current–time transient photocurrent response of the SiC photoanode over 5000 s under on–off illumination cycles. 
The PEC water splitting performance of representative nanostructure candidates has been shown to vary with their growth conditions, surface characteristics, orientation, as well as level of doping of the selected nanostructures.5,13 In this work, the elevated PEC properties of the N-doped 4H-SiC nanochannel array photoanode could be primarily ascribed to the following points.
(i) Highly oriented SiC nanochannel arrays. The nanoarrays present the obvious advantage of enhancing the light capability due to their large axial length, facilitating transport and separation of photoexcited charge carriers with respect to the highly consistent electronic transmission direction and decreased radial transmission distance, as well as offering enough reaction sites based on their large specific surface area, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). All of which are vitally important for obtaining high solar energy conversion efficiency.
(ii) Incorporated N dopants. N dopants can extend the optical absorption edges of SiC nanoarrays and enhance the PEC water splitting behavior. Moreover, it has been shown that the life-time for the light-generated minority carriers (holes of the SiC photoanode) is longer due to the width of the depletion layer established at the interface between the electrolyte and photoanode becoming broader (induced by the incorporated N dopants), which would contribute to the PEC water splitting.28
(iii) The single-crystal nature of the whole SiC nanochannel array. The SiC nanoarrays in this case were fabricated by etching the high quality single-crystal SiC wafer, and so the remaining pieces after the etching process are still the single crystals, without merging of the crystal boundary, interface and new phase. To the best of our understanding, most typical photoanodes have been established by assembling numbers of nanostructures though pyrolysis, hydrothermal/solvothermal, chemical vapor deposition methods, etc.,12,15,21 which inevitably contain plenty of interfaces and/or stacking faults, and correspondingly impede transport of the photoexcited charge carriers. Being significantly different from with these conventional photoanodes, these remarkable single-crystal SiC nanoarrays are capable of greatly facilitating the transport and separation of photoexcited charge carriers. Therefore, the innovative SiC photoanode established in the current work is expected to be a competitive candidate for exploring enhanced PEC performance in the future.
4. Conclusions
In summary, the single-crystal N-doped 4H-SiC nanochannel array photoanode has been successfully fabricated via the electrochemical anodic oxidation and subsequent transfer method. The photoelectrode presents excellent photoelectric properties with a high photocurrent of ∼2.41 mA cm−2 at 1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl under simulated sunlight. Moreover, the photoanode presents a fast photoresponse and a wide photoresponse wavelength range of 310–560 nm. The improved PEC water splitting behavior is mainly attributed to the highly oriented SiC nanochannel arrays, single-crystal nature of the whole SiC film and the incorporated N dopants. We think this work could offer a feasible approach for exploiting novel SiC photoanodes for effective solar water splitting under visible light.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 51702174, 51672137, 51572133, and 51702175), Zhejiang Provincial Nature Science Foundation (Grant No. LQ17E020002), and Natural Science Foundation of Ningbo Municipal Government (Grant No. 2017A610002).
References
X. Zhou, J. Jin, X. Zhu, J. Huang, J. Yu, W.-Y. Wong and W.-K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5282 RSC .
R. Bao, J. Geng, J. Sullivan, J. Xia, W. Wang, W.-Y. Wong and H. Li, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2018, 215, 1800436 CrossRef .
T. Wang and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Walter, E. Warren, J. McKone, S. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. Santori and N. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mi, L. Wen, R. Xu, Z. Wang, D. Cao, Y. Fang and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501496 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645 RSC .
M. Ge, Q. Li, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600152 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. Hahn, A. Bard and C. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, Y. Hara, C. Sun, M. Anderson and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Shao, F. Ning, S. Xu, Z. Li, M. Wei, D. Evans and X. Duan, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 231 CrossRef .
M. Shao, F. Ning, M. Wei, D. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 580 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su, T. Wang, R. Lv, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9001 RSC .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. Luo, S. Liu and J. Gong, Small, 2016, 12, 3415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sreedhar, T. Sreekanth, J. Kwon, J. Yi, Y. Sohn and J. Gwag, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 12814 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, F. Ren, J. Zhou, G. Cai, L. Cai, Y. Hu, D. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Guo and S. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, C. Gray, L. Xiao and T. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, N. McCool and T. Mallouk, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 42 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, Z. Liu, L. Ding and J. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2017, 96, 46 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, J. Chen, M. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Ding and Y. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 642 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, B. Kaiser, J. Ziegler, D. Fertig and W. Jaegermann, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 325101 CrossRef .
D. van Dorp, N. Hijnen, M. Di Vece and J. Kelly, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yasuda, M. Kato, M. Ichimura and T. Hatayama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053902 CrossRef .
I. Digdaya, P. Rodriguez, M. Ma, G. Adhyaksa, E. Garnett, A. Smets and W. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6842 RSC .
Q. Ma, B. Kaiser and W. Jaegermann, J. Power Sources, 2014, 253, 41 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ichikawa, M. Ichimura and M. Kato, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 22698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, H. Mashiko, M. Kamiya, Y. Nakamine, A. Ohtomo, T. Iwasaki and M. Hatano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 213901 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, I. Bello, W. Lau, S. Lee, P. Stevens and B. DeVries, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 7483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, P. Ying, L. Wang, G. Wei, F. Gao, J. Zheng, M. Shang, Z. Yang, W. Yang and T. Wu, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Contarini, S. Howlett, C. Rizzo and B. De Angelis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1991, 51, 177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moulder, W. Stickle and P. Sobol, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 1992, 1, 346 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Jiang, W. Han, M. Xie, F. Wang and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14015 RSC .
M. Sachsenhauser, K. Walczak, P. Hampel, M. Stutzmann, I. Sharp and J. Garrido, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, T. Iwasaki and M. Hatano, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 04DR05 CrossRef .
D. van Dorp and J. Kelly, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 599, 260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, F. Ren, M. Wang, G. Cai, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Shen and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1394 CrossRef CAS .
P. Patel, P. Hanumantha, O. Velikokhatnyi, M. Datta, D. Hong, B. Gattu, J. Poston, A. Manivannan and P. Kumta, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 11 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, C. Kao, B. Tang, W. Chang and R. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 6749 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, D. Ding, C. Ning and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2107 CrossRef .
H. Kim, D. Monllor-Satoca, W. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 8, 247 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00061eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–c) Top-view SEM images of SiC nanoarrays under different magnifications. Inset in (a) is the digital photo of the etched film exfoliated from the SiC wafer substrate. (d and e) Cross-sectional SEM images under different magnifications. (f) Typical TEM image of a part of the wall of the SiC nanoarray. (g) The corresponding HRTEM image of the wall body. Inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Survey XPS spectra, along with spectra of (b) Si 2p, (c) C 1s, and (d) N 1s. (e) Typical XRD pattern recorded from the etched SiC film.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the process for fabrication of the SiC nanoarray photoanode. (b) Schematic representation of the PEC cell. (c) Band-energy and mechanism diagram of the PEC process of the SiC photoanode. (d) LSV curves of pure SiC wafer, N-doped SiC wafer, and N-doped SiC nanoarray photoanode. (e) Current–potential characteristics of the photoanode under illumination with chopped simulated sunlight.	 

N-Doped SiC nanochannel arrays	Ag/AgCl	2.41	This work
n-Type 6H-SiC wafer	Ag/AgCl	∼0.13	
34

n-Type 3C-SiC with Pt nanoparticles	Ag/AgCl	∼1.6–5.4	
28

Si-Doped 3C-SiC	Ag/AgCl	∼0.7 at 1 V	
35

n-Type 4H-SiC	SCE	∼2.32	
36


 	Fig. 4  (a) EIS spectra of the SiC nanoarray under AM1.5G illumination. (b) IPCE spectra of the SiC nanoarray. (c) Transient photocurrent response of the SiC electrode in the dark and in simulated solar light. (d) Current–time transient photocurrent response of the SiC photoanode over 5000 s under on–off illumination cycles.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00061e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
