Advances toward the effective use of block copolymers as organic photovoltaic active layers  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7PY01878A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7PY01878A
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 795-814Advances toward the effective use of block copolymers as organic photovoltaic active layers

        
          
            V. D. 
            Mitchell
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            D. J. 
            Jones
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, Bio21 Institute, 30 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: djjones@unimelb.edu.au
Received 
      8th November 2017
    , Accepted 9th January 2018First published on 10th January 2018AbstractOrganic photovoltaic (OPV) technology could allow the inexpensive production of flexible solar cells via a roll-to-roll printing process. However, the performance of OPV devices relies on the formation of a nanostructured morphology of small but well-defined domains of donor and acceptor materials. Covalent linkage of the donor and acceptor material into a single block copolymer material could provide a bottom-up approach to the formation of ideal morphologies, but fundamental and multidisciplinary research is required to overcome the limitations facing the successful application of this material class to OPV. In this review, the evolution of block copolymers as OPV active layers and the strategies of material design, morphology control, and synthesis are discussed. Donor/acceptor block copolymers designed as single material OPV active layers and studies of model systems which contribute to the understanding of donor/acceptor block copolymers are the focus. Coil–coil and rod–coil block copolymer systems are examined to inform the discussion on rod–rod type materials, while the synthesis and application of fully-conjugated block copolymers is emphasized as the foremost material design.V. D. MitchellValerie D. Mitchell was born in 1982 in Iowa City, Iowa. She received a BSc from the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA in 2007 after which she was employed as an analytical chemist at the University of California, Berkeley. She received her PhD in 2017 from the University of Melbourne where she continues as a postdoctoral researcher with the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics.D. J. JonesDavid J. Jones was born in 1960 in Launceston, Tasmania. He studied at the University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia (PhD, 1995) and carried out postdoctoral work at the University of Sheffield and Cardiff University before joining Imperial College London as team leader for the BP Catalyst Discovery Team. He joined the University of Melbourne in 2005 and has been the project coordinator for the Victorian Organic Solar Cell Consortium (VICOSC), before being engaged as a Senior Research Associate and Senior Lecturer in 2014.
Introduction
Organic photovoltaic technology
As the human population continues to expand there is a concomitant increase in demand for energy, particularly in developing countries. The U.S. Energy Information Administration's 2016 report predicts that global energy consumption will increase by 48% between 2012 and 2020.1 Traditional fuel sources are limited in supply and their consumption generates hazardous by-products, the ramifications of which are already taking their toll on global economies and the environment.2,3 In the coming years the development and implementation of viable alternative energy sources will determine the state of our world and society for future generations. As the phenomenon of global warming and its effects solidify from theory into reality, the urgency with which we must address these issues increases exponentially. Our success in shifting towards ‘green energy’ will most likely rely on a combination of energy technologies, key among them solar energy.
Currently, silicon solar cells dominate the solar energy market. While these solar cells enjoy a level of success, high manufacturing costs and bulky modules limit their broad applicability. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices are solar cells which employ organic small molecules or polymers as the photoactive materials, offering some key advantages over their inorganic counterparts. Organic chromophores can have much larger absorption coefficients than materials such as silicon, and so active layers can be thin, flexible films. Additionally, OPV materials are solution-processable and thus amenable to printing via a roll-to-roll printing process.4 If properly optimized, OPV could provide a fast, inexpensive route to flexible and highly portable solar cells. However, additional limiting properties of OPVs must be addressed before this technology will be competitive with existing systems.
Organic materials have a lower relative permittivity than silicon, and because of this charges are not well shielded from one another. As a result, when an electron from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is photoexcited to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) it remains coulombically bound to the positively charged hole of the vacated HOMO. This charge pair is referred to as the exciton, and their mutual attraction must be overcome if free charges are to be generated. In OPV this is accomplished by layering a material with a high electron affinity (the acceptor) with a material with a low electron affinity (the donor). If the exciton is able to reach the interface between the two materials, the electron will move into the acceptor while the hole will move into the donor material.5 Excitons have a finite lifetime which limits the distance which they can diffuse in a material before the charges recombine. A typical diffusion length for an exciton is around 10 nm.6 Therefore, to maximize the number of excitons able to reach a donor/acceptor interface the domains of both materials should be less than 20 nm. If the domains are too small, however, the free charges face an increased risk of recombination. To minimize this loss free charges must be able to separate to distances of around 15 nm, and so domain spacings should be larger than this threshold.7 Thus there is a narrow range of domain sizes which are optimal for OPV performance, and these domains should additionally be oriented in such a way as to provide charge percolation pathways to the necessary electrodes. Morphological control of the donor/acceptor active layer is a crucial aspect of OPV material design.
Block copolymers as active layer materials
If OPV is to be commercially viable then methods for reproducibly generating thermally stable, optimized morphologies must be developed. Currently, the most common approach to attaining the desired donor/acceptor domains is to blend the materials and allow them to partially phase separate into what is called a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) active layer. This method is suboptimal because morphology formation is poorly controlled and domains are prone to further phase separation at the elevated temperatures normally required for printing.8 An alternative to this blending approach is to covalently link the donor and acceptor into a single material, which prevents macrophase separation into overly large domains. If properly designed, the pair will self-assemble with the donor portion and acceptor portion forming distinct domains. Because the resultant domains will have dimensions dictated by the size of the donor and acceptor, polymeric materials are required to obtain domains over 10 nm in size. For these reasons, donor–acceptor block copolymers may provide an ideal solution to the morphological challenges facing OPV.
Block copolymers have long been exploited to obtain intricate thin-film architectures, and in many systems their phase behaviour is well understood.9 However, the organic semiconducting polymers employed in OPV differ significantly from the traditional non-conjugated polymers typically found in block copolymer literature. It is not obvious how the established theories of block copolymer phase behaviour will translate to OPV systems. Additionally, many factors affect charge mobility and exciton splitting in organic photovoltaics and it is unclear how the covalent linkage between donor and acceptor will affect these processes. For example, many semiconducting polymers (such as the ubiquitous P3HT) are semicrystalline and adopt regular anisotropic structures in thin films; a high degree of crystallinity is often correlated with high charge mobility.10,11 In block copolymers, phase separation into well-defined domains can compete with polymer crystallization, potentially decreasing OPV performance. Possibly the most significant hurdle is a lack of synthetic and purification methods capable of producing suitable conjugated block copolymers for study or application. Thus the adoption of block copolymers as active layer materials is not an effortless manoeuvre, and requires fundamental research and optimization.
Within the realm of linear block copolymers we can classify two types of polymer building blocks based on chain conformation. Coil-type polymers are flexible with small persistence lengths on the order of 1 nm, while rod-type polymers are more rigid with longer persistence lengths greater than 10 nm.12 When designing diblock copolymers, these blocks can be combined to form coil–coil, coil–rod, or rod–rod copolymers (Fig. 2). For organic photovoltaic purposes, chromophores are incorporated as pendant groups on the aliphatic backbone in coil-type blocks, while in rod-type blocks the backbone is comprised of the chromophores directly. Because the aliphatic backbone in coil blocks is electrically insulating, this coil design dilutes the chromophore density in thin film and provides a barrier to charge conduction. In addition, while many interesting morphologies such as spheres or gyroids are possible with flexible coil-type polymers, these may not provide the charge percolation pathways required for efficient photocurrent collection. In contrast the rigid backbones of the all-conjugated conducting polymers favour linear, liquid crystalline domains.13 The typical lamellar morphologies associated with these rod-like polymers, if oriented perpendicular to the electrodes, could provide ample donor–acceptor interface and charge conduction pathways simultaneously as shown in Fig. 1.14 Thus, while coil–coil block copolymers are more thoroughly studied, in OPV typically at least one block and ideally both blocks are fully-conjugated. For this reason, in this review fully-conjugated rod–rod block copolymers will be the primary focus with rod–coil and coil–coil literature presented in less detail. Several reviews on various aspects of semiconducting block copolymer research have been published previously, while this work seeks to provide an updated account of the state-of-the-art in fully-conjugated block copolymer synthesis,15–17 morphology, and photophysical understanding.
 Fig. 1  Comparison between bulk heterojunction active layer (left) and lamellar block copolymer active layer (right). 
 Fig. 2  Classes of linear diblock copolymers. 
Morphology of coil–coil block copolymers
The phase behaviour of polymeric materials dictates the morphology of polymer blends. While mixing of similar substituents in a solution is normally entropically favoured, the large size of polymers decreases the entropic gains of mixing. As the polymer chain length increases, enthalpic contributions become the dominating force and the interaction between the monomeric species governs mixing behaviours. The tendency towards order or disorder is quantified by the Flory–Huggins segment–segment interaction parameter χ, which for two monomer species A and B is given by:  
In this equation kBT is the thermal energy component, Z is the number of nearest neighbour monomers, and εAB is the contact energy between monomers A and B while εAA and εBB are the energies of self-association. If the energies of monomer self-association exceed the energy of association between different monomeric species, χ is negative and interactions between segments are favoured. This could result from stabilizing forces between sequences such as hydrogen bonding. Positive values of χ on the other hand indicate repulsion between segments and a tendency to segregate.18 The degree of polymerization (N) amplifies these tendencies and the propensity of the system to phase separate can be predicted by the product Nχ.
Generally, for values of Nχ less than 10 the block copolymer mixture will exist in a disordered state, while above 10.5 it will adopt an ordered mesophase.20 The conversion from a homogenous blend to an organized morphology is entropically opposed but energetically favoured, and is referred to as the order–disorder transition (ODT). The temperature at which this occurs (TODT) is an important characteristic of every BCP system.21 A third predictive parameter is the volume fraction f of a designated component. In coil–coil block copolymers, adjusting the value of f provides access to a range of morphologies as shown in Fig. 3, although larger values of Nχ may be required for effective phase separation at different monomer ratios.18 In the lamellar regime, the size of the resultant domains scale according to N2/3 rather than directly with the contour length of the polymer, as a result of the entropic cost of full chain extension.22 There are divergences from this guideline however, for example when the polydispersity of the sample is large the domains obtained have been shown to exceed this limit.23
 Fig. 3  Block copolymer morphologies with increasing volume fraction of one component. Reproduced from (ref. 19) with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
While the phenomena described by the Flory–Huggins parameter occur in polymer blends and block-copolymers similarly, the significant difference is the degree to which phase separation is possible. In block copolymers, a covalent linkage joins two or more distinct monomeric sequences, and therefore macrophase separation is impossible. Instead microphase separation occurs, and careful control of the parameters N, χ, and f can yield well-defined domains with desired dimensions. This level of control makes block copolymers ideal candidates for OPV active layer material.
Rod–coil morphologies
Rod–coil type BCPs, while not as extensively studied as coil–coil BCPs, have received a significant amount of attention over the last decade. In rod–coil polymers, the disparity between the fully-conjugated block and the aliphatic block introduces a new set of interactions and additional parameters must be employed to describe the phase behaviour of these systems. The fully-conjugated blocks have the potential to align in liquid crystalline structures, which can strongly affect subsequent thin film morphology. The strength of the liquid crystalline interaction is described by the Maier–Saupe interaction strength μN where N is the degree of polymerization and μ is the Maier–Saupe order parameter.24 If Maier–Saupe interactions are more prominent than the Flory–Huggins interactions, then liquid crystalline type domains such as lamella will dominate the thin-film morphology. Where Flory–Huggins interactions are stronger the traditional nonlamellar morphologies are more common.25 Further impacting the phase behaviour of this system, aliphatic blocks have a characteristic radius of gyration absent in the conjugated blocks. Because these two species share the same interface, this volume disparity introduces a packing frustration. This is quantified by the geometrical asymmetry parameter ν, which is the ratio of the aliphatic radius of gyration to the length of the conjugated rod.17 With the incorporation of μ and ν the phase behaviour of rod–coil polymers becomes increasingly complex, and is described by a four-dimensional phase diagram.26
Rod–rod morphologies
The phase behaviour of fully-conjugated rod–rod type polymers is much less established than that of rod–coil or coil–coil systems. This is partially due to a historical lack of controlled polymerization techniques which produce fully-conjugated polymers with the low PDI required for fundamental studies of self-assembly. In the past decade, however, the development of living polymerization techniques for the production of rod-type polymers has allowed some more thorough explorations.27,28 It has been shown that the increased level of π–π stacking in fully-conjugated polymers leads to an interplay between crystallinity and microphase separation, while also affecting the types of morphologies accessible and the domain sizes.
In fully-conjugated block copolymers, often one or both blocks are capable of crystallization. There are three dominant classes of interaction between microphase separation and crystallization in block copolymers.29 If microphase separation is only slightly favoured, i.e. the system is weakly segregated, then crystallization can dominate and growing crystals can distort or destroy entirely the microphase separated domains. This behaviour is termed ‘break-out’ crystallization. Segregation strength in block copolymers can be determined by the comparison of the Flory–Huggins parameter at the crystallization temperature (χc) and the Flory–Huggins parameter at the order–disorder temperature (χODT). As a guideline, when χc/χODT is less than three, break-out crystallization occurs. In more strongly segregated systems (where χc/χODT > 3) microphase separation dominates crystallization. When the TODT is lower than TC, then crystallization occurs first, driving phase separation. In this situation, the morphologies obtained are dictated by the crystal growth and so favour lamella or fibrillar structures. When the order is reversed (TC < TODT) and segregation is strong, then microphase separation limits crystallization to the domains created; this behaviour is referred to as confined crystallization.30 Finally, the third and least common mode of crystallization in block copolymers is templated crystallization, and occurs in systems with intermediate segregation strengths (1 < χc/χODT < 3) where the volume fraction of the crystalline segment becomes large. In templated crystallization, the microphase separation guides but does not entirely contain crystallization.29
An excellent example of these crystallization regimes was provided by Yu et al. in their investigation on microphase separation in fully-conjugated block copolymers. A series of poly(2,5-dihexyloxy-p-phenylene)-b-poly(3-hexylthiophene) (PPP-b-P3HT) block copolymers (Fig. 4a) with a range of molecular weights and block ratios were prepared and subjected to solvent vapour and thermal annealing treatments. While both blocks are crystalline, P3HT has stronger self-assembly properties and so was predicted to dominate morphological behaviour. In as-spun films of polymer with a majority P3HT block some spinodal-type morphology was observed. Thermal annealing and cooling from the melt induced P3HT break-out crystallization, destroying the mesophase structure. In contrast, in majority PPP block copolymers, P3HT crystallization was confined to the lamellar domains.31
 Fig. 4  Block copolymers investigated for crystallization and phase behaviour in ref. 31 (a) and ref. 32 (b and c). 
In another informative look into rod–rod BCP behaviour, poly(thiophene)-b-poly(fluorene) (P3HT-b-PF) and poly(thiophene)-b-poly(fluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (P3HT-b-PFBT) block copolymers were investigated (Fig. 4b and c). Crystallization and phase separation of the materials were monitored as a function of temperature via small-angle X-ray scattering. Above the melting point of the two blocks, no scattering attributable to microphase separation was evident. Upon cooling, crystallization and microphase separation occurred simultaneously. This indicates that in this system TODT is less than or equal to TC, and that crystallization guides mesophase formation. The resultant linear morphologies were commensurate with P3HT crystallization.32
Lamellar domain sizes produced in rod–rod systems differ from those obtained in flexible polymers. The rigidity and crystallinity of the rod materials cause the lamellar spacing to approach that of the contour length of the constituent polymers unless chain folding is favoured, as in longer chains with more backbone flexibility.33 Deviation from this guideline is common, however. In work on poly(thiophene)-b-poly(fluorene) BCP materials, lamellar domains of 4.2 nm were seen regardless of the chain length of the individual blocks, a much smaller domain spacing than expected. This indicates that in this system microphase separation, morphology, and domain size were inconsistent with that predicted by traditional BCP theory.34 The authors suggest that π–π stacking plays a large role in the resultant morphology, and the measured lamellar domains are a result of microphase segregation as well as alternating amorphous and crystalline domains. Additionally, tilting of the rods to adopt smectic liquid crystalline domains has been shown to reduce lamellar widths.35
Charge separation and mobility in block copolymers
To effectively generate free charges in an organic solar cell, the coloumbic attraction binding the photogenerated exciton together must be overcome. This is heavily reliant on the relative position of the frontier orbitals of the donor and acceptor materials: in the average organic thin-film the HOMO of the donor material must be at least 0.3 eV greater than the HOMO of the acceptor material to afford efficient separation of electron and hole. Thus, the choice of two materials with complimentary frontier orbitals is of fundamental importance in block copolymer design. Fig. 5 shows the energy levels of two successful donor/acceptor pairs which have been used in single material active layers. In both of these pairs, the energy offset between the frontier orbitals are optimized for exciton splitting. The first (Fig. 5a) is a pair of materials used in a block copolymer whose PCE reached 1% which is discussed in more detail later in the text.36 In the second (Fig. 5b) an oligomeric PDI coil-type acceptor block was terminated in a single diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) donor molecule. The excellent energy level offset and broad light absorption of this system contributed to a PCE of 0.89%.37
 Fig. 5  Frontier orbital energy levels of material combinations employed in ref. 36 and 37. 
In addition to morphological advantages, the use of block copolymers in OPV provides an opportunity to directly control the interface between the donor and acceptor material. While in donor–acceptor rod–coil block copolymers a non-conjugated linker separates the two active layer components, in fully conjugated rod–rod type polymers the donor and acceptor are typically linked directly through conjugation. The nature of this connection is expected to have a large effect on the efficiency of charge separation at the interface. In rod–coil materials the donor and accepter are effectively separated by an insulator, potentially decreasing the rate of charge transfer. Additionally, because the aliphatic backbone in the coil-block cannot conduct charge it can decrease charge mobility through the film. In contrast, fully-conjugated BCPs directly couple an electron-accepting polymer to an electron-donating polymer creating a pathway for charge transfer and less inhibited charge mobility. The nature of this intimate association of donor and acceptor is not singularly beneficial, however, as it could also lead to high rates of charge recombination.
In one of the first investigations into block copolymers as active layer materials, Chen et al. synthesized fully-conjugated triblock copolymers in which donor and acceptor polymers were connected directly. Although photoluminescent quenching indicated effective energy transfer from donor to acceptor, no evidence of charge separation was seen.38 This led several groups to incorporate non-conjugated bridging units between donor and acceptor in an attempt to create a barrier to charge recombination.39,40 Using this approach, effective charge transfer was demonstrated across a 2-carbon aliphatic linker, with a 40% increase in photoluminescent quenching and a 100% increase in photoconductivity over the corresponding blend.39
In a further investigation on the effect of alkyl spacers on self-assembly and optical properties of rod–rod block copolymers, chirally-substituted rod–rod block copolymers were prepared with alkyl spacers of either 1, 2, or 6 carbons. The materials employed a P3HT block linked to a chiral poly(3-alkoxythiophene) (P3AOT) block. In comparison with a fully-conjugated P3HT-b-P3AOT block copolymer, it was shown that the alkyl spacers did not significantly inhibit charge transfer. Surprisingly, the 6-carbon linker gave the highest rate of charge transfer, which the authors attributed to the polymer's increased ability to reorganize into a more favourable folded conformation.41
Segalman et al. have done extensive work on the phase behaviour and photovoltaic applications of rod–coil block copolymers.24,25,42–44 In 2009 they presented the rod–coil polymer P3HT-b-P(BA-stat-PerAcr) which employed a P3HT donor and a statistical copolymer of n-butyl acrylate and an acrylate unit carrying a perylene diimide pendant acceptor (Fig. 6). It was shown that at low n-butyl acrylate content, the ability of the block copolymer to self-assemble was severely limited. Increasing the n-butyl acrylate content allowed more chain diffusion and reorganization, enhancing charge mobility. This trend held up to ratios of 2:1 n-butyl acrylate to perylene acrylate, but at higher percentages of n-butyl acrylate the insulating nature of the backbone began to dominate and photovoltaic performance dropped.45
 Fig. 6  Structure of rod–coil block copolymer investigated by Segalman et al.24,25,42–44 
More recently, work has been done to address and evaluate charge recombination in donor and acceptor materials linked directly through conjugation. One of the original high performance all-polymer solar cells employed a blend of P3HT and an alternating copolymer of fluorene and dithienobenzothiadiazole (PFTBT), achieving a PCE of 2.7%.46 The promising combination of these two polymers led a number of groups to employ the pair combined in block copolymers. Because PFTBT is an alternating copolymer, there are two options for connecting the donor polymer and acceptor polymer, either through the fluorene monomer or the dithienobenzothiadiazole (TBT) monomer. The fluorene unit has a LUMO energy level higher and a HOMO energy lower than that of either the P3HT or the TBT unit, and as such is not expected to accept electrons from the P3HT donor. Electron transfer from P3HT to the TBT monomer, in contrast, is highly favoured (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  HOMO and LUMO energy levels of P3HT and PFTBT monomers as determined by density functional theory.47 
Friend et al. prepared oligomers of P3HT-b-FTBT and P3HT-b-TBTF to examine the effect of the two connectivities (Fig. 8). Using transient absorption spectroscopy, it was shown that when the TBT unit was directly connected to the donor polymer significant mixing of the energy levels of the two species occurred generating a charge transfer (CT) state. Excitons generated in the film rapidly migrated to this CT state with near 100% efficiency, but were unable to escape further to form free charges. Consequently, 90% of these states decayed radiatively within 660 ps. In the case in which fluorene was coupled directly to the donor polymer, the energetically unfavourable spacer provided enough separation between the donor and acceptor to prevent mixing of the P3HT and TBT energy levels and there was no evidence of the formation of a charge transfer state. In comparison with a homopolymer blend, charge generation in P3HT-b-PFTBT was as efficient with no observed increase in recombination.47 This and related investigations demonstrated that an energetic spacer could be as effective as an aliphatic spacer in preventing charge recombination.48
 Fig. 8  Structure of oligomers synthesized to probe the relationship between connectivity and charge transfer in BCP.47 
The work performed by Friend et al. illustrated the importance of interface design in donor–acceptor block copolymers. However, this work was performed on a model oligomeric system rather than a full block copolymer system. More recently the work was extended to full P3HT-b-PFTBT and P3HT-b-TBT-PFTBT block copolymers. It was found that the material in which the strong acceptor TBT unit was connected directly to the P3HT gave a PCE 40 times lower than the P3HT-b-PFTBT system. Confirming the results of the Friend paper, this lowered performance was attributed to a high rate of geminate recombination resulting from a charge transfer state formed at the interface between the donor and acceptor polymer.49
The effect of linking donor and acceptor directly through conjugation or via an alkylene spacer was also examined in the rod–rod system shown in Fig. 9.50 Here a poly(quinoxaline thiophene) donor was used in conjunction with a poly(naphthalene diimide-alt-selenophene) acceptor. The authors found that the material in which the donor and acceptor were separated with a nonconjugated spacer (PTQI-b-PNDISL) significantly outperformed that which was directly connected (PTQI-b-PNDIS) with PCEs of 1.54% and 0.36% respectively. For comparison, a blend of the isolated homopolymers gave a PCE of 0.4%. The disparity in performance was attributed to two factors: first, the authors asserted that the flexible alkylene spacer allowed independent organization of both blocks such that the strong crystallinity of the PNDI material did not disrupt the organization of the PTQI block. Second, the authors suggested that electronic isolation of the donor and acceptor in PTQI-b-PNDISL decreased recombination. However, it is difficult to draw unequivocal conclusions from this work due to the synthetic methodologies employed, which will be discussed in a subsequent section.
 Fig. 9  Structures of rod–rod block copolymers investigated in ref. 50. 
In addition to the impact of the chemical nature of the donor/acceptor linkage, modelling has predicted that interfacial width, or the degree of interpenetration at the interface, can have a large effect on charge separation and recombination. Using density functional theory to model the interface in P3HT-b-PFTBT, it was shown that if interfacial widths are decreased to 1 nm then recombination can be suppressed by orders of magnitude.51 In rod–rod block copolymers, interfacial width is expected to be lower than that achievable in flexible systems, and decreases with increased rigidity of the system.52 Thus, employing polymers with increased persistence lengths may be preferable when designing fully-conjugated block copolymers. A second approach to decreasing interfacial width is to increase compositional disparity between blocks in order to enhance the Flory–Huggins parameter. In a study of 30 P3HT-b-PFTBT derivatives it was found that the addition of solubilizing side-chains to the TBT units decreased the microphase separation attainable by the block copolymers, significantly reducing the power conversion efficiencies.53 It can be hypothesized that the addition of the alkyl side-chains increased the similarity between the two blocks, decreasing the Flory–Huggins parameter. The resulting drop in performance indicates the importance of a narrow interfacial width and proper molecular design of the donor and acceptor materials.
Thus, while the block copolymer connectivity allows precise control over the interface between donor and acceptor, it also requires carefully considered design. There is certainly an indication that direct linkage of the donor and acceptor materials through conjugation provides a route for recombination as well as charge separation. Friend et al. clearly demonstrated that connecting a strongly accepting chromophore (TBT, Fig. 7) directly to a strongly donating chromophore (P3HT, Fig. 7) at the BCP interface can lead to a CT state which decreases free charge generation. However, this CT state was eliminated when TBT and P3HT were separated by fluorene, with higher LUMO and lower HOMO than the other two molecules.47,49 In contrast, an aliphatic linker prevents the formation of an interface CT state, but may decrease the rate of charge separation by acting as an insulator. Additional work is needed to establish which route, either a suitably designed conjugated interface or a non-conjugated bridge, is capable of maximizing charge separation while avoiding recombination losses.
Synthesis and application of block copolymers in organic photovoltaics
One limiting aspect of block copolymer application in organic photovoltaics is the difficulty associated with the syntheses of both the individual blocks and the complete block copolymer. Coil-blocks are typically synthesized via living polymerizations, and so this design has the benefit of producing material with a lower molecular weight distribution. In contrast, fully-conjugated rod type polymers are typically prepared through the transition metal-catalysed cross-coupling of aromatic monomers. There are very few chain-growth polymerizations capable of producing fully-conjugated materials, and so often polycondensations are employed with the unfortunate consequence that the resultant materials have broad polydispersity indices (PDIs). Regardless of which block combination is employed, one or both of the polymers must terminate in a moiety which can be used to generate the complete block polymer.
Coil–coil and rod–coil organic photovoltaics
As previously mentioned, the first example of the application of the block copolymer strategy to observe charge transfer in organic semiconductors was reported in 1996 by Chen and Jenekhe.38 The goal of this work was not, however, to produce a photovoltaic cell, but rather to investigate spatial confinement of excitons. The first use of block copolymers specifically as a photoactive layer was a PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) rod–coil system produced 4 years later (Fig. 10). Rod-type poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) with a single aldehyde terminus was synthesized via Siegrist polycondensation. Substitution with a TEMPO initiator produced the PPV-TEMPO macroreagent from which a polystyrene coil block was grown via nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization (NMRP). The polystyrene block was comprised of a 2:1 mixture of styrene to 4-chloromethyl styrene, with the chlorinated monomer providing an attachment point for pendant C60 groups, which were added using atom transfer radical addition (ATRA).54,55
 Fig. 10  Structure of first donor/acceptor rod–coil BCP.54,55 
By varying the conditions of film formation the researchers were able to achieve either microphase separation with no long-range order or self-assembly into a well-defined honeycomb structure. The key variable was choice of deposition solvent. When carbon disulphide was employed, which dissolves P(S-stat-C60MS) well but PPV poorly, PPV aggregation in solution drove the formation of a highly ordered structure in thin film. Chloroform dissolved both blocks equally and resulted in poorly organized microphase separation. This demonstrates the malleability of these systems. Photoluminescence decay in the block copolymer system was much faster than a blend of the donor and acceptor, an indicator that photogenerated excitons were more easily split in the block copolymer film.54
The synthesis of PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) is a valuable illustration of several key points in rod–coil block copolymer photovoltaics. There are two main routes through which coil-type acceptor blocks can be generated: monomer units which contain pendant acceptor groups can be polymerized, or the polymer can be prepared first and the acceptor moieties attached in a subsequent step as in this example. The coupling of the acceptor moieties as pendant groups to a preformed polymer is a common approach,56,57 but requires high reaction efficiency to achieve sufficient grafting density and avoid persistent reactive groups in the product. In the PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) the highest grafting density achievable was one C60 for every two 4-chloromethyl styrene units, and was limited by the potential for multiple ATRA reactions on the same C60 which could negatively affect the polymer structure and self-assembly.55 Grafting density optimization is often required in these coil-type blocks. In other pendant fullerene systems, high levels of grafting density led to decreased self-assembly45 and moderate levels of grafting density in which the acceptor molecules remained in close proximity enhanced charge mobilities by two orders of magnitude over polymers with lower grafting density.58 These studies illustrate the difficulties with and necessity of careful control over coil-block composition.
A second illustrative aspect in the PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) synthesis was the method by which the complete block copolymer was generated. There are two dominant approaches in the literature, in the first the donor and acceptor polymers are synthesized separately and coupled in a subsequent step, and this is called the ‘grafting to’ approach. In the PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) system, the donor block was first synthesized and the acceptor block was grown from an initiator functionality (TEMPO) located at the PPV terminus, this is known as the ‘grafting from’ approach. The ‘grafting to’ synthetic strategy has the disadvantage that it will almost certainly result in a mixture of the individual homopolymers and the block copolymer product. If end-group functionalization is efficient and the second block is generated via a living polymerization, then the ‘grafting from’ route can limit the product mixture to unreacted macroinitiator and the BCP product. The optimal synthetic route from a byproduct standpoint would be to produce both blocks via sequential living polymerizations in one pot, however the number of efficient organic semiconductors which can be generated through this method is vanishingly small.
The PPV-b-P(S-stat-C60MS) system was also prototypical for rod–coil active layer materials in that the donor polymer was the rod block and the acceptor polymer was the coil block. This assignation of the donor as rod and acceptor as coil is the predominant, if not exclusive, arrangement in rod–coil block copolymers. The most common pendant acceptor molecules beyond fullerenes are perylene diimide derivatives.45,59–62 While PPV donor materials were popular in block copolymers initially,55,63 poly(3-hexylthiophene) has come to dominate the field. This is partially a result of the unique photophysical properties of poly(3-hexylthiophene) as an organic semiconductor,64,65 but also significantly because it is accessible via Kumada Catalyst Transfer Polymerization (KCTP), the only chain growth polymerization techniques readily available for the generation of fully-conjugated materials.66
KCTP is arguably the most successful polymerization method employed in the controlled production of conjugated polymers.28 Kumada coupling employs a nickel or palladium catalyst to couple a Grignard reagent with an organic halide, and in polymerization reactions this occurs between heterobifunctional monomers to give a homopolymer (Fig. 11) KCTP is hampered by steric effects in bulky monomers and it has been suggested that the length of the monomer may inhibit the ‘ring-walking’ mechanism required for chain growth.67 For these reasons among others, KCTP cannot be applied to many monomer systems. However, it is invaluable to the field of OPV because through its steric sensitivity it is able to generate the model donor material P3HT with high regioregularity. The increase in regioregularity of P3HT prepared through KCTP dramatically affects the optical properties of the polythiophene, allowing the polymer to adopt a more planar configuration with a higher degree of conjugation and excellent hole transport properties.11 Additionally, following acid quenching the resulting polymer retains a bromine substituent from the initiating bromothiophene which facilitates further coupling reactions and is ideal for the generation of block copolymers.66 As a result of this unique combination of excellent optoelectronic properties, narrow polydispersity, and reactive end-group, P3HT is the most commonly employed donor material in recent block copolymer organic photovoltaics.
 Fig. 11  Catalytic cycle of Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization of P3HT. 
The living nature of KCTP has enabled researches to pursue the coveted one-pot synthesis of well-defined block copolymers via sequential chain growth mechanisms. In 2010, Bielawski et al. combined the traditional nickel-catalysed KCTP synthesis of P3HT with the mechanistically distinct nickel-catalyzed polymerization of arylisocyanide monomers to generate a rod–coil block copolymer. Simply, P3HT polymerization was allowed to proceed until consumption of the thiophene monomer was complete, at which point n-decyl 4-isocyanobenzoate was added to the reaction. The polymerization of this second monomer proceeded smoothly from the catalyst-terminated P3HT block, generating diblock copolymers with narrow PDIs and significant chain extension.68 Following these exciting results, this polymerization combination was used to successfully produce an assortment of P3HT-based rod–coil polymers,69–71 and was more recently adapted to produce block copolymers for organic photovoltaic applications. Clément et al. prepared isocyanide-based porphyrin monomers and, exploiting the previously described synthesis, synthesized rod–coil polymers comprised of a P3HT block terminated in 3–4 porphyrin units. The resultant materials combined the spectroscopic properties of the porphyrin and P3HT species, leading to a broad absorbance well-suited to OPV active layers. The block copolymers were further shown to self-assemble into fibrillar morphologies.72
Rod–rod block copolymer photovoltaics
The synthesis of fully-conjugated block copolymers eliminates the need for pendant chromophores and the related complications of grafting density and the requirement for intermolecular charge transport. However, the lack of living polymerization techniques which produce fully-conjugated materials introduces a new set of challenges. In chain-growth polymerizations the monomers are incorporated one-by-one into the growing chain in a linear fashion, and so the ‘grafting from’ synthetic strategy results in only block copolymer and unreacted macroinitiator. The production of fully-conjugated materials however often necessitates the use of step-growth polycondensation polymerizations. In most polycondensation reactions the catalyst is not associated with a specific growing chain, but instead couples the reactive species randomly leading to a wide distribution of chain lengths.73,74 If used in conjunction with a macroinitiator in the ‘grafting from’ approach, polycondensations will result in not only unreacted macroinitiator and the diblock copolymer, but also triblock copolymer and the isolated polycondensation homopolymer. This greatly complicates the reaction mixture and purification process. Despite this disadvantage, the ‘grafting from’ approach has remained popular for the preparation of rod–rod type polymers, and has been used to generate the highest performing block copolymer systems to date.75 The ‘grafting to’ approach has been used less frequently although it has had some success. Investigations into living polymerizations for fully-conjugated systems are a growing area of research and have begun to produce some promising results expected to benefit this class of block copolymers.
As previously discussed, the first fully-conjugated block copolymer was synthesized in 199638 which inspired the design of donor–bridge-acceptor rod–rod systems in 2002.63,76 Also in 2002, a fully-conjugated oligomeric donor/acceptor system was prepared, combining oligo(alkylthiophene)s with oligo(phenylenevinylene) via Heck coupling.77 However, It wasn't until 2006, 10 years after the first reported system, that a fully-conjugated block copolymer containing donor and acceptor blocks was synthesized for application in organic photovoltaics.78
A popular approach for coupling dihalogenated aromatic compounds is the Yamamoto coupling which employs a nickel complex, normally in stoichiometric amounts.79 This approach can be applied to generate homopolymers with symmetrically halogenated end groups for use in the synthesis of triblock copolymers. The first fully conjugated donor–acceptor block copolymer was prepared using this approach by Tu et al. in 2006. In this work, the homopolymer cyano-substituted poly(phenylenevinylene) (CN-PPV) was synthesized under Yamamoto conditions to yield prepolymers of various lengths, all featuring two bromine-substituted end groups. This prepolymer served as the electron-accepting block and was subsequently coupled to P3HT-Br, again via Yamamoto coupling, to yield the desired triblock copolymer (Fig. 12, left). These initial copolymers suffered from solubility problems and the energy levels of the donor–acceptor polymers were not optimized for charge separation. Nonetheless, the authors demonstrated a rather simple synthetic strategy for the generation of conjugated D–A–D triblock copolymers.78 This approach was later used to produce the highest performing triblock copolymer, which consisted of a naphthalene diimide acceptor as the central block adjoined to two P3HT donor blocks (Fig. 12, right). The resultant material achieved a PCE of 1.28%, albeit in a blend with P3HT homopolymer.80
 Fig. 12  Structures of fully-conjugated block copolymers reported in ref. 78 (left) and ref. 80 (right). 
In a modified version of this synthesis, Izuhara and Swager used Yamamoto coupling in conjunction with a cyclization reaction to generate triblock copolymers with donor–acceptor properties.81 As in the system developed by Tu et al.,78 a dibrominated n-type polymer was synthesized using Yamamoto conditions. The result was a siloxyethyl-substituted poly(pyridylphenylene), and P3HT-Br was used as an end-capping reagent to afford the tri-block prepolymer. A subsequent cyclization reaction generated the desired pyridinium acceptor block (Scheme 1). As hoped, evidence of intermolecular charge transfer between donor and acceptor blocks was seen in thin films of these triblock copolymers. The films also showed desirable phase separation, with higher volume fractions of P3HT leading to nanofiber structures and lower volume fractions forming spherical aggregates 10–30 nm in diameter.81
 Scheme 1  Cyclization reaction to use by Izuhara et al. to generate the fully-conjugated block copolymer P3HT-b-PPymPh.81 
In a slight but interesting modification of the syntheses previously reported,78,80,81 Woody et al. also prepared D–A–D triblock copolymers with an acceptor block flanked by poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT) donors.82 As discussed earlier, Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization produces a brominated terminus at the point of initiation, and quenching of the reaction with methanol or hydrochloric acid leads to expulsion of the nickel catalyst from the growing chain with addition of a hydrogen. This most often generates a monobrominated polymer, but side reactions can lead to couplings between growing P3HT chains and dibrominated or non-brominated materials.83 These P3HT species act as contaminants and decrease the efficiency of block copolymer formation. To increase the yield of monobrominated material, Woody et al. first preformed a phenylnickel(II) bromide complex which served to initiate the growing polymer chain with a phenyl group, replacing the traditional bromine terminus. After polymerization was complete, rather than quenching immediately, the reaction mixture was stored at −15 °C for 12 hours. This allowed the nickel catalyst to slowly undergo dissociative reductive elimination from the polymer chain, leaving the bromine intact. This resulted in an almost entirely monobrominated polymer. Two dibrominated acceptor blocks based on poly(5,8-quinoxaline) (PQ) differing in alkyl side-chain were prepared via standard Yamamoto coupling. These Br–PQ–Br acceptors were then borylated and coupled to the P3OT donors via Suzuki coupling to generate the P3OT–PQ–P3OT triblock copolymers as shown in Fig. 13.82
 Fig. 13  Block copolymers reported by Woody et al.82 
The Yamamoto coupling has the advantage that it employs nickel, a commodity metal, rather than platinum or palladium.84 It also circumvents the use of Grignard or alkyllithium reagents, and so tolerates a broader range of substrates than the Kumada coupling for example.85 However the amount of nickel complex required is often excessive, for instance Woody et al. used a superstoichiometric ratio of nickel complex to substrate.82 Additionally, the haloaromatic homocoupling is limited to the production of homopolymers. One of the most effective means of generating materials with a low energy gap, crucial for organic photovoltaics, is through the cross-coupling of monomers with different energy levels.86 Thus, polymerization techniques capable of producing alternating copolymers are required.
It is expected that, through careful control of electronic properties, conjugated polymers with optimum energy levels for exciton splitting and charge transmission can be designed. A narrow optimized energy gap between 1.1 and 1.4 eV (ref. 87) is of the utmost importance in OPV materials, and while there are multiple ways this can be achieved (by extending conjugation lengths or incorporating electron withdrawing/donating groups, for example) one of the most effective approaches is through the use of comonomers in a system referred to as the push–pull polymer.88,89 In a push–pull polymer, an electron-rich molecule is linked through conjugation to an electron-poor molecule. This leads to a hybridization of molecular orbitals between the two and a blending of the respective HOMOs and LUMOs (Fig. 14). The high energy HOMO of the electron-rich molecule raises the HOMO of the pair while the low energy LUMO of the electron-deficient molecule leads to a decrease in the combined LUMO energy, thus narrowing the energy gap. Additionally, because there is a tendency to transfer charge from one dissimilar unit to the other, electron density is highly delocalized. This delocalization increases conjugation and shortens bond length, further narrowing the energy gap of the polymer.90
 Fig. 14  Schematic of molecular orbital hybridization leading to a narrowed energy-gap in push–pull type polymers. 
The two most common synthetic methods used to generate push–pull polymers are the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling and the Stille coupling, which employ boronic acid73 derivatives and stannae74 respectively. These syntheses are particularly well-suited for the production of push–pull polymers, as the reactions are most efficient when the halogenated monomer is electron deficient and the organometallic monomer is electron rich. In order to obtain the copolymer, two symmetric bifunctional monomers are used. This is referred to as AA–BB coupling in which A and B denote the monomeric functional groups. The AA–BB synthetic approach is quite versatile and allows the incorporation of a wide variety of monomers. However, this polycondensation produces polymers with three different combinations of end-groups (Fig. 15a), and potentially three different polymeric species in the subsequent block copolymer reaction. The number of by products can be diminished by increasing the ratio of one monomer to another, however this approach severely limits the molecular weight of the polymer product according to Carother's equation. Because the monomer ratio has a drastic effect on polymer length in AA–BB type systems, the amounts must be tightly controlled to achieve a consistent molecular weight.91 Alternatively, a heterobifunctional AB type monomer can be used, which is synthetically more difficult to prepare but which yields some distinct advantages. In AB type syntheses, only one end-group combination is possible (Fig. 15b). Additionally, because it is essentially a homopolymerization the monomer ratio need not be considered. As previously alluded to, these polycondensations commonly proceed through a step-growth mechanism and generally result in higher PDIs than the chain-growth KCTP.16
 Fig. 15  Depiction of AA–BB type polycondensation with polymer products (a.) and A–B type polycondensation (b.). 
One of the first high-performance polymers, PFTBT, is a push–pull polymer and was the first such material to be incorporated into a fully-conjugated block copolymer for OPV. Mulherin et al. reported the synthesis and evaluation of block copolymer P3HT-b-PFTBTT in 2011.92 The PFTBTT block was prepared via an AB-type Stille coupling of a fluorene-dithienobenzothiadiazole monomer, followed by end-capping with P3HT-Br (Fig. 16). The coupling reaction between blocks was not efficient and produced a mixture of block copolymer product and homopolymer contaminants; 42% of the material by weight was free PFTBTT.
 Fig. 16  Structure of block copolymer reported by Mulherin et al.92 
Because previous blends of P3HT/PFTBT were shown to give optimal performance at 1:1 weight ratios,93 additional P3HT was added to the block copolymer mixture to compensate for the free acceptor material. Despite the low concentration of block copolymer, microphase separation into lamellar-type domains was observed and a PCE of 1.17% was achieved in the ternary blend.92
The preparation of AB-type monomers can be synthetically challenging, certainly more so than the preparation of AA/BB-type monomers. In 2012 Ku et al. presented a simplified AA/BB-type Stille polycondensation with a P3HT macroinitiator to generate poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(diketopyrrolopyrrole-terthiophene) (P3HT-b-DPP).94 The elegance of this AA/BB approach lies in the flexibility, in that monomers can be substituted easily to allow modulation of the polymeric energy gap. The P3HT-b-DPP block copolymer maintained crystallinity in both blocks if annealed below the melting point of the homopolymers. Interestingly, annealing above the P3HT melting point (220 °C) eliminated crystallinity in that block, and heating above the melting point of DPP (265 °C) eliminated crystallinity in both blocks although microphase separation was enhanced.94 This is an excellent illustration of the competition between the two morphological processes. The authors proceeded to demonstrative the versatility of this synthetic approach by applying it successfully to a second furan-substituted DPP derivative and also a poly(3-ethylhexylthiophene) (P3EHT) macroinitiator. In a subsequent work on P3HT-b-DPP, it was shown that aggregation of the DPP in solution led to structure formation in films, while no microphase separation was seen in bulk samples.95 Thus, choice of deposition solvent is a simple but powerful means of controlling film morphology.
Following the promising results obtained with P3HT-b-PFTBTT,92 another P3HT-b-PFTBT derivative was prepared by Sommer et al. in 2012.96 In this work a dibrominated TBT unit with additional hexyl side chains was copolymerized with a borylated fluorene monomer in an AA/BB type Suzuki polycondensation. Addition of a P3HT-Br end-capper afforded the complete block copolymer (Fig. 17). Following rigorous purification using preparatory gel permeation chromatography (GPC), a pure block copolymer of 30 kg mol−1 was obtained. Unfortunately, thin films of the P3HT-b-PF8TBT material did not show any indication of microphase separation. The authors posited that the incorporation of the additional hexyl side-chains on the TBT unit may have decreased the Flory–Huggins parameter, detrimentally affecting the film morphology.
 Fig. 17  Block copolymers reported in ref. 96 (left) and ref. 75 (right). 
In 2011 the Verduzco group began research into fully-conjugated block copolymers for organic photovoltaics32,97 and since that time they have published numerous works on the synthesis and characterization of these materials.34,49,53,75,98–102 The first systems investigated were P3HT-b-PF and P3HT-b-PFBT, where the poly(3-hexylthiophene) donor was coupled with poly(fluorene) and a statistical copolymer of fluorene and benzothiadiazole respectively.32,97 The block copolymers were generated using a Suzuki polycondensation in conjunction with a P3HT macroinitiator. Because of the mismatched energy levels between the donor and acceptor, these materials were not expected to be high-performing, but allowed fundamental studies on charge transfer and self-assembly in block copolymers with two crystalline blocks. Using transient absorption spectroscopy they showed the formation of long lived holes in P3HT as a result of charge transfer in block copolymers, with charge transfer rates of 30% in P3HT-b-PFO and 57% in P3HT-b-PFBT.97 Using temperature dependent X-ray scattering, they observed crystallization-driven microphase separation in thin film.32 In 2012, the Verduzco group expanded their block copolymer library to include P3HT-b-PFTBT (Fig. 17) in addition to P3HT-b-PF and P3HT-b-PFBT, and modified the synthetic procedure to include a lithium chloride additive during synthesis of the P3HT macroinitiator which was shown to increase the amount of monobrominated P3HT. With these materials they examined the effect of volume fraction on crystallinity, establishing that P3HT crystallinity can be completely suppressed at low weight percentages.98
In succeeding work on P3HT-b-PFTBT, the Verduzco group reported the highest efficiency block copolymer device to-date. The block copolymer was 56% P3HT by weight and using resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS) was shown to adopt a lamellar structure with a 9 nm domain size. The PCE of 3.1% outperformed blends of the constituent polymers, demonstrating the benefit of morphological control and a direct route for charge transfer between donor and acceptor.75 Despite the promising result achieved with P3HT-b-PFTBT, the excellent PCE has yet to be matched in the same or similar materials. This may be related to synthetic variations,103 however, an extensive library of 30 block copolymers were prepared based on the P3HT-b-PFTBT scaffold with varying side-chains and block ratios, however none of them exceeded a PCE of 1%, and only two achieved better than 0.1%. Morphological analysis showed only weak or no phase separation in the materials, which the authors attributed to the addition of alkyl side-chains.53
The hypothesis that lack of phase separation was detrimental for OPV performance was recently buoyed by the work of Lombeck et al.104 In order to enhance phase separation semifluorinated alkyl side chains were incorporated into a poly(carbazole-alt-benzothiadiazole) (PCDTBT) acceptor material in a block copolymer with a P3HT donor (Fig. 18). In comparison with P3HT-b-PCDTBT with alkyl side chains or no side chains, the fluorinated block copolymers showed increased crystallinity and microphase separation. A PCE of 0.95% was obtained with the fluorinated block copolymer, compared to 0.0028% for the alkylated material.104
 Fig. 18  Block copolymer series evaluating the effect of side-chain fluorination.104 
One of the few other block copolymers able to reach 1% PCE employed poly(perylene diimide) as the acceptor block with a P3HT donor.36 This material was prepared using a Stille polycondensation between PDI and dithiophene with a P3HT-Br macroinitiator (Fig. 19). The resultant mixture of polymeric products was purified using extensive preparatory GPC to eliminate as much low molecular weight homopolymer contamination as possible. The highest performance material obtained was 47% P3HT by weight and reached a PCE of 0.96% ± 0.07.
 Fig. 19  Structure of block copolymer as reported in ref. 36. 
The use of polycondensations and a P3HT-Br macroreagent has provided a simple and effective route for the generation of block copolymers. However, this reliance on P3HT limits the choice of acceptor to those complimentary to the energy levels and absorption of P3HT, and thus precludes the use of state-of-the-art high performance materials. In an effort to incorporate other systems, Lee et al. synthesized donor and acceptor homopolymers separately via Stille polycondensation and then joined the preformed blocks in a subsequent Stille coupling (Scheme 2).50 The donor material chosen was poly(quinoxaline-thiophene) (PTQI) which has previously produced efficiencies of 7.08% in conjunction with PC71BM. Two block copolymers were prepared, with and without an alkylene linker separating the blocks (see previous discussion) and the differences in performance were attributed to the nature of the linker.
 Scheme 2  Synthetic route and intended polymerization products as reported in ref. 50. 
However, drawing conclusions from materials produced using this series of AA–BB type couplings is questionable. As illustrated in Fig. 15, both the synthesis of donor and acceptor are expected to produce materials with three end-group combinations. Coupling these polymeric mixtures then could potentially create diblock and triblock polymers and potentially even longer iterations. Additionally, it is well established that the Stille coupling transmetalation is more efficient with stannylthiophenes than stannylbenzenes, and so the efficacy of the PTQI-b-PNDISL linkage is questionable.105 Thus it is possible that the difference in efficiency is caused by some other compositional factor rather than the nature of the linkage. This work emphasizes the need for synthetic routes which minimize by-products or materials designed in such a way as to enable sufficient purification. Until these needs are met fundamental studies on the morphological and electronic behaviour of full-conjugated block copolymers will suffer.
In a closely related and similarly motivated work, a poly(bithiophene-thienothiophene) donor and a DPP-based acceptor were synthesized separately via Stille polycondensation and then linked, again using Stille coupling, to produce a block copolymer. The distinction in this approach, was that the intention was to form a multiblock copolymer, thus alleviating the difficulties associated with trying to form a pure diblock copolymer. The authors prepared and rigorously purified the dibromo donor material and the distannylated acceptor material, producing macroreagents with narrow PDI and number average weights of 10 kg mol−1 (donor) and 5 kg mol−1 (acceptor). The subsequent multiblock synthesis produced material of Mn = 50 kg mol−1, significantly larger than the isolated donor and acceptor blocks. This molecular weight difference facilitated the removal of the unreacted donor and acceptor blocks using preparative size exclusion chromatography. The authors saw some indication of microphase separation in AFM of multiblock copolymer films, however given the array of multiblock copolymer compositions produced it is unclear how stable or reproducible the obtained morphologies would be.106
In order to produce more controlled diblock copolymers using this grafting-to method, the individual blocks must be synthesized with a single reactive terminus each. To accomplish this, Verduzco et al. have investigated a functionalized palladium catalyst capable of initiating a catalyst-transfer Suzuki polymerization. When used in conjunction with AB-type fluorene monomers, poly(fluorene) with a single azide terminus was prepared. Analogously, a functionalized nickel catalyst was used to prepare P3AT with a single hydroxyl terminus. After conversion of the P3AT hydroxyl terminus into an alkyne via Steglich esterification, the P3AT and PF blocks were joined using CuAAC click chemistry.99 Unfortunately the PF synthesis and end-group functionalization remain poorly controlled, and further development is required.100
The further development of chain-growth polymerizations which produce fully-conjugated systems could benefit block copolymer technology immensely. Successful chain-growth catalyst transfer polymerization (CTP) of fully-conjugated materials relies on a continued association of the catalytic species with the growing polymer chain (the associative complex).27 Factors and alternative pathways, which detract from the living nature of these polymerizations and either increase the PDI and/or the presence of polymeric byproducts, include disproportionation, catalyst dissociation, and slow initiation. Careful catalyst design has been identified as a route to limit these alternative pathways and produce a more homogenous polymer product.
Work by McNeill et al. has elucidated several crucial factors for catalyst design which can be adjusted in an effort to achieve chain-growth in each monomer system. It was demonstrated that the electronic nature of the ancillary ligand, which remains bound to the metal center throughout the catalytic cycle, has a large impact on the stability and reactivity of the associative complex. The catalyst remains more tightly associated with the growing polymer chain if the ancillary ligand is electron donating and therefore conducive to metal–π* back donation. This leads to a slower polymerization rate and a narrower PDI. Electron-withdrawing ligands, in contrast, were found to increase the polymerization rate through stabilization of the Ni(0) species which facilitates reductive elimination. The impact of the electronic nature of the ancillary ligand was shown to vary with the electronic nature of the monomer, and can be optimized for each system: it can be seen that a system in which the associative complex is too stable may experience limited catalytic efficacy. Additionally, the steric properties of the ancillary ligand can be adapted to the monomer system in order to provide an appropriate level of restriction, inhibiting disproportionation and competing reactive species but not limiting catalytic activity.107
A further component that can be adjusted to increase the molecular weight control of a polymerization is the addition of a reactive ligand, which is incorporated into the growing polymer chain upon initiation. Reactive ligands are often employed to provide or eliminate functionality at a polymers’ terminus, however they can also have a large affect on the initiation rate of the catalytic cycle.107 Hartwig et al. have shown that a large electronic disparity between a reactive ligand and a given monomer can increase the rate of reductive elimination,108 thereby increasing initiation rates and decreasing the PDI.
CTP is most frequently successful in the polymerization of electron rich systems such as thiophenes or fluorenes,27 while in n-type materials it is often not as effective. This can be partially attributed to the weaker π donation between the monomers and metal center, which leads to poorer stability of the associative complex.109 Furthermore, larger monomer units can enhance the rate of catalyst dissociation. The development of catalyst systems capable of living polymerization in n-type materials would be of great value. The identification of catalyst/monomer systems is which monomers with differing electronic properties are selectively polymerized under the same conditions could enable the synthesis of donor/acceptor block copolymers in one pot through sequential addition of monomers. This would greatly simplify synthesis and possibly decrease the amount of homopolymer contamination. Towards this end, Willot et al. investigated the KCTP of cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT) using the ubiquitous Ni(dppp)Cl2 as catalyst and showed that the polymerization proceeded through a chain growth mechanism, although polydispersities were higher than expected due to slow initiation.110 Block copolymers of thiophene and CPDT (Fig. 20) were prepared through sequential monomer addition. CPDT is higher in electron density, and the Ni(dppp) species associates more strongly with it than thiophene. For this reason the order of monomer addition was crucial to successful block copolymerization: when starting with thiophene polymerization the catalyst would readily incorporate the CPDT monomers, but in the opposite order the Ni(dppp) remained tightly bound to the CPDT chain and unreactive to thiophene.110 An attempt to extend this sequential monomer addition strategy to a block copolymer of P3HT and alkyl-substituted thieno[3,4-b] pyrazines (TP) was less successful, with only 8 TP repeat units appended to the P3HT block before Ni(dppp) dissociation (Fig. 20).111
 Fig. 20  Block copolymers produced by sequential monomer addition in KCTP.111 
While these initial investigations into extensions of KCTP were equal parts promising and disheartening, more recent work has attempted to identify catalytic candidates beyond the Ni(dppp) with good results. A Ni(II) diimine catalyst with a more electron-donating ligand was investigated with excellent results.112 Using this catalyst, both 3-hexylthiophene (electron rich) and benzotriazole (electron poor) were successfully polymerized (Scheme 3) with good control over molecular weight and reasonable polydispersities (1.2–1.5). More importantly, the sequential addition of monomers led to the incorporation of both to obtain block copolymers of molecular weights and polydispersities appropriate for OPV applications. The block copolymers obtained underwent microphase separation to form nanoscale lamella in thin film.112
 Scheme 3  Application of Ni(II) diimine catalyst for KCTP of electron rich and electron poor monomers to generate a BCP.112 
As mentioned, CTP relies on continued association between catalyst and growing chain to achieve chain growth polymerization. An alternative approach is to deactivate the free monomer to the first step in the catalytic cycle (here oxidative addition) while activating the end of the growing polymer. The desired result is that the catalyst will only initiate couplings from one end of the polymer chain and forego condensations between free monomers. This can be accomplished by designing monomers which have substituents that deactivate oxidative addition via electronic resonance effects.113 This approach was used to generate a triblock copolymer composed of poly(selenophene), poly(thiophene) and poly(fluorene) with any order of connectivity.114 The authors used Negishi coupling, which is a palladium-catalyzed cross coupling between an organozinc compound and an organohalide. Because a preferential association with one monomer species can prevent incorporation of dissimilar monomers, a catalyst with weak monomer associations was required. The choice of Pd(Ruphos) as catalyst allowed facile dissociation from the growing polymer, while the AB-type monobromo/monobromozincio monomer design prohibited catalyst insertion into the free monomer bromide. Instead, only the brominated end of the growing polymer was available for oxidative addition, affording chain-like growth and a library of ABC triblock copolymers (Scheme 4).114
 Scheme 4  Triblock copolymer library produced via Negishi polymerization and sequential monomer addition.114 
Rather than attempt to adapt the same polymerization technique to different monomer classes, a catalyst capable of initiating two different cross-couplings could be employed with sequential monomer addition. As an exploration of this concept, P3HT was generated via traditional KCTP using a slight variation in catalyst choice (Ni(dppe) rather than Ni(dppp)). Concurrently, an active monobromo/monochlorozincio dithienosilole (Br-DTS-ZnCl) monomer was prepared. Upon full conversion of 3-hexylthiophene, Br-DTS-ZnCl was added to the reaction. It was shown that the P3HT chains with associated catalysts were able to initiate a Negishi polymerization, generating P3HT-b-PDTS as shown in Scheme 5.115
 Scheme 5  KCTP and Negishi polycondensation initiated sequentially by the same catalyst.115 
In an intriguing example of emerging strategies for fully-conjugated block copolymer synthesis, Tkachov et al. have reported a one-pot chain growth polymerization of electron rich and electron deficient monomers. Recently, a new nickel-catalyzed chain growth polycondensation that proceeds through the formation of an anion-radical of a dibrominated monomer was reported.116 In a rather inspired design, the authors then sought to combine two polymerizations in one pot by preparing a naphthalene diimide (NDI) anion radical monomer as well as a monobromo/monochlorozincio fluorene monomer. Upon addition of Pd/PtBu3 catalyst to the mixture of monomers, the fluorene was polymerized preferentially and the NDI was only incorporated when a majority of the fluorene was consumed.117 Thus a diblock copolymer was formed in a one-pot reaction (Scheme 6). While the allure of one-pot reactions is undeniable, it is unclear how substrate-dependent this polymerization technique is and whether it is broadly applicable.
 Scheme 6  One-pot synthesis of a BCP through selective incorporation of monomers.117 
The systems thus far discussed have relied on cross-coupling reactions between (hetero)aryl halides/pseudohalides and organometallic (hetero)aryl systems. An alternative to these synthetic methodologies, direct arylation polymerization (DArP) is the palladium-catalyzed coupling of (hetero)arenes and (hetero)aryl halides, foregoing the need for organometallic derivatives. The elimination of organometallics in the synthetic scheme simplifies reaction conditions and increases atom economy and for these reasons is of great interest to the semiconducting polymer community.
This synthetic approach was recently employed by Sommer et al. to produce a fully-conjugated P3HT-b-PNDIT2 block copolymer (Scheme 7). Similarly to the other grafting-from block copolymer syntheses, the P3HT block was prepared separately and added as a macroreagent to the PNDIT2 polymerization. However in DArP conditions, the monobrominated P3HT produced during traditional KCTP can potentially couple through both the Br-P3HT and sterically hindered H-P3HT end-groups. The authors discovered that neither of these couplings was very efficient, but that end-capping the terminal bromine with an unsubstituted thiophene allowed 100% incorporation of the P3HT-Th into a growing block copolymer. The expected multiblock species were observed, although the authors were able to minimize polymeric byproducts through reactant stoichiometry.118
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of P3HT-b-PNDIT2 via DArP as reported in ref. 118. 
The development of DArP for fully-conjugated block copolymer synthesis is a valuable expansion of the available synthetic methodologies. However, DArP often shares the problems of other polycondensations, such as poorly controlled molecular weight distributions and polymer compositions. Recent work to combine the benefits of DArP with a chain-growth mechanism has produced some interesting results. Luscombe et al. have reported a two-step chain-growth polymerization for the production of P3HT, in which a monobrominated thiophene monomer is first aurylated in a direct C–H activation. The aurylated monomer, which is stable to aqueous work-up, is then polymerized using a palladium catalyst and the resultant polymer is produced with molecular weight control comparable to that produced using KCTP.119
Amphiphilic block copolymers
Much progress has been made in block copolymer synthesis and optimization for use in single layer OPVs, however power conversion efficiencies are still too low to be commercially relevant. In addition, the most successful systems require the use of chlorinated and aromatic solvents, which are not tolerated in industry. One approach that could potentially address both of these shortcomings is the generation of amphiphilic block copolymers through side chain modulation of one of the block sequences. An amphiphilic block copolymer is expected to show increased phase separation and solubility in polar solvents, potentially even alcohols or water.
The functional groups commonly used to increase hydrophilicity include amino, phosphate, carboxyl, sulfonic, and zwitterionic groups. These substituents have been incorporated into a variety of polymers, including block copolymers, and have been successfully shown to increase solubility in polar solvents.120 Several of the routes towards side chain manipulation proceed through a terminal halogen on an alkyl substituent. The Arbuzov reaction has been quite successful and leads to alkylphosphonates with increased hydrophilicity. For example, following treatment of poly(3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene) with triethyl phosphite, Tu et al. generated a hydrophilic P3HT block (Fig. 21). Although it was coupled to poly(9,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl fluorene)), the block copolymer was soluble in both acetone and THF. By varying the polarity of the solvent system, the authors were able to modify aggregation and photoluminescent properties, illustrating the malleability of these amphiphilic system.121
 Fig. 21  Structures of amphiphilic block copolymers as reported in ref. 121 (left) and ref. 122 (right). 
Polyelectrolytes can also be generated via a terminal bromoalkane through the addition of amino groups such as trimethylamine or pyridine. Gutacker and coworkers were able to synthesize a cationic poly(fluorene)-b-neutral poly(fluorene) through this method. The initial synthesis produced a block copolymer with two dissimilar fluorene monomeric sequences, one with alkyl substituents and one with bromoalkyl substituents. Subsequent treatment with trimethyl amine affords the final amphiphilic product (Fig. 21), which was found to be soluble in a range of solvents from methanol to chloroform.122
While several amphiphilic block copolymers have been synthesized, they are most commonly employed as interlayers for selective charge transmission. This is partially attributed to the charge trapping mechanisms associated with ionic groups, which are detrimental to active layer performance. To address this issue neutral tertiary amines were pursued as side chain moieties as an alternative to the more widely used ionic functional groups. Duan and coworkers synthesized poly(N-7′-((1′,13′-bis(N′,N′′-diethylamino)tridecanyl))-2,7-carbazole)-alt-TBT copolymer (PCDTBT-N) for use as a donor material in conjunction with a water/alcohol soluble fullerene derivative. Unfortunately, this material exhibited no photovoltaic response at all. These results are indicative of the inherent hole-trapping ability of amino groups and emphasize the need to develop non-amino based solubilizing side chains.123
In 2009 Izuhara et al. reported the successful synthesis of n-type conjugated polymers consisting of pyridinium phenylene units. The work produced some interesting results and a potential area for further exploration. One of their polymers, P3, showed a LUMO energy level of 3.9–4.14 eV, comparable to the PCBM LUMO of 4.2 eV. These polyelectrolyte compounds were only soluble in very polar solvents such as water or methanol, both of which are amenable to industrial production of these materials. The polymer P1 was used in a bilayer device, in which the p-type acceptor P3HT was deposited from chloroform in a first step, followed by the deposition of the polyelectrolyte in aqueous solution. This device showed a VOC of 1.2 eV and a low JSC of 7 μA cm−2, not unexpected for a bilayer device.124
More recently the amphiphilic design was revisited and applied to the P3HT-b-PFTBT system in an effort to both increase industrially relevant solubility and enhance self-assembly. Synthesis was accomplished via Suzuki polycondensation from a P3HT-Br macroinitiator, and hydrophilicity was generated through the incorporation of tetraethylene glycol (TEG) moieties into the fluorene unit of the acceptor block. The resultant block copolymers P3HT-b-PFTEGTBT and P3HT-b-PFTEGT6BT are shown in Fig. 22.125 The materials did indeed show improved solubility, and the increased chemical disparity between the donor, acceptor, and block copolymer allowed the development of a facile purification system capable of isolating the block copolymer product. In a subsequent publication, the authors demonstrated that the P3HT-b-PFTEGT6BT material underwent spontaneous microphase separation into thermally stable linear domains with spacing commensurate with the length of the polymer. This was a marked improvement over previous materials, which showed weak, or no phase separation in thin film.53,96
 Fig. 22  Block copolymer structures as reported in ref. 125 and 126. 
In order to demonstrate the benefit of block copolymer purity to thin-film morphology, P3HT and PFTEGT6BT homopolymers were added to the P3HT-b-PFTEGT6BT block copolymer to create a ternary blend. Films of the ternary blend before and after annealing were then compared with those of the purified block copolymer. The ternary blend film had a drastically different morphology, with some indication of linear domain structure in as-spun films but none following annealing.126 This demonstrates the large effect that polymeric contaminants can have on block copolymer morphology, and suggests that the thermal stability and reproducibility of block copolymer OPV requires pure block copolymer materials. Despite the promising film behaviours, the device performance of this system was quite low as a result of poor electron mobility in the PFTEGT6BT block. It was not immediately apparent why the incorporation of TEG chains in the acceptor block was detrimental, as ethylene glycol units have been employed in OPV active layer to good effect previously,127,128 and merits further investigation.
Conclusions
Fully-conjugated block copolymers are promising as single material active layers, offering a route to well-defined, stable morphologies in an industry where this is of the utmost importance. However, this technology lags behind the efficiencies currently reported for high-performance OPV active layers. One obvious reason for this gap is that the polymers which have been incorporated into block copolymers are often chosen for synthetic accessibility rather than OPV performance. The highest-performing polymer blends, such as the recently reported PTzBI/PNDI system,129 often employ materials which cannot as yet be synthesized with the molecular weight control and donor/acceptor connectivity desirable in a block copolymer system. Progress in this area will be crucial to the success of the block copolymer material design. Methodologies are required which not only produce the block copolymers, but produce them with minimal or removable polymeric contamination and with a narrow molecular weight distribution. This could be accomplished with sequential chain-growth polymerizations, however syntheses of this type are only successful with a very limited range of monomers or catalytic systems. In contrast, grafting-to AB-type polycondensations may prove an optimal strategy. This approach would allow access to the state-of-the-art push–pull polymers, while producing materials with a single reactive terminus thus avoiding triblock copolymer contamination. Furthermore, synthesizing the donor and acceptor blocks separately allows greater control over their respective molecular weights and fine-tuning of the block ratios.
An ideal block copolymer active layer would be free from polymer by-products in order to generate reproducible and stable morphologies. While steps can be taken to minimize contaminants synthetically, purification techniques capable of isolating the desired block copolymer are required. This is perhaps best accomplished by introducing a significant and exploitable chemical disparity between blocks, and should be considered in material design. If chosen appropriately, this disparity could also serve to increase the Flory–Huggins parameter and self-assembly properties. The amphiphilic block copolymer systems could satisfy this condition, with the added benefit of improving solubility of the active layer in industrially relevant solvents.
Once the synthetic and purification issues have been resolved, the questions of fully-conjugated block copolymer morphology and photophysics can be more thoroughly addressed. While promising, these materials have lingered at the 3.0% efficiency mark since 2013. However, it is important to realize that the overwhelming majority of reports on fully-conjugated block copolymers have examined highly heterogeneous systems with broad molecular weight distributions, and none have employed modern high-performance materials. The donor/acceptor block copolymer system represents a theoretically ideal active layer material and merits thorough research and optimization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was made possible by support from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency which funds the project grants within the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics. Responsibility for the views, information or advice expressed herein is not accepted by the Australian Government. The authors would also like to gratefully acknowledge the Albert Shimmins Fund for financial support during the writing process.
Notes and references

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, International Energy Outlook 2016, DOE/EIA-0484(2016), May 11,  2016.

          K. H. Lvovsky, G. Hughes, D. Maddison, B. Ostro and D. Pearce, Environmental costs of fossil fuels: a rapid assessment method with application to six cities, in Environmental Department Papers, The World Bank, Washington, DC,  2000, vol. 78 Search PubMed .
B. Machol and S. Rizk, Environ. Int., 2013, 52, 75–80 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, Z. Hong, Z. Xu, G. Li, R. A. Street and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6642–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3417–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Groves, R. A. Marsh and N. C. Greenham, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Schaffer, C. M. Palumbiny, M. A. Niedermeier, C. Jendrzejewski, G. Santoro, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6760–6764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Epps and R. K. O'Reilly, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1674–1689 RSC .
R. Steyrleuthner, R. Di Pietro, B. A. Collins, F. Polzer, S. Himmelberger, M. Schubert, Z. Chen, S. Zhang, A. Salleo, H. Ade, A. Facchetti and D. Neher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4245–4256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Poelking and D. Andrienko, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8941–8956 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Chen, E. L. Thomas, C. K. Ober and G.-p. Mao, Science, 1996, 273, 343–346 CAS .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17039–17048 RSC .
P. D. Topham, A. J. Parnell and R. C. Hiorns, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1131–1156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7385–7395 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Robb, S. Y. Ku and C. J. Hawker, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5686–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yassar, L. Miozzo, R. Gironda and G. Horowitz, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 791–844 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Today, 1999, 52, 32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koo, H. Ahn, S.-W. Kim, D. Y. Ryu and T. P. Russell, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 9059–9071 RSC .
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 525–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Bates, Science, 1991, 251, 898–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Matsushita, K. Mori, R. Saguchi, Y. Nakao, I. Noda and M. Nagasawa, Macromolecules, 1990, 23, 4313–4316 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, B. S. Lokitz, S. W. Sides, J. Chen, W. T. Heller, J. F. Ankner, J. F. Browning, S. M. Kilbey Ii and B. G. Sumpter, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21336–21348 RSC .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205–9216 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Ho, Y.-H. Lee, C.-A. Dai, R. A. Segalman and W.-F. Su, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4208–4219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, D. Yan and J. Z. Y. Chen, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 9060–9070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Bryan and A. J. McNeil, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8395–8405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiriy, V. Senkovskyy and M. Sommer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1503–1517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Loo, R. A. Register and A. J. Ryan, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 2365–2374 CrossRef CAS .
W.-N. He and J.-T. Xu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1350–1400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, H. Yang, S. Wu, Y. Geng and Y. Han, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verduzco, I. Botiz, D. L. Pickel, S. M. Kilbey, K. Hong, E. Dimasi and S. B. Darling, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. Liu, L. Simón-Bower, L. Zhai and A. J. Gesquiere, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 4461–4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lin, K. G. Yager, B. Stewart and R. Verduzco, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 3817–3825 RSC .
P.-T. Wu, G. Ren, C. Li, R. Mezzenga and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2317–2320 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Tao, Y. Guo, J. Yang, Y. Liu, L. Zhao, Z. Xie and W. Huang, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 1825–1833 RSC .
S. Koyuncu, H.-W. Wang, F. Liu, K. B. Toga, W. Gu and T. P. Russell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2993–2998 CAS .
X. L. Chen and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 6189–6192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, Z. Fan, Y. Wang and J. Haliburton, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 1429–1443 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Choi, J. Haliburton, T. Cleveland, R. Li, S.-S. Sun, A. Ledbetter and C. E. Bonner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4317–4326 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van den Bergh, P. Willot, D. Cornelis, T. Verbiest and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Olsen, X. Gu, A. Hexemer, E. Gann and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6531–6534 CrossRef CAS .
B. McCulloch, G. Portale, W. Bras and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7503–7507 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Olsen, X. Li, J. Wang and R. A. Segalman, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 182–192 RSC .
Y. Tao, B. McCulloch, S. Kim and R. A. Segalman, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4219–4230 RSC .
D. Mori, H. Benten, H. Ohkita, S. Ito and K. Miyake, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3325–3329 CAS .
K. Johnson, Y.-S. Huang, S. Huettner, M. Sommer, M. Brinkmann, R. Mulherin, D. Niedzialek, D. Beljonne, J. Clark, W. T. S. Huck and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5074–5083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Grieco, M. P. Aplan, A. Rimshaw, Y. Lee, T. P. Le, W. Zhang, Q. Wang, S. T. Milner, E. D. Gomez and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6978–6988 CAS .
J. W. Mok, Y.-H. Lin, K. G. Yager, A. D. Mohite, W. Nie, S. B. Darling, Y. Lee, E. Gomez, D. Gosztola, R. D. Schaller and R. Verduzco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5578–5585 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, J. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, G. E. Park, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9745–9751 CAS .
H. Kuang, M. J. Janik and E. D. Gomez, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 1224–1230 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Morse and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 73, 3235–3238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Smith, Y.-H. Lin, J. W. Mok, K. G. Yager, J. Strzalka, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite and R. Verduzco, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 8346–8353 CrossRef CAS .
B. de Boer, U. Stalmach, P. F. van Hutten, C. Melzer, V. V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Polymer, 2001, 42, 9097–9109 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464–5472 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gholamkhass, T. J. Peckham and S. Holdcroft, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 708–719 RSC .
M. Heuken, H. Komber, T. Erdmann, V. Senkovskyy, A. Kiriy and B. Voit, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4101–4114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hufnagel, M. Fischer, T. Thurn-Albrecht and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1637–1647 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, A. Cirpan, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1079–1082 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, The Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2006, 36, 245–249 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huettner, M. Sommer, J. Hodgkiss, P. Kohn, T. Thurn-Albrecht, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3506–3515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gupta, C. R. Singh, R. H. Lohwasser, M. Himmerlich, S. Krischok, P. Müller-Buschbaum, M. Thelakkat, H. Hoppe and T. Thurn-Albrecht, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12309–12318 CAS .
S.-S. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Science, 1998, 280, 1741–1744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108–4110 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Loewe, P. C. Ewbank, J. Liu, L. Zhai and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4324–4333 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tkachov, V. Senkovskyy, H. Komber, J.-U. Sommer and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7803–7810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Q. Wu, R. J. Ono, Z. Chen and C. W. Bielawski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14000–14001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Su, S.-Y. Shi, Q. Wang, N. Liu, J. Yin, C. Liu, Y. Ding and Z.-Q. Wu, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6519–6528 RSC .
Y.-Y. Hu, M. Su, C.-H. Ma, Z. Yu, N. Liu, J. Yin, Y. Ding and Z.-Q. Wu, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5204–5212 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Wu, C.-G. Qi, N. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Yin, Y.-Y. Zhu, L.-Z. Qiu and H.-B. Lu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 2939–2947 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chevrier, S. Richeter, O. Coulembier, M. Surin, A. Mehdi, R. Lazzaroni, R. C. Evans, P. Dubois and S. Clément, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 171–174 RSC .
A. D. Schlüter, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 1533–1556 CrossRef .
B. Carsten, F. He, H. J. Son, T. Xu and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1493–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, Y.-H. Lin, M. D. Witman, K. a. Smith, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. Strzalka, E. D. Gomez and R. Verduzco, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2957–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S.-S. Sun, Z. Fan, Y. Wang, C. Taft, J. H. Haliburton and S. Maaref, in Design and synthesis of novel block copolymers for efficient optoelectronic applications, Proc. SPIE,  2002, pp. 121–128 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, M.-K. Ng, L. Wang, L. Yu, B. Lin, M. Meron and Y. Xiao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2002, 8, 3246–3253 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tu, H. Li, M. Forster, R. Heiderhoff, L. J. Balk and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4327–4331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shiqing, K. Eun Hoo, W. Alexander and N. Ei-ichi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 044201 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakabayashi and H. Mori, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9618–9625 CrossRef CAS .
D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2678–2684 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Woody, B. J. Leever, M. F. Durstock and D. M. Collard, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4690–4698 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Lohwasser and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3388–3397 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Rosen, K.
W. Quasdorf, D. A. Wilson, N. Zhang, A.-M. Resmerita, N. K. Garg and V. Percec, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1346–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Semmelhack, P. M. Helquist and L. D. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 5908–5910 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tautz, E. Da Como, T. Limmer, J. Feldmann, H.-J. Egelhaaf, E. von Hauff, V. Lemaur, D. Beljonne, S. Yilmaz, I. Dumsch, S. Allard and U. Scherf, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 970 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Scharber and N. S. Sariciftci, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1929–1940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. C. Jemison and R. D. McCullough, Techniques for the Molecular Design of Push-Pull Polymers towards Enhanced Organic Photovoltaic Performance, in Polymer Composites for Energy Harvesting, Conversion, and Storage, American Chemical Society,  2014, vol. 1161, pp. 71–109 Search PubMed .
S.-S. Sun, C. Zhang, R. Li, T. Nguyen, T. David and J. Brooks, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. E. Rogers, T. E. Long and S. R. Turner, Introduction to Synthetic Methods in Step-Growth Polymers, in Synthetic Methods in Step-Growth Polymers, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2003, pp. 1–16,  DOI:10.1002/0471220523.ch1 .
R. C. Mulherin, S. Jung, S. Huettner, K. Johnson, P. Kohn, M. Sommer, S. Allard, U. Scherf and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4846–4851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. McNeill, A. Abrusci, J. Zaumseil, R. Wilson, M. J. McKiernan, J. H. Burroughes, J. J. M. Halls, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 193506 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Ku, M. a. Brady, N. D. Treat, J. E. Cochran, M. J. Robb, E. J. Kramer, M. L. Chabinyc and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16040–16046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Brady, S.-Y. Ku, L. A. Perez, J. E. Cochran, K. Schmidt, T. M. Weiss, M. F. Toney, H. Ade, A. Hexemer, C. Wang, C. J. Hawker, E. J. Kramer and M. L. Chabinyc, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8187–8197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, H. Komber, S. Huettner, R. Mulherin, P. Kohn, N. C. Greenham and W. T. S. Huck, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4142–4151 CrossRef CAS .
I. Botiz, R. D. Schaller, R. Verduzco and S. B. Darling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9260–9266 CAS .
Y.-H. Lin, K. A. Smith, C. N. Kempf and R. Verduzco, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 229–232 RSC .
K. A. Smith, Y.-H. Lin, D. B. Dement, J. Strzalka, S. B. Darling, D. L. Pickel and R. Verduzco, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 2636–2645 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Smith, D. L. Pickel, K. Yager, K. Kisslinger and R. Verduzco, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Smith, B. Stewart, K. G. Yager, J. Strzalka and R. Verduzco, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 900–906 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, Y. Lee, Y.-H. Lin, J. Strzalka, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, R. Verduzco, Q. Wang and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4599–4608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, M. P. Aplan, Z. D. Seibers, S. M. Kilbey, Q. Wang and E. D. Gomez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20412–20421 CAS .
F. Lombeck, H. Komber, A. Sepe, R. H. Friend and M. Sommer, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7851–7860 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Li and W. You, CHAPTER 15 Donor-Acceptor Alternating Copolymers, in Conjugated Polymers: A Practical Guide to Synthesis, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2014, pp. 319–342,  10.1039/9781849739771-00319 .
A. Gasperini, M. Johnson, X. Jeanbourquin, L. Yao, A. Rahmanudin, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 824–827 RSC .
A. K. Leone and A. J. McNeil, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2822–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shekhar and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13016–13027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Grisorio and G. P. Suranna, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 7781–7795 RSC .
P. Willot, S. Govaerts and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8888–8895 CrossRef CAS .
P. Willot, D. Moerman, P. Leclère, R. Lazzaroni, Y. Baeten, M. Van der Auweraer and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bridges, H. Yan, A. A. Pollit and D. S. Seferos, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 671–674 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yokoyama and T. Yokozawa, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4093–4101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verswyvel, J. Steverlynck, S. Hadj Mohamed, M. Trabelsi, B. Champagne and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4668–4675 CrossRef CAS .
T. Erdmann, J. Back, R. Tkachov, A. Ruff, B. Voit, S. Ludwigs and A. Kiriy, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5383–5390 RSC .
V. Senkovskyy, R. Tkachov, H. Komber, M. Sommer, M. Heuken, B. Voit, W. T. S. Huck, V. Kataev, A. Petr and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19966–19970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tkachov, H. Komber, S. Rauch, A. Lederer, U. Oertel, L. Häußler, B. Voit and A. Kiriy, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4994–5001 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nübling, H. Komber and M. Sommer, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 1909–1918 CrossRef .
S.-L. Suraru, J. A. Lee and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 533–536 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071–9104 RSC .
G. Tu, H. Li, M. Forster, R. Heiderhoff, L. J. Balk, R. Sigel and U. Scherf, Small, 2007, 3, 1001–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gutacker, C.-Y. Lin, L. Ying, T.-Q. Nguyen, U. Scherf and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4441–4446 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, W. Cai, B. B. Y. Hsu, C. Zhong, K. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Hu, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan, A. J. Heeger and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3022–3034 CAS .
D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17724–17725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mitchell, W. W. H. Wong, M. Thelakkat and D. J. Jones, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mitchell, E. Gann, S. Huettner, C. R. Singh, J. Subbiah, L. Thomsen, C. R. McNeill, M. Thelakkat and D. J. Jones, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4942–4951 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torabi, F. Jahani, I. Van Severen, C. Kanimozhi, S. Patil, R. W. A. Havenith, R. C. Chiechi, L. Lutsen, D. J. M. Vanderzande, T. J. Cleij, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meng, H. Song, X. Chen, Z. Xie, J. Liu and L. Wang, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 4357–4363 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, L. Ying, Z. Wang, B. He, X.-F. Jiang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1243–1251 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
V. D. Mitchell	Valerie D. Mitchell was born in 1982 in Iowa City, Iowa. She received a BSc from the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA in 2007 after which she was employed as an analytical chemist at the University of California, Berkeley. She received her PhD in 2017 from the University of Melbourne where she continues as a postdoctoral researcher with the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics.
D. J. Jones	David J. Jones was born in 1960 in Launceston, Tasmania. He studied at the University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia (PhD, 1995) and carried out postdoctoral work at the University of Sheffield and Cardiff University before joining Imperial College London as team leader for the BP Catalyst Discovery Team. He joined the University of Melbourne in 2005 and has been the project coordinator for the Victorian Organic Solar Cell Consortium (VICOSC), before being engaged as a Senior Research Associate and Senior Lecturer in 2014.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison between bulk heterojunction active layer (left) and lamellar block copolymer active layer (right).	 

 	Fig. 2  Classes of linear diblock copolymers.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Block copolymer morphologies with increasing volume fraction of one component. Reproduced from (ref. 19) with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Block copolymers investigated for crystallization and phase behaviour in ref. 31 (a) and ref. 32 (b and c).	 

 	Fig. 5  Frontier orbital energy levels of material combinations employed in ref. 36 and 37.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of rod–coil block copolymer investigated by Segalman et al.24,25,42–44	 

 	Fig. 7  HOMO and LUMO energy levels of P3HT and PFTBT monomers as determined by density functional theory.47	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of oligomers synthesized to probe the relationship between connectivity and charge transfer in BCP.47	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of rod–rod block copolymers investigated in ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of first donor/acceptor rod–coil BCP.54,55	 

 	Fig. 11  Catalytic cycle of Kumada catalyst transfer polymerization of P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structures of fully-conjugated block copolymers reported in ref. 78 (left) and ref. 80 (right).	 

 	Scheme 1  Cyclization reaction to use by Izuhara et al. to generate the fully-conjugated block copolymer P3HT-b-PPymPh.81	 

 	Fig. 13  Block copolymers reported by Woody et al.82	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of molecular orbital hybridization leading to a narrowed energy-gap in push–pull type polymers.	 

 	Fig. 15  Depiction of AA–BB type polycondensation with polymer products (a.) and A–B type polycondensation (b.).	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure of block copolymer reported by Mulherin et al.92	 

 	Fig. 17  Block copolymers reported in ref. 96 (left) and ref. 75 (right).	 

 	Fig. 18  Block copolymer series evaluating the effect of side-chain fluorination.104	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of block copolymer as reported in ref. 36.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthetic route and intended polymerization products as reported in ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 20  Block copolymers produced by sequential monomer addition in KCTP.111	 

 	Scheme 3  Application of Ni(II) diimine catalyst for KCTP of electron rich and electron poor monomers to generate a BCP.112	 

 	Scheme 4  Triblock copolymer library produced via Negishi polymerization and sequential monomer addition.114	 

 	Scheme 5  KCTP and Negishi polycondensation initiated sequentially by the same catalyst.115	 

 	Scheme 6  One-pot synthesis of a BCP through selective incorporation of monomers.117	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of P3HT-b-PNDIT2 via DArP as reported in ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structures of amphiphilic block copolymers as reported in ref. 121 (left) and ref. 122 (right).	 

 	Fig. 22  Block copolymer structures as reported in ref. 125 and 126.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
