Plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from volumetric electromagnetic hotspots   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR05505A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR05505A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 757-761Plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from volumetric electromagnetic hotspots†

        
          
            Sang-Gil 
            Park‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Seung-Bum 
            Yang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Myeong-Su 
            Ahn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young-Jae 
            Oh
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yong Tae 
            Kim
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ki-Hun 
            Jeong
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST Institute for Optical Science and Technology, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kjeong@kaist.ac.kr
bDMC R&D Center, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., Suwon 443-742, Republic of Korea
cCenter for Medical Metrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, 267 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-340, Republic of Korea
Received 
      14th August 2015
    , Accepted 24th November 2015First published on 27th November 2015AbstractThis work reports plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation by using a three dimensional plasmonic absorber. The 3D plasmonic absorber comprises a thin polymer film on glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. The 3D plasmonic absorber clearly shows 24.6 times higher enhancement of photoacoustic signals at an excitation wavelength of 630 nm than a simple polymeric absorber. The photoacoustic enhancement results from the volumetric electromagnetic field enhancement on a light-absorbing polymer through 3D plasmonic nanostructures. This novel photoacoustic absorber provides a new direction for highly efficient ultrasonic generation.
The photoacoustic effect, i.e., acoustic wave generation through photothermal expansion in an optical absorbing medium, has been intensively exploited for high-frequency ultrasound generation and is rapidly served as a new depth imaging technique with high resolution.1–3 Photon-induced ultrasound waves are mainly determined by both mechanical and optical properties of an optical absorbing medium, e.g., thermal expansion coefficient and absorption coefficient. Diverse optical absorbing materials with high elasticity and high optical absorption, such as metallic surfaces,4,5 black PDMS,6,7 carbon nanotubes,8,9 quantum dots,10 or reduced graphene oxide,11 have been utilized for high intensity and high frequency ultrasound generation. Recently, metal nanostructures with localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) are emerging as new optical absorbing media for high frequency ultrasound generation owing to their distinctive advantages of ultrathin absorber thickness and broad bandwidth with high heat-conversion efficiency.12–14 Although LSPR, i.e., non-radiative collective oscillation of free electrons at a metal–dielectric interface, can offer not only direct light absorption in metal nanostructures but also local field enhancement near the nanostructures, termed electromagnetic (EM) hotspots,15,16 most previous studies on plasmon-induced photoacoustic generation have merely utilized direct light absorption inside metal nanostructures. However, the EM hotspots already serve as optical nano-antennas for enhancing optical performance in many other applications such as surface enhanced Raman scattering,17–21 metal enhanced fluorescence,22,23 solar cells,24,25 and optoelectronic devices.26–29 Consequently, the EM hotspots can further provide an excellent opportunity for enhancing the photoacoustic generation by increasing the photothermal expansion of an optical absorbing medium near metal nanostructures.
In this work, we report plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from the volumetric EM hotspots of a 3D plasmonic absorber. The 3D plasmonic absorber consists of a thin optical absorbing polymer film over glass nanopillar arrays (GNA) with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Based on a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method for a modeled 3D plasmonic absorber, the numerical analysis clearly shows the volumetric EM hotspots, i.e., a strongly localized and highly dense electric field between GNA on both the top and the side, where the absorbing polymer exists (Fig. 1b). The volumetric EM hotspots effectively enhance the photothermal effect within the absorbing polymer, which results in plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation. In the experiment, the 3D plasmonic absorber shows 24.6 times higher enhancement of photoacoustic signals than a polymeric absorber. Furthermore, the enhancement factor of this photoacoustic generation shows a strong correlation between absorption enhancement and EM hotspot intensity.
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration for plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands, i.e., 3D plasmonic absorber. Strongly localized and highly dense electromagnetic hotspots between the 3D plasmonic nanostructures strongly enhance photothermal effect on an optical absorbing polymer, which results in plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation. (b) Electric field distribution on modeled glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. The electric field is highly confined between nanopillar arrays. 
The 3D plasmonic absorber was fabricated at a wafer level by using solid-state thermal dewetting of a thin silver film and reactive ion etching as illustrated in Fig. 2a. First, a 10 nm thick silver layer was thermally evaporated on a borosilicate glass wafer and annealed in order to transform the thin silver film into silver nanoislands at 380 °C for one hour on a hotplate. The glass nanopillar arrays were defined by using reactive ion etching with the silver nanoisland mask, which was then removed using a silver etchant. A 30 nm thick silver film was thermally evaporated to form nanogap-rich Ag nanoislands on the top and side walls of GNA. Note that the silver nanoislands on the side wall were spontaneously formed in Volmer–Weber mode during the second silver thermal evaporation.30Fig. 2(b) and (c) show the top and side SEM images of nanogap-rich silver nanoislands after the second silver deposition. Finally, an absorbing polymer layer of AZ1512 photoresist with 1.2 μm thickness was spin-coated over the GNA with Ag nanoislands and hard-baked in a 70 °C oven for two hours. In addition, two different absorbers were also prepared for comparison of photoacoustic generation; (1) a polymeric absorber without metal nanostructures and (2) 2D Ag nanoislands on a smooth glass surface. The 2D silver nanoislands were fabricated by performing thermal annealing after a 10 nm thick silver film deposition. A polymeric absorbing layer was also spin-coated over the Ag nanoislands.
 Fig. 2  (a) Nanofabrication procedures for a 3D plasmonic absorber of a thin optical absorber over glass nanopillar arrays (GNA) with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. A thermally evaporated thin silver film on a borosilicate glass wafer was transformed into silver nanoislands after thermal annealing. The silver nanoislands served as an etch mask for forming glass nanopillar arrays during reactive ion etching. The second thin silver film was then thermally evaporated to form nanogap-rich silver nanoislands on the top and side walls of GNA. Finally, a thin absorbing polymer layer was spin-coated on the GNA with silver nanoislands. (b) The top and (c) side view SEM images of 3D plasmonic nanostructures with volumetric electromagnetic hotspots. 
Photoacoustic signals from different photoacoustic absorbers of 3D plasmonic, 2D plasmonic, and polymeric absorbers, were comparatively studied under different excitation wavelengths of 410 nm to 680 nm. First, the optical absorbance (A), A = 1 − (T + R), was calculated after measuring transmittance (T) and reflectance (R) from three different absorbers by using an inverted microscope (Carl Zeiss, Axiovert 200M) equipped with a spectrometer (Princeton Instruments, MicroSpec 2300i). The absorption enhancement factors (AEF) were calculated by dividing the optical absorbance from the individual plasmonic absorbers by that from a polymeric absorber as shown in Fig. 3b. The photoacoustic signals were measured with a highly sensitive hydrophone (ONDA, HGL-1000) under tunable laser excitation (EKSPLA, NT340, 5 ns in pulse duration, 410–680 nm). The photoacoustic enhancement factors (PEF) were also calculated by using the peak-to-peak amplitudes from 2D and 3D plasmonic absorbers relative to that from a polymeric absorber as shown in Fig. 3(c). Fig. 3(b) exhibits highly enhanced absorbance near 630 nm due to the plasmon resonance from both 2D and 3D plasmonic absorbers. The 3D plasmonic absorber provides 21 times enhancement of photoacoustic generation in a peak-to-peak amplitude. Furthermore, the volumetric EM hotspots of the 3D plasmonic absorber increase optical absorption, compared to the 2D plasmonic absorber (see ESI, Fig. S1†). The photoacoustic enhancement factors also show a strong correlation with the absorption enhancement factors as shown in Fig. 3c. The maximum photoacoustic signal is exhibited at 630 nm excitation wavelength, where the 3D plasmonic absorber generates higher photoacoustic signals than the 2D plasmonic absorber. Fig. 3(d) and (e) indicate the time-domain photoacoustic signals and their spectral responses under a laser excitation of 630 nm, where the pressure levels were calculated by using Fourier transformation of time-domain waveforms. The time-domain waveforms clearly demonstrate a substantial increase of the peak-to-peak amplitudes without notable waveform distortion from the plasmon resonance. In the spectral domain, the photoacoustic amplitude from the 3D plasmonic absorber is 24.6 times higher than that from a polymeric absorber in average over an acoustic range of 1–45 MHz as well. This enhancement was observed over the whole acoustic bandwidth (∼45 MHz) with no significant reduction in the bandwidth. These experimental results clearly support that the plasmonic nanostructures only contribute to a significant increase in the spectral amplitude because the frequency responses mainly depend on the laser pulse duration and the absorber thickness.
 Fig. 3  (a) Experimental set-up for photoacoustic generation and measurement. A tunable pulsed laser beam excites optical absorbers with an oblique incident angle to minimize the surface damage of a hydrophone due to direct laser exposure. The photoacoustic signals were measured by a hydrophone and an oscilloscope. (b) Absorption enhancement factor (AEF) and (c) photoacoustic enhancement factor (PEF) from 2D and 3D plasmonic absorbers relative to those from a polymeric absorber. Both enhancements have the maximum values at 630 nm excitation wavelength due to the plasmon resonance. (d) Time and (e) frequency responses of photoacoustic signals from three different absorbers under 630 nm laser excitation. The time response clearly demonstrates 21 times higher enhancement of peak-to-peak amplitude. The frequency response also shows in average 24.6 times enhancement over a broadband range from 1 MHz to 45 MHz. The data from a polymeric absorber were scaled as 3 times and 10 times for clear comparison in (d) and (e), respectively. 
By virtue of the volumetric EM hotspots of the 3D plasmonic absorber, light absorption within the absorbing polymer mainly enhances photoacoustic signals rather than the direct absorption on Ag nanoparticles because the photothermal effect is proportional to the electric field intensity. Note that the electric field is extremely localized between Ag nanoparticles, EM hotspots, rather than in the Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 1b). The calculated total electric field intensity, the sum of |E|2 at the absorbing polymer and the Ag nanoislands, shows the total electric field intensity in the absorbing polymer takes 86% of the total electric field intensity on the whole area at 630 nm excitation wavelength (see ESI, Fig. S2†). Moreover, higher thermal coefficient of volume expansion β in the absorbing polymer can further increase the photoacoustic signals in the absorbing polymer. Note that the β of polymers (over 300 K−1) is much higher than that of metals (e.g., silver: 54 K−1). Consequently, the absorption mechanism within EM hotspots becomes more dominant than the direct absorption in Ag nanoislands.
The EM hotspot intensity determines the photoacoustic enhancement factor of the 3D plasmonic absorber. In this experiment, the EM hotspot intensity was controlled by changing the silver deposition thickness, which alters the averaged nanogap spacing. Fig. 4(a–c) show the top view SEM images of 3D plasmonic nanostructures depending on the deposition thicknesses. Initially, the nanogap spacing from a silver thickness of 10 nm is mainly determined by the initial size of GNA rather than by the silver thickness (Fig. 4a). As the deposition thickness increases, the nanogap size decreases due to enlarged nanoislands (Fig. 4b). However, the agglomeration of the enlarged nanoislands drastically reduces the number of small nanogaps and thus increases the averaged nanogap spacing (Fig. 4c). The measured peak-to-peak amplitude of the photoacoustic signals under 630 nm laser excitation was directly compared to the average nanogap size, depending on different deposition thicknesses. The nanogap spacing was calculated by measuring the average nanogap spacing between the top Ag nanoislands extracted from the binary SEM images. The minimum averaged nanogap spacing of 15 nm is formed from the 30 nm thick silver deposition (Fig. 4d), which produces the maximum photoacoustic intensity. The photoacoustic signals show a strong correlation with the averaged nanogap spacing. This experimental result also indicates that the photoacoustic enhancement mainly results from optical absorption in the absorbing polymer through volumetric EM hotspots, not in Ag nanoislands. The absorption in Ag nanoislands is theoretically proportional to the volume of Ag nanoislands. However, as the volume of Ag nanoislands gradually increases over 30 nm thick deposition, the photoacoustic signal decreases due to reduction in volumetric EM hotspots.
 Fig. 4  High power photoacoustic signals generated from a 3D plasmonic absorber. (a–c) Top view SEM images of 3D plasmonic nanostructures from different silver thicknesses. (d) Photoacoustic signals and averaged nanogap spacing depending on the silver thickness. The photoacoustic amplitude from a 3D plasmonic absorber shows a strong inverse correlation with the averaged nanogap spacing. 
Conclusions
In summary, this work presents plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from a 3D plasmonic absorber, which consists of a thin absorbing polymer film layer on glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. The 3D plasmonic absorber provides volumetric EM hotspots on the absorbing polymer, which enhances the photothermal effects on the absorbing polymer. The 3D plasmonic nanostructures were precisely controlled by changing the silver thickness during the second deposition. The photoacoustic enhancement from the 3D plasmonic absorber was comparatively studied with those from a polymer absorber as well as a polymer absorber with 2D plasmonic nanostructures. Unlike those from a polymer absorber, the photoacoustic signals from 2D plasmonic nanostructures are substantially enhanced over all visible ranges due to high optical absorption and maximized at an excitation wavelength of 630 nm. The maximum enhancement from 2D plasmonic structures is 16.3 times higher than that from the polymer absorber. Moreover, the 3D plasmonic nanostructures additionally increase the amplitude of photoacoustic signals over 50% higher than the 2D plasmonic nanostructures. The experimental result clearly shows a significant enhancement at a broadband frequency of 4–31 MHz with a center frequency of 17.5 MHz without any noticeable bandwidth loss. In addition, the photoacoustic signals show a clear correlation with nanogap spacing, i.e., the EM hotspot intensity on the absorbing layer. This novel photoacoustic absorber can provide new opportunities for highly efficient and high power ultrasonic generation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (no. 2015036205), Center for Integrated Smart Sensors funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning as Global Frontier Project (CISS-2011-0031866), a grant of the Korea Health Technology R&D Project (HI13C2181) of Ministry of Health & Welfare, and a grant (MOTIE 10041120) of Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy.
Notes and references
H. P. Brecht, R. Su, M. Fronheiser, S. A. Ermilov, A. Conjusteau and A. A. Oraevsky, J. Biomed. Opt., 2009, 14, 064007 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kruger, R. B. Lam, D. R. Reinecke, S. P. Del Rio and R. P. Doyle, Med. Phys., 2010, 37, 6096–6100 Search PubMed .
X. D. Wang, Y. J. Pang, G. Ku, X. Y. Xie, G. Stoica and L. H. V. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 803–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Krishnaswamy and C. M. Lilley, Ultrasonics, 2006, 45, 66–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mitcham, K. Homan, W. Frey, Y. S. Chen, S. Emelianov, J. Hazle and R. Bouchard, J. Biomed. Opt., 2013, 18, 66–76 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, S. Ashkenazi, S. W. Huang and M. O'Donnell, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2008, 55, 2719–2725 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Buma, M. Spisar and M. O'Donnell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 548–550 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Baac, J. G. Ok, A. Maxwell, K. T. Lee, Y. C. Chen, A. J. Hart, Z. Xu, E. Yoon and L. J. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 989 Search PubMed .
L. H. Tong, C. W. Lim and Y. C. Li, J. Appl. Mech., 2014, 81, 081014 CrossRef .
L. J. Diguna, M. Murakami, A. Sato, Y. Kumagai, T. Ishihara, N. Kobayashi, Q. Shen and T. Toyoda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2006, 45, 5563–5568 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, M. A. Park, J. J. Yoh, H. Song, E. Y. Jang, Y. H. Kim, S. Kang and Y. S. Yoon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 241909 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, J. S. Kim, S. Ashkenazi, M. O'Donnell and L. J. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 093901 CrossRef .
N. Wu, Y. Tian, X. T. Zou, V. Silva, A. Chery and X. W. Wang, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2012, 29, 2016–2020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chen, W. Frey, S. Aglyamov and S. Emelianov, Small, 2012, 8, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Novotny and N. van Hulst, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Oh and K. H. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2234–2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Laurence, G. Braun, C. Talley, A. Schwartzberg, M. Moskovits, N. Reich and T. Huser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 162–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schutz, B. Kustner, M. Bauer, C. Schmuck and S. Schlucker, Small, 2010, 6, 733–737 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kang, J. J. Kim, Y. J. Oh, S. G. Park and K. H. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4510–4514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Oh, S. G. Park, M. H. Kang, J.
H. Choi, Y. Nam and K. H. Jeong, Small, 2011, 7, 184–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Pompa, L. Martiradonna, A. Della Torre, F. Della Sala, L. Manna, M. De Vittorio, F. Calabi, R. Cingolani and R. Rinaldi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. H. Chowdhury and J. R. Lakowicz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793–21800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Baxter and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25229–25239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Polyushkin, E. Hendry, E. K. Stone and W. L. Barnes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4718–4724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Park, Y. Choi, Y. J. Oh and K. H. Jeong, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 25530–25535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Park, K. H. Jin, M. Vi, J. C. Ye, J. Ahn and K. H. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2026–2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Campbell, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1997, 27, 1–111 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr05505a‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration for plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation from glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands, i.e., 3D plasmonic absorber. Strongly localized and highly dense electromagnetic hotspots between the 3D plasmonic nanostructures strongly enhance photothermal effect on an optical absorbing polymer, which results in plasmon enhanced photoacoustic generation. (b) Electric field distribution on modeled glass nanopillar arrays with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. The electric field is highly confined between nanopillar arrays.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Nanofabrication procedures for a 3D plasmonic absorber of a thin optical absorber over glass nanopillar arrays (GNA) with nanogap-rich silver nanoislands. A thermally evaporated thin silver film on a borosilicate glass wafer was transformed into silver nanoislands after thermal annealing. The silver nanoislands served as an etch mask for forming glass nanopillar arrays during reactive ion etching. The second thin silver film was then thermally evaporated to form nanogap-rich silver nanoislands on the top and side walls of GNA. Finally, a thin absorbing polymer layer was spin-coated on the GNA with silver nanoislands. (b) The top and (c) side view SEM images of 3D plasmonic nanostructures with volumetric electromagnetic hotspots.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Experimental set-up for photoacoustic generation and measurement. A tunable pulsed laser beam excites optical absorbers with an oblique incident angle to minimize the surface damage of a hydrophone due to direct laser exposure. The photoacoustic signals were measured by a hydrophone and an oscilloscope. (b) Absorption enhancement factor (AEF) and (c) photoacoustic enhancement factor (PEF) from 2D and 3D plasmonic absorbers relative to those from a polymeric absorber. Both enhancements have the maximum values at 630 nm excitation wavelength due to the plasmon resonance. (d) Time and (e) frequency responses of photoacoustic signals from three different absorbers under 630 nm laser excitation. The time response clearly demonstrates 21 times higher enhancement of peak-to-peak amplitude. The frequency response also shows in average 24.6 times enhancement over a broadband range from 1 MHz to 45 MHz. The data from a polymeric absorber were scaled as 3 times and 10 times for clear comparison in (d) and (e), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  High power photoacoustic signals generated from a 3D plasmonic absorber. (a–c) Top view SEM images of 3D plasmonic nanostructures from different silver thicknesses. (d) Photoacoustic signals and averaged nanogap spacing depending on the silver thickness. The photoacoustic amplitude from a 3D plasmonic absorber shows a strong inverse correlation with the averaged nanogap spacing.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr05505a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
