Quantum confined colloidal nanorod heterostructures for solar-to-fuel conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00472A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00472A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3781-3810Quantum confined colloidal nanorod heterostructures for solar-to-fuel conversion

        
          
            Kaifeng 
            Wu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tianquan 
            Lian
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. E-mail: tlian@emory.edu
Received 
      11th February 2016
    First published on 4th April 2016AbstractSolar energy conversion, particularly solar-driven chemical fuel formation, has been intensely studied in the past decades as a potential approach for renewable energy generation. Efficient solar-to-fuel conversion requires artificial photosynthetic systems with strong light absorption, long-lived charge separation and efficient catalysis. Colloidal quantum confined nanoheterostructures have emerged as promising materials for this application because of the ability to tailor their properties through size, shape and composition. In particular, colloidal one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanorods (NRs) offer the opportunity to simultaneously maintain quantum confinement in radial dimensions for tunable light absorptions and bulk like carrier transport in the axial direction for long-distance charge separations. In addition, the versatile chemistry of colloidal NRs enables the formation of semiconductor heterojunctions (such as CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod NRs) to separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs and deposition of metallic domains to accept charges and catalyze redox reactions. In this review, we summarize research progress on colloidal NR heterostructures and their applications for solar energy conversion, emphasizing mechanistic insights into the working principle of these systems gained from spectroscopic studies. Following a brief overview of synthesis of various NRs and heterostructures, we introduce their electronic structures and dynamics of exciton and carrier transport and interfacial transfer. We discuss how these exciton and carrier dynamics are controlled by their structures and provide key mechanistic understanding on their photocatalytic performance, including the photo-reduction of a redox mediator (methyl viologen) and light driven H2 generation. We discuss the solar-driven H2 generation mechanism, key efficiency limiting steps, and potential approaches for rational improvement in semiconductor NR/metal heterostructures (such as Pt tipped CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs). Finally, we conclude by pointing out challenges to be addressed in future research.
Kaifeng Wu
Kaifeng Wu received his BS degree in materials physics from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2010 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from Emory University in 2015 with Prof. Tianquan Lian. He is currently a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at Los Alamos National Laboratory. His research interest is ultrafast charge carrier dynamics in photocatalytic semiconductor and semiconductor/metal hetero-nanostructures.
Tianquan Lian
Tianquan (Tim) Lian received his BS degree from Xiamen University in 1985, MS degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1988, and PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1993. He is currently the William Henry Emerson Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Emory University. Tim Lian research interest is focused on understanding fundamental charge transfer and transport processes in solar energy conversion.
1. Introduction
One of current society's most daunting challenges is the search for sustainable supplies of renewable energy.1 Solar energy conversion is a promising approach to addressing this problem, considering that energy of sunlight striking the earth's surface in one hour (4.3 × 1020 J) is as much as the current world total energy consumption in one year (∼4.7 × 1020 J).1 Over the past decades, tremendous research efforts have been devoted to developing efficient and cost-effective solar energy conversion techniques.2–4 Generally, there are two ways to utilize solar energy: solar driven electricity generation through photovoltaic (solar cells) or thermal-electric devices and solar energy conversion into chemical fuels (solar-to-fuel conversion).2 Although solar cells have been highly-developed and commercialized, better technologies with further efficiency improvement and cost reduction are still needed before they become cost competitive with fossil fuels.5,6 Furthermore, because of the earth's diurnal cycle, deployment of solar cells has to be coupled with energy storage techniques. Direct solar-to-fuel conversion through artificial photosynthesis can address both the needs for solar energy conversion and storage.7 While still in its infancy stage and far from mass production, solar-to-fuel conversion technology has attracted intense research interests in recent years.3Fig. 1A shows a general scheme of an artificial photosynthetic system that is composed of light absorber, electron donor and acceptor, and light harvesting antenna.8 Oxidation and reduction catalysts can be attached onto the electron donor and acceptor, respectively, for desired oxidation and reduction reactions. The donor–absorber–acceptor system is designed for achieving long-lived charge separation because the photogenerated electrons and holes can be separated over three components in the charge separated state (donor+–absorber–acceptor−) with controllable and long separation distances.8–11 The light harvesting antenna is intended for enhancing the light absorption rate in the absorber by efficiently funneling the photoexcitation energy into the absorber.12 These sophisticated superstructures have been realized in molecular systems because of the versatility of molecular synthesis and processing.8–11 However, molecular systems typically suffer from the issues of limited light absorption, slow charge transport, and poor long-term stability.13
 Fig. 1  Solar energy conversion using nanorod heterostructures. (A) Scheme of an artificial photosynthetic system, comprising of light absorber, antenna, electron donor and acceptor. The thick and thin blue arrows indicate electron and energy flow directions, respectively. (B) Semiconductor nanorod (NR) heterostructures. Top: QD-like quantum confinement effect in the radial direction and bulk like transport properties in the axial direction in NRs. D: diameter of QDs or NRs; L: length of NRs; aB: Bohr exciton diameter. Bottom left: Efficient bulk-like rod-to-core long distance exciton transport in CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs. This enables the CdS NR (with strong and tunable light absorption) to act as light harvesting antenna to enhance the effective light absorption rate of CdSe QD core. Bottom right: Long distance charge separation in triadic Pt-tipped CdSe@CdS NRs. 
Solution-processed colloidal quantum confined inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals combine the advantage of cost-effective and versatile productions of organic materials with strong and broad light absorption properties of inorganic semiconductor materials.14,15 In quantum confined spherical nanoparticles, or quantum dots (QDs), the quantum confinement effect gives rise to new properties that are unachievable in traditional bulk materials.16–20 For example, the electron and hole energy levels and corresponding band gaps can be tuned through their sizes.21–24 Confinement induced strong carrier–carrier interactions in QDs lead to enhanced efficiency of multi-exciton generation (MEG) by absorbing one high energy photon,25–34 a process that holds promise for third-generation solar cells beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit.35,36 Strong confinement, which leads to extension of carriers outside the QD boundary, also enhances electronic coupling to adsorbed charge acceptors and the rate of interfacial charge transfer from QDs.37–40 For these reasons, QDs have been extensively studied for solar energy conversion applications.24,41–48 To date, however, the efficiencies of QD based solar energy conversion devices remain low.15,49 In zero-dimensional (0D) materials, the small size limits the light absorption cross sections of QDs (scaled with their volume) and the distance for charge separations (scaled with their diameters).17,50 Recent advances in nanocrystal shape control have led to the synthesis of colloidal quantum-confined one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanostructures, such as nanorods (NRs) with diameters of a few nanometers and lengths of 10s–100s nanometers.51–54 Unlike 0D QDs where the exciton is quantum confined in all three dimensions,55 exciton motions in 1D quantum confined NRs (or quantum rods) are quantum confined in the radial direction but are bulk like along the axial direction.56–58 Thus NRs can simultaneously possess the properties of quantum confined QDs (such as size-tunable band gaps, strong carrier–carrier interactions, strong interfacial couplings) and bulk crystals (such as large absorption cross sections and long distance charge transport and separation),59 as shown in Fig. 1B.
Recent developments in colloidal chemistry have led to modular synthesis of various semiconductor hetero-NRs.60–66 In these hetero-NRs, the well-established concept of “wavefunction engineering” in hetero-core/shell QDs can be applied.22,24,67–69 The spatial distribution of conduction band (CB) electrons and valence band (VB) holes can be engineered by the sizes and compositions of the constituent materials to control their photophysical properties, including the lifetimes of single and multiple excitons and the rates of charge separation and recombination in the presence of charge acceptors.67 Furthermore, metallic nanoparticles can be deposited at selective positions of these semiconductor hetero-NRs.70,71 In principle, these highly-integrated semiconductor/metal NR hetero-structures, consisted of well positioned light absorbing, charge separating and catalytic components, can be ideal materials for artificial photosynthesis.72–75Fig. 1B shows two aspects of how these multifunctional hetero-NRs can be applied for solar energy conversion. In the first one, with CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs as the example, CdS NRs act as light harvesting antenna to strongly absorb light and to transport photo excitation energy into the CdSe core where light emission or photochemical reactions can occur.76–79 In the second one, by adding Pt tips on CdSe@CdS NRs, an all-inorganic donor (CdSe)–absorber (CdS)–acceptor/catalyst (Pt) superstructure is constructed for direct solar-to-fuel conversion.73,75,80–83 The distance of charge separation in the charge separated state (CdSe+–CdS–Pt−) can be simply controlled by the CdS rod length.
In this article, we review the current status of research on colloidal NR heterostructures for solar energy harvesting and conversion, emphasizing spectroscopic insights into carrier dynamics and the mechanism of light-driven H2 generation using hetero-NR based systems. In part 2, we briefly review various NRs and heterostructures reported in the literature. Part 3 provides an introduction of the electronic structure of single component NRs and hetero-NRs. In part 4, we review exciton dynamics in NRs revealed by ultrafast spectroscopic studies. In part 5, we discuss how the unique electronic structure of NRs influences interfacial electron and hole transfer and the application of these charge transfer properties for efficient photocatalysis. Part 6 reviews the progress in light-driven H2 generation in semiconductor/metal hetero-NRs, focusing on mechanistic insight of these reactions gained through time-resolved spectroscopic studies of elementary charge transfer steps, key efficiency-limiting steps, and rational approaches for improving solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency. In part 7, we end with a summary and provide an outlook for the challenges and promises of solar-to-fuel conversion using hetero-NRs.
2. Synthesis of colloidal NRs and hetero-NRs
2.1 Synthesis of single and multi component semiconductor NRs
In their pioneering work, Alivisatos and co-workers reported colloidal synthesis of CdSe NRs with controllable aspect ratios by taking advantage of the anisotropic crystal structure of wurtzite CdSe.51,57,84Fig. 2A shows the TEM images of several CdSe NRs with different aspect ratios. The well-defined exciton absorption and emission peaks in the inset indicate that these NRs are quantum confined. Later, Peng and co-workers quantitatively and systematically studied the temporal shape evolution of CdSe NRs and revealed monomer concentration as the key factor for NR growth.85,86 At high monomer concentrations, nanocrystals grow exclusively along the c-axis of the wurtzite structure, generating high aspect ratio NRs. At lower concentrations, nanocrystals grow simultaneously in three dimensions to form QDs. Addition of strong cadmium binding ligands, such phosphonic acids, facilitates NR growth because they help reduce the number of nuclei and maintain high monomer concentrations in the system. Murray and co-workers reported a different growth mechanism for the synthesis of IV–VI rock-salt PbSe NRs.87 By monitoring the growth of nanocrystals by TEM and absorption spectra, they showed that small particles were produced at early stage and later these nanoparticles evolved into NRs, likely due to an oriented attachment growth mechanism. To grow extremely high aspect ratio NRs (or nanowires), Buhro and co-workers introduced the solution liquid solid (SLS) growth method.88–90 In this method, metallic clusters are used as catalysts where the reactants can dissolve until reaching supersaturation and then nanowires grow from these supersaturated drops. At last, the cation exchange protocol91 offers a versatile approach to prepare new NRs from pre-formed NRs of different materials compositions. For example, starting with wurtzite CdS NRs, one can first exchange Cd2+ with Cu+ to obtain chalcocite Cu2S NRs, and the Cu+ can be further exchanged with Pb2+ to generate rock salt PbS NRs.92
 Fig. 2  Quantum confined semiconductor NRs. (A) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of CdSe NRs with increasing aspect ratios (from top to bottom). The inset in the middle panel shows absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the lowest energy exciton peak of the NR. (B–E) absorption and PL spectra of dot-in-rod NRs with various materials compositions: (B) CdSe@CdS NRs, (C) CdTe@CdSe NRs, (D) ZnSe@CdS NRs, and (E) ZnSe@ZnS NRs. Insets in (B–E): absorption and PL of the corresponding QD cores (where available). (F) Absorption spectra of CdSe NRs (solid line) and CdTe tipped nanobarbells (dashed line). (G) Absorption spectra of CdS NRs (blue line) and ZnSe tipped nanobarbells (red line). Insets in (F) and (G): TEM images of nanobarbells. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B–E) are adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (F) is adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (G) is adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To obtain properties unachievable with single component NRs, hetero-NRs with different combinations of constituent materials have been synthesized.54,60–65,93–95 Seeded-growth has been one of the most successful methods for synthesizing dot-in-rod type heterostructures, ever since the reports of CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs and tetrapods in 2007.61,96Fig. 2B shows that the absorption spectrum of these CdSe@CdS NRs contains both CdSe dot and CdS rod features, but the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum is dominated by CdSe dot emission due to efficient transport of photo excitation energy from the rod to the dot (see below). Following similar procedures, CdTe@CdSe (Fig. 2C)97 and ZnSe@CdS (Fig. 2D)98 NRs with type II band alignments were also successfully synthesized. These type II NRs are especially attractive for solar energy conversion applications because they have intrinsically separated electrons and holes across the heterostructure interface, prolonging their intrinsic lifetime by reducing radiative recombination rate and facilitating further directional transfer to attached electron acceptors and donors, respectively. With the aid of cation exchange reactions, ZnSe@ZnS (Fig. 2E)99 and PbSe@PbS100 dot-in-rod NRs emitting in the ultraviolet and near infrared, respectively, were also reported. In addition to seeded growth of dot-in-rod NRs, the high energy tip surfaces of wurtzite NRs can be readily modified with another material to produce various nanobarbell-like structures. In 2006, Bawendi and co-workers synthesized type II CdSe/CdTe nanobarbells by growing CdTe dots at the tips of pre-formed CdSe NRs (Fig. 2F).64 The growth of CdTe on CdSe tips was confirmed by both TEM image and formation of a charge transfer absorption band at >700 nm in the absorption spectrum. Later, Zamkov and co-workers applied similar procedures and prepared type II CdS–ZnSe nanobarbells (Fig. 2G).65 Unlike dot-in-rod NRs, in these nanobarbells NRs both domains are exposed to the surrounding medium, which may facilitate the extraction of both electrons and holes. For the same reason, however, the stability of these nanobarbells might be an issue hindering their potential applications. Nonetheless, depositing another material on the tips of NRs is a versatile approach to prepare various heterostructures, including the metal tipped NRs that we will discuss in the following session.
2.2 Synthesis of semiconductor/metal hetero-NRs
In 2004, Banin and co-workers reported the pioneering synthesis of a new family of semiconductor/metal hetero-NRs.70 Taking advantage of the high reactivity of NR tips, Au nanoparticles were successfully deposited on CdSe NRs by room-temperature reduction of Au(III) salts (Fig. 3A).70 These hybrid NRs combine the properties of semiconducting CdSe NRs and plasmonic Au nanoparticles, which has been demonstrated to have promising applications in solar energy conversion.101,102 In particular, plasmon-induced hot electron transfer from photo-excited metal to semiconductor offers a new paradigm for light harvesting and charge separation.102,103 A similar synthetic approach was extended to the preparation of cobalt (Co) tipped CdSe NRs (Fig. 3B).104 These NRs combine the properties of semiconducting CdSe NRs and magnetic Co nanoparticles, potentially useful for magnetic field controlled large-scale assembly of NRs. The most important type of hybrid NRs for solar-to-fuel conversion is perhaps the Pt tipped NRs, because Pt is one of the best catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction.4 Habas and co-workers reported the controllable synthesis of CdS NRs with single and double Pt tips by thermal reduction of Pt salts (Fig. 3C).71 They also reported the synthesis of PtNi and PtCo alloyed metal tipped CdS NRs by using combinations of metal precursors. These NRs, combining the light harvesting capability of CdS and catalytic activity of metal domains, have been intensely studied for solar driven H2 generation reactions.72,73,75,81,100,105–108 In addition to the thermal routes, Dukovic and co-workers achieved photo-deposition of Pt on CdS NRs (Fig. 3D),109 where the electrons generated by photo excitation of CdS NRs were used to reduce Pt salts and led to nucleation of multiple Pt nanoparticles on CdS NRs. This approach can potentially generate highly-active photocatalytic hetero-NRs, because the Pt nanoparticles selectively nucleate at positions to which photogenerated electrons preferentially transfer.110 Unfortunately, in this method the locations of the deposited Pt particles are not easily controlled.
 Fig. 3  Semiconductor/metal NR heterostructures. (A–D) TEM image of (A) CdSe NRs with double Au tips, (B) CdSe NRs with a single Co tip, (C) CdS NRs with a single Pt tip, (D) CdS NRs with many Pt particles along the wall. (E) Step-by-step synthesis of Ru–CdSe@CdS–Pt heterostructures. First, Ru@RuOx particles were synthesized; second, a CdSe QD was attached to Ru particle to make Ru–CdSe dimers; third, seeded-growth generated CdSe@CdS NRs with Ru attached on CdSe seed; at the end, Pt was further deposited on Ru–CdSe@CdS NRs. High angle annular dark field (HAADF) images and energy dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS) were used to confirm the success of this step-by-step synthesis. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) is adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (D) is adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (E) is adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
After decades of development, state-of-the-art colloidal synthesis has now evolved into a stage where sophisticated heterostructures can be synthesized through step-by-step growth and assembly of multiple domains in a rational manner, analogous to molecular synthesis.112–114Fig. 3E shows the synthesis of one of those sophisticated heterostructures, Ru–CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs, by Amirav and co-workers.112 Ru nanoparticles (with partially oxidized surfaces) were first synthesized, on which CdSe QDs were attached to form the Ru–CdSe dimers. These dimers were then used as seeds for the growth of Ru–CdSe@CdS NRs, with CdSe embedded in CdS rod and Ru exposed outside (Fig. 3E). Finally, Pt tips were grown on the NRs to form the dual metal-dual semiconductor Ru–CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs. Since Pt and Ru are catalysts for water reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively, these NRs are fully-integrated all-inorganic artificial photosynthetic systems.
3. Electronic structure of NRs
3.1 Electronic structure of single component semiconductor NRs
A qualitative understanding of electronic structure of NRs can be illustrated by the absorption spectra of NRs in Fig. 4A and B. Fig. 4A shows the absorption spectra of three CdS NRs with similar diameter (3.8 nm) but different lengths (13.8 nm, 18.1 nm, and 26.9 nm).115 Because these lengths are much larger than bulk exciton Bohr diameter of CdS (∼5.5 nm116,117), the exciton transition energies in these CdS NRs are independent of rod length and are the same for these rods with the same diameters. Fig. 4B shows the spectra of three CdSe NRs with different diameters (2.7 nm, 3.5 nm, and 5.1 nm). Because these diameters are considerably smaller than bulk exciton Bohr diameter of CdSe (∼10 nm118,119), quantum confinement in the radial direction leads to diameter dependent transition energies, which explains the blue-shifting of absorption peaks with decreasing rod diameter.
 Fig. 4  Electronic structure and optical property of NRs. (A) Static absorption spectra of three CdS NRs with similar diameters (3.8 nm) and different lengths (black: 13.8 nm; red: 18.1 nm; green: 26.9 nm). (B) Static absorption spectra of three CdSe NRs with different diameters (black: 2.7 nm, red: 3.5 nm, green: 5.1 nm) and lengths (black: 17.9 nm, red: 24.5 nm, green: 16.5 nm). (C) Size dependence of the electron and hole energy levels in CdSe NRs calculated by effective mass six-band model. The NR was considered as an ellipsoid crystal with major semi-axis b (the NR axis) much larger than the minor semi-axis a (the NR radius). Arrows show optically allowed interband transitions. (D) Size dependence of the tunneling and optical energy gap in CdSe NRs. Dotted and dashed lines show bare and self-interaction corrected energy gaps between the 1Σ1/2 hole and 1Σe electron subband. Two solid lines show the optical transition energy for the first two optically active 1D excitons. Experimental data for the tunneling and optical gap measured in CdSe NRs from ref. 56 are shown by empty circles and filled squares. (E) Schematic illustration of the “bare”, tunneling and optical gaps and dielectric confinement induced electron (hole) – image charge repulsive self-interaction and enhanced electron–hole attraction. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
Theoretic calculations of electronic structure of both II–VI (CdSe) NRs and IV–V (PbSe) NRs have been reported.58,120 Here we briefly review the results on CdSe NRs. Efros and co-workers considered CdSe NRs of ellipsoid shapes with major semi-axis length b (the NR axis) much larger than the minor semi-axis length a (the NR radius).58 Because b ≫ a, the carrier motions in the radial and axial directions can be separated by adiabatic approximation. The quantum-confined fast motion in the radial direction was first solved and then the axial motion was treated by averaging the position over the fast radial motion.58 The energy levels and wavefunctions of electrons and holes in the radial direction were analyzed within the six-band model that has been shown to successfully describe the optical spectra of CdSe QDs.118,121–123 Each electron state in NRs is characterized by the angular momentum projection on the NR axis, m = 0, ±1,…. These states are labeled as nΣe, nΠe… for |m| = 0, 1…, and n is the number of the level for the given symmetry. Due to spin–orbit coupling and band mixing in the valence band, hole states are much more complicated but can still be successfully treated by the six-band model. Each hole state is characterized by the total angular momentum projection on the NR axis jz = m + Jz, which is the sum of angular momentum projection and the projection of the hole spin J = 3/2 (Jz = ±1/2, ±3/2,…). These states are labeled as nΣ|jz|, nΠ|jz|… The diameter dependent electron and hole quantum levels are plotted in Fig. 4C and the optically allowed interband transitions are obtained by calculating electron–hole overlap integral.
The energy difference between these electron and hole quantum levels (defined as “bare” gaps), however, cannot describe experimentally measured tunneling or optical gaps (Fig. 4D),56 without considering the dielectric confinement effect arising from the difference between dielectric constants of NRs (κs) and their surrounding medium (κm).124 The tunneling gap refers to the quasi-particle band gap without considering exciton binding energy and optical gap refers to the energy required to create an exciton (i.e. the optical transition energy). The Coulomb interactions in the NRs are enhanced by the dielectric contrast effect and can be written as: U(re,rh) = −e2/(κs|re − rh|)− eV(re,rh) + eV(re,re) + eV(rh,rh), where the first and second terms account for electron–hole interaction through inside and outside the NR, respectively, and the last two terms account for electron and hole self-interactions.58U(re,rh) was averaged over the electron and hole wave functions in the radial direction, which leads to the 1D potential profile of e–h Coulomb interaction and electron (hole) self-interaction corrections to their quantum levels. As shown in Fig. 4D, the self-interaction corrections blue-shift the “bare” gaps by more than 100 meV, bringing them to excellent agreement with experimental tunneling spectra. The self-interaction can be qualitatively understood as repulsion between electron (hole) and its image charge,125 as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4E. The 1D e–h potential can be solved to obtain the 1D excitonic levels and the two lowest optically allowed transitions are shown in Fig. 4D. Compared with the tunneling spectra, the binding energy of the ground and first excited excitonic states is higher than 150 and 50 meV, respectively. The calculated energies for the ground excitonic states also agree well with the experimental optical transition energies (Fig. 4D). Therefore, at room temperature, the e–h pairs are strongly bound as 1D excitons with binding energy of 100s meV. Similar dielectric contrast enhanced strongly bound excitons have been observed in many other 1D and 2D materials.125–131
3.2 Electronic structure of semiconductor hetero-NRs
Extensive studies have demonstrated that in core/shell QD heterostructures the spatial distribution of the wavefunctions of conduction band (CB) electrons and valence band (VB) holes can be tuned by the sizes and compositions of the constituent materials, offering a versatile tool to control their photophysical and charge transfer properties.67 Similar wavefunction engineering approach should be applicable to NRs,60 considering that hetero-NRs with various material compositions have been reported (Fig. 2).61–65 Here we discuss the electronic structure of one of the most commonly studied heterostructures, CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs,61–63,68,75,76,132–155 to illustrate wavefunction engineering in hetero-NRs.
The VB offset between bulk wurtzite CdSe and CdS is large (>0.45 V) but the CB offset is smaller and has a considerable uncertainty (ca. 0–0.3 V).63,138 This CB offset uncertainty has led to disputes about whether the band alignment in CdSe@CdS NRs is type I (with both electron and hole confined in the core)138 or quasi-type II (with hole confined in the core and electron delocalized among core and rod).135,149 It is now generally agreed that the electronic structure is tunable from type I to quasi-type II depending on the core size, rod diameter and sometimes interfacial strain.141,148,150,156,157Fig. 5A shows the core-size dependent electronic structure of NRs with fixed rod diameter. In NRs with a small core. electrons in the core is strongly quantum confined; and as a result the electron levels in the lowest energy exciton states of the core (B2, Fig. 5A) and the rod (B1, Fig. 5A) are degenerate. Therefore, electron wavefunction is delocalized from the core to the rod whereas the hole wavefunction is still confined in the core, forming a quasi-type II band alignment. It should be emphasized that, despite of the quasi-type II band alignment, in the presence of the core localized VB hole, the CB electron is also localized near the core, instead of extending throughout the whole rod, due to the strong e–h Coulomb interaction (Fig. 5A). For large core with weak quantum confinement, both the lowest electron and hole levels are located in the core, forming a type I heterostructure. A representative absorption spectrum of CdSe@CdS NRs is shown in Fig. 5B, with the B1 and B2 transitions indicated.
 Fig. 5  Electronic structure and optical property of CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs. (A) Core-size dependent energy level diagrams for CdSe@CdS NRs. In NRs with small cores (middle panel), the lowest energy excitons in CdS NR (B1) and CdSe core (B2) have degenerate CB electron level. Therefore, the electron wavefunction is delocalized among CdSe core and CdS NR, while hole wavefunction is confined in the core, forming a quasi-type II heterostructure. In NRs with large cores (bottom panel), both electron and hole levels of the lowest energy excitons in CdSe core (B2) have lower energy than those of CdS NR (B1), forming a type I heterostructure. (B) The absorption spectrum of typical CdSe@CdS NRs with B1 and B2 transitions labeled. (C) Averaged transient absorption (TA) spectra of CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.7 nm (top) and 3.8 nm (bottom) diameter CdSe cores and varying rod length at 1–2 ps after ∼580 nm excitation. For comparison, TA spectra of corresponding CdSe QDs with similar confinement energies are also shown. (D) Comparison of TA spectra (averaged between 50–100 ps) measured with 400 and 580 nm excitation for CdSe@CdS NRs with 3.8 nm diameter CdSe core. (E) Transient emission spectra (solid black line) measured at the peak of the excitation pulse at increasing numbers of absorbed photons per dot (ppd) for CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.2 nm (left) and 4.0 nm (right) diameter CdSe cores. Spectra were fit using four peaks featuring the single exciton (red), bi-exciton (blue), tri-exciton (green), and CdS emission (magenta). Note that the bi-exciton peak is blue-shifted with respect to the single exciton in the left panel and red-shifted in the right. (F) Excitation intensity dependent emission spectra CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.2 nm (left) and 3.9 nm (right) diameter CdSe cores. Compared to spontaneous emission spectrum at low excitation intensity, the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) peak is blue-shifted in the quasi-type II NRs (left panel) and red-shifted in type I NRs (right panel). (C) and (D) are reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (E) is reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (F) is reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We note that many seeded NRs reported in the literature often contain a bulb-like or branched structure, with diameter larger than the uniform part of the rod, surrounding the seed.76,115,135,149,158–160 This is likely a consequence of imperfect phase control of the seeds, with wurtzite seeded facilitating anisotropic growth along the [001] crystal axis and zinc blende seeds favoring isotropic growth along several cryptographic directions.76 Because of weaker quantum confinement in the bulb part compared with uniform rod part, the CdS NR itself is a homojunction with energy gradient driving the transport of photoexcited excitons from the rod to the bulb.115 For CdSe@CdS NRs, the existence of bulb complicates band alignment in the structure, leading to the possibility that the core and the surrounding bulb have the quasi-type II band alignment but the whole core@bulb forms a type I band alignment with the uniform rod.161
Band alignments in NRs have been probed by multiple techniques, among which transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) is the most commonly used.135,142,161 In these measurements, one can selectively excite the B2 band of the core and monitor its influence on B1 band of the rod.156Fig. 5C shows the TA spectra averaged between 1–2 ps following B2 excitation, for NRs of various lengths with both 2.7 nm and 3.8 nm diameter seeds. For NRs with a 2.7 nm seed (Fig. 5C, top), excitation at B2 leads to instantaneous and simultaneous formation of strong bleaches of both B2 and B1 bands. Since these bleaches are caused by electron state filling,161 this result indicates that B1 and B2 bands share the same CB electronic level, consistent with a quasi-type II electronic structure (Fig. 5A).150,161 In contrast, for 3.8 nm seeded NRs (Fig. 5C, bottom), excitation at B2 only generates a strong B2 bleach with negligible B1 bleach. The derivative-like feature near B1 bleach is also observed in CdSe core only QDs and can be attributed to bi-exciton interaction induced shift of higher energy transitions in the core.162 Therefore, these 3.8 nm seeded NRs have a type I electronic structure (Fig. 5B). We emphasize the importance of resonant excitation at B2 for accurate differentiation of type I or quasi-type II NRs. As shown in Fig. 5D, even for the 3.8 nm seeded NRs, the TA spectrum (averaged between 50–100 ps) after 400 nm excitation has a strong B1 bleach, indicating the presence of electrons in the CdS rod CB. However, this does not indicate a quasi-type II band alignment. Instead, the B1 bleach is caused by trapped excitons on CdS rod,156 which will be further discussed later.
Another way to differentiate type I or quasi-type II NRs is to examine the relative energy of bi-exciton and single-exciton emissions. In type I structures, electrons and holes are localized in the same domain and bi-exciton interaction is attractive; in (quasi)-type II structures electrons and holes are spatially separated and accumulation of two electrons or two holes in a single domain leads to an overall repulsive bi-exciton interaction.164–167 Therefore, bi-excitons should have lower and higher emission energy than single-excitons for type I and quasi-type II NRs, respectively. Sitt and co-workers investigated multiexciton (MX) behavior of CdSe@CdS NRs using quasi-continuous-wave MX emission spectroscopy.141 In this experiment, the NRs are excited using 5 ns pulses whose duration is much longer than the Auger decay lifetime of MXs. But at high excitation densities, the photon absorption rates can still compete with the Auger decay rate, offering a chance to observe MX emission spectra. Fig. 5E shows the excitation density (in the unit of absorbed photons per dot, or ppd) dependent transient emission spectra measured at the peak of the excitation pulse for NRs with 2.2 nm and 4.0 nm cores. With increasing excitation intensity, higher-energy emission features appear. These spectra were fit using four peaks: single-exciton (X), bi-exciton (BX), tri-exciton (TX), and CdS emissions, in the sequence of increasing emission energy. The blue shift of BX emission peak from X emission peak in 2.2 nm seeded NRs indicates a repulsive BX interaction (Fig. 5E, left), consistent with a quasi-type II electronic structure. In contrast, the BX emission peak is red-shifted from X emission in 4.0 nm seeded NRs (Fig. 5E, right), consistent with an attractive BX interaction in type I structures.
Amplified spontaneous emissions (ASE) in type I or quasi-type II NRs are also different, as demonstrated by Demir and co-workers.163 For nanocrystals with two-fold degenerate lowest excited states, ASE occurs primarily from bi-exciton emission.19,165 The ASE peaks of close-packed films of NRs with 2.2 nm (left) and 3.9 nm (right) seeds measured with 120 fs pulse laser excitation (Fig. 5F) are blue- and red- shifted from the single exciton emission peaks, respectively, indicating quasi-type II and type I band alignments in these NRs. This study also suggests that wavefunction engineering in hetero-NRs can be used to tune their ASE spectra for lasing applications.163
4. Exciton dynamics in NRs
Because of strong e–h interaction, optical excitation of NRs generates a bound e–h pair (or excitons). The dynamics of excitons in NRs is both fundamentally interesting and practically important. Along the long axis of nanorods, exciton can move freely. What is the time scale and mechanism (diffusion vs. ballistic transport) of such motion? At the heterostructure interface, one or both carriers can move across the interface depending on the band alignment. Because of defects on NR surface, trapping of carriers likely occurs, which would affect the fate of the other carriers. Under high excitation fluence, there exist multiple excitons on a NR that can undergo exciton–exciton Auger annihilation. The mechanisms and rates of these processes are key parameters that affect the excited properties of nanorods, including the lifetime of excitons and spatial distributions of electrons and holes. Because these exciton/carrier characteristics control the rates and yields of charge transfer from these NRs to external electron donors and acceptors in artificial photosynthetic systems, a rational design of these materials requires a detailed understanding of the exciton dynamics and how they depends on the size, shape and composition of NRs. In the following, we review results of exciton dynamics in both single component and hetero- NRs obtained from ultrafast spectroscopic studies.
4.1 Exciton dynamics in single component NRs
We start with exciton dynamics in CdSe NRs studied by TA spectroscopy.168 These NRs have an average diameter of 3.2 nm and length of 28.9 nm, corresponding to an aspect ratio of ∼9 (Fig. 6B). The absorption bands at 575 and 457 nm are quantum confined 1Σ and 1Π exciton bands, respectively (Fig. 6A). The PL is dominated by the band edge emission at ∼600 nm, with a quantum yield (QY) of ∼7%. The TA spectra of CdSe NRs under weak 400 nm excitation, with the average number of excitons per NR ∼ 0.08, are shown in Fig. 6C. According to the absorption spectrum, 400 nm excitation creates excitonic states higher than 1Π. The excitons rapidly relax into and out of the 1Π band, as indicated by the formation and decay, respectively, of a bi-exciton interaction (between 1Π and 1Σ) induced positive peak at ∼610 nm (Fig. 6C).20,116,169 At the same time, the 1Σ exciton bleach gradually grows in, indicating exciton relaxation into the 1Σ band. By ∼1 ps, the excitons reach the band edge and the TA spectrum is dominated by the state filling of the lowest level (1Σ0 ∼ 587 nm) in the 1Σ band manifold. Fitting the kinetics at 587 nm yields a rise time of 0.5 ps and a decay half-life time of 4.9 ns (Fig. 6D), representing the hot exciton relaxation time and band edge 1Σ0 exciton decay time, respectively. The hot exciton relaxation time in these NRs is comparable to that of QDs, but the band edge 1Σ0 exciton lifetime is ∼3 times shorter than typical CdSe QDs with comparable PL QYs (∼15 ns).20 Although the co-existence of radiative and nonradiative decay channels complicates the situation, this is qualitatively consistent with the theoretically predicted accelerated 1D exciton decay in NRs due to giant oscillator strength concentrated at the band edge.58,120
 Fig. 6  Exciton dynamics in CdSe NRs. (A) Absorption (black solid line) and emission spectra (red dashed line) of CdSe NRs. (B) TEM image the CdSe NRs. (C) TA spectra of CdSe NR at indicated delay times (−0.1 to 1.5 ps) after 400 nm excitation. (D) 1Σ0 (587 nm) bleach formation and decay kinetics. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The unique electronic structure of NRs affects Auger recombination behavior of multiple excitons in a complicated way. First, the presence of well-defined momentum states along the axial direction should suppress Auger recombination process because of the requirement of momentum conservation;170,171 second, transition from a discrete density of states (DOS) in QDs to a quasi-continuous DOS in NRs should promote Auger processes because it is easier to satisfy energy conservation;170,171 last but not the least, the strong electron–hole binding (100s meV) in NRs leads to correlated 1D excitons and Auger recombination of such bound excitons should proceed through a bimolecular process instead of the three-particle process seen in QDs.168,170–172 Experimental results on CdSe NRs indicate that the last effect dominates Auger recombination of 1D excitons.168,170–172 A significant consequence of bimolecular Auger process is that multi-exciton Auger recombination rates in NRs scale with exciton state order in a slower fashion than QDs.168 Furthermore, since the spatial distribution of electrons and holes can also be controlled by wavefunction engineering in hetero-NRs, Auger lifetimes can be further prolonged in (quasi)-type II NRs with separated electron and hole wavefunctions.140,143,146 Such prolonged multi-exciton lifetimes are important for many applications, such as optical gains,19,20 solar cells and light emitting diodes (LEDs),173,174 and multi-electron transfer processes that are required for many solar-to-fuel conversion reactions.1
The CdSe NRs shown above are reasonably well passivated (band edge PL QY ∼ 7%). In contrast, CdS NRs are dominated by trap states. As shown in Fig. 7A, the PL spectrum of representative CdS NRs shows two distinct emission bands, with a narrow band-edge emission at 463 nm and a broad trap-state emission centered at 650 nm, and the overall QY is extremely low (<0.1%).175 This weak and trap dominated PL suggests that exciton dynamics of CdS NRs is distinctly different from CdSe NRs. We investigated this exciton dynamics using a combination of TA and time-resolved PL spectroscopy.175Fig. 7B shows the TA spectra of CdS NRs from 3 ns to 3 μs after 400 nm excitation. The spectra at earlier delay times are not shown but ultrafast intraband exciton relaxation (<0.1 ps) was also observed.175 The TA spectra in Fig. 7B are dominated by a bleach of the 1Σ exciton band (XB) at ∼456 nm and a much weaker and broader photoinduced absorption (PA) band at >500 nm. Addition of electron acceptors does not change the PA signal kinetics, suggesting the PA signal can be attributed to holes.72 However, the much slower formation (∼0.7 ps) of PA than XB (Fig. 7C) suggests that it can be attributed to trapped holes. Indeed, the decay kinetics of both PA and XB features agree with the trap state PL decay (Fig. 7C), with a half-life of ∼100 ns. Thus, as summarized in Fig. 7D, in CdS NRs, ultrafast trapping (0.7 ps) of VB holes leads to long-lived (∼100 ns) trapped excitons (i.e. CB electrons bound to trapped holes). As will be discussed later, this has important implications for photocatalysis because, in spite of this ultrafast hole trapping, CdS NRs are widely used in solar-driven H2 generation reactions and sometimes with exceptionally high efficiencies (>50% quantum efficiency).110,176–179
 Fig. 7  Exciton dynamics in CdS NRs. (A) Static absorption (solid black line) and PL (dashed red line) spectra of CdS NRs (TEM in the inset). (B) TA spectra of CdS NRs at indicted time delays after 400 nm excitation, showing XB and PA (inset) features. (C) Comparison of TA kinetics of XB (purple solid line) and PA (red dashed line), time-resolved PL decay kinetics of trap state (blue dots) and band edge (green solid line), and a multi-exponential fit of PA kinetics (black solid line). (D) A scheme showing electron and hole processes in CdS NRs. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Exciton transport and interfacial charge transfer within hetero-NRs
In artificial photosynthetic systems, semiconductor heterojunctions with type II band alignments are often used because of intrinsically spatially-separated electrons and holes in the excited state. Here we review two examples of hetero-NRs in which electron and/or hole transfer dynamics were monitored by TA spectroscopy. The first example is inter-domain charge separation in CdSe/CdTe type II hetero-NRs (Fig. 8A) demonstrated by Fiebig and co-workers.180 The steady state absorption spectrum of CdSe NRs is dominated by its 1Σ excitonic feature at ∼570 nm (a band) and additional features appear after forming CdSe/CdTe NRs, including the 1Σ excitonic feature of CdTe at ∼620 nm (b band) and a broad peak at >670 nm corresponding to the CT band (c band) between CdTe VB and CdSe CB (Fig. 8A). The PL spectrum of CdSe/CdTe NRs is dominated by the CT band (c band) emission, implying efficient charge transfer between CdSe and CdTe domains (Fig. 8A). As shown in Fig. 8B, the TA spectra measured with 620 nm excitation (in resonant with the CdTe 1Σ band), show instantaneous formation of the CdTe bleach. Within 2 ps, the CdTe bleach shows significant decay and the CdSe bleach and CT band bleach show complementary growth. After 2 ps, all features decay on the ∼1 ns time scale, presumably due to carrier trapping in these NRs. Since the TA bleach signals are dominated by electron state filling contributions, the spectral evolution within 2 ps provide direct evidence for inter-domain electron transfer from CdTe to CdSe. In contrast, excitation of the CdTe NRs within a mixture of CdTe and CdSe NRs only generates CdTe bleach feature (Fig. 8B, bottom). Analysis of the TA kinetics in CdSe/CdTe NRs reveals an electron transfer time constant of ∼500 fs. This time constant is similar to those reported in CdSe/CdTe core/shell QDs (∼770 fs22) and core/crown nanoplatelets (∼640 fs181). In principle, electron transfer time in core/shell QDs only contains interfacial electron transfer and those in hetero-NRs or core/crown nanoplatelets contain both interfacial electron transfer and carrier/exciton transport to the interface. The even faster time constants observed in NRs and nanoplatelets indicate that the carrier/exciton transport in these materials is fast and there likely exists charge transfer barrier in curved core/shell interface in QDs caused by interfacial lattice strain.182 In a related work, Zamkov and co-workers measured carrier dynamics in CdS/ZnSe type II nanobarbells and reported an electron transfer time of <0.35 ps from ZnSe tips into CdS NRs.183 These results show that inter-domain electron transfer inside these type II NRs are often fast, due to fast transport along the nanorod and strong electronic coupling between epitaxially grown semiconductor domains.
 Fig. 8  Charge separation dynamics in CdSe/CdTe and CdSe/CdS hetero-NRs. (A) Static absorption (red) and emission (blue) spectra of CdSe/CdTe NRs. The inset illustrates three absorption bands: lowest energy exciton states of CdSe (a) and CdTe (b) and charge transfer (CT) transition (c). (B) TA spectra of CdSe/CdTe NRs (top) and mixed CdSe and CdTe NRs (bottom) at indicated time delays following photoexcitation of CdTe (at 620 nm). Excitation of CdTe in CdSe/CdTe NRs leads to ultrafast formation (<1 ps) of CdSe and CT band bleaches. In mixed CdSe and CdTe NRs, only CdTe bleach is observed. (C) Transient transmission spectra of CdSe@CdS NRs at indicated delays after 390 nm excitation. (D) Normalized ΔT/T kinetics recorded at different probe wavelengths: Y0 (blue line), 480 nm (thin green line), 490 nm (thick light green line), 560 nm (dot black line), X0 (dot red line). Inset: Long time behavior for X0 and Y0. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
In quasi-type II CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs, hole transfer from CdS rod into CdSe core is the main driving force for rod-to-dot exciton/carrier transport because of the large VB offset. Observation of hole transfer is not as straightforward as electron transfer, because of a lack of a hole contribution to the TA spectra of these materials.161 Nonetheless, Lupo and co-workers have demonstrated that ultrafast measurements can still provide clues for hole transfer.135 CdSe@CdS NRs were excited by a 390 nm pump light, under which condition excitons are created in the CdS rod due to its much larger absorption cross section than the CdSe core at this wavelength.142 The evolution of the transient spectra at different time delays following the excitation is shown in Fig. 8C. Note that transient difference transmittance was plotted in this figure (opposite in sign to the common displayed transient absorbance difference). At 0.2 ps after excitation, the TA spectra are dominated by the Y0 bleach (equivalent to the B1 feature in Fig. 5B), consistent with excitation into the CdS rod. At longer pump–probe delays (0.3–2 ps), the X0 bleach of the CdSe core (equivalent to the B2 feature in Fig. 5B) grows over time. The kinetics at selected wavelengths are plotted in Fig. 8D. While the kinetics at 480 nm, 490 nm, and 560 nm are complicated due to spectral overlap of bleach and induced absorption features, the decay of Y0 and the growth of X0 match each other (inset). Since these features are contributed by electrons, the TA kinetics suggests electron transfer from CdS rod to CdSe core, which seems contradicting the quasi-type II band alignment of these NRs. However, because electron and hole are strongly bound in these 1D NRs,58 the Coulomb force drags electrons from CdS rod to CdSe core during the process of rod to core hole transfer. Therefore, the electron dynamics observed on TA spectra can be used to infer hole dynamics. According to Fig. 8D, hole transfer time from CdS rod to CdSe core is ∼650 fs. Again, this contains contributions from both exciton transport along CdS NRs and hole transfer at the CdSe/CdS interface.
Coupled electron–hole transfer was also observed by Mauser and co-workers in a similar system, CdSe@CdS tetrapods.144 In addition, the authors calculated the wavefunctions of electrons and holes, using effective mass model and taking into account e–h Coulomb interactions. The Coulomb attraction energy used in the calculations is 75 meV, which is a lower limit but already affects electron and hole wavefunctions significantly. As shown in Fig. 9C, the initially created electron and hole states in CdS arms are quite delocalized. Upon hole transfer to the CdSe core driven by VB offset, the electron wavefunction is now localized in and near the CdSe core (Fig. 9B). In addition, if there are defect states that can trap the hole somewhere on the CdS arm, the electron wavefunction is also localized in and near the hole trapping site (Fig. 9D). Since hole trapping is indeed ultrafast and efficient on CdS NRs, this coupled electron–hole dynamics may play a significant role for the exciton transport dynamics in these CdSe@CdS hetero NR systems, which we will discuss in the following session. More recently, Yang and coworkers studied exciton transport and interfacial transfer dynamics in CdSe tetrapods.184 Upon excitation of the Wurtzite CdSe rod, 86% of the excitons were found to move to the zinc blend CdSe core with a time constant of 1 ps, driven by the CB offset across this rod/core quasi-type II interface. The remaining 14% form charge separated state across the interface, with the electron in CdSe core and hole trapped at the CdSe rod.
 Fig. 9  Calculated electron and hole wavefunctions in CdSe@CdS tetrapods. (A) Energy level plotted along the long axis of one of the tetrapod arms. The arrows indicate the real-space dynamics of the electron and hole transfer to the core (red) or to a trapping site (blue). (B) Electron and hole wavefunctions at the band edge of the structure with the hole confined in the CdSe. (C) Electron and hole at the band-edge states of CdS rod before relaxation of the hole to the CdSe core. (D) The hole wave function is localized in a low-energy trapping site in one of the CdS arms, resulting in the localization of the electron wave function to the same arm. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society. 
4.3 Mechanism of exciton transport in 1D nanorods
It is important to emphasize that in all the works discussed in Section 4.2, the measured interdomain exciton and charge transfer times in hetero-NRs contain both the transport of exciton within the rods and exciton/charge transfer at the interface. Similarly, the exciton dynamics in single component NRs (Section 4.1) is also affected by exciton motion along the nanorods. Therefore, it is important to investigate the time constant and mechanism of exciton and carrier transport in these NRs. A convenient way to study this process is through the rod-length dependence of the inter-domain exciton transfer time, which is reviewed in this section.
CdSe@CdS NRs and tetrapods can be viewed as nanoscale light harvesting antennas.76 The excitations created by strong CdS rod absorption are funneled into CdSe core. Because emission from the core is red-shifted from the strong absorption of the rod, these materials have promising applications in luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) where emitted photons by large area absorbers can be efficiently wave-guided (or concentrated) to a small area with small reabsorption loss.77 A critical step involved in this application is the transport of excitons from the light-harvesting CdS rod antenna into the light-emitting CdSe seed. Because of coupled electron–hole dynamics, hole trapping induces exciton trapping on the rod, which compete with exciton localization to the core.144,161,185 Insights into this complicated exciton transport dynamics are important for rational design of these materials for their light-harvesting applications. In our previous work, we investigated this exciton transport dynamics by studying the length dependence of rod-to-seed exciton localization efficiency in CdSe@CdS NRs.156
Representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of NRs of various lengths grown from 2.7 nm seeds are shown Fig. 10A.61,76 Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to identify the position of the CdSe seeds in these NRs (Fig. 10A insets), which is needed for the accurate determination of the rod-to-seed exciton transport distances. The absorptance (percentages of absorbed photons), photoluminescence (PL), and photoluminescence excitation (PLE, PL intensity as a function of excitation wavelength) spectra of these NRs are shown in Fig. 10B. PL spectra of these NRs are dominated by seed exciton (B2) emission (Fig. 10B)61,62 and therefore PLE spectra were acquired by monitoring the B2 emission peaks. PLE spectra are normalized to the same amplitude as the absorptance spectra at the B2 band (Fig. 10B, inset). The ratio of normalized PLE over absorptance yields relative PL QYs, which represent the efficiency of exciton localization from CdS rods into CdSe seeds.161 As shown Fig. 10C, the exciton localization efficiencies are unity at >520 nm, decreases gradually at 480–520 nm, and finally levels off at <480 nm, where the CdS rod absorption dominates, to ∼76%, 56%, and 30% for NRs with lengths of 29 nm, 47 nm, and 117 nm, respectively. These are the efficiencies of the localization of excitons generated at the CdS rod to (near) CdSe seed, driven by the large VB offset.105,161 Similar measurements on NRs with different seed sizes (including both type I and quasi-type II, Fig. 10D middle) show that the length dependence of exciton localization efficiency is universal, independent of seed sizes and band alignments.
 Fig. 10  Competition between exciton transport and trapping in CdSe@CdS NRs. (A) TEM images of CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.7 nm CdSe cores and different lengths (top: 29 nm; middle: 47 nm; bottom: 117 nm). Insets: Corresponding EDX elemental maps indicating the location of the CdSe core (green). (B) Absorptance (black solid line), photoluminescence (PL, blue solid line), and photoluminescence excitation (PLE, red dashed line) spectra of NRs shown in (A). The PLE and absorptance spectra have been normalized at the lowest energy exciton peak in the core, as shown by the insets. (C) Wavelength-dependent relative PL QYs of the NRs shown in (A). The shaded areas show regions of gradual decrease of relative PL QYs. (D) (top) A scheme shows the competition between exciton transport to the core through 1D diffusion and exciton localization on the rod through hole trapping. (middle) Measured (symbols) and simulated (dashed line) exciton localization efficiencies in CdSe@CdS NRs. The efficiency is independent of core sizes: 2.5 nm (blue triangles), 2.7 nm (red circles), and 3.8 nm (green squares). (bottom) CdS rod absorption cross-section (black solid line) and effective CdSe seed absorption cross section (red dashed line) as a function of rod length. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The length-dependent and non-unity rod-to-seed exciton localization efficiencies is consistent with competition between exciton localization to seed and exciton trapping on rod.161 Indeed, TA measurements on these NRs show that the ultrafast formation (∼0.78 ps) of hole trapping signal (PA) signature occurs in all NRs (independent of length), suggesting that this is likely a universal feature associated with CdS surfaces.72,186 Since electron and hole mean free paths are only a few nm,187–191 we consider exciton transport in our NRs as diffusion. The problem can be modeled as a competition between exciton trapping and 1D diffusion (scheme in Fig. 10D), using the modified 1D diffusion equation: , where DX is the exciton diffusion constant, N(x,t) is the time and position dependent exciton concentration, and τTrap is the exciton trapping time (0.78 ps).156 In this model, it is also assumed that interfacial charge transfer is much faster than exciton diffusion. As shown in Fig. 10D (middle), with DX as the only fitting parameter, we can simultaneously fit the localization efficiency for all NRs. The best fit gives a diffusion constant DX of 2.3 × 10−4 m2 s−1, slightly smaller than the bulk value of 3.2 × 10−4 m2 s−1.187–191 According to this diffusion constant, exciton diffusion in 10 nm takes ∼0.5 ps (and further scales quadratically with diffusion length). This should be much slower than charge transfer at the CdSe/CdS interface. Based on the length-dependent exciton localization efficiency in these CdSe@CdS NRs, we define an effective absorption cross section as a product of the rod absorption cross section and the localization efficiency, which represents the cross section for creating excitons in the seed through absorption at the rod.156 As shown in Fig. 10D (bottom), the effective seed absorption cross section first increases with the rod length and approaches saturation at a rod length of ∼100 nm with an effective seed absorption cross section saturating at ∼3.5 of the short rod. This result suggests the existence of an optimal rod length for light harvesting applications.
5. Electron and hole transfer from NRs
NRs have been used as light harvesting and charge separating materials to drive photoreduction reactions, including the reduction of H+ to generate H2.59 In one approach (Fig. 11A), a redox mediator is reduced by light driven electron transfer from NRs, which is then coupled to catalyst (such as Pt) to drive H2 evolution.155,192 In another approach (Fig. 11B), the catalyst (Pt) is directly coupled to the NR as an electron acceptor.75,105 In both schemes, the quantum efficiency of these light driven reactions depend on the rate of interfacial electron and hole transfer from NRs and the competing charge recombination processes. Thus, efficient photocatalysis requires control of these charge transfer and recombination rates through tailoring the NR morphology and composition. Extensive previous studies on QDs have shown that quantum confinement effect in QDs leads to size-dependent driving force and strong interfacial electronic coupling with acceptors, facilitating interfacial charge transfer.38–40,67,193 Due to quantum confinement in the radial directions in NRs, ultrafast interfacial charge transfer can also be expected. Furthermore, 1D geometry gives rise to new charge transfer properties. For instance, the large surface area of NRs allows adsorption of more charge acceptors, which should enhance charge transfer rates because of the additive nature of charge transfer channel.194–196 Fast carrier transport along the long axis suggests the possibility of long distance charge separation.59 In this section, we review recent progress in understanding electron and hole transfer processes from nanorods and how these properties can be used for light driven reactions.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of relevant energy levels and charge transport and transfer processes in photoreduction half reactions using dot-in-rod NRs. (A) Photoreduction of redox mediator A using CdSe@CdS NRs and (B) photoreduction of protons to form H2 using CdSe@CdS/Pt NR heterostructures. kET is the rate constant of electron transfer to acceptor (A) or catalyst (Pt), kCR charge recombination rate constant from catalyst or acceptor to NRs, kHT the hole transfer rate to the electron donor (D). 
5.1 Theoretical models for electron and hole transfer from NRs
Although charge transfer from nanocrystals has been a subject of long-standing interests, models for describing this process have not been well understood and critically tested. Most of the previous understandings are based on the conventional electron transfer model,197 which assumes that the transfer of the CB electrons to the acceptors is decoupled from the dynamics of the VB hole. In a recent paper, Zhu and coworkers have tested this model using QD/molecular acceptor complexes, the simplest model system to study the effect of quantum confinement on charge transfer.198 Their result has shown that ET rate increases monotonically with the driving force over a broad range of 0–1.3 eV, inconsistent with the expectation of the conventional ET model. It was shown that this result can be satisfactorily explained by an Auger assisted electron transfer model. The validity of this model has been further supported by computational studies in model QD–acceptor complexes, in which hole excitation accompanying ET was directly observed and was shown to be important for achieving fast rates in the Auger-assisted regime.198,199 Auger-assisted ET requires that e–h coupling is stronger than electron–phonon coupling and there is a quasi-continuum of states. Because these conditions can be met in many excitonic nanomaterials, such as 0D QDs, 1D nanorods, and 2D nano-platelets (NPLs), Auger-assisted ET should be a general model for charge transfer from these nanomaterials.
Auger-assisted electron (AET) and hole (AHT) transfers from NRs are illustrated in Fig. 12. In the Auger assisted ET model (Fig. 12A), the excess energy of the transferred electron can be conserved by the excitation of the VB hole to a higher level with energy Eh′ due to strong electron–hole interaction, in addition to exciting lattice phonons and acceptor vibration modes. As a result, there is a manifold of product states (NR+[Eh′]-A−) corresponding to hole excitation to the quasi-continuum of VB levels. The total ET rate is the sum of Auger-assisted ET rates to these product states: (1)
 Fig. 12  Auger-assisted electron (AET, panel A) and hole (AHT, panel B) transfer from nanorods. In NRs, in addition to discrete electron and hole (Σ and Π…) levels caused by quantum confinement in the radial direction, free carrier motion along the NR axis gives rise to E vs. k dispersion. In AET (or AHT), electron (hole) transfer is accompanied by hole (electron) excitation to hole (electron) states with higher energy and momentum. 
The electronic coupling strength, HAET(Eh), depends not only on the overlap of the 1Σ electron and acceptor orbitals, but also on the electron–hole Coulomb interaction. Similar expression can also be written down for Auger assisted hole transfer (Fig. 12B).
There may be considerable differences between AET (AHT) from QDs and NRs. In 0D QDs, the density of states (DOS) is low and discrete near the band edge due to quantum confinement in all three dimensions. In 1D QRs (Fig. 12), in addition to the size dependent quantized energy levels (nΣ, nΠ…), there are continua of well-defined k states (E vs. k dispersion) due to free carrier motion along the NR axis. It is unclear, however, whether the number of available states is limited by consideration of momentum conservation. Furthermore, e–h Coulomb interaction is also stronger in 1D NRs due to ineffective dielectric screening. As a result, more efficient Auger-assisted ET and HT processes from NRs may be expected. Because of these differences, it is important to critically test the Auger assisted ET model for NRs.
5.2 Single electron transfer
The effect of 1D exciton structure on electron transfer from quantum confined NRs was studied using CdSe NR–methyl viologen (MV2+) complexes as a model system.168 MV2+ is a well-known one-electron acceptor whose reduced radical form (MV+˙) has strong characteristic absorption in the visible.168,200 The CdSe NRs used here are the same as those in Fig. 6. Using an effective mass model for electron and hole confinement energy16,17 and assuming an exciton binding energy of ∼150 meV,58 the CB edge potential of NRs is estimated to be −0.9 V vs. NHE. Since the reduction potential of MV2+ is ∼−0.45 V,201 the driving force for this photo-induced electron transfer from the 1Σe level is ∼0.45 eV, and it increases for ET from higher CB levels. The TA spectra of CdSe NRs with and without MV2+ at 1.5 ps following 400 nm excitation are compared in Fig. 13A. These spectra were taken at low excitation intensity (∼0.08 exciton per NR) so that only single electron transfer was observed here. Comparisons of transient kinetics in free NRs and NR–MV2+ complexes at 587 nm (1Σ0) and 670 nm (MV+˙ radical) are shown in Fig. 13B and C, respectively. Compared to the long-lived 1Σ0 bleach of free CdSe NRs, the 1Σ0 bleach in NR–MV2+ complexes has a much smaller initial amplitude and decays rapidly in the first 1 ps (Fig. 13B), suggesting ultrafast (hot) electron transfer from CdSe NRs to adsorbed MV2+. Accordingly, compared to the small signal at 670 nm in free CdSe NRs, NR–MV2+ complexes have much larger signal amplitude at 670 nm due to formation of MV+˙ radical (Fig. 13C). Fitting these kinetics yields an electron-transfer time of ∼59 fs. Since this ET rate is much faster than the hot electron cooling process in the NRs (0.5 ps), we speculate that the majority of electrons go through ultrafast hot electron transfer to MV2+ prior to their relaxation to band edge. Similar conclusions were reached in a related study by Kelley and co-workers.200 Ultrafast electron transfer from NRs can be attributed to two reasons: first, they are still quantum confined in the radial direction, which ensures a large amplitude of electron wave function at their surfaces for strong electronic coupling with adsorbed electron acceptors;67 second, they have large surfaces areas for adsorption of a large number of electron acceptors.
 Fig. 13  Single and multiple electron transfer from photoexcited NRs. (A) Transient spectrum of free CdSe NRs (blue) and NR–MV2+ complexes (red) at 1.5 ps after 400 nm excitation (intensity: 7 μJ cm−2). Inset: An expanded view of the spectrum at 500–750 nm and a simulated spectrum of the charge separated state (green circles) of the QR–MV2+ complex. Comparison of TA kinetics probed at (B) 587 nm (1Σ0) and (C) 670 nm (MV+˙ radicals) in free CdSe QRs (blue triangles) and CdSe–MV2+ complexes (red circles). (D) Kinetics of MV+˙ radicals probed at 670 nm for CdSe NRs–MV2+ complexes at different excitation intensities. (E) Comparison of normalized MV+˙ radical signal at 1 ps (number of MV+˙ radical per NR, green circles) and average number of excitons per NR (black line and red triangles) as a function of excitation intensity. (F) Auger annihilation lifetime of n-exciton states (n = 1–30) of CdSe QDs (green circles), quasi-type II CdSe/CdS QDs (red squares), and CdSe NRs (blue triangles). Typical ET times from QDs and NRs to molecular adsorbates (100 fs to 10 ps) are indicated in the shaded area, suggesting that more efficient multiple exciton dissociation can be achieved in CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs than in CdSe QDs. (G) Efficient dissociation of 21 excitons in CdSe NRs by electron transfer to 21 adsorbed methylviologen molecules. (A)–(G) are adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to ultrafast decay of 1Σ0 bleach and formation of MV+˙ radical absorption, interfacial electron transfer in NR–MV2+ complexes also leads to formation of derivative-like features below 650 nm (Fig. 13A inset). These features can be attributed to the charge-separated state (CdSe+–MV+˙). The electric field of this charge-separated state shifts the excitonic transition in CdSe NRs through Stark effect, leading to the derivative-like features in the TA spectrum. Similar features have been observed in many QD–acceptor and NR–acceptor complexes.22,24,72,192,202–204 These features are especially useful for identifying electron transfer processes when the electron acceptors do not have distinct absorptive features in the reduced state,72,102,103,105,115 such as the metallic Pt acceptors that will be discussed later.
Systematic study of how electron transfer rates from QDs depend on electronic coupling and driving force dependence has been reported, owing to the ability to control the size and morphology of QDs.22,193,204 Similar systematic studies on electron transfer from NRs and critical tests of theoretical models are still lacking. Recent developments of NR synthesis have made it possible to prepare NRs with high degree of morphological control, which should enable systematic studies of size and length dependence of charge transfer from NRs in the near future.
5.3 Multiple electron transfer from NRs
Hot electron transfer and multiple exciton generation and dissociation are two promising approaches for increasing the efficiency of solar energy conversion beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit.35 However, both are challenging processes because hot electron transfer needs to compete with ultrafast intraband relaxation (typically sub-ps)169,205–208 and the multiple exciton transfer has to outpace multi-exciton Auger annihilation processes (from ns to sub-ps).172,209,210
The ultrafast electron transfer observed in CdSe NR–MV2+ complexes (∼59 fs) discussed above suggests that it may compete effectively with multiple exciton annihilation and can be utilized for efficient multiple exciton dissociation from NRs. Indeed, we demonstrated that when multiple excitons are created on CdSe NRs, many adsorbed MV2+ molecules can be reduced.168Fig. 13D shows the TA kinetics of MV+˙ radicals as a function excitation intensity in CdSe NR–MV2+ complexes. The average exciton number per NR (w) at these power densities can be determined by analyzing NR TA signal saturation using Poisson statistics.168,209,210 As shown in Fig. 13E, at the highest power density, more than 30 excitons per NR were created. The number of reduced MV2+ molecules per NR can be estimated by assuming that at single exciton conditions (low excitation intensity), every exciton is dissociated by electron transfer to a MV2+ molecule. This assumption is justified by the observation of ultrafast charge transfer at a time scale much faster than the exciton lifetime. Thus, scaled MV+˙ radical signal amplitude at early time (at 1 ps) corresponds to the number of MV+˙ radicals (Fig. 13E). It can be seen that, at the highest power density, as many as ∼21 electrons can be reduced. The successful reduction of many acceptors on each NR is a synergistic result from several factors: NRs can accommodate many excitons due to their relatively large volume;211 they can adsorb many acceptors on their surfaces; and most importantly, they have relatively slow multi-exciton Auger recombination. As we discussed previously, the bi-molecular Auger recombination of 1D excitons in NRs scales much slower with exciton number than the three-particle Auger recombination in QDs, leading to longer lived multi-excitons in NRs (Fig. 13F). Admittedly, multi-exciton lifetimes can also be prolonged in (quasi-) type II QDs, such as CdSe@CdS core/thick shell QDs,24,212,213 and up to 19 electrons can be transferred from each QD.24 However, in artificial photosynthetic systems, both the electron and hole need to be extracted (Fig. 11A and B). In terms of multiple hole transfer, NRs should be much more efficient than core/shell QDs in which the hole is insulated from surface by the shell.
5.4 Hole transfer from NRs
Compared to electron transfer, hole transfer from nanocrystals are far less studied.214–218 This is partially because TA spectra of cadmium chalcogenide NRs are dominated by the electron state-filling induced exciton bleach, making it difficult to follow hole dynamics.20,162 Hole transfer rates are often inferred from PL quenching of nanocrystals in the presence of hole acceptors. Since PL quenching can be caused by decay of both electron and holes, relying on PL decay dynamics alone is sometimes not sufficient. It is often informative to compare PL decay with TA exciton bleach recovery to determine both the dynamics of electrons and holes.
Alivisatos and coworkers have studied hole transfer from CdSe@CdS NRs using PL quenching.219 In such experiments, it is desirable to have relative long PL lifetimes in native nanocrystals so that the effect of hole transfer quenching is the main decay pathway and can be reliably determined. In this experiment the CdS rod effectively passivates the hole traps associated with CdSe seed, increasingly the PL QY to ∼36% (Fig. 14A). A relative thin CdS shell in these materials ensures effective removal of VB holes from the CdSe core in the presence of hole acceptors. The native surface ligands of these NRs were exchanged into a thiol-modified ferrocene molecule, 6-(ferrocenyl)hexanethiol (Fc-hex-SH), with the –SH functioning as anchoring group and –Fc as hole acceptor. 1-Octanethiol (Oct-SH) ligands were used as the control to account for the influence of thiol ligands on carrier dynamics. 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements indicate that the average number of Fc-hex-SH on each NR is about 300. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements (Fig. 14B) show that the driving force for this hole transfer reaction, the energy difference between the redox potential of Fc-hex-SH and VB edge of CdSe core, is ∼0.85 eV. As shown in Fig. 14C, the native and Oct-SH capped NRs have average PL lifetimes of 21.0 and 17.0 ns, respectively. In contrast, the average PL lifetime for Fc-hex-SH exchanged NRs is shortened to 790 ps, which can be assigned to the hole transfer process. Based on these lifetimes, the hole extraction efficiency is near unity for Fc-hex-SH capped CdSe@CdS NRs.
 Fig. 14  Transfer of VB and trapped holes from photoexcited NRs. (A) Absorption and emission spectra of the CdSe@CdS NRs. (B) Energy diagram for various components of the CdSe@CdS NRs and Fc-hex-SH system as determined by cyclic voltammetry. (C) PL decay kinetics of free CdSe@CdS NRs (black), Oct-SH exchanged NRs (red), and Fc-hex-SH exchanged NRs(blue). (D) TA spectra of CdS NRs with added PTZ molecules at indicated delays following 400 nm excitation. (E) Zoom-in of the 500–600 nm wavelength range shows the formation and decay of oxidized PTZ+ radical signal. (F) Time-resolved trap state PL decay kinetics of CdS NRs as a function of added PTZ concentration. (G) Average PL decay rate (inverse of half-life) as a function of PTZ concentration and its fit to the PTZ isotherm adsorption model. The gray dashed line is a linear plot predicted by dynamic quenching. (H) Estimated average PTZ number per NR (m) and fractional surface coverage (θ) of PTZ on NRs according to the PTZ isotherm adsorption model. (A)–(C) are adapted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D)–(H) are adapted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Alivisatos and coworkers have reported a systematic study of driving force and coupling strength dependent study using these thiol-modified ferrocene molecules.220,221 Although QDs are used in these studies, we expect the conclusions to be applicable for hole transfer from NRs. Both the shell thickness of CdSe@CdS core/shell QDs and alkyl chain length of thiol-modified ferrocene molecules were used to tune the electronic coupling between VB hole in QD and HOMO of ferrocene.220 It was found that after correcting for the number of ferrocene per QD, the hole transfer rate decreases exponentially with both shell thickness and alkyl chain length, but with different decay coefficients. The redox potentials of these ferrocenes were modified by functionalizing the cyclopentadiene rings with electron withdrawing and donating substituents, providing an avenue for tuning the driving force for hole transfer over an 800 meV range.221 It was observed that hole transfer rate monotonically increased with driving force in this range. The Auger-assisted hole transfer mechanism was invoked to explain this driving force dependence, where the excessive energy for hole transfer process is used to excite electrons in the CB (Fig. 12B).
In addition to the transfer of VB holes, we reported recently that trapped holes in CdS NRs can also be efficiently extracted.222 As mentioned above, CdS NRs show near unity efficiency of hole trapping on an ultrafast time scale (∼0.7 ps).72 Because CdS NRs have been widely used in solar-driven H2 generation reactions and some studies reported impressive H2 generation performances (>50% quantum efficiency),110,176–179 these results imply that trapped holes can be efficiently extracted in these systems. To gain further insights into trapped hole transfer, we studied CdS NRs in the presence of phenothiazine (PTZ) as hole acceptors.222 PTZ was used because its oxidized form exhibits a strong and characteristic absorption at ∼520 nm,214 which is well separated from excitonic features of CdS NRs.
As shown in Fig. 14D, the XB feature is long-lived (∼250 ns half lifetime) in the presence of PTZ, indicating that PTZ does not introduce electron transfer or trapping channels. TA spectra in the 500–600 nm spectral range (Fig. 14E) show that the PA signal of trapped hole decays with a time constant of ∼3.6 ns, accompanied by the formation of an absorptive band of oxidized PTZ+ radical at ∼520 nm.214 These spectral features provide direct evidence for trapped hole transfer from CdS NRs to PTZ molecules. The radical signal reaches its maximum in <100 ns and then decays on the sub-μs time scale, due to its recombination with the CdS CB electrons. The TA kinetics of PA is consistent with time-resolved trap state PL kinetics, indicating that both can be used to follow the hole transfer kinetics. Due to its better signal-to-noise ratio, PL decay was used to study PTZ concentration dependent hole transfer dynamics, aiming at elucidating the hole transfer mechanism (dynamic vs. static quenching).216 As shown in Fig. 14F, trapped state PL decay becomes faster with increasing PTZ concentration. Fig. 14G shows that the average PL decay rate (the inverse of PL decay half-life) first increases with the PTZ concentration and approaches saturation at high concentrations. This trend is not consistent with dynamic quenching (hole transfer to PTZ in solution via collision) which predicts a linear increase of PL decay rate with quencher concentration. Therefore, the dominant mechanism is hole transfer to PTZ molecules adsorbed on NR surfaces (static quenching). In a related study, Dukovic and co-workers discovered that hole transfer from photoexcited CdS NRs to a mononuclear water-oxidation catalyst [Ru(deeb)(tpy)Cl](PF6) (deeb = diethyl 2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylate, tpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) also occurred through static quenching.223 Fitting the concentration dependent hole transfer rates leads to average numbers of adsorbed molecules as a function of total PTZ concentration, which can be used to generate a Langmuir isotherm for PTZ absorption on NRs (Fig. 14G). At the highest concentration, average number of adsorbed molecules per NR surface is ∼16 and the hole transfer time per PTZ is ∼120 ns. Therefore, although trapped hole transfer is sluggish, high hole transfer efficiency (∼95%) is achieved by the presence of many adsorbed hole acceptors. We note that this occurs in both CdSe@CdS NR-(Fc-hex-SH) and CdS NR-PTZ systems. Indeed, in realistic photocatalytic systems, the concentrations of sacrificial donors are always much higher than photocatalysts to ensure that hole transfer rates are enhanced by the availability of multiple hole transfer acceptors.224
5.5 NRs for redox mediator generation
Efficient interfacial transfer of both electrons and holes from NRs indicates that they should be promising materials for photocatalysis. Photoreduction of methyl viologen (MV2+) is often used as a model reaction to examine the performance of photocatalytic systems because MV2+ is a well-known one-electron acceptor,168,200 and redox mediator for H2 evolution.155,225,226 The advantage of NRs for MV+˙ generation was demonstrated in a study comparing the performance of different nanostructures, including Ru(bipy)32+ (bipy = 2,2′-bipyridine) molecules, CdSe core-only QDs, CdSe@CdS core/shell QDs, CdS NRs, and CdSe@CdS NRs. Mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) ligands were used to stabilize nanocrystals in aqueous phase and to remove holes from nanocrystals. As shown in Fig. 15A, the radical generation quantum yields (QYs) show the following trend: CdSe@CdS NRs (∼98%) > CdS NRs (∼65%) > CdSe@CdS core/shell QDs (∼31%) > Ru(bipy)32+ (∼20%) > CdSe QD (∼11%).155 Especially impressive is the near unity QY of CdSe@CdS NRs. TA kinetics of MV+˙ radical absorption band (Fig. 15B) shows that in all systems, the initial formation is 100% efficient, as a result of ultrafast electron transfer to MV2+. However, the lifetimes of MV+˙ radicals in these systems are different, due to different rates of radical recombination with holes in nanocrystals. The trends of both radical lifetimes (Fig. 15B) and transient QYs at 10 μs (Fig. 15A) follow that of steady state QYs. For CdSe@CdS NRs, there is negligible recombination of MV+˙ radicals within 10 μs (Fig. 15B), resulting in the near unity steady state QY. Charge recombination loss is suppressed in this system because hole transfer from CdSe@CdS NRs to MPA (0.31 ns, measured by time-resolved PL decay) is much faster than the recombination of MV+˙ radical with holes in CdSe@CdS NRs (320 ns, measured with TA). In contrast, fast recombination between MV+˙ radicals and holes in QDs leads to large recombination loss and small steady state QY.155 In addition, we demonstrated that the photo-generated MV+˙ radicals could be coupled with Pt catalyst for light driven H2 generation,155 according to the scheme in Fig. 11A. The H2 generation efficiencies were found to follow the same trend as MV2+ photoreduction.
 Fig. 15  Hetero NRs for efficient photoreduction of methyl viologen (MV2+). (A) Steady state MV+˙ radical photogeneration QYs using different nanomaterials: Ru(bipy)32+, CdSe QD seed, CdS NR, CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) NRs, CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar lowest exciton energy (CS-SE), CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar volume (CS-SV) as the DIR. Also plotted are the transient quantum yields (open triangles) at 10 μs obtained from TA measurements. For experimental conditions, see ref. 155. (B) Comparison of the formation and decay kinetics of MV+˙ radicals generated by 400 nm excitation of aqueous solutions containing different NCs same color scheme as (A) under conditions similar to A. (C) MV+˙ radical generation QYs of ZnSe@CdS DIR NRs under 415 and 550 nm excitations. (D) Schematic depiction of charge separated states I, II and III generated in ZnSe@CdS DIR–MV2+ complexes after excitation at the bulb and rod regions. (E) The concentration of MV˙+ radicals generated by photoreduction using CdSe NRs and CdSe@CdS rod-in-rod NRs with different lengths (S: short ∼ 25 nm; M: medium ∼ 32 nm; L: long ∼ 54 nm). (F) Schematic illustration of different relaxation pathways for photogenerated carrier in CdSe@CdS rod-in-rod NRs in the absence (left) and presence (right) of MV2+. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Further insights into the role of the unique electronic structure of hetero NRs in simultaneously facilitating fast electron transfer to MV2+, suppressing electron–hole recombination and enabling fast hole removal, were obtained through an excitation wavelength dependence study of MV+˙ radical generation using type II ZnSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs.192 As shown in Fig. 15C, the radical generation QY was ∼90% under 415 nm excitation and was much smaller (∼34%) under 550 nm excitation. Detailed spectroscopic studies uncover different charge separated states under these excitation wavelengths. As shown in Fig. 15D, in the presence of MV2+, the exciton created by 550 nm excitation is dissociated to form charge separated state I. In this state, the hole in the ZnSe core and MV+˙ radical adsorbed on the rod region surrounding the core are in spatial proximity, leading to fast recombination and low steady state radical generation QY (∼34%). In contrast, 415 nm excitation at the CdS rod results in three types of charge separated states. ∼70% of excitons are dissociated by ultrafast electron transfer to MV2+ and rapid hole localization into the ZnSe core to generate charge separated state III. The electron and hole are separated over long distances (10s of nm) in this state, effectively suppressing charge recombination and boosting radical generation QY (near unity). The overall QY is lower than unity because of the co-existence of charge separated states I (13%) and II (17%) where recombination losses are larger due to smaller electron–hole spatial separations. The ability to form long-distance charge separated state III is the key to high photocatalysis efficiency of dot-in-rod NRs, providing that electron transfer to the acceptor is fast enough to compete with exciton localization to the core.
The above photocatalysis mechanism for hetero-NRs is corroborated in a recent study by Kamat and co-workers,227 where they measured rod length dependence of MV+˙ radical generation from CdSe@CdS rod-in-rod NRs. These NRs have similar electronic structure with the CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs except that the core is a short CdSe NR.228 As shown in Fig. 15E, in the studied length regime, MV+˙ radical generation rate increases with NR length. The result is explained by the competition between the two paths displayed in Fig. 15F. In path I, the photogenerated excitons localize to the CdSe rod core, driven by the band offset. In path II, the hole still localizes to the CdSe core but the electron can be transferred to MV2+. In longer NRs, path II dominates and the resulting charge separated states also have longer lifetime, leading to enhanced radical generation rate. The competition of exciton transport and interfacial transfer is expected to be a general phenomenon in many nanorods. In a recent study of charge transfer from CdSe tetrapods, it was shown that with a fast electron acceptor, such as MV2+, interfacial electron transfer to the acceptor competes effectively with rod-to-core exciton localization; while for a slower acceptor, such as methylene blue, exciton localization proceeds interfacial electron transfer.229
6. Light driven H2 generation using semiconductor/metal hetero-NRs
Heterostructures with metallic domains deposited on semiconductor NRs combine the size-tunable, light-harvesting property of quantum-confined semiconductor nanocrystals with the catalytic activities of small metal nanoparticles. These highly-integrated all-inorganic structures have shown promising applications for many solar-to-fuel conversion reactions, including light-driven H2 formation by proton reduction,70,71,75,111,230–232 and carbon monoxide, methane, methanol and formic acid formation by CO2 reduction.233–238 CO2 reduction involves highly complicated multielectron–multiproton-transfer processes with multiple product channels. In this paper, we focus on the applications of these nanorods for light driven H2 formation and on the mechanism of photocatalysis learned from detailed time-resolved spectroscopic studies of elementary charge transfer processes. As shown in Fig. 16B, in addition to function as a catalyst (and electron acceptor), the metallic domain can also quench the exciton in the semiconductor domain through undesired energy and hole transfer process. Thus, rational design of such integrated semiconductor/metal domain requires the knowledge of how the metal domain affects the exciton and carrier dynamics in the NR and how selective and long-lived electron transfer from the semiconductor to the metal domain can be achieved.
 Fig. 16  Exciton quenching mechanism in CdS–Pt NRs. (A) Absorption (solid lines, left axis) and emission (dashed lines, right axis) spectra of CdS NRs (black) and CdS–Pt NR heterostructures(red). (B) Schematic energy levels and exciton quenching pathways in CdS–Pt NR heterostructures. (C) TA spectra of CdS–Pt NRs at indicated time delays: 0.2 ps–2 ns (upper panel) and 3–3000 ns (lower panel). (D) TA kinetics of exciton bleach (XB, black solid line, top), photoinduced absorption (PA, red solid line, middle) and charge separated state (CS, green solid line, bottom) spectral features for CdS–Pt NRs. Also shown for comparison are corresponding kinetics for free CdS NRs (grey dashed lines) at the same wavelengths. Inset: Comparison of CS and PA kinetics in CdS–Pt after 1 ns. Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
6.1 Charge separation in Pt tipped CdS NRs
The effect of metal tip on exciton dynamics in the semiconductor NR was examined in a previous study of CdS–Pt NRs.72Fig. 16A shows that in addition to excitonic absorption bands of CdS NRs, the absorption spectrum of CdS–Pt NRs has broad features extending from UV to near IR due to strong d–sp interband transition of platinum nanoparticles.239 The introduction of Pt tip strongly quenches both band edge and trap state emissions of CdS NRs.175 The energy level diagram for this system (Fig. 16B) shows that excitons in CdS NRs can be quenched via electron, hole and energy transfer to the Pt. Only the electron transfer pathway is desired for light-driven H2 generation, while hole and energy transfer pathways would reduce the H2 generation QY.
TA spectroscopy was applied to investigate the competition of possible exciton quenching pathways in CdS–Pt NRs.72Fig. 16C shows the TA spectra CdS–Pt NRs at indicated delays after 400 nm excitation. The exciton bleach (XB) shows much faster decay compared with free CdS NRs (Fig. 16D, top), indicating depopulation of CB electrons in CdS NRs due to the presence of the Pt tip. In contrast, the kinetics of PA signal from trapped holes remains unaffected (Fig. 16D, middle), excluding both hole and energy transfer processes because both should annihilate the hole. Therefore, the observed ultrafast exciton quenching (half-life ∼3.4 ps) is dominated by electron transfer from the CdS NR to Pt tip. The absence of both hole and energy transfer pathways is due to ultrafast (∼0.7 ps) hole trapping on CdS NRs.72 Compared with electron lifetime in free NRs (∼100 ns), the charge separation yield in this system is near unity. Fig. 16C (bottom) also shows that XB recovery is accompanied by the formation of a derivative-like feature of exciton bands, which can be attributed to the CdS+–Pt− charge separated state (CS).72 Both this CS feature and the PA signal can be used to follow the charge recombination dynamics between the electron on Pt and hole in CdS. As shown in Fig. 16D (middle and bottom panels), CS and PA have a half-life time of 1.2 ± 0.6 μs, indicating that the CdS+–Pt− state is long-lived. This long-lived charge separation can also be attributed to hole trapping on CdS NRs, which sets up a long distance between the electron in Pt and hole in the trap site. Therefore, ultrafast hole trapping in CdS NRs leads to efficient and long-lived charge separation, which is essential for the accumulation of electrons in the Pt tip and subsequent H2 production.75,81
The importance of hole trapping for efficient charge separation was corroborated by a related study examining exciton quenching mechanisms in Pt tipped CdSe nanoplatelets (NPLs).240 These CdSe NPLs have atomically precise thickness of only a few CdSe layers and therefore are quantum confined in the thickness direction.241–246 Compared with CdS NRs, these CdSe NPLs are much better passivated because of their Cd-terminated surfaces.241–246 Indeed, as-prepared CdSe NPLs shows a PL QY of ∼36%, consistent with the absence of ultrafast hole trapping process in TA and time-resolved PL measurement.240 TA study of Pt tipped CdSe NPLs shows that the exciton quenching efficiency is 100%, but only 13.4% of excitons are dissociated to form the desired CdSe+–Pt− charge separated state. The majority of excitons (∼86.6%) excitons are quenched by ultrafast exciton transport to the CdSe/Pt interface followed by rapid energy transfer. The comparison between this system and CdS–Pt NRs clearly demonstrates that hole trapping is essential for selective and efficient electron transfer in these semiconductor–metal heterostructures.
6.2 Charge separation in Pt tipped CdSe@CdS NRs
Although hole trapping facilitates charge separation in CdS–Pt NRs, the nature and the location of these hole trap sites are poorly understood. In CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs, the VB hole can be localized to the CdSe core with known and controllable location and depth.75,135 Indeed, our recent study shows that charge separation efficiency in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs is near unity and charge separated states are long-lived (∼100s ns) for both excitation at the CdSe seed and the CdS rod.105 For excitation of the rod, there is a competition between exciton transport to core, trapping on rods, and charge transfer to Pt, which complicates the analysis of the charge transfer process.105 Here we only discuss the situation for core excitation, where the initial location of exciton is in and around the core (Fig. 17C scheme). The TA spectra of CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs at indicated delays after 540 nm excitation are shown in Fig. 17A. The core exciton bleach (XB) feature recovered quickly with concomitant formation of derivative-like charge separated state (CS) signals, similar to the formation of the CS signal in CdS–Pt NRs, suggesting ET to the Pt tip. The time-dependent populations for XB and CS signals, obtained from fitting the TA spectra (Fig. 17B), show that the charge separation and recombination half-lives are 43.5 ± 4.7 ps and 211 ± 38 ns, respectively.105 Compared with the long-lived core exciton lifetime (∼10s ns) in free CdSe@CdS NRs, the charge separation yield is near unity. Here, the suppression of hole transfer is achieved by the VB confinement potential between CdSe and CdS, and energy transfer is suppressed by the long distance between core exciton and Pt tip. Similarly efficient charge separation was also reported for ZnSe@CdS–Pt NRs and CdSe@CdS–Pt octapods.247,248 Considering the long distance, typically 10s of nm, between electron donor (CdSe or ZnSe cores) and acceptor (Pt tip) in these hetero-NRs, efficient ET cannot occur through tunneling mechanism.21 A possible mechanism is the thermally-activated electron hopping,249–252 in which the electron is first dissociated from the hole by thermal activation and then diffuses along the CdS rod to reach to Pt tip (Fig. 17C). More systematic studies are needed to test the validity of this model.
 Fig. 17  Charge separation and recombination in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs. (A) TA spectra of CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs at indicated time delays following excitation of the CdSe core. Exciton bleach (XB) and charge separated states (CS) features are labeled. (B) Kinetics of XB (red circles) and CS (blue triangles) features from 1 to 3000 ns. The black solid lines are multi-exponential fits, from which charge separation and recombination times can be obtained. (C) Scheme of a possible mechanism for the long-range electron transfer in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs, which involves thermal dissociation of electron from hole and random hopping of electron along the rod. (D) and (E) Excitation fluence dependence of PL from individual CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs exposed to (D) pure liquid water and (E) water with 10% methanol (green) or 10% isopropanol (purple) as hole scavengers. Dashed lines serve as guides to the eye. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to ultrafast spectroscopic studies, Amirav and co-workers have applied a single particle PL technique to investigate the time scale of charge separation events in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs.253 Although the presence of Pt tip partially quenches the PL of CdSe@CdS rod, the PL intensity is still sufficient to be observed at the single particle level. The PL intensity was shown to be inversely proportional to the photocatalysis efficiency of each NR. As shown in Fig. 17D, when the NRs are placed in water, a complex, highly nonlinear dependence of PL intensity and illumination power was observed. Specifically, PL intensity shows saturation with increasing photon fluxes. This is attributed to the presence of an excess hole in the NR according to the following model. Upon photoexcitation, the electron transfers rapidly to the Pt, temporarily leaving an extra hole behind in the NR. Under low photon fluxes, this hole eventually recombines with the electron on Pt. However, with increasing photon fluxes, photon absorption rate outpaces this charge recombination event, resulting in a positive trion (one electron and two holes) that can nonradiatively decay through Auger recombination.209,210,254 This quenches PL and produces the observed saturation. From the saturation onset, the charge separated state lifetime is estimated to be on the order of 100 ns, consistent with ultrafast spectroscopic results.105 When hole scavengers, methanol or isopropanol, were added to pure water (Fig. 17E), the saturation onsets shifted to lower photon fluxes, which is attributed to the stabilization of holes by these polar molecules, suppressing their recombination with electrons and thus prolonging the charge separated state lifetime. The estimated charge separated state lifetime in water (120 ± 40 ns) is lengthened upon addition of methanol (250 ± 35 ns) and isopropanol (330 ± 35 ns).
6.3 Hole removal rate limited H2 generation
Although charge separation is efficient and long-lived in semiconductor/metal hetero-NRs, their H2 generation QYs are often far from unity.75,81,105 It indicates that hole removal by sacrificial electron donors might be a key efficiency limiting step in the photocatalytic H2 generation cycle. Indeed, many previous studies support this idea.73,105,110,224 Zamkov and co-workers show that H2 generation performances from mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) capped ZnSe@CdS–Pt is ∼300-fold higher than MUA capped-ZnTe@CdS–Pt NRs (Fig. 18A). Examination of the energetics in these systems (Fig. 18B) indicates that hole transfer from the ZnSe core to the HOMO level of mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) or mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) ligands is allowed whereas it is not favored for the ZnTe core. This interpretation is supported by time-resolved PL decay measurements for ZnSe@CdS and ZnTe@CdS NRs. As shown in Fig. 18C, the PL lifetime of ZnSe@CdS NRs is reduced from 42.0 to 1.9 ns upon exchange from non-polar (NP) ligands to MUA ligands, due to ultrafast hole transfer to MUA. In stark contrast, the PL lifetime of ZnTe@CdS NRs increases from 31 to 59 ns when NP ligands are replaced with MUA ligands, likely due to better surface passivation with MUA ligands. Therefore, this study highlights the importance of hole transfer for a successful photocatalytic reaction.
 Fig. 18  Hole removal rates limited H2 generation in semiconductor-Pt NRs. (A) Comparison of H2 production traces from MUA capped ZnSe@CdS–Pt (blue) and ZnTe@CdS–Pt (red) NRs. Note that the accurate composition of the latter is ZnTe@CdSe@CdS–Pt. A thin layer of CdSe on ZnTe is required for the formation of dot-in-rod heterostructures. (B) Schematic energy levels in ZnSe@CdS–Pt (left) and ZnTe@CdS–Pt (right) NRs, showing that hole transfer from ZnSe to MUA and MPA ligands are energetically allowed while it is forbidden from ZnTe. (C) Comparison of the PL decay in of NP (nonpolar ligands) and MUA ZnSe@CdS (top) and ZnTe@CdSe@CdS (bottom). (D) Comparison of H2 generation quantum efficiencies for MPA and cysteine capped CdS–Pt NRs using SO32−, TEA, EDTA4−, and MeOH as sacrificial electron donors. Inset: Hydrogen evolution as a function of time. (E) Comparison of the oxidation potentials of SO32−, TEA, EDTA4−, and MeOH. (F) H2 generation quantum efficiencies for both MUA capped CdSe@CdS–Pt and CdS–Pt NRs in aqueous solution with SO32− or MeOH as added sacrificial electron donors. (A)–(C) are adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. (F) is adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Berr and co-workers reported similar findings in a study that compares the H2 generation QYs (averaged over four hours of illumination) of the same Pt-decorated CdS NRs in the presence of different sacrificial electron donors.224 As shown in Fig. 18D, for cysteine capped NRs, the highest efficiency is achieved for SO32− (1.7%) and it drops to 0.7% for TEA, 0.1% for EDTA4−, and below the detection limit for MeOH. The same trend is observed for MPA capped NRs. The redox potentials of SO32−, TEA, EDTA4−, and MeOH are displayed in Fig. 18E. Clearly, the H2 generation quantum efficiency increases when the donor redox potential is more negative (reductive). According to Marcus ET theory, in the normal regime, the increase of driving force leads to faster hole transfer.197 Alternatively, if Auger assisted hole transfer applies (Fig. 12B), hole transfer rates also increases with driving force. The authors demonstrate that faster hole transfer not only improves H2 generation QYs but also is essential for the stability of the photocatalytic systems.197 TEM images (not shown here) show that when MeOH and EDTA4− are used as donors, obvious shortenings and aggregations of the NRs are observed after four hours of illumination, indicating photo-oxidation of the NRs by their own holes. When SO32− and TEA are used, no differences can be observed between the TEM images before and after illumination. Therefore, fast hole transfer improves both H2 generation efficiency and the stability of the colloidal NRs.
On the basis of these previous studies, we further compared H2 generation efficiencies of different heterostructured NRs in the presence of different sacrificial electron donors.105 We showed that the relative performance of different NRs depends on the electron donors. As shown in Fig. 18F, with MeOH as an electron donor, higher efficiency was observed for CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs (1.8%) than for CdS–Pt NRs (0.8%). Using SO32− as an electron donor, the efficiencies of both systems were improved, but the efficiency became higher for CdS–Pt NRs (9.6%) than for CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs (3.2%). Ultrafast spectroscopic measurements show that these H2 generation efficiencies correlated well with the hole transfer rates measured with time-resolved PL decay, supporting the idea of hole removal limited H2 generation efficiency.105 The hole transfer rates can be explained by the different nature of trapped holes in CdS NRs and core confined holes in CdSe@CdS NRs. The trapped holes in CdS NRs have strong coupling with phonons,255,256 requiring a large reorganization energy and/or driving force for fast hole transfer.197 In contrast, the core-confined holes in CdSe@CdS NRs are well separated from the surface by the CdS shell. Therefore, in the case of weakly reductive MeOH and MUA, the rate for transferring the trapped holes in CdS NRs is slower than the VB holes from the CdSe core. In contrast, the more strongly reductive SO32− provides a larger driving force for removing the surface-trapped holes in CdS NRs. In this case, the hole transfer rate becomes slower in CdSe@CdS NRs because the core-confined holes are harder to access by the electron donor.
6.4 Approaches for fast hole removal and efficient H2 generation
Previous findings suggest the key to efficient proton reduction using Pt-NR heterostructures is to improve the hole transfer rates. This problem can be approached in two ways: searching for better hole scavengers and engineering the NRs. Sacrificial donors with more negative redox potentials have larger hole transfer driving forces and therefore faster transfer rates. For example, previous studies of various CdS nanostructures show that using a mixture of sulfite and sulfide (S2−/SO32−) as electron donors can lead to H2 generation efficiencies exceeding 50%.177–179,257,258 However, using strongly reductive donors reduces the net energy gain in (and hence the solar-to-fuel energy conversion efficiency of) the fuel-forming reactions. Another way to improve hole transfer rates is to utilize scavengers that can more readily access the NR surface. Typically, the ligands coating colloidal nanostructures form a steric barrier for the donor molecules, hindering their diffusion to and adsorption at the surface and thereby inhibiting the hole transfer process.80 Simon and coworkers recently reported a redox shuttle mechanism to overcome this steric barrier issue in Ni decorated CdS NRs.80 Comparison of H2 generation rates at different pH (Fig. 19A) shows strong enhancement at pH > 14, with an external QY up to 53% (or internal QY up to 71%) at pH 14.7. It was proposed that (Fig. 19A inset), at high pH, instead of a direct oxidation of ethanol donor by the photoexcited hole, the smaller hydroxyl anions (OH−) can easily diffuse to the NR surface and get oxidized to hydroxyl radicals (OH˙). The OH˙ radicals act as charge shuttles and diffuse away into the solution and oxidize ethanol molecules to acetaldehydes, which is known to proceed at a high rate.259 Therefore, a slow hole transfer process (directly to ethanol) can be replaced by two faster ones, involving a redox mediator (OH−/OH˙). Hydroxyl anions (OH−) are difficult to oxidize in neutral water. But at high pH conditions, the concentration of hydroxyl anions (OH−) is high enough so that the redox potential is shifted to more negative values according to the Nernstian equation. The CB electron is presumably transferred to Ni (similar to CdS–Pt system discussed above), and efficient removal of VB hole enables the accumulation of electrons in Ni for the reduction of protons. More recently, Amirav and coworkers applied the same OH−/OH˙ redox mediator mechanism to CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs and reported a near perfect QY of light driven H2 generation (100%).260 In a related study, Xie and co-workers reported the use of small molecule-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as hole shuttles.261 The redox couple TFA˙/TFA− enhances photocatalytic H2 production rate of K4Nb6O17 nanosheet catalysts by more than 30 times.261 Therefore, this redox shuttle mechanism may be general scheme for efficient photocatalysis, provided that a suitable redox couple can be found for the system.
 Fig. 19  Approaches for fast hole removal. (A) H2 generation rates from Ni nanoparticle decorated CdS NRs (cysteine capped) as a function of pH. Inset: A scheme of OH− hole shuttle mediated photocatalytic generation of H2. At high pH, i.e. high hydroxyl anion concentration, the photoexcited holes in CdS NRs oxidize hydroxyl anions to hydroxyl radicals which carry away the positive charges and in turn oxidize ethanol to acetaldehyde. The electrons are transferred to Ni nanoparticle and catalyze H2 formation. (B) H2 generation efficiency in etched Cdse@CdS–Pt NRs. (top) Preparation of CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs with exposed CdSe core via chemical etching. (bottom left) Representative TEM image of etched CdSe@CdS NRs. (bottom right) Comparison of H2 generation efficiency of etched and non-etched CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs. A is adapted with permission form ref. 110. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
A parallel approach for enhancing hole transfer rates is to engineer the morphology of NRs to expose the hole-trapping domains to the electron donor. Recently, Zamkov and coworkers demonstrate that chemical etching of CdSe@CdS NRs using benzoyl peroxide (BPO) led to a partial dissolution of the CdS shell surrounding the CdSe core, which allows for a nearly direct contact between CdSe core and electron donors in the surrounding medium (scheme and TEM image in Fig. 19B).108 Such etched NRs are expected to facilitate hole transfer from the CdSe core and improve their H2 generation QY. As shown in Fig. 19B, with MUA ligands as sacrificial electron donors, etched CdSe/@CdS–Pt NRs indeed show an H2 generation rate ∼3–4 fold higher than un-etched ones. Time-resolved PL decay measurements confirm that the etching treatment reduces CdSe core-to-ligand hole transfer time from 3.7 to 1.3 ns. This etching approach provides a facile post-synthetic route to heterostructures with fast hole extraction rates and improved photocatalytic performances. Alternatively, directly synthesized hetero NRs with hole trapping domains at the ends of the rod, such as the CdS–ZnSe and CdSe–CdTe nanobarbells in Fig. 2F and G, should also have improved photocatalysis performances.
6.5 Systematic optimization of H2 generation efficiency
An important advantage of colloidal hetero-NRs is that the size and shape of each domain can be readily tailored by colloidal synthesis, providing a platform for systematic study of important factors influencing H2 generation performances. In CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs, for instance, tunable parameters include CdSe seed size, CdS rod length, and size and number of Pt tips. Fig. 20A shows the H2 generation QYs for a series of single Pt tipped NRs with different core sizes and rod lengths, using 2-propanol as sacrificial electron donors.75 Comparison of NRs of the same core (either 2.3 nm or 3.1 nm) shows that H2 generation quantum efficiency increases with rod length, presumably because of longer-lived charge separated state lifetime in longer NRs. When rod lengths are comparable, NRs with a smaller CdSe core (2.3 nm) show higher activity than larger core (3.1 nm), likely due to more efficient charge separation for NRs with smaller core. However, the exact origin for this rod length and seed size dependence remains to be elucidated.
 Fig. 20  Other factors affecting H2 generation. (A) H2 generation quantum efficiency in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs depend sensitively on the CdSe core size and CdS rod length, with the highest efficiency achieved in longest rod with a small (2.3 nm diameter) core. (B) H2 generation quantum efficiency obtained with CdSe@CdS NRs decorated with a single, double, or multiple Pt reduction sites. (C) H2 generation activity of the CdS NRs film decorated with size-selected Pt clusters as a function of number of Pt atom per cluster. The average H2 production rate reaches its maximum for Pt46 clusters. This trend is even more pronounced for the monolayer quantum efficiency (ML QE), which takes into account that just the uppermost layer of the CdS nanorod film is covered with clusters. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) is adapted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The number of catalytic metal sites on a nanostructure is an important but often overlooked factor that influences photocatalytic performances, especially for two-electron reactions, such as the H2 evolution.106 For a nanostructure with a single metal site, the release of a H2 molecule corresponds to the sequential absorption of two photons. It becomes more complicated for a nanostructure decorated with two or more metal sites. After transfer of one electron to a metal site, the next photoinduced electron by the absorption of a second photon might be transferred to different metal site. This is more likely to be the case if one considers the Coulomb repulsion between these electrons.253 Therefore, it likely slows down the rate of accumulating two electrons at the same metal site, lowering its H2 generation rate. This notion is confirmed by Amirav and co-workers in a comparison of light-driven H2 generation performances using CdSe@CdS NRs decorated with different number of Pt sites.106 As shown in Fig. 20B, NRs decorated with a single Pt catalyst were found to be the most active for H2 generation, with a QY reaching 27%. In contrast, NRs having two Pt sites has a QY of 18% and NRs with multiple Pt sites showed very low activity (QY < 1%). Similar trends were observed for Pt decorated CdSe NRs by Bang and coworkers.263 Since many other solar-to-chemical conversion reactions, such as O2 evolution and CO2 reduction,1,7,8,264 involve multiple electrons, the number of catalytic sites should be considered in general as an important factor for artificial photosynthetic system design.
The activity of metallic catalysts often sensitively depends on their size and shape.265–267 For instance, Schweinberger and co-workers conducted an elegant study of the effect of Pt cluster size on light-driven H2 generation using Pt decorated CdS NRs.262 In their experiment, CdS NRs were coated on substrates and the size of cluster were precisely controlled at an atomic level by a high frequency laser ablation technique in ultrahigh vacuum.268 All system parameters, such as size and composition of the CdS NRs, type and concentration of the hole scavenger, and cluster coverage, were kept the same except the Pt cluster size. As shown in Fig. 20C, the H2 generation rate first increased with cluster size, reached a maximum for Pt46 (a cluster with 46 Pt atoms), and then decreased at larger cluster size. The observed size effect is interpreted as a trade-off between two opposite size dependence: electron transfer rate from the NR to the Pt and from the cluster to the hydrogen increases and decreases with the cluster size, respectively, presumably because the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the cluster decreases with increasing size. This study suggests an optimum energetic position of the cluster for a given photocatalytic system. In their recent work, Banin and co-workers also reported an optimal size of Au domain for light-driven H2 generation from Au tipped CdS NRs.269
In addition to structural engineering, extensive efforts have been devoted to H2 evolution catalyst design. Efficient catalysts beyond noble metal Pt are highly desired. Alivisatos and co-workers reported that an amorphous MoS3 layer deposited on CdSe@CdS NRs was active for photochemical H2 generation.154 Similarly, Du and co-workers have reported a series of CdS NRs decorated with amorphous metal phosphides H2 generation catalysts.270–273 Biological catalysts, such as hydrogenase, are also intensely studied for light driven H2 generation because of their low over potentials. Dukovic and co-workers demonstrated that electron transfer was efficient in complexes of CdS NRs and [FeFe]–hydrogenase and H2 generation with QYs of up to 20% was achieved.274–276 In a related work, Dyer and co-workers studied [NiFe]–hydrogenase coupled with CdTe QDs for light driven H2 generation.277 Many molecular catalysts, especially transition metal complexes, have also been coupled with nanocrystals for H2 generation.278–281 For example, Krauss and co-workers reported a robust and highly active (QYs > 36%) H2 generation system comprised of CdSe QDs capped with dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) and added nickel salts.282 It was speculated that a water-soluble molecular Ni2+–DHLA complex was formed in situ and acted as a highly efficient proton reduction catalyst. Wu and co-workers reported several similar in situ formed catalysts by adding nickel or cobalt salts to aqueous solution of QDs.283,284 The nature of these in situ formed catalysts needs to be elucidated for rational design and improvement of catalysts. At last, Hill and co-workers have reported several polyoxometalate (POM) catalysts for light-driven H2 generation.285–287 These POM catalysts can be viewed as intermediates between molecular and particulate catalysts and may possess their combined advantages.
7. Summary and outlook
Through synergetic efforts in colloidal synthesis, performance evaluation and mechanistic studies, exciting progress has been made in the field of colloidal 1D nanostructures and their applications for solar driven H2 generation. Designer NR heterostructures with highly-integrated and well-tailored functionalities can be synthesized using low-cost colloidal procedures. Spectroscopic studies uncover exciton and carrier transport and transfer dynamics in these heterostructures and provide mechanistic insights into their light-driven reduction and H2 generation reactions. Specifically, donor–absorber–reduction catalyst model systems, with controllable light harvesting, charge separation and catalytic properties, have been realized using hetero-NRs, such as the Pt tipped CdSe@CdS dot-in-rods. Ultrafast spectroscopic measurements show that electron transfer is efficient (near unity) and the resulting charge separated states (CdSe+–CdS–Pt−) are long-lived (∼100s ns). However, light-driven H2 generation efficiency of these hetero NRs in the presence of hole scavengers remains low (∼20%), indicating that hole transfer to scavengers is the efficiency-limiting step. Significant efficiency enhancements have been realized by improving the rate of the hole transfer step. Looking forward, there are many additional opportunities to be explored and challenges to be addressed.
Fundamentally, new ultrafast techniques need to be developed to investigate the complete light-driven H2 generation cycle under working conditions. All the ultrafast measurements reviewed in this paper only probe the first electron transfer event.72,74,105,247 This is sufficient for mimicking one-electron photocatalytic reactions such as photoreduction of MV2+. Indeed, in this case, relevant charge transfer processes can be directly monitored by time-resolved studies to quantitatively explain the observed steady state photoreduction performances (Fig. 15). In contrast, for light-driven H2 generation reaction, time-resolved spectroscopic measurements can only partially explain the steady state QY (Fig. 18), because the rates for many processes involved in the second electron transfer and catalytic turn over steps remain unknown. It is essential to develop and apply techniques that can follow these latter processes under working conditions to further elucidate the mechanism of solar-to-fuel conversion reactions.
So far, most studies have focused on the photoreduction half reactions, with the needed electron provided by a sacrificial electron donor. Similar approaches can and should be applied to the study of photooxidation half reactions. However, it is important to devise schemes to effectively couple the photoreduction and photooxidation half reactions to fully utilize the potential energy stored in both the photogenerated electron and hole for useful chemical transformation.288–290 For example, thiols are often used as sacrificial electron donors in light-driven H2 generation and they are transformed into di-sulfides during photocatalytic cycles.290 Development of more sophisticated heterostructures with both integrated oxidation and reduction catalysts is a promising and exciting future direction. The dual-metal dual-semiconductor Ru–CdSe@CdS–Pt hetero NRs shown in Fig. 3E is a good example of such systems because the addition of oxidation catalyst Ru can facilitate hole transfer and subsequent oxidative reactions.
Finally, it is important to note that II–VI chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures have been most extensively studied because their synthesis, morphological control and spectroscopic properties are best understood. However, the stabilities of these systems are often limited, due to chemical corrosion and/or photodegradation.110,282 Long-term stability and chemical toxicity issues of these materials should be addressed for practical applications. Surface coating approaches, such as amorphous TiO2 coatings recently developed for low band gap III–V and Si photocathodes,291 might help stabilize these chalcogenide based hetero-NRs. More importantly, they should be considered as a model system for the applications of quantum dots and nanorods in solar energy conversion. The designing principles obtained from the study of these model systems should be applicable for other quantum rods, including more chemically robust materials.13,292,293
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Solar Photochemistry Program under Award Number (DE-FG02-12ER16347).
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2014, June.
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1989, 22, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6802–6827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Liddell, D. Kuciauskas, J. P. Sumida, B. Nash, D. Nguyen, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 34, 40–48 CrossRef .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435–461 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 389–458 CrossRef PubMed .
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2013, 114, 863–882 CrossRef PubMed .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566–5571 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038–15045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8762–8771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Yang, N. Song, W. Rodríguez-Cordoba and T. Lian, Proc. SPIE, 2011, 8098, 809802 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, N. Song, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ben-Lulu, D. Mocatta, M. Bonn, U. Banin and S. Ruhman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, K. J. Tielrooij, A. Osherov, Y. Golan, C. Delerue, G. Allan and M. Bonn, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Midgett, H. W. Hillhouse, B. K. Hughes, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17486–17500 CAS .
G. Nair, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25332–25338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. McGuire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810–1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7318–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cunningham, J. E. Boercker, E. E. Foos, M. P. Lumb, A. R. Smith, J. G. Tischler and J. S. Melinger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3476–3481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Physica E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang and T. Lian, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 229–238 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, X. Xiang and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 303–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale and X.-Y. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 965–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1002–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Matylitsky, L. Dworak, V. V. Breus, T. Basche and J. Wachtveitl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2424–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Zhu and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4858–4864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Keuleyan, E. Lhuillier, V. Brajuskovic and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 489–493 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Burai, A. J. Panay, H. Zhu, T. Lian and S. Lutz, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 667–670 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 477–496 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. Paul Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. G. Kanaras and L. Manna, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1387–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shieh, A. E. Saunders and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8538–8542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 1990, 23, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. Katz, T. Wizansky, O. Millo, E. Rothenberg, T. Mokari and U. Banin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 0868011 Search PubMed .
L.-s. Li, J. Hu, W. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 349–351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1821–1825 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 851–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sitt, I. Hadar and U. Banin, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 494–513 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore and I. R. Franchini, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson, J. Feldmann and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Halpert, V. J. Porter, J. P. Zimmer and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12590–12591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, N. Schmall and M. Zamkov, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4305–4309 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mishra, W.-Y. Wu, B. M. Srinivasan, R. Hariharaputran, Y.-W. Zhang and Y. Chan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1187–1195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu and T. Lian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9406–9418 CAS .
J. Müller, J. M. Lupton, P. G. Lagoudakis, F. Schindler, R. Koeppe, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann, D. V. Talapin and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2044–2049 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Cirloganu, L. A. Padilha, Q. Lin, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, H. Luo, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4148 CAS .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787–1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Habas, P. Yang and T. Mokari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3294–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu, Z. Liu, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10337–10340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Acharya, R. S. Khnayzer, T. O’Connor, G. Diederich, M. Kirsanova, A. Klinkova, D. Roth, E. Kinder, M. Imboden and M. Zamkov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2919–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, C. Mauser, S. Fischbach, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel and J. Feldmann, Small, 2012, 8, 291–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051–1054 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Borys, M. J. Walter, J. Huang, D. V. Talapin and J. M. Lupton, Science, 2010, 330, 1371–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Bronstein, L. Li, L. Xu, Y. Yao, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos and R. G. Nuzzo, ACS Nano, 2013, 8, 44–53 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meinardi, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, R. Simonutti, M. Lorenzon, L. Beverina, R. Viswanatha, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 392–399 CrossRef CAS .
I. Coropceanu and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4097–4101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrović, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Döblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. S. Susha, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, M. Doblinger, F. Jackel, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 0931081 CrossRef .
P. Tongying, F. Vietmeyer, D. Aleksiuk, G. J. Ferraudi, G. Krylova and M. Kuno, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4117–4124 RSC .
P. Tongying, V. V. Plashnitsa, N. Petchsang, F. Vietmeyer, G. J. Ferraudi, G. Krylova and M. Kuno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3234–3240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, L.-S. Li, W. Yang, L. Manna, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 292, 2060–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Koh, A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3909–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Trentler, K. M. Hickman, S. C. Goel, A. M. Viano, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, Science, 1995, 270, 1791–1794 CAS .
H. Yu and W. E. Buhro, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 416–419 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, A. Dong, J. Sun, R. Tang, H. Yu and W. E. Buhro, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7511–7521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. Yin and A. Paul Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 306, 1009–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2490–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, M. Jones, S. S. Lo and G. D. Scholes, Small, 2007, 3, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6538–6543 CAS .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Zhong and G. D. Scholes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9170–9171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dorfs, A. Salant, I. Popov and U. Banin, Small, 2008, 4, 1319–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, R. Brescia, R. Krahne, G. Bertoni, M. J. P. Alcocer, C. D’Andrea, F. Scotognella, F. Tassone, M. Zanella, M. De Giorgi and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1637–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, L. Amirav, S. Aloni and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9997–9999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders, E. Elmalem, A. Salant and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 637–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, W. E. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Y. Yang and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5255–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Hill, N. E. Richey, Y. Sung, P. T. Dirlam, J. J. Griebel, E. Lavoie-Higgins, I.-B. Shim, N. Pinna, M.-G. Willinger, W. Vogel, J. J. Benkoski, K. Char and J. Pyun, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3272–3284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7708–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakibli, P. Kalisman and L. Amirav, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2265–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Razgoniaeva, P. Moroz, S. Lambright and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4352–4359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Khon, K. Lambright, R. S. Khnayzer, P. Moroz, D. Perera, E. Butaeva, S. Lambright, F. N. Castellano and M. Zamkov, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2016–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dukovic, M. G. Merkle, J. H. Nelson, S. M. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4306–4311 CrossRef CAS .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrović, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Döblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Maynadié, A. Salant, A. Falqui, M. Respaud, E. Shaviv, U. Banin, K. Soulantica and B. Chaudret, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 1846–1849 CrossRef .
L. Amirav, F. Oba, S. Aloni and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7007–7011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449–493 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195–1208 RSC .
K. Wu, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 14062–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Puthussery, A. Lan, T. H. Kosel and M. Kuno, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 357–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Hoang, L. V. Titova, H. E. Jackson, L. M. Smith, J. M. Yarrison-Rice, J. L. Lensch and L. J. Lauhon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 1231231 CrossRef .
A. I. Ekimov, F. Hache, M. C. Schanne-Klein, D. Ricard, C. Flytzanis, I. A. Kudryavtsev, T. V. Yazeva, A. V. Rodina and A. L. Efros, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1993, 10, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Norris, A. Sacra, C. B. Murray and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 2612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Bartnik, A. L. Efros, W. K. Koh, C. B. Murray and F. W. Wise, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 19531301 CrossRef .
A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris and M. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843–4856 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros, M. Rosen and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 16347–16354 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 475–521 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Chemla and D. A. B. Miller, Opt. Lett., 1986, 11, 522–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vietmeyer, M. P. McDonald and M. Kuno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12379–12396 CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Brus, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 363–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ye, T. Cao, K. O'Brien, H. Zhu, X. Yin, Y. Wang, S. G. Louie and X. Zhang, Nature, 2014, 513, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 026803 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chernikov, T. C. Berkelbach, H. M. Hill, A. Rigosi, Y. Li, O. B. Aslan, D. R. Reichman, M. S. Hybertsen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 076802 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, F. H. da Jornada, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, F. Wang, S. G. Louie and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1091–1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Müller, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann, D. V. Talapin and H. Weller, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 167402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Müller, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann, D. V. Talapin and H. Weller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 205339 CrossRef .
R. M. Kraus, P. G. Lagoudakis, A. L. Rogach, D. V. Talapin, H. Weller, J. M. Lupton and J. Feldmann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 017401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Lupo, F. Della Sala, L. Carbone, M. Zavelani-Rossi, A. Fiore, L. Lüer, D. Polli, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4582–4587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mauser, T. Limmer, E. Da Como, K. Becker, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and D. V. Talapin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 153303 CrossRef .
G. Morello, F. Della Sala, L. Carbone, L. Manna, G. Maruccio, R. Cingolani and M. De Giorgi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195313 CrossRef .
D. Steiner, D. Dorfs, U. Banin, F. Della Sala, L. Manna and O. Millo, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2954–2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo and L.-W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 91–98 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saba, S. Minniberger, F. Quochi, J. Roither, M. Marceddu, A. Gocalinska, M. V. Kovalenko, D. V. Talapin, W. Heiss and A. Mura, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sitt, F. D. Sala, G. Menagen and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3470–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Lupo, M. Zavelani-Rossi, A. Fiore, D. Polli, L. Carbone, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Superlattices Microstruct., 2010, 47, 170–173 CrossRef .
A. A. Lutich, C. Mauser, E. Da Como, J. Huang, A. Vaneski, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4646–4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mauser, E. Da Como, J. Baldauf, A. L. Rogach, J. Huang, D. V. Talapin and J. Feldmann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 0813061 CrossRef .
G. Morello, F. Della Sala, L. Carbone, L. Manna, R. Cingolani and M. De Giorgi, Superlattices Microstruct., 2010, 47, 174–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, F. Tassone, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3142–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Krahne, G. Morello, A. Figuerola, C. George, S. Deka and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2011, 501, 75–221 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, I. Moreels, R. Gomes, J. S. Kamal, Z. Hens and R. F. Mahrt, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4031–4036 CrossRef PubMed .
C. She, A. Demortière, E. V. Shevchenko and M. Pelton, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1469–1475 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Smith, J. M. Luther and J. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4923–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, S. Chakrabortty, S. W. Ngiam, Y. Chan and T. C. Sum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17711–17716 CAS .
G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, I. Moreels, R. Gomes, Z. Hens and R. F. Mahrt, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1979–1987 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chakrabortty, G. Xing, Y. Xu, S. W. Ngiam, N. Mishra, T. C. Sum and Y. Chan, Small, 2011, 7, 2847–2852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Tang, D. C. Grauer, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, V. K. Yachandra, L. Amirav, J. R. Long, J. Yano and A. P. Alivisatos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10203–10207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song, H. Lv, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11701–11708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, L. J. Hill, J. Chen, J. R. McBride, N. G. Pavlopolous, N. E. Richey, J. Pyun and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4591–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Christodoulou, F. Rajadell, A. Casu, G. Vaccaro, J. Q. Grim, A. Genovese, L. Manna, J. I. Climente, F. Meinardi, G. Raino, T. Stoferle, R. F. Mahrt, J. Planelles, S. Brovelli and I. Moreels, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Khon, A. Mereshchenko, A. N. Tarnovsky, K. Acharya, A. Klinkova, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, I. Nemitz and M. Zamkov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1792–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, N. Schmall, P. Z. El-Khoury, A. N. Tarnovsky and M. Zamkov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1328–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O’Connor, M. S. Panov, A. Mereshchenko, A. N. Tarnovsky, R. Lorek, D. Perera, G. Diederich, S. Lambright, P. Moroz and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8156–8165 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wu, W. E. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Z. Liu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7173–7185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6112–6123 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kelestemur, A. F. Cihan, B. Guzelturk and H. V. Demir, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8509–8514 RSC .
D. Oron, M. Kazes and U. Banin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035330 CrossRef .
V. I. Klimov, S. A. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, J. A. McGuire and A. Piryatinski, Nature, 2007, 447, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Piryatinski, S. A. Ivanov, S. Tretiak and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 108–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Osovsky, D. Cheskis, V. Kloper, A. Sashchiuk, M. Kroner and E. Lifshitz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 197401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11289–11297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Mohamed, C. Burda and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 589–593 CrossRef CAS .
H. Htoon, J. A. Hollingsworth, R. Dickerson and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 227401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, J. T. Stewart, R. L. Sandberg, W. K. Bae, W.-K. Koh, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1092–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1344–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11461–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim, D. Lee, L. A. Padilha, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, C. Lee, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2661 Search PubMed .
A. E. Saunders, A. Ghezelbash, P. Sood and B. A. Korgel, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9043–9049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Buehler, K. Meier and J. F. Reber, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 3261–3268 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 110–117 CrossRef .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X. Wang, J. Yang, G. Liu, J. Han and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11584–11591 CAS .
C. J. Dooley, S. D. Dimitrov and T. Fiebig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12074–12076 CAS .
K. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Jia, J. R. McBride, Z.-x. Xie and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 961–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 43, 190–200 CrossRef PubMed .
N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, P. Z. El-Khoury, A. N. Tarnovsky, M. Kirsanova, I. Nemitz, A. Nemchinov and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1837–1844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. She, G. W. Bryant, A. Demortière, E. V. Shevchenko and M. Pelton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 155427 CrossRef .
H. H.-Y. Wei, C. M. Evans, B. D. Swartz, A. J. Neukirch, J. Young, O. V. Prezhdo and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4465–4471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Warman, M. P. De Haas, S. W. F. M. Van Hovell tot Westerflier, J. J. M. Binsma and Z. I. Kolar, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 5895–5899 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Islam and J. Woods, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1970, 3, 1297 CAS .
W. E. Spear and J. Mort, Proc. Phys. Soc., 1963, 81, 130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mort and W. E. Spear, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1962, 8, 314–315 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Islam and J. Woods, Solid State Commun., 1969, 7, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Chen, K. Wu and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3905–3914 RSC .
H. Zhu, Y. Yang, K. Hyeon-Deuk, M. Califano, N. Song, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, O. V. Prezhdo and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1263–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, A. Issac, D. Stockwell, Z. Huang, J. Huang, J. Guo and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15132–15133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Song, H. Zhu, S. Jin, W. Zhan and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 613–621 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. T. Frederick, L. C. Cass and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10146–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hyeon-Deuk, J. Kim and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 244–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Jiang and D. F. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4594–4602 CAS .
L. Michaelis and E. S. Hill, J. Gen. Physiol., 1933, 16, 859–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, N. Song, Z. Liu, H. Zhu, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 7561–7570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Z. Liu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 6362–6372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhu, N. H. Song and T. Q. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038–15045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Woggon, H. Giessen, F. Gindele, O. Wind, B. Fluegel and N. Peyghambarian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17681 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4028–4031 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 13740–13749 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, C. J. Schwarz, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, R2177–R2180 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 287, 1011–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, J. A. McGuire, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Rupasov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 195324 CrossRef .
S. Schmitt-Rink, D. S. Chemla and D. A. B. Miller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 6601–6609 CrossRef CAS .
F. García-Santamaría, S. Brovelli, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 687–693 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Garcia-Santamaria, Y. F. Chen, J. Vela, R. D. Schaller, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Huang, Z. Q. Huang, S. Y. Jin and T. Q. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19734–19738 CAS .
M. Sykora, M. A. Petruska, J. Alstrum-Acevedo, I. Bezel, T. J. Meyer and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9984–9985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Jiang, V. Leppert and D. F. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19161–19171 CAS .
T. X. Ding, J. H. Olshansky, S. R. Leone and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2021–2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Sharma, Z. S. Pillai and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10088–10093 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tarafder, Y. Surendranath, J. H. Olshansky, A. P. Alivisatos and L.-W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5121–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Ding, J. H. Olshansky, S. R. Leone and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2021–2029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Olshansky, T. X. Ding, Y. V. Lee, S. R. Leone and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15567–15575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Y. Du, H. Tang, Z. Chen and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10224–10230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Tseng, M. B. Wilker, N. H. Damrauer and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3383–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Berr, P. Wagner, S. Fischbach, A. Vaneski, J. Schneider, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jackel and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223903 CrossRef .
P. Du, J. Schneider, P. Jarosz and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7726–7727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1979, 281, 657–658 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Bridewell, R. Alam, C. J. Karwacki and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5064–5071 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sitt, A. Salant, G. Menagen and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2054–2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Wu, Z. Chen, B.-S. Jeong and T. Lian, Chem. Phys., 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.chemphys.2015.08.011 .
U. Banin, Y. Ben-Shahar and K. Vinokurov, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 97–110 CrossRef .
G. Menagen, J. E. Macdonald, Y. Shemesh, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17406–17411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Saunders, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25421–25429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manzi, T. Simon, C. Sonnleitner, M. Döblinger, R. Wyrwich, O. Stern, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14007–14010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kar, S. Farsinezhad, X. Zhang and K. Shankar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14305–14318 RSC .
G. Yin, M. Nishikawa, Y. Nosaka, N. Srinivasan, D. Atarashi, E. Sakai and M. Miyauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2111–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, R. L. Thompson, P. Ohodnicki, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13452–13457 RSC .
C. Wang, R. L. Thompson, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 48–53 CrossRef .
R. C. Johnson, J. Li, J. T. Hupp and G. C. Schatz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 356, 534–540 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, Q. Li, y. Du, Z. Chen and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1049–1054 RSC .
S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16504–16505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ithurria, G. Bousquet and B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3070–3077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. L. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joo, J. S. Son, S. G. Kwon, J. H. Yu and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5632–5633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Son, X.-D. Wen, J. Joo, J. Chae, S.-I. Baek, K. Park, J. H. Kim, K. An, J. H. Yu, S. G. Kwon, S.-H. Choi, Z. Wang, Y.-W. Kim, Y. Kuk, R. Hoffmann and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6861–6864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Son, J. H. Yu, S. G. Kwon, J. Lee, J. Joo and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3214–3219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O’Connor, M. S. Panov, A. Mereshchenko, A. N. Tarnovsky, R. Lorek, D. Perera, G. Diederich, S. Lambright, P. Moroz and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8156–8165 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Conca, M. Aresti, M. Saba, M. F. Casula, F. Quochi, G. Mula, D. Loche, M. R. Kim, L. Manna, A. Corrias, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2238–2243 RSC .
W. B. Davis, M. R. Wasielewski, M. A. Ratner, V. Mujica and A. Nitzan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 6158–6164 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Davis, W. A. Svec, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, Nature, 1998, 396, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
D. Segal, A. Nitzan, W. B. Davis, M. R. Wasielewski and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3817–3829 CrossRef CAS .
D. Segal, A. Nitzan, M. Ratner and W. B. Davis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2790–2793 CrossRef CAS .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13049–13053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Achermann, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 245302 CrossRef .
J. Mooney, M. M. Krause, J. I. Saari and P. Kambhampati, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 2047051 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mooney, M. M. Krause, J. I. Saari and P. Kambhampati, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 0812011 CrossRef .
M. Liu, D. Jing, Z. Zhou and L. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2278 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, H. Yan, X. Wang, F. Wen, Z. Wang, D. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
B. Halliwell, J. M. C. Gutteridge and O. I. Aruoma, Anal. Biochem., 1987, 165, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kalisman, Y. Nakibli and L. Amirav, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1776–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bi, X. Li, L. Zhang, T. Jin, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Schweinberger, M. J. Berr, M. Döblinger, C. Wolff, K. E. Sanwald, A. S. Crampton, C. J. Ridge, F. Jäckel, J. Feldmann, M. Tschurl and U. Heiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13262–13265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. U. Bang, S. J. Lee, J. S. Jang, W. Choi and H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3781–3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. A. Nadeem, J. B. Metson, M. A. Keane, R. F. Howe, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 489–492 CAS .
A. A. Ismail, D. W. Bahnemann, I. Bannat and M. Wark, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7429–7435 CAS .
E. M. Sabio, R. L. Chamousis, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3161–3170 CAS .
M. J. Berr, F. F. Schweinberger, M. Döblinger, K. E. Sanwald, C. Wolff, J. Breimeier, A. S. Crampton, C. J. Ridge, M. Tschurl, U. Heiz, F. Jäckel and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5903–5906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ben-Shahar, F. Scotognella, I. Kriegel, L. Moretti, G. Cerullo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, B. Lv, J. Li, M. Xiao, X. Wang and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1598–1602 CAS .
Z. Sun, H. Zheng, J. Li and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2668–2676 CAS .
Z. Sun, H. Chen, Q. Huang and P. Du, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4964–4967 CAS .
Q. Yue, Y. Wan, Z. Sun, X. Wu, Y. Yuan and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16941–16947 CAS .
M. B. Wilker, K. E. Shinopoulos, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4316–4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Utterback, M. B. Wilker, K. A. Brown, P. W. King, J. D. Eaves and G. Dukovic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5538–5542 RSC .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Greene, C. A. Joseph, M. J. Maroney and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11108–11111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, K. L. Mulfort, P. Du and L. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16472–16475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gimbert-Suriñach, J. Albero, T. Stoll, J. Fortage, M.-N. Collomb, A. Deronzier, E. Palomares and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7655–7661 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-Z. Wu, B. Chen, Z.-J. Li and C.-H. Tung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2177–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W.-G. Wang, X.-J. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3193–3197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Li, X.-B. Li, J.-J. Wang, S. Yu, C.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 465–469 CAS .
Z.-J. Li, J.-J. Wang, X.-B. Li, X.-B. Fan, Q.-Y. Meng, K. Feng, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6613–6618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, J. Song, H. Zhu, Y. V. Geletii, J. Bacsa, C. Zhao, T. Lian, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv, W. Guo, K. Wu, Z. Chen, J. Bacsa, D. G. Musaev, Y. V. Geletii, S. M. Lauinger, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14015–14018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, Y. Chi, J. van Leusen, P. Kögerler, Z. Chen, J. Bacsa, Y. V. Geletii, W. Guo, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 17363–17370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Pirnot, D. A. Rankic, D. B. C. Martin and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2013, 339, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Bernt, P. T. Burks, A. W. DeMartino, A. E. Pierri, E. S. Levy, D. F. Zigler and P. C. Ford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2192–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Li, Z.-J. Li, Y.-J. Gao, Q.-Y. Meng, S. Yu, R. G. Weiss, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2085–2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Kaifeng Wu
	Kaifeng Wu received his BS degree in materials physics from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2010 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from Emory University in 2015 with Prof. Tianquan Lian. He is currently a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at Los Alamos National Laboratory. His research interest is ultrafast charge carrier dynamics in photocatalytic semiconductor and semiconductor/metal hetero-nanostructures.

Tianquan Lian
	Tianquan (Tim) Lian received his BS degree from Xiamen University in 1985, MS degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1988, and PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1993. He is currently the William Henry Emerson Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Emory University. Tim Lian research interest is focused on understanding fundamental charge transfer and transport processes in solar energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Solar energy conversion using nanorod heterostructures. (A) Scheme of an artificial photosynthetic system, comprising of light absorber, antenna, electron donor and acceptor. The thick and thin blue arrows indicate electron and energy flow directions, respectively. (B) Semiconductor nanorod (NR) heterostructures. Top: QD-like quantum confinement effect in the radial direction and bulk like transport properties in the axial direction in NRs. D: diameter of QDs or NRs; L: length of NRs; aB: Bohr exciton diameter. Bottom left: Efficient bulk-like rod-to-core long distance exciton transport in CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs. This enables the CdS NR (with strong and tunable light absorption) to act as light harvesting antenna to enhance the effective light absorption rate of CdSe QD core. Bottom right: Long distance charge separation in triadic Pt-tipped CdSe@CdS NRs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Quantum confined semiconductor NRs. (A) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of CdSe NRs with increasing aspect ratios (from top to bottom). The inset in the middle panel shows absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the lowest energy exciton peak of the NR. (B–E) absorption and PL spectra of dot-in-rod NRs with various materials compositions: (B) CdSe@CdS NRs, (C) CdTe@CdSe NRs, (D) ZnSe@CdS NRs, and (E) ZnSe@ZnS NRs. Insets in (B–E): absorption and PL of the corresponding QD cores (where available). (F) Absorption spectra of CdSe NRs (solid line) and CdTe tipped nanobarbells (dashed line). (G) Absorption spectra of CdS NRs (blue line) and ZnSe tipped nanobarbells (red line). Insets in (F) and (G): TEM images of nanobarbells. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B–E) are adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (F) is adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (G) is adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Semiconductor/metal NR heterostructures. (A–D) TEM image of (A) CdSe NRs with double Au tips, (B) CdSe NRs with a single Co tip, (C) CdS NRs with a single Pt tip, (D) CdS NRs with many Pt particles along the wall. (E) Step-by-step synthesis of Ru–CdSe@CdS–Pt heterostructures. First, Ru@RuOx particles were synthesized; second, a CdSe QD was attached to Ru particle to make Ru–CdSe dimers; third, seeded-growth generated CdSe@CdS NRs with Ru attached on CdSe seed; at the end, Pt was further deposited on Ru–CdSe@CdS NRs. High angle annular dark field (HAADF) images and energy dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS) were used to confirm the success of this step-by-step synthesis. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) is adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (D) is adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (E) is adapted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electronic structure and optical property of NRs. (A) Static absorption spectra of three CdS NRs with similar diameters (3.8 nm) and different lengths (black: 13.8 nm; red: 18.1 nm; green: 26.9 nm). (B) Static absorption spectra of three CdSe NRs with different diameters (black: 2.7 nm, red: 3.5 nm, green: 5.1 nm) and lengths (black: 17.9 nm, red: 24.5 nm, green: 16.5 nm). (C) Size dependence of the electron and hole energy levels in CdSe NRs calculated by effective mass six-band model. The NR was considered as an ellipsoid crystal with major semi-axis b (the NR axis) much larger than the minor semi-axis a (the NR radius). Arrows show optically allowed interband transitions. (D) Size dependence of the tunneling and optical energy gap in CdSe NRs. Dotted and dashed lines show bare and self-interaction corrected energy gaps between the 1Σ1/2 hole and 1Σe electron subband. Two solid lines show the optical transition energy for the first two optically active 1D excitons. Experimental data for the tunneling and optical gap measured in CdSe NRs from ref. 56 are shown by empty circles and filled squares. (E) Schematic illustration of the “bare”, tunneling and optical gaps and dielectric confinement induced electron (hole) – image charge repulsive self-interaction and enhanced electron–hole attraction. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electronic structure and optical property of CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod NRs. (A) Core-size dependent energy level diagrams for CdSe@CdS NRs. In NRs with small cores (middle panel), the lowest energy excitons in CdS NR (B1) and CdSe core (B2) have degenerate CB electron level. Therefore, the electron wavefunction is delocalized among CdSe core and CdS NR, while hole wavefunction is confined in the core, forming a quasi-type II heterostructure. In NRs with large cores (bottom panel), both electron and hole levels of the lowest energy excitons in CdSe core (B2) have lower energy than those of CdS NR (B1), forming a type I heterostructure. (B) The absorption spectrum of typical CdSe@CdS NRs with B1 and B2 transitions labeled. (C) Averaged transient absorption (TA) spectra of CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.7 nm (top) and 3.8 nm (bottom) diameter CdSe cores and varying rod length at 1–2 ps after ∼580 nm excitation. For comparison, TA spectra of corresponding CdSe QDs with similar confinement energies are also shown. (D) Comparison of TA spectra (averaged between 50–100 ps) measured with 400 and 580 nm excitation for CdSe@CdS NRs with 3.8 nm diameter CdSe core. (E) Transient emission spectra (solid black line) measured at the peak of the excitation pulse at increasing numbers of absorbed photons per dot (ppd) for CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.2 nm (left) and 4.0 nm (right) diameter CdSe cores. Spectra were fit using four peaks featuring the single exciton (red), bi-exciton (blue), tri-exciton (green), and CdS emission (magenta). Note that the bi-exciton peak is blue-shifted with respect to the single exciton in the left panel and red-shifted in the right. (F) Excitation intensity dependent emission spectra CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.2 nm (left) and 3.9 nm (right) diameter CdSe cores. Compared to spontaneous emission spectrum at low excitation intensity, the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) peak is blue-shifted in the quasi-type II NRs (left panel) and red-shifted in type I NRs (right panel). (C) and (D) are reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (E) is reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (F) is reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Exciton dynamics in CdSe NRs. (A) Absorption (black solid line) and emission spectra (red dashed line) of CdSe NRs. (B) TEM image the CdSe NRs. (C) TA spectra of CdSe NR at indicated delay times (−0.1 to 1.5 ps) after 400 nm excitation. (D) 1Σ0 (587 nm) bleach formation and decay kinetics. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Exciton dynamics in CdS NRs. (A) Static absorption (solid black line) and PL (dashed red line) spectra of CdS NRs (TEM in the inset). (B) TA spectra of CdS NRs at indicted time delays after 400 nm excitation, showing XB and PA (inset) features. (C) Comparison of TA kinetics of XB (purple solid line) and PA (red dashed line), time-resolved PL decay kinetics of trap state (blue dots) and band edge (green solid line), and a multi-exponential fit of PA kinetics (black solid line). (D) A scheme showing electron and hole processes in CdS NRs. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Charge separation dynamics in CdSe/CdTe and CdSe/CdS hetero-NRs. (A) Static absorption (red) and emission (blue) spectra of CdSe/CdTe NRs. The inset illustrates three absorption bands: lowest energy exciton states of CdSe (a) and CdTe (b) and charge transfer (CT) transition (c). (B) TA spectra of CdSe/CdTe NRs (top) and mixed CdSe and CdTe NRs (bottom) at indicated time delays following photoexcitation of CdTe (at 620 nm). Excitation of CdTe in CdSe/CdTe NRs leads to ultrafast formation (<1 ps) of CdSe and CT band bleaches. In mixed CdSe and CdTe NRs, only CdTe bleach is observed. (C) Transient transmission spectra of CdSe@CdS NRs at indicated delays after 390 nm excitation. (D) Normalized ΔT/T kinetics recorded at different probe wavelengths: Y0 (blue line), 480 nm (thin green line), 490 nm (thick light green line), 560 nm (dot black line), X0 (dot red line). Inset: Long time behavior for X0 and Y0. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Calculated electron and hole wavefunctions in CdSe@CdS tetrapods. (A) Energy level plotted along the long axis of one of the tetrapod arms. The arrows indicate the real-space dynamics of the electron and hole transfer to the core (red) or to a trapping site (blue). (B) Electron and hole wavefunctions at the band edge of the structure with the hole confined in the CdSe. (C) Electron and hole at the band-edge states of CdS rod before relaxation of the hole to the CdSe core. (D) The hole wave function is localized in a low-energy trapping site in one of the CdS arms, resulting in the localization of the electron wave function to the same arm. Adapted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Competition between exciton transport and trapping in CdSe@CdS NRs. (A) TEM images of CdSe@CdS NRs with 2.7 nm CdSe cores and different lengths (top: 29 nm; middle: 47 nm; bottom: 117 nm). Insets: Corresponding EDX elemental maps indicating the location of the CdSe core (green). (B) Absorptance (black solid line), photoluminescence (PL, blue solid line), and photoluminescence excitation (PLE, red dashed line) spectra of NRs shown in (A). The PLE and absorptance spectra have been normalized at the lowest energy exciton peak in the core, as shown by the insets. (C) Wavelength-dependent relative PL QYs of the NRs shown in (A). The shaded areas show regions of gradual decrease of relative PL QYs. (D) (top) A scheme shows the competition between exciton transport to the core through 1D diffusion and exciton localization on the rod through hole trapping. (middle) Measured (symbols) and simulated (dashed line) exciton localization efficiencies in CdSe@CdS NRs. The efficiency is independent of core sizes: 2.5 nm (blue triangles), 2.7 nm (red circles), and 3.8 nm (green squares). (bottom) CdS rod absorption cross-section (black solid line) and effective CdSe seed absorption cross section (red dashed line) as a function of rod length. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of relevant energy levels and charge transport and transfer processes in photoreduction half reactions using dot-in-rod NRs. (A) Photoreduction of redox mediator A using CdSe@CdS NRs and (B) photoreduction of protons to form H2 using CdSe@CdS/Pt NR heterostructures. kET is the rate constant of electron transfer to acceptor (A) or catalyst (Pt), kCR charge recombination rate constant from catalyst or acceptor to NRs, kHT the hole transfer rate to the electron donor (D).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 12  Auger-assisted electron (AET, panel A) and hole (AHT, panel B) transfer from nanorods. In NRs, in addition to discrete electron and hole (Σ and Π…) levels caused by quantum confinement in the radial direction, free carrier motion along the NR axis gives rise to E vs. k dispersion. In AET (or AHT), electron (hole) transfer is accompanied by hole (electron) excitation to hole (electron) states with higher energy and momentum.	 

 	Fig. 13  Single and multiple electron transfer from photoexcited NRs. (A) Transient spectrum of free CdSe NRs (blue) and NR–MV2+ complexes (red) at 1.5 ps after 400 nm excitation (intensity: 7 μJ cm−2). Inset: An expanded view of the spectrum at 500–750 nm and a simulated spectrum of the charge separated state (green circles) of the QR–MV2+ complex. Comparison of TA kinetics probed at (B) 587 nm (1Σ0) and (C) 670 nm (MV+˙ radicals) in free CdSe QRs (blue triangles) and CdSe–MV2+ complexes (red circles). (D) Kinetics of MV+˙ radicals probed at 670 nm for CdSe NRs–MV2+ complexes at different excitation intensities. (E) Comparison of normalized MV+˙ radical signal at 1 ps (number of MV+˙ radical per NR, green circles) and average number of excitons per NR (black line and red triangles) as a function of excitation intensity. (F) Auger annihilation lifetime of n-exciton states (n = 1–30) of CdSe QDs (green circles), quasi-type II CdSe/CdS QDs (red squares), and CdSe NRs (blue triangles). Typical ET times from QDs and NRs to molecular adsorbates (100 fs to 10 ps) are indicated in the shaded area, suggesting that more efficient multiple exciton dissociation can be achieved in CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs than in CdSe QDs. (G) Efficient dissociation of 21 excitons in CdSe NRs by electron transfer to 21 adsorbed methylviologen molecules. (A)–(G) are adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Transfer of VB and trapped holes from photoexcited NRs. (A) Absorption and emission spectra of the CdSe@CdS NRs. (B) Energy diagram for various components of the CdSe@CdS NRs and Fc-hex-SH system as determined by cyclic voltammetry. (C) PL decay kinetics of free CdSe@CdS NRs (black), Oct-SH exchanged NRs (red), and Fc-hex-SH exchanged NRs(blue). (D) TA spectra of CdS NRs with added PTZ molecules at indicated delays following 400 nm excitation. (E) Zoom-in of the 500–600 nm wavelength range shows the formation and decay of oxidized PTZ+ radical signal. (F) Time-resolved trap state PL decay kinetics of CdS NRs as a function of added PTZ concentration. (G) Average PL decay rate (inverse of half-life) as a function of PTZ concentration and its fit to the PTZ isotherm adsorption model. The gray dashed line is a linear plot predicted by dynamic quenching. (H) Estimated average PTZ number per NR (m) and fractional surface coverage (θ) of PTZ on NRs according to the PTZ isotherm adsorption model. (A)–(C) are adapted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D)–(H) are adapted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Hetero NRs for efficient photoreduction of methyl viologen (MV2+). (A) Steady state MV+˙ radical photogeneration QYs using different nanomaterials: Ru(bipy)32+, CdSe QD seed, CdS NR, CdSe@CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) NRs, CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar lowest exciton energy (CS-SE), CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar volume (CS-SV) as the DIR. Also plotted are the transient quantum yields (open triangles) at 10 μs obtained from TA measurements. For experimental conditions, see ref. 155. (B) Comparison of the formation and decay kinetics of MV+˙ radicals generated by 400 nm excitation of aqueous solutions containing different NCs same color scheme as (A) under conditions similar to A. (C) MV+˙ radical generation QYs of ZnSe@CdS DIR NRs under 415 and 550 nm excitations. (D) Schematic depiction of charge separated states I, II and III generated in ZnSe@CdS DIR–MV2+ complexes after excitation at the bulb and rod regions. (E) The concentration of MV˙+ radicals generated by photoreduction using CdSe NRs and CdSe@CdS rod-in-rod NRs with different lengths (S: short ∼ 25 nm; M: medium ∼ 32 nm; L: long ∼ 54 nm). (F) Schematic illustration of different relaxation pathways for photogenerated carrier in CdSe@CdS rod-in-rod NRs in the absence (left) and presence (right) of MV2+. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (C) and (D) are adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Exciton quenching mechanism in CdS–Pt NRs. (A) Absorption (solid lines, left axis) and emission (dashed lines, right axis) spectra of CdS NRs (black) and CdS–Pt NR heterostructures(red). (B) Schematic energy levels and exciton quenching pathways in CdS–Pt NR heterostructures. (C) TA spectra of CdS–Pt NRs at indicated time delays: 0.2 ps–2 ns (upper panel) and 3–3000 ns (lower panel). (D) TA kinetics of exciton bleach (XB, black solid line, top), photoinduced absorption (PA, red solid line, middle) and charge separated state (CS, green solid line, bottom) spectral features for CdS–Pt NRs. Also shown for comparison are corresponding kinetics for free CdS NRs (grey dashed lines) at the same wavelengths. Inset: Comparison of CS and PA kinetics in CdS–Pt after 1 ns. Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Charge separation and recombination in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs. (A) TA spectra of CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs at indicated time delays following excitation of the CdSe core. Exciton bleach (XB) and charge separated states (CS) features are labeled. (B) Kinetics of XB (red circles) and CS (blue triangles) features from 1 to 3000 ns. The black solid lines are multi-exponential fits, from which charge separation and recombination times can be obtained. (C) Scheme of a possible mechanism for the long-range electron transfer in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs, which involves thermal dissociation of electron from hole and random hopping of electron along the rod. (D) and (E) Excitation fluence dependence of PL from individual CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs exposed to (D) pure liquid water and (E) water with 10% methanol (green) or 10% isopropanol (purple) as hole scavengers. Dashed lines serve as guides to the eye. (A) and (B) are adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Hole removal rates limited H2 generation in semiconductor-Pt NRs. (A) Comparison of H2 production traces from MUA capped ZnSe@CdS–Pt (blue) and ZnTe@CdS–Pt (red) NRs. Note that the accurate composition of the latter is ZnTe@CdSe@CdS–Pt. A thin layer of CdSe on ZnTe is required for the formation of dot-in-rod heterostructures. (B) Schematic energy levels in ZnSe@CdS–Pt (left) and ZnTe@CdS–Pt (right) NRs, showing that hole transfer from ZnSe to MUA and MPA ligands are energetically allowed while it is forbidden from ZnTe. (C) Comparison of the PL decay in of NP (nonpolar ligands) and MUA ZnSe@CdS (top) and ZnTe@CdSe@CdS (bottom). (D) Comparison of H2 generation quantum efficiencies for MPA and cysteine capped CdS–Pt NRs using SO32−, TEA, EDTA4−, and MeOH as sacrificial electron donors. Inset: Hydrogen evolution as a function of time. (E) Comparison of the oxidation potentials of SO32−, TEA, EDTA4−, and MeOH. (F) H2 generation quantum efficiencies for both MUA capped CdSe@CdS–Pt and CdS–Pt NRs in aqueous solution with SO32− or MeOH as added sacrificial electron donors. (A)–(C) are adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. (F) is adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Approaches for fast hole removal. (A) H2 generation rates from Ni nanoparticle decorated CdS NRs (cysteine capped) as a function of pH. Inset: A scheme of OH− hole shuttle mediated photocatalytic generation of H2. At high pH, i.e. high hydroxyl anion concentration, the photoexcited holes in CdS NRs oxidize hydroxyl anions to hydroxyl radicals which carry away the positive charges and in turn oxidize ethanol to acetaldehyde. The electrons are transferred to Ni nanoparticle and catalyze H2 formation. (B) H2 generation efficiency in etched Cdse@CdS–Pt NRs. (top) Preparation of CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs with exposed CdSe core via chemical etching. (bottom left) Representative TEM image of etched CdSe@CdS NRs. (bottom right) Comparison of H2 generation efficiency of etched and non-etched CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs. A is adapted with permission form ref. 110. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Other factors affecting H2 generation. (A) H2 generation quantum efficiency in CdSe@CdS–Pt NRs depend sensitively on the CdSe core size and CdS rod length, with the highest efficiency achieved in longest rod with a small (2.3 nm diameter) core. (B) H2 generation quantum efficiency obtained with CdSe@CdS NRs decorated with a single, double, or multiple Pt reduction sites. (C) H2 generation activity of the CdS NRs film decorated with size-selected Pt clusters as a function of number of Pt atom per cluster. The average H2 production rate reaches its maximum for Pt46 clusters. This trend is even more pronounced for the monolayer quantum efficiency (ML QE), which takes into account that just the uppermost layer of the CdS nanorod film is covered with clusters. (A) is adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) is adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (C) is adapted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
