Towards sustainability and green chemical engineering: tools and technology requirements  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B402799J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B402799J
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2004, 6, 401-406Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards sustainability and green chemical engineering: tools and technology requirements

        
          
            C. 
            Tsoka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. R. 
            Johns
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Linke
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            A. 
            Kokossis
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Process & Informations Systems Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK GU2 7XH. E-mail: a.kokossis@surrey.ac.uk
bChemcept Limited, Crayside, Whitchurch Road, Crays Pond, Reading, UK RG8 7QA
Received 
      23rd February 2004
    , Accepted 29th June 2004First published on 16th August 2004AbstractWe report on a consultation with a panel of senior technical managers within the European process industries. The outcome of the consultation is that, with known and foreseeable technology, the European industry could remain profitable, and reduce pollution by over 20% within 10 years. This paper reports the tools and technologies that are perceived to be important in achieving low pollution levels economically. Alongside established tools such as process simulation, the study gives priority to less established tools including Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) and process synthesis. The study places a high priority on a range of established and emerging technologies. These include highly selective catalysts, fuel cells, process intensification, supercritical separation and reaction, solar cells, bulk chemicals from renewables, novel chemicals, design for recycle and processes that are economic on smaller scales.
1 Introduction
The chemical process industries are currently the most successful sector of manufacturing industry within Europe. The European Union has identified a sustainable process industry as a major priority. To that end, the EC supported a consultation study with senior industrialists and academics to identify priorities in enhancing the sustainability of the process industries. The study embraced the economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainability. This paper focuses on two aspects of the study, namely the priority tools and technologies for reducing pollution.
The study employed a “Delphi” consultation.1 We describe the consultation in Section 2. The tools considered, and their rankings, are described in Section 3, and the technologies in Section 4.
It is concluded that, given the political will, the European chemical industry is capable of reducing pollution by over 20% in the next 10 years. Tools that need to be more widely used include Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) and process synthesis. Technologies that need to be more widely used include highly selective catalysts, fuel cells, process intensification, supercritical separation and reaction, solar cells, bulk chemicals from renewables, novel chemicals, design for recycle and processes that are economic on smaller scales.
2 Delphi methodology
The consultation was undertaken on a European-wide basis with advice taken from experts from Finland, France, Germany, Holland, Hungary, Spain, Sweden and the UK. We also consulted a limited number of US experts in the field. Their input helped in the formulation and analysis of the questionnaires. However, their views were not included in the statistical analysis of results. The consultation was organized as follows:
(1) Telephone and personal interviews were conducted with about 20 experts to elicit their views on the priorities and actions that could be taken to enhance the sustainability of the European chemical process industries. Most respondents were senior industrialists. However, the panel was augmented by relevant academics and with individuals working to improve technology transfer and industrial/academic collaboration.
(2) The interviews were analysed and a set of topics identified. These topics were organized under the headings “Incentives”, “Tools”, “Technologies”, “Communication and Technology Transfer” and “International Competition”. A questionnaire was developed to explore views on the topics. Approximately 60 questions were sent to panel members by e-mail or via the World Wide Web. The panellists for the questionnaire provided about a 50% overlap with people consulted by telephone. Questions on incentives were formulated requesting views on the effectiveness of each incentive. Other questions were formulated as illustrated in Table 1. Thus, each question could be answered with a tick, with the option of respondents entering additional remarks. The results of this first questionnaire were analysed to determine the majority views on each topic. Where there were clear divisions of opinion, members holding the opinion were asked to support their positions. For example, panel members stating that a technology was “not needed” were asked to support that view against the view that “more R & D is needed”. Similarly, arguments from panellists supporting the view “already adequately known” were sought. These arguments were analysed and consolidated. Thus, if several panellists gave arguments supporting the view “not needed”, the arguments were compared and the common themes abstracted. The consolidated arguments were returned to the panellists for review. Where indicated by the review, the first consolidated argument was revised and passed for re-review until an agreed consolidation was produced. (In 90% of cases, the consolidation was simple and non-controversial. In the few cases that re-review was needed, the review process clarified the points made.) The objective was to provide a single concise argument to support each position. Where a number of panellists gave the same argument in different words, a single set of words was used to summarize the arguments. Where quite distinct arguments were put forward to support the same position, the arguments were listed separately. The consolidated arguments were sent back to relevant panellists for confirmation, or amendment.
Table 1 Example question: would additional work or information on the following technologies benefit sustainability?




Technologies
Not needed
Already adequately known
More information needed
Needs more R & D




Design for product recycle
 
 
 
 




(3) A second questionnaire was prepared. It omitted questions on which there had been complete agreement. It added a few further questions prompted by feedback from the first questionnaire. For each topic from the first questionnaire, the percentage responding to each option was given. Additionally, the consolidated “for” and “against” arguments were given. The objective of the second questionnaire was to give panellists an opportunity to revise their opinions in the light of the new arguments. As for the first questionnaire, panellists were given the opportunity to raise new points that occurred to them as a result of the first round feedback. The results were analysed, and a consolidated response prepared. Unanimity of view was neither sought, nor expected. Nevertheless, a near-consensus was achieved for many topics.
4) A third questionnaire was prepared. It did not give a further opportunity to revise views. However, it gave the opportunity to report whether the panellists thought that the consultation had been fair and representative. In addition, it introduced a very limited number of additional questions which had been raised in response to the second questionnaire. The feedback was that, with minor caveats, the results were fair and representative of the views of those knowledgeable both of the chemical industry and of the steps needed to progress sustainability.
The consultation was performed over a nine month period. A response level of between 80% and 100% was achieved at each round of consultation ensuring a consistent process.
3 Tools to support sustainability
The panel considered 19 tools that might be of value in enhancing the sustainability of the chemical process industry. Fig. 1 shows the ten tools that more than 10% of the panel considered worthy of more R & D. A further nine tools received little or no support for further R & D. We give here just R & D rankings because we believe that these identify the topics in which substantial progress can be expected. Note that the list excludes tools that are already widely used and will also be employed to develop the next generation of clean processes. For example, process simulation2 is employed in assessing virtually all new processes and operating improvements. Process optimization3 is rated relatively low for additional research because it is already well established. Given the opportunity, it is never desirable to design or operate a process in a sub-optimal manner. Hazard and Operability (HAZOP)4 is an example of an important non-computer-based tool that is routinely employed. The top four tools shown in Fig. 1 can certainly make an impact on sustainability and deserve additional R & D, and support for technology transfer to industry.
 Fig. 1  Tools to support sustainability. 
It should be emphasized that the list is by no means exhaustive. For example, approximately 300 software tools are routinely used to evaluate the performance and impact of actual or proposed chemical processes. For a selection of tools, we give a brief description of the tools and a discussion of their relevance to pollution minimization below. A fuller list can be seen at the site maintained by Process and Information Systems Engineering (PRISE) at the University of Surrey.
Computer-aided molecular design
Harper et al.5 and Marcoulaki and Kokossis6 give recent developments in CAMD. The primary goal of the chemical process industries is to sell effects; it only incidentally sells chemicals. The desired effect may be solvent action, detergent action, refrigeration etc. CAMD provides tools to design molecules with desired effects and, at the same time, to eliminate undesired side effects. For example, it can design a chemical that has a desired solvent action, but avoids ozone depletion and certain toxic properties. The tool is needed because of the vast numbers of possible chemical species that could exist. For example, the number of possible different chemical species that could be synthesized from 20 carbon atoms and 42 hydrogen atoms exceeds the number of chemicals known to mankind (including natural and synthetic chemicals). CAMD builds on tools to predict the chemical, physical and environmental properties of chemicals from their chemical formulae. It seeks to determine a formula that provides a favorable combination of commercial and environmental properties. Clean chemicals are central to a clean chemical industry.
Further work in the area should provide better ways to predict some of the important environmental impacts of molecules. Additional research should also provide improved methods to solve the optimization problem of “inventing” molecules with the best combination of economic and environmental characteristics.
Integrated process and product design
In developing a sustainable industry, we are concerned with the total environmental impact of the process to manufacture the product and of the product itself. The objective of integrated process and product design is to minimize the total environmental impact by designing both the product and the process as an integrated whole. The principle of the approach is readily accepted. However, the approach lacks a formal methodology and needs support from computer tools. Specifically, a tool that combines CAMD and process synthesis would be desirable. Recent developments in this direction appear promising.7,8
The technology is at the very early stages of development. There have been very limited applications. Furthermore, there is not yet a formal methodology for the approach. There are no integrated computer tools and no formal non-computer methods similar to HAZOP (for safety), or environmental critical assessment. It is probable that more work is needed on supporting tools such as CAMD and process synthesis before substantial progress will be made.
Process synthesis
Process synthesis has been known for over thirty years, and successful, environmentally significant applications have been reported. However, it is only recently that generally available tools are being developed. The history and current status of the technique is described by Johns,9 and some recent developments are given by Linke and Kokossis.10 Process synthesis extends optimization to include discrete variables, such as number and sequence of operating units, choice of extracting agents and selection of recycle streams. The optimization is computationally difficult. There are three competing approaches (AI, superstructure and implicit enumeration), and none is yet sufficiently mature for routine application. The major goal is to identify promising process structures, reactants and extractants. Once the process topology has been identified, conventional simulation and optimization can be employed to fine-tune the design. The software addresses the problem that, even for apparently simple processes, there are hundreds of millions of variants that could be made to work. It is not practicable for the human designer to look at more than a dozen or so in any detail.
It is common experience that real-value optima are flat. Thus, there is a value from conventional optimization, but it is small compared to the radical design improvements that can result from a process synthesis study. There are examples where effluents have been eliminated entirely, and major cost savings have resulted from eliminating equipment items. Commercial activity in process synthesis is in its infancy, and still needs to be backed by a vigorous R & D activity.
Industrial ecology and symbiosis
Industrial ecology is a system-oriented approach that seeks a balance between industrial systems and natural ecological systems. Industrial symbiosis is the methodology that is employed within the general framework of industrial ecology; it includes the environmental cost in the production and consumption processes. It stimulates industrial clusters or “eco-industrial” parks, in order to maximize the use of co-located operations, which can reuse the wastes of one process as “raw materials” for another.
The areas currently being analysed are the chains of products and materials, the human influence on biochemical cycles, and issues related to production. Issues related to production include product and process design, environmental management systems, environmental supply chain management, and eco-industrial parks. A successful example of industrial symbiosis exists in Denmark, in the eco-industrial park. However, much work needs to be done before generally applicable tools become available. The topic is perceived to be important also from the symbiosis of industry and community whereby wastes from both sources are minimized. More details on industrial ecology can be found in Ehrenfeld.11
Opponents of industrial ecology believe that the potential is overrated because:
(1) The possibilities for use of residues in other industries are limited and depend on spatial proximity (e.g. in eco-industrial parks). There are also serious disadvantages. Production facilities become linked so that supplies of unrelated products must be made in proportion. Where the demand for one declines and the other increases, production problems result. Either process “A” has to be kept in production to consume the by-product of process “B”, or production of process “B” has to be curtailed. Thus, in practice, it is only applicable for manufacture that forms a very small part of the total production of each product.
(2) It is also complex to design, operate and manage. There are insurmountable problems in organizing and maintaining synchronized production facilities.
(3) It is thought of in terms of “by-product synergy” or “waste to product opportunities”. In that narrow sense, there is limited scope. However, the broader problem of identifying and re-using significant waste streams across industry sectors is important.
Lifetime process optimization
Conventional optimization does not take into account the wear and tear on a process resulting from load changes, or operation under extreme conditions. An alternative method that enables an effective compromise to be struck between instantaneous profit and long plant life by including constraints on wear and tear into the problem formulation would be advantageous. The incentive to employ such a tool is clear; however, the impact may be limited compared to the tools discussed above.
Process integration
Process integration is the best-established technical approach for improving sustainability. The most frequently applied process integration technique is Pinch technology which allows the calculation of targets for energy and waste minimization.12 Related methods have been extensively employed to reduce energy consumption. Significant reductions (>40%) have been achieved in numerous cases. Pinch technology is now an established area that is taught in undergraduate and postgraduate courses. It has delivered, and will continue to deliver, major economic and environmental benefits to industry. It is one of the few tools to have a track record of simultaneously reducing cost and reducing energy use. As it is generalized beyond energy reduction, it becomes more closely integrated within the broader area of process synthesis.
Environmental critical examination and waste minimization
These are both panel, or team-based, exercises. Both have been applied successfully during the last ten years. They employ formal step-by-step methods of identifying wastes or pollutants and determining how they can be reduced. The waste minimization methodology is described in the IChemE “Waste Minimization Guide”13 which was initially developed from US Environmental Protection Agency Guidelines. Environmental Critical Examination14 is an environmental analogue of Hazard and Operability (HAZOP) analysis. Although having different origins, much of the methodology is common to both.
Process optimization
Process optimization builds on process simulation to optimize process design and operation. By restricting the optimization to controllable variables such as pressure, temperature and flow rate, existing plant operations can be optimized. These optimizations can be undertaken off-line, or can be incorporated into on-line optimizing control. By extending the optimization to include design variables such as unit sizes and shapes, design optimization can be achieved. Optimization can maximize profitability or minimize release of pollutants. It can also achieve a desired optimal balance between profit and pollution. Supply chain optimization takes a broader (but less detailed) view to model the whole supply chain including production and distribution.
Eco-efficiency
Eco-efficiency is described by Saling.15 It is a method to facilitate the rapid assessment of the life-cycle environmental impact of new processes, or proposed process modifications. It is designed to focus on those elements critical to environmental performance and hence assist the designer to select the best compromise between profitability and pollution. There are many competing methods for analysing life-cycle impacts and this tool is just an example of those available. As such, the support it received can be viewed as a general reflection of support for this range of tools.
4 Technologies to support sustainability
The tools and methods described above result in efficient ways of deploying known technologies. However, the results achieved depend on the technologies that the designer has already considered using. It is expected that the next generation of “clean” processes will include enhanced technologies to deliver improved performance. Some of these technologies will be new; some will be developments of well-known technologies that currently have limited application. Fig. 2 gives a list of technologies ranked in order of research priority.
 Fig. 2  Technologies for sustainable processes. 

Fig. 2 includes only technologies that are currently not used extensively. Many already extensively-used technologies will continue to play an important role, including methods for energy and material recovery. Brief reasons why some of the technologies listed in Fig. 2 may be important for sustainable processes are given as follows.
It should be emphasized that the list is not an exhaustive list, it covers only those technologies noted by more than one person in the preliminary discussions from which the questionnaires were drawn up. An exhaustive consideration of all the technologies that may be relevant in providing better sustainability was beyond the scope of the project.
Highly-selective catalysts
Such catalysts make better use of raw materials and produce less by-products and waste. In principle they improve both profitability and environmental performance.
Process intensification
There are a series of technologies that enable equipment sizes to be radically reduced. These include, amongst others, spinning disc reactors, reactive distillation, and high specific surface heat exchange. The state of the art in process intensification technologies is discussed in Moulijn and Stankievicz.16 Such technologies enable plant sizes to be correspondingly reduced. The very low inventories have environmental benefits and there are also claimed cost benefits. An important incidental benefit is that the processes may be economic on a smaller scale. (See discussion below on small-scale processes.)
Fuel cells
Fuel cells offer the prospect of more efficient conversion of chemical energy to electrical (and hence mechanical) energy. The comparison is with traditional heat engines. It is over 100 years since fuel cells were proposed. For most of that time applications have been very limited. However, recent developments (for example, better understanding of the physico-chemical processes which allow computer modelling and optimization) make fuel-cells a more attractive proposition.
Compact units that convert chemical energy directly to electrical energy at high thermodynamic efficiency and with no moving parts provide the promise of wider application. However, the panel felt that the main application was for transport use and for local electricity production (for example, replacing diesel generators). Specific chemical industry applications are likely to be limited.
Bulk chemicals from renewables
Vegetable raw materials are already employed for products at the scale of many thousands of tonnes per annum. The objective is to use raw materials that can be replaced indefinitely by natural processes. It is only when we have achieved this goal that the chemical process industries can become truly sustainable. Currently, only a trivial proportion of chemical production comes from renewable resources. Thus, the chemical industry can make no claim to be sustainable. Any significant change will require long-term commitment. Some panellists held the alternative view that the priority for renewable raw materials is lower in the chemical industry than in many other industries. Thus, only 8% of total world hydrocarbon production goes to chemical manufacture. There is a broader problem of which the chemical industry is only a small part.
Supercritical separation and reaction
Solvents become more effective under supercritical conditions (for example supercritical carbon dioxide). The greater efficiency can obviate the necessity to use aggressive materials. There may also be energy benefits because latent heat effects are minimized.
Novel chemicals
The objective is to develop new replacement chemicals with lower environmental impact in their production or use. The laboratory and technical scale research required to commercialize novel chemicals complements computer-based methods such as CAMD that suggest chemicals with improved properties.
Solar cells
Solar cells provide the prospect of inexhaustible energy without depleting mineral resources, or generating pollution. Currently efficiencies are extremely low, so that manufacture and installation is costly and has a significant environmental impact. Work on solar cells is justified because of their broad application. However, solar energy has a relatively low impact on the sustainability of the chemical industry; it is just an alternative source of electrical energy.
Design for recycle
Products should be designed so that they can be recycled. Thus, the recyclability of the product should be considered from the earliest stages of conceptual design through to the detailed design of both the manufacturing process and the processes needed to effect recycling at the end of its useful life. This recycle design could include new reprocessing facilities, or the product could be designed to make use of existing facilities. In either case, product recycling is an integral part of the design. The principles are generally well known. However, the problem is to make an economic case, which has to be done on a case-by-case basis. Far higher priority should be placed on waste reduction than recycling.
Economic small-scale processes
The chemical industry is well aware of economies of scale. The rationale for such economies is that as you double the linear dimension of the plant, you quadruple the surface area and multiply the throughput (vessel volumes, flow-rates) by eight. The capital cost is roughly proportional to the surface area. Thus, doubling the linear dimension roughly halves the capital cost per unit throughput. There are further benefits in that heat losses and material leakages are roughly proportional to surface area. Thus the energy and material efficiency also improves with equipment size. Better energy and material efficiencies provide environmental benefits. The inverse of this finding is that the processes become more expensive and less efficient when built on a small scale. Large-scale plants do, however, have the disadvantage that raw materials and products may need to be transported over large distances, with corresponding costs and environmental impacts. There are benefits to developing technologies that are efficient on a small scale.
Production-scale chromatography
The technology is energy-efficient and highly selective. It can be used at near ambient conditions. In this respect, it contrasts with traditional widely used technologies such as distillation. However, following separation by chromatography, there remains a significant cost in removing the desired product from the carrier. Foreseeable developments in chromatography should enable both economic larger-scale applications and more cost-effective ways of removing desired products from the carrier. The flexibility of chromatography may also find applications in economic small-scale production.
Microbiological processes
Many microbiological processes are highly selective, and thus avoid by-products. They also take place under near-ambient conditions. However, a major disadvantage is that the desired product is frequently only present as a fraction of a percent. Thus, the manufacture of a few grams of product might require the processing of tonnes of contaminated and slightly warm water. Waste treatment and energy recovery for this depleted nutrient solution is difficult. The environmental benefits are thus very case specific. More extensive use of microbiological process in the pharmaceutical industry is foreseen. However, for general application, biotechnological processes are rarely clean or environmentally friendly. Most such processes utilise raw materials in a very inefficient way and produce substantial quantities of polluting wastes. For example, wastes are characterized by high Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD). Thus, biotechnology is seen as holding an important niche, rather than having potential wide-scale application in the chemical industry. Indeed, for bulk chemicals and some pharmaceuticals, there are often pollution and cost benefits in switching from microbiological processes to more traditional chemical processes.
Carbon dioxide capture and re-injection
The principle is to inject carbon dioxide into underground reservoirs for indefinite storage. The rationale is that, if methane has been safely stored underground for geological times, the same geological reservoir can be used to store carbon dioxide. In this way, we can continue to use natural gas (and other mineral fuels) with no net effect on the environment until they are all depleted. Indeed, carbon dioxide is a less effective global warmer than methane, so we may actually be benefiting the environment.
The major concern is that the large uncertainties may only be resolved on a geological timescale. The uncertainties cannot be resolved by conventional research. Considering the cost-balance between re-injection and methods of reducing carbon dioxide production at source, it was felt that the probability of successful application by the chemical industry is small.
Wind power
The wind provides an inexhaustible supply of renewable energy. It appears that, with increasing scale, wind power is becoming more economic. However, from the chemical industry viewpoint, wind power is just another source of bought-in electricity.
5 Scope for improvement with known methods
Industry-based members of the panel noted that European industry had spent large sums of money in anticipatory research. They had expected the EU to move faster in encouraging more sustainable technologies. As such, there is already the capability to reduce pollution levels significantly if the incentives are provided. A separate study was made of the effectiveness of incentives. This study showed that the consensus belief is that pollution levels could be considerably reduced without destroying international competitiveness. For example, we received the following response to the question, “what reduction in pollution could be delivered over 10 years with appropriate fiscal incentives”. With the proviso that the incentives had to be neutral (thus not increase the total tax burden on industry), the following response was obtained:
Mean estimation of reduction: 22.0%, standard deviation of response 11.5%.
If we restrict the question to industrial respondents, the response was:
Mean estimation of reduction: 24.0%, standard deviation of response 13.0%
Thus, industrialists who were aware of the anticipatory R & D already undertaken were more confident of reductions than academics. (However, the statistical significance of the difference is clearly very low.)
Details of a much broader study are given in a forthcoming publication.
6 Discussion and conclusions
The Delphi method has provided an effective means of consulting a geographically dispersed panel. The consultation has provided a broad consensus that substantial reductions in pollution are possible. However, these reductions can only be achieved by establishing a fiscal environment in which taxes reflect environmental impacts. With, or without, such incentives, some reduction will be delivered.
The radical advances needed to deliver the improvements will come from deployment of new tools and introduction of novel technology. Specifically, two computer-based tools will need to be more widely deployed. The tools are computer-aided molecular design and process synthesis. In the longer run, such tools are likely to be integrated to provide effective means for the integrated design of products and processes. These computer-based tools will be used alongside more traditional means of designing products and processes. Computers alone cannot include all the operability and safety characteristics that must be considered before any new process or product is brought on line.
The most important improved technologies required specifically by the chemical industry seem to be highly selective catalysts, process intensification, supercritical separation and reaction and novel chemicals. In recent years, catalyst development has advanced from a black art to a science. The advances have built on improved understanding of the chemical and physical behaviour of molecules at surfaces. Process intensification builds on well-known phenomena, such as enhanced contact and separation under high gravity. It also benefits from improved fabrication methods on a small scale. Supercritical separation and reaction is achieved from a better understanding of near-critical conditions. “Novel chemicals” may be “invented” using CAMD. However, the important advances are in the ability to predict physico-chemical properties from molecular structure. Such advances facilitate both computer-based methods and methods based on human insight. All the novel technologies depend on laboratory chemistry and small-scale prototype processes to verify the benefits and practicability.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of the European Commission for this research, under contract number G1MA-CT-2002-00016.
References

The Delphi method: techniques and applications, ed. H. A. Linsto, Addison–Wesley Pub. Co., Reading, MA, USA,  1975 Search PubMed .

          W. L. Luyben, Process Modelling Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers, London, Mc Graw-Hill, New York, 2nd edn.,  1990 Search PubMed .

          U. M. Diwekar, Introduction to Applied Optimization and Modeling, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands,  2003 Search PubMed .

          T. A. Kletz, HAZOP and HAZAN: Identifying and Assessing Process Industry Hazards, IChemE, Rugby, 4th edn.,  1999 Search PubMed .
P. M. Harper, R. Gani, P. Kolar and T. Ishikawa, Computer-aided molecular design with combined molecular modeling and group contribution, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1999, 158–160, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Marcoulaki and A. C. Kokossis, On the development of novel chemicals using a systematic synthesis approach. Part I. Optimisation framework, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2000, 55(13), 2529 CrossRef CAS .
P. Linke and A. C. Kokossis, Simultaneous synthesis and design of novel chemicals and chemical process flowsheets, Comput. Aided Chem. Eng., 2002, 10, 115–120 Search PubMed .

          A. I. Papadopoulos, P. Linke, An Efficient Decomposition-based Approach For The Integrated Design of Solvents and Processes, paper 426t, AIChE Annual Meeting, San Francisco, CA,  2003 Search PubMed .
W. R. Johns, Process Synthesis: Poised for a wider role, Chem. Eng. Prog., 2001, 97(4), 59–64 Search PubMed .
P. Linke and A. C. Kokossis, Attainable designs for reaction and separation processes from a superstructure-based approach, AIChE J., 2003, 49(6), 1451–1470 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Ehrenfeld, Industrial ecology: A framework for product and process design, J. Cleaner Prod., 1997, 5(1–2), 87–95 Search PubMed .

          R. Smith, Chemical Process Design, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .

          B. D. Crittenden and S. T. Kolaczowski, Waste Minimization GuideInstitution of Chemical Engineers, Rugby, UK,  1992 Search PubMed .

          W. R. Johns, G. M. Smith, K. Cherrill and E. P. Whitley, Pollution Control for Processes Involving Uranium, report IC3235-1, Intera Information Technologies Ltd., Henley-on-Thames, UK,  1993 Search PubMed .
P. Saling, A. Kicherer, B. Dittrich- Krämer, R. Wittlinger, W. Zombik, I. Schmidt, W. Schrott and S. Schmidt, Eco-efficiency analysis by BASF—The method, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2002, 4, 203–218 Search PubMed .

Re-Engineering the chemical processing plant, ed. J. A. Moulijn and A. Stankievicz, Marcel Dekker, The Netherlands,  2003 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
Table Content:

Design for product recycle	 	 	 	 

 	Fig. 1  Tools to support sustainability.	 

 	Fig. 2  Technologies for sustainable processes.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
