Optimization of amorphous silicon double junction solar cells for an efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting device based on a bismuth vanadate ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP55035D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP55035D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4220-4229Optimization of amorphous silicon double junction solar cells for an efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting device based on a bismuth vanadate photoanode

        
          
            Lihao 
            Han
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Fatwa F. 
            Abdi
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Paula 
            Perez Rodriguez
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bernard 
            Dam
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Roel 
            van de Krol
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Miro 
            Zeman
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Arno H. M. 
            Smets
          
        
      a
aPhotovoltaic Materials and Devices (PVMD) Laboratory, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5031, 2600 GA Delft, Netherlands. E-mail: L.Han@tudelft.nl;  Fax: +31 15 27 82968;   Tel: +31 15 27 88906
bMaterials for Energy Conversion and Storage (MECS) Laboratory, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5045, 2600 GA Delft, Netherlands
cHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie Gmbh, Institute for Solar Fuels, Hahn-Meitner-Platz 1, Berlin 14109, Germany
Received 
      3rd December 2013
    , Accepted 23rd December 2013First published on 2nd January 2014AbstractA photoelectrochemical water splitting device (PEC-WSD) was designed and fabricated based on cobalt-phosphate-catalysed and tungsten-gradient-doped bismuth vanadate (W:BiVO4) as the photoanode. A simple and cheap hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) double junction solar cell has been used to provide additional bias. The advantage of using thin film silicon (TF-Si) based solar cells is that this photovoltaic (PV) technology meets the crucial requirements for the PV component in PEC-WSDs based on W:BiVO4 photoanodes. TF-Si PV devices are stable in aqueous solutions, are manufactured by simple and cheap fabrication processes and their spectral response, voltage and current density show an excellent match with the photoanode. This paper is mainly focused on the optimization of the TF-Si solar cell with respect to the remaining solar spectrum transmitted through the W:BiVO4 photoanode. The current matching between the top and bottom cells is studied and optimized by varying the thickness of the a-Si:H top cell. We support the experimental optimization of the current balance between the two sub-cells with simulations of the PV devices. In addition, the impact of the light induced degradation of the a-Si:H double junction, the so-called Staebler–Wronski Effect (SWE), on the performance of the PEC-WSD has been studied. The light soaking experiments on the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junctions over 1000 hours show that the efficiency of a stand-alone a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction cell is significantly reduced due to the SWE. Nevertheless, the SWE has a significantly smaller effect on the performance of the PEC-WSD.
1. PEC-WSDs based on BiVO4
A photoelectrochemical water splitting device (PEC-WSD) provides an attractive route to utilizing sunlight to split water into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2). H2 can then be directly used as a fuel in a combustion engine, or as an intermediate to form hydrocarbons. Electrodes based on metal oxide semiconductors have been the focus of many studies as potential PEC-WSDs, mainly due to their stability in aqueous solutions, easy synthesis, and low cost. One of the most promising metal oxide semiconductors is bismuth vanadate (BiVO4).1,2 In the monoclinic phase, BiVO4 is a photoactive n-type semiconductor,3,4 and it is stable in aqueous solution with pH values between 3 and 11.5 Theoretically, BiVO4 can generate a photocurrent of ∼7.5 mA cm−2 under AM1.5 solar illumination (1000 W m−2), assuming that all photons with energies higher than the bandgap (2.4 eV, ref. 6) are absorbed and contribute to the O2 generation at the surface.
Early efforts to employ BiVO4 as the photoanode material, however, have been hampered by low efficiencies, resulting in AM1.5 photocurrents lower than 1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).7–11 In the last couple of years, BiVO4 performance has been improved significantly by modifying the material with O2 evolution catalysts.2,12–19 The remaining technological bottleneck is the substantial additional bias potential that needs to be applied in order to draw a reasonable photocurrent. Reducing or eliminating this bias is a challenge for nearly all visible-light absorbing PEC materials, such as BiVO4, α-Fe2O3,20 WO321 and Ta3N5.22 The demonstration of AM1.5 photocurrents higher than 2 mA cm−2 for BiVO4 requires an external bias higher than 1 V. This is usually supplied by an external voltage source (e.g. potentiostat), which significantly reduces the overall solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency (ηSTH).23
An elegant solution to the problem is to employ a Z-scheme configuration (named after the shape of the energy diagram), by combining a photoelectrode material with a photovoltaic solar cell.24 In this configuration, the solar cell is placed at the back of the photoelectrode. Using the light transmitted through the photoelectrode, the solar cell can supply the bias voltage needed by the photoelectrode as reported in various publications.25,26 The solar cells integrated in the PEC-WSDs range from dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)27 and GaAs p–n junction solar cells28 to more sophisticated AlGaAs/Si solar cell configurations.29 The choice of PV material is determined by two competing requirements, one related to cost reduction and one related to high conversion efficiencies. Very cheap solar cells usually have lower conversion efficiencies, while the high conversion efficiencies can only be achieved with expensive solar cells.
In a recent publication, we have demonstrated that a W:BiVO4 photoanode powered by an a-Si:H tandem cell could give a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 4.9%, which is currently the highest value ever reported for a water splitting device based on a metal oxide photoelectrode.30 In this paper, we will discuss the advantages of using a-Si:H tandem solar cells for PEC-WSDs based on W:BiVO4 photoanodes, and will focus on the optimization of the solar cell with respect to the solar spectrum transmitted to the W:BiVO4 based photoelectrode. We demonstrate that the light induced degradation of the a-Si:H solar cell, the so-called Staebler–Wronski Effect (SWE),31 when integrated in a PEC-WSD has a smaller impact on the ηSTH compared to the ηSTH of a stand-alone a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction PV device.
2. Why a-Si:H/a-Si:H tandem cells?
In this paper, we still use platinum (Pt) as the counter electrode in the solution for an efficient H2 evolution. However, in the long term strategy, the expensive Pt counter electrode has to be replaced by a cheaper metal and integrated at the back contact of the solar cell. This requires the photovoltaic cell to be immersed in water, so the first requirement for the PV cell in the PEC-WSD is that it should be stable in aqueous electrolytes. Silicon (Si) has been chosen as it is the most resistant PV material in aqueous environments. This allows the use of cheaper encapsulation materials than more sensitive PV materials, such as chalcogenides and III–V semiconductors. In addition, the same reasons why Si is the most dominant material in the PV industry apply to PEC-WSDs as well. Si is earth-abundant, non-toxic, environmentally sustainable, relatively low-cost and widely investigated.
The second requirement is related to the transmittance of the solar spectrum through the photoanode component of the PEC-WSD. The maximum power point (MPP) of a stand-alone PV device is generally optimized with respect to the standard AM1.5 (1000 W m−2) solar spectrum. In contrast, the PV cell in the PEC-WSD has to be optimized and works efficiently under illumination with AM1.5 sunlight that is filtered by the components at the front side: the quartz-window of the water tank, electrolyte, catalyst layer, photoanode films and F-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrate of the device (as depicted in Fig. 1(a)). This transmitted spectrum (TS), shown by the yellow curve in Fig. 1(b), is missing most of the blue spectral region (λ < 450 nm) and contains around 60% of the irradiation of the AM1.5 spectrum in the red part (λ > 550 nm) (as depicted by the blue dash curve).
 Fig. 1  The cross-section sketch of the photoelectrochemical water splitting device (PEC-WSD) demonstrated in this paper (a). The AM1.5 spectrum and the photoanode modified spectrum (left axis) and the transmittance spectrum (right axis) (b). 
The third requirement for the PV cell is that its j–V characteristics should match the j–V curve of the photoanode. In our earlier work, an AM1.5 photocurrent density (j) of 3.6 mA cm−2 for a cobalt-phosphate-catalysed (CoPi) BiVO4-based photoanode at 1.23 V vs. RHE was reported.19,30 This remarkably high photocurrent of a material deposited using a low-cost and easily scalable spray pyrolysis process was achieved by introducing a gradient dopant profile of tungsten (W) in BiVO4 to form a stack of homojunctions. This results in an enhanced internal electric field. This field greatly increases the charge separation efficiency, which was shown to be the main limiting factor for the performance of these spray-deposited BiVO4 photoelectrodes.1 The operating point (OP) of the PEC-WSD is determined by the intersection point of the j–V curve of the solar cells and that of the photoanode device. For optimal performance, the OP has to be at a voltage as high as possible in order to get a sufficient bias potential to drive the surface reactions. Since the j of the photoanode levels off at V ≥ 1 V, it is more efficient if the VOP ≥ 1 V. This implies that the PV component needs to deliver an open-circuit voltage VOC ≥ 1.5 V, whereas j has to be matched with that of the photoanode. To obtain PV devices with VOC ≥ 1.5 V, options are limited to the implementation of multi-junction PV devices based on TF-Si or III–V materials. In this paper we do not consider III–V semiconductor materials as they suffer from both instability in aqueous environments and high costs. Typical materials used in TF-Si junctions are a-Si:H, amorphous silicon–germanium (a-SiGe:H) and nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si:H). The band gaps of these materials determine the range of VOC that can be achieved in the corresponding junction, i.e. VOC,a-Si:H = 0.8–1.0 V, VOC,a-SiGe:H = 0.5–0.6 V and VOC,nc-Si:H = 0.48–0.6 V. Consequently, in view of the required VOC ≥ 1.5 V for the BiVO4 photoanode, the PV device configurations are limited to an a-Si:/a-Si:H double junction or a triple junction device (e.g., a-Si:H/a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H, a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H/a-SiGe:H, a-Si:H/nc-Si:H/nc-Si:H). The individual junctions in these multi-junction configurations have to deliver a j value of 7.5 mA cm−2 with respect to the TS to achieve the theoretical maximum ηSTH of 9.2%.
In this contribution, we focus on the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction device instead of a triple junction device. The PV component of a PEC-WSD is required to have a VOC as high as possible and a j value as high as possible when illuminated by the photons transmitted through the photoanode. These are competing parameters if we consider the double and triple junctions. A triple junction has the advantage of high VOC, but its short-circuit current density (JSC) is limited when the incident light is filtered by the photoanode. Due to the spectral overlap of the photoanode with the top cell, the triple junction can only deliver a maximum JSC of 3.8 mA cm−2 theoretically (this value is estimated according to the integration of the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode, assuming all the photons are converted into electron hole pairs and the current density is evenly distributed among all the three junctions). In contrast, the double junction cell generates a more moderate VOC, but has a much higher maximum theoretical JSC of 5.8 mA cm−2 when placed behind the photoanode. Since the VOC is sufficiently high to drive the W:BiVO4 photoanode, the double junction is the most logical approach. Furthermore, it has several advantages over the triple junction device. The total layer thickness of the double junction cell is significantly thinner than that of the triple junction device based on a nc-Si:H material. The total amount of the layers in the double junction cell is less than that of the triple junction and the deposition time is also much shorter. Therefore, it is the cheapest solution for this type of PEC-WSD. In addition, the tandem cell allows much more flexibility than the triple-junction cell for equally distributing the current density over both sub-cells by varying the film thicknesses or bandgaps of both junctions. Furthermore, at applied bias voltages larger than the typical value of a redox potential of water ∼1.23 V, the current density of the photoanode tends to saturate. The gain in ηSTH by boosting the voltage of the solar cell above 2 V by using an additional thick bottom cell in a triple junction is therefore minimal. In view of all the above issues, the a-Si:H/a-Si:H device is the most straightforward option to meet the requirement for the PEC-WSD based on CoPi-catalysed gradient-doped W:BiVO4.
3. Experiment
The a-Si:H/a-Si:H solar cells were deposited in a multi-chamber tool equipped with radio frequency plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (RF-PECVD) reactors. Solar cells were deposited on 2.5 cm × 10 cm ASAHI VU-type substrates (∼600 nm thick textured FTO on glass), which were kept at a temperature of 170 °C during the TF-Si deposition. Before the deposition of TF-Si films, a stripe of 300 nm thick aluminium (Al) was coated near the edge of the ASAHI VU-type substrates using a Provac evaporator in a rotation mode. This Al stripe acts as the front contact of the tandem cell.
A boron-doped amorphous silicon carbide (a-SiC:H(B)) layer was deposited as a p-layer. A very thin intrinsic a-SiC:H buffer layer was deposited between p- and a-Si:H i-layers to achieve higher values for VOC. The n-layer of the top cell is a single layer of phosphorus-doped nanocrystalline silicon oxide (nc-SiOx:H(P)) whereas the n-layer of the bottom cell is a double layer of nc-SiOx:H(P) and phosphorus-doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H(P)). The n-type nc-SiOx:H(P) material has the advantage of lower parasitic absorption losses and better reflection performance compared to the conventional n-type a-Si:H(P) cell with a higher refractive index (n).
Three layers of Ag/Cr/Al were evaporated on the n-type nc-SiOx:H(P) area as the back contact. The Al layer prevents the oxidation of the Ag layer, whereas the Cr interlayer avoids mixing of Ag and Al in post-deposition annealing treatments. All metal back contacts have an area of 1 cm × 1 cm. The cross-section sketch of the solar cell structure is shown in Fig. 1(a).
In this work, the thickness of the a-Si:H i-layer has been varied to optimize the performance of the solar cell. Three a-Si:H/a-Si:H tandem solar cells with different thicknesses of the top i-layer (50 nm, 75 nm, and 100 nm) were deposited, while the thickness of the bottom i-layer of 350 nm was kept the same for all three cells. In this paper we refer to these tandem cells as the ‘thin cell’ (i-layer in the top cell is 50 nm), the ‘medium cell’ (i-layer in the top cell is 75 nm) and the ‘thick cell’ (i-layer in the top cell is 100 nm).
The gradient-doped W:BiVO4 was synthesized by spray pyrolysis on a piece of TEC-15 FTO substrate, and the fabrication procedure was reported in our previous publication.30 PEC characterization was performed in a two-electrode configuration in 0.1 M (mol L−1) KPi (pH ∼ 7) aqueous solution as the electrolyte and Pt coil as the counter electrode.
The integrated PEC-WSDs were fabricated with the photoanode on the upper side of the glass substrate and an optimized solar cell at the bottom side of the glass substrate. Using the same substrate for both the spray pyrolysis technique on one side and RF-PECVD on the other side might lead to cross-contamination of the solar cell and photoanode processing. Therefore, a more practical option is to process the photoanode and PV part on different glass substrates, which are subsequently connected back-to-back using transparent glue at the non-processed sides. The FTO window layer of the solar cell was connected to the FTO of the photoanode using a graphite as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The back contact of the solar cell was connected to the Pt counter electrode.
A PASAN flash AM1.5 spectrum solar simulator was used to measure the j–V characteristics of solar cells under standard test conditions. Using the flash simulator, a constant temperature of 25 °C on the surface of the solar cells during the measurement was guaranteed. In addition, an accurate illumination area was ensured by using a black mask to rule out the possible contribution of contactless areas. During the flash measurement, a reference monitoring photodiode is used to calibrate the average intensity of the AM1.5 spectrum. The optical thickness and properties of the various films are determined using reflection and transmission measurements on each single layer. These layers were separately processed as single layers on flat glass substrates. The thickness of each film was determined using an optical model based on a Tauc–Lorentz oscillator as defined in SCOUT program.32
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of solar cells indicates the fraction of photons at a certain wavelength that results in collected electrons at the contacts. It is not straightforward to measure the EQE of individual top and bottom cells as well as that of the total double junction solar cells. In this work, the device was illuminated by two different types of LEDs during the EQE measurement, respectively: red (λ = 632 nm) LEDs to saturate the bottom cell and measure the top cell; blue LEDs (λ = 397 nm) to saturate the top cell and measure the bottom cell. A problem in achieving a solely biased top cell or bottom cell is the fact that both junctions have the same absorber layers with in principle the same spectral response. Light biasing the top cell is straightforward by using blue light, as the blue light is fully absorbed in the top cell. However, the bottom cell has to be biased by red light, which is also partly absorbed by the top cell. The intensity of the red LEDs is increased such that only the bottom cell is close to saturation (so no saturation of the top cell).
In this paper, we use two types of EQE spectra. The first type is the standard EQEAM1.5, which is used to determine the JSC,AM1.5 out of the spectral photon flux ΦAM1.5 under the standard solar spectrum of AM1.5 (1000 W m−2): (1) The second type of EQE spectra is referred to as EQETS which represents the spectral response of the PV component in which the optical losses due to the front photoanode and its supporting layers are included: EQETS(λ) = T(λ)EQEAM1.5(λ)(2)where T(λ) presents the transmittance of the photoanode component (Fig. 1(b)). With ΦTS(λ) = ΦAM1.5(λ)T(λ).(3)This gives the following expression for the short circuit density JSC,TS of the PV device after the photoanode becomes (4)and it is smaller than the JSC,AM1.5 value.
The potential of the working electrode (diameter 6 mm) was controlled using a potentiostat (EG&G PAR 283) and an immersed Pt wire was used as the counter electrode. White light photocurrent measurements were performed under simulated AM1.5 solar illumination (1000 W m−2) using a NEWPORT Sol3A Class AAA solar simulator (type 94023A-SR3). Electrical contact to the sample was made using a silver wire and graphite paste. For the combined PEC-WSD, j was monitored using a digital multimeter (KEITHLEY 2001). It should be pointed out that the photoanode performance is very sensitive to the blue (and UV) spectrum, therefore, the measured j value is highly sensitive to the differences in the shape of the blue spectral part between the various solar simulators (xenon vs. tungsten). This requires the solar simulator to be calibrated during the various measurements to minimize the possible spectrum mismatching with the AM1.5 spectrum. During the j–t curve measurement of the PEC-WSD, the external power applied to the Class AAA solar simulator is real-time controlled to guarantee an irradiance equal to standard test conditions (1000 W m−2).
4. Solar cell optimization
In this section, we optimize the current matching of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junctions and consequently the ηSTH of the PEC-WSD. First, as a reference, we compare the EQEAM1.5 of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junctions with a single junction a-Si:H solar cell with an i-layer thickness of 350 nm (corresponding to the bottom cell of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction). The EQEAM1.5 of the single junction a-Si:H solar cell shows that it utilizes the AM1.5 solar spectrum in the range of 300 nm up to 800 nm (blue curve in Fig. 2(a)) better than that of the double junctions. In the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction structure, the spectral utilization of the AM1.5 solar spectrum is distributed over the top cell (300 nm < λabs < 750 nm) and the thicker (350 nm) bottom cell (400 nm < λabs < 800 nm). The sum of the top and the bottom cell results in a slightly smaller EQEAM1.5 in the spectral range of λ > 450 nm in reference to the single junction solar cell. This lower response is explained as the additional doped layers between the top and bottom junctions, which are logically lacking in the single junction. These layers result in additional parasitic losses and reflection losses back into the top cell due to the nc-SiOx:H n-layer with low refractive index values. The double junction with the highest total spectral utilization is the thick cell (green curves in Fig. 2(a)), which shows a slight enhancement of the EQE in the 400–550 nm range. This indicates that a thick top cell leads to a reduction of the parasitic absorption losses in the n-doped and p-doped layers between the top and bottom cells. The blue response (300–450 nm) shows a slightly lower EQEAM1.5 for the single junction compared to the double junctions. Both configurations have the same p-layer, so the difference in blue response is not based on parasitic absorption losses in the supporting layers.
 Fig. 2  EQE spectra in the series of the top i-layer thickness (black: thin cell, red: medium cell, green: thick cell), compared with that of a single junction a-Si:H solar cell (blue and magenta) (a); EQE spectra of the three tandem PV cells calculated under the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode (b). 
It is important to note that we have ruled out the possibility of an artefact of the EQE measurement approach. In practice, by light biasing one of the sub-cells in the double junction under V = 0 V conditions, the light-biased sub-cell puts a reverse bias of approximately −0.65 V (an estimated voltage between VOC and VMPP,TS of an a-Si:H sub-cell) on the non-light-biased cell. To study the extent of this effect, the EQE spectral response of the single junction solar cell was measured under an intentionally reverse bias of −0.65 V as well. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a) (magenta coloured curve), the EQE curve somewhat increases in the whole measured wavelength range, but its blue response in the λ < 450 nm range is still lower than for the double junction. Consequently, the origin of the improved collection in the blue spectrum is believed to be a result of the larger internal electric field as a result of the much thinner top cells in the double junctions in reference to the rather thick single junction. The thicker single junction results in a smaller internal electric field and less effective collection of the close to the p–i interface photo-excited charge carriers. The single junction under reverse bias results in small increase in the current of ΔJSC = 0.3 mA cm−2. This implies that the determined JSC of sub-cells in the tandem cell using EQE and light biasing can lead to a maximum systematic overestimation of the current of ΔJSC/JSC = 1.7%, due to mutual voltage biasing between the sub-cells.
Next, the spectral matching of the double junctions with the PEC-WSD is analysed. The EQETS of the three devices in reference to the spectrum transmitted through the photoanode structure CoPi/BiVO4/FTO/glass is determined by measuring EQEAM1.5(λ) and T(λ) of the photoanode (using eqn (2)). The resulting EQETS are shown in Fig. 2(b). The same EQETS (λ) spectra have been directly measured by placing the photoanode structure as a ‘high-pass filter’ between the monochromator and the solar cell during the EQE measurement. The T(λ) of the photoanode has a relatively low transmission of ∼10% in the blue region (λ < 450 nm), whereas it has a moderate transmission of ∼60% in the red region. Consequently, the EQETS(λ) of the solar cell is significantly reduced in the blue range and therefore affects the top cell the most.
Additional validation of the EQE measurements is obtained by simulating the performance of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H solar cell structures using the in-house developed Advance Semiconductor Analysis (ASA) software.33 A semiconductor model of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H solar cell is built in ASA, and the measured wavelength dependent n(λ) and k(λ) (extinction coefficient) values have been used as the optical input data for the simulation. The simulations have been performed for the three tandem cells: the thin cell, the medium cell and the thick cell. The simulated EQEAM1.5 and EQETS of each cell are depicted in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. The simulated EQE spectra closely resembles the measured EQEAM1.5 and EQETS as shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), implying that our approach of measuring EQEAM1.5 and EQETS is validated.
 Fig. 3  ASA simulation of EQE spectra in the series of the top i-layer thickness (black: thin cell, red: medium cell, green: thick cell), compared with that of a single junction a-Si:H solar cell (blue and magenta) (a) and under the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode (b). 
The optimum current matching between the top and bottom cells depends on the employed spectrum. Fig. 4 shows both the short circuit densities JSC,AM1.5 and JSC,TS of the top and bottom cells for the three a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junctions for the AM1.5 solar spectrum and the TS through the photoanode structure, respectively. The solid and dashed lines indicate the results obtained from experiment and simulation, respectively, which are in excellent agreement. For the AM1.5 spectrum the double junction is limited by the JSC,AM1.5 of the 350 nm thick bottom cell. The thin cell shows an excellent current matching between the top and bottom cells, whereas the medium and thick cells are bottom-limited. The situation is different when part of the spectrum is filtered by the photoanode. Since the photoanode mainly absorbs the blue light, JSC,TS becomes top-limited for the thin and medium solar cells. The data in Fig. 4 show that an ∼89 nm top cell is perfectly current-matched with a 350 nm thick i-layer in this a-Si:H/a-Si:H device.
 Fig. 4  The JSC of the reported a-Si:H/a-Si:H cell under the standard AM1.5 spectrum illumination (solid black & red) and under the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode (solid blue & green); compared with those values from the ASA simulation (dash). 

Fig. 5 illustrates the external parameters of the tandem solar cells, VOC,AM1.5, JSC,AM1.5, fill factor (FFAM1.5), efficiency (ηPV,AM1.5) under standard AM1.5 illumination (black squares) and VOC,TS, JSC,TS, FFTS, ηTS, under illumination of the spectrum transmitted through the photoanode (red circles).
 Fig. 5  The external electrical properties of a-Si:H/a-Si:H solar cells in the series of top i-layer thickness illuminated by the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum (black square) and by the photoanode transmitted spectrum (TS) (red circle), the operating point (OP) for PEC-WSDs (blue triangle), and the power mismatching between the OP and the corresponding maximum power point (MPP) (green diamond). 
As discussed above, the JSC,TS of the PV device decreases significantly in reference to JSC,AM1.5 when the cell is positioned after the photoanode material. The various VOC values remain roughly constant for the three devices. Slightly lower VOC,TS values are measured for the transmitted spectrum due to the weak dependence of the VOC on the current density34 (5)
When illuminated by the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum, the current-matched thin solar cell results in the highest JSC,AM1.5 and consequently the highest VOC,AM1.5. But when the double junction is shaded by the photoanode, the JSC,TS of the thin solar cell drops the most due to the heavily current-limited top cell. The highest JSC,TS is obtained for the double junction with the thickest top cell, as it is the configuration closest to the optimum conditions for current matching (i-layer thickness of ∼89 nm in the top cell). The ηSTH for this device, in which no external bias is applied, is defined as35 (6)
The value of 1.23 V is the chemical potential needed to split the H2O molecule, JOP is the current density at the operating point and 100 mW cm−2 (or 1000 W m−2) is the average intensity of the AM1.5 spectrum. At first glance it might be surprising to see that the thin and medium cells have higher ηSTH values than their PV component ηTS values (the efficiency of the tandem solar cell operating in the spectrum which is transmitted from the photocathode). It is important to realize that for ηTS, the majority of the energy in the blue part of the AM1.5 solar spectrum does not contribute to generating voltage and current, whereas the energy in this spectral part does contribute to the performance ηSTH of the PEC-WSD.
In Fig. 6, the j–V curves of the BiVO4 photoanode structure and the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junctions are illustrated. It is obvious that the thick solar cell results in the largest power at its OP, in spite of the fact that its VOC is slightly lower compared to the other two cells. Combination of the PEC cell and the PV solar cell would result in a ηSTH of 4.2%. The voltage VOP, current density JOP and ηSTH at OP are presented by the blue triangles in Fig. 5 (right-side axis), respectively. The efficiency of a PV device under the illumination of the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode, ηTS, is determined by its MPPTS divided by the average intensity of AM1.5: (7)
The MPPTS of the PV part of the PEC-WSD is in general not equal to the OP of the PEC-WSD. The loss due to the power mismatching between the OP (solid circles in Fig. 6) and the MPPTS (hollow circles in Fig. 6) is defined as ΔP = POP − PMPP,TS. As shown by the green diamonds in Fig. 5, the minimum mismatching loss is achieved for the PEC-WSD with the thick solar cell. This allows us to define an effective fill factor for the OP: (8)
By comparing the OP and MPPTS of each cell in Fig. 6, the FFOP of a thick solar cell turns out to be the highest, as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 6  The j–V characteristics of the photoanode measured under the AM1.5 spectrum illumination (blue) and the j–V characteristics corresponding to the three a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction cells with various i-layer thicknesses measured under the illumination of the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode. The maximum power point (MPP) of the solar cells and the corresponding operating point (OP) in the PEC-WSDs are shown as well. The right axis reflects the corresponding ηSTH. 
5. Performance and stability of the PEC-WSD
In this section, we address the performance and the stability of the PEC cell and the PV cell of the PEC-WSD. First, we focus on the performance and the stability of the PEC part. The gradient-doped W:BiVO4 PEC is connected to the optimized thick solar cell using wire configurations as illustrated in Fig. 1(a).
The resulting chronoamperometry plot of this combined device is shown in Fig. 7. In the first minute of the AM1.5 illumination, the JOP of the PEC-WSD reaches ∼4.2 mA cm−2, corresponding to ηSTH ∼ 5.2%. This j value is slightly higher than the results shown in Fig. 5 (∼3.4 mA cm−2, ηSTH ∼ 4.2%). The main reason is that the potentiostat should sweep from the lower voltage to higher voltage in the j–V curve measurements of the photoanode. In these few minutes, the generated O2 bubbles that accumulate on the surface of the photoanode reduce the number of active catalysts on the surface. This would result in a lower j value near the OP of the photoanode (green solid circle in Fig. 6) than the j value in the beginning moment of the stability measurement of the hybrid PEC-WSD. This initial decrease can be inferred in Fig. 7 as well: the j value drops and tends to stabilize at ∼3.4 mA cm−2 (ηSTH ∼ 4.2%) after ∼2.5 minutes of the measurement.
 Fig. 7  Photocurrent density vs. time for the CoPi coated gradient-doped W:BiVO4 and double junction a-Si:H/a-Si:H device (black), and the CoPi-coated FTO/a-Si:H/a-Si:H device (grey) under AM1.5 illumination. 
Longer term reduction of the j might be due to the CoPi layer peeling off into the electrolyte. The ∼4.2% efficiency we report in this paper was determined after stabilizing for 10 minutes in the illuminated electrolyte. In addition, in a recent publication,30 we demonstrated a stable 4.9% ηSTH by optimizing the W:BiVO4 photoanode and careful deposition of the CoPi layer. As a result, no degradation in the performance was observed during the course of one hour measurement. We achieve this highest efficiency for a metal oxide semiconductor photoanode reported to date, using a double junction a-Si:H solar cell which is cheaper and easier to fabricate as compared to the triple junction solar cell used as the benchmark structure reported in the literature.36 This 4.9% stable ηSTH value is higher than the 4.2% ηSTH value we have achieved in this paper, and the reason for that is the difference in the substrate on the photoanode side. The 4.9% ηSTH was obtained by using a textured FTO coated glass (ASAHI VU-type) as the substrate of BiVO4. In contrast, a flat FTO substrate (TEC-15) is used in this work, mainly because we are focusing on the optimization of the solar cell. Using a flat substrate, less light is being trapped in the photoanode, and higher spectrum photon flux is available for the solar cell.
To illustrate the contribution of the gradient-doped W:BiVO4, the W:BiVO4 photoanode is replaced by only an electrodeposited layer of CoPi on the same type of FTO substrate. As a result, only ∼1.5 mA cm−2 of photocurrent density is observed (grey curve in Fig. 7), significantly lower than the gradient-doped W:BiVO4 photoanode. This confirms that the CoPi-based electrocatalyst requires significantly higher bias voltages as delivered by a triple junction a-Si:H PV device, in order to obtain a reasonable ηSTH. This demonstrates the advantage of the BiVO4 photoanode in reference to the CoPi-based electrocatalyst which provides a significant overpotential for water oxidation.
Finally, we discuss the stability of the PV part of the PEC-WSDs. The a-Si:H/a-Si:H tandem cell suffers from the SWE, which is the creation of additional metastable defects in the a-Si:H absorber layer when exposed to light. These metastable light induced defects enhance the charge carrier recombination and deteriorates the FF mainly and the JSC of the a-Si:H solar cell to a less extent. The effect can be reversed by thermally annealing out the metastable defects at moderate temperatures of 120–180 °C. The impact of the SWE metastability on the ηSTH of the PEC-WSD is studied in the following paragraphs as well.
Light soaking experiments of the sole a-Si:H/a-Si:H devices were carried out under 1 Sun AM1.5 illumination, while keeping the solar cell at a temperature of 25 °C. The relative degradation of ηTS, ηSTH, JSC,TS, JOP and FFTS measured versus light soaking time is illustrated in Fig. 8 respectively. After light soaking of ∼660 h all three devices are fully degraded and stabilized. Among the external parameters, the FF shows the largest relative decrease after 1000 h of illumination, i.e. ΔFFTS/FFTS is 20–30% of the corresponding initial value. The relative degradation of the current density ΔJSC,TS/JSC,TS and open circuit voltage ΔVOC,TS/VOC,TS (not shown in Fig. 8) ranges from 5% up to 10%. As a result the relative decrease of the conversion efficiency ΔηTS/ηTS after stabilization ranges from 30% up to 35%. Fig. 8 demonstrates that the largest part of the degradation occurs in the first 20 hours of light soaking, which is in general addressed as the ‘fast’ degradation phase. The ‘slow’ degradation phase corresponds to the additional slow degradation of external parameters after 20 hours of light soaking until the saturated external values of the external parameters have reached after 660 hours of light soaking.
 Fig. 8  The relative degradation of the η, FF and JSC of the double junction PV cells with the light soaking time, normalized according to the as-deposited value of each device under the photoanode transmitted spectrum (TS) (left) and the operating point (OP), respectively. 

Fig. 8 shows that relative degradation of ηSTH ranging from 9% up to 18% is significantly smaller compared to ηTS (∼32%). This demonstrates that the OP is less affected by SWE degradation than the MPPTS of the PV part. Another observation is that the stabilized ηSTH depends on the thickness of the top cell. As illustrated in Fig. 9, this can be explained by the differences in sensitivity of the OP to the degradation of external parameters. If the slope (dj/dV) of the j–V curve of the photoanode in the OP is steep, the OP is more sensitive to degradation of JSC,TS, VOC,TS and FFTS. Whereas if the slope dj/dV of the j–V curve is less steep (at higher voltages), OP becomes less sensitive to the degradation of the JSC,TC as can be seen in Fig. 9. The OP of a thick solar cell has the highest voltage and consequently intersects the j–V curve in a range with the smallest slope dj/dV. Therefore the PEC-WSD with the thick solar cells is less affected by the degradation in JSC,TS. The OP of the PEC-WSD based on the thin solar cell has the smallest voltage and the j–V curve in a range with the largest slope dj/dV. Consequently, this PEC-WSD should be the most sensitive to variation in the JSC,TS. However, since the degradation ΔJSC,TS/JSC,TS is the smallest for a thin solar cell, the effective drop in ηSTH is the smallest. Therefore, the ηSTH is a competition between the sensitivity of the changes of the external parameters given by the dj/dV at the OP and the degradation of the external parameters itself. For that reason, the PEC-WSD based on the medium solar cell shows the largest degradation in ηSTH (red arrow in Fig. 9). It is more sensitive to the degradation due to a larger slope dj/dV compared to the PEC-WSD based on the thick solar cell, and also experiences a larger degradation in JSC compared to the PEC-WSD based on the thin solar cell. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 9 as well.
 Fig. 9  The j–V characteristics of the three a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction cells with various i-layer thicknesses after 1000 h of light soaking and measured under the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode. The operating points of the degraded devices (OPdeg) are indicated by the hollow circles on the inter-crossing points, and as a reference the operating point (OP) of the as-deposited PV cells is depicted by the solid circles with the corresponding colour (shown in Fig. 6 as well). 
6. Conclusion
CoPi-catalysed gradient-doped W:BiVO4, deposited by spray pyrolysis, is confirmed as an efficient photoanode to split the water using solar energy. An a-Si:H tandem solar cell is introduced in order to provide the bias power source and is integrated into a wireless PEC-WSD. The advantages of the a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction solar cell over other PV technologies are that it is the simplest and cheapest PV device that can meet the requirements of stability in aqueous environments, the straightforward fabrication process, and matching spectral response, voltage and current.
Due to absorption of the W:BiVO4 photoanode in the front, only ∼10% of blue and ∼60% of red spectral range in the AM1.5 solar spectrum can be utilized by the a-Si:H/a-Si:H tandem cell. The thickness of the i-layer in the top cell has been optimized in terms of current matching using both EQE measurements and ASA simulations. The thin solar cell (i-layer of 50 nm in the top cell) shows the best current matching under the AM1.5 spectrum, while the thick solar cell (i-layer of 100 nm in the top cell) performs the best in reference to the spectrum transmitted through the photoanode.
The impact of the Staebler–Wronski effect on the ηSTH of the photoelectrochemical water splitting devices has been studied. The operating point is fortunately less affected by the SWE compared to the maximum power point of the solar cell component under the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode. The optimized a-Si:H/a-Si:H tandem solar cell combined with BiVO4 can result in a photocurrent of ∼3.4 mA cm−2 (stabilized for at least 10 min), which corresponds to a ηSTH of 4.2%.
The ηSTH can be further enhanced provided that the infra-red range of the solar spectrum is better utilized, by using a double junction cell in which the bottom cell is based on PV materials with a lower bandgap, e.g., the micromorph (a-Si:H/nc-Si:H) solar cells. In addition, further optimization of the photoanode material and device is promising, which might reduce the high current and voltage requirement of the solar cell. Furthermore, by the implementation of some light trapping techniques at the photoanode, higher current density can be achieved due to absorption in the photoanode. The progress of going from concepts based on a triple junction solar cell to a double junction solar cell is already realized in this paper. Our next objective is to utilize a single junction solar cell in the PEC-WSD to reach higher values of the ηSTH.
Author contributions
L.H. and A.H.M.S. designed the tandem solar cell structure. L.H. synthesized, optimized and simulated the double junction a-Si:H solar cell. L.H. and P.P.R. finished the j–V curve, EQE, light soaking measurements of the solar cell. F.F.A. and R.v.d.K. designed the homojunction concept of the photoanode. F.F.A. carried out BiVO4 spray deposition and CoPi catalyst deposition. F.F.A. and L.H. measured the j–V and the j–t curve of the hybrid PEC-WSD. L.H. and A.H.M.S. wrote the draft. A.H.M.S., M.Z., B.D., and R.v.d.K. supervised the project. All the authors discussed the results and implications, and commented on the manuscript at all stages.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following PVMD colleagues: Pavel Babal and Marinus Fisher for the discussions on solar cell deposition; Dr Serge Solntsev for the assistance in ASA simulation. Financial support from the VIDI project (granted to Dr Arno H.M. Smets) by NWO-STW and European Commission's Framework Project 7 (NanoPEC, Project 227179) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
F. F. Abdi, N. Firet and R. van de Krol, ChemCatChem, 2012, 5, 490–496 CrossRef .
W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yua and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046–4051 CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459–11467 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, N. Firet, A. Dabirian and R. van de Krol, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2012, 1446 DOI:10.1557/opl.2012.811 .
S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S. Y. Kishioka, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, H160–H163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, D. W. Flaherty, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2001, 115, 3794 CrossRef .
L. H. Dall'Antonia, N. R. de Tacconi, W. Chanmanee, H. Timmaji, N. Myung and K. Rajeshwar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, D29–D32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhao and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7127–7133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Long, W. Cai and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 548–554 CAS .
T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21392–21401 RSC .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. G. Deutsch, T. E. Furtak, J. A. Turner, L. D. Brown and A. M. Herring, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7032–7039 RSC .
K. Sayama, N. Wang, Y. Miseki, H. Kusama, N. Onozawa-Komatsuzaki and H. Sugihara, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 17–19 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ye, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12464–12470 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370–18377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398–9404 CAS .
W. Hamd, S. Cobo, J. Fize, G. Baldinozzi, W. Schwartz, M. Reymermier, A. Pereira, M. Fontecave, V. Artero, C. Laberty-Robert and C. Sancheza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13224–13232 RSC .
G. W. Ho, K. J. Chua and D. R. Siow, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 181–182, 661–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2566 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. E. Delahoy, S. C. Gau, O. J. Murphy, M. Kapur and J. O. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1985, 10, 113 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and X. M. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J. H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Staebler and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 31, 292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Theiss, SCOUT Thin Film Analysis Software Handbook, Aachen,  2002 Search PubMed .

          M. Zeman, J. van den Heuvel, M. Kroon, J. Willemen, B. Pieters, J. Krč and S. Solntsev, Advance Semiconductor Analysis User Manual, Delft,  2011 Search PubMed .

          T. Kirchartz, Generalized detailed balance theory of solar cells, Jülich,  2009, vol. 38, p. 17 Search PubMed .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25(1), 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The cross-section sketch of the photoelectrochemical water splitting device (PEC-WSD) demonstrated in this paper (a). The AM1.5 spectrum and the photoanode modified spectrum (left axis) and the transmittance spectrum (right axis) (b).	 
	(1)
EQETS(λ) = T(λ)EQEAM1.5(λ)	(2)
ΦTS(λ) = ΦAM1.5(λ)T(λ).	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  EQE spectra in the series of the top i-layer thickness (black: thin cell, red: medium cell, green: thick cell), compared with that of a single junction a-Si:H solar cell (blue and magenta) (a); EQE spectra of the three tandem PV cells calculated under the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  ASA simulation of EQE spectra in the series of the top i-layer thickness (black: thin cell, red: medium cell, green: thick cell), compared with that of a single junction a-Si:H solar cell (blue and magenta) (a) and under the transmitted spectrum through the photoanode (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  The JSC of the reported a-Si:H/a-Si:H cell under the standard AM1.5 spectrum illumination (solid black & red) and under the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode (solid blue & green); compared with those values from the ASA simulation (dash).	 

 	Fig. 5  The external electrical properties of a-Si:H/a-Si:H solar cells in the series of top i-layer thickness illuminated by the standard AM1.5 solar spectrum (black square) and by the photoanode transmitted spectrum (TS) (red circle), the operating point (OP) for PEC-WSDs (blue triangle), and the power mismatching between the OP and the corresponding maximum power point (MPP) (green diamond).	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 6  The j–V characteristics of the photoanode measured under the AM1.5 spectrum illumination (blue) and the j–V characteristics corresponding to the three a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction cells with various i-layer thicknesses measured under the illumination of the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode. The maximum power point (MPP) of the solar cells and the corresponding operating point (OP) in the PEC-WSDs are shown as well. The right axis reflects the corresponding ηSTH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocurrent density vs. time for the CoPi coated gradient-doped W:BiVO4 and double junction a-Si:H/a-Si:H device (black), and the CoPi-coated FTO/a-Si:H/a-Si:H device (grey) under AM1.5 illumination.	 

 	Fig. 8  The relative degradation of the η, FF and JSC of the double junction PV cells with the light soaking time, normalized according to the as-deposited value of each device under the photoanode transmitted spectrum (TS) (left) and the operating point (OP), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  The j–V characteristics of the three a-Si:H/a-Si:H double junction cells with various i-layer thicknesses after 1000 h of light soaking and measured under the transmitted spectrum (TS) through the photoanode. The operating points of the degraded devices (OPdeg) are indicated by the hollow circles on the inter-crossing points, and as a reference the operating point (OP) of the as-deposited PV cells is depicted by the solid circles with the corresponding colour (shown in Fig. 6 as well).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
