Recent progress of Cu-based electrocatalysts for upgrading biomass-derived furanic compounds  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CY00041A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CY00041A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, 13, 2899-2921Recent progress of Cu-based electrocatalysts for upgrading biomass-derived furanic compounds

        
          
            Jingwen 
            Tan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mei 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuyang 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenbiao 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Qingsheng 
            Gao
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Chemistry and Materials Science, and, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Functional Supramolecular Coordination Materials and Applications, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, P. R. China. E-mail: tqsgao@jnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative Materials, Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Collaborative Innovation Centre of Chemistry for Energy Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
Received 
      9th January 2023
    , Accepted 2nd April 2023First published on 3rd April 2023AbstractThe electrochemical upgradation of biomass feedstock has attracted significant interest as it allows the carbon cycle of decentralized and energy-poor resources in the absence of sinks and sources of high-grade heat. Over the past few years, remarkable progress has been made in the electrochemical hydrogenation and oxidation of furanic molecules (e.g., furfural and 5-hydroxymethyl furfural) on Cu-based catalysts. The elaborate designing of active surfaces is paramount for the efficient and selective conversion towards value-added alcohols, alkanes, and carboxylic acids. In this review, the relevant efforts and progress to access insights into the electrochemical processes are outlined. It first briefly introduces the reaction fundamentals and then successively discusses the representative achievement in the catalytic performance and mechanism of Cu-based electrocatalysts, and the further improvement of electronic efficiencies by pairing cathodic hydrogenation with anodic oxidation in a single electrolysis system. Finally, the future development of electrocatalysts and electrolysis techniques is anticipated. This review will be instructive in exploiting cost-efficient catalysts based on transition metals for the electrochemical refining of biomass feedstock and beyond.Jingwen TanJingwen Tan is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Qingsheng Gao at the College of Chemistry and Materials, Jinan University. Her research interest focuses on noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for electrochemical refinery.Qingsheng GaoQingsheng Gao is a Professor of Chemistry at Jinan University, Guangzhou. He received his B.S. degree in 2005 and Ph.D. degree in 2010 from Fudan University, and then he moved to Max-Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces in Germany to carry out his postdoctoral research. His current research interest focuses on cost-efficient nanostructures used in catalysis and energy conversion.
1. Introduction
As a renewable carbon resource, biomass is used to generate large quantities of gaseous and liquid fuels to substitute the traditional fossil fuels.1–3 In 2010, the U.S. Department of Energy proposed the “Top 10” platform chemicals, which comprise ethanol, furans, glycerol, xylitol, and other bio-based platform compounds derived from biomass feedstock through pyrolysis and hydrolysis processes.4,5 Thereinto, furans, i.e., furfural (FF) and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), received growing attention as multifunctional C5 and C6 platform molecules.6,7 As illustrated in Fig. 1, a series of high-value chemicals, such as 2-methylfuran (2-MF), furan carboxylic acid (FA), furfuryl alcohol (FAL), 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), and 2,5-dimethylfuran (DMF), are derived from them. As the product of reductive upgrading, FAL is widely utilized in manufacturing resins, synthetic fibers, adhesives, and coatings; 2-MF is a potential liquid biofuel with a high octane value and energy efficiency.8,9 The corresponding oxidation products, such as FA and FDCA, can be used to produce plasticizers and thermosetting resins in the industry.10
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the hydrogenation and oxidation of FF and HMF to high-value chemicals. 
Thermo-catalytic conversion is available for industrial applications, but it is prohibited by aggressive conditions (e.g., additional hydrogen and oxygen sources, intense temperature, and high pressure) and the risk of polymerization of the products at high temperatures.11,12 Powered by sustainable electricity (e.g., wind and solar power), electrocatalytic conversion provides a more promising alternative at ambient temperature and pressure.13,14 By replacing the traditional additives with clean electrons as oxidizing/reducing agents, it enables selective, environmentally friendly, and energy-benign transformation towards the target products by accurately controlling the external currents or potentials (Fig. 2).15,16 In these electrocatalytic processes, the reactive species of hydrogen (e.g., *H, * denotes an electrocatalytically active site) or oxygen (e.g., *OOH and *OH) in situ generated from water electrolysis can react with substrates towards alcohols/alkanes via electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH) or carboxylic acids via electrocatalytic oxidation (ECO), respectively.17,18 Moreover, they involve a series of radical processes that spawn electro-reductive/oxidative coupling for extending carbon chains.12,19 The reaction pathways can be modulated towards selective hydrogenation/oxidation by tuning the electrocatalyst surface and working conditions (e.g., potentials, currents, and pH level). Inspired by the catalyst-design principles well documented in conventional thermo-catalysis, noble metals (such as Pt, Ag, and Pd) have been applied to the electrochemical refinery of furans.11,20 However, they are highly challenging in product Faraday efficiency (FE) and selectivity because of their availability for a series of competition reactions. For example, most noble metals are active at the cathode for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the anode for oxygen evolution reaction (OER),21 leading to the dissatisfactory efficiency of electrons. In addition, the expensive cost and poor tolerance of poisons prohibit their practical application.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic conversion of furanic compounds derived from biomass. 
With high surface activity, multiple oxidation states (Cu0, CuI, and CuII) and rich earth-abundance, Cu has attracted considerable interest as a non-precious electrocatalyst for various electrocatalytic applications.22–25 Recently, Cu has been applied in the ECH and ECO of furans,14 accomplishing witnessed progress in an electrochemical refinery. Based on the Sabatier principle, the binding energies (BEs) of substrates and *H or *OH can be employed as fundamental descriptors to define the ECH or ECO rate and activity of electrocatalysts.9,26,27 Typically, the BE of aldehyde groups on Cu is moderate and advantageous for activating biomass-derived furans. Moreover, the BEs of *H and *OH on Cu are weaker than those on Ru, Pd, Co, and Ni, accounting for the slow discharging steps of HER and OER, which leads to the high FE of ECH and ECO. Extensive efforts have been devoted to designing Cu surfaces rationally to promote the conversion and selectivity of furans. Assisted by the speedy development of in situ techniques, a more profound comprehension of ECH and ECO mechanisms has been obtained, which has inspired the further development of electrocatalysts and electrolysis. Following these recent achievements, a comprehensive, authoritative, pivotal, and readable review is essential to shedding light on the critical issues of Cu-based electrocatalysts for upgrading furans, which are currently absent.
This review comprehensively summarizes the recent efforts and developments made for the electrochemical conversion of furans (Fig. 3). Following the fundamental introduction of electrochemical hydrogenation and oxidation, it introduces the representative achievement in catalytic performance and mechanism of Cu-based electrocatalysts for the ECH and ECO of furans and then further improvement with amplified electronic efficiency by pairing cathodic ECH with anodic ECO. Finally, the prospects of electrocatalysts and the relevant electrolysis protocols are presented. It is anticipated that this review will inspire the exploitation of cost-efficient transition metal-based catalysts for an electrochemical refinery.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration for the topic “Cu-based electrocatalysts for upgrading biomass-derived furanic compounds” of this review. 
2. Fundamentals of electrochemical hydrogenation and oxidation
2.1 Electrochemical hydrogenation of furans
Based on viable proton and electron transfer pathways,28 the electrochemical hydrogenation of biomass-derived furans proceeds in two ways. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, the first route is ECH, in which *H species is formed in situ on the electrode surface through the electrochemical reduction of a proton or H2O molecule in acidic or neutral/alkaline electrolytes, respectively.29 It shares the same Volmer step of HER. Afterwards, *H combines with activated furans for hydrogenation towards furanic alcohols and alkanes. In this ECH route, electron transfer is an inner sphere process that highly depends on electrode surface properties. The second route is direct electroreduction (DER), which involves electron transfer between the substrate and the electrode surface. The working electrode serves as an electron transfer medium, and the carbonyl substrate can be electrochemically reduced with protons and electrons to form furan–C˙–OH via the inner and outer sphere processes.30 Such furan–C˙–OH can be combined with each other to form pinacol or with H+/e− toward alcohols. Both ECH and DER compete with HER, which reduces the FE of electrochemical upgrading.
 Fig. 4  (a) Diagram of ECH and DER mechanisms for biomass-derived furans. (b) Production rates of MF, FA, and hydrofuroin on Cu electrodes modified by thiols with various carbon chain lengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Typical chemisorption configurations of FF on the surface of metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
ECH occurs preferentially on electrodes with low HER overpotentials (e.g., Pt, Pd, and Ru) owing to the easy formation of *H, while DER typically favors electrodes (e.g., Pb, Hg, and C) with high HER overpotentials.11 Both ECH and DER occur at Co, Cu, Ag, and Au electrodes with intermediate hydrogen overpotentials. In particular, Cu primarily involves ECH, DER, and HER; the competition of which offers the multiformity of reaction pathways and products but requires elaborative design on the surface structures and properties of electrocatalysts. For example, Li and co-workers modified the Cu surface with three organic thiols [3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), 12-mercaptododecanoic acid (MDA), and heterocyclic 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (2-MBT)] with various carbon-chain lengths to investigate the electrocatalytic mechanism of FF (Fig. 4b).29 A ECH process required *H and *FF adsorbed on the catalyst surface based on the typical Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH) mechanism,32 which was inhibited after the modification of a long-chain thiol on Cu. The electron transfer of an outer sphere process proceeded via electron tunneling, in which the inhibition effect was related to the chain length of the thiols. Experimental results showed that MDA suppressed the ECH and DER processes in relation to the inhibition of electron transfer by long carbon chains. FAL and 2-MF were stymied at the MPA- and MBT-modified electrodes, indicating that hydrogenation and hydro-deoxygenation required direct interaction of the FF with the electrode surface, i.e., the ECH process. In contrast, pinacol formation was independent, which confirmed that the DER was insensitive to electrode surface properties. In addition, the isotope labeling test with D2O further demonstrated the ECH mechanism of 2-MF and FAL. Both proceeded in parallel through the inner sphere process and competed with HER, and the further reduction of FAL to 2-MF is difficult because of the unfavorable deoxygenation of hydroxyl.33 Owing to the presence of DER and HER, the product FE and selectivity visibly decreased.
The properties of metals determine the adsorption mode of furans, which is an essential factor affecting reaction FE and selectivity.34 As shown in Fig. 4c, a η1-(O)-furfural adsorption mode is preferred on metals (such as Cu and Ag) with high d electron density, and the tilted adsorption is more stable than the vertical one.31 The 3d orbital of Cu overlaps partially with the antibonding orbital of the furan ring, so the flat adsorption mode of FF is unstable and typically unavailable. Furthermore, the strong repulsion leads to a weak BE of a furan ring on the Cu(111) facet, which limits the hydrogenation of the ring. Compared to Cu, other metals (such as Pt, Pd, and Ni) with a relatively lower d electron density show a strong interaction with the π-bonds in FF, and FF prefers adopting a η2-(C,O)-furfural mode. Both the furan ring and the carbonyl in this mode interact with the metal surface, leading to over-hydrogenation and even the opening reaction of furan rings. The interaction intensity of FF on these metals follows the trend of Ni > Pd > Pt ≫ Cu.31
The effect of the chemisorption mode of HMF over Ni/Al2O3, Pd, and Cu catalysts was reported by Duarte et al.35 HMF prefers η1-(C)-acyl as well as η2-(C, O)-aldehyde adsorption patterns on Ni and Pd to promote hydrogenation and hydro-deoxygenation. On the Cu surface, HMF adopts the same adsorption model as FF (η1-(O)-HMF), and alcohol products are obtained. It can be observed that the adsorption mode of substrates (e.g., *FF and *HMF) directly determines product selectivity.
The selectivity of FA and MF is very sensitive to the pH of electrolytes. Generally, MF is the major product under strongly acidic conditions, while FA is the dominant product under neutral or basic conditions.36 The pH dependence implies that the two processes may undergo different reaction mechanisms, i.e., LH or proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) mechanisms. DFT calculations provided insights into the whole process of electrocatalytic hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis of FF on Cu(111).33 The dissociation and hydrogenation steps possessed similar energy barriers (1.01 vs. 0.98 eV), indicating the competitive formation of MF and FAL. For the dissociated *O, the PCET and LH pathways were further considered because of the different acid–base environments. The PCET generated *OH and H2O via an exothermic process without energy barriers, while the LH pathway required at least 1.12 eV. Therefore, the potential-dependent PCET pathway is favorable under the condition of sufficient H+. It was inferred from the reaction kinetics that the reaction to FAL generally adhered to the LH route, and the formation of MF should be an LH-PCET mixing process with the rate-determining step (RDS) of hydrodeoxygenation. Because PCET significantly depends on the proton donor and potential, it is arduous for *O to generate H2O via *H transfer in H+ insufficient cases, leading to poor MF generation under neutral and basic conditions.
The phase effect of electrolytes (e.g. aqueous/organic bi-phasic system) is also essential for the product distribution in ECH because there are popular diffusion limitations near the Helmholtz layers of the electrode.37,38 Jiang et al. elaborated and pointed out the bi-phasic promotion related to the different distributions of reactants and products in five bi-phasic systems.39 Typically, in the bi-phasic system of cyclohexane/water, the yield and FE of 2-MF were 9.7 and 18.2 times those of single aqueous electrolysis, respectively. The ECH towards 2-MF involves the first breaking of C–O on unsaturated surface sites and the subsequent hydrogenation of *furfural–CH2, in which the quick removal of in situ formed 2-MF from the electrode surface by organic solvents shifts the chemical equilibrium towards the side of more products. However, the excessive extraction of FF by organic solvents unfortunately reduces the conversion of FF and the yield of FAL because of their positive correlation with [FF] in an LH mechanism, which can be recovered as a suitable organic solvent is adopted to balance the distribution in bi-phases. The consistent promotion was evidenced on other electrodes, such as carbon cloth, electrochemically polished Cu and electrodeposited Ag, confirming the effect independent of catalysts.
Collectively, these factors highlight the importance of reaction conditions in the ECH of furanic compounds because of the co-presence of competitive hydrogenation, hydrolysis, electro-reductive coupling and HER pathways. As suggested, a consistent and reliable condition should be established before screening catalysts for efficient electrochemical upgrading. To access the structure–activity relationship and the electrocatalytic mechanism, the working conditions should be carefully controlled to ensure the RDS on the catalyst surface.
2.2 Electrochemical oxidation of furans
The oxidative conversion of furans provides important intermediates for pharmaceuticals, fragrances, dyestuffs, and other fields.7,40 As an alternative reaction to OER at anodes, ECO provides not only a green and economical way for furans oxidation41 but also a feasible way to cut down the cell voltage for water electrolysis when it is paired with cathodic HER.42–44 Similar to ECH, the ECO includes inner and outer sphere pathways.45 In the outer sphere process, there is little interaction between the substrate/intermediate/product and the electrode, and the electrode is used only for the electron transfer process. The electrolyte, additives, voltage, and current density are the major factors that account for selectivity and yield. For example, the additive of TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy) could be electrochemically oxidized and subsequently capture electrons of HMF to promote the ECO of HMF, in which the working electrode, a graphite rod, showed comparable ECO performance with Au.42 However, the separation of products is difficult owing to the addition of redox species.
The inner sphere process is similar to the OER.46 As shown in Fig. 5, the surface of anodic catalysts is activated to higher valences after deprotonation by coupling with OH−. When the organic substrate is adsorbed on the electrode and combined with reactive oxygen species (ROS) through a PCET process, the O atom of ROS is transferred to the substrates for oxidation, followed by the reduction of ROS. This process extremely depends on the physical and chemical properties of the catalysts.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of OER and ECO mechanisms in alkaline electrolytes. 
As one of the biomass-derived platform chemicals, HMF is envisioned as a precursor for various high-value multifunctional compounds.7 For example, FDCA has attracted significant interest in industrial applications as an intermediate for polymers, pharmaceuticals, and agrochemicals.47,48 The electro-oxidation of HMF to FDCA includes the oxidation of –OH and CO, which can be divided into two pathways (Fig. 6). In pathway I, the –OH of HMF is oxidized to form 2,5-furandicarbaldehyde (DFF), while in pathway II, HMF is oxidized to 5-formyl-2-furoic acid (HMFCA) via the oxidation of CO towards –COOH. The subsequent oxidation of DFF and HMFCA generates 5-formyl-2-furancarboxylic acid (FFCA) and finally FDCA. Pathway II mainly occurs in strongly alkaline media (pH ≥ 13), but HMF is susceptible to polymerization in electrolytes with a pH ∼ 14, while pathway I is dominant in non-strongly alkaline environments (pH < 13). A much smaller thermodynamic value for HMF oxidation (0.30 V vs. RHE) than the standard potential for OER (1.23 V vs. RHE) clearly demonstrated that the oxidation of HMF is thermodynamically more advantageous than that of OER.49
 Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic oxidation pathways for HMF. 
3. Electrochemical hydrogenation of furans
3.1 Bulky Cu electrodes
Typically, electrocatalytic performance strongly depends on the properties of the working electrodes. For instance, Liu et al. compared the ECH performance of FF on a series of electrodes (Cu, Pb, Ni, Fe, Pt, Ti, and C) in Na2CO3–NaHCO3 electrolytes (0.1 M and pH ∼ 10).50 In terms of current efficiency and product selectivity, they were ranked as Cu > Pb > Ni > Fe > Ti > C > Pt. The Cu electrodes reached a current efficiency of 71% and an FAL selectivity of 87%. The merit of Cu compared with other electrodes (Pt, Ni, C, Fe, and Al) was further confirmed in an acidic electrolyte (0.5 M H2SO4, a mixed solvent of H2O and acetonitrile).51 Pinacol was the main product on Al, Pb, Fe, and C, indicating a preference for the DER mechanism, which accounted for the lower product selectivity of 2-MF. In contrast, Cu afforded a selectivity of approximately 80% for 2-MF, which was more advantageous than Pt and Ni. Notably, the strong acidity was beneficial for the hydro-deoxygenation of FF to 2-MF rather than the hydrogenation to FAL.33 Although the promise of Cu is highlighted for ECH, the FE and selectivity remain limited by the small surface areas of bulky Cu electrodes.
Roughening Cu electrodes is feasible to improve ECH performance because the undercoordinated surface sites, defects, and grain boundaries are beneficial for the chemical absorption of substrates and the stabilization of surface bound intermediates toward target reactions.52,53 Kornienko and co-workers obtained roughened Cu electrodes (R-Cu) by cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments, which were enclosed predominantly by Cu(111), (200), and (220).54 Unroughened single crystal Cu electrodes (111, 110, and 100) were taken as references, and it was observed that Cu(110) contributed only the significant FE of FAL at pH 3, while 2-MF was achieved on R-Cu. This implied that Cu(110) exhibited the optimal selectivity of FAL, and defects or surface/subsurface oxygen species on R-Cu accounted for the production of 2-MF. Combining the electrochemical device with Raman or Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (Fig. 7a–c), a broader perspective on the ECH mechanism can be obtained. The R-Cu was covered by an amorphous CuOx layer, as confirmed by in situ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). After increasing the potential to more negative, the CuOx was reduced to metallic Cu with several new bands appearing, such as those assigned to the Cu–H, Cu–C, and Cu–O bands. It is deduced that because the potential of the intermediates was more positive than the FAL detected in electrolytes, the adsorption and initial hydrogenation steps could readily proceed once CuOx was reduced. The Cu–H band appeared after the Cu–C/O band, suggesting that the hydrogenation of the adsorbed intermediates is rate-limiting. This study elucidates the mechanism of the defects on bulky Cu in conjunction with in situ Raman, which provides us with a deeper understanding of Cu-based electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 7  (a–c) Low, medium, and high-frequency regions of in situ SER spectra of FF reduction on the R-Cu surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Electrocatalytic performance of EP-Cu, AP-Cu, and OP-Cu: (d) FE and yield of FAL during the reaction time at −0.56 V vs. RHE. (e) Residual FF amount after 5 minutes of electrolysis and normalized FAL yield by roughness (rFOL,roughness) in 1 hour. (f) BEH and BEFF on p-Cu(111) and d-Cu(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2022, the Royal Society of Chemistry. ECH performance of FF on synergistic Cu0–Cu+ active sites: (g) analysis of the average oxidation state of Cu as obtained from Cu K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) in CuO nanowires with significantly increased potentials. (h) FF conversion with or without KSCN, and (i) schematic diagram of the hydrogenation pathway from FF to FAL on the Cu0–Cu+, pure Cu(111), and Cu2O(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2022, Springer. 
Gao and co-workers recently employed O2 plasma treatment to generate a CuOx layer on Cu foil (OP-Cu), which was rapidly reduced to rough and defect-rich Cu in 5 minutes during ECH (Fig. 7d–f).55 Compared to electrochemically polished Cu foil (EP-Cu) and Ar plasma-treated Cu foil (AP-Cu), OP-Cu exhibited superior FE of FAL (>90% at −0.56 V vs. RHE) in 0.25 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 6.8, Fig. 7d). To identify the contribution of the rough and defective Cu surface formed in situ to the enhancement, the FAL generation rate was further normalized by the electrode roughness value, which remained stable during 1 h of electrolysis (Fig. 7e). It was found that OP-Cu provided more than twice the values of EP-Cu and AP-Cu, which compellingly demonstrated the superior intrinsic activity of the defective Cu surface. In other words, the efficient ECH was attributed not simply to the extended surface through roughening but more dominantly to the enriched defect sites that were more favorable for the ECH kinetics. The kinetic analysis indicated that the rate of ECH was positively correlated with the difference between *H and *FF concerning their competitive adsorption. Based on the DFT calculation results, a higher discrepancy of the binding energies (BEH − BEFF) on defective Cu compared with non-defective Cu (Fig. 7f) should account for the more efficient ECH on OP-Cu.57,58 A similar electroreduction method was utilized to construct Cu/Cu2O nanowires (ER Cu NW) on Cu foam, where the active phase of ECH was the abundant Cu/Cu2O interface.59 The FE of 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran (BHMF) from HMF on ER Cu NW was maintained above 90%, and the selectivity was approximately 100% at the current density range of 40–80 mA cm−2. As suggested by the DFT calculations, a Cu/Cu2O interface for the ECH of HMF featured the lowest energy barrier, corroborating the high FE and selectivity on ER Cu NW. Zou and co-workers employed CuO/Cu foam for the ECH of FF, which exhibited excellent performance with the selectivity and FE approximately 90% at −0.20 V vs. RHE.56 The prepared CuO nanowires (NWs) were observed in an oxidation state by in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), which confirmed that the Cu0 and Cu+ states co-existed during ECH (Fig. 7g). However, with the addition of SCN−, the performance of ECH decreased because of poisoning Cu+ with SCN−, proving that Cu+ is the active site of ECH (Fig. 7h). The DFT results revealed that Cu0–Cu+ acted synergistically on CuO NWs, where Cu+ sped up the second hydrogenation step of FF and Cu0 lowered the energy barrier for FAL desorption (Fig. 7i).
In addition, owing to the larger active surface and distinctive pore structure, nanoporous Cu electrodes have been proven to be outstanding electrocatalysts for the ECH of FF. Ding and co-workers proposed the chemical dealloying of CuAl alloys to fabricate nanoporous Cu electrocatalysts (NP-Cu2) with a bicontinuous nanoporous structure and high roughness.60 The NP-Cu2 achieved remarkable selectivity (96%) and high FE (95%) of FAL in fluidized electrocatalysis, surpassing commercial Cu sheets and Cu nanocatalysts, which means that moderate roughness and specific surface area on bulky Cu can afford sufficient *H for ECH and inhibit DER. In general, poorly coordinated surface sites and defects formed by the roughening procedure tend to increase active site density and boost ECH activity.61
Apart from the ECH of furans, Cu bulky electrodes are also applicable to the DER process. The DER provides a feasible approach that allows for the green synthesis of larger biomass (e.g., benzaldehyde and furfural derivatives). Generally, the DER mechanism involves the formation of furan–C˙–OH at first and then the subsequent dimerization to pinacol derivatives. The DER processes of FF and benzaldehyde on Cu and Pb were probed by Xu and co-workers in NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 electrolyte (0.25 M, pH 6.7).62 The two aldehydes exhibited self-coupling and cross-coupling on both metal surfaces but with opposite selectivity: the Cu offered higher selectivity for cross-coupling, while the Pb tended to FF coupling (Fig. 8). Such deviations from the stochastic coupling control are attributed to the relatively larger discrepancy in the BEs of the aldehydes. CV experiments and in situ FTIR spectroscopy confirmed that benzaldehyde was more strongly adsorbed on both metals than FF, while there was a more significant difference for Pb. The experimental results adhere to Sabatier's rule that the BEs of FF and benzaldehyde are similar, thus enabling the optimal cross-coupling on the Cu electrode.63 Moreover, Sun and co-workers employed Cu foam as the cathode for the DER of FF.64 FAL was the dominant product observed at pH 0 under the previous conclusion. When insufficient *H was generated on Cu at pH 13, the DER was favorable with a pinacol yield of 60% and FE >40%, implying that Cu is a prospective electrocatalyst for the DER of FF. In general, the availability of high pH electrolytes and low coverage of *H are favorable for DER but conversely for ECH, which was also validated in defective OP-Cu.55 It follows that the reaction conditions, such as pH and voltage, affect product selectivity.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of ECH and DER pathways in a mixed benzaldehyde-FF reduction system. 
The above findings demonstrate the activity of bulky Cu electrodes/foams/foils for the electrochemical hydrogenation of biomass-derived furans. Owing to the well-documented surface structures and electronic configurations, these bulky electrodes feature merits in mechanistic investigations to gain clear insights into the structure–activity relationship (e.g., facet/vacancy/size dependence).65 However, there is still a challenge in electrocatalytic performance on bulky Cu because of the low density and activity of surface sites. It is urgent to design advanced Cu-based catalysts via nanostructuring and incorporation with secondary metals, following the guidelines acquired from bulky electrodes.
3.2 Nanostructured Cu catalysts
Exploiting nanoscale catalysts is feasible to achieve excellent electrocatalytic activity. Biddinger and co-workers prepared a 3D nanoscale Cu electrocatalyst that comprises 400 nm Cu nanoparticles on Cu foils (Cu/Cu-400 nm) via electrodeposition.66 The productivity of FAL and MF on Cu/Cu-400 nm was 2.4 times greater than that of bare Cu at the onset potential of FF reduction, with gaseous H2 at a trivial level. These nanocrystalline Cu materials were superior when the applied potential became more negative than the onset potential. Compared to Cu foils, Cu/Cu-400 nm displayed enhanced roughness and electrochemical active surface area (ECSA), which facilitated electron transport and mass transfer processes. Moreover, Xu et al. developed Cu nanoparticles uniformly dispersed on 3D hierarchical and porous N-doped carbon nanosheets (Cu/NC900 and Fig. 9a and b) for the ECH of FF to FAL.67 The hierarchical micro/mesoporous structure of carbon sheets enabled the effectively promoted mass diffusion and charge transfer during the ECH process. Thereinto, 15%-Cu/NC900 achieved approximately 100% selectivity and FE of FAL, obviously surpassing the counterpart of Cu foils (Fig. 9c). A series of control experiments proved that the CuI/Cu0 species were the active sites for ECH, which agrees with other reports.56,68 Compared with bulky Cu, the nanostructured Cu exposed more active sites, which enhanced the FE of FAL and inhibited the HER process.
 Fig. 9  (a) Preparation process diagram, (b) N2 adsorption–desorption equivalent temperature curve of Cu/NC900 samples and (c) ECH performance of FF to FAL on Cu/NC900 samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Structural characterization of Cu1/PC SACs and the ECH performance of FF: (d) K-edge XANES spectrum of Cu and (e) corresponding Fourier transform. A balance of FE and carbon acquired (f) with various charge amounts consumed at −0.75 V vs. RHE and (g) after 10 C of charge were consumed at different applied potentials. Notably, the FA in these panels is the abbreviation of furfuryl alcohol and is equal to the FAL used in the context. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73 Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have recently exhibited superior electrocatalytic performance in various electrocatalysis, such as HER, OER, O2 reduction, and CO2 reduction.69–71 The uniformly distributed and separated active sites in SACs are highly similar to homogeneous catalysts, ensuring high metal availability compared to conventional nanoparticle catalysts.72 This structural feature would be available for ECH. Zhang and co-workers proposed a simple fabrication for P-doped carbon-supported Cu catalysts with a high surface area and variable sizes of Cu sites, ranging from nanoparticles to single atoms.73 With a low Cu mass loading of 0.45 wt%, the Cu1/PC could achieve homogeneously distributed Cu single atoms (Fig. 9d and e). Consequently, the high FE and selectivity of >90% for FAL were accomplished at pH 5 (Fig. 9f). In addition, it was feasible to promote the ECH of FF to 2-MF by modulating voltages (Fig. 9g), as opposed to the previously reported 2-MF formation that required strongly acidic conditions. The crucial point was that P strengthened the adsorption of the –OH group in FAL and promoted its deoxygenation on Cu1/PC, thus facilitating the conversion of FAL to 2-MF.
Nanostructured Cu electrocatalysts can afford improved ECH performance compared to bulky electrodes owing to the highly exposed surface with abundant coordinatively unsaturated sites. The DER is usually limited on such an expanded surface because the relatively strong bindings with furans and *H enable the inner-sphere process towards ECH. Owing to the approximately 100% metal dispersion and maximized metal utilization, SACs deserve more attention as the next-generation electrocatalysts for the ECH of furans. More importantly, modeling SACs with elaborative engineering on the coordination of metal sites provides a reliable platform for mechanistic investigation. To this end, particular attention should be paid to the structural stability of SACs because recent research has identified the in situ clustering of single atoms during electrocatalysis.74–76
3.3 Cu-based bimetallic catalysts
Integrating other metals with Cu is feasible to modulate surface/interfacial electronic configurations and subsequently ameliorate the adsorption intensity of substrates and intermediates towards the promoted ECH of furans. Basu and co-workers electrodeposited Cu upon optimized porous Ni foam (NPNi/NF) to obtain Cu-NPNi/NF electrocatalysts.77 A typical diffraction of Ni and Cu with a slight positive shift in the Cu plane was observed in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of Cu-NPNi/NF, which denoted the formation of bi-metallic Cu–Ni and the interaction between them. It was anticipated that alloying Cu with Ni would upshift the d-band center towards the Fermi level, contributing to the strengthened chemisorption of *H and *FF over the catalyst surface. Compared with Cu, NF, NPNi/NF, and Pt, the Cu-NPNi/NF expressed a more advantageous FAL formation rate (118.7 ± 8 μmol h−1 cm−2). Typically, the ECH of FF towards 2-MF involved 4 *H, requiring higher *H coverage on electrodes. Introducing *H-prone metals (e.g., Pd and Ru) into Cu-based catalysts is an effective strategy to increase the coverage and achieve excellent 2-MF selectivity.29,50 To this end, Zhang and co-workers constructed Cu catalysts (Cu/C) with high specific surface area by calcining MOF precursor (HKUST-1), which were further evolved to a Cu–Pd bimetallic catalyst (CuPd0.021/C) using a displacement method.78 In comparison with Cu/C, the CuPd0.021/C achieved excellent selectivity and FE of 2-MF (Fig. 10a and b). In addition, CuPd0.021/C gained the highest FE of 75% in the 0.1 M acetic acid solution, with a partial current density of 4.5 mA cm−2 for 2-MF at −0.58 V vs. RHE. In situ SERS was used to analyze the chemisorption of both *FF and *H, which varied by introducing Pd (Fig. 10c–e). The higher surface *H coverage on CuPd0.021/C than Cu/C was indicated by the higher normalized intensity for νM–H. In parallel, a relatively small Stark tuning slope of −23 cm−1 V−1 was detected by the η2-(C, O) adsorption mode of FF on CuPd0.021/C compared with a larger Stark tuning slope of −72 cm−1 V−1 for the κ-(O) adsorption mode on Cu/C. The higher *H coverage and the preferable η2-(C, O) adsorption pattern of FF are beneficial for forming 2-MF. DFT theoretical calculations further revealed that the introduction of Pd altered the RDS and lowered the free energy barrier for the ECH of FF, promoting the  to  (Fur = furyl) and increasing the 2-MF selectivity. It can be observed that the introduction of secondary metal provides optimized adsorption on the Cu electrocatalyst for the substrate and *H.
 Fig. 10  Equilibrium data of FE and carbon obtained after the electrolysis of FF (40 mM) in acetate buffer solution (0.1 M and pH 5) with (a) Cu/C and (b) CuPd0.021/C as electrocatalysts after consuming 10 C of charge. (c) Cu/C and CuPd0.021/C of potential-dependent in situ SERS spectra were obtained in an acetic acid solution (0.1 M and pH 2.9) containing 50 mM FF. As a function of applied potential, (d) normalized intensity of metal hydride (M-H) vibrations and (e) CO stretching vibrations on Cu/C and CuPd0.021/C. The degree of Stark tuning that the carbonyl functional group experienced was afforded by the slope of the linear regression (m). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
Core@shell nanostructures combining Cu with other metals usually enable highly exposed heterointerfaces to promote electrocatalysis.79,80 Zhong et al. reported on an array of Cu nanowires (Ag@Cu NWAs/CF) decorated with layered Ag synthesized in situ on Cu foam.81 The hierarchical structure of Ag@Cu NWAs/CF exposed more active sites than those on Cu NWAs/CF, Ag/CF, and CF, which significantly boosted mass transfer with superior selectivity and FE of FAL (96.6% and 96.1%).
Compared with FF, HMF affords a higher diversity of hydrogenation products owing to the co-presence of CO and –OH, such as BHMF, 2,5-dimethylfuran (DMF) and 2,5-dimethyl-2,3-dihydrofuran (DMDHF). Koper and co-workers systematically investigated these processes on metal electrodes.82 Depending on the reaction products, metal catalysts are classified into three types: (1) metals (Fe, Ni, Cu, and Pb) that primarily form BHMF; (2) metals (Co, Ag, Au, Cd, Sb, and Bi) that form BHMF and DMDHF under the working potential; and (3) metals (Pd, Pt, Al, Zn, and In) that mainly form DMDHF. All electrodes have analogous onset potentials, and the distribution of the product relies significantly on the intrinsic properties of the electrodes. Therefore, bimetallic electrocatalysts involving Cu and other metals, particularly those assigned to the other two types, provide more opportunities for regulating the ECH pathways of HMF.
In DFT calculations, HMF exhibited a weak interaction with Ag surfaces because the adsorption energy was −0.87 eV on the Ag(100) surface via the oxygen of the alcohol group.83 There is little bond length change in the aldehyde group and furan ring of adsorbed HMF, demonstrating excellent selectivity for BHMF. Accordingly, Benito and co-workers optimized Cu–Ag catalysts by electrodeposition on Cu foam or galvanic displacement with Ag nanoparticles (Ag/Cu ED and Ag/Cu GD),84 resulting in Cu–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles and dendrites, respectively. Both provided larger ECSA and promoted mass and charge transfer processes compared with Cu and Ag. Such properties and the synergistic effects between Ag and Cu surface active sites may be responsible for the two-fold selectivity for ECH of HMF to BHMF (selectivity >80%, conversion ∼100%, and BHMF productivity 0.206 and 0.280 mmol cm−2 h−1). Very recently, this 3D nanostructured Ag/Cu ED was further utilized in operation at high current densities (40–50 mA cm−2), which enabled a trade-off between the activation of HMF and H2O with remarkable selectivity (85%) and productivity (0.567 mmol cm−2 h−1).85
The smaller size of AgCu nanoalloys (Ag1Cu1/PA, Ag3Cu1/PA, and Ag1Cu3/PA) loading on pyrolyzed sodium alginate (PA) enabled the faster kinetic of ECH.86 With an average size of 7.4 nm, Ag1Cu1/PA performed the optimal selectivity of 94% for BHMF, with a favorable ECH over HER in a 0.05 M borate buffer solution over a wide potential ranging from −0.26 to −1.12 V vs. RHE. DFT calculations further confirmed that the strengthened electrophilicity of Ag–Cu alloys was more preferential to adsorb and activate HMF compared with Ag, resulting in a lower energy barrier in ECH. Owing to the high HER overpotential and selectivity of BHMF on Ag, the integration of Ag and Cu can remarkably synergistically accelerate the performance of Cu-based electrocatalysts.
Duan and co-workers proposed the electroreduction of CuO nanowire arrays (NWAs) to Cu NWAs and subsequently constructed Ru1Cu monoatomic alloy catalyst through the galvanic replacement reaction of Cu and Ru3+ (Fig. 11).87 The Ru1Cu achieved an FE of 85.6% and a yield of 0.47 mmol cm−2 h−1 for DHMF at −0.3 V vs. RHE, far exceeding that of Cu NWs (Fig. 11a and b). More interestingly, under high concentrations of HMF (100 mM), the FE of DHMF (87.5%) was essentially retained, avoiding HMF dimerization conventionally observed under high concentrations (Fig. 11c and d). Mechanistic experiments further evidenced that H2O was activated on Ru following electron transfer and dissociation into the *H species process, with *H subsequently binding to the CO of HMF to form DHMF via the ECH mechanism (Fig. 11e). In comparison, HMF received electrons from Cu electrodes and combined them with neighboring protons through the proton–electron transfer process (CPET) to generate radical intermediates, which were subsequently converted to DHMF through the CPET process (Fig. 11f). This contribution highlighted the critical role of single-atomic Ru in facilitating the generation of *H from H2O dissociation, which consequently increased the surface coverage of *H and inhibited the dimerization process.
 Fig. 11  ECH performances on Ru1Cu SAA and Cu. FE and productivity of DHMF on (a) Cu and (b) Ru1Cu at a potential window ranging from −0.15 V to −0.5 V vs. RHE. (c and d) Various concentrations of HMF on Cu and Ru1Cu SAA at −0.5 V vs. RHE. Various HMF electrochemical reduction mechanisms on (e) Ru1Cu and (f) Cu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
The above examples identify the promotion of ECH by incorporating Cu with other metals. Introducing a different active site for offsetting Cu is key to this issue. Therefore, *H-prone metals (e.g., Pd and Ru) have been adopted as effective additives, resulting in developments in the ECH of FF and HMF. However, such additional metals are usually active for HER, so they should be controlled to low atomic content. Challenges remain for the profound reduction of FF and HMF, such as the hydrogenation and opening of furanic rings rather than carbonyl reduction. To this end, foreign metals (e.g., Pt and Ir) with strong adsorption of furanic rings can be used to construct Cu-based bimetallic candidates.31
4. Electrocatalytic oxidation of furans
Conventional thermo-catalytic methods for the oxidation of HMF and FF use noble-metal catalysts (e.g., Ru, Pd, and Pt) under harsh conditions.7 However, industrial development is hampered by the prohibitive expense of these noble metals and energy consumption. Recently, the ECO of furans has displayed unique advantages, such as mild conditions, green environments, and the controllable selectivity of products. Witnessed progress has been made in developing cost-efficient electrocatalysts for the ECO.10,88 First-row 3d transition metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) compounds exhibit high activity but suffer from the competition by extensive OER. In comparison, Cu is almost inactive for OER, offering the promise of efficient ECO of furans. In addition, Cu is accessible for both ECH and ECO as a bifunctional electrocatalyst in an electrolysis system, but Fe, Co, and Ni are usually prohibited at cathodes owing to the fast HER.
4.1 Cu (hydro)oxides
Cu and its (hydro)oxides have demonstrated superior activity for ECO, which is correlated with oxidized species formed in situ at anodic potentials taken for electrooxidation.89 The remarkable performance of nanocrystalline Cu foam (NCF) electrodes in the ECO of HMF to FDCA was reported by Choi and co-workers.90 It was found that the high-curvature Cu nanocrystals of NCF were more prone to anodic dissolution than bulk Cu electrodes, allowing for more amorphous Cu2O, CuO, and Cu(OH)2 to be generated in situ by successive dissolution and precipitation during electrochemical oxidation. During the ECO of HMF on NCF, the yield of FDCA was 96.4% without any apparent intermediate accumulation of oxidation products (Fig. 12a and c). In contrast, a considerable accumulation of FFCA in the Cu foil during HMF oxidation (Fig. 12b) revealed that the conversion of FFCA to FDCA was rate-determining. The NCF comprised Cu ions with more flexible coordination and could interact intensely with HMF, leading to deeper oxidation. Furthermore, Shi and co-workers proved that the in situ formation of CuOOH acted as the main active site for HMF oxidation on Cu foam-supported Cu(OH)2[CF-Cu(OH)2].91 The electrochemically activated CF-Cu(OH)2 achieved approximately 100% FE and 98.7% FDCA yields. Raman and FTIR spectra proved the existence of CuOOH (Fig. 12d and e). The significant decrease in open-circuit potential after adding HMF further implied that CuOOH was the active site for ECO (Fig. 12f).
 Fig. 12  HMF conversion and product distribution at (a) NCF and (b) plain Cu in KOH (0.1 M) containing 5 mM HMF, and (c) those achieved at the NCF electrode after five consecutive cycles. (d) Raman and (e) FTIR spectra of CF-Cu(OH)2 and activated CF-Cu(OH)2 samples. (f) Open circuit potential as a function of time to probe the longevity of CuOOH species with and without 10 mM HMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Wang and co-workers developed an oxidation-electroreduction method to improve the electrochemically active surface area of Cu/Cu foam electrodes.92 Concerning traditional metal hydroxide electrocatalysts, e.g., Cu(OH)2, Ni(OH)2, and Co(OH)3, the onset potential on Cu/Cu foam was only about 0 V vs. RHE, which was 1.2 V lower than those of metal hydroxides required for the ECO of FF, with the FE of FA approximately 100% at 0.3–0.5 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13a and b). Unlike the conventional ECO of aldehyde-based compounds, where the H atom on the aldehyde group was oxidized to H2O, Cu/Cu foam released the H atom to form H2 at low potential (Fig. 13c). DFT calculations (Fig. 13d) proved that gem-diolate anions (GDA) generated from FF were first adsorbed on the Cu(111) surface with subsequent C–H bond splitting to form furanic acid (*FA) and hydrogen atoms (*H). Regarding the energy barrier for the formation of H2 and H2O, the hydrogen atoms generated by C–H splitting preferentially bind to H2 at low potential (ΔE1 = 0.53 eV) without oxidation to H2O (ΔE2 = 0.83 eV). Instead of a conventional electrolyzer with FF electrooxidation at the anode and HER at the cathode, the assembled electrocatalytic system could simultaneously produce FA and H2 at the anode (Fig. 13e), which enabled the generation of approximately 2 kWh of electricity per cubic metre of H2, without the input power required for typical electrolysis. Moreover, Cu/Cu foam enabled the ECO of HMF to HMFCA at low voltage (<0.5 V vs. RHE) with selectivity and FE of approximately 100%.93 Apart from HMF and FF, various aromatic aldehydes were available, such as FFCA, benzaldehyde, and 4-hydroxymethylbenzaldehyde, for which the corresponding carboxylic acids were harvested after electrolysis. It is proved that Cu/Cu foam could be universal for various aldehydes at low potentials. The key is that, as opposed to the conventional high-potential oxidation of aldehydes, the authors achieved a bipolar hydrogen system that permits both the oxidation of aldehydes at the anode to generate H2 and cathodic HER from water. Recently, Liu et al. explored the uniqueness of Cu in the electrocatalytic oxidative dehydrogenation (EOD) of aldehydes.94 They uncovered competing reaction pathways between EOD and non-electrochemical Cannizzaro reaction, which shared a common gem-diol intermediate and exhibited a strong potential dependence. The EOD could involve the adsorption of this diol species on the electrode surface, followed by C–H bond cleavage to produce H2. DFT calculations demonstrated that Cu provides a moderate barrier to C-H cleavage (0.72 eV) and intermediate H binding (+0.31 eV), and at low potentials, the Tafel step may be superior to the reverse Volmer step, leading to an EOD mechanism. More favorable adsorption promotes the rate of surface-mediated C-H cleavage. Therefore, the EOD reaction becomes more competitive with the Cannizaro reaction as the potential increases.
 Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves on Cu/Cu foam electrodes for the ECO of FF with various transition metal-based hydroxides. (b) The concentration of organic compounds in the anode electrolyte as a function of time performed in the chronoamperometry test at 0.3 V vs. RHE on Cu/Cu foam. (c) Schematic diagram of the reaction pathway and (d) the corresponding free energy profile on the Cu(111) surface with low potential oxidation of FF. (e) Diagram of the assembled electrocatalytic system: low potential aldehyde oxidation for the anode reaction and cathodic reaction for the ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
The above examples confirmed the feasibility of Cu as electrocatalysts for the ECO of furans. However, the feeble adsorption and activation of OH− species on CuO or Cu(OH)2 remain a barrier to further development. Analogous to the design of ECH electrocatalysts, introducing other metals with high affinity to OH− would boost electrooxidation performance.
4.2 Cu-based bimetallic catalysts
Regarding the high affinity of OH− on Pd, Zhou et al. designed CuO-PdO nanocomposites using a hydrothermal method, in which PdO nanoparticles were dispersed on CuO nanoribbons (Fig. 14a).95 The performance of CuO–PdO in the ECO of HMF was significantly advanced compared to pure CuO, with lower onset potential (1.14 V vs. 1.28 V vs. RHE), superior FDCA yield (96.2% vs. 90.8%) and 4.7 times higher current density at 1.35 V vs. RHE (Fig. 14b and c). In situ attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) elucidated the adsorption behavior of HMF on CuO–PdO (Fig. 14d–f). The C–O band attributed to HMF and intermediates showed higher wave numbers for CuO–PdO, implying that the coverage of organic molecules on the CuO–PdO surface was significantly stronger than that of CuO. In addition, the intensity of the O–H band was more obviously enhanced during the ECO process, meaning that more OH− were enriched on the CuO–PdO surface. In other words, the CuO–PdO provided a stronger adsorption ability to capture HMF and OH−. The DFT calculations also depicted that the introduction of PdO lowered the reaction barrier, and the RDS transformed from FFCA → FDCA to HMF → HMFCA, proving that the synergistic effect of CuO and PdO played a pivotal role in the ECO process. In addition to strengthening OH− adsorption, incorporating metal (e.g. Ni and Mn) into Cu-based catalysts is also favorable to generating more active sites in the ECO process. Cu-doped porous Ni nanotubes (NiCu NTs) with abundant active sites were exploited for the ECO of HMF with FDCA yields of approximately 100% and FE >90% during 5 consecutive cycles at 1.42 V vs. RHE.96 Compared with NiCu NPs (27 mF cm−2) and Ni NPs (9 mF cm−2), NiCu NTs presented the enormous value of Cdl (64 mF cm−2), suggesting that NiCu NTs were available with more active sites. However, in situ Raman showed that the in situ formed high-valent Ni3+ OOH was the active species for ECO, and the role of Cu was unfortunately ignored.
 Fig. 14  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of CuO–PdO samples (orange circles denote PdO nanoparticles) and (b) normalized LSV curves with ECSA of CuO–PdO and CuO in 1 M KOH with 50 mM HMF. (c) FE of HMFOR and FDCA yields on CuO–PdO in cycle tests. In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of CuO and CuO–PdO (d and e) at different potentials and (f) along with reaction time at 1.3 V vs. RHE during HMFOR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
By contrast, Lee and co-workers evaluated NiOOH and Cu(OH)2 for the oxidation of alcohol and aldehyde groups,97 in which Cu(OH)2 was more active than NiOOH for the oxidation of aldehyde to carboxylic acid, while NiOOH was more effective than Cu(OH)2 for that of alcohol to aldehyde. In situ XAS analysis was performed to highlight the distinction between the oxidation ability of NiOOH and Cu(OH)2 for the –OH of FAL and the –CHO of FF during ECO (Fig. 15). Compared to H2O oxidation, a Cu(OH)2 electrode immersed in FAL and FF solutions displayed oxidation characteristics, indicating that Cu(OH)2 was more favorable for organic molecule oxidation. The intensity of the white line of FF oxidation gradually decreased over a range of potentials, from open circuit potential (OCP) to 1.6 V vs. RHE, in contrast to the intensity of water and FAL oxidation (Fig. 15a and b). This meant that the electron transfer rate from FF to the Cu(OH)2 surface via aldehyde oxidation at 1.6 V vs. RHE was considerably faster than the regeneration rate of Cu(OH)2, leading to a decrease in the unoccupied states of the electronic structure of the Cu(OH)2 surface. This implies that Cu(OH)2 was more active in FF oxidation than in FAL and H2O oxidation. For NiOOH, only the white line intensity of FAL oxidation dropped at 1.5 V vs. RHE compared to the FF and water oxidation reactions (Fig. 15b and c). However, there was again an increased intensity of the white line for FAL oxidation, with a higher intensity than that for water oxidation but weaker than the intensity of FF oxidation at 1.6 V vs. RHE. This revealed that the NiOOH surface was in a more reduced state at 1.5 V vs. RHE because the electron transfer with FAL by alcohol oxidation was considerably faster than the regeneration of NiOOH. These results demonstrate the remarkable reliability of NiOOH for the oxidation of FAL to FF. Their synergistic combination was expected to improve the ECO performance of HMF. Compared with the pristine NiOOH and Cu(OH)2 electrodes, Cu(OH)2/NiOOH afforded obvious superiority, giving >95% yield and FE of FDCA with 50 mM HMF. This was attributed to the rapid conversion of the alcohol group of HMF to the aldehyde group on NiOOH first, followed by the rapid conversion of the aldehyde group to carboxylic acid by Cu(OH)2, which collectively propelled the conversion of HMF → DFF → FFCA → FDCA. Analogously, Huang et al. prepared a series of ultrathin Ni1−xCux(OH)2 nanosheets using a co-deposition method.98 The ECO performance was improved by Cu doping, among which Ni0.9Cu0.1(OH)2 showed the best ECO performance with a high yield of FDCA (91.2%) at 1.45 V vs. RHE. The intensity of the redox peaks in the LSV curves of Ni2+/3+ increased in Ni0.9Cu0.1(OH)2, which connoted that Cu could accelerate the oxidation of Ni2+ and contribute to the formation of more reactive Ni3+ species. The Tafel slope of Ni0.9Cu0.1(OH)2 was 64.6 mV dec−1, indicating a faster kinetic rate of HMF oxidation while inhibiting the OER reaction. The promotion of ECO was also attributed to the considerable increase in electrochemically active M2+ sites in Ni1−xCux(OH)2.99 The dispersibility of Cu was augmented by Ni because the amount of Cu was reduced after the incorporation of Ni. However, the number of M2+ sites was extended approximately 10 times. The synergistic effects of Cu and Ni contributed to the high oxidation activity of HMF, for which the conversion of HMF was 100%, and the yield of FDCA was 93.3%. Therefore, a secondary metal was introduced into the Cu-based catalysts to optimize the adsorption behavior of intermediates by employing the synergistic effect of bimetallic catalysts. Compared with the single-metal composition catalysts, the bimetallic catalysts displayed outstanding performance, which offered a novel strategy for exploiting ECO catalysts.
 Fig. 15  
In situ XANES spectra of Cu and Ni K-edge obtained from the electrochemical oxidation of FAC and FAD on (a) Cu(OH)2 and (c) NiOOH electrodes for in situ XAS analysis. (b) Corresponding LSV curves of Cu(OH)2 and NiOOH electrodes in the in situ XAS analysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
Spinel structures (AB2X4, A and B are metals, and X is an oxygen group element) provide metal redox-active centers on the surface owing to the migration of electrons at the oxygen site between metals of different valence, leading to superior electrochemical activity.100,101 Seagull-shaped CuMn2O4 was synthesized using a hydrothermal method and subsequently immersed in NH3·H2O to generate O vacancies (CuMn2O4–NH3-40).102 Compared to CuMn2O4 without NH3·H2O etching, CuMn2O4–NH3-40 demonstrated an increase in Mn4+–O bonding in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) owing to abundant O vacancies. Single-metal oxides of Mn (Mn2O3) and Cu (CuO) fabricated using the identical synthetic method were further examined in the ECO. The Mn species was found to be the active site of HMF oxidation, and the presence of Cu improved the dispersion of Mn sites. CuMn2O4–NH3-40 provided more oxygen vacancies than CuMn2O4, and the O vacancies added high-valent Mn4+–O groups, endowing the catalyst with superior yields and selectivity (approximately 100%). Wang and co-workers uncovered the effect of various Co sites on Co3O4, in which Zn2+ and Al3+ were replaced with tetrahedral sites (CO2+Td) and octahedral sites (Co3+Oh) for the ECO of HMF.103 It is found that octahedral sites (Co3+Oh) acted as active sites for HMF oxidation, while tetrahedral sites (CO2+Td) adsorbed HMF. In addition, Cu2+ was employed to displace Co2+ in Co3O4, with the superior oxidation activity of HMF on CuCo2O4 compared to Co3O4. This was attributed to the Cu2+ induced more exposure of active sites (Co3+Oh) and advantageous adsorption capacity of HMF than CO2+Td. The onset oxidation potential of CuCo2O4 for HMF was only 1.23 V vs. RHE, which was lower than that of Co3O4. After electrolysis at a constant potential of 1.45 V vs. RHE, excellent yield and FE (both >93%) for FDCA were achieved on CuCo2O4. The above examples demonstrate the capability of various geometric sites in spinel oxides for HMF and H2O adsorption and oxidation. Thus, rationally designed geometric sites can remarkably promote HMF oxidation activity.
In addition, the ECO of FF to 5-hydroxy-2(5H)-furanone (HFO) has received considerable interest. HFO is a pivotal component in many bioactive compounds and intermediates, which are typically synthesized via thermo-catalysis.104,105 However, it is challenging to obtain HFO from FF because HFO is prone to transform to maleic acid (MA) under high-temperature conditions.106 A series of metal sulfides (CuS, ZnS, and PbS) were prepared for the ECO of FF to HFO by Han's group.107 It was demonstrated that CuS possessed the lowest charge transfer resistance, accelerating electron transfer with 70.2% FF conversion and 83.6% HFO selectivity. Mechanism investigation revealed that a multi-step reaction, including C–C bond breaking, ring opening, oxidation and intra-molecular isomerization, formed HFO. This study pioneered a new path for the ECO of FF to high-value-added products.
The incorporation of other metals into Cu-based catalysts positively affects ECO performance. Foreign metals should possess a strong adsorption or activation ability to OH−/H2O, which enables the generation of ROS (*OH, *O, or *OOH) to trigger electrooxidation. For example, Ni sites are more active than Cu in the oxidation of alcohol to aldehyde, while the subsequent oxidation of aldehyde to carboxylic acid is preferred on Cu. Such relay catalysis advanced by the synergy between two metal sites has demonstrated superiority in the high-degree electrooxidation of HMF to FDCA. It is noteworthy that Cu turns into an auxiliary component when other metals (e.g., Ni) are dominant as active sites, in which the role and working mechanism of Cu should be re-examined, but this is out of the scope of this review.
5. Paired electrolysis system
When ECO and ECH are coupled into an electrocatalytic system, the corresponding oxidation and reduction products are achieved, referred to as a paired electrolysis system.108,109 Compared to individual electrolysis systems (ECO or ECH), paired electrolysis systems can save costs and attain double of the current efficiency (200% in theory). In particular, in an ECH process, the kinetics of OER at the anode are slow, and the O2 is unvaluable. Therefore, it is feasible to integrate ECO and ECH to produce high-value chemicals with significantly lower voltage inputs. However, a paired electrolysis system is more sophisticated than an individual electrolysis system for which several key challenges must be addressed: (i) the electrolysis system device and electrocatalysts are required to be suitable for target reactions; (ii) ECO and ECH processes must be compatible to avoid extensive polarization on the cathode and anode; and (iii) the post-treatment, product separation, and purification procedures should be simple and accessible.
Zhao and co-workers assembled Cu3P/CC and Ni2P/CC as the cathode and anode, respectively, into a paired electrolysis system of FF (Fig. 16a).110 In contrast to overall water splitting, the electrolysis onset voltage was significantly reduced to 1.2 V vs. RHE after adding FF, implying superior oxidation and hydrogenation performance of paired electrolysis (Fig. 16b). Shi's group developed Cu(OH)2-modified Cu foam (CF-Cu(OH)2) catalysts and employed them in a paired electrolysis system for the efficient ECO of HMF and the ECH of p-nitrophenol, as illustrated in Fig. 16c.91 Product analysis demonstrated that the yield and FE of both p-aminophenol and FDCA exceeded 90% within 3 hours. These examples prove that Cu-based catalysts as electrodes in paired electrolysis are beneficial for the green synthesis of high-value-added chemicals, decreasing energy consumption and synchronously achieving reductive and oxidative valorization.
 Fig. 16  (a) Diagram of a paired electrolysis system comprising Cu3P/CFC and Ni2P/CFC and (b) its LSV curves compared with those of a water splitting system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Diagram of a paired electrolysis system with HMF and p-nitrophenol as substrates on CF-Cu(OH)2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
6. Conclusion and prospect
In this review, we summarized the recent progress of Cu-based catalysts for the ECH, ECO and paired electrolysis of biomass-derived furans. Table 1 summarizes the representative Cu electrocatalysts used for the electrochemical hydrogenation of furanic compounds. With regard to the ECH of FF and HMF, bulky Cu electrodes are typically used for mechanistic investigation owing to their well-documented surface structures. Effective surface roughing can further improve performance owing to the introduction of rich defects and grain boundaries, in which the in situ reconfiguration from initial CuOx to defective Cu active sites deserves more concern during the ECH process. Compared with bulk Cu catalysts, nanostructuring Cu catalysts is an effective strategy to boost activity because of their larger surface area and fast mass/charge transfer. In particular, Cu SACs enable higher metal availability, with the ligand atoms also synergistically acting with Cu sites to modulate the adsorption mode of FF toward efficient hydrogenation. However, Cu catalysts are still limited by weak *H binding, and the combination with *H-prone metals (Pd and Ru) can increase the *H coverage on catalysts and change the adsorption mode of furans, which in turn can deliver the superior selectivity of 2-MF. Notably, introducing an excess of these metals will lead to a significant HER process. Thus, the content requires careful balance. Cu is also suitable for DER owing to the simultaneous presence of both inner and outer sphere processes. The DER process comprises self-coupling or cross-coupling, in which the product selectivity depends on the various BEs of aldehydes on the catalysts.
Table 1 Summary of the literature on furan ECH on Cu-based catalysts




Substrate
Catalysts
Conditions
Products
Ref.




FE: Faraday efficiency; Sel: selectivity; Y: yield; Con: conversion; and RT: room temperature.




FF (0.035 M)
Cu foil
0.1 M K2SO4/cyclohexane (pH 2), −0.73 V vs. RHE, 3 h, RT
FEFAL: 63.4%, YFAL: 56.5%; FE2-MF: 43.6%, Y2-MF: 19.4%

39



FF (0.1 M)
Cu foil
0.1 M Na2CO3-NaHCO3 (pH 10), −1.4 V vs. SCE, 10 h, RT
FEFAL: 71.0%, SelFAL: 87.0%

50



FF (0.05 M)
Cu gauze
0.5 M H2SO4/CH3CN, −10 mA cm−2, 2 h, 8 °C
Sel2-MF: 80.0%, SelFAL: 9.0%

51



HMF (0.05 M)
0.5 M H2SO4/EtOH, −10 mA cm−2, 2 h, 8 °C
SelDMF: 35.6%, SelBHMF: 33.8%


FF (0.059 M)
Rough Cu foil
K2SO4 solution (pH 3), −0.426 V vs. RHE, 3 h, RT
FEFAL: 42%, FE2-MF: 58%

54



FF (0.035 M)
O2 plasma Cu
0.25 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8), −0.56 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT
FEFAL: 91.0%, SelFAL ≈ 100%, YFAL: 70%

55



FF (0.05 M)
CuO/Cu foam
1 M PBS solution, −0.20 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 38.6 C, RT
FEFAL: 91.5%, SelFAL: 100%, ConFF: 90%

56



HMF (0.05 M)
ER Cu NW
0.5 M Na2SO4 solution, −40 mA cm−2, 4 h, RT
FEBHMF > 90%, SelBHMF ≈ 100%, ConHMF > 95%

59



FF (0.05 M)
NP-Cu2
0.1 M PBS solution, −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h, RT
FEFAL: 95%, SelFAL: 96%, ConFF > 75%

60



FF (0.02 M)
Cu foil
0.25 M PBS solution (pH 6.7), −0.50 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT
FEFAL > 20%, FEHydrofuroin ≈ 20%

62



FF (0.01 M)
Cu foam
0.1 M KOH (pH 13), −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h, charge reaches 28.8 C, RT
FEHydrofuroin > 40%, YHydrofuroin > 60%, ConFF > 90%

64



FF (0.1 M)
Cu/Cu-400 nm
0.5 M H2SO4/CH3CN, −0.5 V vs. RHE, 1.5 h, RT
FE2-MF > 75%, product rate2-MF ≈ 1.0 μmol min−1 cm2, FEFAL > 20%, product rateFAL ≈ 0.6 μmol min−1 cm2

66



FF (0.03 M)
15%-Cu/NC900
1.0 M KOH (pH 14), −1.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 4 h, RT
FEFAL > 95%, SelFAL ≈ 100%, ConFF: 99%

67



FF (0.04 M)
Cu1/PC
0.1 M acetate buffer solution (pH 8), −0.75 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 10 C, RT
FEFAL > 90%, SelFAL > 90%

73



FF (0.01 M)
NPNi/NF
0.5 M KOH, −0.45 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT
Formation rateFAL: 118.7 ± 8 μmol h −1 cm−2, SelFAL: 74.3%, ConFF: 75.2%

77



FF (0.01 M)
CuPd0.021/C
0.1 M acetic acid solution (pH 2.9), −0.58 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 10 C, RT
FE2-MF: 75%

78



HMF (0.02 M)
Ag@Cu NWAs/CF
0.5 M borate buffer (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, charge reaches 116 C, RT
FEBHMF: 96.5%, SelBHMF: 97.1%

81



FF (0.02 M)
0.5 M borate buffer (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, charge reaches 116 C, RT
FEFAL: 96.1%, SelFAL: 96.6%


HMF (0.05 M)
Ag/Cu GD
0.5 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, RT
FEBHMF > 80%, SelBHMF ≈ 87%, ConHMF ≈ 100%, product rateBHMF: 0.290 mmol cm−2 h−1

84



HMF (0.05 M)
Ag/Cu GD
0.5 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.2), −0.51 V vs. RHE, RT
FEBHMF > 80%, SelBHMF: 60%, ConHMF ≈ 30%, product rateBHMF: 0.567 mmol cm−2 h−1

85



HMF (0.01 M)
Ag1Cu1/PA
0.05 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.14), −0.52 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT
FEBHMF: 61.8%, SelBHMF: 94.1%, ConHMF ≈ 93.2%,

86



HMF (0.02 M)
Ru1Cu SAA
0.5 M PBS solution, −0.3 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT
FEBHMF: 85.6%, product rateBHMF: 0.47 mmol cm−2 h−1

87






Table 2 summarizes the ECO performance of the representative Cu electrocatalysts. Cu and Cu (hydro)oxides are almost inactive towards OER, exhibiting a promising prospect for the ECO of furans. However, the ECO process also involves the adsorption and activation of OH−, while the weak ability of OH− species on Cu and Cu oxides remains a constraint. Therefore, introducing other metals with a high affinity for OH−, such as Pd and Ni, can strengthen the adsorption of OH−, thereby lowering the reaction barrier of ECO. In addition to the enhanced adsorption of OH−, the introduction of metals (e.g., Ni and Mn) in Cu-based catalysts would create new active sites. Cu species synergize with the second metal and improve the dispersion of the secondary metal, thus boosting the FE and the selectivity of FDCA.
Table 2 Summary of the literature on furan ECO on Cu-based catalysts




Substrate
Electrocatalyst
Conditions
Products
Ref.




FE: Faraday efficiency; Sel: selectivity; Y: yield; Con: conversion; and RT: room temperature.




HMF (0.005 M)
Nanocrystalline Cu foam
0.1 M KOH, 1.62 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 41 C, RT
FEFDCA: 95.3%, YFDCA: 96.4%, ConHMF: 99.9%

90



HMF (0.1 M)
CF-Cu(OH)2
1.0 M KOH, 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 6 h, RT
FEFDCA ≈ 100%, YFDCA: 98.7%

91



FF (0.05 M)
Cu/Cu foam
1.0 M KOH, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 0.5 h, RT
FEFA ≈ 100%

92



HMF (0.05 M)
Cu/Cu foam
1.0 M KOH, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 0.5 h, RT
FEHMFCA ≈ 100%, SelHMFCA ≈ 100%

93



HMF (0.05 M)
CuO–PdO
1.0 M KOH, 1.35 V vs. RHE, 20 min, RT
FEFDCA: 93.7%, YFDCA: 96.2%, ConHMF: 99.5%

95



HMF (0.02 M)
NiCu NTs
1.0 M KOH, 1.42 V vs. RHE, 2 h, RT
FEFDCA > 96.4%, YFDCA: 99.0%, ConHMF ≈ 100%

96



HMF (0.005 M)
Cu(OH)2/NiOOH
0.1 M NaOH, 1.40 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT
FEFDCA: 98.3%, YFDCA: 98.3%

97



HMF (0.005 M)
Ni0.9Cu0.1(OH)2
1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 116 C, RT
FEFDCA: 91.2%, YFDCA: 91.2%, ConHMF ≈ 100%

98



HMF (0.005 M)
CuNi(OH)2/C
1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 90 C, RT
FEFDCA: 94.4%, YFDCA: 93.3%, ConHMF: 98.8%

99



HMF (0.01 M)
CuMn2O4–NH3-40
1.0 M KOH, 1.31 V vs. RHE, 6 h, RT
FEFDCA: 98.4%, ConHMF: 100%

102



HMF (0.05 M)
CuCo2O4
1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, RT
FEFDCA: 94.0%, YFDCA: 93.7%

103



FF (1 mmol)
CuS
[Et3NH]NO3 (1.8 wt%)–MeCN–H2O (12.5 wt%), 1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 7 h, RT
ConFF: 70.2%, SelHFO: 83.6%

107





Moreover, the combination of in situ characterization techniques to detect the crystalline phase evolution process of electrocatalysts, the adsorption behavior of substrate intermediates, the chemical state of catalysts, etc., have emerged as an integral approach to explore the electrocatalytic mechanism considerably. For example, in situ Raman and in situ FTIR are available to analyze the interactions of substrates and *H/ROS with the catalyst surface during electrocatalysis to elucidate ECH or ECO mechanisms. In addition, in situ XAS and in situ XPS can reveal active sites and reconfiguration processes by probing the valence variation of catalysts during the electrocatalytic processes. The combination of in situ characterization techniques and experimental results enables a profound interpretation of the structure–effect relationships of electrocatalysts, which is indispensable in facilitating the design of robust electrocatalysts.
Finally, the paired electrolysis technique can simultaneously combine ECH and ECO to deliver high-value chemicals with higher current efficiency and lower voltage input. Currently, most investigations have separately adopted ECO and ECH-favorable electrodes as paired electrolysis electrodes, rarely employing bifunctional electrodes.
It is noteworthy that relevant research on Cu-based electrocatalysts is in its infancy stage. More efforts are expected to advance the development of high-activity catalysts for the electrochemical refinery of biomass feedstock.
(1) At present, most efforts concentrate on improving the selectivity and activity of Cu-based catalysts by engineering nanostructures but ignore the stability of the electrocatalysts during electrolysis. For example, when Cu-based electrocatalysts are exposed to a strong acid electrolyte for ECH, they are prone to dissolve and deactivate. Therefore, it is critical to develop highly stable Cu-based electrocatalysts. MOFs or graphene can be wrapped on the surface of Cu-based catalysts to stabilize the surface structure and morphology and maintain catalyst activity. Additionally, based on the strong metal–support interaction (SMSI),111,112 the introduction of oxide support species enables the migration of support species to protect and inhibit the aggregation of highly dispersive Cu sites for a long lifetime.
(2) Conventional ex situ characterization techniques only reflect the pre- and post-reaction states of catalysts, but the working states during catalytic reactions attract more attention, such as the dynamic changes in electrocatalysts and the corresponding chemisorption of reaction substrates/intermediates.113–115 Concerning the various functions of various in situ techniques (e.g., XPS, TEM, FTIR, Raman, XRD, and scanning tunnel microscope (STM)), there is a necessity to establish a combination of these techniques with complementary aspects for systematically tailoring kinetic evolution and identifying catalytic mechanisms.116,117 The relevant efforts are expected to guide the rational design of better electrocatalysts.
(3) New catalytic systems combining electrocatalysts with the ones well documented in thermo-catalysis enable more control for upgrading furans. For example, the pore channels of zeolites can modulate the diffusion of molecules, leading to significant differences in molecular transport and eventual shape-selective turnover in electrocatalysis.118 Moreover, the guest molecules are subject to the local electric field in the zeolite channels or cages to change their energy levels. Encapsulating metal nanoparticles in zeolite microenvironments can confine metal substances to ultra-small particles (<2.5 nm), suppressing the aggregation and leaching of metal substances, which is an effective way to achieve higher activity and stability. Analogously, booming MOF materials with defined pore structures and coordination environments would be feasible as promising electrocatalysts or additives for the electrochemical upgrading of furans.119
(4) A paired electrolysis system can couple ECH and ECO to simultaneously generate high-value chemicals with practical applications in the green synthesis domain. However, oxidation and reduction processes must be compatible and equally efficient in separating and purifying products. More efforts are demanded in paired electrolysis to achieve optimal products.120,121 In this regard, membrane electrode assembly (MEA)-based flow cells can significantly reduce ohmic loss, boost mass transport, and improve energy efficiency for cost-effective electrolysis. In addition, optimal supporting electrolytes and product purification methods are of great importance for practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22175077), Innovation Team Project in Guangdong Colleges and Universities (2021KCXTD009), and Guangzhou Science and Technology Program (202201020071).
References
R. Gerardy, D. P. Debecker, J. Estager, P. Luis and J. C. M. Monbaliu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7219–7347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sudarsanam, R. Y. Zhong, S. Van den Bosch, S. M. Coman, V. I. Parvulescu and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8349–8402 RSC .
D. Esposito and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5821–5835 RSC .

          T. Werpy and G. Petersen, Top value added chemicals from biomass: volume I–results of screening for potential candidates from sugars and synthesis gas, National Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, CO (US),  2004 Search PubMed.
J. J. Bozell and G. R. Petersen, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 539–554 RSC .
L. Hu, J. Xu, S. Zhou, A. He, X. Tang, L. Lin, J. Xu and Y. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2959–2980 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, E. Paone, D. Rodríguez-Padrón, R. Luque and F. Mauriello, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4273–4306 RSC .
S. Jung and E. J. Biddinger, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 1370–1379 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Z. Yuan, R. Peng, S. Wang and Y. Zou, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, 5, 1117–1138 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ge, J. Li and H. Duan, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 1–29 CAS .
S. A. Akhade, N. Singh, O. Y. Gutiérrez, J. Lopez-Ruiz, H. Wang, J. D. Holladay, Y. Liu, A. Karkamkar, R. S. Weber and A. B. Padmaperuma, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11370–11419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. S. Lucas, R. G. Grim, S. A. Tacey, C. A. Downes, J. Hasse, A. M. Roman, C. A. Farberow, J. A. Schaidle and A. Holewinski, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1205–1270 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. May and E. J. Biddinger, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3212–3221 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Fan, W. J. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. Q. Zou, S. Y. Wang and Z. P. Chen, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 7818–7868 RSC .
P. Zhang and L. Sun, Chin. J. Chem., 2020, 38, 996–1004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Shi, C. G. Xia, Y. Huang and L. He, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 2830–2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li and Y. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18258–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Sun, G. Yin, C. Du and Y. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3216–3232 RSC .
J. Wu, L. Xu, Y. Li, C.-L. Dong, Y. Lu, T. T. T. Nga, Z. Kong, S. Li, Y. Zou and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 23649–23656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Garedew, F. Lin, B. Song, T. M. DeWinter, J. E. Jackson, C. M. Saffron, C. H. Lam and P. T. Anastas, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4214–4237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, Z. Li, X. Xu and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13459–13470 RSC .
G. M. Tomboc, S. Choi, T. Kwon, Y. J. Hwang and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F.-X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff, X. Zhou, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7646–7659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Perez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Gottle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lopez-Ruiz, E. Andrews, S. A. Akhade, M.-S. Lee, K. Koh, U. Sanyal, S. F. Yuk, A. J. Karkamkar, M. A. Derewinski and J. Holladay, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9964–9972 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Iris, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 9239–9253 RSC .
Y. Gao, Q. Xue, J. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 14202–14209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Chadderdon, D. J. Chadderdon, J. E. Matthiesen, Y. Qiu, J. M. Carraher, J.-P. Tessonnier and W. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14120–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, R. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Liang, Y. Shi, R.-L. Li, Y. Ling, Y. Yu, J. Li and B. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 8958–8967 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, R. Wojcieszak, F. Dumeignil, E. Marceau and S. B. Royer, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11023–11117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hao, Y. Wu, C. Liu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 3095–3100 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Li, Y. Lu, S. Wang and Y. Zou, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 3142–3153 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weng, X. Lu, N. Ji, A. Fukuoka, A. Shrotri, X. Li, R. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. Xiong and Z. Yu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 7785–7806 RSC .
D. P. Duarte, R. Martínez and L. J. Hoyos, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 54–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Z. Yuan, R. Peng, S. Wang and Y. Zou, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, 5, 1117–1138 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Steinmann and Z. W. Seh, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 289–291 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo and G. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17516–17522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, J. Tan, Y. Chen, W. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 3103–3106 RSC .
G. Bharath and F. Banat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 24643–24653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Luo, J. Barrio, N. Sunny, A. Li, L. Steier, N. Shah, I. E. L. Stephens and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101180 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Xu, S.-M. Xu, Y. Ren, Y. Yan, J. Yang, K. Ji, L. Li, M. Xu, M. Shao, X. Kong, X. Sun and H. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Holade, N. Tuleushova, S. Tingry, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, H. Guesmi, D. Cornu and K. B. Kokoh, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 3071–3112 RSC .
A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7559–7567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8394–8400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barwe, J. Weidner, S. Cychy, D. M. Morales, S. Dieckhöfer, D. Hiltrop, J. Masa, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11460–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Giannakoudakis, J. C. Colmenares, D. Tsiplakides and K. S. Triantafyllidis, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 1970–1993 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4228–4254 RSC .
L. Liu, H. Liu, W. Huang, Y. He, W. Zhang, C. Wang and H. Lin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 804, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nilges and U. Schröder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2925–2931 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. Han, X. Lv, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2551–2582 CrossRef CAS .
B. Garlyyev, J. Fichtner, O. Piqué, O. Schneider, A. S. Bandarenka and F. Calle-Vallejo, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 8060–8075 RSC .
J. Li and N. Kornienko, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5127–5130 RSC .
P. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Tan, Y. Yang, Y. Jia, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 4032 RSC .
Z. Xia, Y. Li, J. Wu, Y.-C. Huang, W. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Pan, X. Yue, Y. Wang, C.-L. Dong, S. Y. Wang and Y. Q. Zou, Sci. China: Chem., 2022, 65, 2588–2595 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lopez-Ruiz, E. Andrews, S. A. Akhade, M. S. Lee, K. Koh, U. Sanyal, S. F. Yuk, A. J. Karkamkar, M. A. Derewinski, J. Holladay, V. A. Glezakou, R. Rousseau, O. Y. Gutierrez and J. D. Holladay, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9964–9972 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lopez-Ruiz, U. Sanyal, J. Egbert, O. Y. Gutiérrez and J. Holladay, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16073–16085 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, K. Huang, X. Qiu, W. Ge, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, C. Lian, H. Liu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Fundam. Res., 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.fmre.2022.01.016 .
Z. Yang, X. Chou, H. Kan, Z. Xiao and Y. Ding, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 7418–7425 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, Y. Huang, G. Zeng, F. M. Toma, W. A. Goddard and A. T. Bell, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1206–1214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Anibal and B. Xu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11643–11653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Anibal, A. Malkani and B. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 3181–3194 RSC .
X. Shang, Y. Yang and Y. Sun, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5395–5401 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Yang, J. Tan and Q. Gao, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 3116–3125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, A. N. Karaiskakis and E. J. Biddinger, Catal. Today, 2019, 323, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, C. Yu, J. Chen and Z. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 305, 121062 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Chen and Y. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8245–8249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, W. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lang, X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, K. Liu, B. Qiao, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11986–12043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Liu, Y. Huang, W. Zhou and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 5743–5757 RSC .
P. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Luan, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, S.-X. Guo, Q. Gu, B. Johannessen, M. Mollah and A. L. Chaffee, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3028–3038 RSC .
X. Bai, X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. Ling, Y. Zhou, J. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 17140–17148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, M. Tong, P. Yu, L. Wang, G. Zhang, C. Tian and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202211098 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, H. Qi, A. Li, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Zhang, Q. Zhao, Q. Jiang, Y. Su and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 12062–12071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Dixit, K. Bhattacharyya, V. K. Ramani and S. Basu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4201–4212 RSC .
P. Zhou, L. Li, V. S. S. Mosali, Y. Chen, P. Luan, Q. Gu, D. R. Turner, L. Huang and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202117809 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao and K. Sasaki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 1226–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, L. Yang and Q. Gao, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15944–15969 RSC .
Y. Zhong, R. Ren, Y. Peng, J. Wang, X. Ren, Q. Li and Y. Fan, Mol. Catal., 2022, 528, 112487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, K. J. P. Schouten, J. C. van der Waal, E. de Jong and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6704–6717 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, S. R. Kubota, A. N. Janes, M. T. Bender, J. Woo, J. R. Schmidt and K. S. Choi, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4563–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sanghez de Luna, P. H. Ho, A. Sacco, S. Hernández, J.-J. S. Velasco-Vélez, F. Ospitali, A. Paglianti, S. Albonetti, G. Fornasari and P. Benito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23675–23688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. de Luna, A. Sacco, S. Hernandez, F. Ospitali, S. Albonetti, G. Fornasari and P. Benito, ChemSusChem, 2022, e202102504 CAS .
H. Li, T. Zhang, M. Peng, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Fu and W. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 28904–28914 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ji, M. Xu, S. M. Xu, Y. Wang, R. Ge, X. Hu, X. Sun and H. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202209849 CAS .
M. Xiang, N. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Zhang and Z. Yan, ChemPlusChem, 2021, 86, 1307–1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, K. Qi, D. Wang, X. Dai and W. Qi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 6437–6443 RSC .
D.-H. Nam, B. J. Taitt and K.-S. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, H. Bai, H. Zhao, W. Fan and W. Shi, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 1545–1557 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Huang, T. Liu, L. Tao, J. Tian, K. Gu, X. Wei, P. Zhou, L. Gan and S. Du, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202115636 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, L. Tao, X. Zhu, C. Chen, W. Chen, S. Du, Y. Zhou, B. Zhou, D. Wang and C. Xie, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, N. Agrawal, A. Ganguly, Y. Chen, J. Lee, J. Yu, W. Huang, M. M. Wright, M. J. Janik and W. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4175–4189 RSC .
P. Zhou, X. Lv, S. Tao, J. Wu, H. Wang, X. Wei, T. Wang, B. Zhou, Y. Lu and T. Frauenheim, Adv. Mater., 2022, 2204089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Zhao, P. Xu, Z. Lv, X. Shi and H. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10181–10191 RSC .
J. Woo, B. C. Moon, U. Lee, H.-S. Oh, K. H. Chae, Y. Jun, B. K. Min and D. K. Lee, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 4078–4091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. Yu, G. Zeng, F. Bao, Y. Yuan and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9685–9691 RSC .
H. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Yao, Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Li, K. Chen, X. Lu, P. Ouyang and J. Fu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5797–5801 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Flores-Lasluisa, F. Huerta, D. Cazorla-Amorós and E. Morallón, Environ. Res., 2022, 214, 113731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S. Sun, C. Wei, Y. Sun, P. Xi, Z. Feng and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, Y. Qin, J. Du, F. Zhang and X. Lei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 11790–11797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang, Y. Zou, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, N. He, J. Shi and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19215–19221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Boukouvalas and N. Lachance, Synlett, 1998, 1998, 31–32 CrossRef .
P. Kumar and R. K. Pandey, Green Chem., 2000, 2, 29–32 RSC .
X. Li, B. Ho, D. S. W. Lim and Y. Zhang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 914–918 RSC .
H. Wu, J. Song, H. Liu, Z. Xie, C. Xie, Y. Hu, X. Huang, M. Hua and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4692–4698 RSC .
F. Marken, A. J. Cresswell and S. D. Bull, Chem. Rec., 2021, 21, 2585–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sbei, T. Hardwick and N. Ahmed, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 6148–6169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Han, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 899–908 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. van Deelen, C. H. Mejia and K. P. de Jong, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 955–970 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Meng, J. Zhu, M. Huang, B. Wen, R. Guo and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. U. Rao, J. Wang, D. Ren, S. Sirisommboonchai, C. Choi, H. Machida, Z. Huo and K. Norinaga, Fuel Process. Technol., 2022, 226, 107097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Wang, H. Chu, Y.-C. Chu and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1281–1291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
R. Zheng, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Xie and M. He, Joule, 2022, 6, 1148–1159 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dinca, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Meyer, I. Choi, C. Tian and L. Ackermann, Chem, 2020, 6, 2484–2496 CAS .
D. Pletcher, R. A. Green and R. C. D. Brown, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4573–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Jingwen Tan	Jingwen Tan is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Qingsheng Gao at the College of Chemistry and Materials, Jinan University. Her research interest focuses on noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for electrochemical refinery.
Qingsheng Gao	Qingsheng Gao is a Professor of Chemistry at Jinan University, Guangzhou. He received his B.S. degree in 2005 and Ph.D. degree in 2010 from Fudan University, and then he moved to Max-Planck Institute for Colloids and Interfaces in Germany to carry out his postdoctoral research. His current research interest focuses on cost-efficient nanostructures used in catalysis and energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the hydrogenation and oxidation of FF and HMF to high-value chemicals.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic conversion of furanic compounds derived from biomass.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration for the topic “Cu-based electrocatalysts for upgrading biomass-derived furanic compounds” of this review.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Diagram of ECH and DER mechanisms for biomass-derived furans. (b) Production rates of MF, FA, and hydrofuroin on Cu electrodes modified by thiols with various carbon chain lengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Typical chemisorption configurations of FF on the surface of metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of OER and ECO mechanisms in alkaline electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic oxidation pathways for HMF.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) Low, medium, and high-frequency regions of in situ SER spectra of FF reduction on the R-Cu surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Electrocatalytic performance of EP-Cu, AP-Cu, and OP-Cu: (d) FE and yield of FAL during the reaction time at −0.56 V vs. RHE. (e) Residual FF amount after 5 minutes of electrolysis and normalized FAL yield by roughness (rFOL,roughness) in 1 hour. (f) BEH and BEFF on p-Cu(111) and d-Cu(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2022, the Royal Society of Chemistry. ECH performance of FF on synergistic Cu0–Cu+ active sites: (g) analysis of the average oxidation state of Cu as obtained from Cu K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) in CuO nanowires with significantly increased potentials. (h) FF conversion with or without KSCN, and (i) schematic diagram of the hydrogenation pathway from FF to FAL on the Cu0–Cu+, pure Cu(111), and Cu2O(111) surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2022, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of ECH and DER pathways in a mixed benzaldehyde-FF reduction system.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Preparation process diagram, (b) N2 adsorption–desorption equivalent temperature curve of Cu/NC900 samples and (c) ECH performance of FF to FAL on Cu/NC900 samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Structural characterization of Cu1/PC SACs and the ECH performance of FF: (d) K-edge XANES spectrum of Cu and (e) corresponding Fourier transform. A balance of FE and carbon acquired (f) with various charge amounts consumed at −0.75 V vs. RHE and (g) after 10 C of charge were consumed at different applied potentials. Notably, the FA in these panels is the abbreviation of furfuryl alcohol and is equal to the FAL used in the context. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73 Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Equilibrium data of FE and carbon obtained after the electrolysis of FF (40 mM) in acetate buffer solution (0.1 M and pH 5) with (a) Cu/C and (b) CuPd0.021/C as electrocatalysts after consuming 10 C of charge. (c) Cu/C and CuPd0.021/C of potential-dependent in situ SERS spectra were obtained in an acetic acid solution (0.1 M and pH 2.9) containing 50 mM FF. As a function of applied potential, (d) normalized intensity of metal hydride (M-H) vibrations and (e) CO stretching vibrations on Cu/C and CuPd0.021/C. The degree of Stark tuning that the carbonyl functional group experienced was afforded by the slope of the linear regression (m). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  ECH performances on Ru1Cu SAA and Cu. FE and productivity of DHMF on (a) Cu and (b) Ru1Cu at a potential window ranging from −0.15 V to −0.5 V vs. RHE. (c and d) Various concentrations of HMF on Cu and Ru1Cu SAA at −0.5 V vs. RHE. Various HMF electrochemical reduction mechanisms on (e) Ru1Cu and (f) Cu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  HMF conversion and product distribution at (a) NCF and (b) plain Cu in KOH (0.1 M) containing 5 mM HMF, and (c) those achieved at the NCF electrode after five consecutive cycles. (d) Raman and (e) FTIR spectra of CF-Cu(OH)2 and activated CF-Cu(OH)2 samples. (f) Open circuit potential as a function of time to probe the longevity of CuOOH species with and without 10 mM HMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves on Cu/Cu foam electrodes for the ECO of FF with various transition metal-based hydroxides. (b) The concentration of organic compounds in the anode electrolyte as a function of time performed in the chronoamperometry test at 0.3 V vs. RHE on Cu/Cu foam. (c) Schematic diagram of the reaction pathway and (d) the corresponding free energy profile on the Cu(111) surface with low potential oxidation of FF. (e) Diagram of the assembled electrocatalytic system: low potential aldehyde oxidation for the anode reaction and cathodic reaction for the ORR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of CuO–PdO samples (orange circles denote PdO nanoparticles) and (b) normalized LSV curves with ECSA of CuO–PdO and CuO in 1 M KOH with 50 mM HMF. (c) FE of HMFOR and FDCA yields on CuO–PdO in cycle tests. In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of CuO and CuO–PdO (d and e) at different potentials and (f) along with reaction time at 1.3 V vs. RHE during HMFOR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  
In situ XANES spectra of Cu and Ni K-edge obtained from the electrochemical oxidation of FAC and FAD on (a) Cu(OH)2 and (c) NiOOH electrodes for in situ XAS analysis. (b) Corresponding LSV curves of Cu(OH)2 and NiOOH electrodes in the in situ XAS analysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Diagram of a paired electrolysis system comprising Cu3P/CFC and Ni2P/CFC and (b) its LSV curves compared with those of a water splitting system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Diagram of a paired electrolysis system with HMF and p-nitrophenol as substrates on CF-Cu(OH)2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 


FF (0.035 M)	Cu foil	0.1 M K2SO4/cyclohexane (pH 2), −0.73 V vs. RHE, 3 h, RT	FEFAL: 63.4%, YFAL: 56.5%; FE2-MF: 43.6%, Y2-MF: 19.4%	
39

FF (0.1 M)	Cu foil	0.1 M Na2CO3-NaHCO3 (pH 10), −1.4 V vs. SCE, 10 h, RT	FEFAL: 71.0%, SelFAL: 87.0%	
50

FF (0.05 M)	Cu gauze	0.5 M H2SO4/CH3CN, −10 mA cm−2, 2 h, 8 °C	Sel2-MF: 80.0%, SelFAL: 9.0%	
51

HMF (0.05 M)	0.5 M H2SO4/EtOH, −10 mA cm−2, 2 h, 8 °C	SelDMF: 35.6%, SelBHMF: 33.8%
FF (0.059 M)	Rough Cu foil	K2SO4 solution (pH 3), −0.426 V vs. RHE, 3 h, RT	FEFAL: 42%, FE2-MF: 58%	
54

FF (0.035 M)	O2 plasma Cu	0.25 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8), −0.56 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT	FEFAL: 91.0%, SelFAL ≈ 100%, YFAL: 70%	
55

FF (0.05 M)	CuO/Cu foam	1 M PBS solution, −0.20 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 38.6 C, RT	FEFAL: 91.5%, SelFAL: 100%, ConFF: 90%	
56

HMF (0.05 M)	ER Cu NW	0.5 M Na2SO4 solution, −40 mA cm−2, 4 h, RT	FEBHMF > 90%, SelBHMF ≈ 100%, ConHMF > 95%	
59

FF (0.05 M)	NP-Cu2	0.1 M PBS solution, −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h, RT	FEFAL: 95%, SelFAL: 96%, ConFF > 75%	
60

FF (0.02 M)	Cu foil	0.25 M PBS solution (pH 6.7), −0.50 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT	FEFAL > 20%, FEHydrofuroin ≈ 20%	
62

FF (0.01 M)	Cu foam	0.1 M KOH (pH 13), −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 2 h, charge reaches 28.8 C, RT	FEHydrofuroin > 40%, YHydrofuroin > 60%, ConFF > 90%	
64

FF (0.1 M)	Cu/Cu-400 nm	0.5 M H2SO4/CH3CN, −0.5 V vs. RHE, 1.5 h, RT	FE2-MF > 75%, product rate2-MF ≈ 1.0 μmol min−1 cm2, FEFAL > 20%, product rateFAL ≈ 0.6 μmol min−1 cm2	
66

FF (0.03 M)	15%-Cu/NC900	1.0 M KOH (pH 14), −1.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 4 h, RT	FEFAL > 95%, SelFAL ≈ 100%, ConFF: 99%	
67

FF (0.04 M)	Cu1/PC	0.1 M acetate buffer solution (pH 8), −0.75 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 10 C, RT	FEFAL > 90%, SelFAL > 90%	
73

FF (0.01 M)	NPNi/NF	0.5 M KOH, −0.45 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT	Formation rateFAL: 118.7 ± 8 μmol h −1 cm−2, SelFAL: 74.3%, ConFF: 75.2%	
77

FF (0.01 M)	CuPd0.021/C	0.1 M acetic acid solution (pH 2.9), −0.58 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 10 C, RT	FE2-MF: 75%	
78

HMF (0.02 M)	Ag@Cu NWAs/CF	0.5 M borate buffer (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, charge reaches 116 C, RT	FEBHMF: 96.5%, SelBHMF: 97.1%	
81

FF (0.02 M)	0.5 M borate buffer (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, charge reaches 116 C, RT	FEFAL: 96.1%, SelFAL: 96.6%
HMF (0.05 M)	Ag/Cu GD	0.5 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.2), −1.30 V vs. SCE, RT	FEBHMF > 80%, SelBHMF ≈ 87%, ConHMF ≈ 100%, product rateBHMF: 0.290 mmol cm−2 h−1	
84

HMF (0.05 M)	Ag/Cu GD	0.5 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.2), −0.51 V vs. RHE, RT	FEBHMF > 80%, SelBHMF: 60%, ConHMF ≈ 30%, product rateBHMF: 0.567 mmol cm−2 h−1	
85

HMF (0.01 M)	Ag1Cu1/PA	0.05 M borate buffer aqueous solution (pH 9.14), −0.52 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT	FEBHMF: 61.8%, SelBHMF: 94.1%, ConHMF ≈ 93.2%,	
86

HMF (0.02 M)	Ru1Cu SAA	0.5 M PBS solution, −0.3 V vs. RHE, 1 h, RT	FEBHMF: 85.6%, product rateBHMF: 0.47 mmol cm−2 h−1	
87



HMF (0.005 M)	Nanocrystalline Cu foam	0.1 M KOH, 1.62 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 41 C, RT	FEFDCA: 95.3%, YFDCA: 96.4%, ConHMF: 99.9%	
90

HMF (0.1 M)	CF-Cu(OH)2	1.0 M KOH, 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 6 h, RT	FEFDCA ≈ 100%, YFDCA: 98.7%	
91

FF (0.05 M)	Cu/Cu foam	1.0 M KOH, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 0.5 h, RT	FEFA ≈ 100%	
92

HMF (0.05 M)	Cu/Cu foam	1.0 M KOH, 0.3 V vs. RHE, 0.5 h, RT	FEHMFCA ≈ 100%, SelHMFCA ≈ 100%	
93

HMF (0.05 M)	CuO–PdO	1.0 M KOH, 1.35 V vs. RHE, 20 min, RT	FEFDCA: 93.7%, YFDCA: 96.2%, ConHMF: 99.5%	
95

HMF (0.02 M)	NiCu NTs	1.0 M KOH, 1.42 V vs. RHE, 2 h, RT	FEFDCA > 96.4%, YFDCA: 99.0%, ConHMF ≈ 100%	
96

HMF (0.005 M)	Cu(OH)2/NiOOH	0.1 M NaOH, 1.40 V vs. RHE, 4 h, RT	FEFDCA: 98.3%, YFDCA: 98.3%	
97

HMF (0.005 M)	Ni0.9Cu0.1(OH)2	1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 116 C, RT	FEFDCA: 91.2%, YFDCA: 91.2%, ConHMF ≈ 100%	
98

HMF (0.005 M)	CuNi(OH)2/C	1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, charge reaches 90 C, RT	FEFDCA: 94.4%, YFDCA: 93.3%, ConHMF: 98.8%	
99

HMF (0.01 M)	CuMn2O4–NH3-40	1.0 M KOH, 1.31 V vs. RHE, 6 h, RT	FEFDCA: 98.4%, ConHMF: 100%	
102

HMF (0.05 M)	CuCo2O4	1.0 M KOH, 1.45 V vs. RHE, RT	FEFDCA: 94.0%, YFDCA: 93.7%	
103

FF (1 mmol)	CuS	[Et3NH]NO3 (1.8 wt%)–MeCN–H2O (12.5 wt%), 1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 7 h, RT	ConFF: 70.2%, SelHFO: 83.6%	
107


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
