Plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA01450A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA01450A
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5790-5805Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPlasmon-enhanced chemical reactions

        
          
            Manda 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruibin 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Caihong 
            Fang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianfang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jimmy C. 
            Yu
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk
bDepartment of Chemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China
Received 
      11th December 2012
    , Accepted 25th January 2013First published on 25th January 2013AbstractThe emerging field of plasmonics with the capability to guide and localize light in the nanoscale regime has enabled technologies that can efficiently harvest and utilize solar energy for chemical processes. In this review, recent advances at the intersection of plasmonics and chemical reactions are surveyed. The origins of plasmonic enhancements in chemical reactions will be first discussed. The applications of localized plasmons in various chemical reactions, including photodecomposition of organic pollutants, solar water splitting, and organic synthesis, will then be summarized. We will also discuss the challenges that can expedite the progress of plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions.Manda XiaoMr Manda Xiao is a research assistant in Professor Jianfang Wang's group. He received his BS degree in polymer science and engineering from Fudan University in 2008 and his MPhil degree in materials science and engineering from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2010. His research interests focus on the design, synthesis, and assembly of noble metal nanocrystals and their applications in catalysis and solar energy conversion.Ruibin JiangMr Ruibin Jiang is currently a PhD student in physics in Professor Jianfang Wang's group in The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree in materials physics in 2007 and his MS degree in materials science and engineering in 2010 from China University of Petroleum. His current research interests include the localized plasmon resonances of noble metal nanocrystals and their applications in nanophotonics and photocatalysis.Feng WangDr Feng Wang is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Electrical Engineering of The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree in chemistry from Anhui University in 2005 and his MS degree in inorganic chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2008. He received his PhD degree in chemistry under the supervision of Professor Jimmy C. Yu from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2012. His research efforts are devoted to photocatalysis and polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells.Caihong FangMs Caihong Fang is currently a PhD student in Professor Jianfang Wang's group in The Chinese University of Hong Kong. She obtained her BS degree in materials chemistry in 2006 and her MS degree in materials physics and chemistry in 2009 from Anhui Normal University. She received her MPhil degree in materials science and engineering from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2011. Her research interests are noble metal nanocrystals and plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis.Jianfang WangDr Jianfang Wang, currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Physics of The Chinese University of Hong Kong, obtained his BS degree in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 1993 and his MS degree in inorganic chemistry from Peking University in 1996. He obtained his PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 2002. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara from February 2002 to July 2005. His current research interests include the plasmonic and catalytic properties of metal nanocrystals, plasmonic harvesting of solar energy, and nanostructured functional metal oxide materials.Jimmy C. YuDr Jimmy C. Yu received his PhD degree from the University of Idaho in 1985. He is now Professor of Chemistry and Associate Director of the Institute of Environment, Energy and Sustainability at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Dr Yu is widely recognized for his research on the design and fabrication of novel photocatalysts. He holds six patents on the preparation of photocatalytic nanomaterials for environmental and energy applications.
1 Introduction
As far back as ancient times, colloidal noble metal nanoparticles have attracted much attention due to their bright and fascinating colours. They were mostly used in staining glass and in dyeing fabrics for religious purposes.1–3 Nowadays the origin of the colours has been well understood to be associated with the unique capability of noble metal nanocrystals to support the collective oscillations of their conduction-band electrons, which are known as localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs). The LSPR properties of noble metal nanocrystals depend on several parameters, which include the shape, size, composition, and environment of the nanocrystals, and the inter-particle geometry and spacing of the oligomeric nanocrystal assemblies.4–6 On the basis of theoretical foundations developed since the 1900s, as well as the rapid advances in colloidal chemistry in the past decades, scientists have now been able to achieve unprecedented control over the dimensions, morphology, and assembly configuration of noble metal nanocrystals.7–13
Along with the increasing degree of control, the localized plasmons of noble metal nanocrystals are currently under intensive investigation from both fundamental and technological perspectives. Upon resonant excitation, the collective oscillations of the free electrons give rise to large local electric field enhancements, or in other words, strongly concentrated light intensities. The field intensity enhancements are maximal at the metal surface and decay exponentially away from the surface, as revealed in Fig. 1a with a Au nanosphere as an example. Fig. 1b shows the contour of the field intensity enhancement around a Au nanorod that has the same particle volume as the Au nanosphere, illustrating that the field intensity enhancements can be increased by using anisotropic metal nanocrystals. These intense electric field intensity enhancements surrounding metal nanocrystals are highly effective for amplifying a variety of optical signals, such as Raman scattering,14–25 fluorescence,26–33 high-harmonic generation,34,35 circular dichroism,36–38 and two-photon luminescence.39–41Fig. 1c illustrates the use of plasmons to enhance various optical processes. When an optically active species, such as a fluorescent dye molecule or a semiconductor nanocrystal, is placed in the near-field region of a plasmonic metal nanocrystal, the light absorption of the species can be increased, and the light-emission process can be modulated. Raman intensity enhancements up to 1014 to 1015 fold for molecules adsorbed on the surfaces of noble metal nanostructures have been reported, which allows for ultrasensitive characterization down to the single-molecule level.17,18 For plasmon-enhanced fluorescence, single-molecule fluorescence enhancements as high as 1340 fold have been reported in lithographically fabricated bowtie Au nanoantennas.33 Other characteristics of the fluorescence emission from molecular dyes, including polarization, spatial intensity distribution, and emission energy, can also be altered by localized plasmons.42 Plasmonic metal nanostructures have also been utilized as active components in optical devices, such as spasers,43–45 data storage,46–48 and photodetectors.49 In biotechnological applications, the large extinction cross sections and photothermal conversion efficiencies, in conjunction with the tailorable responsive wavelengths, of plasmonic metal nanocrystals have made them ideal candidates in labeling,50–52 sensing,53–56 drug delivery,57–60 and photothermal therapy.61–69 In harvesting solar energy, the incorporation of plasmonic metal nanocrystals in photovoltaic cells can result in strong light confinement and increased light absorption, which leads to the reduction of the physical thickness of the absorber layers in silicon solar cells and the increase in the power conversion efficiencies of polymer and dye-sensitized solar cells.70–82
 Fig. 1  (a and b) Finite-difference time-domain simulation results showing the contours of the electric field intensity enhancements around a Au nanosphere and a Au nanorod, respectively. The nanosphere has a diameter of 50 nm, and the nanorod has the same volume, with the length and diameter being 102 nm and 30 nm, respectively. The field intensity is plotted on a logarithmic scale, which applies for both the nanosphere and nanorod. (c) Schematic illustrating the utilization of a plasmonic nanocrystal to enhance the optical signal from a nearby molecular species. 
Noble metal nanocrystals have recently been found to play important roles in a number of chemical reactions, which range from solar water splitting and organic synthesis to photodecomposition of organic pollutants. Under resonant irradiation, the LSPRs of metal nanocrystals can strongly enhance reaction rates, as well as product selectivities.83–90 Moreover, the integration of plasmonic metal components with wide-band-gap semiconductors endows the composite materials with photocatalytic activities under visible light.91,92 In this review, we attempt to provide a brief overview of this flourishing field, where plasmonic metal nanocrystals are employed to enhance chemical reactions. We begin by describing the functional mechanisms of localized plasmons in different chemical reactions, followed by summarizing their recently demonstrated applications, and then discuss the related open questions and challenges. We note that there has been one review article published in 2011 in this field.93 In that article, the authors focus on plasmon-enhanced water splitting and related chemical reactions. The article is written from the perspective of chemical reactions and the role of involved LSPRs. In this article, we focus on the mechanisms of plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic reactions and the use of plasmon-involved photocatalysts in different applications. The article is written from the perspective of plasmonics and the applications of LSPRs in different photocatalytic chemical reactions.
2 Functional mechanisms of plasmons in chemical reactions
Plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions can generally be divided into two groups according to the type of applied catalyst. One group of reactions is based on hybrid materials composed of catalytically active semiconductors and plasmonic metal ingredients. If the plasmonic ingredients are used to enhance the light absorption of the semiconductors through a strong LSPR effect, catalytic reactions will mainly occur on the surfaces of the semiconductor catalysts. Moreover, if the semiconductor has a wide band gap, the integration of the plasmonic component can endow the former with photocatalytic activities under visible light through plasmonic sensitization, which is an electron-transfer process occurring at the metal–semiconductor interface under the excitation of the LSPR. In this case, both the electrons transferred to the semiconductor and the holes left in the metal can contribute to catalytic reactions. The other group of reactions is characterized by the direct catalytic effect on the surface of plasmonic metal nanocrystals under resonant excitation. We term this process as pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis. In pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis, reactions are mainly mediated by plasmonic local heating and plasmon-excitation-induced energetic electron injection into the unoccupied molecular orbitals in adsorbates. The mechanisms underlying plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions are discussed in more detail below.
2.1 Plasmonic enhancement of light absorption
As mentioned above, the near-field enhancement effect of localized plasmons can give rise to strongly amplified optical signals from molecular species. This effect can also be applied to semiconductor materials with their absorption spectrally overlapping with the plasmon resonance of metal nanocrystals. In a hybrid nanostructure consisting of a plasmonic metal nanocrystal and a semiconductor with overlapping absorption and plasmon resonance energies, the incident light excites the LSPR in the metal nanocrystal and electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor, simultaneously. The part of the semiconductor that is in the vicinity of the metal nanocrystal can feel a strong local field whose intensity is several orders of magnitude higher than that of the far-field incident light (Fig. 2a). Because the electron–hole pair formation rate is proportional to the local field intensity, the concentration of the charge carriers formed in this part of the semiconductor is therefore strongly enhanced (Fig. 2a).94 The plasmon-excitation-induced electric field enhancements are known from previous studies to decay nearly exponentially away from the metal surface and extend up to 10–50 nm, depending on the nanocrystal size and shape.42,74 Therefore, within this spacing range, the formation rate of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor can be enhanced. On the other hand, we note that some researchers have employed resonance energy transfer to explain the enhanced formation rate of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor.95 In this explanation, the energy-transfer process is thought to be similar to Förster resonance energy transfer, which typically occurs among fluorescent dye molecules and/or luminescent semiconductor nanocrystals. The plasmonic metal nanocrystal acts as a donor. It absorbs light energy and transfers it resonantly to the semiconductor, which acts as an acceptor. We believe that more experiments that are carefully designed will be needed to differentiate the plasmon-enhanced light absorption from the resonance energy transfer for the enhanced formation rate of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor. In the following, we will simply treat this mechanism as plasmon-enhanced light absorption.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrating the three functional mechanisms of plasmons in chemical reactions. (a) Plasmonic enhancement of light absorption. (b) Plasmonic sensitization. (c and d) Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis. VB and CB represent the valence band and the conduction band of the semiconductor, respectively. EF is the Fermi level at equilibrium. red and ox stand for the reduced and oxidized forms of the redox species, respectively. Evacuum is the vacuum energy level. 
In plasmon-enhanced light absorption, the plasmonic metal nanocrystal acts as a light energy processor, which effectively concentrates incident photon energy in the LSPR and transfers it to adjacent optical species through near-field interaction. This plasmonic light concentration effect can be highly effective for enhancing light absorption in thin film photoelectrodes for water splitting, where the absorption layer thickness is usually sacrificed because of the limited carrier diffusion lengths in most photoelectrode materials.87,88,96,97 In addition to the near-field enhancement, the large scattering cross sections of plasmonic metal nanocrystals also contribute to the increased light absorption in semiconductors through the scattering of incident photons.74 Multiple scattering of incident light by plasmonic metal nanocrystals inside metal–semiconductor composite materials can largely increase the effective optical path length, therefore promoting light absorption in semiconductors.
To maximize the plasmonic enhancement of light absorption in semiconductor materials, perfect spectral overlap among the illumination light source, the absorption of the semiconductor, and the LSPR of the metal nanocrystal is highly desired, no matter whether the light absorption of the semiconductor is a linear or nonlinear process. The spatial geometry arrangement of metal and semiconductor building blocks is also important, because the plasmon-excitation-induced local electric field enhancement is strongly dependent on the shape of the metal nanocrystal and the distance away from the surface of the metal nanocrystal. The guidance for the construction of such metal–semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts has been discussed recently.93,98
2.2 Plasmonic sensitization
Plasmonic sensitization refers to a novel plasmon-driven charge separation process that occurs at the interface between a wide-band-gap semiconductor and an intimately integrated plasmonic metal nanocrystal (Fig. 2b). Most oxide semiconductors employed in photocatalysis are n-type. When they are in contact with noble metals, the thermal equilibration of the Fermi level causes the downward bending of the conduction band of the semiconductor. Therefore a potential barrier, the Schottky barrier, forms. This barrier blocks the electron transfer from the metal to the semiconductor. However, under resonant excitation of the LSPR of the metal nanocrystal, a population of energetic electrons that are not in thermal equilibrium with the lattice of the metal nanocrystal will be generated.49,99–101 The fraction of electrons with energies higher than the Schottky barrier can cross the barrier and inject into the conduction band of the semiconductor. This charge transfer process is similar to the dye sensitization process in dye-sensitized solar cells. We would also point out that the direction of this electron transfer process is opposite to that in conventional semiconductor photocatalysts that are integrated with metal nanoparticle cocatalysts. In the latter case, the metal nanoparticle cocatalyst acts as an electron sink. The electrons generated upon light excitation transfer from the conduction band to the metal nanoparticle.102–104 The electron transfer from the semiconductor to the metal and that from the metal to the semiconductor, i.e., plasmonic sensitization, occur under different light excitation situations. When the semiconductor is excited at photon energies higher than its band gap, the excited electrons in the conduction band have the possibility of transferring to the metal. On the contrary, when the plasmon resonance of the metal is excited, the plasmon-excitation-induced hot electrons in the metal have the probability of overcoming the Schottky barrier and injecting into the conduction band of the semiconductor. The probability of electron transfer from the metal to the semiconductor is determined by the energy of the hot electrons and the height of the Schottky barrier. The Schottky barrier is in turn determined by the work function of the metal and the Fermi level of the semiconductor. In addition, the potential barrier for electron transfer from the semiconductor to the metal is generally smaller than the Schottky barrier, because the Fermi level is usually below the conduction band edge (Fig. 2b). In the majority of the related studies to date, the band gap energy of the semiconductor is larger than the plasmon resonance energy of the metal. However, when the band gap is very close to the plasmon resonance energy, or when the excitation light is broadband, the competition of the two electron-transfer processes will depend on the barrier heights and the relative excitation light intensities for the semiconductor and the plasmon resonance of the metal.
As a result of the plasmonic sensitization process, a wide-band-gap semiconductor that is originally inactive under visible light obtains extra electrons and can therefore perform catalytic reduction reactions.91,92 On the other hand, the holes left in the metal nanocrystal have a mild oxidation ability, which can be utilized for chemoselective oxidation of organic molecules.89,90 The separated charges can also be collected as photocurrents for photodetection and photovoltaics.102,105–107 Such a charge separation process has received great interest in recent years.108–111 Although experimental evidence for such a charge separation process has been accumulated, the detailed mechanism of the electron transfer is still under debate at present.108,112–114 More studies will be needed to unravel the mechanism and understand the pivotal factors that affect the plasmonic sensitization process so that the efficiency of this process can be improved.
2.3 Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis
Pure plasmonic metal nanocrystals can also function as catalysts for chemical reactions. The excitation of LSPRs under light irradiation has been found to be able to enhance the rates of catalytic chemical reactions. Two mechanisms have been proposed and ascertained. They are plasmonic heating and hot electron transfer. The former is realized through the photothermal conversion of plasmonic metal nanocrystals, which results from the decay of LSPRs through electron–phonon relaxation and subsequent thermalization of lattice phonons.64 Under resonant excitation of pulsed laser light, the local temperature on the surface of plasmonic metal nanocrystals can be raised up to ∼500 °C, which creates an ideal substrate for thermal reactions.115 The latter is a photoinduced electron transfer process, which is similar to plasmonic sensitization (Fig. 2c). In this process, the hot electrons generated by plasmon excitation inject into an available molecular orbital, usually the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), to form transient anions (Fig. 2d).86,93,116 The injection of hot electrons into the LUMO of the adsorbate results in the weakening and stretching of the original chemical bond in order to lower the energy of the formed transient anions.86 The subsequent decay of the transient anions and the back transfer of the injected electrons into the metal nanocrystal deposit energy into the molecular vibrational modes. The average time for molecular vibrational energy to dissipate on metal surfaces is on the order of picoseconds, which is long enough to allow for typical chemical transformations.117 If the deposited energy is sufficient to overcome the activation barrier required for the dissociation of the adsorbates, chemical transformations can then occur.86,93 In addition, electron transfer in the opposite direction can also occur if a hot hole in the metal nanocrystal attacks an occupied molecular orbital.118–120
3 Plasmons in different reactions
In this section, major experimental studies applying LSPRs for enhancing chemical reactions are summarized. They focus mainly on the photodecomposition of organic pollutants, photocatalytic water splitting, and the synthesis of organic molecules. Other reactions, such as plasmon-enhanced CO oxidation, photooxidation of alcohol, as well as plasmon-mediated high-temperature reactions, will also be briefly discussed.
3.1 Photodecomposition of organic pollutants
Decomposing pollutants by photocatalysis is an economical and effective means for water disinfection and air purification.121–123 Conventional photocatalytic materials for photodecomposition are mainly based on wide-band-gap metal oxide semiconductors, which only show high catalytic activities under ultraviolet (UV) light and suffer from rapid electron–hole recombination.121,122 Great efforts have been made to overcome these issues. For example, the light absorption of wide-band-gap semiconductors can be extended to the visible region by doping the semiconductors with nitrogen, carbon, and transition metals.124–126 The electron–hole recombination can be suppressed by depositing metal nanoparticles on the surface of the semiconductors.103,104 The photocatalytic activities can also be enhanced by controlling the crystalline structures and tailoring the exposed crystalline facets.127,128
The integration of plasmonic metal nanocrystals with wide-band-gap semiconductors and the utilization of the attractive features of LSPRs represents a promising alternative to the methods mentioned above. Plasmonic metal nanocrystals can enhance the electron–hole pair formation rate in semiconductor photocatalysts through plasmon-enhanced light absorption or endow wide-band-gap semiconductors with visible-light photocatalytic activities through plasmonic sensitization. On the basis of these functional mechanisms, many noble metal-incorporated photocatalysts have been designed and prepared in recent years (Fig. 3).129–156 The recent reports on the photodegradation of organic compounds by use of various noble metal-contained photocatalysts are summarized in Table 1. Awazu et al. described the utilization of Ag–silica core–shell nanostructures to enhance the charge carrier formation in TiO2 films (Fig. 3a).130 The photodecomposition rate of methylene blue (MB) on such films was increased by a factor of 7 under near-UV illumination. The silica shell was found to play an important role in the photocatalytic reaction by preventing the oxidation of the Ag core, as well as controlling the spacing between the Ag core and TiO2. Kumar et al. investigated the effect of the silica layer thickness on the overall photocatalytic performance of (Ag nanoparticle)–(TiO2 thin film) hybrid systems by use of atomic layer deposition to achieve high-resolution film thickness control of SiO2 and TiO2 layers.131 The hybrid system with a 2 nm SiO2 interlayer exhibited the best photocatalytic performance, suggesting that the plasmonic near-field enhancement effect plays a dominant role. On the basis of the same principle, Au–Ag core–shell nanorods were utilized to enhance the light absorption of Pt/n-Si/Ag heterostructured nanowires, which consisted of a nanoscale Schottky photodiode (Pt/n-Si) with two catalysts (Pt and Ag) and a SiO2 sheath (Fig. 3b).132 The decoration of the Au–Ag nanorods onto the outer shell of the photodiodes resulted in a 3-fold enhancement in the degradation rate of nitrobenzene (NB) in comparison to the photodiodes alone.
 Fig. 3  Representative plasmon-assisted photocatalysts used for decomposing organic pollutants. (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the cross section of a sandwich structure composed of a top TiO2 film, a middle layer of Ag–SiO2 core–shell nanostructures, and a SiO2 substrate. (b) TEM image of a Pt/n-Si/Ag photodiode decorated with Au–Ag core–shell nanorods. The inset shows the image of an individual nanorod on the surface of the photodiode. (c) TEM image of a KNbO3 nanowire decorated with Au nanoparticles. (d) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Ag–AgCl hybrid nanostructures. (e) TEM image of Ag–C core–shell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, 132 and 155. Copyright 2008, 2011 American Chemical Society and 2009 Elsevier. 
Table 1 Recent studies on the utilization of plasmon-assisted photocatalysts for degrading organic pollutants




Photocatalyst
Pollutant
Mechanism
Main result
Ref.





a @ denotes a core–shell structure.
b RhB is rhodamine B.
c MO is methyl orange.
d 2-CP is 2-chlorophenol.





Ag/TiO2
MB
Plasmon-enhanced absorption
Degradation rate 3.8 times larger than that on TiO2 alone

129



Ag@SiO2/TiO2a
MB
Plasmon-enhanced absorption
Degradation rate 5 times larger than that on TiO2 alone

130



Ag/SiO2/TiO2
MB
Plasmon-enhanced absorption
Degradation rate 2.3 times larger than that on TiO2 alone

131



Au@Ag/Pt/n-Si/Ag
NB
Plasmon-enhanced absorption
Degradation rate 3 times larger than that without Au@Ag

132



SiO2@TiO2/Au
MB
Plasmonic sensitization
Stable and recyclable visible-light photocatalytic activity

133



Ag/TiO2/graphene
MB
Plasmonic sensitization
Good recyclability under visible light

134



Ag/TiO2
RhBb
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 2 times larger than that of P25

135



Ag/TiO2
MB
Plasmonic sensitization
Enhanced near-UV photocatalytic activity

136



SiO2/Au/TiO2
RhB
Plasmonic sensitization
100% decomposition of RhB within 40 min under sunlight

137



Pt/TiO2
MOc
Plasmonic sensitization
Enhanced photocatalytic activities under both UV and visible light

138



Au/KNbO3
RhB
Plasmonic sensitization
Reaction rate constant 15 times larger than that of KNbO3

139



Ag/AgCl
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 8 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2

140



Ag/AgBr
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 1.5 times larger than that on Ag/AgCl, much larger than that on N-doped TiO2

141



AgCl@Ag
MB
Plasmonic sensitization
Good stability and recyclability under visible light

142



Ag/AgX
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Photocatalytic activity 30 times higher than that on TiO2

143



AgCl/Au
MB
Plasmonic sensitization
Stable and visible-light-responsive

144



Ag/AgBr
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
83% MO decomposed within 2 min under sunlight

145



Ag/AgCl
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
95% MO degraded within 2 h

146



Ag/AgCl
RhB
Plasmonic sensitization
Complete degradation of 10 mg L−1 MO within 15 min

147



Ag/AgCl
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 2 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2

148



Ag/AgCl
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Photocatalyst recycled 19 times without the loss of the activity

149



Ag/AgCl
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
96% MO degraded within 18 min

150



Ag/AgCl/TiO2
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 3 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2

151



Ag/AgI/Al2O3
2-CPd
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rates 49 and 22 times larger than those on AgI/Al2O3 and N-doped TiO2

152



Ag/AgBr/Al2O3
2-CP
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 10 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2

153



Ag/AgX/graphene
MO
Plasmonic sensitization
Degradation rate 3 times larger than that on Ag/AgX alone

154



Ag@carbon
RhB
Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis
Degradation rate 6 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2

155



Au/metal oxide
HCHO
Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis
64% HCHO oxidized under visible light, no reaction without light irradiation

156





When plasmonic metal nanocrystals are in direct contact with semiconductor catalysts, photocatalytic decomposition reactions can be induced by plasmonic sensitization. Noble metal nanocrystal-sensitized TiO2 composites constitute a large group of plasmon-assisted photocatalysts utilizing this strategy.133–138 Kochuveedu et al. prepared SiO2–TiO2 core–shell nanospheres that were decorated with Au nanoparticles at high densities for MB photodegradation.133 Under resonant excitation, the generated hot electrons injected into the conduction band of TiO2 and produced superoxide radicals with oxygen. The superoxide radicals thereafter caused the photodecomposition reaction. In addition, the integration of metal nanocrystal-sensitized TiO2 composites with graphene sheets can further facilitate charge transfer owing to the excellent electrical conductance of graphene.134 The sensitization effect was also observed in other wide-band-gap semiconductor materials, such as KNbO3 and silver halides (Fig. 3c and d).139–154 Among them, silver halides sensitized with Ag nanocrystals have so far received the greatest interest because of their extraordinary photocatalytic activities and superior stability under visible light.140–154 In this type of photocatalyst, Ag nanoparticles absorb visible light owing to their LSPRs. The plasmon-excitation-induced holes are hypothesized to transfer into AgCl (or AgBr) and oxidize Cl− (or Br−) ions into Cl (or Br) atoms. The electrons left on the Ag nanoparticles are hypothesized to react with O2 to produce superoxide radicals. The superior photocatalytic activities are therefore attributed to the strong oxidizing abilities of the Cl (or Br) atoms formed on the AgCl (or AgBr) side and the superoxide radicals formed on the Ag nanoparticle side.140 However, there has been no direct evidences confirming the charge carrier flow between the Ag nanoparticles and AgCl (or AgBr) under plasmon excitation. More experiments need to be designed and performed to elucidate the underlying photocatalytic mechanisms for these types of photocatalysts.
In addition, visible light-driven photodecomposition of organic molecules on unconventional catalysts such as Ag–C core–shell nanostructures (Fig. 3e) and ZrO2-supported Au nanoparticles has also been reported recently.155,156 For these photocatalysts, the photocatalytic activities have been tentatively thought to result from plasmon-excitation-induced heat and hot holes.
3.2 Solar water splitting
The production of fuels from sunlight has been widely thought of as one potentially viable means for the development of a sustainable energy system.157–160 Hydrogen is the simplest and most attractive fuel for production because of its high energy capacity and environmental friendliness. Photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical water splitting using semiconductor materials, first demonstrated by Fujishima and Honda in the early 1970s, has attracted enormous attention due to its great potential for resolving environmental and energy issues.161 For proof-of-concept demonstrations of solar water splitting, two major systems are often adopted. One is heterogeneous photocatalysis using powdered photocatalysts (Fig. 4a). In such a system, semiconductor powders in various shapes and sizes are dispersed in a water pool. Upon irradiation with photons with a larger energy than the band gap of the semiconductor, electron–hole pairs are generated in the semiconductor. After dissociation, the photogenerated electrons and holes diffuse to the respective catalytically active sites on the semiconductor surface to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. To facilitate the water splitting reactions, the bottom level of the conduction band should be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V relative to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)) while the top level of the valence band should be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V relative to NHE). Theoretically, a band gap of 1.23 V is therefore required to drive the water splitting reactions. However, in reality, semiconductors with much larger band gap energies are often utilized due to the requirements of the overpotentials for both the reducing and oxidizing reactions.162,163
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrating two main system configurations for solar water splitting. (a) Powdered photocatalysts. (b) Photoelectrochemical cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
An alternative design employs photoelectrochemical cells that contain electrodes made of semiconductors and cocatalysts to execute the water splitting reactions (Fig. 4b). The H2 and O2 evolution half reactions can occur separately on two different electrodes. This allows for wider choices of semiconductors, because each semiconductor electrode needs only to have either a sufficiently negative conduction band edge or a sufficiently positive valence band edge. Moreover, the kinetics of each half reaction can be facilely examined at each electrode. The performances of the two configurations with various semiconductors and cocatalysts have been discussed in a number of comprehensive reviews.163–165
Two important considerations in developing efficient photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical cells for solar water splitting are the broadening of light absorption to the visible range and the inhibition of the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. Recent studies have shown that the introduction of LSPRs can greatly help in tackling these issues.91,92,166,167 Silva et al. reported that P25 titania loaded with Au nanoparticles exhibited photocatalytic activity for water splitting under visible light.92 Photogeneration of hydrogen was observed under either a filtered polychromatic light or monochromatic laser excitation (Fig. 5a). In contrast, a negligible amount of hydrogen was produced with TiO2 only. The visible-light photocatalytic activity was ascribed to the electron transfer from Au nanoparticles to TiO2, i.e., plasmonic sensitization. The proposed mechanism has also been confirmed by several other reports.166,167 In the exploration of plasmon-enhanced light absorption, Ingram and Linic investigated the enhancement of the water splitting rate on N-doped TiO2 with Ag nanostructures.85 The metal and semiconductor nanoparticles were physically mixed together. The stabilizing molecules around the metal nanostructures precluded the direct electron transfer between the metal and N-doped TiO2 nanoparticles, allowing only the resonant enhancement of light absorption inside the semiconductor. At a bias of 0.3 V, stoichiometric amounts of H2 and O2 were produced under visible light (Fig. 5b). The addition of plasmonic Ag nanostructures to N-doped TiO2 nanoparticles resulted in an increase in the amounts of evolved gases by ∼10 fold, while the introduction of Au nanoparticles only led to a slight increase because of the spectral mismatch between the LSPR and semiconductor light absorption (Fig. 5c). Torimoto et al. studied the spacing-dependent enhancement of the water splitting rate using hybrid photocatalysts composed of Au nanoparticle cores and adsorbed CdS nanoparticles, separated by an insulating SiO2 layer of varying thickness.168 A thicker SiO2 layer of 17 nm was found to give rise to a larger enhancement of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, while a thinner SiO2 layer of 2.8 nm actually reduced the performance of the hybrid photocatalyst (Fig. 5d). The authors reasoned that the reduced photocatalytic activity of the thinner SiO2 layer is caused by Förster-type energy transfer from the semiconductor nanoparticle to the Au nanoparticle. In addition, plasmonic nanoparticles have also been utilized to enhance the photocatalytic performance of Fe2O3 photoelectrodes.87,88 One major limitation of Fe2O3 for solar water splitting is its poor charge carrier transport, with a minority carrier diffusion length of less than 20 nm.96,97 Moreover, its absorption in the visible range is also weak, with an absorption length of 0.1–1 μm at 500–600 nm.88 These obstacles can be largely alleviated by utilizing the strong local field enhancements of plasmonic nanoparticles. Thomann et al. reported plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic water splitting on Fe2O3 thin films with silica-coated Au nanoparticles that were either embedded inside or placed on top of the film surface.88 The highest photocurrent enhancement was observed in the particle-on-top configuration, which gave rise to a maximum enhancement of ∼11 fold at 590 nm along with a broadband enhancement of ∼8 fold (Fig. 5e and f). The former was ascribed to plasmon-enhanced light absorption on the basis of the spectral overlap between the photocurrent enhancement and the simulated absorption spectrum, while the latter was considered to result from the interplay between the plasmonic and multilayer interference effects.
 Fig. 5  (a) Hydrogen evolved during the photocatalytic reactions using TiO2 and Au (1.5 wt%)/TiO2 as the catalysts and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a sacrificial electron donor under 532 nm laser irradiation and polychromatic light (λ > 400 nm). Solid squares: Au/TiO2, λ = 532 nm; solid circles: Au/TiO2, λ > 400 nm; hollow squares: TiO2, λ = 532 nm; hollow circles: TiO2, λ > 400 nm. (b) Gas evolution upon visible light illumination of N-doped TiO2 and Ag/N-doped TiO2 photocatalysts. (c) Photocurrent responses of N-doped TiO2 with or without metal nanoparticles upon illumination with a broadband visible light source. (d) Hydrogen evolution with the photocatalysts of CdS–SiO2 and CdS–SiO2/Au–SiO2 core–shell nanostructures with SiO2 layer thicknesses of 17 nm and 2.8 nm on a Au core. The experiments were performed by light irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 350 nm). (e) Measured photocurrent (red diamonds) and simulated absorption (blue curve) enhancement of thin film Fe2O3 photoelectrode with silica-coated Au nanoparticles on the top. The samples are shown schematically in the inset. (f) SEM image of the top surface of the sample used for the data in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 85, 88, 92 and 168. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Synthesis of organic molecules
Although the degradation of organic pollutants and the production of hydrogen from water through photocatalysis have been studied extensively, photocatalytic reactions under visible light in the area of organic chemistry have so far received much less attention. In addition, semiconductor photocatalysts capable of efficient photodegradation and water splitting usually have high oxidation potentials. This limits their applications in the catalytic synthesis of some fine chemicals, where partially oxidized products are often preferred.169,170 Recently, a number of studies have been devoted to the mild oxidation ability of Au nanoparticles supported on metal oxides. Among different studies along this direction, selective aerobic oxidation of alcohol to carbonyl compounds with O2 as an oxidant has attracted a great deal of attention from the viewpoint of green chemistry.89,90,171–174 Naya et al. reported the chemoselective oxidation of cinnamyl alcohol by TiO2-supported Au nanoparticles (Fig. 6a).89 Under UV light irradiation, cinnamyl alcohol was oxidized nonselectively. In contrast, visible light irradiation yielded the partially oxidized products cinnamaldehyde and cinnamic acid with 90% and 10% selectivities, respectively. The good resemblance between the action spectrum of the initial rate −(dE/dt)0 and the absorption spectrum of the Au/TiO2 catalyst clearly indicates that the excitation of the LSPR of the Au nanoparticles is the driving force for the partial oxidation of cinnamyl alcohol (Fig. 6b). In a recent study, Tsukamoto et al. found that small Au nanoparticles, with diameters less than 5 nm, located at the interface between anatase and rutile TiO2 particles were the most active sites for the aerobic oxidation of 1-phenylethanol.90 Moreover, electron spin resonance study confirmed that electrons were transferred from photoactivated Au nanoparticles to TiO2, which subsequently led to the formation of peroxo-type oxygen anions (O–O−) on the surface of TiO2.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the Au/TiO2 catalyst used for the chemoselective oxidation of cinnamyl alcohol. (b) Action spectrum of −(dE/dt)0 and the diffuse reflectance spectrum of the Au/TiO2 catalyst. F(R∞) denotes the Kubelka–Munk function. (c) Acetophenone conversion as a function of the number of laser pulses per liquid drop. (d) Acetophenone (solid circles) and benzaldehyde (hollow circles) conversion as a function of the LED photoexcitation time. (e) Rate of ethylene epoxidation on Ag nanostructures at 450 K in the dark and under visible light irradiation. (f) Rate of ethylene epoxidation as a function of the light source intensity. The dashed line is a linear fit to the experimental data. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, 89 and 175. Copyright 2010, 2011 American Chemical Society and 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
Visible light-driven selective oxidation reactions were also observed on bare metal nanoparticles. Hallett-Tapley et al. studied the selective oxidation of sec-phenethyl and benzyl alcohols by H2O2 in liquid droplets using 15 nm Au nanoparticles as the photocatalyst.175 Different energy sources, including a pulsed laser (532 nm), a light-emitting diode (LED, 530 nm), and microwave irradiation were utilized. When the pulsed laser (Fig. 6c) or microwave irradiation were used, the maximum percentages of the conversion to acetophenone from sec-phenethyl alcohol were lower than those obtained with the LED (Fig. 6d). The latter reached up to ∼95%. The oxidation mechanism was thought to involve both plasmonic photothermal conversion and plasmon-excitation-induced hot electron transfer from the Au nanoparticles to H2O2, i.e., pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis. The plasmon excitation caused the formation of HO·, HOO·, and ketyl radicals, which were key intermediates in the reaction pathway. In addition, Christopher et al. showed that Ag nanostructures under low-intensity visible light can catalyze oxidation reactions, such as ethylene epoxidation, CO oxidation, and NH3 oxidation.86 Visible light irradiation was found to increase the reaction rate of ethylene epoxidation by 4 fold, although the reaction temperature was kept the same (Fig. 6e). A linear dependence of the photoinduced reaction rate on the irradiation light intensity was further revealed (Fig. 6f). This linear dependence signifies a plasmon-excitation-induced, hot-electron-driven chemical process. Moreover, enhanced photooxidation ability for a ruthenium(II) complex was observed when the molecular photocatalyst was anchored on the surface of silica-coated Ag nanoparticles. The large field enhancement around the metal nanoparticles was found to boost the excitation of the molecules to the singlet metal-to-ligand charge-transfer state, which enhances the photooxidation activity.176
3.4 Other reactions
In addition to the three major fields of applications, plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions have also been demonstrated in a wide range of reactions including photoreduction of nitroaromatic compounds, elemental sulphur, O2, CO2, ferricyanide, and graphene oxide, as well as the mineralization of alcohol and organic acids.113,176–184 Hung et al. showed plasmonic enhancement in CO oxidation reaction using a Au nanoparticle/Fe2O3 composite as a catalyst in a microreactor.83 The laser excitation of the LSPR of the Au nanoparticles strongly enhanced the CO oxidation rate in the presence of the composite catalyst, as evidenced by the quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) signal of CO2 (Fig. 7a). The separate use of Au or Fe2O3 nanoparticles as the catalysts, however, resulted in negligible photocatalytic activities. Moreover, the laser-induced catalytic activity was found to be at least 2–3-fold higher than that obtained by uniform heating (Fig. 7b), suggesting that this reaction is not driven solely by the photothermal heating of the Au nanoparticles, but relies on the interaction of the two materials, possibly assisted by plasmon-excitation-induced hot electrons.
 Fig. 7  (a) QMS signals of CO2 during the laser-induced CO oxidation reactions on the different catalysts. (b) Comparison of the average CO2 QMS signals obtained between laser irradiation and uniform heating. (c) Schematic illustrating the plasmon-assisted steam reforming process in a side view. The arrows indicate the direction of fluid flow. A 532 nm laser is focused on the top of the support to excite the plasmon resonance of the Au nanoparticles. The heat generated in the nanoparticles is transferred to the surrounding fluid and causes the formation of water vapour. The vapour molecules react on the surface of the Au nanoparticles to produce gas bubbles. The gas bubbles, after getting large enough, are carried downstream by the flowing fluid. (d) Variation of the partial pressures of the different gases versus time from the steam reforming reaction shown in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 and 185. Copyright 2009, 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Adleman et al. utilized the photothermal conversion properties of Au nanoparticles to perform miniaturized endothermic chemical reactions in microfluidic chips (Fig. 7c).185 Plasmonic heating can be highly concentrated186 and very efficient for locally generating the vapours of reactants over the catalyst, while keeping the chip and the fluid away from the catalyst at room temperature. Under laser excitation, the surface temperature of the Au nanoparticles was high enough to promote the steam reforming of ethanol and water vapours. Products, including CO2, CO, and H2, were detected by the residual gas analyzer (Fig. 7d). When the reaction time was long enough, even carbon was observed to be deposited near the laser focus. Similarly, Fasciani et al. demonstrated the plasmon-assisted thermal decomposition of dicumyl peroxide at room temperature.115 The reaction was finished in less than 1 min under 532 nm laser excitation. On the basis of this result, the authors estimated that peroxide molecules were exposed to temperatures of ∼500 °C for a time period of submicroseconds. However, there was no direct evidence showing whether this decomposition reaction was solely driven by the photothermal effect or assisted simultaneously by plasmon-excitation-induced hot electron transfer.
4 Conclusion and outlook
Integration of LSPRs into catalysis allows for the design of new photocatalytic systems. In this review, we have introduced different routes for utilizing LSPRs for accelerating chemical reactions and summarized the recent advances in the applications of plasmon-assisted photocatalysis. The exciting developments in this active field have opened up new pathways for the efficient transformation of solar energy into storable chemical energy. However, to unravel the full potential of LSPRs, several challenges need to be overcome in the near future.
Firstly, the electron transfer processes from metals to semiconductors in plasmonic sensitization and from metals to adsorbed molecules in pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis have not been fully understood. For the metal–semiconductor interface, whether the electron transfer from metals to semiconductors is driven by the interband transitions in the metal or through plasmon-excitation-induced hot electron tunnelling is still ambiguous.108,112 For the metal–adsorbate interface, we should also ask whether the formation of transient anions is due to the direct excitation of the metal–adsorbate complex or through an indirect multistep process, which consists of plasmon-excitation-induced hot electron generation and subsequent injection into the LUMO of the adsorbate molecule. More experimental and theoretical efforts on the elaboration of these processes are strongly desired, as the understanding of these will greatly help to optimize the plasmonic enhancement effects by judiciously choosing appropriate metal nanostructures and semiconductors and designing suitable hybrid structures.
Secondly, plasmonic metal nanocrystals that possess a non-negligible fraction of absorption in the total extinction can efficiently absorb light and convert it into heat. This plasmonic photothermal conversion can usually cause a local temperature increase around metal nanocrystals. Since reaction rate constants are exponential functions of temperature, the plasmon-excitation-induced local temperature increase will almost always accelerate chemical reactions. How to measure the local temperature on the surface of metal nanocrystals has remained a great challenge. Experimental means are highly desired for accurately and reliably measuring the local temperature on the surface of metal nanocrystals. On the basis of the local temperature measurements, approaches and experiments need to be designed to separate quantitatively the contributions to the catalytic activity among plasmonic photothermal conversion, plasmon-enhanced light absorption, plasmonic sensitization and photocatalysis.
Thirdly, in plasmon-involved chemical reactions, simple and efficient synthetic protocols that can give precise structural control over the geometries and relative arrangements of the metal and semiconductor nanocrystals in the hybrid photocatalysts are crucial. In addition, specific assembly techniques that enable maximum exposure of the metal components to light irradiation are also desired to optimize their light absorption and transfer the absorbed energy for chemical reactions.
Fourthly, the experiments on plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions have so far have mainly relied on the plasmonic properties of gold and silver. Practical implementation of plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions will require the use of inexpensive, earth-abundant elements such as aluminum and copper. Their LSPR properties and chemical stabilities for catalytic chemical reactions are important issues to be considered. In addition, several types of non-metal nanomaterials have recently been found to exhibit interesting LSPR properties. They include indium tin oxide nanoparticles,187 tungsten oxide nanocrystals,188 and copper chalcogenide nanocrystals.189–191 Exploration of these non-metal nanomaterials for plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions will be interesting and worthwhile.
We think that the four challenges mentioned above represent important directions in this burgeoning field. Overcoming these experimental and theoretical challenges will undoubtedly expedite the progress in this field, lead to many more exciting discoveries in science, and probably create new means for directly converting solar energy into storable chemical energy.
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support from the Joint Research Scheme between National Natural Science Foundation of China and Hong Kong Research Grants Council (NSFC/RGC, Ref. no. N_CUHK465/09, Project Code: 2900339).
Notes and references
M. Kerker, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1985, 105, 297–314 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bobin, M. Schvoerer, C. Ney, M. Rammah, B. Pannequin, E. Cilia Platamone, A. Daoulatli and R. P. Gayraud, Color Res. Appl., 2003, 28, 352–359 CrossRef .
A. Ruivo, C. Gomes, A. Lima, M. L. Botelho, R. Melo, A. Belchior and A. P. de Matos, J. Cult. Heritage, 2008, 9, e134–e137 CrossRef .
X. H. Huang, S. Neretina and M. A. El-Sayed, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4880–4910 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1805–1825 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012 10.1039/c2cs35367a .
J. Zhao, A. O. Pinchuk, J. M. McMahon, S. Z. Li, L. K. Ausman, A. L. Atkinson and G. C. Schatz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1710–1720 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870–1901 CrossRef .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Y. Chen, Y. G. Sun, X. M. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. N. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, S. E. Clare and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1842–1851 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, J. Pérez-Juste, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1783–1791 RSC .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Millstone, S. J. Hurst, G. S. Métraux, J. I. Cutler and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2009, 5, 646–664 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Porter, R. J. Lipert, L. M. Siperko, G. F. Wang and R. Narayanan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1001–1011 RSC .
N. P. W. Pieczonka and R. F. Aroca, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 946–954 RSC .
X.-M. Qian and S. M. Nie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 912–920 RSC .
S. Lal, N. K. Grady, J. Kundu, C. S. Levin, J. B. Lassiter and N. J. Halas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 898–911 RSC .
X. M. Qian, X.-H. Peng, D. O. Ansari, Q. Q. Yin-Goen, G. Z. Chen, D. M. Shin, L. Yang, A. N. Young, M. D. Wang and S. M. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shegai, Z. P. Li, T. Dadosh, Z. Y. Zhang, H. X. Xu and G. Haran, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 16448–16453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, N.-H. Seong and D. D. Dlott, Science, 2008, 321, 388–392 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopinath, S. V. Boriskina, W. R. Premasiri, L. Ziegler, B. M. Reinhard and L. D. Negro, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3922–3929 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Mulvihill, X. Y. Ling, J. Henzie and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 268–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392–395 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ming, L. Zhao, Z. Yang, H. J. Chen, L. D. Sun, J. F. Wang and C. H. Yan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3896–3903 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Pompa, L. Martiradonna, A. Della Torre, F. Della Sala, L. Manna, M. de Vittorio, F. Calabi, R. Cingolani and R. Rinaldi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 126–130 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 113002 CrossRef .
S. Kühn, U. Håkanson, L. Rogobete and V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 017402 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, K. Munechika and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 690–696 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ming, L. Zhao, H. J. Chen, K. C. Woo, J. F. Wang and H.-Q. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2296–2303 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Muskens, V. Giannini, J. A. Sánchez-Gil and J. Gómez Rivas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2871–2875 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kinkhabwala, Z. F. Yu, S. H. Fan, Y. Avlasevich, K. Müllen and W. E. Moerner, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 654–657 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Jin, Y.-J. Kim, I.-Y. Park, Y. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Nature, 2008, 453, 757–760 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Park, S. Kim, J. Choi, D.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Kim, M. F. Kling, M. I. Stockman and S.-W. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 677–681 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Fan and A. O. Govorov, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2580–2587 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov, Z. Y. Fan, P. Hernandez, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1374–1382 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Slocik, A. O. Govorov and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang, T. B. Huff, D. A. Zweifel, W. He, P. S. Low, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 15752–15756 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Durr, T. Larson, D. K. Smith, B. A. Korgel, K. Sokolov and A. Ben-Yakar, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 941–945 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nevet, N. Berkovitch, A. Hayat, P. Ginzburg, S. Ginzach, O. Sorias and M. Orenstein, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1848–1852 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ming, H. J. Chen, R. B. Jiang, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 191–202 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 027402 CrossRef .
N. I. Zheludev, S. L. Prosvirnin, N. Papasimakis and V. A. Fedotov, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. M. Belgrave, R. Bakker, V. M. Shalaev, E. E. Narimanov, S. Stout, E. Herz, T. Suteewong and U. Wiesner, Nature, 2009, 460, 1110–1112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ditlbacher, J. R. Krenn, B. Lamprecht, A. Leitner and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Lett., 2000, 25, 563–565 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. M. Chon, C. Bullen, P. Zijlstra and M. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 875–880 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zijlstra, J. W. M. Chon and M. Gu, Nature, 2009, 459, 410–413 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sokolov, M. Follen, J. Aaron, I. Pavlova, A. Malpica, R. Lotan and R. Richards-Kortum, Cancer Res., 2003, 63, 1999–2004 CAS .
R. Popovtzer, A. Agrawal, N. A. Kotov, A. Popovtzer, J. Balter, T. E. Carey and R. Kopelman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4593–4596 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. El-Sayed, X. H. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Wang, J. H. Lee and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3263–3267 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Mayer, S. Lee, H. W. Liao, B. C. Rostro, A. Fuentes, P. T. Scully, C. L. Nehl and J. H. Hafner, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 687–692 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, T. Weiss, M. Mesch, L. Langguth, U. Eigenthaler, M. Hirscher, C. Sönnichsen and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Castellana, R. C. Gamez and D. H. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4182–4185 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, Y.-P. Lin, C.-W. Wang, H.-C. Tzeng, C.-H. Wu, Y.-C. Chen, C.-P. Chen, L.-C. Chen and Y.-C. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3709–3715 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wijaya, S. B. Schaffer, I. G. Pallares and K. Hamad-Schifferli, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Y. Cheng, J. Y. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. W. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. N. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935–939 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huschka, O. Neumann, A. Barhoumi and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS .
C. Loo, A. Lowery, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, Y. Zhao, T. B. Huff, M. N. Hansen, A. Wei and J.-X. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3136–3141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Chen, D. L. Wang, J. F. Xi, L. Au, A. Siekkinen, A. Warsen, Z.-Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. N. Xia and X. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1318–1322 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gobin, M. H. Lee, N. J. Halas, W. D. James, R. A. Drezek and J. L. West, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1929–1934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, S. E. Clare and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1842–1851 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Norman, J. W. Stone, A. Gole, C. J. Murphy and T. L. Sabo-Attwood, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 302–306 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Kuo, C.-N. Chang, Y.-T. Chang, M.-H. Yang, Y.-H. Chien, S.-J. Chen and C.-S. Yeh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2711–2715 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hägglund, M. Zäch and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef .
T. H. Reilly III, J. van de Lagemaat, R. C. Tenent, A. J. Morfa and K. L. Rowlen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243304 CrossRef .
J.-L. Wu, F.-C. Chen, Y.-S. Hsiao, F.-C. Chien, P. L. Chen, C.-H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959–967 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407–8409 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Cole and N. J. Halas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 153120 CrossRef .
J. F. Qi, X. N. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. B. You, C.-C. Chen, W.-C. Hsu, H.-R. Tan, X. W. Zhang, Z. R. Hong and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6210–6217 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gusak, B. Kasemo and C. Hägglund, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6218–6225 CrossRef CAS .
I.-K. Ding, J. Zhu, W. S. Cai, S.-J. Moon, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 52–57 CAS .
B. Ding, B. J. Lee, M. J. Yang, H. S. Jung and J.-K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 415–421 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nahm, H. Choi, J. Kim, D.-R. Jung, C. Kim, J. Moon, B. Lee and B. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 253107 CrossRef .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Hung, M. Aykol, D. Valley, W. B. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1314–1318 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navalon, M. de Miguel, R. Martin, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2218–2226 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. L. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467–472 CAS .
E. Thimsen, F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. B. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Naya, A. Inoue and H. Tada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6292–6293 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309–6315 CrossRef CAS .
A. Primo, T. Marino, A. Corma, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6930–6933 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, T. Javed, T. Skeini, A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant and N. A. Kotov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4819–4823 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese Jr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hofmann and W. Steinmann, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1968, 30, K53–K56 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Endriz and W. E. Spicer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1970, 24, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inagaki, K. Kagami and E. T. Arakawa, Phys. Rev. B, 1981, 24, 3644–3646 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 20–28 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729–7744 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Adam, L. Brus, C. E. D. Chidsey, S. Creager, C. Creutz, C. R. Kagan, P. V. Kamat, M. Lieberman, S. Lindsay, R. A. Marcus, R. M. Metzger, M. E. Michel-Beyerle, J. R. Miller, M. D. Newton, D. R. Rolison, O. Sankey, K. S. Schanze, J. Yardley and X. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6668–6697 CrossRef .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 182110 CrossRef .
F. M. Wang and N. A. Melosh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5426–5430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, L. C. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, G. Hernandez-Sosa, D. Moses, J. Lee and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5548–5552 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Lee, C. H. Jung, J. Park, H. Seo, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4251–4255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Primo, A. Corma and H. García, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 886–910 RSC .
L. C. Du, A. Furube, K. Yamamoto, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6454–6462 CAS .
W. B. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fasciani, C. J. Bueno Alejo, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 203–207 CrossRef .
C. D. Lindstrom and X.-Y. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4281–4300 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Beckerle, M. P. Casassa, R. R. Cavanagh, E. J. Heilweil and J. C. Stephenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 64, 2090–2093 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Redmond, X. M. Wu and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8942–8947 CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742–1749 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Wu, P. L. Redmond, H. T. Liu, Y. H. Chen, M. Steigerwald and L. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9500–9506 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates Jr, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Paola, G. Marcì, L. Palmisano, M. Schiavello, K. Uosaki, S. Ikeda and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 5985–5992 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9173–9177 CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Qu, R. Cheng, Q. Su and X. F. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16730–16733 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Kochuveedu, D.-P. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2500–2506 CAS .
Y. Y. Wen, H. M. Ding and Y. K. Shan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4411–4417 RSC .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu, B. Cheng and H. C. Ong, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1466–1474 CAS .
M. Logar, B. Jančar, S. Šturm and D. Suvorov, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12215–12224 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. F. Chi and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088–7092 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. P. Li, T. J. Yan and G. S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13820–13828 CAS .
J. Y. Lan, X. M. Zhou, G. Liu, J. G. Yu, J. C. Zhang, L. J. Zhi and G. J. Nie, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 5161–5167 RSC .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Dai, J. Y. Wei and M.-H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7931–7933 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Zhang, X. Y. Qin, H. Jin, Y. Dai, Z. Y. Wang, J. Y. Wei, J. Zhan, S. Y. Wang, J. P. Wang and M.-H. Whangbo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1821–1824 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. An, S. Peng and Y. G. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2570–2574 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. R. Li, Z. H. Kang, Y. Liu, H. T. Li, X. D. He, S. Y. Lian, J. L. Liu and S.-T. Lee, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10593–10597 RSC .
Y. G. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2127–2133 CAS .
L. Kuai, B. Y. Geng, X. T. Chen, Y. Y. Zhao and Y. C. Luo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18723–18727 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, H. M. Li, J. X. Xia, S. Yin, Z. J. Luo, L. Liu and L. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 22–29 CAS .
J. Jiang and L. Z. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3710–3717 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Lou, B. B. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, H. F. Cheng, Z. K. Zheng and Y. Dai, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 4104–4110 RSC .
C. H. An, R. P. Wang, S. T. Wang and X. Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11532–11536 RSC .
L. Han, P. Wang, C. Z. Zhu, Y. M. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2931–2935 RSC .
J. G. Yu, G. P. Dai and B. B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16394–16401 CAS .
C. Hu, T. W. Peng, X. X. Hu, Y. L. Nie, X. F. Zhou, J. H. Qu and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhou, C. Hu, X. X. Hu, T. W. Peng and J. H. Qu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2746–2750 CAS .
M. S. Zhu, P. L. Chen and M. H. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sun, W. Z. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Shang and L. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 290–293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H.-Y. Zhu, J.-C. Zhao, Z.-F. Zheng and X.-P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5353–5356 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
J.-J. Chen, J. C. S. Wu, P. C. Wu and D. P. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 210–216 CAS .
S. V. Awate, S. S. Deshpande, S. Rakesh, P. Dhanasekaran and N. M. Gupta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11329–11339 RSC .
T. Torimoto, H. Horibe, T. Kameyama, K.-I. Okazaki, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura, A. Ishikawa and H. Ishihara, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2057–2062 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hughes, Y.-J. Xu, P. Jenkins, P. McMorn, P. Landon, D. I. Enache, A. F. Carley, G. A. Attard, G. J. Hutchings, F. King, E. H. Stitt, P. Johnston, K. Griffin and C. J. Kiely, Nature, 2005, 437, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turner, V. B. Golovko, O. P. H. Vaughan, P. Abdulkin, A. Berenguer-Murcia, M. S. Tikhov, B. F. G. Johnson and R. M. Lambert, Nature, 2008, 454, 981–983 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowalska, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2009, 241–243 RSC .
E. Kowalska, O. O. P. Mahaney, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344–2355 RSC .
W. Y. Zhai, S. J. Xue, A. W. Zhu, Y. P. Luo and Y. Tian, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 127–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10446–10448 RSC .
G. L. Hallett-Tapley, M. J. Silvero, M. González-Béjar, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10784–10790 CAS .
K. Mori, M. Kawashima, M. Che and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8598–8601 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhu, X. B. Ke, X. Z. Yang, S. Sarina and H. W. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9657–9661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kiyonaga, T. Mitsui, M. Torikoshi, M. Takekawa, T. Soejima and H. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10771–10778 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Naya, M. Teranishi, T. Isobe and H. Tada, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 815–817 RSC .
J. J. McMahon, M. Barry, K. J. Breen, A. K. Radziwon, L. D. Brooks and M. R. Blair, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1158–1166 CAS .
C.-W. Yen and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19585–19590 CAS .
T. S. Wu, S. Liu, Y. L. Luo, W. B. Lu, L. Wang and X. P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2142–2144 RSC .
D.-Y. Wu, L.-B. Zhao, X.-M. Liu, R. Huang, Y.-F. Huang, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2520–2522 RSC .
H. Kominami, A. Tanaka and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1287–1289 RSC .
J. R. Adleman, D. A. Boyd, D. G. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Fang, L. Shao, Y. H. Zhao, J. F. Wang and H. K. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 94–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dorfs, T. Härtling, K. Miszta, N. C. Bigall, M. R. Kim, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Povia and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11175–11180 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Hsu, K. On and A. R. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19072–19075 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Manda Xiao	Mr Manda Xiao is a research assistant in Professor Jianfang Wang's group. He received his BS degree in polymer science and engineering from Fudan University in 2008 and his MPhil degree in materials science and engineering from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2010. His research interests focus on the design, synthesis, and assembly of noble metal nanocrystals and their applications in catalysis and solar energy conversion.
Ruibin Jiang	Mr Ruibin Jiang is currently a PhD student in physics in Professor Jianfang Wang's group in The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree in materials physics in 2007 and his MS degree in materials science and engineering in 2010 from China University of Petroleum. His current research interests include the localized plasmon resonances of noble metal nanocrystals and their applications in nanophotonics and photocatalysis.
Feng Wang	Dr Feng Wang is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Electrical Engineering of The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree in chemistry from Anhui University in 2005 and his MS degree in inorganic chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2008. He received his PhD degree in chemistry under the supervision of Professor Jimmy C. Yu from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2012. His research efforts are devoted to photocatalysis and polymer–inorganic hybrid solar cells.
Caihong Fang	Ms Caihong Fang is currently a PhD student in Professor Jianfang Wang's group in The Chinese University of Hong Kong. She obtained her BS degree in materials chemistry in 2006 and her MS degree in materials physics and chemistry in 2009 from Anhui Normal University. She received her MPhil degree in materials science and engineering from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2011. Her research interests are noble metal nanocrystals and plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis.
Jianfang Wang	Dr Jianfang Wang, currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Physics of The Chinese University of Hong Kong, obtained his BS degree in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 1993 and his MS degree in inorganic chemistry from Peking University in 1996. He obtained his PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 2002. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara from February 2002 to July 2005. His current research interests include the plasmonic and catalytic properties of metal nanocrystals, plasmonic harvesting of solar energy, and nanostructured functional metal oxide materials.
Jimmy C. Yu	Dr Jimmy C. Yu received his PhD degree from the University of Idaho in 1985. He is now Professor of Chemistry and Associate Director of the Institute of Environment, Energy and Sustainability at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Dr Yu is widely recognized for his research on the design and fabrication of novel photocatalysts. He holds six patents on the preparation of photocatalytic nanomaterials for environmental and energy applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) Finite-difference time-domain simulation results showing the contours of the electric field intensity enhancements around a Au nanosphere and a Au nanorod, respectively. The nanosphere has a diameter of 50 nm, and the nanorod has the same volume, with the length and diameter being 102 nm and 30 nm, respectively. The field intensity is plotted on a logarithmic scale, which applies for both the nanosphere and nanorod. (c) Schematic illustrating the utilization of a plasmonic nanocrystal to enhance the optical signal from a nearby molecular species.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrating the three functional mechanisms of plasmons in chemical reactions. (a) Plasmonic enhancement of light absorption. (b) Plasmonic sensitization. (c and d) Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis. VB and CB represent the valence band and the conduction band of the semiconductor, respectively. EF is the Fermi level at equilibrium. red and ox stand for the reduced and oxidized forms of the redox species, respectively. Evacuum is the vacuum energy level.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative plasmon-assisted photocatalysts used for decomposing organic pollutants. (a) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the cross section of a sandwich structure composed of a top TiO2 film, a middle layer of Ag–SiO2 core–shell nanostructures, and a SiO2 substrate. (b) TEM image of a Pt/n-Si/Ag photodiode decorated with Au–Ag core–shell nanorods. The inset shows the image of an individual nanorod on the surface of the photodiode. (c) TEM image of a KNbO3 nanowire decorated with Au nanoparticles. (d) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Ag–AgCl hybrid nanostructures. (e) TEM image of Ag–C core–shell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, 132 and 155. Copyright 2008, 2011 American Chemical Society and 2009 Elsevier.	 


Ag/TiO2	MB	Plasmon-enhanced absorption	Degradation rate 3.8 times larger than that on TiO2 alone	
129

Ag@SiO2/TiO2a	MB	Plasmon-enhanced absorption	Degradation rate 5 times larger than that on TiO2 alone	
130

Ag/SiO2/TiO2	MB	Plasmon-enhanced absorption	Degradation rate 2.3 times larger than that on TiO2 alone	
131

Au@Ag/Pt/n-Si/Ag	NB	Plasmon-enhanced absorption	Degradation rate 3 times larger than that without Au@Ag	
132

SiO2@TiO2/Au	MB	Plasmonic sensitization	Stable and recyclable visible-light photocatalytic activity	
133

Ag/TiO2/graphene	MB	Plasmonic sensitization	Good recyclability under visible light	
134

Ag/TiO2	RhBb	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 2 times larger than that of P25	
135

Ag/TiO2	MB	Plasmonic sensitization	Enhanced near-UV photocatalytic activity	
136

SiO2/Au/TiO2	RhB	Plasmonic sensitization	100% decomposition of RhB within 40 min under sunlight	
137

Pt/TiO2	MOc	Plasmonic sensitization	Enhanced photocatalytic activities under both UV and visible light	
138

Au/KNbO3	RhB	Plasmonic sensitization	Reaction rate constant 15 times larger than that of KNbO3	
139

Ag/AgCl	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 8 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
140

Ag/AgBr	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 1.5 times larger than that on Ag/AgCl, much larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
141

AgCl@Ag	MB	Plasmonic sensitization	Good stability and recyclability under visible light	
142

Ag/AgX	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Photocatalytic activity 30 times higher than that on TiO2	
143

AgCl/Au	MB	Plasmonic sensitization	Stable and visible-light-responsive	
144

Ag/AgBr	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	83% MO decomposed within 2 min under sunlight	
145

Ag/AgCl	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	95% MO degraded within 2 h	
146

Ag/AgCl	RhB	Plasmonic sensitization	Complete degradation of 10 mg L−1 MO within 15 min	
147

Ag/AgCl	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 2 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
148

Ag/AgCl	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Photocatalyst recycled 19 times without the loss of the activity	
149

Ag/AgCl	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	96% MO degraded within 18 min	
150

Ag/AgCl/TiO2	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 3 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
151

Ag/AgI/Al2O3	2-CPd	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rates 49 and 22 times larger than those on AgI/Al2O3 and N-doped TiO2	
152

Ag/AgBr/Al2O3	2-CP	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 10 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
153

Ag/AgX/graphene	MO	Plasmonic sensitization	Degradation rate 3 times larger than that on Ag/AgX alone	
154

Ag@carbon	RhB	Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis	Degradation rate 6 times larger than that on N-doped TiO2	
155

Au/metal oxide	HCHO	Pure-metal plasmonic photocatalysis	64% HCHO oxidized under visible light, no reaction without light irradiation	
156


 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrating two main system configurations for solar water splitting. (a) Powdered photocatalysts. (b) Photoelectrochemical cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Hydrogen evolved during the photocatalytic reactions using TiO2 and Au (1.5 wt%)/TiO2 as the catalysts and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a sacrificial electron donor under 532 nm laser irradiation and polychromatic light (λ > 400 nm). Solid squares: Au/TiO2, λ = 532 nm; solid circles: Au/TiO2, λ > 400 nm; hollow squares: TiO2, λ = 532 nm; hollow circles: TiO2, λ > 400 nm. (b) Gas evolution upon visible light illumination of N-doped TiO2 and Ag/N-doped TiO2 photocatalysts. (c) Photocurrent responses of N-doped TiO2 with or without metal nanoparticles upon illumination with a broadband visible light source. (d) Hydrogen evolution with the photocatalysts of CdS–SiO2 and CdS–SiO2/Au–SiO2 core–shell nanostructures with SiO2 layer thicknesses of 17 nm and 2.8 nm on a Au core. The experiments were performed by light irradiation with a 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 350 nm). (e) Measured photocurrent (red diamonds) and simulated absorption (blue curve) enhancement of thin film Fe2O3 photoelectrode with silica-coated Au nanoparticles on the top. The samples are shown schematically in the inset. (f) SEM image of the top surface of the sample used for the data in (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 85, 88, 92 and 168. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the Au/TiO2 catalyst used for the chemoselective oxidation of cinnamyl alcohol. (b) Action spectrum of −(dE/dt)0 and the diffuse reflectance spectrum of the Au/TiO2 catalyst. F(R∞) denotes the Kubelka–Munk function. (c) Acetophenone conversion as a function of the number of laser pulses per liquid drop. (d) Acetophenone (solid circles) and benzaldehyde (hollow circles) conversion as a function of the LED photoexcitation time. (e) Rate of ethylene epoxidation on Ag nanostructures at 450 K in the dark and under visible light irradiation. (f) Rate of ethylene epoxidation as a function of the light source intensity. The dashed line is a linear fit to the experimental data. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, 89 and 175. Copyright 2010, 2011 American Chemical Society and 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) QMS signals of CO2 during the laser-induced CO oxidation reactions on the different catalysts. (b) Comparison of the average CO2 QMS signals obtained between laser irradiation and uniform heating. (c) Schematic illustrating the plasmon-assisted steam reforming process in a side view. The arrows indicate the direction of fluid flow. A 532 nm laser is focused on the top of the support to excite the plasmon resonance of the Au nanoparticles. The heat generated in the nanoparticles is transferred to the surrounding fluid and causes the formation of water vapour. The vapour molecules react on the surface of the Au nanoparticles to produce gas bubbles. The gas bubbles, after getting large enough, are carried downstream by the flowing fluid. (d) Variation of the partial pressures of the different gases versus time from the steam reforming reaction shown in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 and 185. Copyright 2009, 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
