Vanadium-containing electro and photocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10857B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10857B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2171-2206Vanadium-containing electro and photocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction: a review

        
          
            Josué M. 
            Gonçalves
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Matheus 
            Ireno da Silva
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lucio 
            Angnes
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Koiti 
            Araki
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Fundamental Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes 748, 05508-000, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. E-mail: josuefisicoquimico@hotmail.com; matheus.ireno@gmail.com; luangnes@iq.usp.br; koiaraki@iq.usp.br; josuemartins@usp.br;   Tel: +55-11-3091-8513
Received 
      2nd October 2019
    , Accepted 27th November 2019First published on 17th December 2019AbstractThe frenetic global development is improving the average quality of life in an unprecedented way, but at the expense of increasing pressure on natural resources, environmental pollution and energy demand, which are being exacerbated by population growth and industrialization in developing countries. The energy demand probably is the one contributing the most to such a situation, thus urging the development of clean and renewable alternative energy sources in order to avoid an imminent energy crisis in the near future. A possible solution is a society in which most energy needs are fulfilled by photoinduced or electrochemical water-splitting, storing solar energy as hydrogen and dioxygen gas, and releasing the chemical energy in fuel cells while regenerating water. However, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and the oxygen reduction reaction taking place respectively in water-splitting and fuel cells are quite sluggish because of their multielectronic and multiprotonic nature. Catalysts such as IrO2 and RuO2 are being successfully used as state-of-the-art OER electrocatalysts but such noble metal-based materials are severely limited by their scarcity and high cost. Thus, noble metal free electro/photocatalysts are being eagerly pursued to provide more sustainable alternatives. In this context, vanadium-based and vanadium-containing electro and photocatalysts based on hydroxides/oxyhydroxides/oxides, vanadates, chalcogenides and nitrides stand out among the most promising alternatives, and recent advances have demonstrated their key role in enhancing the catalytic activity by strong synergic electronic and structural effects. In fact, such high-performance materials have potential in the fabrication of fuel cells and photosynthetic devices competitive enough in converting chemical energy into electricity and solar energy into solar fuel, enabling large-scale production, storage and usage of the infinite energy of the sun in a more convenient and safe manner. Perspectives are also provided on the preparation, evaluation of synergic effects in OER electro/photocatalytic activity, and their correlation with the electronic and crystalline structure of the materials, as well as on the electrode material design.Josué M. GonçalvesJosué Martins Gonçalves is a postdoctoral researcher in the group headed by Prof. Lucio Angnes at the University of Sao Paulo (USP), Brazil, and honored with a prestigious research fellowship from FAPESP. He graduated in chemistry from University Vale do Acaraú (UVA) in 2014 where he conducted research in electroanalytical chemistry with Prof. Murilo S. S. Julião and received his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, USP, in 2019, working with nanoparticles and nanocomposites and their electrochemical applications, under the supervision of Prof. Koiti Araki. His current research interests include applications of nanomaterials based on nanoparticles and graphene for use in sensors, electrocatalysis and energy conversion and storage devices.Matheus Ireno da SilvaMatheus Ireno da Silva earned his bachelor's degree in chemistry from the Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of São Paulo (IFSP), Brazil, in 2017. Currently, he is a natural sciences PhD student at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo (IQ-USP) Brazil, with emphasis in nanotechnology and supramolecular chemistry. His research interests are focused on the synthesis, characterization and application of self-assembled nanoparticles and nanocomposites, aiming at the improvement of their sensing, electro and photocatalytic, and energy storage, production and conversion performances by synergistic effects.Lucio AngnesLucio Angnes is a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo. His research interests include the construction of electrodes with new and alternative materials, development of modified electrodes and arrays of microelectrodes, design of different procedures of enzyme immobilization (on electrodes or inside microchannels) and association of the created devices with flowing systems (flow and batch injection analysis). With 160 authored research papers, he is a member of the Scientific Board of Biosensors & Bioelectronics, Electroanalysis, Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, and actuates as the Coordinator of Innovation at FAPESP (São Paulo State Research Foundation). He is member of the Sao Paulo State Academy of Science.Koiti ArakiKoiti Araki is a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo since 2006, principal researcher of the Supramolecular Chemistry and Nanotechnology Lab, and member of the Sao Paulo State Academy of Science. His research interests are focused on the design and preparation of functional hybrid nanobiomaterials and nanocomposites through a coordinative supramolecular chemistry approach that can help tackle the main challenges in energy, nanomedicine and environment.
1. Introduction
Human society is evolving more and more rapidly as a consequence of globalization, catalyzed by the development of information technology, massive processing capability, automation and artificial intelligence integrating knowledge and logistics to enhance production efficiency. Such a frenetic global wave is improving the average quality of life in an unprecedented way, but at the expense of increasing pressure on natural resources, environmental pollution and increasing energy demand. In fact, the demand for all resources is been exacerbated by population growth and industrialization in developing countries,1–3 but especially on energy resources such as fossil fuels, which is believed to be directly connected to global warming. Thus, there is an urge to develop clean and renewable alternative energy sources to avoid an imminent energy crisis in the near future.1–6
Water-splitting is a convenient way to store energy as hydrogen at low cost,7 if it is based on highly efficient green processes and abundant natural resources in a cyclic way. However, the coupled oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a quite slow process as expected from its multielectronic and multiprotonic nature, thus kinetically limiting the rate of electrolysis of water.8 Accordingly, developing efficient electrocatalysts for the OER is fundamental to improve the water-splitting technology and the competitiveness of related technologies to expand the possibilities of water-based energy technologies.
Except for the geothermal source, all renewable energy sources are primarily dependent on solar energy that can be directly harvested in photoconversion devices or systems, or from wind, waves, hydroelectricity, or biomass, providing energy with low or no emission of green-house gases and other pollutants.3 One strategy to achieve such a goal is the massive use of less polluting electric power but, unfortunately, only 25% of the electricity worldwide has been generated from renewable sources in 2017. A decrease in the fossil fuel based energy market is expected as a consequence of the increasing competitiveness of the energy from renewable sources,9 but the rate may not be enough to catch up with the actual needs. In fact, the production of 23.6 and 47.7% of clean energy, forecast respectively by 2020 and 2040, does not seem achievable considering the implementation pace until now.
Among the several possibilities, water-splitting is the one considered the most promising10,11 when coupled with fuel cells and internal combustion engines to recover the chemical energy stored as H2 and O2. In this process , solar energy and/or electricity is used to promote simultaneously the OER and the hydrogen evolution reaction, HER, according to the respective anodic and cathodic semi-reactions. Hydrogen gas is a clean fuel with a high energy content whereas dioxygen is the most widely used oxidizing agent. In this way, the energy stored in the chemical bonds can be conveniently recovered in fuel cells and internal combustion engines where the water-splitting process is reversed, producing water and electricity or mechanical work, respectively.5
Precious metals and metal oxides1 such as platinum, iridium and ruthenium oxide (PtO2, IrO2 or RuO2) have accelerated the growth of renewable energy production, but there is no need to say that new cheaper technologies9 based on more abundant elements such as first row transition metals must be developed. In fact, most of the new technologies rely on enhanced energy conversion and storage efficiency of electrochemical and photoelectrochemical processes, such as water splitting, fuel cells, solar cells and metal–air batteries.2 Nevertheless, it is important to point out that solar energy production depends on the irradiation power and is restricted to day light period. Thus, it is strongly dependent on climate changes and is limited to about 12 hours a day; therefore it cannot be considered a continuous primary energy source.4–6
The control of the physicochemical properties to achieve excellent catalytic and photocatalytic efficiency is quite complex and involves materials engineering, but the main concepts and ideas behind it are relatively simple. Devices based on the electrolysis of water (or electrochemical and photochemical water-splitting), fuel cells and metal–air batteries, are systems with two electrodes, where the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) or the oxidation of a fuel takes place at the anode and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), or the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),2 is accomplished at the cathode. In the case of photocatalysts, the most fundamental process is the photoinduced charge-separation process generating holes, h+, with high enough potential and long enough lifetime to promote the OER (2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+), and electrons with enough potential to promote the HER (2H+ + 2e− → H2) reducing H+ to hydrogen gas.12 However, both processes involve protons and their redox potentials are strongly dependent on the solution pH. Accordingly, the reaction conditions must be judiciously controlled2 and generally is promoted under acidic (eqn (1) and (2)) or in alkaline (eqn (3) and (4)) conditions.
1.1 OER semi-reactions under acidic conditions
Cathodic semi-reaction: 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2, E0C = 0 V(1)
Anodic semi-reaction: 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e−, E0A = 1.23 V(2)
1.2 OER semi-reactions under alkaline conditions
Cathodic semi-reaction: 4H2O(l) + 4e− → 2H2(g) + 4OH−(aq), E0C = −0.83 V(3)
Anodic semi-reaction:  4OH−(aq) → O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e−, E0C = −0.83 V(4)where potentials are related to the NHE.
The advances achieved with electrocatalysts based on first row transition metal elements such as Co, Fe, Ni and Mn, especially as nitrides,13 sulphides,14 phosphides,15 metal alloys,16 oxides,17–19 hydroxides,7,20 and hybrid materials,21 have being recently revised, including the additivation or doping of materials with iron,22,23 cobalt24 and manganese.25 However, less attention has being focused on vanadium oxides which have a conduction band (CB) with negative enough potential (vs. NHE) to promote the HER and a positive enough valence band (VB) potential to promote the OER, as well as narrow enough band-gaps for absorption in the visible range as expected for a photocatalyst. Similar is the situation of WOCs based on vanadium and those additivated or doped with vanadium despite its structural and oxidation state versatility being associated with drastic changes in the electronic structure, conductivity and ion diffusion, as well as catalytic properties, as a function of the crystalline structure, as expected from their relatively strong bonds with ligand molecules typical of efficient catalytic sites26 and modulators27 capable of tuning the properties and activity of metallic sites next to it when incorporated into other materials. Also, an increasing interest in vanadium based or doped materials is evident in the last three years, especially because it can enhance the conductivity and decrease the charge-transfer resistance thus significantly improving the photo and electrocatalytic OER properties, as demonstrated by electrochemical and recent theoretical studies.28,29 Accordingly, we will focus on these types of materials emphasizing the preparation strategies and materials design to achieve relevant synergic effects, as well as the structure–activity relationships to pursue the best performance possible.
The fundamental concepts, materials and technologies exploited in electrocatalytic and photocatalytic devices will be reviewed, especially high performance OER electrocatalysts that can be used as alternatives for materials based on noble rare metal elements such as IrO2 and RuO2, thus providing green hydrogen fuel at low cost and high efficiency.7 The widespread application of such materials is severely limited by the scarcity7,26,27 and consequent high costs. In addition, the electrochemistry fundamentals will also be revised, discussing the performance evaluation of OER electrocatalysts and photocatalysts, emphasizing the advancements achieved in the last three years, in order to summarize the main challenges and perspectives for the development of higher performance materials and devices.
1.3 Criteria for evaluation of OER electrocatalysts and photoanode performance

1.3.1 Electrocatalytic materials for the OER. 
Electrocatalysts are materials designed to decrease the additional potential (considering the thermodynamic potential as the reference) necessary to transfer electrons, improving the kinetics of a given reaction, in this particular case the oxygen evolution reaction. This implies that such materials must also have good electric conductivity and a high concentration of very active catalytic sites, in addition to good thermodynamic stability to withstand the generally harsh chemical environment under real application conditions. Ideally, the material must fulfill not just some but all these requirements, in addition to being environmentally friendly, easily producible and cheap to be competitive in the market. Of course, the cost of the catalysts can be further decreased by modifying conventional electrodes with such high-performance materials thus transferring their electrocatalytic properties and stability in different electrolytes to them, while using as small as possible amounts per electrode.
For example, RuO2 and IrO2 with a rutile structure have been extensively studied given their high OER electrocatalytic activity in acidic and alkaline media. However, both tend to decompose relatively fast at the high positive potentials necessary to promote the oxidation of water at a reasonable rate, despite the somewhat higher stability of iridium dioxide.2,28 In contrast, more abundant, cheap and environmentally friendly first row transition metal oxides29–31 and hydroxides2 can be more stable while exhibiting suitable electric conductivity. Accordingly, they can be the ideal matrix to incorporate structural and chemical modifications to enhance their electrocatalytic properties whilst preserving the other favorable properties. A more recent approach is the preparation of non-oxide materials such as chalcogenides, pnictides and organometallic materials, whose potential is yet to be fully revealed.
A very interesting tool to evaluate the catalytic behavior of such materials is electrochemistry. An electrochemical faradaic reaction is characterized by an electron flow (current) as a function of the potential applied to the working electrode, thus generating typical i–E curves. Accordingly, linear scan voltammetry (LSV) experiments are typically carried out to evaluate OER and HER activity, at scan rates of 10–50 mV s−1, a parameter used to control the timescale that is directly related to the measured current intensity. Larger scan rates imply shorter timescales and larger currents, since a larger flux of electrons is necessary to compensate for the same change in electric potential. Thus, the control of the potential range and scan rate in a simple LSV experiment allows the determination of relevant electrocatalytic parameters such as the overpotential η, the exchange current density i0, and the Tafel slope b which can be used to compare the performance of different materials.2
The thermodynamic electric potential for the OER in acidic media, under standard conditions, is equal to 1.23 V vs. the SHE, but the actual potential needed to promote this reaction can be much larger due to slow heterogeneous electron transfer kinetics. Also, it must be remembered that the oxidation reaction is always coupled with a reduction reaction taking place at the counter electrode, exactly in the same extent, in order to close the electric circuit. Considering the water-splitting reaction, the oxidation and reduction reactions take place respectively at the anode and at the cathode, generating O2 and H2, and the overpotential can be generated at one or both electrodes. In fact, the potential necessary to promote the electrolysis of water is typically several hundreds of millivolts much larger than the thermodynamic potential, where the excess energy is used to overcome the kinetic barrier for electron transfer at the electrode surface (Fig. 1A).2,5 Thus, the overpotential η (eqn (5)) of a generic reaction (eqn (7)), under a given experimental condition, is the difference between the applied potential E and the standard potential E0 and can be easily evaluated using the Nernst equation (eqn (6)), where Eeq is the thermodynamic potential under any condition except the standard one. Usually, the overpotential is referred to as the additional potential necessary to reach a certain current density, typically j = 10 mA cm−2 (required in a water splitting solar device with an efficiency of 12.3% under an illumination of 1 sun), such that materials with lower overpotentials are the ones with larger electrocatalytic activity. At this point it is important to remember that the OER and HER potential shifts as a function of pH can be neglected if the reference electrode potential shifts in the same way. This is the case of the reversible hydrogen electrode when used directly in contact with the electrolyte solution, without a salt bridge, which is emerging as a convenient reference electrode to carry out water-splitting electrocatalysis experiments. η = E − Eeq(5) (6) O + ne− ⇌ R(7)
 Fig. 1  (A) i–E curves for a water-splitting reaction.28 (B) Current density plot, j (solid line) and extrapolations of the anodic current density ja (upper dashed line) and cathodic current density jc (lower dashed line) as a function of the overpotential η, according to the Butler–Volmer equation, with αc = 0.5.32 (C) Plot of the overpotential η as a function of the natural logarithm of the anodic and cathodic current densities according to the Butler–Volmer equation, with αc = 0.5.32 (D) Plot of η vs. logi showing a change in the Tafel slope for the same electrocatalyst.2 Panel (A) figure reproduced from B. Seo and S. H. Joo, Recent advances in unveiling active sites in molybdenum sulfide-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4, 19, with permission from Springer Open. Panels (B and C) figures reproduced from R. Guidelli, R. G. Compton, J. M. Feliu, E. Gileadi, J. Lipkowski, W. Schmickler and S. Trasatti, Defining the transfer coefficient in electrochemistry: An assessment (©IUPAC Technical Report, De Gruyter), Pure and Applied Chemistry, 2014, 86, 245–258. Panel (D) figure adapted from N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction: recent development and future perspectives, Chemical Society Reviews, 2017, 46, 337–365 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a polarization experiment, the measured current (i) at the working electrode is actually a product of the equilibrium involving the oxidized and reduced species (eqn (6)) at the electrode–solution interface, being the sum of the cathodic and anodic currents (eqn (8)). Thus, there is a contribution from both, oxidation (eqn (9)) and reduction (eqn (10)) reactions, to the measured current as expressed by the Butler–Volmer equation (eqn (11)), but only one of the currents has a significant contribution at high enough potentials relative to E0. For example, at positive and negative enough potentials, only the oxidation (αa) or reduction (αc) current, respectively, is relevant to the total current i0. However, at zero overpotential the system is in its thermodynamic equilibrium condition and the anodic (ia) and cathodic currents (ic) have the same value but opposite signals, so that the overall current is zero (Fig. 1A). Consequently, the magnitude of the current, named the exchange current (i0), carries information about the electrocatalyst-substrate charge-transfer processes. The exchange current density (j0) (eqn (12)), which is i0 divided by the electrode area (A), can be determined at the intersection of the linear section of the overpotential as a function of logarithm of the current plot (as demonstrated in Fig. 1C), while its tangent is named the Tafel slope, b.2,32 Hence, the magnitude of j0 embodies the charge-transfer interactions between the electrocatalyst and the substrate. i = ia + ic(8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
The Butler–Volmer equation indicates that the contribution of cathodic current is insignificant when compared with the anodic current at high enough positive potentials relative to the redox potential and vice versa as shown in Fig. 1B. Accordingly, this expression can be simplified by applying the Tafel equation (eqn (13)), which considers only the anodic current at positive enough potentials and vice versa. This equation can be written as the overpotential as a function of the logarithm of the current (eqn (14)) allowing the determination of the exchange current density j0 and the Tafel slope b. This parameter provides very relevant information on the electrocatalytic activity of materials since its reciprocal indicates how fast the current density increases as a function of η. In other words, the electrocatalytic activity increases as the slope b becomes smaller, since it is related to the rate determining step and the mechanism of the corresponding heterogeneous electron-transfer reaction. Thus, considering Fig. 1D, clearly there is a change in the mechanism of the reaction that is much faster at b2 than at b1. (13) (14)


1.3.2 OER photocatalysts. 
The mechanism of a photocatalytic process on a semiconductor involves five main steps: (i) the absorption of a photon; (ii) the generation of an exciton or an electron–hole pair; (iii) its vibrational relaxation and migration of the electron and the hole promoting the charge-separation process; (iv) the adsorption of the reactant onto the surface of the excited photocatalyst; and (v) the hole and electron transfer processes at the interface promoting oxidation and reduction reactions (Fig. 3A)33,34 followed by desorption of the products. In the case of the water-splitting reaction, the electron and the hole promote respectively the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions.
The absorption of a photon with energy corresponding to the optical band-gap generates an exciton, or in other words, generates a hole in the valence band and a corresponding electron in the conduction band. Nevertheless, they are strongly electrostatically coupled and an additional energy is required to separate them and generate useful free charge-carriers.12,33,35 Thus, the minimum energy required for the photons to generate a separated charge state is larger than the “optical band-gap” and is named the “electric band-gap”.
The free charge-carriers can be then used to promote redox reactions, oxidizing and reducing molecular species adsorbed on the semiconductor surface. However, an electron and a hole can recombine regenerating an exciton, be trapped in defective sites, or decay to the ground state emitting a photon (fluorescence/phosphorescence) or phonons (heat) via internal conversion processes, a non-radioactive pathway.33 One of the key steps, the photoinduced charge-separation process, takes place when a photon with suitable energy is absorbed, but it is fundamental that the free electron and hole have long enough lifetimes to promote the photocatalytic reactions. Considering that the charge-separation process takes place in about 10−12 s, their diffusion to the surface of the photocatalyst occurs in 10−9 to 10−6 s, and the water splitting reaction occurs in a 10−6 to about 1 s range. It is evident that the recombination, trapping and decay of the charge carriers tend to compete advantageously with the desired redox reaction.33 Among them, the recombination process is the one that is attracting most of the attention. To facilitate the understanding, the magnitude of the attractive coulombic force (eqn (15)) felt by an electron for a hole can be compared with gravity, the force (eqn (16)) that tends to attract materials to the center of massive bodies such as planet Earth. As pointed out by Low et al.,36 the separation of charged excitons can be compared to a jump that momentarily increases the potential energy but rapidly returns back to the initial or fundamental state. In fact, the Coulomb constant (8.99 × 109 N m2 C−2) is orders of magnitude larger than the gravitational constant (6.67 × 10−11 N m2 kg−2) such that the attraction force acting to keep the electron–hole pair together is much larger and more difficult to overcome. One way to avoid the immediate return to the initial state after the “jump” is by having places or “locus” where they can be accommodated, such as allowed electronic states in the conduction band that can be occupied upon photoexcitation of the semiconductor material. In addition, a gradient of energy or potential can be created by establishing suitable junctions, as discussed in the next section. (15) (16)
The steps III and V, thereby, are quite energy consuming or complex from the mechanistic point of view and are the main focus of theoretical and experimental discussions.12,33,35 In order to develop more efficient photocatalysts, it is fundamental to understand in depth the photoactivation and the subsequent electron–hole pair separation process, responsible for the generation of free charge carriers. Nevertheless, the redox processes of interest that occur after the migration of electrons and holes to the surface of the electroactive material, and their interaction with the reactants at the catalytic active sites has not yet been mechanistically fully clarified. Accordingly, it should be the focus of research in the near future aided by new theoretical–experimental techniques and tools.
In this context, an enhancement of the charge-separation efficiency concomitantly with the inhibition of the recombination process is considered the key to improve the photocatalytic activity. The following strategies are generally adopted for such a purpose:
(a) Incorporation of a co-catalyst onto the photocatalyst surface, and/or the formation of hetero or homojunctions, to decrease the activation energy and promote the photoinduced charge-separation;
(b) Modification/tuning of the band structure/energy by doping;
(c) Use of sacrificial reagents to consume holes, or electrons, thus avoiding recombination to activate the complementary free charge-carrier;
(d) Use of nanoparticles with shorter photoinduced charge diffusion lengths; and
(e) Minimization of surface defects (increase of the degree of crystallinity) that may act as electron or hole trapping sites accelerating the recombination process.12,33–35,37
Additionally, the intrinsic catalytic activity of each site and the number of such sites are fundamental for the overall performance since, upon photoinduced charge-separation and migration, the separated charges must encounter and activate the catalytic active sites, which must react as promptly as possible to maximize the photocatalytic activity. Of course, the activation of the catalytic sites implies that the band potential energies are large enough to overcome the kinetic and thermodynamic barriers for charge transfer.
In addition, extended lifetimes of separated free charges, fine-tuned band potentials and active site kinetic and thermodynamic properties associated with stable materials with high light harvesting efficiency are all fundamental characteristics when considering their perspectives for real application in devices. Thus, research is primarily focused on (a) decreasing the rate of photocorrosion of the photocatalytic material; (b) decreasing the band-gap to employ not only high energy UV-light but visible light also; (c) tuning the absolute energy of conduction and valence bands by doping; (d) preparing materials with suitable junctions to improve charge-separation and charge-diffusion efficiency; (e) narrowing the bands to improve the photon energy harvesting efficiency; (f) maximizing the density of available active sites; (g) studying the influence of pH and/or the presence of mediators or sacrificial reagents; and (h) analyzing how each of the preparation steps influence the performance.35
The band-gap width and the absolute energy of the conduction and valence bands are important parameters for the preparation of photocatalytic materials. As previously mentioned, the potential of the conduction band must be more negative than the redox potential of the H2O/H2 half reaction (0.00 V vs. NHE, at pH = 0). In contrast, the valence band potential must be more positive than the redox potential of the O2/H2O half reaction (1.23 V vs. NHE, at pH = 0) to promote the OER. Titanium dioxide, one of the most explored photocatalyst, has suitable valence and conduction band potentials, but only absorbs ultraviolet light (4–6%) since the anatase and rutile band-gaps are respectively 3.2 eV and 3.0 eV, thus exhibiting low sunlight harvesting efficiency.38,39 Furthermore, the high electron–hole recombination rate contributes to further decrease the global efficiency and limit its practical application. However, doping and establishing suitable junctions can change that scenario. In fact, the doping strategy can be used to shift the band energies providing an efficient method to improve the absorption of visible light (>400 nm).33 On the other hand, homojunctions34 and heterojunctions (types I, II and III)36 can be established also.
A junction is formed when semiconductor materials are connected together promoting a local charge redistribution process responsible for the generation of what is called “depletion layer” and an electric potential gradient at the interface. The semiconductor can be the same or different, generating respectively homojunctions and heterojunctions where the Fermi level energy is equilibrated in both materials by charge migration to the interface. There are three typical types of heterojunctions: straddling gap (type-I); staggered gap (type-II); and broken gap type (type-III) (Fig. 2B, C and D, respectively).
 Fig. 2  Scheme illustrating the possible band structure and thermodynamically allowed charge migration processes upon absorption of a photon and the formation of an electron–hole pair, as well as the associated electrochemical processes that can take place on the surface of (A) a semiconductor, and the heterojunctions with a band structure according to arrangements (B) type-I; (C) type-II; and (D) type-III.36 Figure reproduced from J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction photocatalysts, Advanced Materials, 2017, 29, 1601694 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In the type-I arrangement, the valence and conduction bands of semiconductor A have respectively lower and higher energy than the VB and CB of semiconductor B. Consequently, the holes and electrons generated upon photoexcitation of A will migrate to the VB and CB of semiconductor B. In other words, the photon energy will be transferred from A to B, contributing to increase the recombination rate and decrease the charge-separation efficiency. In addition, a fraction of the reductive potential of the electron and the oxidizing potential of the hole is lost as thermal energy, diminishing the driving force for both oxidation and reduction reactions.
In the type-II arrangement, the VB and CB energies of A are higher than those that of semiconductor B, such that the electrons tend to move to the CB of B whereas the holes remain or move into semiconductor A thus promoting a more efficient charge-separation process. Note that in this case, only the oxidation or reduction potential of a hole or an electron is decreased upon electron migration induced by the electric gradient at the junction. Finally, in the type-III arrangement, the VB and CB of semiconductor A have higher energies than both the VB and CB of B, inhibiting any charge carrier redistribution induced by the junction. Clearly, this is the worst situation since the junction does not contribute whatsoever to the efficiency of the charge-separation process.
The efficiency of photocatalytic materials is compared considering the dioxygen production rate as a suitable parameter, which can be determined by (a) converting the density of the photocurrent measured at the thermodynamic potential (1.23 V vs. NHE, at pH = 0) directly into the theoretical O2 production rate in μmol h−1 cm−2 or (b) measuring the overpotential needed to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (this current is more commonly used and accepted for comparison purposes). Alternatively, the quantity of O2 gas produced during a defined period of time can be measured by volumetric techniques or quantified using gas chromatography techniques, and the results are used to determine the faradaic efficiency of the photocatalyst by comparing the amount actually produced with the theoretically expected one, since some byproduct also can be produced. Nevertheless, some studies restrict themselves to the electrochemical measurements and determination of the theoretical parameters.

2. V-containing OER electrocatalysts
2.1 Oxides
Vanadium oxides with the general formula VOx (1 ≤ x ≤ 2.5) are known to be produced in different crystal phases in which the metal ion can exhibit oxidation states from II to V, for example in VIIO, VIII2O3, VIVO2, and VV2O5, among others.40–42 These oxides can be present in more than sixteen crystalline structures that can coexist as mixed phases.40–42 Such structural and compositional variability explains the large number of synthetic routes available for vanadium oxides, but the sol–gel43 and hydrothermal44,45 routes are the two most commonly used methods among others such as ultrasound,46 atomic layer deposition (ALD),47 thermal decomposition, precipitation, flame spray pyrolysis (FSP),48 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),49 pulsed laser evaporation/deposition (PLE),41etc.
Vanadium oxides are abundant in all crystalline phases and exhibit excellent electrochemical properties and high specific capacity and energy density, being one of the most promising candidates as cathode materials for lithium batteries.42 In addition, the interaction of these materials with ionic and molecular species is relatively strong, imparting electrocatalytic and/or photocatalytic properties to semiconductor materials. Some of them also exhibit electrochromic and photochromic properties that can be combined with their catalytic properties to generate specific applications. Such characteristics make them good candidates as catalysts for water splitting processes, for both oxygen50–52 and hydrogen40 evolution reactions.
The large structural variability implies the possibility of highly complex crystal phase mixtures. A good example is given by the work of Lee et al.41 who explored the stability of metastable VO2 polymorphs to prepare high quality thin films of epitaxially stable monocrystalline materials. VO2(A), VO2(B), VO2(M), and VO2(R) polymorphs, respectively with tetragonal, monoclinic, monoclinic and rutile structures, were produced on perovskite substrates (Fig. 3A). All these materials present exactly the same composition but the crystal and electronic structures can be completely different, thus exhibiting contrasting chemical, optical and electrical properties. But, the preparation of materials with a single polymorphic phase is quite difficult given their proximity in the phase diagram and consequently similar thermodynamic properties, which explains the high tendency to form mixed polymorphic phases.
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic representation of the structures of (a) VO2(B), (b) VO2(A), (c) VO2(M), and (d) VO2(R) produced on ABO3 perovskite substrates respectively with (001), (011) and (111) crystallographic orientations, (B) their resistivity as a function of temperature (extracted from ref. 41), and (C) comparison of the V2O5, α-V2O5, β-V2O5, γ-V2O5, and V2O5(M) polymorphs structures. Extracted from ref. 42. Panels (A and B) figure adapted from S. Lee, I. N. Ivanov, J. K. Keum and H. N. Lee, Epitaxial stabilization and phase instability of VO2 polymorphs, Scientific Reports, 2016, 6, 19621 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
VO2(M) and VO2(R) are the two most studied polymorphs among all four structures shown above, especially due to the possibility of a metallic-to-insulator phase transition (MIT, 68 °C) near room temperature (Fig. 3B). In fact, this transition results in a three orders of magnitude decrease in the resistivity enabling its application in optoelectronic devices such as smart windows, electrical switches53 and frequency-agile metamaterials.54 On the other hand, VO2(B) is a semiconductor material with potential application in energy storage and electricity generation devices, especially in lithium-ion battery electrodes, since it possesses a crystalline structure with wider interplanar spaces favoring ion diffusion.55 In contrast, the VO2 (A) polymorph with a tetragonal structure is an insulator and has attracted less attention, particularly due to the difficulties in preparing this material. Thus its properties and potential applications are yet to be unveiled.41
The high valence oxide V2O5 also is a polymorphic material and can be found mainly as α-V2O5, β-V2O5, γ-V2O5, and V2O5(M) (V2O5·nH2O or vanadium pentoxide xerogel, VXG) respectively with orthorhombic, monoclinic and monoclinic nanoribbons, with variable numbers of water molecules intercalated in the interlamellar space (Fig. 3C). The xerogel can be used as the precursor of vanadium oxides such as α-V2O5, VO2(B), and VO2(R), given its suitable dimensions allied to the possibility of easy control of the oxidation state of vanadium ions in octahedral sites.42 However, vanadium pentoxide exhibits low electric conductivity due to the limited mobility of electrons in the bands formed by d-orbitals, commonly present in transition metal oxides including VO2, except VO2(R). Furthermore, the charge–discharge processes are accompanied by irreversible structural changes, responsible for the presence of two incompatible coexisting phases in the material. This situation is a consequence of reticular tensions leading to an irreparable damage to the structure of the material.56 Accordingly, developing new strategies for stabilization and production of materials constituted by a single crystalline phase is an important step for the development of vanadium oxide based electrocatalysts.
This may explain why vanadium oxide derivatives, typically those based on mixed oxides of transition metal ions such as FexOy, CoxOy, NixOy, binary NiFeOx, CoFeOx,50 MxCo3−xO4 and MxFe3−xO4 (M = Ni, Fe, Co, Mn, Cu and Zn)51,57 and ternary CoFeNiOx58 gained prominence as catalysts for the OER only quite recently. At this point, it is noteworthy that these materials are usually prepared by thermal decomposition, a strategy that allows little control of composition, morphology and chemical structure.50 Therefore, there are many ongoing efforts pursuing more simple and efficient alternative synthetic routes for mixed metal oxide materials.
It has been demonstrated that the incorporation of Fe into Ni and Co-based catalysts increases their OER activity. Accordingly, it was proposed that Fe is the chemically active site in Ni-based catalysts, while the nickel matrix acts predominantly as a conducting support for it; whereas in analogous Co-based materials, both sites seem to act synergistically since they already have relatively high catalytic activity even in the absence of Fe sites.52 More recently, Co-based catalysts are being doped with vanadium instead of iron59 to improve their conductivity and catalytic performance. The good activity expected for VOx in the OER has been demonstrated, for example, in a recent study by Chai et al.,52 which evinced the potential of tridimensional VOx nanoleaves/nanoflowers prepared on vulcanized nickel foam (NiS/SF) by a simple hydrothermal method (Fig. 4D).
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of NF, NiS/NF, VOx/NF and VOx/NiS/NF samples: (A) linear scan voltammograms (LSVs) including those of a RuO2/NF sample for comparative purposes; (B) the Tafel plots, showing the respective slopes; (C) the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results; and (D) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of VOx/NiS/NF.52 Figure adapted from Y.-M. Chai, X.-Y. Zhang, J.-H. Lin, J.-F. Qin, Z.-Z. Liu, J.-Y. Xie, B.-Y. Guo, Z. Yang and B. Dong, Three-dimensional VOx/NiS/NF nanosheets as efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10156–10162 with permission from Elsevier. 
VOx has larger conductivity in comparison with metal oxide materials generally employed in the OER,59 but it is not enough yet to assure the fast heterogeneous electron-transfer processes60 required in high performance electrocatalysts. Accordingly, a thin film was deposited on highly stable vulcanized nickel foam to maximize the electric conductivity and the surface area.52 In fact, the nanoflower like structures further enhanced the surface area as compared with flat homogeneous films, and consequently increased the surface concentration of effectively available catalytic active sites. In addition, the VOx nanoflowers deposited on vulcanized nickel foam (VOx/NiS/NF) was shown to be amorphous providing additional porosity to these tridimensional structures, thus contributing to further increase the surface area and the electrocatalytic activity. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy images demonstrated that there is a mixed valence oxide material with V4+ and V5+ sites firmly attached to the NiS/NF surface by V–S bonds.52 Both features are relevant to improve the OER activity since both have a positive effect on the conductivity of the material. The mixed-valence nature increases the intrinsic electron mobility whereas M–S–Ni bonds tend to be more effective bridges than M–O–Ni bonds in metal oxides such as nickel oxide.60
The OER activity of these materials is shown in Fig. 4 using linear scan voltammograms (LSVs) and Tafel plots, and the SEM image clearly evidences the nanoflower like morphology. The VOx/NiS/NF electrode exhibited an overpotential of 330 mV to reach a current of 50 mA cm−2, the best result among the materials considered in the study (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, VOx/NF demonstrated a poorer OER electrocatalytic performance even as compared with RuO2/NF,52 indicating that M–S–Ni bonds play a relevant role in the performance, probably by increasing the electron transfer kinetics from VOx to the nickel foam. This is confirmed by the lowest Tafel slope of 121 mV dec−1 and resistance measured for this material (Fig. 4B), as reflected in the smallest diameter of the corresponding Nyquist plot semicircle obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Fig. 4C). In addition, the high double layer capacitance of 21.69 mF cm−2 confirmed the large electrochemically active surface area of the VOx nanoflowers. Finally, the rate of O2 production of 1.01 molecules per s (ref. 52) was by far the largest one for the VOx/NiS/NF system, as expected considering all previously described results.
In short, the activity of VOx-based electrocatalysts for the OER can be enhanced by exploiting the synergic interactions with other materials, producing composite materials with enhanced surface area and electric conductivity, which can reflect directly on their performance. In fact, the incorporation of VOx into transition metal oxides for the production of mixed metal oxide electrocatalysts taking advantage of synergistic and additive properties is the main strategy that is currently being used in the quest for increasingly higher performance electrocatalysts.
The most studied mixed metal oxides are based on nickel, iron and cobalt bimetallic and trimetallic oxides, where the incorporation of vanadium resulted in synergistic effects that greatly increased their OER activity. Note that VOx and FeOx are in an opposite branch of the volcano plot (Fig. 5A) relative to NiOx and CoOx. Accordingly, theoretically, MVOx materials should exhibit higher OER activity since their M–OH binding energies are larger than those in the corresponding MFeOx (M = Co and Ni) mixed oxides thus decreasing the OER activation energy. Recently (2018), Liardet and Hu50 prepared amorphous CoVOx catalysts by a simple hydrothermal method and tested this hypothesis considering that CoOx has higher mass activity than NiOx. In fact, a significant increase in electrocatalytic performance was achieved as compared with the corresponding iron derivatives CoFeOx, as detailed below.
 Fig. 5  (A) Volcano plot of OER mass electroactivity versus M–OH binding energy (extracted from ref. 48). (B) Polarization curves of m-CoVOx deposited on nickel foam and the respective Tafel plots measured in 1 M KOH and 1 M Fe-free KOH at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1; (C) polarization curves of α-CoVOx deposited on nickel foam, measured in 1 M KOH and 1 M Fe-free KOH, at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (D) Volcano plot of the mass activity versus M–OH bond strength of several α-CoyV1−yOx samples with different proportions of Co:V atoms. Extracted from ref. 4. The volcano plot relative to OER activity versus M–OH binding energy (extracted from ref. 50). Figure reproduced from L. Liardet and X. Hu, Amorphous cobalt vanadium oxide as a highly active electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution, ACS Catalysis, 2018, 8, 644–650 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
They prepared m-CoVOx, α-CoVOx and VOx and CoOx catalysts by the hydrothermal method, but m-CoVOx was found to be a heterogeneous mixture of a hydrated cobalt complex phase with chloride, carbonate and hydroxide ligands with the general formula [Co(CO3)0.35Cl0.2(OH)1.10]·1.74H2O, exhibiting an XRD profile resembling that of CoOx, and an amorphous phase containing cobalt and vanadium oxide. In contrast, α-CoVOx was shown to be a single homogeneous amorphous material, as confirmed by STEM and XRD. The OER activity was evaluated in 1 M KOH electrolyte using glassy carbon electrodes modified with these materials. The influence of the eventual presence of iron was also evaluated using an electrolyte solution especially purified for the removal of trace amounts of Fe ions, named Fe-free KOH. m-CoVOx showed good performance for oxidation of water exhibiting an overpotential of 366 and 358 mV at 10 mA cm−2, respectively in KOH and Fe-free KOH, whereas VOx and CoOx required a much larger overpotential to reach this current density.
Interestingly, the presence of trace amounts of Fe(II) ions did not significantly change the overpotential of m-CoVOx and CoOx but a much larger overpotential was required in Fe-free KOH in the case of VOx, indicating that iron ions are not fundamental for the OER activity of these cobalt materials. Analogously, m-CoVOx deposited directly on nickel foam by the hydrothermal method50 showed overpotentials respectively of 293 and 298 mV in 1 M KOH and Fe-free KOH, and corresponding Tafel slopes of 49 and 67 mV dec−1 (Fig. 5B). Interestingly, the long-term evaluation showed a stable performance for 15 hours, at 10 mA cm−2. The reaction mechanism for these materials was discussed based on that found in the literature for both CoOx and VOx since the biphasic behavior probably reflects the contribution of both active sites, which can be considered independently in a preliminary simplified approach.61
The α-Co0.75V0.25Ox (Co:V ratio = 3:1) modified glassy carbon (GC) electrode reached a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 347 and 351 mV in 1 M KOH and Fe-free KOH respectively, with Tafel slopes of 51 and 49 mV dec−1, whereas the modified NF electrode resulted in overpotentials of 254 and 262 mV and Tafel slopes of 35 and 34 mV dec−1 (Fig. 5C), probably reflecting the higher conductivity provided by the nickel foam electrode.
The OER activity of m-CoVOx and α-CoVOx on GC electrodes was similar to that of other mixed vanadium and cobalt oxide materials such as Co2V2O7 (340 mV),62 Co3V2O8 (359 mV),63 and nanoroses of Co3V2O8 (391 mV).64 Nevertheless, their activity is substantially increased when deposited on nickel foam. For example, α-CoVOx/NF is highly competitive with cobalt oxide based catalysts such as Co3O4/NF (497 mV),65 NiCo LDH/NF (420 mV),66 NiCo DH/N-graphene/NF (350 mV),67 CoP/NF (290 mV),68 CoFeOx/NF (260 mV) and NiCoFeOx/NF (240 mV).58
The correlation of OER activity and the strength of M–OH bond shown previously does not indicate that this is the best description parameter to guide us in the search for the best materials, but clearly can be used to obtain important information about the electrocatalytic performance of mixed metal oxides.69 The D(M–OH) bond energy is defined as the sum of the heterolytic and homolytic bond dissociation energies of a MIII(OH) metal hydroxide. The D(M–OH) of α-CoVOx was determined considering a binary physical mixture and a linear combination of the bond energies of each component (CoOx and VOx), as well as the change in the mass activity as a function of the Co:V ratio. A volcano shaped relationship showing a much larger mass activity as a function of the M–OH bond strength (Fig. 5D) was obtained for iron oxide as compared to the vanadium oxide derivatives (Fig. 5A). The ideal material α-Co0.75V0.25Ox was found nearby the apex of the volcano plot demonstrating the possibility of predicting the electrocatalyst performance based on the precursor composition.
More recently, it was demonstrated that other metal oxide-based materials can present OER activity, widening the possibilities for many applications. Recently, Xing et al.57 prepared nanocomposites of mixed manganese/vanadium oxide on reduced graphene oxide doped with nitrogen (MnVOx@N-rGO) for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and OER. Reduced GO is commonly used in the preparation of electrocatalysts but is not yet extensively explored in the OER. Among the interesting properties of such carbon materials is the possibility of incorporation of coordinating groups onto rGO to improve the anchoring of metal oxides.70 In addition, their conductivity and catalytic properties for the ORR can be enhanced by doping with elements such as nitrogen.71 Thus, these are strategic building-blocks to explore such properties and their high surface area and chemical stability combined with light weight to develop nanocomposites with interesting synergic interactions and enhanced effects based on metal oxide materials.
The preparation of well-defined materials supported on a nanometric substrate is not an easy task, but the MnVOx@N-rGO composite was successfully obtained by controlled deposition of the manganese and vanadium oxide precursor, [Mn4V4O17(OAc)3]3−, on GO dispersed in acetonitrile, with NH4OH as the reducing agent and nitrogen source, for the production of N-rGO (Fig. 6A) under hydrothermal conditions. The removal of organic contaminants and crystallization of MnVOx was promoted by calcination in two steps, at 440 and 900 °C, and the resultant materials were respectively named I-440 and I-900. The DRX analyses indicated the formation of Mn2V2O7 in I-440 and Mn1.5V1.5O4 in I-900, two mixed-valence oxides containing Mn(II), Mn(III) and Mn(IV) sites, and V(IV) and V(V) sites, as confirmed by XPS.
 Fig. 6  (A) Scheme of the synthetic route for the preparation of the MnVOx@N-rGO catalyst. (B) Linear scan voltammograms (LSVs) of I-900, I-440 and Pt/C on carbon fiber paper in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte solution. (C) Corresponding Tafel plots derived from the LSVs of Fig. 8B.57 Figure reproduced from X. Xing, R. Liu, K. Cao, U. Kaiser, G. Zhang and C. Streb, Manganese vanadium oxide–N-doped reduced graphene oxide composites as oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution electrocatalysts, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44511–44517 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The OER activity of MnVOx@N-rGO (I-440 and I-900) was studied by depositing it on carbon fiber paper and carrying out electrochemical measurements in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte solution (Fig. 6B). The I-440 and I-900 composites presented similar behaviors as confirmed from an overpotential of 440 and 420 mV and Tafel slopes of 286 and 271 mV dec−1 at 10 mA cm−2, but the material treated at 900 °C showed improved stability for 1500 redox cycles, which is relatively high for OER electrocatalysts.
Despite the much higher OER overpotentials, the electrocatalysts that are not based on Co, Fe and Ni oxides are still very relevant. In fact, high ORR and OER activity were recently reported for mixed valence manganese oxides.69 Also, the positive role of stable and highly conducting materials is already well established for the preparation of electrocatalytic composite materials based on metal oxides.52 Finally, the almost identical performance of I-440 (Mn2V2O7) and I-900 (Mn1.5V1.5O4) is surprising, particularly when considering their contrasting crystal structures, indicating that synergic interactions probably are playing a key role and that the proper choice of the components and structural design modulating their interactions is an interesting strategy for the development of increasingly efficient OER electrocatalysts.
2.2 Hydroxides
The most relevant advancements on the design of homogeneous and heterogeneous OER electrocatalysts were recently reviewed by Gonçalves and collaborators.26 Eye catching developments were described, especially those based on layered double hydroxides (LDHs) that were shown to be the most promising ones based on abundant and cheap transition metal elements. Such results were also reviewed by Lv et al.72 and Cai et al.,7 who presented the recent advances on the rational design of LDH-based OER electrocatalysts, focusing especially on the synthetic strategies allowing structural and composition control.
LDHs constitute a special class of materials in which the crystals are formed by pilling up electrically charged layers analogous to that of brucite (Mg(OH)2), which is constituted by individual layers with Mg(II) ions in octahedral sites and hydroxides ions in the vertices. LDHs are prone to composition changes upon lattice substitution, an interesting way to impart new properties while maintaining an almost unchanged structure. For example, when a Mg(II) ion is isomorphically substituted by a trivalent metal cation (M3+), the excess of positive charge must be neutralized and anions are incorporated into the interlamellar space. As consequence, a series of LDH type materials of general formula [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2]x+(Am−)x/m·nH2O can be generated, where M2+ stands for a bivalent metal cation such as Mg2+, Ca2+, Cu2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+, and M3+ represents a trivalent cation, typically Al3+, Cr3+, Fe3+, Mn3+, and Co3+. Finally, A represents an organic or inorganic anion of charge m− such as acetate, Cl−, NO3−, CO32− and SO42−, whereas x is the molar ratio of M3+/(M2+ + M3+) ions, as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the classical LDH structure.73 Figure reproduced from T. Li, N. H. Miras and Y.-F. Song, Polyoxometalate (POM)-Layered Double Hydroxides (LDH) composite materials: design and catalytic applications, Catalysts, 2017, 7, with permission from the MDPI. 
Accordingly, vanadium-containing LDHs can be prepared in two ways: (a) by isomorphic incorporation of vanadium cations or (b) by intercalation of vanadium-based anions. Indeed, Nejati and colleagues74 reported the influence of vanadate anion intercalated in zinc-iron layered double hydroxides (ZnFe-LDHs) obtained by the coprecipitation method producing ZnFe–VO4-LDH nanoplates. This was shown to be an efficient electrocatalyst for the OER in alkaline solution, presenting a relatively low overpotential (<585 mV), small Tafel slope (26.0 mV dec−1), and large exchange current density. At η = 0.46 V (vs. SCE), a current density of 188.43 mA cm−2 was measured for ZnFe–VO4-LDH nanoplates, a significantly much larger value than that measured for ZnFe–MoO4-LDH and ZnFe–NO3-LDH nanoparticles. The improved electrocatalytic properties were associated with its layered structure, where the larger interlamellar spacing allows the random movement of electrons and favors the diffusion of hydroxide ions and water molecules along the metal hydroxide layers, thus ensuring effective interaction of electroactive species with the catalytic active sites. The larger interlamellar spacing in ZnFe–VO4-LDH compared to ZnFe–MoO4-LDH and ZnFe–NO3-LDH analogues was confirmed by XRD, and was reflected as increased electroactive areas (respectively 5.031, 4.667 and 2.005 times larger than those of the respective GC electrodes), facilitating O2 diffusion and evolution.
Despite the significant improvements achieved by vanadate anion intercalation in ZnFe-LDHs, there is a consensus that vanadate ions act only as spacers and the electrocatalytic sites are the Zn2+ and Fe3+ sites. A contrasting result was obtained by Liu et al.75 who synthesized a LDH by isomorphic incorporation of V5+ cations by a simple one-step and low energy coprecipitation method, which generated amorphous cobalt-vanadium bimetallic hydr(oxy)oxide (denoted as CoV-UAH) with ultrathin two-dimensional structures (∼0.7 ± 0.1 nm) and uniform V-ion doping (Fig. 8C and D). This showed to be a robust and promising electrocatalytic material for the OER, with a low overpotential of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and long stability under operating conditions (170 h) in alkaline medium (Fig. 8A and B). In fact, this electrocatalytic activity is even better than that of CoV-LDH prepared by Bao and collaborators76 and Co0.75V0.25-hydroxide nanoneedles (HNNs) prepared by Yang et al.,77 as shown in Table 2.
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical performance of CoV-UAH in the OER. (A) The iR-corrected LSVs for CoV-UAH, Co-UH, V2O5, CoV–C and IrO2; and (B) corresponding Tafel plots. (C) AFM image of CoV-UAH, in which P-I and P-II mark the pores in the nanosheets. (D) Corresponding height profiles of CoV-UAH. In situ XAS characterization of CoV-UAH. (E) Co K-edge XANES data collected at the initial state and in situ state of CoV-UAH and CoV–C as well as those of CoOOH for comparison. (F) V K-edge XANES data collected at the initial state and in situ state of CoV-UAH and CoV–C as well as those of VO2 for comparison. Here, the in situ experiments were performed during the potentiostatic OER process at 1.50 V vs. RHE.75 Figure adapted from J. Liu, Y. Ji, J. Nai, X. Niu, Y. Luo, L. Guo and S. Yang, Ultrathin amorphous cobalt–vanadium hydr(oxy)oxide catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, Energy & Environmental Science, 2018, 11, 1736–1741 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 Activity parameters of recently reported OER based catalysts: pH conditions, onset potential, Tafel slope and overpotential at 10 mA cm−2a




OER catalysts
Nanomaterial
Nanomaterial or substrate
Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 (E10) (mV vs. RHE)
Onset potential (V vs. RHE)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Stability (h)
pH condition
Ref.





a Ball-milled SNCF = SNCF-BM, SNCF = SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ, CaCu3Fe4O12 (CCFO), SrFeO3 (SFO), CaFeO3 (CFO), ultrathin amorphous cobalt–vanadium bimetallic hydr(oxy)oxide (CoV-UAH). NiF = nickel foam; GCE = glassy carbon electrode; NiS = S-modified NF; N-rGO = N-doped reduced graphene oxide. AuVNF = gold–vanadate nanoflute, and HNNs = hydroxide nanoneedles. # = 1000 cycles. ## = 1500 cycles. ### = 2000 cycles. #### = 5000 cycles. ##### = 10000 cycles.





NiFe2−xVxO4
Spinel oxides
—
—
—
∼40.0
—
1 M KOH

83



CoV1.5Fe0.5O4
Spinel oxides
—
∼300
∼1.51
38.0
25
1 M KOH

84



m-CoVOx
MOx
Ni
293
—
49.0
15
1 M KOH

50



α-CoVOx
MOx
Ni foam
254
∼1.46
35.0
15
1 M KOH

50



CoVOx
MOx
—
300
∼1.50*
66.0
∼10
1 M KOH

51



MnVOx@N-rGO I-440
MOx
N-rGO
440
—
286.0
—
0.1 M KOH

57



MnVOx@N-rGO I-900
MOx
N-rGO
420
—
271.0
##
0.1 M KOH

57



V–Co/CoO@C
MOx
C nanorod
320
—
143.0
30
1 M KOH

85



VOx/Ni3S2
MOx
Ni foam
—
—
82.0
10
1 M KOH

86



Co3V2O8
Vanadates
—
359
∼1.58*
65.0
3
1 M KOH

63



Co3(VO4)2-II
Vanadates
—
330
1.54
59.0
∼11
1 M KOH

87



AuVNF
Vanadates
—
310
1.43
127.0
10
1 M KOH

88



Fe0.5V0.5
Oxides/hydroxide
—
390
—
36.7
10
1 M KOH

89



Co1−xVxOOH
Oxyhydroxide
Ni foam
190
—
39.9
100
1 M KOH

90



CoV-UAH
LDH
—
250
1.41
44.0
170
1 M KOH

75



CoV-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
310
∼1.52*
108.0
—
1 M KOH

76



Co0.75V0.25-HNNs
LDH
Ni foam
268
∼1.47*
80.0
48
1 M KOH

77



ZnFe–VO4-LDH
LDH
—
<585
—
26.0
1.11
0.1 M KOH

74



Ni0.75V0.25-LDHs
LDH
—
∼315
∼1.48
50.0
∼25
1 M KOH

59



NiFeV-DLH
LDH
—
192
∼1.40
42.0
18
1 M KOH

82



Ni3V1Fe1-LDH
LDH
GCE
269
∼1.48*
68.0
#
1 M KOH

91



Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH
LDH
CFP
200
∼1.48
39.0
60
1 M KOH

81



Ni0.75Fe0.125V0.125-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
231
1.46
39.4
15
1 M KOH

80



NiVIr-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
203
∼1.43
55.3
<15
1 M KOH

92



NiV-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
200
—
178.0
#
1 M KOH

93



NiVIr-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
180
—
38.0
#
1 M KOH

93



NiVRu-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
190
—
83.0
#
1 M KOH

93



CoMoV-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
270
∼1.50*
106.0
20
1 M KOH

76



CoFeV-LDH
LDH
Ni foam
242
—
57.0
32
1 M KOH

94



Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF
Sulfide
Ni–Co foam
330
—
182.0
#####
1 M KOH

95



V–Ni3S2
Sulfide
Ni foam
148
—
42.0
60
1 M KOH

96



V–Ni3S2
Sulfide
CC
180
—
56.0
30
1 M KOH

97



NiFe(OH)x/VS
Sulfide
Ni foam
—
—
75.0
10
1 M KOH

98



Ni3S2/VS4
Sulfide
Ni foam
—
—
43.0
50
1 M KOH

99



Co/VN
Nitride
—
320
∼1.52*
55.5
###
1 M KOH

62



Co3V/VN
Oxide/nitride
—
324
—
68.68
—
1 M KOH

100



Co/VN
Nitride
Ni foam
312
—
69.02
####
1 M KOH

100



NiCo2O4/VN800
Oxide/nitride
GCE
385
—
75.7
∼7
1 M KOH

101



CVN/CC
Nitride
CC
263
—
64.1
100
1 M KOH

102



VN
Nitride
CC
458
—
—
<10
1 M KOH

103



VN–Co
Nitride
CC
395
—
—
—
1 M KOH

103



VN–P
Nitride
CC
401
—
—
—
1 M KOH

103



VN–Co–P
Nitride
CC
335
—
—
10
1 M KOH

103





Table 2 Best BiVO4-based photoanodes found in the literature in the period of 2011 to 2016 (measured under standard AM 1.5 G illumination and 1 sun intensity (100 mW cm−2, obtained at 1.20–1.23 V vs. RHE)).131 Table adapted from R. K. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Recent advances in the BiVO4 photocatalyst for sun-driven water oxidation: top-performing photoanodes and scale-up challenges, Catalysts, 2017, 7 with permission from MDPI




BiVO4-based photocatalyst
Photocurrent density (mA cm−2 at 1.20–1.23 V vs. RHE)
Year




2%: Mo:BiVO4 with CoPi
2.00
2011


Porous BiVO4
1.10
2012


Porous BiVO4 with FeOOH
1.70


3%: Mo:BiVO4
1.00
2013


3%: Mo:BiVO4 with FeOOH
3.00


1%: W:BiVO4 with CoPi
2.30


BiVO4 with gradient-doped W (0 to 1%)
1.10


BiVO4 with gradient-doped W (0 to 1%) with CoPi
3.60


Nanoporous BiVO4
1.80
2014


Nanoporous BiVO4 with NiOOH
3.30


Nanoporous BiVO4 with FeOOH
3.60


Nanoporous BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH
4.20


Nanoporous BiVO4 with NiOOH/FeOOH
3.20


Mo:BiVO4 macro mesoporous (inverse opals)
1.1


Double deck inverse opal Wo3:BiVO4
3.30


Wo3/W:BiVO4 core–shell nanowires
3.10


Al-doped inverse opals BiVO4 heterostructures
1.50


(W,Mo):BiVO4
1.60


WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4 helix
3.60


WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4 helix with FeOOH/NiOOH
5.35


BiVO4 with CoOx
1.5
2015


BiVO4 with NiO/NiOOH/CoOx
3.50


N:BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH
5.00


WO3/BiVO4 nanorods with CoPi
6.72


(H,3%: Mo):BiVO4 with Co-Ci
4.90


SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone Mo:BiVO4
4.18
2016


SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone Mo:BiVO4 with Fe(Ni)OOH
5.82


Pristine BiVO4/SnO2/Au on textured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate
1.37


Pristine BiVO4/SnO2/Au on textured PDMS substrate with FeOOH
2.00


WO3/BiVO4
3.00


WO3/BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH
4.00


Dense BiVO4 with CoPi
3.00


WO3/BiVO4/SnO2
1.50


10%: Mo:BiVO4
1.20




Interestingly, the combination of in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy with first-principles simulations revealed that the ultrathin, amorphous and alloyed structure is responsible for the easy transformation into the desirable active phase, dramatically enhancing the catalytic activity. The large amounts of homogeneously distributed [VO4] units distort the adjacent CoO6 sites generating mismatches and defects responsible for the formation of an amorphous structure. In other words, CoV-UAH may be better described as consisting of distorted [CoO6−x] octahedral and [VO4] tetrahedral units. In fact, the absorption edge of V in CoV-UAH is shifted to lower energy implying that V ions in lower valence states such as V4+ and V3+ can be present in the structure. Such a reduction reaction may take place by charge transfer from cobalt to vanadium due to the strong interactions between them, as confirmed from cobalt and vanadium K-edges in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 8E and F).75
A highly efficient and low cost bimetallic NiV-LDH electrocatalyst featuring less than 1 nm thick monolayers, able to sustain current densities as high as 27 mA cm−2 (57 mA cm−2 after ohmic drop correction) and a Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 at an overpotential of 350 mV, was proposed by Fan et al.59 In fact, these values indicate that its performance is comparable to that of the best NiFe-LDH catalyst in alkaline solution.22 The combination of favorable characteristics, such as high charge carrier mobility and surface area, associated with its high density of active sites, seems to be responsible for the exceptional electrocatalytic activity.
In recent years, bimetallic NiFe-LDHs have been cited as the non-noble metal hydroxide-based materials with the best electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties. However, most recently it has been shown that synergic interactions arising from the incorporation of a third metallic element can improve further such properties. In this perspective, significant improvements were achieved by incorporation of Mn2+ (ref. 25) (190 mV overpotential and a Tafel slope of 68.6 mV dec−1), Co2+ (ref. 78) (250 mV overpotential and a Tafel slope of 31.0 mV dec−1) and Ce3+ (ref. 79) (227 mV overpotential and a Tafel slope of 33.0 mV dec−1) into the NiFe-LDH structure (∼300 mV overpotential and a Tafel slope of ∼64.0 mV dec−1 (ref. 59)). Similarly, Dinh et al.80 reported the hydrothermal synthesis of ultrathin and porous NiFeV trimethyl hydroxide nanoparticles (NiFeV-LDHs), grown on a nickel foam (NF) substrate, demonstrating to be efficient electrodes for water splitting in an alkaline medium. The nanosheets constituting this material are a few hundred nanometers wide but only ∼10 nm thick (Fig. 9A and B). The Ni0.75Fe0.125V0.125-LDH/NF electrode presented the best performance for the OER in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, with excellent electrocatalytic activity at an overpotential of 231 mV (Fig. 9C) and a Tafel slope of only 39.4 mV dec−1 (Fig. 9D), allied to a remarkable durability and stability for 15 h of continuous operation. Such a remarkable performance was mainly attributed to the synergic effects in the trimetallic system increasing the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity and surface area.
 Fig. 9  (A) FESEM image and (B) TEM images of NiFeV-LDHs nanosheets. (C) The overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and (D) Tafel slopes of NiFeV-LDHs/NF, Ni(OH)2/NF, NiFe-LDHs/NF, and NiV-LDHs/NF, in 1.0 M KOH, at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1.80 Figure adapted from K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Ultrathin porous NiFeV ternary layer hydroxide nanosheets as a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, Small, 2018, 14, 1703257 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The synergistic effects on trimetallic LDHs have also been studied by Jiang et al.81 who performed X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and XPS studies to understand the role of V ions in high performance FeNi-LDHs. The very strong electronic interactions of the V ions with the other transition metal ions were found to be responsible for the synergic effects in Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH nanoleaves exhibiting a Tafel slope of 39 mV dec−1 at η = 200 mV, as expected for a material with high electrocatalytic activity and faster electron-transfer kinetics than the NiFeV-LDHs prepared by Dinh et al.80
The in situ XAS analyses were consistent with a significant shortening of the metal–oxygen bond lengths in the activated catalyst (Fig. 10A–C), especially the V–O distances (Fig. 10C). Such V atoms may have an enhanced capability to bind oxygen intermediates as compared with Ni and Fe-sites, thus exhibiting higher OER activity. In fact, the results of density functional theory modeling indicated that the binding energy at vanadium sites in NiFeV-LDHs is very close to the optimal expected value for WOCs, resulting in much lower overpotentials than in nickel-based and iron-based catalysts. This may be related to the increased electron density at V sites by partial electron-transfer from Fe and Ni-atoms through the O2− bridges (Fig. 10D), associated with an additional stabilization of the V sites in high valence states under OER conditions. More interestingly, the dioxygen binding energies to the V sites can be tuned according to the Sabatier principle in such a way to favor the release of O2 generated in the process.
 Fig. 10  (A–C) FT curves respectively of Ni, Fe, and V K-edge EXAFS k2χ(k) functions. The orange and pink circles represent the fitting values. (D) Schematic representations of the electronic coupling of Ni, Fe, and V in Ni3Fe, Ni3V, and Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH. Microscopy measurements of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 NSs: (E) top-view SEM image of a carbon fiber coated with Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH at high magnification, (F) TEM image of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 NSs scratched off from the as-prepared CFP electrode, and (G) atomic-resolution BF-TEM image of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5NSs.81 Scale bars: (E) = 100 nm; (F) = 40 nm; (G) = 1 nm. Figure adapted from J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Atomic-level insight into super-efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution on iron and vanadium co-doped nickel (oxy)hydroxide, Nature Communications, 2018, 9, 2885 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Finally, the porous ultrathin surface of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 (Fig. 10E) maximizes the number of available active sites and facilitates electrolyte diffusion, contributing to improve the electrocatalytic performance while conferring good mechanical stability to the electrode. This nanoarchitecture can be seen in the TEM image shown in Fig. 10F, where a thickness of 2.7–4.2 nm was measured. The diffraction patterns were consistent with the (101) interplanar distance of 2.67 Å as confirmed in the BF-TEM atomic resolution image shown in Fig. 10G. This spacing is similar to that found in α-Ni(OH)2 (2.68 Å) even considering the isomorphic substitution of Ni by Fe and V in the nickel hydroxide lattice.
Even better results were reported by Li and collaborators82 who proposed that the electronic structure of NiFe-LDH materials can be tuned by vanadium ion doping, generating nanostructured NiFeV-LDHs with unprecedented OER activity (Fig. 11A) as a consequence of synergic effects. A current density of 20 mA cm−2 was achieved at 1.42 V vs. RHE, i.e. with only 195 mV overpotential and a Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1 (Fig. 11C), in 1.0 M KOH solution, confirming it as the best NiFeV electrocatalyst ever prepared. The effect of composition on the OER electrocatalytic performance of such 4.8 nm thick platelet-shaped nanomaterials was carefully studied (Fig. 11B). The electrochemical behavior and theoretical modelling by DFT and U simulations suggest that the exceptional activity can be attributed to the huge electronic effect of vanadium ions narrowing the gap and increasing the conductivity and activity of catalytic sites (Fig. 11D). Thus, the incorporation of vanadium cations into trimetallic LDHs has consistently shown to be a very promising strategy to develop materials with much better electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic structure of NiFeV-LDH and (B) SEM image of the as-prepared NiFeV-LDHs nanosheet array. (C) Comparison of the overpotential of NiFeV-LDHs, NiFe-LDHs, and NiV-LDHs at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2. (D) Total density of states (TDOS) curves of NiFeV-LDHs and NiFe LDHs, where the narrowed bandgap of NiFeV-LDH indicates a more conducting material.82 Figure adapted from P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Tuning electronic structure of NiFe layered double hydroxides with vanadium doping toward high efficient electrocatalytic water oxidation, Advanced Energy Materials, 2018, 8, 1703341 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
2.3 Nitrides
Among the different classes of transition metal compounds highlighted as OER electrocatalysts, transition metal nitrides (TMNs) showed promising results13,103 and good electrical conductivity and resistance to corrosion.103,104 Especially iron,105 cobalt106 and nickel107,108 based nitrides showed attractive electrocatalytic performance for the OER. However, less attention has been focused on vanadium nitrides103 which need stability improvements under working conditions at high potentials.
In this context, Yang and collaborators103 have suggested adjusting the electronic structure of TMNs by doping as a suitable strategy to improve the stability of this class of materials. Recently, they reported the preparation of vanadium nitride (VN) nanowires co-doped with cobalt and phosphorous using a simple hydrothermal and post-annealing approach (Fig. 12A–C), as well as the results of HER and OER activity evaluation. Co and P were shown to be well dispersed in the individual nanowires of VN–Co–P, as confirmed by EDS mapping (Fig. 12D–H), exhibiting higher chemical stability and activity and an overpotential of 335 mV in alkaline media, lower than that for VN, VN–Co and VN–P (Table 2), demonstrating the possibility of preparation of TMN-based OER electrocatalysts. In fact, VN–Co–P displayed exceptional OER performance and a faradaic efficiency near 100%, as confirmed from the amount of O2 produced during GC measurements. However, the TEM analyses of the VN–Co–P electrocatalyst indicated that VN is not as stable as initially supposed and its surface was converted into amorphous oxide/hydroxide after the OER. A similar process also is frequently observed with other non-oxide metal-based catalysts (such as metal nitrides, phosphides, and borides) after cycling/working under operating conditions.103,106 Accordingly, it is possible that the catalytically active material is the thin layer of oxide/hydroxide formed on the surface of VN during electrochemical oxidation of water. In addition, there is a synergistic effect between the doped Co and P atoms, which could help expose the active sites on the VN–Co–P surface to the reactants while improving the electronic effects.103,109 Co-doping not only may increase the density of d-states with an energy similar to the Fermi level allowing low-to-intermediate adsorption energies,103,110 but also can contribute to enhance the electron conductivity and physical properties, thereby providing stabilized and more catalytically active sites in VN–Co–P than in undoped VN.103,111
 Fig. 12  SEM images of (A) VN, (B) VN–Co, and (C) VN–Co–P. (D–H) EDS mapping of VN–Co–P.103 (I) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CVN/CC. Comparative (J) iR-corrected LSV profiles and (K) respective Tafel plots (inset: CA test at 1.56 V vs. RHE) of the OER catalysts. Panels (A–H) figure adapted from H. Yang, Y. Hu, D. Huang, T. Xiong, M. Li, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Efficient hydrogen and oxygen evolution electrocatalysis by cobalt and phosphorus dual-doped vanadium nitride nanowires, Materials Today Chemistry, 2019, 11, 1–7 with permission from Elsevier. Panels (I–K) figure adapted from S. Dutta, A. Indra, Y. Feng, H. Han and T. Song, Promoting electrocatalytic overall water splitting with nanohybrid of transition metal nitride-oxynitride, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 2019, 241, 521–527 with permission from Elsevier. 
A similar doping strategy was used by Dutta et al.102 for the preparation of nanohybrid materials based on cobalt nitride Co4N and vanadium oxynitride (VN1−xOx) named Co4N–VN1−xOx, significantly improving its electrocatalytic OER properties in this way. This tridimensional material was prepared on carbon cloth (CVN/CC) by pyrolysis of a Co–V precursor grown on polyaniline (PANI) deposited on the substrate (CV-PANI/CC, Fig. 12I). The CVN/CC nanohybrid exhibited excellent OER electrocatalytic activity with as low an overpotential as 263 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte solution (Fig. 12J). Its performance is superior to that recently reported for Co–VN (η10 = 320 mV)62 and RuO2/CC (η10 = 295 mV), the most advanced noble metal catalysts, confirming the high activity achievable by hybrid nitride-oxynitride based materials. The improved reaction kinetics is also confirmed by the low Tafel slope of 64.1 mV dec−1 (Fig. 12K). Chronoamperometric (CA) measurement at 1.56 V vs. RHE was carried out to estimate the stability of the materials (inset; Fig. 12K). The initial increase in the current density can be explained by the formation of new catalytically active sites during the electrochemical activation. The decrease in the current density with time was assigned to partial deactivation of the active sites and detachment of the catalyst from the CC support. However, the material was able to withstand the harsh operating conditions and produce a stable current density for 20 h of CA test, whereas RuO2/CC lost 60% of its initial activity within the same period of time. Furthermore, the preparation method based on pyrolysis of nitrogen rich precursors deposited on carbon cloth is efficient112 and avoids the use of toxic ammonia gas, the usual method for the synthesis of metal nitrides.106,113
Bimetallic TMNs incorporating cobalt and vanadium (Co–V) were also explored as catalysts for the oxidation of water,100 using Co2V2O7·xH2O nanoparticles as the precursor (Fig. 13B). The Co2VO4 and Co/VN materials were prepared simply by adjusting the parameters for calcination under an NH3 atmosphere. At 400 °C, the V5+ ions in the precursor were partially reduced to V4+ thus generating Co2VO4. The efficiency of this reduction reaction is higher at 500 °C producing the Co/VN hybrid material (Fig. 13C and D), as expected for the formation of VN and reduction of Co2+ to cobalt metal. Both Co and V come from the Co2V2O7·xH2O precursor assuring the intimate contact and strong interaction of Co and VN units, thus avoiding the aggregation of Co nanoparticles and enhancing the number of available catalytically active sites. Interestingly, the bimetallic materials based on Co–V were shown to be active for the HER and OER depending on their structure. In fact, Co/VN demonstrated good activity for the HER whereas Co2VO4 is a better OER electrocatalyst as indicated by the overpotential of 300 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Tafel slope 65.32 mV dec−1) and good durability, as confirmed by CV and CA measurements. The electrode showed only little performance loss after 5000 CV cycles and maintained a current density of 20 mA cm−2 with minimal change of the overpotential during 12 h of operation. The electrocatalytic performance of Co/VN and Co3V/VN was similar, exhibiting overpotentials of 312 and 324 mV and Tafel slopes of 69.02 and 68.68 mV dec−1 respectively. All these results demonstrate that bimetallic Co–V can be an interesting alternative OER electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 13  (A) Scheme showing the preparation of Co–V bimetallic catalysts. SEM image (B) of the Co2V2O7·xH2O precursor nanoplates and (C and D) Co/VN catalyst.100 Figure adapted from Y. Xiao, C. Tian, M. Tian, A. Wu, H. Yan, C. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Jiao and H. Fu, Cobalt-vanadium bimetal-based nanoplates for efficient overall water splitting, Science China Materials, 2018, 61, 80–90 with permission from Springer Nature. 
A more detailed study on the preparation of Co/VN based materials (Fig. 14A) was carried out by Peng and collaborators62 who monitored the morphological changes as a function of the reaction temperature and time by SEM, where smooth nanosheets were observed as the product of hydrothermal processing of Co2V2O7 (Fig. 14). Such a morphology is maintained even after nitration with ammonia at 550 °C for 3 h (Fig. 14B) but the surface becomes rougher as a consequence of the large amounts of embedded nanoparticles, indicating that they are segregated on the surface while the nanosheets become porous (Fig. 14C). Ammonium nitrogenation of the hydrothermal product was performed at different temperatures and times. When the annealing temperature was below 550 °C and the time shorter than 3 h, some vanadate species still remained. However, a VN and Co metal composite was produced when the annealing temperature was increased above 550 °C and the time longer than 3 h, as confirmed by XRD analyses.
 Fig. 14  (A) Scheme showing the preparation of the porous Co/VN nanosheets as an OER electrocatalyst. SEM images of (B) the hydrothermal product of Co2V2O7 and (C) Co/VN material with insets showing the corresponding high-magnification images. (D) HR-TEM image of Co/VN. (E) Elemental maps of Co and O of nanoparticles embedded in the Co/VN nanosheets. (F) Nyquist plots of Co/VN, Co2V2O7, and commercial IrO2 electrocatalysts, and the equivalent electric circuit used to simulate the Nyquist plots in the inset, where Rs is the electrolyte resistance, Rct is the charge-transfer resistance, and Cdl represents the double-layer capacitance. Figure adapted from X. Peng, L. Wang, L. Hu, Y. Li, B. Gao, H. Song, C. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Fu, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, In situ segregation of cobalt nanoparticles on VN nanosheets via nitriding of Co2V2O7 nanosheets as efficient oxygen evolution reaction electrocatalysts, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 1–7 with permission from Elsevier. 
HRTEM experiments were performed to determine the oxidation state and distribution of cobalt in the composite in more detail, as shown in Fig. 14D. The incorporated nanoparticles were shown to have a core–shell structure where the core showed interference fringes of 0.201 nm and 0.176 nm, respectively assigned to the (111) and (200) planes of Co-metal nanocrystals (JCPDS 15-0806). They are covered up by a several nanometer thick amorphous shell, whose elemental mapping (Fig. 14E) showed a strong O signal consistent with the presence of an oxide layer associated with the metallic Co core. In summary, results suggest that metallic Co nanoparticles covered with an oxide layer are embedded in the porous VN nanosheets produced by ammonium nitrogenation of the hydrothermal decomposition product of Co2V2O7. The new structure showed ultrafast electron transfer and excellent OER activity (320 mV overpotential) confirmed from the Nyquist plot (Fig. 14F). The Co/VN electrocatalyst exhibited a charge-transfer resistance of 4.2 Ω, lower than that of Co2V2O7 and IrO2, commercial catalysts. These results were also consistent with the low Tafel slope of 55.5 mV dec−1 but long term stability is a fundamental property for a water splitting catalyst. The overpotential showed no obvious shift at a current density of 100 mA cm−2, and a mere 20 and 34 mV shift was respectively observed after 1000 and 2000 CV cycles at a current density of 200 mA cm−2. The excellent stability results from the good adhesion and contact between metallic Co and the conducting VN substrate thereby preventing loss and aggregation of the embedded Co nanoparticles on the VN nanosheet substrate, with the material demonstrating good potential as a catalyst for water oxidation reactions and related applications.
A more detailed analysis of the last two examples revealed some very relevant properties of vanadium nitride (VN), that was also employed as the support for Co-based electrocatalysts,62,100 such as metallic conductivity, chemical resistance to the majority of solvents and good stability under typical application conditions.114 Accordingly, Zheng et al.101 prepared a series of vanadium (VN) nitride materials to take advantage of such properties by using them as the support for NiCo2O4. The material prepared by supporting NiCo2O4 on VN and processing at 800 °C, named NiCo2O4/VN800, exhibited better OER catalytic activity and stability (Fig. 15C) than pure NiCo2O4 and NiCo2O4 supported on carbon black (NiCo2O4/C), presenting overpotentials of respectively 385, 426, and 418 mV. Its good electrocatalytic properties were confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), where smaller arcs in the Nyquist plots (Fig. 15B) were consistent with the high conductivity and good corrosion resistance of VN, associated with higher Co2+ and Ni3+ contents on the surface as a consequence of the electrostatic interaction of VN and NiCo2O4.
 Fig. 15  (A) SEM image and scheme showing the possible activation mechanism of the NiCo2O4/VN800 material for the OER. (B) Nyquist plots and (C) CV curves of NiCo2O4, NiCo2O4/C, and NiCo2O4/VN800.101 Figure adapted from Z. Zheng, X. Du, Y. Wang, C. M. Li and T. Qi, Efficient and stable NiCo2O4/VN nanoparticle catalyst for electrochemical water oxidation, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 2018, 6, 11473–11479 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
At this point it is important to remember that the oxidation state of V in VN is 3+ and its valence electronic configuration is 3d2. Accordingly, V(III) has a strong tendency to transfer an electron whilst cobalt ions in NiCo2O4 have unoccupied orbitals that can accommodate it. The possible mechanism is explained as follows: (1) VN electrons tend to be transferred to the NiCo2O4 surface, (2) while Co3+ is a stronger oxidant than Ni2+ and much more easily reduced resulting in an increased Co2+ content, (3) but the Ni3+ content should increase accordingly to preserve the electric charge balance of this mixed oxide. The schematic diagram of such a mechanism is shown in Fig. 15A, thus explaining the high electrocatalytic activity of NiCo2O4/VN800.
2.4 Chalcogenides
Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been widely investigated as HER electrocatalysts, but only poor performances as OER electrocatalysts have been reported27 so far, indicating that there is still much room for improvement in this class of materials. In this context, Fan et al.95 presented an innovative solution consisting of the partial conversion of NiV-LDH nanosheets to Chevrel phase bifunctional chalcogenides producing materials with high electrocatalytic performance for water electrolysis. To achieve such a goal, hydrangea-shaped NiV-LDH nanosheets were synthesized over NCF through a hydrothermal process (Fig. 16B and C), and then Ni–V–Mo sulfide (Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11) was deposited by anion exchange between NiV-LDH and (NH4)2MoS4 nanosheets. This precursor was suspended in DMF and stirred for 15 minutes at room temperature, N2H4·H2O was added and the mixture was poured into a Teflon lined autoclave, mixed with previously prepared NiV-LDH/NCF, sealed and kept at 200 °C for 6 hours. Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF formed in the process was washed four times with ethanol and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 6 h, and then isolated and studied (Fig. 16A). The material presented high durability and OER catalytic activity in 1.0 M KOH solution (water splitting at a constant overpotential of 1.0 V for 8 h delivered a current density of 198 mA cm−2), with an overpotential of 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16D), better than most advanced systems based on Ni–V electrodes, attesting the good potential of Chevrel phase TMCs as electrocatalysts for water splitting in alkaline media.
 Fig. 16  (A) Scheme showing the synthesis of 3D Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF bifunctional electrocatalysts. SEM images of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF at (B) low and (C) high resolution. Inset in (C) shows magnified nanosheets. (D) HER and OER LSV curves of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF for water splitting. The inset shows the simultaneous H2 and O2 gas evolution of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF electrodes powered by a 1.5 V battery. Morphological and structural characterization of V–Ni3S2/NF.95 (E) SEM image of Ni foam coated with a V–Ni3S2 nanorod array at low magnification. (F) SEM image of the V–Ni3S2 nanorod array. (G) TEM image and (H) EDX elemental mapping of Ni (brown), S (magenta), and V (yellow) elements. Scale bars: (a) 100 μm; (b) 1 μm; (c) 500 nm. Electrochemical OER properties of V–Ni3S2/NF in 1 M KOH. (I) Polarization curves and (J) corresponding Tafel plots of V–Ni3S2/NF, Ni3S2/NF, NF, and RuO2.96 Figure adapted from H. Fan, J. Huang, G. Chen, W. Chen, R. Zhang, S. Chu, X. Wang, C. Li and K. K. Ostrikov, Hollow Ni–V–Mo chalcogenide nanopetals as bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 2019, 7, 1622–1632 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Figure adapted from J. Guo, K. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, L. Tang and X. Zhang, Efficient bifunctional vanadium-doped Ni3S2 nanorod array for overall water splitting, Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers, 2019, 6, 443–450 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Still considering transition metal disulfides, Guo et al.96 decorated nickel foam with vanadium-doped Ni3S2 nanorods, developing a matrix for application in WOCs (Fig. 16E and F). As can be seen in the EDX mapping shown in Fig. 16G and H, the highly dispersed vanadium dopant behaves as additional synergistic catalytically active sites. The nanorod morphology is responsible for the high surface area and rapid mass transfer processes, while the NF substrate provides fast charge-transfer to the catalytic active sites. Therefore, the designed V–Ni3S2/NF system demonstrated high OER catalytic activity, providing impressive performance for water oxidation indicated by the overpotential of just 148 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16I) and the very low Tafel slope of 58 mV dec−1 (Fig. 16J), as well as high long-term stability. The V ions act as electron transfer sites to Ni sites reducing them to the metallic state, as indicated by the typical negative shift of the Ni 2p peak in the XPS spectrum. Notably, the increased metallic character imparted great benefits in improving the electrocatalytic properties. The designed V–Ni3S2/NF electrode is believed to be promising for practical use and at the same time offers an interesting new approach for the development of efficient electrocatalysts for energy conversion.
Similarly, Ma et al.97 prepared bifunctional 3D electrodes based on Ni3S2 nanosheets doped with vanadium deposited on carbon fiber cloth (V–Ni3S2/CC) presenting high global efficiency for the water splitting reaction. The V–Ni3S2 nanosheet electrode exhibited a large electroactive area, in addition to a high density of accessible catalytically active sites with large heterogeneous charge-transfer rate constants and fast electrolyte diffusion. Such a favorable set of properties are mostly a consequence of the electrode architecture (Fig. 17A) since the carbon fiber was densely decorated with a layer of vertically aligned micrometric and tens of nanometers thick V–Ni3S2 nanosheets exposing the edges. Furthermore, the 3D electrode has ultra-high flexibility and mechanical stability (Fig. 17A, lower left). They have uniform distribution of Ni, V and S where the V4+ ions act as the dopant (Fig. 17C) improving the electrocatalytic performance by enhancing the intrinsic activity and the kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction at the Ni3S2 sites. Surprisingly, the V–Ni3S2/CC electrodes demonstrated to be quite stable for the oxidation of water, exhibiting a low overpotential of 180 mV (10 mA cm−2) and a Tafel slope of 56 mV cm−2 for the OER, clearly indicating a positive synergic interaction of vanadium and Ni3S2 sites (Fig. 17D and E). No obvious decay of the catalytic current was detected for up to 30 h, demonstrating its good stability under operating conditions.
 Fig. 17  Morphological and structural characterization of V–Ni3S2/CC. (A) SEM image showing the carbon fiber vertically aligned with the V–Ni3S2 nanosheet array at low magnification. (B) TEM image showing the V–Ni3S2 nanosheets. (C) EDX elemental mapping showing the sheet features and uniform distribution of V, Ni, and S elements. Scale bars: (A) 1 μm and (B) 100 nm. Electrochemical OER measurements of V–Ni3S2/CC in 1 M KOH. (D) Polarization curves and the corresponding (E) Tafel plots of V–Ni3S2/CC, Ni3S2/CC, and RuO2.97 Figure adapted from L. Ma, K. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Guo and X. Zhang, Vanadium doping over Ni3S2 nanosheet array for improved overall water splitting, Applied Surface Science, 2019, 489, 815–823 with permission from Elsevier. 
3. V-containing photocatalysts
Photocatalytic water-splitting  is one of the most promising approaches for the production of green renewable energy12,38–40,115 since it is based on the use of sunlight to promote the oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions. The oxidation process (OER) involves the formation of “holes” h+ driving the half-reaction (2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+), whereas the reduction process is promoted by the high energy electrons simultaneously produced according to the half-reaction (2H+ + 2e− → H2).12 Any one of these processes can be the rate determining step but it is well known that the oxygen evolution reaction is more complex and sluggish since it involves four electrons and four protons, and the rate is limited by the high activation energy for the formation of the OO bond.12,39 In addition, the strong oxidizing conditions required greatly limit the class of materials that can possibly be used,115 such that the development of high performance OER photocatalysts continues to be a technological challenge and is attracting great attention of the scientific community.40
Oxometallates and semiconductor metal oxides such as TiO2, Fe2O3, ZnO, WO3 and BiVO4 probably are the most important materials for photocatalytic water-splitting. However, they still have low efficiencies as expected from their poor electronic properties (Fe2O3 and BiVO4) and/or large band-gaps (TiO2, WO3 and ZnO)40,116 decreasing the match with the solar spectrum. Accordingly, strategies such as surface state passivation, combinatorial synthesis, tuning the semiconductor material's band structure by doping with different elements, surface activation with WOCs, and nanostructuring115 are being explored to overcome these problems.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is one of the most important materials for this purpose due to its high photostability, insignificant toxicity, natural abundance and low cost.12 However, this oxide needs electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet range to be excited due to the large band-gap of 3.2 and 3.0 eV respectively for anatase and rutile phases, as confirmed from the low quantum efficiency under solar illumination.38,40 This is because most of the sunlight spectrum is made up of visible light (45%), and only 4 to 6% of the photons are in the UV range.38 In addition, the high recombination rates of photoexcited electron–hole pairs limit its practical application.39
TiO2 has higher photocatalytic activity for the OER as compared to vanadium oxides; however these materials have absorption in the visible range being more promising candidates as photocatalysts in this context.40 In a study performed by Shen et al. (2012),40 V2O5, V6O13, VO2(B) and VO2(M) were produced by the hydrothermal method and subsequently characterized to evaluate the photocatalytic and electrochemical properties providing important results to understand the influence of the degree of crystallinity and band-gap energy on the photoelectrochemical performance for H2(g) production. The band-gap energies measured for these materials deposited on ITO, at pH 0.0, were respectively 2.16, 3.10, 2.65, and 3.12 eV (Fig. 18A). It is evident that all four vanadium oxides have a band-gap lower than that of TiO2 and have a maximum absorption in the visible range, respectively at 573, 400, 468 and 397 nm.
 Fig. 18  (A) Band structure of VO2(M), VO2(B), V6O13 and V2O5 vanadium oxides at pH = 0.0.40 (B) Structure of bands and band-gaps of some photocatalysts at pH = 0.0.35 Panel (A) figure adapted from T. F. R. Shen, M.-H. Lai, T. C. K. Yang, I. P. Fu, N.-Y. Liang and W.-T. Chen, Photocatalytic production of hydrogen by vanadium oxides under visible light irradiation, Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers, 2012, 43, 95–101 with permission from Elsevier. Panel (B) figure adapted from T. Jafari, E. Moharreri, S. A. Amin, R. Miao, W. Song and L. S. Suib, Photocatalytic water splitting—the untamed dream: a review of recent advances, Molecules, 2016, 21 with permission from MDPI. 
Furthermore, by comparing the position of their valence and conduction bands with those of other currently studied semiconductor photocatalysts at the same pH (Fig. 18B), it is clear that vanadium oxides deserve greater attention. In fact, they have a conduction band (CB) with negative enough electrochemical potential (vs. NHE) to promote the HER, and a positive enough valence band (VB) potential to promote the OER, while having narrow enough band-gaps for absorption in the visible range. Despite the low OER photocatalytic activity of vanadium oxides as compared to other materials, great synergistic effects have been reported when they are incorporated into photocatalytic systems.38,115,117–123 Thus, the potential of vanadium incorporating materials such as MVO4 type vanadates (where M = Bi,117–119 Nd124 and Ce120,125), vanadium pentoxides (V2O5)121,122 has been shown and excellent results have been obtained with vanadium-doped semiconductor metal oxides38,123,126,127 currently studied as photocatalysts for the OER.
The possibility of doping TiO2 with vanadium and other transition metals has been studied by some groups, aiming at the extension of the TiO2 absorption to the visible region (>400 nm).38,123,126,127 In addition, vanadium doping stabilizes the rutile phase to the detriment of the anatase phase, decreasing the phase transition temperature from ∼1100 °C to ∼650 °C.126 Such a strategy has been used to increase the photocatalytic OER properties of TiO2 by Wu et al. (2011),38 as well as those of the HER by Agegnehu et al. (2016).127 In this case, the authors produced vanadium-doped anatase-TiV6.25%O2 and anatase-TiV9.37%O2 nanoparticles, thus shifting the VB and CB of TiO2 from −0.103 and 2.972 eV (Fig. 19A) respectively to −0.077 and 2.806 eV (Fig. 19B) and −0.074 and 2.527 eV (Fig. 19C). That is, vanadium doping decreased the anatase band-gap from 3.075 eV to 2.833 eV and 2.601 eV, respectively for the anatase-TiV6.25%O2 and anatase-TiV9.37%O2 photocatalysts. In other words, they demonstrated not only the possibility of decreasing the band-gap of TiO2 enhancing the photocatalytic activity in the visible range, both for the HER and OER, but also demonstrated the possibility of producing nanocomposites using graphene as the substrate, increasing the photocatalytic efficiency of pure TiO2 by several folds.
 Fig. 19  Theoretical simulations showing the band-gap narrowing for (A) anatase-TiO2, (B) anatase-TiV6.25%O2 and (C) anatase-TiV9.37%O2.127 Figure adapted from A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, M.-C. Tsai, J. Rick, W.-N. Su, J.-F. Lee and B.-J. Hwang, Visible light responsive noble metal-free nanocomposite of V-doped TiO2 nanorod with highly reduced graphene oxide for enhanced solar H2 production, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6752–6762 with permission from Elsevier. 
One of the first studies, if not the first one, on the O2 evolution reaction based on vanadium-doped TiO2 was reported by Wu and collaborators (2011)38 who doped TiO2 with 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0 and 5.0 mol% vanadium but observed only little changes in the photoabsorption behavior in the UV region. Nevertheless, a significant decrease was noticed in the reflectance ratio in the 400 to 700 nm range as a function of V5+ ion concentration, which indicates an increase in visible light absorption and a decrease in the band-gap. O2 production by the V–TiO2 photocatalyst at low vanadium doping was larger than that for pure TiO2 as follow: 0.0% < 1.0% > 2.0% > 3.0% > 4.0% > 5.0%. The photocatalytic activity of V1.0%–TiO2 was the best one, reaching O2 evolution rates as high as 160 μmol L−1 h −1 under 1 sun illumination.
However, the O2 production achieved by Wu et al. (2011)38 is not as high as that reported in some current studies. For example, Liang et al. (2019)39 reported the synthesis and use of carbon nanotube coated TiO2 nanostructures (TiO2/C HNTs) as efficient photocatalysts for water oxidation. The presence of the carbon coating on the TiO2 surface reduced the band gap and enabled light absorption in the visible and near infrared (NIR) region, thus facilitating the separation of electrons and holes and slowing down the recombination processes. In addition, the unique nanotube structure developed by the authors greatly increased the specific surface area and the light collection efficiency, significantly enhancing the photocatalytic performance. Finally, the material exhibited an OER rate of 705 μmol h−1 g−1 under sunlight and an excellent 539 μmol h−1 g−1 under NIR light illumination. However, the future seems to be tending towards vanadium doped V–TiO2 materials deposited on carbonaceous substrates such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, as demonstrated by Liang et al. (2019)39 and Agegnehu et al. (2016).127 In fact, such a combination presents enormous potential to improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO2-based materials for the OER and HER, thus opening the road for water-splitting systems.
In addition, to explore the synergistic photocatalytic effects of vanadium doping on TiO2, other promising semiconductor oxides such as WO3 have also been explored in the development of new photocatalysts, particularly for the HER and water splitting. One example is the work of Chandrasekaran et al. (2019)123 describing the synthesis of Mn and V-doped WO3 (Mn–WO3 and V–WO3, respectively). The water-splitting photocurrent measured for V–WO3 was 1.8 and 4.2 times larger than that for WO3 and Mn–WO3, respectively, where V–WO3 presented an overpotential of just −38 mV as compared to −411 and −97 mV of these oxides. Although no synergic OER activity has been discussed or observed upon doping of WO3 with vanadium, this work demonstrated that these materials have great potential and are interesting alternatives to the TiO2-based derivatives.
Currently, TiO2 is the most effective and extensively studied photocatalyst, but it suffers from some limitations as previously discussed on this account, especially due to its wide band-gap of 3.2 eV. Thus, photocatalysts active under visible light (VLD) have gained attention for many possible applications.128 In this sense, one of the most studied photocatalysts nowadays is the bismuth vanadate semiconductor, BiVO4, due to its small band-gap, low toxicity, high stability and possibility of effective utilization of solar energy.129 Nevertheless, the photocatalytic activity of BiVO4 is extremely dependent on its crystalline structure129,130 and particle size,128 so BiVO4 nanoparticles demonstrated much larger photocatalytic activity than microparticles under visible light illumination.
BiVO4 can be found in three different crystalline phases (Fig. 20): (a) tetragonal scheelite (ts-BiVO4) (Fig. 20A and C), (b) tetragonal zircon (tz-BiVO4) (Fig. 20B and E) and (c) monoclinic scheelite (m-BiVO4) (Fig. 20D).128 For example, the m-BiVO4 phase is known to be the best for photocatalytic applications under visible light since its band-gap is ∼2.4 eV, whereas the materials in the tetragonal phases have much larger band-gaps, thus being effective absorbers of UV light. The photoinduced charge separation performance is also much better but the mobility of the charge carriers is much lower and, consequently, the shorter free-mean path indicates a thin charge diffusion layer (<100 nm) and a relatively high electron–hole recombination rate. This is lower than that in the other phases in a quite significant way.129–131 Despite such unfavorable characteristics, the photocatalytic activity of BiVO4 can be enhanced using strategies such as the formation of heterojunctions, morphological control, nanostructuring, doping with heteroatoms, improvement of electron transport rates, inhibition of electron–hole recombination, improvement of surface properties, and production of materials in different crystalline phases and expositing different planes.35,117–122,128–131
 Fig. 20  Crystalline structures of tetragonal BiVO4: (A) scheelite (ts-BiVO4) and (B) zircon-like (tz-BiVO4). Local coordination of V and Bi ions in crystalline structures of (C) ts-BiVO4; (D) monoclinic scheelite (m-BiVO4); and (E) tz-BiVO4 (red = V, purple = Bi, and gray = O). Extracted from ref. 130. Figure adapted from Y. Park, K. J. McDonald, K.-S. Choi, Progress in bismuth vanadate photoanodes for use in solar water oxidation, Chemical Society Reviews, 2013, 42, 2321–2337 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The best BiVO4 photoanodes reported from 2011 to 2016 (Table 2) were recently reviewed by Tolod, Hernández and Russo (2017)131 and the photocurrent density produced under 1 sun illumination was compared. In this work, the new vanadium-based photocatalytic systems/materials reported since then, from 2017 to 2019, were reviewed and are listed in Table 3. It is interesting to note that until early 2019 the best photocatalyst for the OER found in the literature was the one prepared by Pihosh et al. (2015),132 based on heterojunctions of WO3/BiVO4 core/shell nanostructures, named WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi. This system delivered a photocurrent density of 6.72 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (zero overpotential) or, in other words, ∼90% of the theoretically achievable value using BiVO4. Stoichiometric amounts of H2 and O2 were produced, where the hydrogen was generated at rates as high as 102 μmol h−1 cm−2 (1 sun, 25 °C) and 281 μmol h−1 cm−2 (3 sun, 50 °C), while oxygen was generated respectively at 51 and 140 μmol h−1 cm−2.
Table 3 Activity parameters of V-containing oxide-based photocatalysts: crystalline structure, substrate, electrolyte, band-gap, O2 evolution rate, photocurrent at zero overpotential and electron acceptor (measured under standard AM 1.5 G illumination) and 1 sun intensity (100 mW cm−2, or as specified in * and **)a




OER photocatalyst
Crystalline structures
O2 evolution rate and/or photocurrent density (mA cm−2 at x V vs. RHE)
Electron acceptor
pH
Band-gap (eV)
Ref.
Year





a * = 365 nm; ** = UV-vis light and visible light.





1% V–TiO2
Rutile TiO2
*160 μmol L−1 h−1
Fe2(SO4)3
2.0
—

38

2011


Cr:Cu3V2O8
Monoclinic A3B2O8
11.21 at 1.53 V
Na2SO3
9.2
—

115

2018


Ce–BiVO4
Pristine BiVO4
**∼320
AgNO3
7.0
—

120

2016


∼95 μmol g−1 h−1


V2O5 IO
Inverse opal V2O5
∼0.08 at 1.23 V
Na2SO4
6.8
2.78

121

2019


V2O5 IO@BiVO4
Inverse opal V2O5 and pristine BiVO4 heterojunction
—
Na2SO4
6.8
2.66

121

2019


∼0.42 at 1.23 V


V2O5 IO@BiVO4@NiOOH
Inverse opal V2O5, pristine BiVO4 and amorphous NiOOH heterojunction
—
Na2SO4
6.8
2.68

121

2019


∼1.14 at 1.23 V


V2O5
Pristine V2O5
0.21 at 1.5 V
Na2SO4
—
2.49

122

2019


V2O5/BiVO4
Pristine V2O5 and BiVO4 heterojunction
—
Na2SO4
—
2.49

122

2019


1.53 at 1.5 V
2.6


V–WO3
Pristine WO3
2.49 at 1.23 V
Na2SO4
—
—

123

2019


WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi
Monoclinic WO3 and BiVO4 heterojunction
6.72 at 1.23 V
—
7.0



132

2015


Cu–BVO
Monoclinic BiVO4
350.2 μmol g−1 h−1
Na2S2O8
∼13
2.07

135

2018


∼2.1 at 1.23 V


2% P–BiVO4
P-dipcoated pristine BiVO4
0.28 at 1.23 V
Na2SO4
—
—

136

2018


Ni:FeOOH/Zn:BiVO4/Mo:BiVO4
Amorphous Ni:FeOOH and monoclinic BiVO4 homojunction
2.7 at 1.23 V
—
7
2.37 (Zn)

34

2019


2.38 (Mo)


W–BiVO4/V2O5
Monoclinic BiVO4 and orthorhombic V2O5 heterojunction
7.79 ± 1.1 at 1.23 V
Na2SO4
6.9
—

137

2018


BiVO4/Co3O4/CoFe-LDH
Monoclinic BiVO4 and Co3O4 nanoparticles heterojunction and CoFe-LDH amorphous coating
3.9 at 1.23 V
KPi
—
—

140

2019


∼5.5 at 1.23 V
Na2SO3


NiFeOx/BiVO4 PE
Monoclinic BiVO4
4.8 at 1.23V
Seawater
8.0
2.4

141

2019


5.0 at 1.23 V
KPi
7.0


Fe2O3/BiVO4/NiFe-LDH
Monoclinic BiVO4 and hematite Fe2O3 heterojunction and NiFe-LDH coating
3.9 at 1.80 V
NaOH
13.6
2.03

142

2018


BVO/CMZ-LDH
Monoclinic BiVO4 and hydrotalcite CoMnZn-LDH
1.06 at 1.23 V
NaBi
9.3
2.48

143

2019


NiCo2O4/Mo:BiVO4
Pristine BiVO4 decorated with ultrathin spinel-structured NiCo2O4 nanosheets
4.5 at 1.23 V
KH2PO4
7.0
2.45

144

2019




It is important to mention that in addition to the core of WO3 prepared by glancing angle deposition (GLAD) and the shell of BiVO4 synthesized by electrodeposition, the cobalt phosphate (Co–Pi) OER catalyst was also incorporated by photo-assisted electrodeposition (Fig. 21A) to optimize the performance. The combination of BiVO4 with more conducting WO3 nanorods forming a core/shell heterojunction has made it possible to overcome many of the problems faced by BiVO4-based OER photocatalysts. In fact, a BiVO4 layer thinner than the charge diffusion thickness was deposited on WO3 to decrease the electron–hole recombination, increase the conductivity, and enhance the optical density by efficient light trapping in the core/shell nanostructure independent of the incidence angle as a consequence of the nanorod morphology (Fig. 21B). In contrast, photoanodes based on flat film structures lose efficiency mainly by reflection.
 Fig. 21  (A) Illustration showing the preparation of nanorods by GLAD followed by electrodeposition of BiVO4 + CoPi, and a scheme showing the respective mechanism of the photocatalytic water-splitting process. (B) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image demonstrating the lateral section of the ITO/Pt/ITO/WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi photoanode.132 Figure adapted from Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Photocatalytic generation of hydrogen by core–shell WO3/BiVO4 nanorods with ultimate water splitting efficiency, Scientific Reports, 2015, 5, 11141 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
As already discussed, the morphological control and nanostructuring of BiVO4 can improve its photocatalytic activity, as recently demonstrated by Jansi et al. (2019).133 They added the surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in the solvothermal synthesis of BiVO4 to control its morphology by reducing the interfacial tension, producing a more stable environment during the growth process, while reducing its agglomeration and limiting its size, realizing a defect rich crystalline and highly ordered nanostructures combining BiVO4 nanoflowers and nanorods. Although they did not evaluate its potential as WOCs under operating conditions, it is interesting to emphasize the importance of morphology and size control in a BiVO4 based water-splitting photocatalyst, since faster interfacial charge transfer kinetics, more efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers, and higher conductivity, stability and photoactivity (increased by 28%) were achieved.
Although materials prepared by doping BiVO4 with other elements do not present photocatalytic activity or photocurrents as high as those achieved with heterojunctions, they are considered an important strategy to enhance these properties prior to incorporation into heterojunctions. One of the first studies related to BiVO4 doping was carried out by Parmar et al. (2012),134 who studied the possible synergic effects of several transition metal ions in M–BiVO4 materials (where M = Mo, W, Ti, Cr, Fe, Zn, Nb, Ru, Pt, Sn, Ce, and Ta), demonstrating that only W and Mo drastically increased the photocurrent for water oxidation. Whilst BiVO4 presented a photocurrent of 0.42 mA cm−2, W–BiVO4 and Mo–BiVO4 presented photocurrents as high as 1.98 and 2.38 mA cm−2, respectively, under 1 sun illumination and zero overpotential (1.23 V vs. RHE), in contrast to the other derivatives that showed even worse performances. Since then, W and Mo doped materials have been receiving most of the attention and have been incorporated into heterojunctions.
More recently, however, the properties of analogous materials prepared by doping BiVO4 with ions of elements such as Cu,135 Ce,120 P,136 Zn and Mo34 have been reported. For example, considering the similarity of the ionic radius of Bi3+ (103 pm) and Ce3+ (102 pm) but the contrasting radius of V5+ (54 pm), Jiang et al. (2016)120 studied the possibility of Ce3+ doping by lattice substitution of Bi3+ with minimal distortion of the vanadate phase (VO43−), thus retaining the monoclinic crystal structure (preventing its conversion to the tetragonal phase) and decreasing the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The commonly used dopants tend to replace vanadium sites causing structural distortions and inducing undesirable crystalline phase changes that can be detrimental to the OER, even considering some gain in activity as compared to “pure” BiVO4. In fact, they successfully produced the Ce0.1Bi0.9VO4 photocatalyst via a simple solvothermal method, which presented an OER activity more than 4 times higher than that of pure BiVO4 as well as higher photocurrents. Such an enhanced performance was assigned to the maintenance of the monoclinic phase structure of VO4 and immobilization of photogenerated holes by the Ce3+ ions, thus slowing down the electron–hole recombination.
A contrasting approach was employed by He et al. (2018)135 who produced a photoanode based on porous BiVO4 nanotubes, where V is substituted by copper in various proportions (Cu-BVO) by a simple solvothermal method followed by annealing. The material prepared with an optimal Cu2+ doping percentage of 5.0% exhibited an average O2 evolution rate of 350.2 μmol h−1 g−1, about 2.4 times larger than that of pure BVO nanotubes. A similar approach was employed by Xia et al. (2018)136 to achieve P doping of BiVO4 by lattice substitution at the V sites, which resulted in a 2.8-fold increase in photocurrent density and about 4 times increase in the rate of hydrogen evolution. On the other hand, Lee et al. (2018)34 realized a BiVO4-based material doped with Zn at the Bi sites and with Mo at the V sites without significantly altering its crystal structure.
The insertion of Mo6+ into V5+ sites increased the n-type conductivity and pushed the Fermi level next to the conduction band, increasing the mobility of electrons, whilst the presence of Zn2+ at Bi3+ sites increased the acceptor character of the material, thus shifting the Fermi level closer to the valence band (Fig. 22A). In addition, Zn2+ increased the number of oxygen adsorption sites, enhancing the charge transfer interactions. In this way, they managed to produce a Zn:BVO/Mo:BVO heterojunction with suitable band alignment to generate a built-in potential that facilitated the charge separation process (Fig. 22B). The performance of the material was enhanced further by deposition of Ni:FeOOH as a WOC. The resultant Ni:FeOOH/Zn:BVO/Mo:BVO system exhibited a doped homojunction with charge-transfer and charge transport efficiency of 65 and 89% respectively, delivering a photocurrent density of 2.7 mA cm−2 and a faradaic efficiency of 92% at 1.23 V vs. RHE, a performance competitive with those reported for other photoanodes.
 Fig. 22  (A) Scheme of the band structure of each sample calculated by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) using Tauc plots. (B) Structure and benefits of the Zn:BVO/Mo:BVO n–n* type-II homojunction as the photoanode for water oxidation: (1) Mo doping increases the charge transportation due to increased carrier density, (2) Zn doping improves the surface charge-transfer process due to the formation of oxygen vacancies, and (3) the built-in homojunction potential facilitates the charge separation processes.34 Figure adapted from J. M. Lee, J. H. Baek, T. M. Gill, X. Shi, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, H. S. Jung and X. Zheng, A Zn:BiVO4/Mo:BiVO4 homojunction as an efficient photoanode for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2019, 7, 9019–9024 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
More recently, photocatalysts based on V2O5/BiVO4 (ref. 121, 122 and 137) heterojunctions were proposed and their perspectives were evaluated. Studies on the photocatalytic properties of vanadium pentoxide for water splitting and the OER are scarce as expected due to its high electron–hole recombination rate and kinetic barrier121 and consequently poor photoelectrochemical performance. Nevertheless, V2O5 can more efficiently absorb visible light since its band-gap (2.3 to 2.8 eV) is lower than that of BiVO4.121,122,137–139 In addition, V2O5 was demonstrated to be an excellent candidate for the hole transport layer and can improve the lifetime of organic and perovskite solar cells.137–139
In this context, Arunachalam et al. (2019)121 and Yaw et al. (2019)122 presented the synthesis and evaluated the OER photocatalytic activities of V2O5@BiVO4@NiOOH (1.14 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE) and V2O5/BiVO4 (1.53 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) photoanodes. The photocurrent densities achieved are significantly superior when compared to BiVO4 but are still inferior to photoanodes produced with other BiVO4-based OER photocatalysts. As previously mentioned, the best photocatalyst for the OER until early 2019 was the WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi material prepared by Pihosh et al. (2015),132 but recently Oliveira et al. (2019)137 reported n–n* heterojunctions based on W–BiVO4 nanoparticles and V2O5 nanorods exhibiting the highest performance ever. Seven photoanodes consisting of W–BiVO4 (BVO), V2O5 (VO) and five different W–BiVO4/V2O5 heterojunction configurations were realized (Fig. 23A) and evaluated. SJ1 and SJ2 photoanodes were based on single heterojunctions, whereas MJ1, MJ2 and MJ3 were based on multiple heterojunctions. Tungsten doping was performed to increase the electron transport whereas the heterojunction with V2O5 increased the hole transport and visible light harvesting efficiency generating synergic effects that boosted the performance.
 Fig. 23  (A) W–BiVO4 (BVO), V2O5 (VO) photoanodes and their different heterojunction configurations on the FTO substrate. SJ, single junction and MJ, multiple junctions. (B) LSV curves for W–BiVO5, V2O5 and their heterojunctions.137 Figure adapted from A. T. Oliveira, M. Rodriguez, T. S. Andrade, H. E. A. de Souza, J. D. Ardisson, H. S. Oliveira, L. C. A. Oliveira, E. Lorençon, A. C. Silva, L. L. Nascimento, A. O. T. Patrocínio and M. C. Pereira, High water oxidation performance of W-doped BiVO4 photoanodes coupled to V2O5 rods as a photoabsorber and hole carrier, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800089 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The photocatalytic activity tests for the OER were performed by LSV at pH 7 and corrected by the electroactive area of each photoanode (Fig. 23B). The lowest photocurrent densities (0.025 ± 0.012 and 0.003 ± 0.002 mA cm−2) at zero overpotential (1.23 V vs. RHE) were measured for BVO and VO, respectively, whereas the highest photocurrent density of 7.79 ± 1.1 mA cm−2, higher than that of any other reported BiVO4-based OER photocatalysts, was evaluated for the MJ3 heterojunction. The next more efficient heterojunctions were MJ2 (3.09 ± 0.54 mA cm−2), MJ1 (2.64 ± 0.43 mA cm−2), SJ1 (2.20 ± 0.41 mA cm−2) and SJ2 (1.67 ± 0.35 mA cm−2). The poor contact of the BVO film with the FTO substrate negatively affected the performance of BVO, which came out to be lower than that reported in the literature.
On the other hand, the performance of the MJ3 photoanode was further enhanced by deposition of a layer of the OER electrocatalyst FeOOH/NiOOH onto the surface by photo-assisted electrodeposition, yielding a photocurrent of 10.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, the highest ever recorded in the literature for a BiVO4-based OER photocatalyst. The light absorption (ηabs) and charge separation efficiency (ηsep) were measured to evaluate the photocatalyst efficiency. These two parameters are inversely coupled, so increasing the ηabs × ηsep parameter remains a challenge since the larger thickness of the photocatalyst film reflects in a decrease of ηsep while increasing ηabs and vice versa. As expected, they also reported the highest value of ηabs × ηsep (93% under backlight) since it is the key parameter responsible for the performance of a photocatalyst. Thus, the enhancement of the hole transport throughout the film probably is the most relevant factor responsible for efficient photoinduced charge-separation at larger thicknesses and improved OER activity.
The W–BiVO4/V2O5 random heterojunction (sample MJ3) proved to be much more efficient than other configurations, not only because it increased the photocurrent density but also because it decreased the onset potential, suggesting a reduction in both the kinetic and thermodynamic barriers for the OER. To assess the contribution of each of these factors, open circuit potential (OCP) and electrochemical impedance analyses were carried out in the dark and under illumination, demonstrating that the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters can be tuned by changing the structure of the heterojunctions. Higher photovoltages were obtained by depositing V2O5 onto the photoanode, whereas its incorporation into the photoanode improved the transport of the photogenerated holes decreasing the electron–hole recombination, thus speeding up the charge transport across the film and enhancing the photocurrent density. These results are extremely promising, but the robustness must be improved since, after only 2 hours of operation, the photocurrent of the W–BiVO4/V2O5/FeNi heterojunction dropped to 6.6 mA cm−2.
4. Summary and outlook
The most recent and promising advances in vanadium-containing electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) were reviewed, considering its key role in the performance of fuel cells and photosynthetic devices converting solar energy into solar fuels, enabling large-scale production, storage and use in a more convenient and safe manner. However, being in command of such a slow kinetics and high overpotential tetra-protonic and tetra-electronic reaction continues to be a formidable challenge that has been tackled using expensive noble metal-based materials. Thus, the development of high performance and durable electrocatalysts prepared with more abundant and inexpensive elements is extremely important, attracting increasing number of research groups interested in paving the way for a more sustainable society based on photoinduced water splitting and hydrogen fuel cells for the fundamental energy needs.
Vanadium oxides have excellent electrochemical and catalytic properties especially as mixed oxides, when considering their high tendency to induce positive synergistic effects, thus improving the electrocatalytic activity of water-splitting catalysts, particularly for the OER. Bimetallic and trimetallic mixed oxides, typically composed of first row transition metal ions such as Fe, Ni and Co, were demonstrated to be quite efficient. Nevertheless, their catalytic performance can be boosted by incorporation of vanadium oxides, usually by substitution of Fe by V ions in the crystalline structure. Since the V–OH bond is stronger than the Fe–OH bond, the activation energy tends to be smaller and higher electrocatalytic activity is expected for the vanadium sites, as discussed throughout this review. Furthermore, vanadium oxides can be present in sixteen different crystalline structures, thus being a quite versatile material that facilitates structural matching and synthesis of mixed vanadium oxide materials. In fact, the crystalline structure of V-containing electrocatalysts, as well as the proper choice of the supporting matrix, strongly influences the electrocatalytic activity. High conductivity matrices such as nickel sponge and reduced graphene oxide are highly recommended, especially the last one which still is not fully understood yet despite being extremely promising.
In general, vanadium-containing hydroxides exhibit high OER electrocatalytic performance, especially those in which the incorporation of vanadium cations tends to distort the octahedral [MO6−x] sites due to the formation of tetrahedral [VO4] sites next to it, as well as by the emergence of strong synergic effects by reticular substitution generating trimetallic FeVNi-LDH materials. In addition, the very strong electronic interactions of the V ions with other transition metal ions shorten the metal–oxygen bond lengths in the activated catalyst, especially the V–O distances, resulting in bonding energies close to the expected optimal value for WOCs. In fact, the strong bond of V and the adsorbed oxygen species can be tuned according to the Sabatier principle to improve O2 release from the V sites during the OER process. Additionally, nanostructuring can be used as a strategy to maximize the number of connected active sites and facilitate electrolyte diffusion, thus improving the performance of HDL-based electrocatalysts. It is also worth noting that very recently some comparative studies were carried out to demonstrate the possibility of synergistically modulating the electronic structure of NiV-LDH materials by doping with Ru or Ir to boost both HER and OER activities in alkaline solutions.
In contrast to transition metal hydroxides, vanadium-containing transition metal nitrides (TMNs) have relatively high overpotentials and only one article reported an overpotential below 300 mV vs. RHE. This reflects the low stability of TMNs for extended periods of time when subjected to the high potentials under operating conditions. On the other hand, VNs are emerging as excellent substrates for OER electrocatalysts because of their excellent metallic properties, resistance to most solvents and stability under a wide range of conditions, as well as high conductivity and good resistance to corrosion.
The studies listed in Table 1 were carefully analyzed and the results summarized in Fig. 24 indicate that materials based on vanadium-doped transition metal disulfides (V–Ni3S2) probably are the most promising electrocatalysts for the OER, due to characteristics such as (1) the leaf-shaped morphology providing large surface areas exposed to the electrolyte; (2) the edge-terminated V–Ni3S2 nanosheet array architecture providing enhanced charge and electrolyte diffusion to the catalytic active sites; and (3) the enhanced catalytic activity of the Ni3S2 sites improving the intrinsic performance.
 Fig. 24  Overpotential measured for the best electrocatalysts classified according to the type of vanadium containing material reported in this review. 
The most studied oxide photocatalysts today are those based on TiO2, WO3, ZnO, Fe2O3 and BiVO4; however their efficiencies are still low as compared with the best electrocatalysts, mainly because the first three have too large band-gaps to efficiently absorb sunlight and the latter two have poor electrical properties. In contrast, vanadium compounds, especially their oxides, have absorption bands in the visible region, CB and VB potentials suitable for promotion of both HER and OER, and excellent electrochemical properties. In addition, strong synergic effects were confirmed upon its incorporation into other photocatalytic materials. However, m-BiVO4 (in the scheelite monoclinic phase), one of the most promising materials, is plagued by low conductivity, low transport efficiency of photogenerated free charges (electrons and holes), and high recombination rate of the electron–hole pair. In other words, there are new interesting materials and perspectives in the quest for the ideal high performance photocatalyst, as well as formidable challenges that can be overcome by using strategies such as the formation of heterojunctions, improvement of the synthesis and film production parameters, control of morphology, nanostructuring, doping with heteroatoms, improvement of surface properties, incorporation of surface co-catalysts and the production of new crystalline phases, among others.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP 2018/21489-1) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq 303137/2016-9, 401581/2016-0 and 311847/2018-8), in addition to the fellowships granted to M. I. S. (CAPES 141853/2015-8) and J. M. G. (FAPESP 2018/16896-7).
References
L. Zhang, J. Xiao, H. Wang and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7855–7865 CrossRef CAS .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1513–1524 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-I. Jamesh and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 31–68 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, X. Bu, P. Wang, J. C. Ho, J. Yang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5069–5089 RSC .
J. M. Gonçalves, T. A. Matias, L. P. H. Saravia, M. Nakamura, J. S. Bernardes, M. Bertotti and K. Araki, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 161–169 CrossRef .

          E. (Org.)
          Share of renewables in electricity production: Renewable energies are progressing quickly with falling costs, accessed  06/07/2019 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Yang, B. Jiang, J. Li, M. Zeng and L. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8187–8208 RSC .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, C. Hu, X. Long and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5995–6012 RSC .
D. Wang, T. Sheng, J. Chen, H.-F. Wang and P. Hu, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 291–299 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, P. Liu, J. Jiang, L. Ai, Z. Shao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19912–19933 RSC .
G. Fu and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9386–9405 RSC .
T. Zhang, Y. Zhu and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8147–8158 RSC .
M. Gong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
F. Song, L. Bai, A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C. Hu, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7748–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, X. Liu, S. Jin, H. Chen, W. Lee, M. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5875–5897 RSC .
B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14120–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, G. Li, Z. Han, Z. Wang, X. Huang, H. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14380–14390 RSC .
Z. Li, M. Shao, H. An, Z. Wang, S. Xu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6624–6631 RSC .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621–1600640 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, N. Zhang, G. Qiu and R. Ma, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 165, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Z. Cai, Y. Jia, X. Xiong, Q. Xie, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Duan and X. Sun, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 532–537 RSC .
J. M. Gonçalves, T. A. Matias, K. C. F. Toledo and K. Araki, Adv. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 74, 63 CrossRef .
F. Lyu, Q. Wang, S. M. Choi and Y. Yin, Small, 2019, 15, 1804201–1804217 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Seo and S. H. Joo, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4, 19 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Browne, C. Domínguez and P. E. Colavita, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 7, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, K. Dastafkan and C. Zhao, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 10, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
I. Godwin, A. Rovetta, M. Lyons and J. Coleman, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 7, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guidelli, R. G. Compton, J. M. Feliu, E. Gileadi, J. Lipkowski, W. Schmickler and S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 86, 245–258 CAS .
D. Kong, Y. Zheng, M. Kobielusz, Y. Wang, Z. Bai, W. Macyk, X. Wang and J. Tang, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 897–924 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lee, J. H. Baek, T. M. Gill, X. Shi, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, H. S. Jung and X. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9019–9024 RSC .
T. Jafari, E. Moharreri, S. A. Amin, R. Miao, W. Song and L. S. Suib, Molecules, 2016, 21, 900–928 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Reza Gholipour, C.-T. Dinh, F. Béland and T.-O. Do, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8187–8208 RSC .
D. Wu, H. Tong, Q. Chen and C. Xia, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2011, 127, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, X. Bai, P. Hao, Y. Guo, Y. Xue, J. Tian and H. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 711–720 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. R. Shen, M.-H. Lai, T. C. K. Yang, I. P. Fu, N.-Y. Liang and W.-T. Chen, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2012, 43, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, I. N. Ivanov, J. K. Keum and H. N. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. F. G. Huila, Xerogel de pentóxido de vanádio: novas abordagens na caracterização e aplicações, PhD thesis, Tese de Doutorado,
Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,  2013 DOI:10.11606/T.46.2013.tde-05082013-134912 .
G. Guzman, R. Morineau and J. Livage, Mater. Res. Bull., 1994, 29, 509–515 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, G. Xie, C. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Zhang and Y. Luo, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1878–1880 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Cao, Y. Wu, Y. Gong, Z. Liu, H. E. Hoster, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Yang, Q. Yan, P. M. Ajayan and R. Vajtai, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5408–5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Qiao, Z. Xu, L. Cao, H. Ouyang, J. Li and R. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boukhalfa, K. Evanoff and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6872–6879 RSC .
S.-H. Ng, T. J. Patey, R. Büchel, F. Krumeich, J.-Z. Wang, H.-K. Liu, S. E. Pratsinis and P. Novák, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3748–3755 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Su, C. H. Chen, M. L. Yu, G. J. Han, G. Q. Wang, K. Xin, W. Lan and X. Q. Liu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 185102 CrossRef .
L. Liardet and X. Hu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 644–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Merle, I. Abrahams and J. Barralet, Materials Today Energy, 2018, 9, 247–253 CrossRef .
Y.-M. Chai, X.-Y. Zhang, J.-H. Lin, J.-F. Qin, Z.-Z. Liu, J.-Y. Xie, B.-Y. Guo, Z. Yang and B. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10156–10162 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, H. Y. Hwang, H. Tao, A. C. Strikwerda, K. Fan, G. R. Keiser, A. J. Sternbach, K. G. West, S. Kittiwatanakul, J. Lu, S. A. Wolf, F. G. Omenetto, X. Zhang, K. A. Nelson and R. D. Averitt, Nature, 2012, 487, 345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chang, S. B. Lee, D. Y. Jeon, S. J. Park, G. T. Kim, S. M. Yang, S. C. Chae, H. K. Yoo, B. S. Kang, M.-J. Lee and T. W. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4063–4067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, B. Shang, J. Yang, W. Yan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15873–15881 RSC .
Q. Liu, Z.-F. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Ren, C.-J. Sun, W. Lu, Y. Zhou, L. Stanciu, E. A. Stach and J. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6127 CrossRef .
X. Xing, R. Liu, K. Cao, U. Kaiser, G. Zhang and C. Streb, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44511–44517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8946–8957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fan, H. Chen, Y. Ji, H. Huang, P. M. Claesson, Q. Daniel, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo, F. Li, Y. Luo and L. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, P. Li, X. Wang, W. Gao, Z. Shen, Y. Zhu, S. Yang, W. Song and K. Ding, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10731–10738 RSC .
R. D. L. Smith, C. Pasquini, S. Loos, P. Chernev, K. Klingan, P. Kubella, M. R. Mohammadi, D. Gonzalez-Flores and H. Dau, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2022 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Wang, L. Hu, Y. Li, B. Gao, H. Song, C. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Fu, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xing, L.-B. Kong, M.-C. Liu, L.-Y. Liu, L. Kang and Y.-C. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18435–18443 RSC .
J. Zhang, B. Yuan, S. Cui, N. Zhang, J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Zhang, R. Zhang and Q. Huo, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 3295–3302 RSC .
N. H. Chou, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1566–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, A. Zhang, L. Li and L. Ai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 445–451 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13567–13570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Zhu, Y.-P. Liu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
L. Sun, L. Zhou, C. Yang and Y. Yuan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 15140–15148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lv, Z. Yang, K. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1803358 CrossRef .
T. Li, N. H. Miras and Y.-F. Song, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 260–276 CrossRef .
K. Nejati, A. R. Akbari, S. Davari, K. Asadpour-Zeynali and Z. Rezvani, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 2889–2895 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Ji, J. Nai, X. Niu, Y. Luo, L. Guo and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1736–1741 RSC .
J. Bao, Z. Wang, J. Xie, L. Xu, F. Lei, M. Guan, Y. Zhao, Y. Huang and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3521–3524 RSC .
M. Yang, X. Fu, M. Shao, Z. Wang, L. Cao, S. Gu, M. Li, H. Cheng, Y. Li, H. Pan and Z. Lu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2050–2055 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, X. Hu, H.-C. Li and H.-Q. Yu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801878 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Wang, C. Shan, P. Xi, W. Liu and Y. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6336–6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Small, 2018, 14, 1703257 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703341 CrossRef .
Anindita, A. Singh and R. N. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3243–3248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chakrapani, G. Bendt, H. Hajiyani, T. Lunkenbein, M. T. Greiner, L. Masliuk, S. Salamon, J. Landers, R. Schlögl, H. Wende, R. Pentcheva, S. Schulz and M. Behrens, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1259–1267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Y. Li, W. Li, S. Chen, C. Wang, M. Cui and T. Ma, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2019, 103, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Niu, W. Li, X. Wu, B. Feng, Y. Yu, W. Hu and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10534–10542 RSC .
M. Hao, M. Xiao, L. Qian and Y. Miao, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2018, 12, 409–416 CrossRef CAS .
B. Das, M. Sharma, A. Hazarika and K. K. Bania, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 7042–7050 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, Y. Ji, H. Zou, J. Zhang, B. Zhu, H. Chen, Q. Daniel, Y. Luo, J. Yu and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3289–3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Y. Xue, R. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. a. Li and X. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21911–21917 RSC .
Z. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Hu, L. Xu, M. Guan, J. Qiu, Y. Huang, J. Bao and H. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1890–1896 RSC .
S. Li, C. Xi, Y.-Z. Jin, D. Wu, J.-Q. Wang, T. Liu, H.-B. Wang, C.-K. Dong, H. Liu, S. A. Kulinich and X.-W. Du, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1823–1829 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Q. Lu, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3899 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, Z. Wang, W. Liu, L. Xu, M. Guan, Y. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Bao and H.-m. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16828–16834 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, J. Huang, G. Chen, W. Chen, R. Zhang, S. Chu, X. Wang, C. Li and K. K. Ostrikov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1622–1632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, K. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, L. Tang and X. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 443–450 RSC .
L. Ma, K. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Guo and X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 815–823 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, J.-Y. Xie, X.-L. Yang, J.-Y. Lv, B. Dong, B.-Y. Guo, Y.-L. Zhou, J.-F. Yu, L. Wang, Y.-M. Chai and C.-G. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 484, 1010–1018 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, L. Cao, L. Feng, J. Huang, K. Kajiyoshi, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, W. Li, L. Feng and G. Hai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117911 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, C. Tian, M. Tian, A. Wu, H. Yan, C. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Jiao and H. Fu, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 80–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, X. Du, Y. Wang, C. M. Li and T. Qi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11473–11479 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta, A. Indra, Y. Feng, H. Han and T. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 521–527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Hu, D. Huang, T. Xiong, M. Li, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 11, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, A.-L. Wang, W. Xiao, D. Chao, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, S. Chen, J. Kang, X. Wang, J. Ding, J. Wang, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705516 CrossRef .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Z. Zhu, J. Sun, R. He, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, G. Jia, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8670–8674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Y. Zhou, H. Shen, S. A. Rasaki, T. Thomas, J. Wang, C. Wang, J. Wang and M. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6774–6780 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, F. Yan, K. Li, C. Zhu, Y. Xie, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1083–1091 RSC .
R. Li, Z. Wei and X. Gou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4133–4142 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, L. Cai, Y. Wang, Z. Lin, Y. Zuo, M. Wang and Y. Chai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706008 CrossRef .
B.-J. Hsieh, M.-C. Tsai, C.-J. Pan, W.-N. Su, J. Rick, J.-F. Lee, Y.-W. Yang and B.-J. Hwang, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, H. Zhong, D. Bao, J. Yan and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu, X. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14710–14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Winter, V. C. Viejo and J. W. Proscia, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 1993, 327, 109 CrossRef .
D. Cardenas-Morcoso, A. Peiro-Franch, I. Herraiz-Cardona and S. Gimenez, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ola and M. M. Maroto-Valer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 24, 16–42 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ke, T. Peng, L. Ma, P. Cai and P. Jiang, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Shen, X. Yang, T. Zhang and H. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 562–573 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, Y. Liu, T. Jing, B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2058–2063 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arunachalam, K.-S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4656–4663 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Yaw, Q. Ruan, J. Tang, A. K. Soh and M. N. Chong, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 364, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrasekaran, P. Zhang, F. Peng, C. Bowen, J. Huo and L. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6161–6172 RSC .
T. H. Chiang and T.-M. Chen, Materials, 2017, 10, 1118–1129 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, Z. Liu, G. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Song and J. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 23921–23935 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, A. S. Poyraz, C.-H. Kuo, R. Miao, Y. Meng, S.-Y. Chen, T. Jiang, C. Wenos and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, M.-C. Tsai, J. Rick, W.-N. Su, J.-F. Lee and B.-J. Hwang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6752–6762 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, B. Su, Y. Tang, X. Jiang and A. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700885 CrossRef .
T. S. Dabodiya, P. Selvarasu and A. V. Murugan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 5096–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
R. K. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 13–36 CrossRef .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11141 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Rani, M. Praveenkumar, S. Ravichandran, G. Ravi, R. K. Guduru and R. Yuvakkumar, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 7427–7435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. S. Parmar, H. J. Kang, A. Bist, P. Dua, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, Z. Li, D. Zhao, H. Liu, Y. Zhong, J. Ning, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. Hu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2589–2599 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xia, M. Chen, L. Xiao, W. Fan, B. Mao, D. Xu, P. Guan, J. Zhu and W. Shi, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 93, 582–589 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Oliveira, M. Rodriguez, T. S. Andrade, H. E. A. de Souza, J. D. Ardisson, H. S. Oliveira, L. C. A. Oliveira, E. Lorençon, A. C. Silva, L. L. Nascimento, A. O. T. Patrocínio and M. C. Pereira, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800089 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, T. He, H. Wang, X. Song, H. Liu, J. Yang, K. Liu and H. Ma, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 18456–18465 RSC .
D. Wang, N. K. Elumalai, M. A. Mahmud, M. Wright, M. B. Upama, K. H. Chan, C. Xu, F. Haque, G. Conibeer and A. Uddin, Org. Electron., 2018, 53, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Jin, C. Yang, J. Pan, W. Du, J. Hu, H. Zeng and Y. Zhou, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1900115 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. M. Hwang, I. Hwang, J. Han, J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jo, K. Seo, Y. Kim and J. S. Lee, iScience, 2019, 19, 232–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, H. Chu, X. Xiang, R. Luo, J. He and A. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 350, 148–156 CrossRef CAS .
T.-G. Vo, Y. Tai and C.-Y. Chiang, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Q. Zhou, B. Zheng, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang and Y. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22274–22278 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Josué M. Gonçalves	Josué Martins Gonçalves is a postdoctoral researcher in the group headed by Prof. Lucio Angnes at the University of Sao Paulo (USP), Brazil, and honored with a prestigious research fellowship from FAPESP. He graduated in chemistry from University Vale do Acaraú (UVA) in 2014 where he conducted research in electroanalytical chemistry with Prof. Murilo S. S. Julião and received his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, USP, in 2019, working with nanoparticles and nanocomposites and their electrochemical applications, under the supervision of Prof. Koiti Araki. His current research interests include applications of nanomaterials based on nanoparticles and graphene for use in sensors, electrocatalysis and energy conversion and storage devices.
Matheus Ireno da Silva	Matheus Ireno da Silva earned his bachelor's degree in chemistry from the Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of São Paulo (IFSP), Brazil, in 2017. Currently, he is a natural sciences PhD student at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo (IQ-USP) Brazil, with emphasis in nanotechnology and supramolecular chemistry. His research interests are focused on the synthesis, characterization and application of self-assembled nanoparticles and nanocomposites, aiming at the improvement of their sensing, electro and photocatalytic, and energy storage, production and conversion performances by synergistic effects.
Lucio Angnes	Lucio Angnes is a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo. His research interests include the construction of electrodes with new and alternative materials, development of modified electrodes and arrays of microelectrodes, design of different procedures of enzyme immobilization (on electrodes or inside microchannels) and association of the created devices with flowing systems (flow and batch injection analysis). With 160 authored research papers, he is a member of the Scientific Board of Biosensors & Bioelectronics, Electroanalysis, Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, and actuates as the Coordinator of Innovation at FAPESP (São Paulo State Research Foundation). He is member of the Sao Paulo State Academy of Science.
Koiti Araki	Koiti Araki is a full-time professor at the Institute of Chemistry of University of Sao Paulo since 2006, principal researcher of the Supramolecular Chemistry and Nanotechnology Lab, and member of the Sao Paulo State Academy of Science. His research interests are focused on the design and preparation of functional hybrid nanobiomaterials and nanocomposites through a coordinative supramolecular chemistry approach that can help tackle the main challenges in energy, nanomedicine and environment.
4H+ + 4e− → 2H2, E0C = 0 V	(1)
2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e−, E0A = 1.23 V	(2)
4H2O(l) + 4e− → 2H2(g) + 4OH−(aq), E0C = −0.83 V	(3)
4OH−(aq) → O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e−, E0C = −0.83 V	(4)
η = E − Eeq	(5)
	(6)
O + ne− ⇌ R	(7)

 	Fig. 1  (A) i–E curves for a water-splitting reaction.28 (B) Current density plot, j (solid line) and extrapolations of the anodic current density ja (upper dashed line) and cathodic current density jc (lower dashed line) as a function of the overpotential η, according to the Butler–Volmer equation, with αc = 0.5.32 (C) Plot of the overpotential η as a function of the natural logarithm of the anodic and cathodic current densities according to the Butler–Volmer equation, with αc = 0.5.32 (D) Plot of η vs. logi showing a change in the Tafel slope for the same electrocatalyst.2 Panel (A) figure reproduced from B. Seo and S. H. Joo, Recent advances in unveiling active sites in molybdenum sulfide-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4, 19, with permission from Springer Open. Panels (B and C) figures reproduced from R. Guidelli, R. G. Compton, J. M. Feliu, E. Gileadi, J. Lipkowski, W. Schmickler and S. Trasatti, Defining the transfer coefficient in electrochemistry: An assessment (©IUPAC Technical Report, De Gruyter), Pure and Applied Chemistry, 2014, 86, 245–258. Panel (D) figure adapted from N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Electrocatalysis for the oxygen evolution reaction: recent development and future perspectives, Chemical Society Reviews, 2017, 46, 337–365 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
i = ia + ic	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 2  Scheme illustrating the possible band structure and thermodynamically allowed charge migration processes upon absorption of a photon and the formation of an electron–hole pair, as well as the associated electrochemical processes that can take place on the surface of (A) a semiconductor, and the heterojunctions with a band structure according to arrangements (B) type-I; (C) type-II; and (D) type-III.36 Figure reproduced from J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Heterojunction photocatalysts, Advanced Materials, 2017, 29, 1601694 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic representation of the structures of (a) VO2(B), (b) VO2(A), (c) VO2(M), and (d) VO2(R) produced on ABO3 perovskite substrates respectively with (001), (011) and (111) crystallographic orientations, (B) their resistivity as a function of temperature (extracted from ref. 41), and (C) comparison of the V2O5, α-V2O5, β-V2O5, γ-V2O5, and V2O5(M) polymorphs structures. Extracted from ref. 42. Panels (A and B) figure adapted from S. Lee, I. N. Ivanov, J. K. Keum and H. N. Lee, Epitaxial stabilization and phase instability of VO2 polymorphs, Scientific Reports, 2016, 6, 19621 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of NF, NiS/NF, VOx/NF and VOx/NiS/NF samples: (A) linear scan voltammograms (LSVs) including those of a RuO2/NF sample for comparative purposes; (B) the Tafel plots, showing the respective slopes; (C) the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results; and (D) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of VOx/NiS/NF.52 Figure adapted from Y.-M. Chai, X.-Y. Zhang, J.-H. Lin, J.-F. Qin, Z.-Z. Liu, J.-Y. Xie, B.-Y. Guo, Z. Yang and B. Dong, Three-dimensional VOx/NiS/NF nanosheets as efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10156–10162 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Volcano plot of OER mass electroactivity versus M–OH binding energy (extracted from ref. 48). (B) Polarization curves of m-CoVOx deposited on nickel foam and the respective Tafel plots measured in 1 M KOH and 1 M Fe-free KOH at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1; (C) polarization curves of α-CoVOx deposited on nickel foam, measured in 1 M KOH and 1 M Fe-free KOH, at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (D) Volcano plot of the mass activity versus M–OH bond strength of several α-CoyV1−yOx samples with different proportions of Co:V atoms. Extracted from ref. 4. The volcano plot relative to OER activity versus M–OH binding energy (extracted from ref. 50). Figure reproduced from L. Liardet and X. Hu, Amorphous cobalt vanadium oxide as a highly active electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution, ACS Catalysis, 2018, 8, 644–650 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Scheme of the synthetic route for the preparation of the MnVOx@N-rGO catalyst. (B) Linear scan voltammograms (LSVs) of I-900, I-440 and Pt/C on carbon fiber paper in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte solution. (C) Corresponding Tafel plots derived from the LSVs of Fig. 8B.57 Figure reproduced from X. Xing, R. Liu, K. Cao, U. Kaiser, G. Zhang and C. Streb, Manganese vanadium oxide–N-doped reduced graphene oxide composites as oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution electrocatalysts, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44511–44517 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the classical LDH structure.73 Figure reproduced from T. Li, N. H. Miras and Y.-F. Song, Polyoxometalate (POM)-Layered Double Hydroxides (LDH) composite materials: design and catalytic applications, Catalysts, 2017, 7, with permission from the MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical performance of CoV-UAH in the OER. (A) The iR-corrected LSVs for CoV-UAH, Co-UH, V2O5, CoV–C and IrO2; and (B) corresponding Tafel plots. (C) AFM image of CoV-UAH, in which P-I and P-II mark the pores in the nanosheets. (D) Corresponding height profiles of CoV-UAH. In situ XAS characterization of CoV-UAH. (E) Co K-edge XANES data collected at the initial state and in situ state of CoV-UAH and CoV–C as well as those of CoOOH for comparison. (F) V K-edge XANES data collected at the initial state and in situ state of CoV-UAH and CoV–C as well as those of VO2 for comparison. Here, the in situ experiments were performed during the potentiostatic OER process at 1.50 V vs. RHE.75 Figure adapted from J. Liu, Y. Ji, J. Nai, X. Niu, Y. Luo, L. Guo and S. Yang, Ultrathin amorphous cobalt–vanadium hydr(oxy)oxide catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, Energy & Environmental Science, 2018, 11, 1736–1741 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


NiFe2−xVxO4	Spinel oxides	—	—	—	∼40.0	—	1 M KOH	
83

CoV1.5Fe0.5O4	Spinel oxides	—	∼300	∼1.51	38.0	25	1 M KOH	
84

m-CoVOx	MOx	Ni	293	—	49.0	15	1 M KOH	
50

α-CoVOx	MOx	Ni foam	254	∼1.46	35.0	15	1 M KOH	
50

CoVOx	MOx	—	300	∼1.50*	66.0	∼10	1 M KOH	
51

MnVOx@N-rGO I-440	MOx	N-rGO	440	—	286.0	—	0.1 M KOH	
57

MnVOx@N-rGO I-900	MOx	N-rGO	420	—	271.0	##	0.1 M KOH	
57

V–Co/CoO@C	MOx	C nanorod	320	—	143.0	30	1 M KOH	
85

VOx/Ni3S2	MOx	Ni foam	—	—	82.0	10	1 M KOH	
86

Co3V2O8	Vanadates	—	359	∼1.58*	65.0	3	1 M KOH	
63

Co3(VO4)2-II	Vanadates	—	330	1.54	59.0	∼11	1 M KOH	
87

AuVNF	Vanadates	—	310	1.43	127.0	10	1 M KOH	
88

Fe0.5V0.5	Oxides/hydroxide	—	390	—	36.7	10	1 M KOH	
89

Co1−xVxOOH	Oxyhydroxide	Ni foam	190	—	39.9	100	1 M KOH	
90

CoV-UAH	LDH	—	250	1.41	44.0	170	1 M KOH	
75

CoV-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	310	∼1.52*	108.0	—	1 M KOH	
76

Co0.75V0.25-HNNs	LDH	Ni foam	268	∼1.47*	80.0	48	1 M KOH	
77

ZnFe–VO4-LDH	LDH	—	<585	—	26.0	1.11	0.1 M KOH	
74

Ni0.75V0.25-LDHs	LDH	—	∼315	∼1.48	50.0	∼25	1 M KOH	
59

NiFeV-DLH	LDH	—	192	∼1.40	42.0	18	1 M KOH	
82

Ni3V1Fe1-LDH	LDH	GCE	269	∼1.48*	68.0	#	1 M KOH	
91

Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH	LDH	CFP	200	∼1.48	39.0	60	1 M KOH	
81

Ni0.75Fe0.125V0.125-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	231	1.46	39.4	15	1 M KOH	
80

NiVIr-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	203	∼1.43	55.3	<15	1 M KOH	
92

NiV-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	200	—	178.0	#	1 M KOH	
93

NiVIr-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	180	—	38.0	#	1 M KOH	
93

NiVRu-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	190	—	83.0	#	1 M KOH	
93

CoMoV-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	270	∼1.50*	106.0	20	1 M KOH	
76

CoFeV-LDH	LDH	Ni foam	242	—	57.0	32	1 M KOH	
94

Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF	Sulfide	Ni–Co foam	330	—	182.0	#####	1 M KOH	
95

V–Ni3S2	Sulfide	Ni foam	148	—	42.0	60	1 M KOH	
96

V–Ni3S2	Sulfide	CC	180	—	56.0	30	1 M KOH	
97

NiFe(OH)x/VS	Sulfide	Ni foam	—	—	75.0	10	1 M KOH	
98

Ni3S2/VS4	Sulfide	Ni foam	—	—	43.0	50	1 M KOH	
99

Co/VN	Nitride	—	320	∼1.52*	55.5	###	1 M KOH	
62

Co3V/VN	Oxide/nitride	—	324	—	68.68	—	1 M KOH	
100

Co/VN	Nitride	Ni foam	312	—	69.02	####	1 M KOH	
100

NiCo2O4/VN800	Oxide/nitride	GCE	385	—	75.7	∼7	1 M KOH	
101

CVN/CC	Nitride	CC	263	—	64.1	100	1 M KOH	
102

VN	Nitride	CC	458	—	—	<10	1 M KOH	
103

VN–Co	Nitride	CC	395	—	—	—	1 M KOH	
103

VN–P	Nitride	CC	401	—	—	—	1 M KOH	
103

VN–Co–P	Nitride	CC	335	—	—	10	1 M KOH	
103


2%: Mo:BiVO4 with CoPi	2.00	2011
Porous BiVO4	1.10	2012
Porous BiVO4 with FeOOH	1.70
3%: Mo:BiVO4	1.00	2013
3%: Mo:BiVO4 with FeOOH	3.00
1%: W:BiVO4 with CoPi	2.30
BiVO4 with gradient-doped W (0 to 1%)	1.10
BiVO4 with gradient-doped W (0 to 1%) with CoPi	3.60
Nanoporous BiVO4	1.80	2014
Nanoporous BiVO4 with NiOOH	3.30
Nanoporous BiVO4 with FeOOH	3.60
Nanoporous BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH	4.20
Nanoporous BiVO4 with NiOOH/FeOOH	3.20
Mo:BiVO4 macro mesoporous (inverse opals)	1.1
Double deck inverse opal Wo3:BiVO4	3.30
Wo3/W:BiVO4 core–shell nanowires	3.10
Al-doped inverse opals BiVO4 heterostructures	1.50
(W,Mo):BiVO4	1.60
WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4 helix	3.60
WO3/(W,Mo):BiVO4 helix with FeOOH/NiOOH	5.35
BiVO4 with CoOx	1.5	2015
BiVO4 with NiO/NiOOH/CoOx	3.50
N:BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH	5.00
WO3/BiVO4 nanorods with CoPi	6.72
(H,3%: Mo):BiVO4 with Co-Ci	4.90
SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone Mo:BiVO4	4.18	2016
SiOx/Pt/SnO2 nanocone Mo:BiVO4 with Fe(Ni)OOH	5.82
Pristine BiVO4/SnO2/Au on textured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate	1.37
Pristine BiVO4/SnO2/Au on textured PDMS substrate with FeOOH	2.00
WO3/BiVO4	3.00
WO3/BiVO4 with FeOOH/NiOOH	4.00
Dense BiVO4 with CoPi	3.00
WO3/BiVO4/SnO2	1.50
10%: Mo:BiVO4	1.20

 	Fig. 9  (A) FESEM image and (B) TEM images of NiFeV-LDHs nanosheets. (C) The overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and (D) Tafel slopes of NiFeV-LDHs/NF, Ni(OH)2/NF, NiFe-LDHs/NF, and NiV-LDHs/NF, in 1.0 M KOH, at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1.80 Figure adapted from K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Ultrathin porous NiFeV ternary layer hydroxide nanosheets as a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, Small, 2018, 14, 1703257 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A–C) FT curves respectively of Ni, Fe, and V K-edge EXAFS k2χ(k) functions. The orange and pink circles represent the fitting values. (D) Schematic representations of the electronic coupling of Ni, Fe, and V in Ni3Fe, Ni3V, and Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH. Microscopy measurements of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 NSs: (E) top-view SEM image of a carbon fiber coated with Ni3Fe0.5V0.5-LDH at high magnification, (F) TEM image of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 NSs scratched off from the as-prepared CFP electrode, and (G) atomic-resolution BF-TEM image of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5NSs.81 Scale bars: (E) = 100 nm; (F) = 40 nm; (G) = 1 nm. Figure adapted from J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Atomic-level insight into super-efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution on iron and vanadium co-doped nickel (oxy)hydroxide, Nature Communications, 2018, 9, 2885 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic structure of NiFeV-LDH and (B) SEM image of the as-prepared NiFeV-LDHs nanosheet array. (C) Comparison of the overpotential of NiFeV-LDHs, NiFe-LDHs, and NiV-LDHs at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2. (D) Total density of states (TDOS) curves of NiFeV-LDHs and NiFe LDHs, where the narrowed bandgap of NiFeV-LDH indicates a more conducting material.82 Figure adapted from P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Tuning electronic structure of NiFe layered double hydroxides with vanadium doping toward high efficient electrocatalytic water oxidation, Advanced Energy Materials, 2018, 8, 1703341 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of (A) VN, (B) VN–Co, and (C) VN–Co–P. (D–H) EDS mapping of VN–Co–P.103 (I) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CVN/CC. Comparative (J) iR-corrected LSV profiles and (K) respective Tafel plots (inset: CA test at 1.56 V vs. RHE) of the OER catalysts. Panels (A–H) figure adapted from H. Yang, Y. Hu, D. Huang, T. Xiong, M. Li, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Efficient hydrogen and oxygen evolution electrocatalysis by cobalt and phosphorus dual-doped vanadium nitride nanowires, Materials Today Chemistry, 2019, 11, 1–7 with permission from Elsevier. Panels (I–K) figure adapted from S. Dutta, A. Indra, Y. Feng, H. Han and T. Song, Promoting electrocatalytic overall water splitting with nanohybrid of transition metal nitride-oxynitride, Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 2019, 241, 521–527 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Scheme showing the preparation of Co–V bimetallic catalysts. SEM image (B) of the Co2V2O7·xH2O precursor nanoplates and (C and D) Co/VN catalyst.100 Figure adapted from Y. Xiao, C. Tian, M. Tian, A. Wu, H. Yan, C. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Jiao and H. Fu, Cobalt-vanadium bimetal-based nanoplates for efficient overall water splitting, Science China Materials, 2018, 61, 80–90 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Scheme showing the preparation of the porous Co/VN nanosheets as an OER electrocatalyst. SEM images of (B) the hydrothermal product of Co2V2O7 and (C) Co/VN material with insets showing the corresponding high-magnification images. (D) HR-TEM image of Co/VN. (E) Elemental maps of Co and O of nanoparticles embedded in the Co/VN nanosheets. (F) Nyquist plots of Co/VN, Co2V2O7, and commercial IrO2 electrocatalysts, and the equivalent electric circuit used to simulate the Nyquist plots in the inset, where Rs is the electrolyte resistance, Rct is the charge-transfer resistance, and Cdl represents the double-layer capacitance. Figure adapted from X. Peng, L. Wang, L. Hu, Y. Li, B. Gao, H. Song, C. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Fu, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, In situ segregation of cobalt nanoparticles on VN nanosheets via nitriding of Co2V2O7 nanosheets as efficient oxygen evolution reaction electrocatalysts, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 1–7 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) SEM image and scheme showing the possible activation mechanism of the NiCo2O4/VN800 material for the OER. (B) Nyquist plots and (C) CV curves of NiCo2O4, NiCo2O4/C, and NiCo2O4/VN800.101 Figure adapted from Z. Zheng, X. Du, Y. Wang, C. M. Li and T. Qi, Efficient and stable NiCo2O4/VN nanoparticle catalyst for electrochemical water oxidation, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 2018, 6, 11473–11479 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Scheme showing the synthesis of 3D Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF bifunctional electrocatalysts. SEM images of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF at (B) low and (C) high resolution. Inset in (C) shows magnified nanosheets. (D) HER and OER LSV curves of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF for water splitting. The inset shows the simultaneous H2 and O2 gas evolution of Ni8V2(Mo3S4)11/NCF electrodes powered by a 1.5 V battery. Morphological and structural characterization of V–Ni3S2/NF.95 (E) SEM image of Ni foam coated with a V–Ni3S2 nanorod array at low magnification. (F) SEM image of the V–Ni3S2 nanorod array. (G) TEM image and (H) EDX elemental mapping of Ni (brown), S (magenta), and V (yellow) elements. Scale bars: (a) 100 μm; (b) 1 μm; (c) 500 nm. Electrochemical OER properties of V–Ni3S2/NF in 1 M KOH. (I) Polarization curves and (J) corresponding Tafel plots of V–Ni3S2/NF, Ni3S2/NF, NF, and RuO2.96 Figure adapted from H. Fan, J. Huang, G. Chen, W. Chen, R. Zhang, S. Chu, X. Wang, C. Li and K. K. Ostrikov, Hollow Ni–V–Mo chalcogenide nanopetals as bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 2019, 7, 1622–1632 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Figure adapted from J. Guo, K. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, L. Tang and X. Zhang, Efficient bifunctional vanadium-doped Ni3S2 nanorod array for overall water splitting, Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers, 2019, 6, 443–450 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Morphological and structural characterization of V–Ni3S2/CC. (A) SEM image showing the carbon fiber vertically aligned with the V–Ni3S2 nanosheet array at low magnification. (B) TEM image showing the V–Ni3S2 nanosheets. (C) EDX elemental mapping showing the sheet features and uniform distribution of V, Ni, and S elements. Scale bars: (A) 1 μm and (B) 100 nm. Electrochemical OER measurements of V–Ni3S2/CC in 1 M KOH. (D) Polarization curves and the corresponding (E) Tafel plots of V–Ni3S2/CC, Ni3S2/CC, and RuO2.97 Figure adapted from L. Ma, K. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, J. Guo and X. Zhang, Vanadium doping over Ni3S2 nanosheet array for improved overall water splitting, Applied Surface Science, 2019, 489, 815–823 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Band structure of VO2(M), VO2(B), V6O13 and V2O5 vanadium oxides at pH = 0.0.40 (B) Structure of bands and band-gaps of some photocatalysts at pH = 0.0.35 Panel (A) figure adapted from T. F. R. Shen, M.-H. Lai, T. C. K. Yang, I. P. Fu, N.-Y. Liang and W.-T. Chen, Photocatalytic production of hydrogen by vanadium oxides under visible light irradiation, Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers, 2012, 43, 95–101 with permission from Elsevier. Panel (B) figure adapted from T. Jafari, E. Moharreri, S. A. Amin, R. Miao, W. Song and L. S. Suib, Photocatalytic water splitting—the untamed dream: a review of recent advances, Molecules, 2016, 21 with permission from MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 19  Theoretical simulations showing the band-gap narrowing for (A) anatase-TiO2, (B) anatase-TiV6.25%O2 and (C) anatase-TiV9.37%O2.127 Figure adapted from A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, M.-C. Tsai, J. Rick, W.-N. Su, J.-F. Lee and B.-J. Hwang, Visible light responsive noble metal-free nanocomposite of V-doped TiO2 nanorod with highly reduced graphene oxide for enhanced solar H2 production, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6752–6762 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Crystalline structures of tetragonal BiVO4: (A) scheelite (ts-BiVO4) and (B) zircon-like (tz-BiVO4). Local coordination of V and Bi ions in crystalline structures of (C) ts-BiVO4; (D) monoclinic scheelite (m-BiVO4); and (E) tz-BiVO4 (red = V, purple = Bi, and gray = O). Extracted from ref. 130. Figure adapted from Y. Park, K. J. McDonald, K.-S. Choi, Progress in bismuth vanadate photoanodes for use in solar water oxidation, Chemical Society Reviews, 2013, 42, 2321–2337 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


1% V–TiO2	Rutile TiO2	*160 μmol L−1 h−1	Fe2(SO4)3	2.0	—	
38
	2011
Cr:Cu3V2O8	Monoclinic A3B2O8	11.21 at 1.53 V	Na2SO3	9.2	—	
115
	2018
Ce–BiVO4	Pristine BiVO4	**∼320	AgNO3	7.0	—	
120
	2016
∼95 μmol g−1 h−1
V2O5 IO	Inverse opal V2O5	∼0.08 at 1.23 V	Na2SO4	6.8	2.78	
121
	2019
V2O5 IO@BiVO4	Inverse opal V2O5 and pristine BiVO4 heterojunction	—	Na2SO4	6.8	2.66	
121
	2019
∼0.42 at 1.23 V
V2O5 IO@BiVO4@NiOOH	Inverse opal V2O5, pristine BiVO4 and amorphous NiOOH heterojunction	—	Na2SO4	6.8	2.68	
121
	2019
∼1.14 at 1.23 V
V2O5	Pristine V2O5	0.21 at 1.5 V	Na2SO4	—	2.49	
122
	2019
V2O5/BiVO4	Pristine V2O5 and BiVO4 heterojunction	—	Na2SO4	—	2.49	
122
	2019
1.53 at 1.5 V	2.6
V–WO3	Pristine WO3	2.49 at 1.23 V	Na2SO4	—	—	
123
	2019
WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi	Monoclinic WO3 and BiVO4 heterojunction	6.72 at 1.23 V	—	7.0	
	
132
	2015
Cu–BVO	Monoclinic BiVO4	350.2 μmol g−1 h−1	Na2S2O8	∼13	2.07	
135
	2018
∼2.1 at 1.23 V
2% P–BiVO4	P-dipcoated pristine BiVO4	0.28 at 1.23 V	Na2SO4	—	—	
136
	2018
Ni:FeOOH/Zn:BiVO4/Mo:BiVO4	Amorphous Ni:FeOOH and monoclinic BiVO4 homojunction	2.7 at 1.23 V	—	7	2.37 (Zn)	
34
	2019
2.38 (Mo)
W–BiVO4/V2O5	Monoclinic BiVO4 and orthorhombic V2O5 heterojunction	7.79 ± 1.1 at 1.23 V	Na2SO4	6.9	—	
137
	2018
BiVO4/Co3O4/CoFe-LDH	Monoclinic BiVO4 and Co3O4 nanoparticles heterojunction and CoFe-LDH amorphous coating	3.9 at 1.23 V	KPi	—	—	
140
	2019
∼5.5 at 1.23 V	Na2SO3
NiFeOx/BiVO4 PE	Monoclinic BiVO4	4.8 at 1.23V	Seawater	8.0	2.4	
141
	2019
5.0 at 1.23 V	KPi	7.0
Fe2O3/BiVO4/NiFe-LDH	Monoclinic BiVO4 and hematite Fe2O3 heterojunction and NiFe-LDH coating	3.9 at 1.80 V	NaOH	13.6	2.03	
142
	2018
BVO/CMZ-LDH	Monoclinic BiVO4 and hydrotalcite CoMnZn-LDH	1.06 at 1.23 V	NaBi	9.3	2.48	
143
	2019
NiCo2O4/Mo:BiVO4	Pristine BiVO4 decorated with ultrathin spinel-structured NiCo2O4 nanosheets	4.5 at 1.23 V	KH2PO4	7.0	2.45	
144
	2019

 	Fig. 21  (A) Illustration showing the preparation of nanorods by GLAD followed by electrodeposition of BiVO4 + CoPi, and a scheme showing the respective mechanism of the photocatalytic water-splitting process. (B) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image demonstrating the lateral section of the ITO/Pt/ITO/WO3/BiVO4 + CoPi photoanode.132 Figure adapted from Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Photocatalytic generation of hydrogen by core–shell WO3/BiVO4 nanorods with ultimate water splitting efficiency, Scientific Reports, 2015, 5, 11141 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Scheme of the band structure of each sample calculated by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) using Tauc plots. (B) Structure and benefits of the Zn:BVO/Mo:BVO n–n* type-II homojunction as the photoanode for water oxidation: (1) Mo doping increases the charge transportation due to increased carrier density, (2) Zn doping improves the surface charge-transfer process due to the formation of oxygen vacancies, and (3) the built-in homojunction potential facilitates the charge separation processes.34 Figure adapted from J. M. Lee, J. H. Baek, T. M. Gill, X. Shi, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, H. S. Jung and X. Zheng, A Zn:BiVO4/Mo:BiVO4 homojunction as an efficient photoanode for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2019, 7, 9019–9024 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) W–BiVO4 (BVO), V2O5 (VO) photoanodes and their different heterojunction configurations on the FTO substrate. SJ, single junction and MJ, multiple junctions. (B) LSV curves for W–BiVO5, V2O5 and their heterojunctions.137 Figure adapted from A. T. Oliveira, M. Rodriguez, T. S. Andrade, H. E. A. de Souza, J. D. Ardisson, H. S. Oliveira, L. C. A. Oliveira, E. Lorençon, A. C. Silva, L. L. Nascimento, A. O. T. Patrocínio and M. C. Pereira, High water oxidation performance of W-doped BiVO4 photoanodes coupled to V2O5 rods as a photoabsorber and hole carrier, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800089 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 24  Overpotential measured for the best electrocatalysts classified according to the type of vanadium containing material reported in this review.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
