Stimulus-responsive graphene systems towards actuator applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42812E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42812E
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3520-3536Stimulus-responsive graphene systems towards actuator applications

        
          
            Yang 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Song
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhipan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Liangti 
            Qu
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Cluster Science, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, School of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: zhipan@bit.edu.cn; lqu@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      20th August 2013
    , Accepted 26th September 2013First published on 3rd October 2013AbstractThe rise of graphene has triggered the fast increasing research upsurge in both controllable synthesis of graphene and unique applications associated with its miraculous properties. In particular, graphene-based smart devices that can automatically respond to external stimulations are among those attracting our most attention. In this featured article, we summarize some of the recent advances in stimulus-responsive graphene actuation systems contributed by us and others, and discuss the different roles that graphene plays in various actuation circumstances such as under electrical, chemical, photonic, thermal and other stimuli. Impressive progress including graphene-based robots is also presented, demonstrating the great prospects of graphene actuation systems in a wide range of applications including sensors, switches, artificial muscles, nano/micro electromechanical devices, etc.Zhipan ZhangZhipan Zhang received his doctorate degree from École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in 2008. After working at Dysol Ltd, Monash University and the University of Calgary, he is now an Associate Professor at the Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on energy-related applications of new materials, particularly in photovoltaics and solar fuels.Liangti QuLiangti Qu received a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 2004. He is now a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing Institute of Technology and leads the nanocarbon research group. His research interests in materials chemistry mainly focus on the synthesis, functionalization and application of nanomaterials with carbon–carbon conjugated structures, including carbon nanotubes, graphene and conducting polymers.

Broader context
An actuator is a type of device that can operate on a certain source of energy, such as electric current, pressure and chemical energy, and transform that energy into motion. It is desirable to have an actuator with controlled motions upon application ofan environmental stimulus, because such a device could mimic organisms and have wide applications ranging from sensors, switches, and artificial muscles to nano/micro electromechanical systems. Meanwhile, graphene, the perfect two-dimensional single-atom-thick carbon sheet, has attracted tremendous research interest due to its huge specific surface area, high electron mobility at room temperature, excellent mechanical flexibility, exceptionally high thermal conductivity and environmental stability. These remarkable electrical, thermal and mechanical properties of graphene are important in designing and fabricating future actuation systems, and therefore, it is not surprising that graphene has recently been revealed to be a beneficial component in composite polymer actuators and even an outstanding actuating material by itself. In this Perspective, we discuss the exciting developments, emerging applications and existing challenges of stimulus-responsive graphene actuation systems that convert different types of energies such as electrical, chemical, photonic, thermal energies to mechanical energy, aiming to attract increasing research efforts to this interesting yet demanding interdisciplinary field.

1. Introduction
Since the experimental observation of graphene in 2004,1 this two-dimensional (2D), single-atom layer carbon material has attracted enormous research interest,2 with more than 40000 entries found in a simple topic search with ‘graphene’ as the keyword in the ISI Web of Knowledge databases and over 80% of them impressively appeared in the past three years.3 Considering that graphene has many extraordinary characteristics such as high thermal conductivity,4 high room-temperature electron mobility5–7 and excellent mechanical properties,8,9 it is not surprising that graphene research has developed fast enough to move from the simple synthesis, modification and functionalization of graphene to the application of its great properties to emerging advanced devices in the fields of bioscience,10 electronics,11–15 energy storage and conversion,16–23etc. Among all these applications, smart graphene devices that spontaneously respond to external stimuli are of broad practical interest and importance. For example, graphene actuation systems responsive to electrochemical, light and other external stimuli can convert different energy forms (electric, chemical, photonic, thermal, etc.) to mechanical energy24 that is potentially profitable for diverse applications ranging from robots to sensors to memory chips.25–29 Considering its excellent electrical, thermal and mechanical properties, it is not surprising that graphene has been increasingly noticed in actuator-oriented applications. However, to the best of our knowledge, there have been few efforts to look at the exciting progress on this interesting topic.24 In this perspective paper, we aim to present the very recent developments of graphene actuation systems contributed by us and other groups, summarize important results in this fast-growing research field and postulate the potential trends in fabricating future graphene actuators. As we shall see below, graphene can be directly utilized as an active component responsive to environmental stimuli in the target devices. On the other hand, owing to its unique electrical and mechanical properties, graphene can also work as a filler material to boost the conductivity, flexibility, mechanical strength and the overall actuation performance of existing smart actuation systems. Therefore, this Perspective is accordingly structured to reflect different roles that graphene plays in various actuation systems.
2. Graphene as an active component of actuators
Theoretically, Roger and Liu studied the electrochemical actuation of monolayer graphene upon charge injection and ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte immersion, showing that the electrostatic double layer (DL) could induce strains more than 1% and its contribution to the overall strain was always equal to or higher than that of the quantum-mechanical strain (∼0.2%) from charge injections of −0.1 e per C atom.30 They further demonstrated that graphene oxide (GO) is in principle an excellent material for actuators and artificial muscles. For example, their model predicted that asymmetrically unzipped C4O GO could exhibit large expansions of up to 9.6% with hole injections and a notable contraction of −4.8% upon −0.15 e per C atom charge injection.31 More impressively, massive irreversible strains of up to 28.2% were envisaged with the structural unzipping of clamped GO, yet to be experimentally proved, far exceeding that of the pristine graphene.32 Therefore in the following sections, we will discuss stimulus-responsive actuators with graphene as an active component.
2.1. Electrical/electrochemical actuators
Among all types of graphene-based stimulus-sensitive actuators, those responsive to electrical or electrochemical stimulations are most widely researched. Chen and coworkers demonstrated an electrochemical actuator constructed on self-supported sheets composed exclusively of graphene flakes.33 An actuation strain of 0.064% was observed at an applied potential of −1 V vs. SCE in 1 M NaCl solution, and the strain could be further improved to 0.1% by addition of magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles to lessen the sheet stacking of graphene flakes. Lu et al. demonstrated that IL could be inserted to separate the layers of paralleled graphene nanosheets in a pretreatment (Fig. 1a) and a RGO–IL of 66.7 wt% IL was shown to have as large as 98% variation in thickness under a 2 V electrical stimulation,34 yet the unstable parallel structure due to the lack of binder and large volume deformation led to the breakdown of the electrode under high voltage, long actuation time or repetitive cycles. To address this instability issue, they later improved their system by introducing multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) to reduce the restacking of RGO and the RGO–MWCNT actuator exhibited an excellent long-term actuation stability of up to a million cycles, as is plotted in Fig. 1b.35 In a different way, we have designed an all-graphene based actuator by asymmetrically modifying the opposite surfaces of a monolithic graphene film using hexane plasma (Hex-P) and O2 plasma (O2-P), respectively, and the O2-P treated graphene strip displayed a rhythmic length change of up to 0.2% in response to the electrochemical potential change, which was about 20 to 50 times larger than that of its Hex-P treated counterpart (Fig. 1c).36 As a result, the graphene actuator demonstrated a saturated curvature of ca. 0.6 cm−1 despite the rigidity of the graphene strip and its displacement decreased only by ∼10% over 90 measurement cycles at a frequency of 0.01 Hz. We also found that O2-P treatment on a freestanding graphene film made by direct filtration of aqueous graphene colloidal suspensions could notably improve the actuating response of the graphene film to a strain of ca. 0.85% at 1.2 V under a low testing frequency of 0.005 Hz,37 which is four times higher than that for carbon nanotube (CNT) based actuators.38 Interestingly, the strain response of the O2-P treated graphene film was adequately load-tolerant, only suffering a slight reduction at ∼6.1 MPa (Fig. 1d). To further increase the strain response, we have rationally selected polypyrrole (PPy) to increase the elasticity of the system and fabricated a PPy–graphene bilayer actuator.39 The combination of graphene and PPy film was devised to harvest their synergetic function for excellent actuation response, and indeed as shown in Fig. 1e, the PPy–graphene actuator demonstrated reversible motion with a large bending ability of about 120°, superior to that of the unitary graphene films mentioned above and overcoming the relatively poor mechanical strength of the PPy film.
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of ion insertion induced graphite expansion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Cycling tests for RGO–MWCNT hybrid, MWCNT, and RGO actuators under 2 V and 1 Hz applied square wave voltage stimulation respectively; D0 represents the initial displacement value for the tenth cycle. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.) (c) The length changes of the graphene strips treated with Hex-P and O2-P under an applied square wave potential of ±1.2 V with a frequency of 0.05 Hz, where L and ΔL are defined as the length and the length change of the graphene actuator. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) (d) Strain response of a scroll of graphene film under load. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) Snapshots of the bending status of the PPy–graphene bilayer actuator driven by electrochemical potential within ±0.8 V, where the electrode to hold the sample was located inside the electrolyte. PPy and graphene layers were placed on the left and right sides of the demo actuator. Left, middle and right photos correspond to the potentials of −0.8 V, 0 V and +0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Besides 2D film actuators, one-dimensional (1D) and three-dimensional (3D) electrical/electrochemical graphene actuators have been developed for different applications. Biener et al. controllably removed carbon atoms from a network composed of both amorphous carbon and graphite nanoplatelets and obtained macroscopic 3D nanographene (3D-NG) with macroporosity and surprisingly high robustness.40 As all atoms in 3D-NG monoliths were shown to be surface atoms and thus susceptible to interfacial charge accumulation or depletion induced by electrochemically driven ion adsorption, the length of a 3D-NG electrode could impressively change reversibly up to 2.2% under ±1 V electrical stimulation (Fig. 2a and b), corresponding to a volume strain of 6.6%. We also built a 3D graphene–PPy pillar actuator by electropolymerizing pyrrole (Py) on a Py-soaked 3D graphene framework.41 The 3D graphene–PPy actuator showed a record saturated strain of 2.5% with a square wave potential of ±0.8 V and even retained a high strain level of 0.6–1% within the loading range of 50–350 g. As depicted in Fig. 2c, the 3D graphene–PPy actuator was further demonstrated as a smart filler for a controlled switch, where it was filled into a plastic pipeline and immersed partially in 1 M NaClO4 solution to imitate a circumstance of aqueous medium. To enhance the visibility, a small hole of ∼250 μm in diameter was created in the center of the 3D actuator and exposed to a red laser spot on the backside. Once a positive potential of 0.8 V was applied to the 3D graphene–PPy actuator for 250 s, the initial red spot disappeared, showing that the light had been blocked due to the hole contraction associated with the effective expansion of the actuator. The on–off switch process is highly reversible, reliable and could be durably run for months, suggesting the great potential of the 3D actuating structure for advanced actuator systems. On the other hand, we recently constructed 1D fibrillar actuators based on lightweight and flexible graphene fibers (GFs) where PPy was selectively partially coated on the GF in the longitudinal direction via electropolymerization.42 The GF–PPy actuator was shown to have a high tensile strength of up to 230 MPa, a good maximum bending angle of ∼70° and a reasonable durability over repetitive actuations of long cycles. Owing to the high flexibility and the high stiffness of the GF, the GF–PPy fibrillar actuator was designed to perform an S-shaped actuation and work as multi-armed microtweezers (Fig. 2d and e) and actuating net, potentially applicable in different scenarios ranging from lifting living cells in culturing media for biological applications to knitting into other cloth fabrics for wearable electronics usages.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic presentation of in situ strain measurements performed in a dilatometer equipped with an electrochemical cell. (b) Strain Δl/l (red, left ordinate) and applied potential (black, right ordinate) versus time t in a 0.7 M NaF electrolyte solution and potential jumps between −1 V and +1 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.) (c) Photographs of a designed device in which the graphene–PPy actuator was filled into a plastic pipeline with a microsized hole in the center. The device was partially immersed in 1 M NaClO4 solution and the hole was exposed to a laser beam for visibility. A Pt wire in contact with the sample was used as the working electrode. The lower two photos show the open (on) and closed (off) state of the hole under the applied potential of +0.8 V and −0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d and e) Snapshots of the tri-armed tweezers driven by an applied electric potential of +0.8 V and −0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.) 
2.2. Light driven graphene–elastomer actuators
Graphene has been reported to show an excellent infrared (IR) response based on the photothermal conversion.43,44 As graphene comprises a perfect sp2-bonded carbon network of various stretching and bending vibrations, the infrared–phonon interactions during the forced resonance vibration process enhance the disordering degree and transfer the kinetic vibration energy to show heat motion energy. This photothermal conversion, together coupled with the high thermal conductivity of graphene,45 enables graphene to be employed in novel devices with new types of driven force styles, such as optically driven actuators with possibilities of wireless actuation and remote displacement controls. Liang et al. achieved a homogeneous incorporation of sulfonated-graphene (SG) into an IR-transparent thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) and studied the IR-triggered actuation behavior of SG–TPU.46 Under a pre-stretch of about 200–250% and exposure to an IR source of ∼30 mW cm−2, an SG–TPU film with 0.1 wt% SG contracted to its initial shape in 10 s and an SG–TPU film with 1 wt% SG was even capable of lifting a 21.6 g weight up to 3.1 cm with an impressive force of 0.21 N and an estimated energy density of over 0.33 J g−1, while pure TPU literally showed no actuation in the same test due to its intrinsic IR transparency. Isocyanate-graphene–TPU (IG–TPU) and reduced-graphene–TPU films were also tested and their performance was found to be inferior to that of the SG–TPG film, possibly due to the poor dispersion of reduced-graphene in TPU and the numerous defective sites from functional groups in the isocyanate-graphene sheets. In subsequent studies, with a different elastomer of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Panchapakesan and coworkers have systematically investigated the photomechanical actuation of graphene–PDMS and other composites. When 0.1 to 2 wt% graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) were added into PDMS to form a homogeneous composite, it demonstrated reversible, elastic expansion and contraction under IR illumination with measured changes in stress of +14 kPa at low pre-strains and −36 kPa at high pre-strains, respectively, which were four orders of magnitude higher than those of a pristine PDMS polymer.47 The optical-to-mechanical energy conversion factor of the GNP–PDMS actuator with a GNP composition of 2 wt% was estimated to be ∼7 to 9 MPa W−1. They further studied the dimensional dependence of the photomechanical response of different carbon nanostructures by comparing PDMS composites with 1 wt% 1D MWCNTs, 2D single-layer graphene (SLG), 2.5D GNPs (i.e. few-layer graphene) and 3D highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).48 The IR-induced photochemical stress response was found to increase with the decrease of the dimensionality of the carbon nanostructures, with 1D MWCNTs being the most effective additive to achieve photon absorption and subsequent energy transduction to the polymeric chains for actuation. Nonetheless, the photoinduced stress of the SLG–PDMS film was only moderately inferior to that of the MWCNT–PDMS composite but far superior to that of the GNP–PDMS one, and the layer dependent stress and efficiency responses were determined to decrease 20% and 30%, respectively, per additional graphene layer up to 5 layers.49 Based on these light driven graphene actuators, they developed a two-axis sub-micron resolution stage as is depicted in Fig. 3a, allowing for two-axis photo-thermal positioning of ∼100 μm per axis with at least 120 nm resolution and 5 μm s−1 actuation speed.50 Maximum actuator efficiency values of up to 0.03% were witnessed in this system and sub-10 nm resolution was envisaged by incorporating capacitive and interferometric feedbacks, suggesting the promising potential of graphene-based actuation technologies in energy efficient transduction systems.
 Fig. 3  (a) Simplified single-axis nanopositioner layout. A laser displacement sensor is used to measure the stage position. Independently controlled diodes on either side of the stage allow for differential positive or negative axis stage motion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.) (b) Time course of a typical gripping–releasing process based on the actuating behavior of a bimorph graphene actuator. The photographs show the microrobot picking, lifting, moving, and placing an object in a nearby container by turning on and off the infrared light. (c) Time course of the typical walking worm due to the on–off switching modulation of the friction modes. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Images of the fingers of a hand-shaped RGO–ELP hydrogel controllably bending and unbending in response to the location of an IR laser spot. (e) Schematic and images of a light-driven crawler. A RGO–ELP hydrogel molded with a slight curvature was placed with the porous side facing down. The laser was applied so as to induce gel curling. Subsequent uncurling during recovery after the laser was removed pushed the gel forward (1 mm tick marked). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) 
More recently, there has been a trend to develop advanced actuators that have controlled and robotic motions such as gripping-releasing action and self-walking. Wu et al. coated chemically modified polyethylene (PE) films with a mixture of large-area graphene–chitosan and showed that the bimorph configuration of large-area graphene–chitosan–PE behaved as a transparent soft actuator that expanded under IR illumination.51 As illustrated in Fig. 3b, a ring-shaped gripper was devised and its two ends could close and open under the on–off state of IR irradiation to realize picking and placing of an object to a nearby container. Intriguingly, based on the same actuator, they further constructed freestanding artificial worms (Fig. 3c). Due to the judicious design of shape-determined mechanic asymmetry, the head and rear edges of the large-area graphene–chitosan–PE actuator were periodically driven by the actuating force with the on–off switching of IR light, mimicking a crawling worm with a speed of up to 3.8 mm min−1. Alternatively, Wang et al. created light-driven actuators by combining reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanosheets and elastomeric proteins such as elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs), fully exploiting the GO's biocompatibility and ELPs' ability to undergo large, elastic deformations with a little loss of energy.52 The bending rates and angles of the RGO–ELP actuator increased upon increasing IR laser intensity and RGO concentration, with maximum bending angles of ∼80° obtained. When the IR light was removed, the actuator recovered ∼74 to 84% of its initial state within 10 s. As shown in Fig. 3d, a hand-shaped RGO–ELP matrix was carved and a sequential irradiation on its ‘fingers’ created controlled joint-like flexing motions in arbitrary order. Similarly, arch-shaped RGO–ELP gels could behave as light-driven crawlers on glass slides (Fig. 3e). Upon applying the laser on the rear edge of the gel, it folded underneath. When the laser was stopped, the front edge rose and the rear edge produced a forward-directed force by pushing against the glass as it uncurled, moving the entire gel forward ∼3 mm to complete a walking cycle. Considering the ease of fabrication and the high sensitivity of these graphene actuating systems, the successful demonstration of controlled motion and self-walking behavior paved the way for a range of technological applications including light-controlled dynamic cell-culture, drug delivery, soft robotics, etc.
2.3. Thermally responsive actuators
In contrast to conventional materials with a positive coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE), graphene has demonstrated distinctive large negative CTE (contraction upon heating) values ranging from −7 ppm K−1 in a single-layer graphene membrane53 to −81.2 ppm K−1 in a discotic liquid crystal phase of nanographene.54 Consequently, when a graphene layer is coupled to a thin layer of different material, the bimorph structure could perform actuation induced by the asymmetric thermomechanical response. Cho and coworkers transferred graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) onto a thin epoxy cantilever and observed upward deformation of the microactuator upon heating directly on the graphene film.55 As shown in Fig. 4a and b, when the temperature of the graphene–epoxy cantilever was linearly tuned up to 36 °C with a supplied input power of up to 1.26 mW, the microactuator could demonstrate a linear deflection with effective conversion factors of 0.17 μm °C−1 and 2.58 μm mW−1, respectively. Owing to the transparency of graphene, a biomimetic microactuator imitating a transparent dragonfly wing was further fabricated by depositing a graphene serpentine on a transparent organic film where graphene served both as the actuating material and structural support. The microactuator could generate a flapping and bending movement upon changing the frequency and the duration of the applied voltage. In the meantime, Conley et al. studied the curvature of bimorph graphene–SiNx and graphene–Au cantilevers and compared the strain, CTE, and the adhesion force acting on graphene layers attached to SiNx and Au substrates.56 They found that all the cantilevers were born to be considerably bent towards the graphene side at room temperature, and the degree of bending became temperature-dependent following an initial annealing step. Additionally, some irreversible bending during the initial heating/cooling process turned reversible in successive temperature cycling (Fig. 4c and d). As illustrated in Fig. 4e, the above-mentioned bending behaviors of these bimetallic-like cantilevers could be rationalized by contributions from three distinct components. Graphene films deposited on SiNx and Au were under significant built-in tensile strains of ∼1.5% and 0.04%, respectively, leading to the natural bending of the bimorph cantilevers immediately after fabrication. Meanwhile, the non-hysterical dependence of the cantilevers' curvature on temperature shown in Fig. 4d was attributed to the mismatch of CTE between graphene and the substrate of SiNx, while the slipping between graphene and the substrate at large strains was deemed to partly account for the disappearance of the irreversibility in the bending of the graphene–SiNx cantilevers. Therefore, the observed variation in bending of the graphene bimorph cantilevers as a function of temperature could be applied to create novel types of nanoelectromechanical switches and actuators. More recently, Liang et al. constructed the graphene–polydiacetylene (PDA) bimorph actuator by first coating a 10,12-pentacosadiynoic acid monomer onto a flexible graphene paper and then photopolymerizing the monomer to PDA under UV illumination.57 As shown in Fig. 4f, in the graphene–PDA actuator, graphene achieved a large displacement and curvature of 1.8 mm and 0.37 cm−1 at an applied dc of about 20 mA (current density of about 0.74 A mm−2). The bending motion was highly reversible even at a lower dc of 7.5 mA, corresponding to a current density of about 0.28 A mm−2 (Fig. 4g). Under ac stimulations, the graphene–PDA actuator was triggered to exhibit rapid and reversible oscillations, and combining two graphene–PDA actuators with different sizes could lead to a walking mini-robot based on their differences in the amplitude of oscillation. The temperature of the graphene–PDA bimorph actuator was found to rise sharply to a steady state the moment the electric power was turned on under ambient conditions and it was believed the electric power input was first absorbed by the graphene paper and then transformed into thermal energies to heat the actuator system, leading the PDA layer to expand more significantly than that of the graphene part due to the differences in their CTEs and thus demonstrating the actuation bending phenomenon. A second mechanism of the electric-induced expansion of PDA crystal was also identified to explain the fast and reversible oscillation actuation under ac stimulations, demanding further work to fully unravel the working principles of this novel graphene–PDA bimorph actuator.
 Fig. 4  (a) Temperature extracted from the emitted IR radiation as a function of the input power, and the solid line shows the best fit to the data. The inset shows a color contour plot of the temperature profile of the cantilever, with the dotted gray lines representing the beam boundaries. Color scale from 17 to 40 °C is shown on the right. (b) Tip displacement of the cantilever beam as a function of temperature. The solid line shows the fit to the data. The insets show the SEM images of the initial position of the cantilever beam (top left) and bend up state upon applying electrical power (right bottom). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (c) Temperature dependence of the profile Z(x) of a 3-layer-graphene–SiN cantilever during the initial heating (red)/cooling (blue) cycle immediately after fabrication, note the hysteretic behavior. (d) Temperature dependence of the profile for the same device in subsequent heating/cooling cycles. (e) Schematic illustration of different mechanisms that induced the bending of the graphene bimetallic-like cantilevers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (f) Optical photos of the bending actuation for the graphene–PDA bimorph actuator (10 mm × 2.7 mm × 10 μm) without (left) and with (right) an applied dc of 20 mA. The unit of the ruler was 1 mm. (g) Optical microscopy photos of the movable end of the graphene–PDA actuator without (left) and with (right) an applied dc of 7.5 mA. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Apart from graphene, GO can also respond to external thermal stimuli. As shown in Fig. 5a, Zhu et al. demonstrated that the length of GO paper experienced reversible contraction/expansion upon heating/cooling between 30 and 80 °C, a phenomenon similar to the negative thermal expansion of graphene.58 They carefully investigated this large pseudonegative thermal expansion (PNTE) of GO (up to −130.14 ppm K−1) and found that it in fact originated from thermohydration effects that were highly dependent on the relative humidity and the state of water in GO. As illustrated in Fig. 5b, GO sheets were composed of multiple islands with protruding out-of-plane oxygenated functional groups and bound water between neighboring layers. During the adsorption (cooling) stage, water molecules percolated mainly to the protruding islands in the hydrophilic regions and increased the overall interlayer spacing. The fast saturation of these hydrophilic regions and other areas with water caused GO sheets to slide apart from each other, resulting in the elongation of the GO paper. Correspondingly, the desorption (heating) process saw the reverse structural changes with the collapse of interlayer spacing, leading to the contraction of the GO paper to complete the PNTE cycle. Furthermore, the intrinsic (molecular) CTE was determined to be only 0.85 ppm K−1 (note that this value is positive), manifesting the importance of the thermohydration process in realizing actuations based on the PNTE of GO. With this mechanism, Sun et al. also prepared a gradient-structured GO actuator that bent with a large curvature as the temperature changed.59 The GO actuator was of a continuous mass density gradient from one side to another side, and this asymmetric bulk profile was believed to produce the driving force for the actuation behavior induced by the loss/acquisition of the interlamellar water during the temperature change. As shown in Fig. 5c, the curvature of the GO paper positively increased with the rising temperature, probably due to the higher water losing rate at higher temperatures. At 100 °C, the curvature could reach 0.36 mm−1 with a strain difference of about 0.86% between the top surface and the bottom surface, demonstrating that its excellent strain-accommodation ability was fully comparable to that of some of the best electrochemical graphene actuators.
 Fig. 5  (a) Thermal behavior of GO paper for repeated cooling and heating cycles at a relative humidity of 2.0% with the label dL standing for absolute length change and L0 initial length at 30 °C. (b) Schematic drawing of the water adsorption/desorption process in GO paper. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) Curvature of the gradient-structured GO actuator as a function of temperature after heating for 60 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) 
2.4. Actuators working on moisture stimuli
The hydration induced actuation of GO materials shown in Fig. 5b opens up a possibility to fabricate GO actuators responsive to changes in environmental water amounts and/or relative humidity (RH). Guo et al. obtained single phase nematic GO liquid crystals by centrifugal vacuum evaporation and studied their hydration-responsive folding and unfolding behaviors.60 As shown in Fig. 6a, when a droplet of 2 mg mL−1 aqueous GO solution was dried between two metal needles, it gradually shrank with water evaporation until the stretched liquid bridge broke due to instability, leaving thin flat GO deposits on the two opposing substrates upon the collapse of the droplet. When hydration occurred, the deposits took in water and recovered the droplet with the initial volume and shape before the breakage. The observed phenomenon was rationalized by a folding/unfolding transition of GO (Fig. 6b), where rehydration lowered interlayer forces and released the elastic fold energy stored previously by liquid surface tension during drying, thus establishing a new hydration-actuated folding and rehydration-actuated unfolding actuating system for controlled release. Differently, Ruoff and coworkers showed a macroscopic graphene-based actuator prepared by sequential filtration of MWCNTs and then GO platelets to form a bilayer MWCNT–GO paper.61 As demonstrated in Fig. 6c, the bilayer paper initially rolled up with the MWCNT side facing outward at a low RH of 12% at room temperature, gradually unrolled to become almost flat around a RH of 55% to 60%, started to curl in the opposite direction with the GO side facing out as the RH exceeded ∼60%, and eventually fully curled at a RH of 85%. The bilayer paper actuator demonstrated similar curling as a function of temperature as well. Thermal gravimetric analysis confirmed that the GO layer had a water content of 17%, while the MWCNT layer was free of water. Consequently, the actuation was deemed to originate from the difference between the amounts of interlamellar water in both layers under different RH values or temperatures.
 Fig. 6  (a) Optical micrographs of a droplet of GO suspension positioned in the millimeter gap between two metal needles. Left to right: drying caused surface recession, concentration of the GO layers, and eventually physical gelation due to interlayer interaction. Instability in late stages of drying induced rupture of the droplet and Z-directional collapse driven by surface tension. Rehydration triggered anisotropic growth and recovery of the original shape. (b) Proposed molecular assembly of GO plates during drying and rehydration. Left to right: receding drying front templates, vertical alignment of GO layers by surface anchoring; increase in concentration caused layer-to-layer interaction and partial gelation; thinning caused liquid bridge instability, surface tension led to vertical collapse, and folding; and rehydration triggered unfolding, expansion, and shape/size recovery. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (c) Actuation of the bilayer paper sample as a function of RH. From left to right, RH was 12%, 25%, 49%, 61%, 70% and 90%, respectively. White-arrowed side: surface of the graphene oxide layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.) 
Very recently, we have rationally designed and fabricated the region-asymmetric graphene/graphene oxide (G/GO) fiber actuators in virtue of the laser positioning reduction of the freshly spun GO fibers.62 As shown in Fig. 7a, the asymmetric G/GO fiber was conveniently fabricated by scanning of a laser beam along the preformed GO fiber, where the scanned area was converted to G (also called RGO) and the unexposed region remained unchanged. During the laser scanning, the color change from yellow-brown for the GO to black for the scanned surface on the GO fiber was observed clearly, characteristic of the conversion from GO to G. Due to the oxygen-rich functional groups of GO and the unique stacking of GO sheets, water has a strong affinity with GO layers rather than the G structure, resulting in the relatively fast and reversible expansion/contraction of GO layers for complex and well-confined deformation once exposed to moisture. As expected, a rapid bending to the G side occurred once the G/GO fiber was exposed to moisture with a RH of 80%, while the fiber recovered to its initial state as the environmental humidity regressed to the ambient condition of 25% (Fig. 7b). This process was fully reversible with an average motion rate of ca. 8° s−1, indicating the reliable shape-memory feature of the G/GO fiber. Accordingly, the decrease of the RH to 10% led to the deformation of the G/GO fiber to the GO side due to the contraction of GO layers caused by a loss of water moisture. As demonstrated in Fig. 7c, with the aid of the sensitive response of the G/GO fibers, we further designed the three-wire moisture tentacles that stood gracefully in a sunny day and looked crestfallen when it rains. Additionally, the pliability of G/GO fibers facilitated the weaving into a textile structure with self-supported stability, which bent accordingly as exposed to moisture while maintaining the integrality of the G/GO fiber network (Fig. 7d). After removing the applied moisture, the bent textile effectively recovered its initial shape. The excellent humidity-responsive bending/unbending ability of the G/GO fibers enabled us to build a new-type of microfiber walking device that could travel in a narrow slit. As shown in Fig. 7e, when the G/GO fiber walker was placed between two glass slides with a gap of ca. 1 mm and supported by a ratchet substrate, it was able to stand there under ambient conditions owing to its excellent mechanical properties. Once moisture was applied, its back-end shifted right due to the increased bending (Fig. 7e, stage 1), and during the stretching process induced by the removal of moisture, the fore-end of the G/GO fiber walker slid forward while the hind tip was fixed by the indentations on the substrate (stage 2). With periodical alternation of the environmental humidity, the device walked unidirectionally in a step-by-step manner with a moving rate of 4 mm per cycle even without a systematical device optimization. Quantitative studies showed that the length change of the GO fiber was up to ca. 5% in response to the humidity changes, which was 20 times more than that of its laser treated counterpart, further proving that the deformation of the G/GO fiber was mainly determined by the shape change of GO induced by interlayer water absorption/desorption.
 Fig. 7  (a) Left: scheme of laser positioning reduction on one side of a GO fiber. The black region corresponded to laser induced G region along the brown GO fiber. Right: optical image of the top surface for the as-prepared asymmetric G/GO fiber. (b) Photographs of a G/GO fiber (2 cm in length) under different RH values. (c) Photographs of three-wire moisture tentacles of the G/GO fibers at the sunny and rainy days, respectively. Scale bars: 5 mm. (d) Photographs of the hand-knitted textile-like network of G/GO fibers exposed to moisture (RH 80%) for different times, and the corresponding photograph after removing moisture (rightmost). Scale bar is 5 mm. (e) Photographs showing the G/GO fiber crawling on the ratchet paper within the narrow slit in response to the “on” and “off” states of applied moisture. The G side of the G/GO fiber was placed downwards. RH values at “on” and “off” states were about 80% and 25%, respectively. Scale bars: 1 cm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.) 
3. Graphene as a filler/conductive substrate of actuators
3.1. Ionic electroactive actuators
Apart from playing an active role as the actuating material, graphene has been added as an additive for electrical and/or mechanical support in the ionic electroactive composite film for actuation purposes. As most ionic electroactive actuators are of a bi-layer or tri-layer configuration, graphene can act as a light-weight, highly conductive supporting layer to improve actuating efficiencies. Liu et al. deposited PPy on a bilayer film of SG and RGO, and thus fabricated a tri-layer actuator of PPy–SG–RGO configuration with a high conductivity of 15 S cm−1.63 In this actuator, PPy and RGO worked as actuation and conductive inert layers, respectively, while the SG layer was designed to alleviate the delamination problem as SG has good affinities for both PPy and RGO layers and thus avoided the formation of a weakly interacted PPy–RGO interface. Consequently, the PPy–SG–RGO actuator showed the highest bending angle (>90°), movement rate (158° per second), and the lowest charge consumption per mass unit (18 C g−1) among a series of actuators with similar structures reported so far.64–66 The tri-layer graphene actuator also demonstrated stable actuating performance for over 1000 actuation cycles and the lifetime of the actuator was around 5000 cycles. Graphene has also been introduced to ionic polymer–metal composite (IPMC) actuators to improve their weak generative blocking force and poor lifetime that both result from the solvent loss in the polymer matrix due to the evaporation, electrolysis, and the unsatisfactory mechanical property of the polymer. A high quality GO–Nafion membrane was cast from the GO–Nafion gel prepared by adding GO aqueous dispersion to Nafion alcohol solution and subsequently replacing the solvent with DMF.67 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images confirmed a good dispersion of GO in Nafion, probably due to the contribution of the polar groups on the surface of GO sheets, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, and/or ether groups. Nafion membranes with 10 wt% GO loading showed up to 4 orders of magnitude increase in conductivity and the actuator based on this GO–Nafion membrane exhibited a largest blocking force twice as much as that of pure Nafion. Jung et al. further noticed this improvement and their systematic study found that even a low 1.0 wt% loading of graphene in Nafion could significantly increase the tensile strength and Young's modulus of the ionic membrane up to 200%. Additionally, graphene was shown to notably improve the harmonic response and actuation behavior of Nafion-based IPMC actuators, yielding over 200% larger bending deformation, 110% higher blocking forces and almost doubled specific electromechanical efficiency of graphene-reinforced actuators compared to devices solely based on recast Nafion (Fig. 8a).68 Slightly differently, Yang et al. replaced the typical platinum electrode in IPMC and designed a new IPMC actuator by forming MWCNT–graphene composites on both sides of the Nafion membranes as electrodes.69 The MWCNT–graphene electrodes effectively enhanced mechanical properties of the IMPC actuator and improvements of about 20% in displacement and up to 100% in natural frequency were observed (Fig. 8b), confirming the beneficial effects of graphene additives in IPMC actuators.
 Fig. 8  (a) I–V curves of recast Nafion and 0.1 and 1.0 wt% graphene–Nafion actuators. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd.) (b) Frequency response plot of IPMCs with five different kinds of electrodes. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (c) Illustration of electrochemical actuation mechanisms for the Ag actuator (left) and the RGO–Ag actuator (right). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.) 
Very recently, GO has been additionally selected as the stabilizer of Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) and a subsequent thermal reduction of GO–AgNP to a highly conductive RGO–Ag hybrid electrode qualified the material for electrochemical actuator applications.70 Compared to the pure Ag electrode, the RGO–Ag hybrid electrode was able to function in a wide frequency scope ranging from 0.01 to 10 Hz with much better actuating performance, where 4 times more displacement was observed at 0.01 Hz and at least one magnitude larger displacements were found at higher frequencies. Meanwhile, the actuation of the RGO–Ag actuator was stable over 500 cycles, while the pure Ag actuator quickly lost its response in 50 cycles. This significant improvement in actuating performance and stability was ascribed to the effective restraints on the redox reaction of AgNPs through wrapping of RGO around them. As shown in Fig. 8c, in a pure Ag actuator, the fast and dominantly non-faradic capacitive actuation process 1 was coupled with a slow redox actuation process 2 where the oxidization of Ag to Ag+ at the anode and the accumulation of Ag+ at the cathode took place to induce anode expansion. With the increase of the modulating frequency and/or working cycles, process 2 failed to respond to the electrical stimulation and led to the demise of the actuator. In comparison, for the RGO–Ag actuator, only process 1 took place due to the neat wrapping of RGO around the AgNPs and the efficient prevention of the redox of Ag/Ag+, therefore significantly improving the actuating response at high frequencies and long cycles.
3.2. Dielectric elastomer actuators
Graphene also finds its application in dielectric elastomer actuators to build interesting multifunctional devices. Known as “artificial muscles”, dielectric actuators are able to function under Maxwell stress at acoustic frequencies71 and exceed strains of 100%.72 An ideal material for electrodes of elastomeric actuators requires strong mechanical compliance but low mechanical impedance to the elastomer upon actuation, while maintaining electrical conductivity during elongation and contraction of the dielectric elastomer film. Work from Michel et al. demonstrated that graphene meets these requirements.73 They added 20 wt% reduced graphene nanoplatelets in cross-linked PDMS and obtained conductive, printable and stretchable composites of a low sheet resistance of 0.1 kΩ □−1 and a low modulus of elasticity. The dielectric actuator based on this material showed about 4% lateral strain under an applied electric field of 40 V μm−1 and a maximum of 5% strain immediately before the breakdown (43 V μm−1). Interestingly, it had the ability to self-heal even after the breakdown when the spark may burn part of the electrode and dielectric film, oxidize some of the silicone to silica and turn that part of the electrode inactive. As shown in Fig. 9a, the actuator suffered a breakdown at an electric field of ∼44 V μm−1 but self-repaired in a few seconds and resumed functioning without any degradation, hysteresis or memory effect. This self-healing effect was observed only in cross-linked PDMS electrodes containing graphene contents but not in those of carbon black additives or non-cross-linked PDMS electrodes. Unfortunately, no specific explanations were given to account for the exact mechanism for this self-healing effect and the reasons why carbon black or non-cross-linked PDMS electrodes cannot self-recover, yet it could be postulated that the homogeneous distribution of graphene in the silicone matrix and the robustness of cross-linked PDMS might have greatly contributed to separate the faulty site from the active area during the breakdown and rejuvenate the actuator despite that more experiments are needed to prove this point.
 Fig. 9  (a) A working diagram showing an actuator suffering breakdown and then self-healing at 2400 V (an electric field of ∼44 V μm−1). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Color change of an actuated grating at an applied voltage of 6 kV and a frequency of 0.5 Hz. Left: relaxed state; right: maximum actuation at 6 kV. The patterned electrode was filled with 1 wt% FGS. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2010 Optical Society of America.) (c) Actuating behaviors of the stretchable actuator when the input voltage was applied from 0 to 3 kV. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (d) Voltage-induced actuation of a crumpled graphene–elastomer laminate. As voltage was applied, the laminate reduced its thickness and expanded its area where the area actuation strain was over 100% and the transmittance of the film improved. The lower curve shows the transmittance of the laminate in the visible range as a function of the area actuation strain. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.) 
Another attractive feature of the dielectric actuator is the transparency of the elastomer and therefore the compliant electrodes can be bifunctional and behave as electrostatically actuated optical elements. Fang et al. chose functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs) as the filler material to mix PDMS as the conductive silicone electrodes for elastomer actuators and fabricated patterned electrodes with imprinted diffraction grating and imbedded polystyrene (PS) particles as tunable diffraction grating and photonic structure, respectively.74 Under the illumination of collimated white light from a halogen lamp, the patterned diffraction grating first showed a blue color and then a green color upon the actuation under a voltage of 6 kV with a frequency of 0.5 Hz (Fig. 9b). The observed lateral expansion of the PDMS–FSG actuator was about 14%, i.e. the lattice period d of the grating enlarged by 14%, corresponding well to the 13% increase in the wavelength λ of the observed reflected light from approximately 470 (blue) to 530 (green) nm as λ of diffracted light at a given diffraction angle α in the first diffraction order is proportional to λ = dsinα. Similarly, PDMS-infiltrated PS spheres of 600 nm acted as a two-dimensional diffraction grating and the observed color in the first diffraction order changed from green to red upon electrical actuation. Further decreasing the size of PS spheres to 300 nm led to a device with true photonic crystal properties where a sharp IR peak measured under normal incidence due to the Bragg reflection at the compressed PS layers shifted from 825 nm in the natural state to 795 nm upon actuation at 3 kV, suggesting the creation of a material with an optical stop band. Besides these applications, stretchable graphene-based actuators can also be used for tactile display purposes. Kim et al. sandwiched an optically clear adhesive (OCA) dielectric elastomer film between two transparent, few-layer graphene sheets and prepared actuators capable of displacing ∼1050 μm (Fig. 9c) and relaxing to its natural length at a frequency of 0.5 Hz up to an actuating voltage of 3 kV.75 The actuator was even functional under 25% stretching owing to the excellent mechanical properties of the graphene electrode, qualifying it as an ideal candidate for functional touch-screen panel devices. More recently, Zang et al. achieved controlled folding and unfolding of crumpled graphene films on pre-stretched PDMS films and demonstrated that the graphene–elastomer laminate capably increased its area over 100% under a dc voltage of 3000 V and restored its non-deformed state when the voltage was turned off, an actuation response five times larger than that of its counterpart with flat non-delaminated graphene electrodes.76 As a result, the transmittance of the laminate varies between 40% and 60% during actuation (Fig. 9d), yielding an artificial muscle with tunable transparency and allowing nanoscale mechanisms to be visible at the macroscale with novel tunability and flexibility.
3.3. Acoustic actuators
With a similar structure to the dielectric elastomer actuator, an acoustic actuator is formed when a layer of piezoelectric material such as poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) is sandwiched between two graphene electrodes and works on the converse piezoelectric effect where the application of an electrical field induces mechanical deformation in the crystal and possibly produces the sound wave. Jang and coworkers first demonstrated the graphene-based acoustic actuator as a transparent, energy-efficient and extremely thin flat-panel speaker by inkjet printing GO films with different thicknesses on a plasma-modified PVDF film and subsequently reducing it with hydrazine vapor.77 In comparison to the speaker with a commercial poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) based thin film, the graphene-based acoustic actuator showed higher responses over all frequencies from 40 to 20 k Hz (Fig. 10a), particularly in the midrange. As illustrated in Fig. 10b, bending the actuator could further improve the frequency response in the bass and midrange frequency through focusing waves of sound energy. With the aid of a soft substrate to remove the nonlinear harmonics, the graphene-based acoustic actuator could amplify 3 kHz tonal input and attenuate frequency harmonics of 6–21 kHz due to the added damping, showing its potential application in active noise cancellation (ANC) systems. In a later work, Xu et al. fabricated similar devices by transferring 1 to 4 layered graphene synthesized by CVD to a PVDF thin film and compared their sound pressure level (SPL) together with a commercial PEDOT:PSS-based thin film speaker.78 As demonstrated in Fig. 10c, all graphene-based speakers had higher SPL over all tested frequencies, and the PVDF film with 4 layer graphene had the 20 dB higher response in the midrange and 30 dB higher response in the treble range, corresponding to 10 and 31.6 times higher sound levels compared to that produced by the commercial PEDOT:PSS-based speaker at the same driving voltage. It is also notable that the performance of this 4-layer-graphene-based PVDF film almost matched that of the aluminum-based commercial thin film, but it was hundreds of times thinner (1.36 nm vs. ∼550 nm) and satisfactorily transparent. The bending test showed that the device had an enhanced frequency response under moderate bending conditions and an excellent mechanical stability. Recently, Bae et al. further exploited the piezoelectric nature of the polymeric layer of the graphene acoustic actuator turning the actuator into a nanogenerator during the bending/unbending process (Fig. 10d and e).79 They slightly changed the piezoelectric layer and selected poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (p(VDF-TrFE)) as the active material to fabricate graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene acoustic actuators and nanogenerators by first spinning or bar coating p(VDF-TrFE) on as-grown CVD graphene films and subsequently transferring another layer of graphene on top of p(VDF-TrFE). The better electrical conductivity of CVD-grown graphene over that of RGO in ref. 77 was deemed to lower the power consumption. Within the frequency range of 1 to 3000 Hz, the acoustic actuator showed a small inconsistency in response to the input signal, but was much better than that of previously reported CNT-based transparent acoustic actuators in tests using white noise signal.80 The rollability test further showed that the relative change of resistance of the graphene/p(VDF-TrFE) film was around 20% when the graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene structure was rolled and released up to 100 cycles, indicating the graphene acoustic actuator was of high flexibility and stability and ideal for developing integrated flexible, light-weight acoustic devices. As the reverse process of the acoustic actuation, bending the actuator led to the generation of electricity through converting mechanical energy to electrical energy. To test the effectiveness of the graphene acoustic actuator as a nanogenerator, it was subjected to a bending test with an applied strain of ∼0.3% and a rate of 60 mm s−1. The performance of the nanogenerator was fairly stable for >500 cycles, with an average output voltage of ∼2.5 V (maximum value ∼3 V) and a current density of over ∼0.2 μA cm−2 (maximum value ∼0.37 μA cm−2), and the energy conversion efficiency of the device was found to be 8%. Earlier studies on graphene-based nanogenerators included devices fabricated with a similar p(VDF-TrFE) film,81 ZnO nanostructures82,83 and Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3 (PZT) ribbons,84 and those studies have been well covered in a recent review specially devoted to graphene-based nanogenerators for mechanical energy harvesting.85 Interestingly, without the incorporation of any piezoelectric materials, some graphene-based nanogenerators could work on the principle of releasing capacitive charges from the GO layer sandwiched in a Al/GO/PEDOT:PSS configuration86 or embedded in the poly(methyl methacrylate) matrix87 due to the distance variation between the GO layer and the adjacent top/bottom electrodes during the mechanical deformation, therefore rendering another option in the device design to effectively harvest the acoustic energy or the impact energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) The frequency response of graphene-based acoustic actuators with three different electrode thicknesses (60, 90 and 120 nm) compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based commercial thin film transducer. (b) Each frequency response under the flat and bending conditions (radius: 6 cm) of a graphene-based acoustic actuator transducer with 120 nm electrode thickness. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (c) Measured SPLs versus frequency of the graphene-based thin film transducer with the corresponding layers 1, 2, 3, and 4, compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based and aluminum-based commercial thin film transducer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing LLC.) (d) Photograph showing the electrical connections of sound source, amplifier, graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene-based acoustic device and electrical circuit with red LED during the measurement. (e) Schematic depiction showing the graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene-based device working as an actuator as well as a nanogenerator. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) 
3.4. Composite hydrogel actuators and others
Owing to its good mechanical properties and high thermal conductivity, graphene can also be blended with stimulus-sensitive polymer hydrogels to reinforce the compressibility and tensile strength of the composite network, thus forming actuators responding to external electrical, pH and/or temperature changes. Zhang et al. synthesized graphene oxide/polyacrylamide (GO/PAM) and graphene oxide/polyacrylamid-co-poly(acrylic acid) composite hydrogels (GO/PAM-co-PAA) via in situ polymerization.88 The incorporation of graphene in the PAM xerogel was found to decrease its swelling ability of up to ∼40% but it significantly increases the compressive strength of the PAM hydrogel due to the good compatibility between PAM and GO (Fig. 11a). When the GO/PAM and GO/PAM-co-PAA hydrogels were placed under an electric field, bending studies showed that hydrogels with GO had the highest bending angle value of up to ∼70° in both groups, with or without PAA. The bending angle was also pH dependent as PAA was pH-sensitive, however, the actuating response to pH-stimuli was unfortunately not demonstrated. In another work, Hou et al. hydrothermally prepared graphene hydrogels with inter-penetrating poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) chains.89 In principle, the PNIPAM–graphene layers tend to stack, expel the internal water and shrink as the ambient temperature increases, while these layers will conversely separate and hold the embedded water to form a swollen hydrogel as the temperature falls. Indeed, PNIPAM–graphene hydrogels could repeatedly shrink at 50 °C and swell back to their original volume when transferred to a water bath at 20 °C, exhibiting a reversible temperature-responsive volume change. Interestingly, as depicted in Fig. 11b, when a voltage of 21 V was applied on a PNIPAM–graphene hydrogel, the gel got heated from 26 to 38 °C over 190 s, shrank from 15 × 15 × 8 mm to 12.5 × 12.5 × 6 mm in the meantime (48% reduction in volume) and eventually disconnected from the electrode surface, thus reducing the current to zero and preventing further shrinkage of the gel. In essence, this device worked differently from conducting polymer actuators, as it relied on water transport rather than ionic transport to initiate a volume change and therefore had the possibility to function in a non-ionic environment. In a later work, Li et al. additionally introduced the acrylic acid (AA) component as a loosely crosslinked 2nd network to build a pH- and temperature-responsive PNIPAM/AA/GO double network (DN) hyrdogel via a two-step sequential free-radical polymerization.90 The introduction of GO in the DN hydrogel was found to effectively decrease the volume phase transition temperature (VPTT) of the PNIPAM/AA hydrogel from approximately 32 °C to around 29 °C and increase the response rate of the DN hydrogel, which were rationally attributed to the high thermal conductivity of graphene. Meanwhile, GO greatly mitigated the poor elasticity of the hydrogel, improving its maximum elongation from 25% to ∼175% just before breakdown. Although the swelling/shrinking characteristics of the DN hydrogel were expressed in the weight ratio rather than the volumetric change, it was evident that GO containing DN hydrogels had a fast response to pH/temperature variation and swelled as the temperature changed from 35 °C to 20 °C or the pH varied from 4 to approximately 8, validating the concept of actuators responsive to pH and temperature stimuli.
 Fig. 11  (a) Compressive strength and compression ratio of GO/PAM hydrogels with different amounts of GO (w/w%). The inset shows the shape of the GO/PAM hydrogels after testing. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Electrical conductivity and volume changes (inset) for the PNIPAM–graphene hydrogel (25:2 mg mL−1 NIPAM–GO) at 21 V; length in mm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd.) 
4. Summary and outlooks
The dynamic research on graphene during the past few years has brought up numerous interesting findings on the syntheses and characteristics of this fascinating material, and scientists have been exploiting its versatility in different scientific fields ranging from biology, chemistry, and materials science to physics. Particularly, integrating graphene into smart systems that spontaneously respond to external stimuli is important to develop advanced smart devices such as sensors, switches and artificial muscles of nanoscale, microscale and macroscale. In this featured article, we have systematically reviewed the recent progress in stimulus-responsive graphene actuation systems that are able to convert electrical, chemical, photonic, thermal and other types of energies to mechanical energies in actuation. Regardless if graphene takes a passive or active role, the incorporation of graphene component is found to ameliorate the conductivity, flexibility and mechanical strength and improve the overall actuation performance of these smart actuation systems, suggesting that graphene is naturally compatible with a range of actuators working with different actuating mechanisms. The realization of self-powered, robotic motions by light, thermal and moisture stimuli has further validated smart devices that can be wirelessly and remotely controlled. In the future, it is of great theoretical and practical interest to develop all-graphene based actuators working using other stimuli. For example, graphene has been theoretically shown to possibly have an engineered piezoelectric effect through the selective surface adsorption of atoms such as F and Li,91,92 and the experimental observation of this effect would facilitate the fabrication of all-graphene based actuators that could work on a change in the intensity of the electric field. Lastly, it is highly desirable to construct actuating systems that are capable of responding to multiple stimuli (such as electrical and light, light and thermal, thermal and moisture, etc.) and delivering multifunctionality (for example, knittable fibrillar actuators for smart textile and light-driven robots for carrying tiny items). With these achievements, graphene actuation systems with better sensitivity and efficiency are envisaged to have wide applications in various fields.
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support from the 973 program (2011CB013000) of China and NSFC (21004006, 21174019, 21325415 and 51161120361), Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation (no. 131043), the research foundation for the doctoral program of higher education of China (20101101120036), the 111 Project 807012. ZZ thanks Excellent Young Scholars Research Fund of Beijing Institute of Technology for the financial support.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Web of Knowledge databases, © 2013 Thomson Reuters, Data retrieved as of August 1, 2013 .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Mayorov, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, L. Britnell, R. Jalil, L. A. Ponomarenko, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. K. Geim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2396–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, P. M. Ming and J. Li, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 064120 CrossRef .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
N. O. Weiss, H. L. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5782–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Reich, Nature, 2013, 497, 422–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Javier García de Abajo, Science, 2013, 339, 917–918 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
Y. P. Zhai, Y. Q. Dou, D. Y. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grande, V. T. Chundi, D. Wei, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhänen, Particuology, 2012, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo, S. M. Liu and L. J. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3671–3679 RSC .
P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1999, 286, 2148–2150 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fennimore, T. D. Yuzvinsky, W. Q. Han, M. S. Fuhrer, J. Cumings and A. Zettl, Nature, 2003, 424, 408–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Ahir and E. M. Terentjev, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Madden, Science, 2006, 311, 1559–1560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Jang, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, D. J. Kang, T. P. Butler, D. G. Hasko, J. E. Jung, J. M. Kim and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 26–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Roger and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10858–10863 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Roger and J. Z. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 021903 CrossRef .
G. W. Roger and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1250–1255 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Liang, Y. Huang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, D. Sui, S. L. Fang, R. H. Baughman, Y. F. Ma and Y. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3778–3784 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Lu, J. H. Liu, Y. Hu and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3978–3980 RSC .
L. H. Lu, J. H. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. W. Zhang, H. Randriamahazaka and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4317–4321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Xie, L. T. Qu, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Zhu, H. Bai, G. Q. Shi and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6050–6054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Xie, H. Bai, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2057–2059 RSC .
R. H. Baughman, C. Cui, A. A. Zakhidov, Z. Iqbal, J. N. Barisci, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, A. Mazzoldi, D. De Rossi and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 1999, 284, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, X. J. Xie, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4015–4020 RSC .
J. Biener, S. Dasgupta, L. Shao, D. Wang, M. A. Worsley, A. Wittstock, J. R. I. Lee, M. M. Biener, C. A. Orme, S. O. Kucheyev, B. C. Wood, T. M. Willey, A. V. Hamza, J. Weissmüller, H. Hahn and T. F. Baumann, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5083–5087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, C. G. Hu, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7563–7568 RSC .
Y. H. Wang, K. Bian, C. G. Hu, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, H. M. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 35, 49–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acik, G. Lee, C. Mattevi, M. Chhowalla, K. Cho and Y. J. Chabal, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 840–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, D. Vinh and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6825–6831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Z. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Liang, Y. F. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CAS .
J. Loomis, B. King, T. Burkhead, P. Xu, N. Bessler, E. Terentjev and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 045501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Loomis and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 215501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Loomis, B. King and B. Panchapakesan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 073108 CrossRef .
J. Loomis, X. M. Fan, F. Khosravi, P. Xu, M. Fletcher, R. W. Cohn and B. Panchapakesan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1900 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Z. Wu, J. Feng, L. L. Peng, Y. Ni, H. Y. Liang, L. H. He and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18584–18591 RSC .
E. Wang, M. S. Desai and S. W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2826–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Bao, F. Miao, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Y. Jang, C. Dames and C. N. Lau, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 562–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Grigoriadis, N. Haase, H. J. Butt, K. Müllen and G. Floudas, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1403–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Zhu, R. Shabani, J. Rho, Y. Kim, B. H. Hong, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 977–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Conley, N. V. Lavrik, D. Prasai and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4748–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Liang, L. Huang, N. Li, Y. Huang, Y. P. Wu, S. L. Fang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li, R. Baughman and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4508–4519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, C. M. Andres, J. D. Xu, A. Ramamoorthy, T. Tsotsis and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8357–8365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Sun, Y. Z. Pan, Z. Y. Zhan, L. X. Zheng, J. Y. Lu, J. H. L. Pang, L. Li and W. M. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23741–23744 CAS .
F. Guo, F. Kim, T. H. Han, V. B. Shenoy, J. X. Huang and R. H. Hurt, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8019–8025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. An, J. W. Suk and R. S. Ruoff, Small, 2010, 6, 210–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Cheng, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10482–10486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Liu, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6307–6312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Han and G. Q. Shi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 99, 525–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, L. Tong, C. Li, Z. Z. Gu and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1653–1658 RSC .
A. R. Liu, L. Zhao, H. Bai, H. X. Zhao, X. H. Xing and G. Q. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 951–955 CAS .
Y. F. Lian, Y. X. Liu, T. Jiang, J. Shu, H. Q. Lian and M. H. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9659–9663 CAS .
J. H. Jung, J. H. Jeon, V. Sridhar and I. K. Oh, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1279–1289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, H. W. Choi, S. H. Choi, M. H. Jeon and S. Y. Lee, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 21, 055012 CrossRef .
L. H. Lu, J. H. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. W. Zhang and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Heydt, R. Pelrine, J. Joseph, J. Eckerle and R. Kornbluh, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 2000, 107, 833–839 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Pelrine, R. Kornbluh, Q. B. Pei and J. Joseph, Science, 2000, 287, 836–839 CrossRef CAS .
S. Michel, B. T. T. Chu, S. Grimm, F. A. Nüesch, A. Borgschultec and D. M. Opris, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20736–20741 RSC .
Z. H. Fang, C. Punckt, E. Y. Leung, H. C. Schniepp and I. A. Aksay, Appl. Opt., 2010, 49, 6689–6696 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Kim, J. Kang, C. Lee, H. Y. Kwon, S. Hwang, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, J. D. Nam, B. H. Hong, J. B. Choi and H. R. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 145501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Zang, S. Ryu, N. Pugno, Q. M. Wang, Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. H. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Shin, J. Y. Hong and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8527–8529 RSC .
S. C. Xu, B. Y. Man, S. Z. Jiang, C. S. Chen, C. Yang, M. Liu, X. G. Gao, Z. C. Sun and C. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 151902 CrossRef .
S. H. Bae, O. Kahya, B. K. Sharma, J. Kwon, H. J. Cho, B. Ozyilmaz and J. H. Ahn, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3130–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, R. Rajamani, K. A. Stelson and T. Cui, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 132, 626–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, N. Thanh Tien, N. E. Lee and S. W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 169–175 CAS .
H. J. Shin, W. M. Choi, D. Choi, G. H. Han, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, S. W. Kim, Y. W. Jin, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15603–15609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar, K. Y. Lee, H. K. Park, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee and S. W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4197–4204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, W. Seung, B. K. Sharma, S. W. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8970–8975 CAS .
J. Kwon, B. K. Sharma and J. H. Ahn, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 06GA02 CrossRef .
R. H. Que, Q. Shao, Q. L. Li, M. W. Shao, S. D. Cai, S. D. Wang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5418–5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Valentini, S. B. Bon and J. Kenny, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1028–1032 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Zhang, R. Q. Li, L. Zhang, H. B. Chen, W. C. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Wu, X. D. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and J. P. Gao, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7231–7239 RSC .
C. Y. Hou, Q. H. Zhang, Y. G. Li and H. Z. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1959–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, J. F. Shen, H. W. Ma, X. Lu, M. Shi, N. Li and M. X. Ye, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 1951–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1387–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Ong, K. N. Duerloo and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3615–3620 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Zhipan Zhang	Zhipan Zhang received his doctorate degree from École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in 2008. After working at Dysol Ltd, Monash University and the University of Calgary, he is now an Associate Professor at the Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on energy-related applications of new materials, particularly in photovoltaics and solar fuels.
Liangti Qu	Liangti Qu received a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 2004. He is now a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing Institute of Technology and leads the nanocarbon research group. His research interests in materials chemistry mainly focus on the synthesis, functionalization and application of nanomaterials with carbon–carbon conjugated structures, including carbon nanotubes, graphene and conducting polymers.

Broader context
An actuator is a type of device that can operate on a certain source of energy, such as electric current, pressure and chemical energy, and transform that energy into motion. It is desirable to have an actuator with controlled motions upon application ofan environmental stimulus, because such a device could mimic organisms and have wide applications ranging from sensors, switches, and artificial muscles to nano/micro electromechanical systems. Meanwhile, graphene, the perfect two-dimensional single-atom-thick carbon sheet, has attracted tremendous research interest due to its huge specific surface area, high electron mobility at room temperature, excellent mechanical flexibility, exceptionally high thermal conductivity and environmental stability. These remarkable electrical, thermal and mechanical properties of graphene are important in designing and fabricating future actuation systems, and therefore, it is not surprising that graphene has recently been revealed to be a beneficial component in composite polymer actuators and even an outstanding actuating material by itself. In this Perspective, we discuss the exciting developments, emerging applications and existing challenges of stimulus-responsive graphene actuation systems that convert different types of energies such as electrical, chemical, photonic, thermal energies to mechanical energy, aiming to attract increasing research efforts to this interesting yet demanding interdisciplinary field.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of ion insertion induced graphite expansion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Cycling tests for RGO–MWCNT hybrid, MWCNT, and RGO actuators under 2 V and 1 Hz applied square wave voltage stimulation respectively; D0 represents the initial displacement value for the tenth cycle. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.) (c) The length changes of the graphene strips treated with Hex-P and O2-P under an applied square wave potential of ±1.2 V with a frequency of 0.05 Hz, where L and ΔL are defined as the length and the length change of the graphene actuator. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) (d) Strain response of a scroll of graphene film under load. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) Snapshots of the bending status of the PPy–graphene bilayer actuator driven by electrochemical potential within ±0.8 V, where the electrode to hold the sample was located inside the electrolyte. PPy and graphene layers were placed on the left and right sides of the demo actuator. Left, middle and right photos correspond to the potentials of −0.8 V, 0 V and +0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic presentation of in situ strain measurements performed in a dilatometer equipped with an electrochemical cell. (b) Strain Δl/l (red, left ordinate) and applied potential (black, right ordinate) versus time t in a 0.7 M NaF electrolyte solution and potential jumps between −1 V and +1 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.) (c) Photographs of a designed device in which the graphene–PPy actuator was filled into a plastic pipeline with a microsized hole in the center. The device was partially immersed in 1 M NaClO4 solution and the hole was exposed to a laser beam for visibility. A Pt wire in contact with the sample was used as the working electrode. The lower two photos show the open (on) and closed (off) state of the hole under the applied potential of +0.8 V and −0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d and e) Snapshots of the tri-armed tweezers driven by an applied electric potential of +0.8 V and −0.8 V, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Simplified single-axis nanopositioner layout. A laser displacement sensor is used to measure the stage position. Independently controlled diodes on either side of the stage allow for differential positive or negative axis stage motion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.) (b) Time course of a typical gripping–releasing process based on the actuating behavior of a bimorph graphene actuator. The photographs show the microrobot picking, lifting, moving, and placing an object in a nearby container by turning on and off the infrared light. (c) Time course of the typical walking worm due to the on–off switching modulation of the friction modes. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Images of the fingers of a hand-shaped RGO–ELP hydrogel controllably bending and unbending in response to the location of an IR laser spot. (e) Schematic and images of a light-driven crawler. A RGO–ELP hydrogel molded with a slight curvature was placed with the porous side facing down. The laser was applied so as to induce gel curling. Subsequent uncurling during recovery after the laser was removed pushed the gel forward (1 mm tick marked). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Temperature extracted from the emitted IR radiation as a function of the input power, and the solid line shows the best fit to the data. The inset shows a color contour plot of the temperature profile of the cantilever, with the dotted gray lines representing the beam boundaries. Color scale from 17 to 40 °C is shown on the right. (b) Tip displacement of the cantilever beam as a function of temperature. The solid line shows the fit to the data. The insets show the SEM images of the initial position of the cantilever beam (top left) and bend up state upon applying electrical power (right bottom). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (c) Temperature dependence of the profile Z(x) of a 3-layer-graphene–SiN cantilever during the initial heating (red)/cooling (blue) cycle immediately after fabrication, note the hysteretic behavior. (d) Temperature dependence of the profile for the same device in subsequent heating/cooling cycles. (e) Schematic illustration of different mechanisms that induced the bending of the graphene bimetallic-like cantilevers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (f) Optical photos of the bending actuation for the graphene–PDA bimorph actuator (10 mm × 2.7 mm × 10 μm) without (left) and with (right) an applied dc of 20 mA. The unit of the ruler was 1 mm. (g) Optical microscopy photos of the movable end of the graphene–PDA actuator without (left) and with (right) an applied dc of 7.5 mA. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Thermal behavior of GO paper for repeated cooling and heating cycles at a relative humidity of 2.0% with the label dL standing for absolute length change and L0 initial length at 30 °C. (b) Schematic drawing of the water adsorption/desorption process in GO paper. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) (c) Curvature of the gradient-structured GO actuator as a function of temperature after heating for 60 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Optical micrographs of a droplet of GO suspension positioned in the millimeter gap between two metal needles. Left to right: drying caused surface recession, concentration of the GO layers, and eventually physical gelation due to interlayer interaction. Instability in late stages of drying induced rupture of the droplet and Z-directional collapse driven by surface tension. Rehydration triggered anisotropic growth and recovery of the original shape. (b) Proposed molecular assembly of GO plates during drying and rehydration. Left to right: receding drying front templates, vertical alignment of GO layers by surface anchoring; increase in concentration caused layer-to-layer interaction and partial gelation; thinning caused liquid bridge instability, surface tension led to vertical collapse, and folding; and rehydration triggered unfolding, expansion, and shape/size recovery. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) (c) Actuation of the bilayer paper sample as a function of RH. From left to right, RH was 12%, 25%, 49%, 61%, 70% and 90%, respectively. White-arrowed side: surface of the graphene oxide layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Left: scheme of laser positioning reduction on one side of a GO fiber. The black region corresponded to laser induced G region along the brown GO fiber. Right: optical image of the top surface for the as-prepared asymmetric G/GO fiber. (b) Photographs of a G/GO fiber (2 cm in length) under different RH values. (c) Photographs of three-wire moisture tentacles of the G/GO fibers at the sunny and rainy days, respectively. Scale bars: 5 mm. (d) Photographs of the hand-knitted textile-like network of G/GO fibers exposed to moisture (RH 80%) for different times, and the corresponding photograph after removing moisture (rightmost). Scale bar is 5 mm. (e) Photographs showing the G/GO fiber crawling on the ratchet paper within the narrow slit in response to the “on” and “off” states of applied moisture. The G side of the G/GO fiber was placed downwards. RH values at “on” and “off” states were about 80% and 25%, respectively. Scale bars: 1 cm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) I–V curves of recast Nafion and 0.1 and 1.0 wt% graphene–Nafion actuators. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd.) (b) Frequency response plot of IPMCs with five different kinds of electrodes. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2012 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (c) Illustration of electrochemical actuation mechanisms for the Ag actuator (left) and the RGO–Ag actuator (right). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A working diagram showing an actuator suffering breakdown and then self-healing at 2400 V (an electric field of ∼44 V μm−1). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Color change of an actuated grating at an applied voltage of 6 kV and a frequency of 0.5 Hz. Left: relaxed state; right: maximum actuation at 6 kV. The patterned electrode was filled with 1 wt% FGS. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2010 Optical Society of America.) (c) Actuating behaviors of the stretchable actuator when the input voltage was applied from 0 to 3 kV. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd.) (d) Voltage-induced actuation of a crumpled graphene–elastomer laminate. As voltage was applied, the laminate reduced its thickness and expanded its area where the area actuation strain was over 100% and the transmittance of the film improved. The lower curve shows the transmittance of the laminate in the visible range as a function of the area actuation strain. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The frequency response of graphene-based acoustic actuators with three different electrode thicknesses (60, 90 and 120 nm) compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based commercial thin film transducer. (b) Each frequency response under the flat and bending conditions (radius: 6 cm) of a graphene-based acoustic actuator transducer with 120 nm electrode thickness. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (c) Measured SPLs versus frequency of the graphene-based thin film transducer with the corresponding layers 1, 2, 3, and 4, compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based and aluminum-based commercial thin film transducer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing LLC.) (d) Photograph showing the electrical connections of sound source, amplifier, graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene-based acoustic device and electrical circuit with red LED during the measurement. (e) Schematic depiction showing the graphene/p(VDF-TrFE)/graphene-based device working as an actuator as well as a nanogenerator. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Compressive strength and compression ratio of GO/PAM hydrogels with different amounts of GO (w/w%). The inset shows the shape of the GO/PAM hydrogels after testing. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Electrical conductivity and volume changes (inset) for the PNIPAM–graphene hydrogel (25:2 mg mL−1 NIPAM–GO) at 21 V; length in mm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
