Flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors for the internet of everything (IoE)  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03567C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03567C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2233-2258Flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors for the internet of everything (IoE)

        
          
            Jong-Hoon 
            Lee†
a, 
      
        
          
            Guijun 
            Yang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Choong-Hee 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roop L. 
            Mahajan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Seul-Yi 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Soo-Jin 
            Park
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Inha University, Incheon 22212, Republic of Korea. E-mail: leesy1019@inha.ac.kr; sjpark@inha.ac.kr
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
Received 
      15th November 2021
    , Accepted 30th March 2022First published on 6th April 2022AbstractIn this era of fast-moving technology, the new paradigm of the Internet of Everything (IoE)—the intelligent connection between people, processes, data, and things—will be accompanied by dramatic changes in modern life that will go beyond the familiar Internet of Things (IoT). The IoE may alter how we live, work, and interact with many untethered things in a wide range of applications, including personal devices, home appliances, and industry. A key requirement for its successful widespread adoption is secure performance in various applications of data and power management. In this regard, supercapacitors play an important role as a real-time backup power supply and micro-power source for the embedded electronics. In particular, they are ideal for the next-generation of portable and wearable electronics that require lightweight, robust, flexible, reliable, and environmentally benign electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices. Hybrid supercapacitors (HSCs) have emerged as an important class of EES device. They have advantages such as high-power density, high specific capacity, long-term cycling stability, and safety. For the portable and flexible IoE smart devices, flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs) provide an attractive solution to overcome the poor readiness in terms of immediate power supply and auxiliary energy source. However, there are still a few major challenges including suitable electrode materials, electrolytes, and the configuration design to achieve a satisfactory energy density, bendability, twistability, mechanical durability, and safety that need to be met before FSHSCs can be fully deployed. In this review paper, after briefly describing the development history of supercapacitors, we focus on recent research progress in FSHSCs for portable and/or wearable devices, classified according to the structures (yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured types). This is followed by a discussion of the micro-type FSHSCs for miniaturized interdigitation, categorized on the basis of the fabrication methods, including masking, inkjet screening, and 3D ink printing. The article concludes with a discussion of recent trends in industry of adopting FSHSCs for IoE applications, several examples of commercialized and demonstrated products, and a detailed discussion of the desirable features and challenges encountered in their deployment in different sectors of the IoE infrastructure. We hope that this will spur new ideas and insights for research into the next generation of IoE devices.Seul-Yi Lee received her PhD degree in the Department of Chemistry from Inha University, South Korea (2013) where her research topics included the synthesis and characterization of carbonaceous nanomaterials. She then joined as a Research Associate at the Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science (ICTAS) and the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Virginia Tech (2014–2021) where she worked on mass production of graphene and its derivatives from coal and a variety of applications including thermal managements, biosensors, batteries, and structural applications. She is now working as a Research Scientist in the Department of Chemistry at Inha University. Her current research interests focus on carbonaceous materials and their hybrid composites towards meeting the grand challenges in the areas of energy and sustainability for the future.Soo-Jin Park received his PhD in Materials Chemistry from Institut de Chimie des Surfaces et Interfaces, CNRS, France (1992), under the supervision of Professor J. B. Donnet. He joined Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT) as a Principal Research Scientist, Republic of Korea (1996). Currently, he has been a full professor in the Department of Chemistry at Inha University, Republic of Korea, since 2005. His research has focused on the surfaces and interfaces of carbon, ceramic, polymer, and composite materials. In particular, his research group has worked on developing various nanoporous materials and their composites for Energy, Electronics, and Environments.

Broader context
With the rapid growth of the Internet of Everything (IoE) technology, there has been tremendous increasing demand for the next generation of flexible and miniaturized electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices. Flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs) have emerged as prime candidates for lightweight, wearable, and portable electronics, because they can perform a great auxiliary role for providing instant-charge to their role for intermittent use and frequent holstering for IoE technology. Further, the FSHSCs are highly attractive due to the superior mechanical flexibility, the satisfactory energy density, their merits of rapid charging rate with the time constant of a few seconds, large cycle life >100000 cycles, economic efficiency, and environmental friendliness. This review highlights the recent research progress in the design and application of FSHSCs for portable and/or wearable devices, classified according to the structures (yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured types), with an emphasis on their state-of-the-art performance. Also, we discuss the challenges faced by the FSHSCs for expanding their use for future IoE applications.

1. Introduction
The Internet of Everything (IoE) as an overarching term is in a pivotal position to lead next-generation communication and networking technologies to extend our connectivity to the entire world.
While the Internet of Technology (IoT) has focused on physical devices in a dynamic network infrastructure without human intervention, the IoE encompasses four components (people, processes, data, and things) by creating a ‘web of things’ to enrich people's lives with network connections and technologies of intelligence and cognition. The IoE is a superset for the IoT; it is more into humans or virtual entities that communicate Machine to Machine, Machine to People, and technology assisted People to People.1,2 The IoE infrastructure with billions of sensors and/or actuators implanted into devices, machines, and ordinary objects, facilitates expansion of networking opportunities and improvement of experiences, thereby making data-based decision-making smarter. It would allow extraction and examination of data, in real-time, from diverse and heterogeneous IoE environments, followed by conversion of the collected information into actions.
The IoE will be able to empower personal healthcare, collaborative robotics, smart homes, smart cities, active assisted living, and smart agriculture. For example, electronic devices in the IoE could be used as not only a smart sensor for health care and environmental and industrial monitoring, but also as a utility meter (or actuator) for efficient management of energy, water, gas, etc. They would help provide valuable data to make good decisions in real-time and offer diverse services for people.
Humans act as the most important content receivers and sensors collecting data for sensory systems at the same time. The physical IoE-devices may need to be implantable and/or embeddable in the user or under the user's skin and wearable on a person's body being attached to their owner to detect the wearers’ motions. In this regard, two important challenges for the IoE devices are data security and power management. As a system connected with everything, the IoE devices are expected to be very small and/or located in/on chips, glasses, clothes, etc.3,4 Thus, the association with lightweight, flexible, and miniaturized electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices would be essential to achieving a long-life IoE technology (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Conceptual illustration of the supercapacitor-powered Internet of Everything (IoE) technology. 
Among the potential energy storage devices that include batteries (such as lithium-ion, sodium-ion, fuel cells) and supercapacitors,5–10 supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors, have been considered as smart and promising EES devices due to their merits of rapid charging rate with the time constant of a few seconds, large cycle life >100000 cycles, excellent power density and specific capacitance, economic efficiency, environmental friendliness, and high safety.11–15 Thus, supercapacitors can perform an auxiliary role for providing instant-charge to their role for intermittent use in the IoE device. In particular, flexible and miniaturized design of an EES device can be directly embedded in the mobile IoE technology. This allows reduction in the size of the components and power consumption in miniaturized and interdigitated electronic circuits, thereby filling a niche in meeting the energy and power supply needs of the IoE devices. For an evolutionary perspective of this design, a brief review of the historical development of supercapacitors is in order, as shown schematically in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  The development of supercapacitors based on their electrode materials and the charge storage mechanism (reproduced with permission from ref. 16, © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). 
The historical development of supercapacitors can be divided into three primary stages according to the type of electrode materials and their mechanism of charge storage and transfer.16 The first of these is the electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs), in which the electrode materials are primarily carbon-based, such as activated carbon,17–22 carbon aerogel,23–28 carbon nanotubes,29–34 and carbon nanofibers.35–42 The EDLCs store charge electrostatically, which does not include the transfer of charge between the electrode and electrolyte. However, their applications are often limited by relatively low specific/volumetric energy densities.43–45 In the second stage, pseudocapacitors attracted attention due to their very high specific capacity.39,46,47 They store charge faradaically through the charge transfer between the electrode and electrolyte. Common pseudocapacitor electrode materials include metal oxides48–53 and conductive polymers.51,54–59 However, those materials have high resistivity, which is not conducive to electron transport in the electrochemical process. Moreover, the relatively low conductivity, and poor cycle life of pseudocapacitors have restricted their application.
Addressing the above-mentioned drawbacks led to the third stage of supercapacitors, called hybrid supercapacitors, which involve the combination of carbon and pseudo capacitance electrode materials. They achieve an increase in the working potential window, which in turn results in higher energy and power density while still maintaining longer cycle life and stability.60–66 Recently, a great deal of research effort has focused on the hybrid solid-state supercapacitors for the development of energy storage with both high power and high energy density to meet the burgeoning demand in the emerging market of flexible and wearable electronic devices, see Fig. 3, which shows statistics on the number of publications on early generation supercapacitors (EDLC and pseudo), hybrid supercapacitors, and flexible solid-state supercapacitors, in descending order.
 Fig. 3  Total number of published literature studied related to electrode materials for supercapacitors from 2011 to 2021. Search formulation: “supercapacitor”, “carbon, supercapacitor”, “hybrid, supercapacitor”, and “flexible solid state, supercapacitor”, search from Web of Science, as of February 10th, 2022. 
Very recently, flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs) have emerged as the prime candidates for the next-generation lightweight, wearable, and portable electronics for personal medical electronics, and military and civilian applications along with the rapid growth of IoE technology.67,68 With the development of the IoE infrastructure, new and intelligent yarn structures (fiber, sheet, coaxial) with advanced concepts of their integration with other EES devices have been proposed, which will greatly improve the application efficiency of supercapacitors. With the popularization of a smart grid as well as next-generation wearable and portable electronics in the IoE era, flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs), as a new type of green and efficient energy storage device, are considered one of the practical tools to enhance power quality and energy efficiency.
In recognition of this and the special technical issues that arise in their adoption, we believe that the FSHSCs deserve a separate category (see Fig. 2 and 4) as well as a review of their own. To this end, after providing a brief historical development of supercapacitors from EDLCs through pseudocapacitors to hybrids (Section 2), we examine in Section 3 flexible and miniaturized designs and fabrication methods for various types of micro-sized FSHSCs to maximize the usable energy. Their configurations for high electrochemical performance, safety considerations, and superior mechanical properties are highlighted. In Section 4, the potential application domains of FSHSCs, combined with/without other EES systems, in different market segments including portable personal electronics, automobile and electrical vehicles, energy harvester assembly, and microgrids are described. A discussion of the recent industrial trend in the increasing use of FSHSCs is also included. The review article addresses the desirable features of the next generation of FSHSCs for IoE applications (Section 5), and concludes with a discussion of the challenges and opportunities faced in the future development of the FSHSCs in Section 6.
 Fig. 4  Taxonomy of supercapacitors. 
2. General overview
2.1. Mechanism for energy storage
According to the charge storage mechanisms, the earlier supercapacitors were mainly divided into two categories, electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors. The different energy storage mechanisms of the EDLCs and pseudocapacitors are illustrated in Fig. 2.69
Non-faradaic EDLCs store energy in an ionic double-layer (Helmholtz layer) built upon the accumulation and electrostatic adsorption of electrolytic ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface, leading to extremely high-power density. However, their low energy density due to the limited effective surface area of the electrode materials poses a big problem.
For pseudocapacitors or Faraday quasi-capacitors, the Faraday quasi-capacitor theoretical model was first proposed by Conway.70 It is based on the two-dimensional or quasi-two-dimensional surface and near-surface or bulk phase of the electrode, where underpotential deposition occurs via highly reversible chemical absorption–desorption (redox) reactions, resulting in capacitance related to the electrode charging potential. Thus, faradaic pseudocapacitors exhibit much higher energy density from reversible redox reactions at the surface and subsurface of the materials, including conducting metal oxides and conductive polymers, but they display poor rate capability and cycling stability.71,72 We note here that the performance of both the EDLCs and pseudocapacitors is highly dependent on the electrode materials and the reversible interfacial area of the active electrode materials for long-range interactions. The latter plays a role mainly through ion adsorption at the surfaces of electrodes, leading to storage of the charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface.73–78 This is the key factor in determining the fast charge–discharge kinetics along with superior cycle life and safe operation.79–81 Numerous studies have focused on the improvement of the specific capacitance of the electrode materials. Several new materials with key roles in determining the capacitance characteristics have been developed.82–85
Motivated by the need to take advantages of the desirable features of both the EDLCs and pseudocapacitors, a new class of hybrid supercapacitors has been developed. Their performance approaches that of traditional capacitors, although still lower than the peak power density possible with the conventional capacitors,16,86,87 see Fig. 5.88,89 However, they possess several orders of magnitude higher specific/volumetric energy density compared to that of the EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. Additionally, through their unique charge storage mechanism, they are able to store and deliver a large amount of charge in a short period of time.72
 Fig. 5  A Ragone plot of the specific energy and power densities of various energy-storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 and 89. © 2019 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co., © 2017 IEEE. 
The early generation of hybrid supercapacitors used liquid electrolytes including aqueous solutions, organic solutions, and ionic liquids. These hybrids were meant to compete directly with the EDLCs for higher power density rather than with batteries having high energy density. A good amount of recent research effort, therefore, has focused on improving their energy density to compete with that of batteries. In this regard, another big challenge that has evolved from the use of liquid electrolytes in the supercapacitors is the need to use high-cost packaging materials and sophisticated technology to avoid possible leakage of the electrolytes. This is critically related to the safety issues because most of the electrolytes are highly toxic and corrosive.72
With demand for smart and next generation electronics such as flexible displays, personal healthcare devices and foldable smartphones on the rise, increasing attention is being paid to a new class of EES systems—flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs). The configuration of these supercapacitor devices is almost identical to that of the other supercapacitors in terms of key device components (i.e., electrodes, electrolyte, a separator, and the packaging). However, they require the electrodes to be flexible and the electrolyte to be solid-state, mainly made of carbon materials and/or solid-state type polymer, respectively.90–92 In addition to the flexibility, these FSHSCs have superior safety characteristics due to the lack of metals and liquids in their constituents. These features make them highly attractive for wearable and/or implantable devices, which are particularly close to the human body for a long period of time.71 In addition, the hybrid designs of the FSHSCs would enable efficient energy storage capacity while maintaining a high-power output. Fig. 5 encapsulates the development of the FSHSC devices with respect to specific energy and specific power density, which can be used for a comparison with other energy devices, such as fuel cells, batteries, etc. The figure shows that FSHSCs would be the best alternative as a back-up power supply in the event of an outage and a self-charging capacitor for a variety of sensors including temperature, humidity, infrared, gas, pressure, etc., which are necessary for protection of the data in wireless communication of the IoE infrastructures.93–95
2.2. The electrodes
A good electrode material should meet many requirements, including high conductivity, no chemical reaction with the electrolyte, full wetting by the electrolyte, large specific surface area, economy, and environmental friendliness.71,96–99 The ability of the electrode material to perform Faraday charge transfer can increase the accumulated capacitance.100–103 The need to decrease the resistivity is an ongoing problem in the development of electrode materials for supercapacitors. The micropores on the surface of the electrode material allow electrolyte ions to enter and diffuse freely, and the pore size affects the resistance to a certain extent.22,104–106 In addition, methods such as the use of a conductive binder,107–109 or the direct growth of the electrode active material on a conductive skeleton in the absence of a binder,110–113 are beneficial for reducing the electrode resistivity.114–117 The composite electrode materials provide a good platform for the preparation of supercapacitors with excellent performance by compounding various components to obtain a synergistic effect that circumvents the individual shortcomings and realizes the complementary advantages of each component.118–120 Together with the fundamental requirements mentioned above, the electrodes for FSHSCs are expected to meet higher standards such as flexibility, mechanical strength, and formability.
2.3. The electrolytes
Judicious choice of the electrolyte is the key to safe and high-performance for FSHSCs, because the electrolyte plays a critical role in the transfer and balance of charges between the two electrodes. On the premise that the electrode material is stable within the working voltage range, the stable electrochemical potential window of the electrolyte plays a decisive role in determining the working voltage of FSHSCs. For example, because the potential window of aqueous electrolytes is about 1.23 V; the FSHSCs with water-based electrolytes usually have a working potential window of about 1.0–1.3 V. Due to the low internal resistance of the water-based electrolytes, the resulting FSHSC devices provide higher conductivity and larger specific capacitance. And they are environmentally friendly as well as easily processible. Nevertheless, due to the decomposition voltage of water, they have a narrow operating window, low energy density, and low circulation, along with stability and leakage issues. FSHSCs with organic- and ionic liquid (IL)-based electrolytes can usually operate within higher potential windows of 2.5–2.7 and 3.5–4.0 V, respectively. However, the organic electrolytes continue to suffer from low specific capacitance and poor conductivity, along with high cost, toxicity, and volatility. Moreover, the purification of organic electrolytes, and the assembly of FSHSCs are more complicated processes. The ionic liquid-based electrolytes have high chemical and thermal stability, low volatility and flammability, and good compatibility. However, the complicated preparation process leads to high cost, thus limiting their large-scale application.121,122
Recently, solid-state type electrolytes, using a polymeric matrix with the solvents mentioned above, are emerging as a prime candidate for FSHSCs. They have abundant conductive ions and are also useful to separate the electrodes and thereby avoid the potential leakage problems of the liquid electrolytes.
Meanwhile, the interaction between the electrolytes and the electrode materials plays a very important part in determining the performance of FSHSCs. The match between the size of the electrolyte ions and the pore size of the carbon electrode material influences the achievable specific capacitance. The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte also plays an important role in the internal resistance of the FSHSCs, especially those with organic- and ionic liquid-based electrolytes. In addition, the viscosity, boiling point and freezing point of the electrolyte affect the thermal stability of the FSHSCs to a large extent, thereby affecting the operating temperature range.66
We note that these observations on the electrolytes are valid for traditional supercapacitors as well. Generally speaking, the requirements for an ideal electrolyte are as follows: (i) a wide potential window; (ii) high ionic conductivity; (iii) high chemical and electrochemical stability; (iv) high chemical and electrochemical inertness with respect to the supercapacitor components (e.g., electrodes, current collectors, packaging); (v) a wide operating temperature range; (vi) good compatibility with electrolyte materials; (vii) low volatility and flammability; (viii) environmental friendliness, and (ix) low cost. It is very difficult for an electrolyte to meet all of these requirements; each electrolyte has its own advantages and disadvantages. In recognition of this, there has been a big movement to develop solid-state electrolytes aiming to improve the overall performance of the electrolytes and related supercapacitors.122–127
3. Research progress in flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors
As discussed earlier, the escalating demand for flexible, portable, and wearable high-tech electronic products has spurred significant interest in the research, development, and manufacture of such products. In contrast to the traditional electronic products that are currently on the market, flexible electronic devices exhibit unique properties such as stretchability, bendability, compressibility, and twistability.128,129 They also require a flexible power supply that can deliver an excellent and consistent electrochemical performance under both normal working conditions and under mechanical deformation. In this respect, FSHSCs have attracted increasing research interest, with the current focus on the following primary aspects: (i) improving the mechanical (toughness and tensile) properties to meet the needs of daily wear, and (ii) improving the electrochemical performance to obtain higher energy density, power density, rate performance and long-term cycling stability.
The schematic configurations of a typical FSHSC and two types of device design for FSHSCs are illustrated in Fig. 6. In the rest of this section, we describe yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured FSHSCs, their performance characteristics as well as their fabrication techniques.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of (a) the configuration of typical flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSC) and (b and c) two types of FSHSC device. 
3.1. Yarn-type structured FSHSCs
Substrates with good flexibility or high ductility are the very basis of wearable devices. Hence, polymer plastics, metal foils, carbon cloth/carbon paper/carbon fibers/graphene, silicones, and hydrogels are commonly used substrates due to their excellent mechanical flexibility and physicochemical stability (good resistance to heat, acid–base corrosion, abrasion, etc.).130–133 In another approach, research into the FSHSC devices has focused on one-dimensional (1D) fiber structures and two-dimensional (2D) planar structures. Examples of 1D structures include lightweight, highly flexible and deformable fibers, yarns, threads, or cables with typical diameters of tens to hundreds of micrometers and lengths of a few millimeters that can be incorporated into breathable textiles or integrated with functional materials. This structure is an ideal choice for the construction of woven, flexible wearable energy storage devices. The following three main types of yarn-type (i.e., 1D-structured) FSHSCs are currently available: (a) parallel fiber FSHSCs (Fig. 7a), (b) twisted fiber FSHSCs (Fig. 7b), and (c) coaxial fiber FSHSCs (Fig. 7c).134 The first of these is formed by aligning and encapsulating two fiber electrodes with a separator or solid-state electrolyte in between; the second type is formed by coating the two electrodes with a solid-state electrolyte or barrier film, entwining them around each other, and encapsulating them in a flexible plastic tube, and the third type is prepared by forming successive rings, with a current collector in the centre, followed by one electrode, the solid-state electrolyte, the other electrode, and another, outer current collector, all encapsulated in a flexible plastic tube.
 Fig. 7  Typical device configurations of fiber SCs: (a) two parallel fibers; (b) two twisted fibers; (c) single coaxial fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.1.1. Parallel Yarn-type structured FSHSCs. 
The parallel-fiber FSHSC type is easily scaled up by integrating cells to improve the energy density for devices, notwithstanding a few remaining challenges such as the limited contact area between two fibers and use of a planar substrate. Qu et al.135 prepared highly flexible and conductive hollow graphene/conducting polymer composite fibers for use in a parallel-plate FSHSC, with a specific capacitance of 304.5 mF cm−2 (8.1 mF cm−1, 143.3 F cm−3, or 63.1 F g−1). The energy density of the complete device was 6.8 W h cm−2, and that of an individual fiber electrode was 27.1 Wh cm−2. Moreover, the specific capacitance remained basically unchanged after 500 bendings, and 96% of the initial specific capacitance was retained after 10000 bendings.
Oxidized carbon nanotube fiber (OCNTF)/polypyrrole (PPy) brush-like electrodes were prepared for use in an ultra-flexible fiber FSHSC.136 In this approach, the OCNTF provided a conductive, large surface area substrate for the electropolymerization of PPy, while the carbon fibers provided both a mechanical support for the ONCTF/PPy nanocomposite structure and a current collector for the HSC. The maximum gravimetric capacitance of the OCNTF/PPy HSC was 305 F g−1, the gravimetric energy density was 42 W h kg−1, and the maximum volumetric capacitance was 14950 mF cm−3 at a current density of 2.5 mA cm−2. The results suggest that the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups and redox-active PPy on the OCNTF/PPy electrode surface provided an enhanced pseudo capacitive charge storage and a high specific capacitance.
Current difficulties in obtaining a uniform composition of conductive fiber materials with high specific surface area and porous network structures lead to slow internal ion transport and, hence, a low specific capacity and energy density. To address this problem, Wu et al.137 proposed a microfluidic-directed strategy for the preparation of nitrogen-doped graphene fibers in a conducive, uniform environment, as shown schematically in Fig. 8(a). The resulting N-doped graphene fibers had a uniform porous network, a large specific surface area of 388.6 m2 g−1, and a high conductivity of 30785 S m−1. In addition, an optimal quantity of nitrogen active sites was present to enhance the surface charge density and ionic interactions in the electrode and increase the specific capacitance and energy density of the FSHSC.
 Fig. 8  Parallel yarn-type FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of the preparation of N-doped MGFs and their practical applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (b) the capacitance retention of the Co-NCFY and the schematic of the assembled FSHSCs and LED powered by the FSHSC devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 © 2021 Elsevier; and (c) schematic illustration of the FSHSCs and the photograph of the three FSHSCs connected in parallel and series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Amiri et al.138 reported Co3O4-anchored and N-doped porous carbon fibers (Co-NCFY) for yarn-type FSHSCs representing high electrochemical performance and high mechanical properties. N-doping and chemical activation of carbon fibers lead to increased electrical integrity and wettability. As shown in Fig. 8(b), the prepared Co-NCFY exhibited the specific capacitance of 713 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, cycling stability of >92% at 20 A g−1 after 8000 cycles, and energy density of 45.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of 209 W kg−1. Also, Co-NCFY showed good mechanical properties as tensile strength of 87.4 MPa and Young's modulus of 26.4 GPa.
Yarn-type electrodes using P-doped graphene oxide/carbon fibers (PGO/CF) and NiCo2O4-loaded graphene oxide/carbon fibers (NCGO/CF) were reported, as shown in Fig. 8(c).139 The individual specific capacitances of PGO/CF and NCGO electrodes represented 615 and 465 F g−1, respectively. The assembled FSHSC with PGO/CF as the negative electrode and NCGO/CF as the positive electrode with KOH/poly(vinyl alcohol) as the electrolyte, exhibited the volumetric energy density of 36.77 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 142.5 mW cm−3.


3.1.2. Twisted Yarn-type structured FSHSCs. 
In the twisted fiber FSHSCs, two fibers are easily woven into wearable energy storage cells. We still need to solve some issues including an inferior power output and poor performance consistency, compared to their planar or straight-type counterparts, which may come from limited direct contact area between both fibers and high internal resistance from physically detaching each other during bending and folding operation.
A novel twisted yarn-type FSHSC with excellent mechanical and electronic chemical properties based on Korean traditional paper coated with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and/or single-walled carbon nanotubes was prepared by Park et al., as shown in Fig. 9(a).140 The resulting FSHSCs, paper-derived twisted yarn-type, exhibited an average gravimetric power density of 3.7 kW kg−1 and maximum gravimetric energy density of 11.7 mW h kg−1. A comparison of the resulting FSHSCs and sheet-type FSHSCs under the same experimental conditions indicated that the former provides a better performance than the latter. In particular, at a scan rate of 500 mV s−1, the specific capacitance of the resulting FSHSC is >7 times that of the sheet-type FSHSC. This is primarily due to the shorter conductive pathway in the yarn-type FSHSC, which results in a lower ESR compared to that of the sheet-type FSHSC. These improvements are further contributed to by an increased packing density via wrinkling of the yarn-type FSHSC during twisting. Since then, they have developed mass production via ultrafast reduction and a one-step roll-to-roll process for graphene-based yarn FSHSCs. A bulk-scale yarn-type FSHSC, a meter-long and one millimeter-thick, was developed, as shown in Fig. 9(b).141 The gel-phase GO fibers with an aspect ratio of over 20000000 were bi-scrolled with the conductive paper used as a porous matrix. The fabricated symmetric cell with H2SO4/poly(vinyl alcohol) used as an electrolyte exhibited the specific capacitance of 240 F g−1 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The capacitance measured at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1 was over 75% of that measured at 100 mV s−1. The electrodes indicated the volumetric energy density of 141.5 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 509.3 W cm−3. The assembled cells by a series of connections of three-unit cells lit up the red LED. Furthermore, the assembled device can be sewn on knitwear and operated as a humidity meter for longer than 20 min with high flexibility enough for star-shape sewing.
 Fig. 9  Twistable and coaxial yarn-type structured FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of the electrode structures of conductive KTP sheets with different carbon nanomaterials, fabrication and the cross-section image of the yarn-type single electrode, and a photograph of the biscrolled electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (b) schematic illustration of the rGOF-based yarn-type FSHSC's continuous fabrication process via a roll-to-roll fast reduction process employing a twisting assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 © 2021 ACS Publications; (c) schematic diagram of the hierarchical and porous rGO/PEDOT/PANI yarn-type FSHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © 2020 Springer; (d) fabrication scheme and images of the NAD/BQ/CNT yarn FSHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 © 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (e) schematics illustrating the synthesis process to prepare the MDC/DWNTY yarn FSHSC and the interfacial shear strength measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144 © 2022 AAAS; (f) cross-sectional views of the CFZHSC device and the textile-based device including TENG, and schematic illustration of the temperature sensor and Bluetooth module incorporated into the textile-based integrated device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145 © 2022 Elsevier. 
A hierarchical porous structure using rGO, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), and polyaniline composites was designed for a high-performance FSHSC, as shown in Fig. 9(c).142 This unique structural property indicated an interconnected and conductive framework with substantial reactive sites. The fabricated yarn-type FSHSC exhibits a specific capacitance of 535 F g−1, and 26.89 W h kg−1 at a power density of 800 W kg−1. In addition, the resulting cells exhibited good flexibility and mechanical stability at arbitrary deformations.
An implantable FSHSC was fabricated by nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)/benzoquinones (BQ)/CNT as a yarn electrode for in vivo energy storage devices, as shown in Fig. 9(d).143 The yarn-type FSHSC was inspired by a cellular redox system. Based on such a redox system, the CNT yarn electrodes were fabricated by inserting a twist in CNT sheets with electrochemically deposited NAD and BQ for redox shuttling. This led to the maximum area capacitance (55.73 mF cm−2) of the NAD/BQ/CNT yarn electrodes under physiological conditions, such as phosphate-buffered saline and serum. The yarn electrodes showed a negligible loss of capacitance after 10000 repeated charge/discharge cycles and deformation tests (bending and knotting).
Na et al. designed a jewelled necklace-like hybrid composite comprising double-walled CNT yarn (DWNTY) as a string and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as a bead for an all-in-one FSHSC (Fig. 9(e)).144 The MOF beads were thermally converted into microporous MOF-derived carbons, thereby maximizing energy storage capability, that is a high energy density of 7.54 mW cm−3 at a power density of 190.94 mW cm−3. The enhanced interfacial interaction between DWNTY and MOF by diazotization and ligand selection also contributed to the mechanical robustness of the FSHSC that can support a weight loading of 10 kg.


3.1.3. Coaxial yarn-type structured FSHSCs. 
Coaxial-fiber FSHSCs, fabricated by layer-by-layer assembly, provide large contact areas between the two electrodes, structural stability during bending, and more compact configuration. However, the fabrication is still challenging due to its technical complexity and scalability. The poor electrochemical performance of these FSHSCs restricts their practical applications.
To overcome these issues, Zhao et al. demonstrated coaxial fiber-shaped hybrid supercapacitors using zincphilic 3D MOF-derived carbon with N- and OH-containing functional groups (N,O-MOFC) and CNT fibers (CNTF). The hierarchically nanostructured 3D Zn/N,O-MOFC anode on the CNTF contributed to fast ion diffusion ability, resulting in the assembled FSHSC (CFZHSCs) having a larger volumetric specific capacitance of 128.06 F cm−3 and a high volumetric energy density of 57.63 mW h cm−3. In addition, it was demonstrated that the CFZHSC devices were integrated with a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) to achieve a self-powered textile-based monitoring system for a temperature detector, as displayed in Fig. 9(f).145
Wu et al. prepared Fe2O3 nanowires/Ni-coated carbonaceous yarn by electroless plating of nickel on polyester yarns and Fe2O3 nanowires grown with a hydrothermal process.146 The fabricated FSHSC showed a specific capacitance of 263 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 and high-capacity retention and long cycle life (88% after 10000 cycles). Cao et al.147 fabricated a coaxial-shaped MnNiCo-carbonate hydroxide nanoneedle-based FSHSC on carbon fibers, for which the specific capacitance and cycling stability were measured to be 96 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 91% after 8000 cycles. The energy density of the prepared cells was 30 W h kg−1 at a power density of 750 W kg−1. In particular, the resultant FSHSC exhibited superb stability under bending conditions.

3.2. Sheet-type structured FSHSCs
The laminated FSHSC is a typical example of a 2D planar structure in which shorting during mechanical deformations such as bending, folding, and twisting are prevented by the presence of a separator between the positive and negative electrodes, and the remaining gap is filled with the appropriate electrolyte. The surface area of these electrodes is sufficiently large to facilitate the loading of more active materials to provide the laminated FSHSC with an increased specific capacitance and energy density. Whereas the performance of traditional electrodes in the traditional HSCs are measured according to the mass ratios of capacitance, energy, and power, the important performance indicators for flexible electrodes and devices are the corresponding areal ratios. To increase the specific energy per surface area of the flexible electrode, the loading of active material on the electrode surface should be maximized. However, the easy agglomeration of the active material under a high load severely limits the resulting improvement in electrochemical performance and leads to electrode hardening.
Recently, Yun et al. prepared a large-scale wearable FSHSC assembled with electrodes composed of one-step carbonized plant epidermis and gelatine-based hydrogel electrolyte.148 Specifically, they used carbonized mulberry paper as a substrate, which contributes to maximizing the volumetric energy/power densities and mechanical/chemical toughness. Inspired from plant roots, the designed active materials’ structure was composed of vertically grown WO3 nanorods and rGO. Both WO3 nanorods and rGO are tightly anchored as strongly as plant roots on the surface of carbonized mulberry fibers. Interestingly, such a structure can effectively maintain the flexibility of the carbonized paper and prevent delamination of the WO3 nanorods without an additional protection layer, as displayed in Fig. 10(a).
 Fig. 10  Sheet-type structured FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of organism epidermis based FSHSCs and the synthetic process for plant-root inspired active materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. © 2021 Elsevier; (b) schematic diagram for the synthesis procedure and TEM image of NiCo2O4NSs@HfCNWs/CC, and the electron transportation and ion diffusion mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. © 2020 Elsevier; (c) schematic illustration and TEM image of coral-like PEDOT NT arrays on textile carbon fibers. Reproduced permission with ref. 150. © 2020 ACS Publications; (d) schematic diagram and wearable display of the quasi-solid-state ZIHC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. © 2022 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (e) schematic illustration of the stacking pattern of the anode and cathode carbon fiber mat to fabricate a large area energized composite, and the photographs of energized composites powering a toy drone propeller. Reproduced permission with ref. 152. © 2022 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co; and (f) integrated self-charging power system (SCPS) including MoS2 quantum sheet-based FSHSCs along with the schematic illustration of various low-powered electronic applications using the system and the circuit diagram of SCPC with an energy harvester and storage unit. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. © 2022 ACS Publications. 
Hafnium carbide nanowires (HfCNWs) supporting porous NiCo2O4 nanosheets (NiCo2O4 NSs) on carbon cloth (CC) electrodes (NiCo2O4NSs@HfCNWs/CC) were designed, as shown in Fig. 10(b).149 The unique structure of NiCo2O4NSs@HfCNWs/CC leads to improvement of the electrochemical performance. The high specific surface of HfCNWs provides large active sites for growing NiCo2O4NSs, which leads to high loading and agglomeration restraint of the active materials. The interwoven structure of HfCNWs serves as well-structured conductive networks and shortens pathways for ion diffusion. The micropores on the porous NiCo2O4NSs provide sufficient active sites for electrochemical reaction. The fabricated electrode showed a specific capacitance of 2102 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, rate capability of 85% capacitance retention at 20 A g−1, and 98% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. Furthermore, the assembly of NiCo2O4NSs@HfCNWs/CC and activated carbons exhibited the energy density of 53 W h kg−1 at a power density of 800 W kg−1 with good flexibility.
Coral-like poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanotube arrays were loaded on a textile carbon fiber (TC) electrode (TC@PEDOT) using ZnO nanowires as a template, as shown in Fig. 10(c).150 The unique structures of coral-like TC@PEDOT provide reversible and fast faradaic reactions with sufficient electroactive sites for maximizing utilization in the doping/de-doping reactions. The TC@PEDOT exhibited specific capacitance of 184 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and 88% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. The prepared cell retained electrochemical performance even after 160° bending and showed 92% capacitance retention after 500 cycles of a 120° bending test.
As volumetric energy density is one of the crucial factors in determining the lifespan of the FSHSC, Luo et al. constructed an aqueous Zn ion hybrid capacitor (ZIHC) by harmonizing the interlayer spacing of a graphene film and Zn ion solvation structure for efficient compact capacitive charge storage. The assembled ZIHC manifests a superior cycling life of 100000 cycles with 93.9% capacitance retention and an outstanding volumetric capacitance of 235.4 F cm−3. This performance is attributable to optimization of the pore geometry of graphene to adapt hydrated Zn ions, which is meaningful toward densely packed Zn ion storage (Fig. 10(d)).151
Pandey et al. designed a dual-function supercapacitor-based energy-storing carbon fiber-reinforced polymeric composite (e-CFRP) for the body panel in an electric vehicle, which can not only store electrical energy but also function as the structural component for the electric vehicle's body shell. This is made possible by using a unique vertically attached graphene on carbon fiber structure electrodes, which plays an important role in improving the energy density because of the enhanced surface area. The resulting additional energy can be used to accelerate the vehicle and provide extra miles per charge. A toy car's body panel fitted with e-CFRP was able to operate the energy stored in its frame, as shown in Fig. 10(e).152
Nardekar et al. utilized the bifunctional properties of MoS2 quantum sheets (QSs) for smart gadgets as a power source via fabricating FSHSCs as an energy storage device and triboelectric nano-generator (TENG) with a MoS2 QS-based charge-trapping interfacial layer as the energy harvester, as illustrated in Fig. 10(f).153 The proposed MoS2 QSs self-charging power system (SCPS) can be easily attached to any part of the human body to provide an uninterrupted power source to light up smart gadgets.
A flexible metal paper-based FSHSC by immersion in a solution containing an amine surfactant material, followed by immersion in a solution filled with gold nanoparticles was produced.154 The surfactant helped the gold nanoparticles enter the paper fiber, and the resulting ligand-mediated layer-by-layer assembly was able to directly bridge the interfaces of the metal nanoparticles via small molecules. The same method was then used to coat the metal oxide material layer for a similar bridging effect. The maximum areal power and energy densities of the resulting metalized paper FSHSC were 15.1 mW cm−2 and 267.3 μW h cm−2, respectively, in the liquid state, and 9.5 mW cm−2 and 174.7 μW h cm−2 in the solid state. In addition, the FSHSCs were readily folded and cut while maintaining a high performance.
An Fe3O4 nanoparticles/graphene-loaded carbon cloth composite was prepared without an additive via a facile annealing-assisted dip-coating method.155 The electrode exhibited the specific capacitance of 406 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and cycle retention of 94% after 3200 cycles. Moreover, the symmetric FSHSC assembly represented the energy density of 19.2 W h kg−1 at a power density 800.2 W kg−1 with no degradation in the performance after being folded at 45 to 180°. Also, the fabricated device showed no decline of electrochemical performance after 4000 cycles at 1 A g−1.
MnO2 nanospheres were electrochemically deposited on graphene paper (GrP) to fabricate a GrP/MnO2 electrode with a high specific capacitance of 385.2 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 0.1 M Na2SO4.156 The assembled FSHSC using the GrP/MnO2 as the positive electrode and GrP as the negative electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 76.8 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2, good cycling stability (82.2% retention after 5000 cycles), a high energy density of 6.14 mW h cm−2, and a power density of 36 mW cm−2. A novel, cuttable, and shape-able FSHSC was reported.157 The flexible and self-supporting electrodes were produced via the ultrasonic mixing of hydrothermally synthesized ultra-long MnO2 nanowires (MNWs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) followed by suction filtration. Nano-cellulose (NCF) films were then deposited on both sides of the composite electrode by suction filtration to form a sandwich structure. Studies have shown that such an interwoven structure of long MnO2 nanowires can stabilize the electrochemical performance of the electrode during bending, shearing, and stretching, while the nanocellulose layer can effectively prevent electrode short circuiting during the shearing process. The cuttable and shape-able FSHSC provides a significant degree of freedom for bespoke design and shape construction. The designed FSHSC with a honeycomb structure exhibited an areal capacitance of 227.2 mF cm−2, which could be increased to >1000 mF cm−2 by vertical stacking.158 Moreover, the areal capacitance was effectively unchanged upon stretching to 500% of the original length and maintained at 98% of its original value after 10000 cycles of stretching to 400% of the original length. In addition to the honeycomb structure, other 2D and 3D structures are easily realized, including a grille or pyramid structure, by suitable cutting. In particular, the pyramid structure allows conformal contact with 3D elastic objects, and a four pyramid-shaped FSHSC can be connected to produce a reversibly stretchable spring-shaped FSHSC with the potential for further processing. The various composites for flexible solid-state electrodes used in the FSHSCs are listed in Table 1.85,138–142,144–146,149–152,155,159–169 Although different yarn- and sheet-type FSHSCs described above have expanded our portfolio of these devices for wearable devices, the interdigitated micro-structure FSHSCs will become the EES of the future miniaturized, flexible, and wearable electronic devices. These are discussed in detail in the next section.
Table 1 The various flexible solid-state composite electrodes used in FSHSCs




Material
Potential window/V
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance/F g−1 (scan rate or current density)
Retention/% (cycles)
Ref.




PVA: poly(vinyl alcohol), PAM: polyacrylamide, PMMA: poly(methyl methacrylate)




Yarn-type cell (1D)


rGO/single-walled carbon nanotubes/cellulose paper
−0.5 to 0.5
H2SO4/PVA
366 (25 mV s−1)
>99 (10000)

140



Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polyaniline/rGO
0–0.8
H3PO4/PVA
535 (13.4 A g−1)
>99 (10000)

142



rGO fibers/carbon-coated cellulose paper
−0.5 to 0.5
H2SO4/PVA
240 (100 mV s−1)
>99 (10000)

141



Fe2O3 nanowires/Ni-coated carbonaceous yarn
−1 to 0
KOH/PVA
263 (10 mV s−1)
88 (10000)

146



P-Doped GO/carbon fibers
−1.2 to 0
KOH/PVA
315 (0.4 A g−1)
91 (10000)

139



NiCo2O4/GO/carbon fibers
−0.3 to 0.5
KOH/PVA
465 (0.8 A g−1)
87 (10000)

139



Polyaniline/carbon nanotubes/graphene
0–0.8
H3PO4/PVA
232 (10 mV s−1)
90 (6000)

159



Co3O4/porous carbon nanofibers
0–1
H2SO4/PVA
713 (1 mV s−1)
92 (8000)

138



Double-walled CNT/MOFs
0–1
H3PO4/PVA
151 (1 A g−1)
88 (10000)

144



CNT fiber/Zn/MOFs
0–1.8
Zn(CF3SO3)2/PVA
58 (100 mV s−1)
99 (10000)

145



rGO/Ti3C2Tx/poly(diallyldimethylammonium)
1.2–2.4
LiCF3SO3/PMMA
237 (10 mV s−1)
81 (5000)

160



Sheet-type cell (2D)


NiCo2O4 nanosheets/HfC nanowires/carbon cloth
−0.1 to 0.6
KOH/PVA
2102 (1 A g−1)
98 (5000)

149



PEDOT nanotube arrays/textile carbon fibers
0–1
H2SO4/PVA
184 (0.5 A g−1)
88 (10000)

150



NiFe2O4 nanocubes/rGO
−1 to 0.9
KNO3/PVA
488 (1 A g−1)
90 (10000)

161



CoSi/activated carbons
−0.5 to 0.2
KOH/PVA
453 (0.5 A g−1)
89 (10000)

162



NiCo2O4/rGO/activated carbon fibers
−0.2 to 0.55
KOH/PVA
1487 (3 mA cm−2)
88 (1000)

85



PEDOT/mesoporous vanadium nitride arrays/carbon cloth
−1.2 to 0.2
KOH/PVA
226 (1 A g−1)
92 (5000)

163



Fe3O4 nanoparticles/rGO/carbon cloth
−1.1 to 0
KOH/PVA
406 (1 A g−1)
94 (32000)

155



Mesoporous Bi2MoO6 nanospheres/activated carbon cloth
0–0.8
KOH/PVA
345 (1 A g−1)
90 (10000)

164



MnO2/carbon nanofibers/activated carbons/cotton textile
0–1.6
Na+/Na2SO4
130 (0.5 A g−1)
>99 (15000)

165



WO3/multi-walled carbon nanotubes-coated carbon cloth
−0.6 to 0
LiClO4/PVA
430 (2 mA cm−2)
94 (5000)

166



Polyaniline nanofiber arrays/GO/carbon cloth
0–1
H2SO4/PVA
743 (5 mV s−1)
90 (2000)

167



rGO/PANI composites
−0.2 to 0.8
ZnCl2/PAM
198 (1 A g−1)
94 (10000)

168



rGO/N2H4-graphene
0.3–1.6
Na2SO4/PAM
74 (5 mV s−1)
85 (8500)

151



Co-hexacyanoferrate/GO sheets
0–2
Na2SO4/PVA
410 (10 A g−1)
99 (10000)

169





3.3. Micro-structured FSHSCs
With the looming large market potential of the IoE paradigm, smaller, thinner, lighter, and more flexible designs of the electric devices will be needed. For example, microdevices that combine energy storage and wireless charging functions can be defined as integrated wireless charging energy storage microdevices, which could be a promising alternative for the design of portable and movable electronics. As the energy stored in a unit volume of the traditional structure of the FSHSC is somewhat limited, the miniature interdigital FSHSC has emerged as a very promising candidate for meeting the requirements of microelectronic devices. This has an interdigitated planar structure in which two electrodes are spaced across the same flexible insulating substrate, the gap in between is filled with electrolyte, and the upper layer is moulded with the same flexible insulating substrate. This structure can improve the electrode/electrolyte interface, increase the active specific surface area accessible to ions, promote ion penetration, and provide higher energy and power densities for electronic devices in a limited space. Furthermore, the working voltage of the device can be expanded by connecting multiple miniature interdigitated FSHSCs in series in the same plane. This planar structure also facilitates the connection between different devices, thereby avoiding redundant and complicated connection lines. Interdigitated electrodes can be prepared by processes such as laser-induced patterning (etching, scribing, etc.), screen and inkjet printing, 3D printing, lamination, and photolithography, a brief description of which follows.

3.3.1. Etching and scribing. 
Exquisite and high-resolution patterned FSHSCs can be obtained via the removal of unwanted parts from the film or assembly using a pre-patterned mask, template, or software program. The etching process is performed under dry (i.e., plasma or laser) or wet (microfluidic etching) conditions. The etching process for flexible on-chip FSHSCs enables the fabrication of the desired patterns with the assistance of masks. Etching and scribing are cost-effective techniques without extra masks and complex processing. These strategies are effective to maintain specific nanostructures of active materials for high performance FSHSCs.
Gao et al. prepared an integrated wireless charging micro FSHSC by the laser-scribing method.170 The prepared FSHSCs consisted of two modules—wireless, charging coil acting as antennas and micro supercapacitors. A planar coaxial structure was introduced to integrate the two parts, in which the micro supercapacitors are in the centre surrounded by a coil. A shared electrode was designed to connect the two parts, which can act as a conductive line of the coil to harvest energy from the magnetic field as well as an electrode of three interdigital parallel micro supercapacitors. Taking advantage of the seamless designed system, the micro FSHSC exhibited excellent high capacitance and high energy density of 454.1 mF cm−2 and 463.1 μW h cm−2, respectively. They operated a micro FSHSC-assembled miniature car (Fig. 11(a)).
 Fig. 11  Micro-structured FSHSCs by etching, scribing, and inkjet/screen printing methods: (a) schematic illustration of fabricating the integrated FSHSC device via the laser etching method and the integrated FSHSC-wireless charging system, and the photograph of a car with the device running on the floor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. © 2021 Spring Nature Limited; (b) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the ZnO nanorod/rGO patterns on a PET film via the IR laser etching method and the SEM images of the patterned structure. Reproduced permission with ref. 174. © 2020 Springer Nature Limited; (c) schematic illustration of the fabrication of a flexible FSHSC on an elastomer rubber substrate by the inkjet method and the interdigitated FSHSC incorporated on a wrist worn sweat band for powering fitness monitoring devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. © 2019 Elsevier; (d) schematic illustration of the fabrication of inkjet-printed FSHSCs using aqueous printable MXene/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (MP) hybrid ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (e) schematic illustration of the fabrication of printed FSHSCs by a mask-assisted spray coating method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (f) schematic of the smart contact lens and DIW-based fabrication process of the monolithically integrated FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. © 2019 AAAS; (g) schematic illustration of the screen-printing process using graphene inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. © 2019 ACS Publications; and (h) schematic illustration of the fabrication of screen-printed planar FSHSCs and the solar-charging integrated devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. © 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A facial selective patterning strategy was developed to fabricate ZnO nanorod/rGO-based solid-state planar FSHSCs (ZnO NR/rGO).171 This process involved in situ formation of interdigitated graphene electrodes and ZnO NRs by photothermal conversion of GO and Zn precursors using infrared (IR) laser etching (Fig. 11(b)). The fabricated ZnO NR/rGO exhibited a high stack capacitance of 3.90 F cm−3 and an energy density of 0.43 mW h cm−3, which are approximately three-fold higher than those of the bare rGO FSHSCs. The simple IR laser etching (scribing) strategy enables the selective growth of graphene/ZnO composites, particularly at desired locations, resulting in contribution to the pseudocapacitive properties. In addition, it can be utilized for forming simple and complex patterns in the interdigitated FSHSC devices for high performances. This is attributed to the lowering of internal resistances by the decrease of ion diffusion length.
Using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as a stretchable support, S. Park et al. fabricated the high-performance elastomeric rGO/Au-based FSHSCs via facile and versatile direct laser patterning.172 The prepared FSHSCs exhibited rubbery elasticity in every direction, which can be operated at large strains up to 60%. Zhang et al. prepared an integrated stretchable radio frequency system, which includes a stretchable rectenna based on the asymmetric microstrip antenna, an FSHSC, and a stretchable strain sensor.173 Here, the FSHSC consists of graphene, which was fabricated by patterning of PI sheets by CO2 laser scribing, and poly(vinyl alcohol)/KCl gel electrolyte. The FSHSC is efficiently charged by the stretchable rectenna, which takes only ∼200 s to go from 0 to 0.5 V. The stored energy in the FSHSC can generate a constant output voltage of ∼1.8 V to power the strain sensor. The suggestion is that such an FSHSC can be used in self-powered units for future wearable devices used in wireless communication.
Kim et al. also reported 3D nanostructured laser-induced graphene (LIG) patterned on fluorinated polyimides (fPI) via a laser photothermal method.174 The patterned LIG/fPI exhibited a very large specific surface area of 1126 m2 g−1, resulting from a highly microporous structures formed during laser-induced graphitization. The LIG/fPI-based FSHSCs show very high power and energy densities of 0.58 mW cm−2 and 0.01 mW h cm−2, respectively.
In a nutshell, these studies have demonstrated that laser etching/scribing can produce various interconnections between multiple micro FSHSCs on a single device, which allows the required voltage and/or current output to be easily adjusted before device fabrication.


3.3.2. Inkjet and screen printing. 
Inkjet and screen printing are widely used for mass-printing methods due to their simplicity and versatility. Inkjet printing is suitable for the fabrication of on-chip devices due to low cost, fast process, and scalability. The solubility, viscosity, surface tension, and particle size of active materials for supercapacitor inks are critical to the fabrication of FSHSCs. Fig. 11(c–g) illustrate schematic layouts of the inkjet and screening printing strategies.
CNT/polyaniline composites were used as the active materials and polyurethane was used as a long-lasting binder for the symmetrical supercapacitor, as shown in Fig. 11(c). The resulting FSHSC exhibited excellent mechanical elasticity even when subjected to strong mechanical deformation, with a maximum surface capacitance of 167 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.4 mA cm−2, along with considerable surface energy and power densities of 14.9 μW h cm−2 and 0.29 mW cm−2, respectively.175
An aqueous printable MXene/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid) hybrid ink was demonstrated that has an adjustable viscosity to directly inkjet-print micro-supercapacitors (Fig. 11(d)).176 Chu et al. developed air-stable conducting polymer ink using polyaniline and citric acid to print wearable micro FSHSCs.177 The inks are directly employed to print micro FSHSCs via the spray coating method. The prepared micro FSHSCs show a large volumetric capacitance of 26.0 F cm−3 and high energy density of 2.4 mW h cm−3 at the power density of 238.3 mW cm−3 (Fig. 11(e)).
J. Park et al. reported a microscale direct ink writing (DIW) process for a FSHSC-integrated soft and smart contact lens system, as shown in Fig. 11(f).178 They used a mixture of activated carbon/MWCNT/polyvinylidene fluoride/polyvinylpyrrolidone as an electrode ink. A new solid-state polymer electrolyte was designed using an ionic liquid with the organic electrolyte ink, which was subjected to the UV-assisted click reaction, resulting in a self-standing, solid-state polymer electrolyte.
Screen printing is applicable for diverse substrates including paper, cloth, and woven mesh. These techniques feature advantages of (1) controllability of paste movements during printing, (2) applicability for the fabrication of thick functional films, and (3) low cost of facilities. As an example, a screen-printed flexible and stretchable FSHSC can be used as an energy buffer element to power a wearable device, such as a health monitoring system or smart wear textile.
For future printed electronics, a promising conductive ink should possess high conductivity, flexibility, long-term stability, and compatibility with diverse substrates. To date, most conductive inks for printed electronics have been based on metal nanoparticles (e.g., gold (Au), silver (Ag), and copper (Cu)), which are high in cost and poor in flexibility. Moreover, copper nanoparticles tend to corrode with long-term service.
In this regard, He et al. prepared graphene nanoplatelet (GNP) inks with a large original mean flake diameter of ∼19.3 μm and PVP binder less than 1 wt% to achieve highly conductive inks, resulting in high performance large-sized screen printed FSHSCs.179 It was shown that drying of the inks and the post-printing (heating) process are critical to producing high-quality conductive tracks after screen printing. The schematic illustration of the screen-printing process is shown in Fig. 11(g). The GNP-based inks were successfully screen-printed on flexible substrates including polyimide (PI), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and paper. It was demonstrated that the printed highly conductive GNP patterns can be used directly as the current collector to replace the metallic collector for FSHSCs.
A porous carbon-coated hexagonal Mn3O4 (p-Mn3O4@C) nanosheet electrode has been fabricated via an in situ synthetic strategy during a screen-printing process.180 The p-Mn3O4@C inks are successfully prepared by tuning the formulation compositions for the printing-suitable rheological properties. The fully screen-printed p-Mn3O4@C-based FSHSCs exhibited an outstanding volumetric capacitance of 60.2 F cm−3, remarkable volumetric energy density (14.1 mW h cm−3) and cycling stability of 92.6% retention after 10000 cycles. In addition, the fabricated self-powered system based on the p-Mn3O4@C-based FSHSCs and a commercial solar cell demonstrated excellent integration performance, which can be utilized in solar cells and customized low-power boosters even under weak sunlight, as shown in Fig. 11(h).
Li et al. developed 3D porous fabrics as a skeleton for wearable fabric-based micro FSHSCs with ultrahigh areal capacitance.181 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was patterned on the 3D fabrics to achieve continuous conductive networks via a screen-printing strategy, while MnO2 microspheres epitaxially grown on PEDOT:PSS were fully exposed to electrolyte with the support of fabric fibers. The resulting porous fabric-based FSHSC exhibited high areal capacitance of 135 mF cm−2, which is 3.5 times higher than that of devices on non-porous polymeric substrates. The fabric-based FSHSCs are good candidates for smart wearable clothes and washability with a retention of electrochemical performance.


3.3.3. 3D printing. 
The 3D printing technique is an upcoming process for on-chip energy storage materials by building of 3D objects. It has some merits: (1) printing flexibility and geometry controllability, (2) well-controlled thickness including high aspect-ratio configuration, and (3) low cost and environmental friendliness by a simplified process.
Lai et al.182 fabricated N-doped hierarchical carbon-metal oxide networks via the 3D printing method. The data showed that Fe2O3 nanoparticles decorated on a well-structured 3D network by 3D printing give superior ionic diffusion and transportation with a shortened pathway. The electrode of the Fe2O3/N-doped carbon structure represented specific capacitance and cycling durability of 377 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and 93% after 10000 cycles, respectively. The energy density of prepared cell was 144 W h kg−1 at a power density of 100 W kg−1. Zhao et al. reported a coaxial yarn-type supercapacitor fabricated by direct 3D printing with a multi-ink writing process (Fig. 12(a)). The device exhibited a specific capacitance and cycle retention of 59 F g−1 and 93% after 12000 cycles with high mass loading of active materials (16.4 mg cm−2). They suggested supercapacitor integration with self-powered and self-monitoring systems for solar cells and electric motors.183
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for 3D printed FSHSCs with a 3D printer, 3D pen, and roll-to-roll production: (a) 3D printed coaxial V2O5/MWCNT-based FSHSC device with the direct coherent multi-ink writing technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. © 2021 AAAS; (b) fabrication of MXene (Ti3C2)@PPy-based FSHSCs using a 3D pen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (c) thermally drawn FSHSCs by activated carbons, carbon blacks, and PVDF using a 3D printer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (d) roll-to-roll process for 3D printing of transparent FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. © 2021 Cell Press; and (e) relationship between required energy for devices and length in FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co. 
For a smart home energy management system, Vafhasiya et al. demonstrated the concept of integrating 3D-printed electrochemical devices into insulation voids in construction bricks in order to create electrochemical energy storage as an intrinsic feature of home building bricks (Fig. 12(b)).184 They fabricated 3D-printed electrodes for FSHSCs using graphene/polylactic acid (PLA) filaments using a 3D pen in any desired shape. Furthermore, a Ti3C2@polypyrrole (PPy) hybrid composite was electroplated on the surface of the 3D-printed electrodes to achieve high capacitive performance. The resultant electrodes of Ti3C2@PPy-coated 3D-printed graphene/PLA exhibited outstanding capacitive performance and power density. The fabricated FSHSC devices were integrated into a real brick to showcase a smart home energy storage system that allows the prevention of a power outage in an elevator.
To produce 100 meter-long fully functional energy storage fibers for FSHSCs, a flow-based preform-to-fiber (top-down method) thermal drawing process using the 3D printing strategy was introduced in which a preform of macroscale dimensions was assembled with all five component materials (i.e., thermally reversible porous electrode and electrolyte gel, conductive polymer and copper microwire current collectors, and encapsulating hermetic cladding).185 This allowed the resulting 100-meter-long fiber to constitute a single cell (Fig. 12(c)).
Roll-to-roll 3D direct ink printing can also be an efficient process for continuous FSHSC fabrication, as shown in Fig. 12(d).186 Since the process used a transparent dialysis membrane, it was able to provide flexible and transparent FSHSCs. The fabricated FSHSCs indicated a high specific capacitance of 363 mF g−1 with high optical transmittance of ∼80%. This class of FSHSCs can potentially quickly gain popularity in window display panels, smart goggles, and face shields, which all require transparent energy storage materials.
Khudiyev et al. represented the relationship of the required length of fiber-type FSHSCs to operate electric devices in the present and future fiber-type FSHSCs, as shown in Fig. 12(e).185 Current fibers of 100 meter-long or less can operate various electronic devices including magnetic sensors, microphones, motion sensors, switches, Bluetooth modules, etc. In the future, FSHSCs will be embedded into garments such as gloves, underwear, socks, and outer clothing, which require hundreds to kilometers of fibers and will be able to operate much advanced electronic devices such as displays, and computers.
By virtue of the interdigital structures with their high-power density and long cycle life, the micro-structured FSHSCs have attracted great attention in wearable, highly integrated, and flexible electronics for on-chip and miniaturized EES devices. With the rapid development of the IoE infrastructure, the micro-structured FSHSCs are expected to generate increasing interest in certain fields including biomedical sensors and actuators requiring long lifetime and fast charge/discharge rate. This could outweigh the disadvantages of the micro batteries that inevitably suffer from frequent replacement due to their short lifespan. Various flexible electrodes are used for micro-structured FSHSCs, as summarized in Table 2.23,180,182,183,187–199
Table 2 The various flexible electrodes used in micro-structured FSHSCs




Material
Potential window/V
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance/F g−1 (scan rate or current density)
Retention/% (cycles)
Ref.




Etching and scribing


PEDOT/PSS/reduced graphene oxide
0–1
H3PO4/PVA
10 (5 mV s−1)
95 (10000)

187



NiCo2S4/activated carbon cloth
0–1.6
KOH/PVA
83 (1 A g−2)
82 (10000)

188



MoS2/MXene film
0–0.8
ZnSO4/gelatine
76 (1 mV s−1)
98 (6000)

189



Boron carbon nitride
0–1
H2SO4/PVA
273 (2 A g−1)
>99 (10000)

190



PEDOT/PI-derived graphene
0–1
H2SO4/PC
138 (0.5 A g−1)
98 (4000)

191



Inkjet and screen printing


MnO2/graphene oxide
0–1
LiCl/PVA
14 (10 mV s−1)
90 (9000)

192



MnO2/reduced graphene oxide
0–1.8
KOH/PVA
249 (20 mA cm−2)
92 (20000)

193



Mn3O4 nanosheet/carbonaceous glucose
0–1.3
Na2SO4/CMC
386 (1 A g−1)
93 (10000)

180



CoS2/Ni3S4/reduced graphene oxide
0–1.5
KOH/PVA
144 (0.5 A g−1)
95 (10000)

194



MnFe(CN)6/reduced graphene oxide
0–0.8
LiCl/PVA
467 (1 A g−1)
80 (5000)

195



3D printing


Fe2O3/N-doped hierarchical carbon
0–3.5
EMIMBF4/PVdF-HFP
377 (2 mV s−1)
93 (10000)

182



V2O5 nanowires/CNT
0–1.6
KOH/PVA
59 (75 mV s−1)
93 (12000)

183



NiP/Porous graphene
0–1
KOH/PVA
13 (1.5 mA cm−2)
96 (5000)

196



Graphene oxide aerogel
0–0.8
H2SO4/PAA
56 (0.3 A g−1)
81 (20000)

23



MnO/carbon nanofiber
0–1.6
LiTFSI/PAN
208 (5 mV s−1)
—

197



TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibril/CNT
0–0.9
H2SO4/PVA
63 (0.2 A g−1)
65 (20000)

198



Polyaniline/reduced graphene oxide
0–0.8
H2SO4/PVA
423 (0.8 A g−1)
75 (1000)

199






4. Application domain of FSHSCs
The supercapacitors were developed and produced in the United States in the 1960s, and gradually entered the market in the 1980s as an emerging green energy-saving energy storage device. The supercapacitors provide superior performance and an order-of-magnitude increase in energy storage compared to those of traditional physical capacitors. Due to their fast-charging speed, high power density, long cycle life, safety, and environmental friendliness, the supercapacitors have important application prospects in a variety of fields, including electric vehicles, consumer electronic power supplies, military applications, and industry. The global supercapacitors market was valued at ∼USD 834 million in 2019, and it is expected to reach ∼USD 2660 million by 2025, registering a CAGR of 21.8% during the period of 2020–2025.200 Additionally, the most important features of supercapacitors compared to other EES devices are stable power supply for applications, which is an emerging trend in the market.
Looking ahead, we expect FSHSCs to be one of the key enablers in the IoE economy, which according to the McKinsy Global Institute Report, Internet of Everything: Mapping the value beyond the myth, June 2015 is expected to be worth over $14.4 trillion. A brief overview of the selected market segments for current and future applications is provided below.
4.1. Portable consumer electronics
The consumer adoption of smart devices has popularized the Internet of Everything (IoE) technology. Lighter, thinner, more flexible, and more durable devices are required to meet the growing demand. The FSHSCs are ideal to fill this niche. They create their own electricity, supplying power with the energy density comparable to a battery, and thus opening the possibility to further reduce the size of power components in miniaturized and interdigitated electronic circuits. In particular, flexible and stretchable FSHSCs are gaining more consideration for wearable technology including smart-watches and glasses, sensors embedded in shoes and clothing, and epidermal electronics. The FSHSCs can even be tattooed on the skin or implanted in the human body as energy suppliers. Moreover, they have a unique advantage in form factor, capable of saving space on circuit boards. According to Capacitech Energy, they have developed yarn-type commercial FSHSCs and demonstrated a space saving of 20% in a circuit board, compared with traditional cylindrical supercapacitors.201
4.2. Automobile and electrical vehicles
A hybrid energy storage system (HESS), which commonly consists of a battery and a supercapacitor, has been spotlighted as the next generation energy and power supplier in automobile and electrical vehicles.202–204 That is, the HESS is designed on a driving condition-based energy management strategy to achieve a superior EES system by combining the high energy density of a battery and high power density of a supercapacitor.205
The most popular function of supercapacitors in an automobile is an ignition of an automobile in its starting mode. In this, the HESS can improve the voltage drop of the whole automobile at the starting moment. Also, it enables a smooth and rapid start by providing a short burst of power during acceleration and hill climbing, thereby potentially providing long battery lifetime. Furthermore, a HESS can allow a smaller DC-to-DC converter for the compact electronic circuit and devices, instead of a large DC-to-DC converter to interface between a conventional supercapacitor and the battery/DC link, while maintaining or improving the high performance. That is, it maintains the voltage of the FSHSC at a value higher than the battery voltage. In complement, the battery directly provides power when the FSHSC voltage drops below the battery voltage, thus eliminating the need for the battery to harvest energy. The net effect is an increase in its service lifetime. These features in conjunction with a more stable battery and the downsized powertrain could be very desirable for an ultra-exclusive performance car.
Recently, Lamborghini has used a supercapacitor as its power reserve and employs it in its auto-stop-start system in the Sián models rather than a battery-powered starter. In addition, it is claimed that the energy intensive supercapacitor provides enough specific power (1 kg hp−1) with light weight (34 kg).206–208 According to Lamborghini, this approach removes any jerkiness that would normally occur during a gear shift. The net outcome is a fast response with fewer gaps in its acceleration.209
A smart car with various functionalities including an autonomous system is getting closer to becoming a reality in our daily lives. A smart car capable of accessing the Internet and communicating with smart devices, other cars, and infrastructures, should be a key component for IoE generation.210 Significantly, the future smart car necessarily will require highly interdigitated electronics and be electronic system-rich with more than 100 computers per car.211 Thus, it is essential to downsize the supercapacitors to, for example, micro-sized FSHSCs as earlier discussed in Section 3.3, to provide high energy and power densities for the IoE technology.
Meanwhile, if FSHSCs were coupled with the traditional EES devices to harness the advantages of both, their application rate may see a jump in their use in automobiles and EVs. The FSHSCs should mitigate the space constraint in the vehicle hood and facilitate innovative design of a vehicle by sneaking EES materials into the wiring harness or by being mounted on the inner surface of the vehicle body.
The Volvo Car group has developed a concept to integrate the EES components into the car structure for lightweight future EVs. In particular, the flexible and durable composites embedded with a new supercapacitor (i.e., FSHSC here) will allow a curved or free-form shaped skin, moulded and formed to fit around the car's frame including the body panel, and the boot lid, with concomitant saving on space.212
While the EV market has still largely focused on improving the battery technology for the main energy supply system, some manufacturers are already looking ahead to the next advanced energy storage solution. The FSHSCs providing ideal utilization rate in electric vehicles could be a solution for efficient and free-formed EVs in the future.
4.3. Applications using energy harvester-supercapacitor assembly
With the advent of the IoE era, the connectivity links are growing exponentially in the personal portable devices as well as IoE-based embedded homes and building systems.
Normally, these IoE-based devices demand unattended operation over long-time spans because they are based on continual data sharing and communication in wireless environments. Thus, constant power supply and energy efficiency are critical for the management of an IoE system. So far, the IoE devices are powered by a battery. Considering the limited lifespan of a battery, self-powered and/or energy harvesting technology with an energy-efficient storage system will be feasible for leading edge IoE devices that are suitable to work constantly for remote applications in the IoE environment.
Although wind and solar power-derived energy harvesting devices are rapidly developing, they have the disadvantage of random fluctuations. For instance, changes in wind speed will cause fluctuations in the output power of wind turbines, which will, in turn, affect the power quality of the grid. Thus, effective wind power generation requires the use of small-capacity and short-term energy storage devices.
In this regard, energy integrated systems combined with FSHSCs and energy harvesters could be the needed solution. They are highly suitable because their superior cycle lifetimes and high-current charge–discharge characteristics allow them to readily adapt to the large current fluctuations of wind energy. Thus, FSHSCs can be efficiently combined with wind or solar-based energy harvesters to form hybrid EES devices that can absorb energy under the conditions of sufficient sunlight or strong wind during the day and provide timely discharge during the night or during times of weak wind, thus providing stable power generation. We note that these observations are valid for traditional supercapacitors as well.
With the on-going advances in the shrinking of integrated circuits essential for the miniaturized IoE devices, the module weight and size of the EES system to be combined with the wind energy harvesters are critical. To this end, FSHSCs can be well-fitted to a curved or free-form shape, directly adapting to the IoE-based electronics related to home and building appliances.213
There have been a number of research reports on self-powered flexible devices combined with supercapacitors. They describe FSHSCs operating IoE devices including LED displays, electric motors, water pumps, and miniature motor vehicles. They show the potential of FSHSCs for self-powered integrated devices, critical to the IoE environment.183,214–217
4.4. Microgrid applications
A microgrid is a controllable small (micro)-scale power network, which plays an important role in the future smart power systems.218 It provides an effective approach to meeting the increased power demand by facilitating an effective and smooth integration of distributed power sources, loads and energy storage devices in the local vicinity.219 An FSHSC system on-boarded with a micro-device can be applied to the microgrid to store power when there is sufficient power available and feed it back to the grid when the power supply is insufficient or there is an outage, thereby ensuring that the grid load is always balanced. This capability is very critical to protect the continuous data sharing and communications in IoE systems. Further, this also enhances the economy of the wind or solar power-based microgrid used in the micro-devices.
Not limited to microgrids, an FSHSC-embedded EES system can improve the power quality, replace the currently used uninterruptible power supply (UPS), and improve the reliability of the power supply for sensitive equipment such as communication, computing, and medical equipment in a big grid.
4.5. Industrial trend: FSHSCs for IoE applications
Suffice to say, FSHSCs are becoming increasingly competitive choices for IoE-associated applications. In recent years, vibrant development of FSHSCs has accelerated their adoption in the IoE infrastructure. Several products have come into the market with standardized forms. Some examples follow.
One of the pioneer companies, Capacitech Energy Inc., has commercialized cable-type FSHSCs, which provide innovative flexible form factors and a facile expandability of voltage-up by a series of connections.201 These have enabled overcoming of the shaping issue that may arise in the small electronic enclosures and/or wiring components. The cable-type FSHSCs secure larger than 20% of free space on a circuit board compared to the counterpart cylindrical supercapacitors. Fig. 13(a) displays the spatial efficiency of a cable-type FSHSC compared to that of the traditional cylindrical supercapacitors. As a utilitous example, FSHSCs were successfully applied to energy harvester-supercapacitor assembly on the SOS pendant as necklace chains, see Fig. 13(b). Moreover, cable-type FSHSCs for some IoE systems suggest that they save the maintenance expense. In an IoE-rich world, there exist numerous devices required in hard-to-reach places, for example, a sensor for weather condition monitoring on bridges, fine dust monitoring devices on spires, and anemometers on wind turbines. The current battery systems, however, typically need replacement every 2.5 years due to their short service life. The associated battery maintenance has played a big role in delaying the advent of the IoE devices due to the attendant—huge amount of cost and time. The long service life of FSHSCs with no restrictions of spaces and shapes could be the needed prescription for saving expenses in maintenance and replacement.
 Fig. 13  Recent industrial trend of FSHSC development and the applications in IoE devices: (a) spatial efficiency of a cable-type FSHSC compared to the traditional cylindrical supercapacitors (Capacitech Energy, Inc.), (b) SOS pendant using a cable-type FSHSC as a power storage cell (Capacitech Energy, Inc.), (c) commercial product of a film-type FSHSC operating a white-light LED (Flexcap Energy, Ltd), (d) advanced supercapacitor-powered EV model of Lamborghini Sián FKP 37 (Automobile Lamborghini S.p.A), (e) a commercial power buffer device using supercapacitors equipped in wireless transmissions for IoT devices (LoRaWan® module), and (f) energy harvester-supercapacitor assembly using film type supercapacitors and solar cells for IoT designs (CAP-XX, Ltd and PowerFilm Solar Inc.). Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, 210, 216, 217, 229 and 233. 
FlexCap Energy Ltd has presented a customized thin film-type FSHSC to withstand mechanical deformation for wearable and smart textile electronics, as displayed in Fig. 13(c).220 Their main goal was to meet customers’ requirements in terms of design for a fully flexible energy storage system, a much-needed requirement in the IoE infrastructure. Flexibility, regardless of the size and shape for spatial efficiency in the film-type FSHSCs, is a pivotal factor in the seamless integration of FSHSCs with the existing IoE devices.
With growing capacitance of FSHSCs, they have begun to break out on their own and become ubiquitous at this point. Arrow Electronics has claimed that conventional batteries need supercapacitors for modern electronics.221 That is, supercapacitors will not replace batteries but will likely co-exist with them. Supercapacitors are useful to stabilize fluctuating loads and provide high levels of instantaneous power. In this regard, FSHSCs have become popular to reach into EVs, because they would not only enable charging an EV in a matter of minutes but also be deployed in any place unrestrictedly. In 2019, Lamborghini launched the Sián sports car—the industry's first hybrid EV equipped with a supercapacitor rather than with Li-ion batteries.222 They reported that Sián can reach 60 mph in 2.8 seconds due to a supercapacitor array—three times lighter than a battery producing the same power (Fig. 13(d)).
CAP-XX Ltd is a manufacturer of a thin-type high power supercapacitor. Very recently, MCCI Co., which is an open-source developer for LoRaWan® long-range wireless IoT networks, selected the CAP-XX’ ultra-thin FSHSCs for their wireless IoT module, as shown in Fig. 13(e).223 This is a joint effort by the two companies. MCCI claimed that the FSHSCs produced from CAP-XX can handle the periodic wireless data transmission that requires high burst power, thereby—offloading that role from the battery and thus enabling designers to use smaller batteries in the often space-constrained IoT sensors.
With respect to portable and wearable electronics in self-powered energy systems, the integration of an FSHSC with an energy harvester, such as a wind or solar power-based energy system, has become quite vital (Fig. 13(f)). CAP-XX and PowerFilm Solar have demonstrated ways to eliminate batteries completely or reduce their size and cost in IoT designs.224 While batteries are a simple solution for electronics, they can be bulky and expensive to maintain and replace. A supercapacitor paired with solar energy harvesting can provide a range of efficient power options for the IoT device.
5. Next generation of FSHSCs for IoE applications
The Internet of Everything (IoE), considered to be a superset of the Internet of Things (IoT), connecting people, processes, and big data—is an important future technology impacting all aspects of our lives. For example, smart grids will be necessary to meet the future energy needs without adversely impacting the environment. When fully implemented, it could allow integration of renewable energy in the grid as well as meeting the energy demands intelligently. In its operation, the smart grid could deploy different communication networks (i.e., public, private, wired, and wireless), different energy sources, different energy storage technologies and smart meters, with due considerations for cybersecurity, energy efficiency, and maximizing the performance of the components, such as feeders and transformers in the distributed grid system.1,2
In this regard, more and more electric devices have been connected to the smart grid directly in a non-hierarchical way to route data across the network with a high degree of integration of information. The energy security initiative would be a priority for well-managed energy storage system in the IoE infrastructures.
For stable grid connections, supercapacitors are expected to bridge gaps such as fluctuation and intermittence of energy and power sources. However, for meeting the demand of future smart grids and their adoption for the IoE world, development of a new generation of modern miniaturized energy storage device (i.e., flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors; FSHSCs) needs to be addressed.
Broadly speaking, for the adoption of supercapacitors in an auxiliary mode or in stand-alone operation for the EES system, further research is required to identify new electrode/electrolyte materials, organize the controllable structure and reduce the internal resistance with a goal to achieve high capacitance, high energy and power densities, and long-life cycles. However, size, weight, and conventional form factor of supercapacitors including cylindrical or rectangular shapes end up generating a lack of available space in the flexible and wearable miniaturized electronics. The FSHSCs can overcome this problem. They hold potential for physical spatiality to be integrated into a smart electronic product or system's infrastructure to build a discrete and distributed network of power dense energy storage. To this end, FSHSCs should be efficiently designed to achieve all integrated and multiple components into a single device accompanied by safety and low energy consumption. Fig. 14 presents the main components for the high-performance FSHSCs for IoE applications. The various challenges and strategies involved in meeting this goal as well as those for a new class of IoE applications, such as flexible and wearable miniaturized electronics, are described below.
 Fig. 14  Main components for the high-performance FSHSCs in IoE applications. 
5.1. Increasing the power and energy densities
As earlier shown in Fig. 5, the Ragone plot indicates that supercapacitors exhibit a higher power density than other energy storage devices.87 Nevertheless, strategies for increasing the energy density while maintaining an already high-power density, or for increasing both the energy and power density at the same time are a current research focus.
These strategies for the broad class of hybrid supercapacitors have generally focused on: (i) improving the specific capacitance of the electrode materials or developing new electrode materials with high specific capacitance; (ii) enlarging the potential window of the supercapacitors; and/or (iii) designing and optimizing a hybrid battery/supercapacitor system or an asymmetric hybrid supercapacitor. In the context of FSHSCs, we note that the unique architecture and configuration of their essential elements (i.e., flexible anode and cathode, and solid-state electrolyte) offers additional opportunities for enhancing the performance. First, a solid-state electrolyte as an essential element for FSHSCs provides an ion diffusion pathway as well as a separator at the same time, which results in efficient space occupancy, thereby drastically increasing the volumetric energy density. Secondly, comparably higher ratios of electrode width to insulated width (gap) spacing between two electrodes in a cell increase the power and energy densities (when only the electrode area is considered), by diminishing the equivalent series resistance (ESR). Thus, optimizing the structure of an FSHSC plays an important role in enhancing the overall performance of the devices. Several other features of the FSHSCs such as a good choice of electrodes, rational design and electrolytes for high-performance, and the mechanical properties and scalability for mass production are added advantages.
5.2. Maximizing the FSHSC performance via asymmetric and hybrid assembly strategies
Electrodes play a critical role in determining the electrochemical performance of FSHSCs. Besides the high flexibility and durability expected of these electrodes, several other factors essential to designing an ideal FSHSC electrode are large accessible surface area and efficient pore size for electrolyte ions, excellent electrical conductivity, and/or large amount of mass loading of the active materials for high energy density.27 To achieve high energy density, one promising strategy for providing support is to introduce high mass loading of pseudo capacitive materials onto light weight, porous, and highly conductive 3D architectures. However, overloading of pseudo capacitance materials results in lower power density because of the inherent poor electrical conductivity and low stability resulting from excessive electrochemical reaction. Furthermore, the poor mechanical properties, mainly arising from the inherent properties of metals, ceramics, etc., are also a challenge. A proper balance between the EDLC and pseudo capacitance materials is thus important in the selection of the FSHSC electrode materials for achieving a high performance device while maintaining mechanical durability.
Engineering of hybrid assemblies with a battery-type electrode as an energy source and EDLC electrode as a power source is another promising strategy towards enhancing the energy density of an FSHSC device.225 The hybrid takes advantage of the different potential windows of two different electrodes to increase the operating voltage and energy density. For complementary potential windows, pseudo capacitive materials including metal oxides and EDLC materials including porous carbon are used as the cathode and anode, respectively. In particular, the poor conductivity of the pseudo capacitive materials restricts efficient electrochemical performance in the system. In this regard, pseudocapacitive materials combined with highly conductive materials could enhance the capacitance and improve the conductivity. For high performance of an FSHSC device by hybrid assembly, it is essential to develop high energy density and highly conductive anode materials. However, the poor durability, flexibility, and safety issues from the metal electrodes (e.g., Li, Al, SiOx, etc.) pose a challenge.
As discussed in Section 3, one way of meeting this challenge is make use of unique architectures, including yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured types. These would enhance the device performance with the advantage of a simple and uncomplicated structure and make FSHSC devices competitive with micro-batteries for some applications from embedded sensors to wearable systems integrated into clothes or energy harvesting. For wearable FSHSCs to be compatible with IoE technology, additional requirements of the materials, such as washability, stretchability, and mechanical durability as well as great biosafety in the case of implantable healthcare devices or direct contact to humans will have to be considered.
In this regard, 1D yarn-type FSHSCs are suitable for knitting of smart fabrics, on-board energy storage cables, and integrated electrical cables for energy transmission and storage. 2D sheet-type FSHSCs are adoptable on thin film power sources attached on flexible displays, power source films on health devices, and energy storage layers on device stacks. 3D architecture FSHSCs can also be deployed on on-chip bulk-phase power units and form factor-power sources. Furthermore, micro-structured FSHSCs with predominantly enhanced energy density would make the FSHSC devices competitive with micro-batteries for some applications from interdigitated micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) sensors/actuators to wearable and medical devices.
5.3. Engineering of solid-state electrolytes
Except for the electrode materials, selection of a suitable electrolyte is one of the most essential factors for the high-performance of an FSHSC device. Recently, solid-state electrolytes including all-solid-state and quasi-solid-state (e.g., inorganic, polymeric, and gel-type electrolytes) have attracted great attention because they perform multiple roles of electrolyte, separator, and binder in FSHSCs. The solid-state electrolytes are mostly composed of a polymeric material as a matrix and solvent. In some cases, electrolyte salts are added to provide mobile ions. For FSHSCs, they can be classified into four categories: aqueous, non-aqueous, ionic liquid, and redox solid-state electrolytes. PVA has been widely used in the FSHSCs because of its excellent features, including cost-effectiveness, ease of processing, chemical stability and mechanical durability, non-toxicity, biodegradability, and transparency. As a linear polymer containing hydroxyl groups, it can be hydrolysed completely or partially in aqueous solution. The semi-crystalline nature of aqueous-based PVA provides abundant hydrogen bonding, resulting in a high absorption capacity of water that improves the ionic conductivity.91,226 The PVA solid-state electrolytes are further divided into proton conducting electrolyte (e.g., H2SO4/PVA and H3PO4/PVA), alkaline electrolyte (e.g., KOH/PVA), and lithium salt electrolyte (e.g., LiCl/PVA).227
Although PVA shows high structural integrity, good mechanical properties, and water absorption capacity, the aqueous-based PVA solid-state electrolytes still have significant limitations of low moisture retention, low ionic conductivity, and low voltage window, causing short lifetime and low performance of the device.226 Moreover, a suitable electrolyte should be carefully selected by considering the active materials and operating conditions. For example, use of a proton conducting electrolyte should be avoided when MnO2 is used as the active material, due to its instability under acidic conditions from reduction–dissolution reaction.90 Also, since modern high-performance EES systems are susceptible to accidental fires due to overheating, low capacitance retention, and electrolyte leakage, the development of high-performance solid-state electrolytes with properties such as flexibility, high ionic conductivity, good mechanical strength, chemical stability, ease of processability, low volatility, wide potential window, and good electrode/electrolyte contact need active research.
5.4. Reliable mechanical properties and mass production for practical applications
As wearable devices, FSHSCs have to meet some additional requirements. These are washability, stretchability, mechanical durability, and great biosafety for implantable healthcare devices. Stable electrochemical performance under various mechanical deformations such as bending, stretching, folding, and twisting is essential for practical applications of FSHSCs. Thus, high mechanical properties and flexibility of all the components, including the active materials, electrolyte, and current collectors, are important. One suggestion is loading active materials on flexible substrates with high mechanical properties or using a free-standing graphene-based FSHSC with highly flexible and robust electrodes, as previously discussed in Section 3. It is fair to say that graphene is the most qualified material due to its superior properties, such as high Young's modulus (1 TPa) and high electron mobility (2.5 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1).228
Large scale production of FSHSCs poses significant challenges. The reduction of material and production costs will be necessary to accelerate the broader application of FSHSCs in the near future. These include, among others, mass production of active materials, inkjet, and screen printing. Currently, the most deployed techniques for the production of graphene (multilayer graphene) are modified Hummer's methods, which use a mixture of chemicals to convert graphite to graphene oxide, followed by chemical or thermal treatment to produce reduced graphene oxide.229–231 Recently, researchers have shifted their efforts to producing graphene and its derivatives using a coal as a precursor. The underlying mechanism is extraction and separation of the crystalline domains in coals using an oxidation, exfoliation process.232,233 Coal is a plentiful and an affordable natural resource as a graphene precursor. Two of the authors of this review article, Lee and Mahajan, have developed a novel one-pot process for the synthesis of graphene from coal that is not only simpler, cheaper, and scalable but is also environment-friendly.234 It is expected that the graphene materials so produced would provide cost-effective and large-scale manufacture of FSHSCs for practical applications.
5.5. Integrated multi-functionality of smart FSHSCs for the IoE infrastructure
Along with the continuous development of IoE technology, multiple functional FSHSCs have emerged, including piezo-electric, energy harvesting, and shape-memory FSHSCs. From the prospective of device-level integration, renewable energy harvesters like tribo/piezoelectric and solar cell-driven self-charging devices have been integrated with FSHSCs. This is a significant step towards achieving self-powered systems for smart wearable, portable/miniatured, and highly functionalized IoE devices. These can be realized through integration, and by using multi-functional electrodes using active materials that can efficiently harvest mechanical or solar energy from the living environment and convert it effortlessly to electricity, which is stored in such advanced FSHSCs.
An FSHSC can also be deployed as a wireless recharging coil while acting as an antenna. This should be of great interest for wireless communication in the IoE infrastructure, which is at the heart of a personal health monitoring system to detect a signal including the human pulse, motions, sweat, and voice and environmental signals, such as UV light and NO2 gas for portable and wearable user-friendly devices in all-in-one systems.
A future miniaturized sensing system would be built around its integration with an FSHSC, requiring no external power supply. Thus, the efficient design for shared electrodes in these devices would allow independency of the use of external electric circuit connections, in addition to decreasing the size/weight of the whole devices. It would provide freedom from shapes and space constraints. This advantage would be highly desirable for portable and wearable personal electronic devices expected to be actively used in an IoE-dominated life.
Most of the above-mentioned integrated energy harvesters/sensors and FSHSCs for self-powered systems are still in the early stages of proof-of-concept. It will be essential to improve the performance, i.e., the total energy conversion efficiency of an all-in-one device by optimizing the advanced fabrication method of multi-functional materials and the architecture of FSHSCs that can be well-matched in the integrated circuit design.
6. Concluding remarks
As a new type of high-efficiency energy storage device, flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs) have shown promising opportunities in many fields, such as wearable electronics, smart clothes, implantable healthcare devices, and medical monitoring sensors for powering integrated active devices in the IoE environment. The innovative form factor of FSHSCs, such as 1D-, 2D-, and micro-structured, offers not only a solution to a lack of available space, in conventional supercapacitors, which has limited opportunities for their deployment, but also an opportunity to streamline and develop new designs of miniaturized energy storage systems.
However, before full exploitation of their potential is realized, the development of FSHSCs with high energy and power density, high voltage resistance and/or high- or low-temperature resistance as well as superior mechanical properties is required for the practical future smart EES devices.
The device performance of FSHSCs relies entirely on the electrodes and electrolytes, and their configurations and designs. The electrode performance for the FSHSCs should be significantly improved to materialize the many promises of such FSHSC-based devices into reality. To this end, new materials composed with low-cost, green, and environmental-friendly, simple and yet efficient manufacturing processes that do not require high-cost equipment are among the issues that urgently need to be solved. Furthermore, it is necessary to continuously develop electrodes with excellent electrochemical performance and lightweight and good mechanical flexibility. In addition, to meet the high energy density needs, high performance electrode materials need to be developed, which would require research focus on systematic investigation of various parameters such as favourable pore size distribution, specific surface area, electrical conductivity, surface functional groups, crystal structure, and wettability.
While efforts continue to enhance the energy density of FSHSCs to approach that of batteries, the strategy of a hybrid architecture of battery-type and supercapacitor-type electrodes should be pursued. A simple strategy of suitable matching of the positive and negative electrode materials in terms of their work functions as well as matching of the electrodes and electrolytes in terms of the interfacial reaction kinetics can also contribute an enhancement of energy and power density. Thus, we believe that advanced FSHSCs can be considered a viable alternative to micro battery energy storage technology for medical and consumer applications in the IoE, at least to a certain degree. This is because of their ability to allow for fast charging/discharging rate, efficient energy distribution, and a much longer life cycle without loss of performance. Another main advantage of FSHSCs would be ease of maintenance (>10 years) compared to a micro-battery that needs a periodic maintenance after approximately every 2 or 3 years.
Since FSHSCs operate in a dynamic mechanical deformation environment, they require higher requirements on the flexibility of the electrode and on the binding forces between the multilayer components, such as electrodes and electrolytes. A new generation of solid-state electrolytes should be developed, which exhibit superior ion conductivity and a wide operating temperature/voltage range. Especially for FSHSCs, the compatibility of solid-state electrolyte/electrode interfaces should be critically considered because electrolytes play an important role in an electrochemical reaction at the interfaces sandwiched between a pair of electrodes. Thus, it is important that solid-state electrolytes be in full contact with the internal surface (pores) of the electrodes.
It has always been a challenge to combine the characteristics of high energy density, durability, safety, and environmental friendliness in FSHSCs for highly interdigitated small devices. In particular, developing all bio-compatible materials is a special priority for personal medical devices. Since the rapid developments in IoE technology have also resulted in significant focus on the development of flexible and wearable micro-electronic devices, FSHSCs embedded with portable electronic products are spotlighted as another potential development direction for the next generation of flexible EES devices. The FSHSCs can be directly built to verify and control the energy storage system and optimal management performance in combination with other EES systems in IoE technology.
In summary, this review paper has focused on FSHSCs with various structures including yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured types for portable, wearable, and/or interdigitated electronics, in terms of electrochemical performance and mechanical durability. Their applications in future electronic devices and the related IoE technologies have been addressed in portable personal electronics, automobiles and electrical vehicles, energy harvester assembly, and microgrids. Although there are still challenges to utilize these smart flexible EES devices in the market, we believe that they will play one of the pivotal roles of future digital life and accelerate the advent of an overarching and transformative era—the IoE era.
Author contributions
Writing—original draft preparation, J.-H. L., G. Y., C.-H. K., S.-Y. L.; writing—review and editing, J.-H. L., G. Y., C.-H. K., R. L. M., S.-Y. L., S.-J. P; supervision, S.-Y. L., S.-J. P. All the authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2022M3J7A1062940 and 2022033777) and supported by Korea Electric Power Corporation (Grant number: R21XO01-5).
References
X. Fan, X. Liu, W. Hu, C. Zhong and J. Lu, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 130–139 CrossRef .
D. J. Langley, J. van Doorn, I. C. L. Ng, S. Stieglitz, A. Lazovik and A. Boonstra, J. Bus. Res., 2021, 122, 853–863 CrossRef .
N. Papadopoulos, W. Qiu, M. Ameys, S. Smout, M. Willegems, F. Deroo, J.-L. van der Steen, A. J. Kronemeijer, M. Dehouwer, A. Mityashin, R. Gehlhaar and K. Myny, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 606–611 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Hussain and M. M. Hussain, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4219–4249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang and S.-J. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 285, 405–414 CrossRef CAS .
F. Duffner, N. Kronemeyer, J. Tübke, J. Leker, M. Winter and R. Schmuch, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 123–134 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yi, H. M. K. Sari, X. Li, F. Wang, Y.-R. Zhu, J. Hu, J. Zhang and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Lin, T.-E. Lin, T. Lan, X. Liao, F. Maréchal, Y. Yang, C. Dong and L. Wang, Renewale Sustainable Energ. Rev., 2021, 135, 110119 CrossRef .
F. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806510 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sharma and V. Kumar, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 49, 3520–3532 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Nishihara, N. Kobayashi, T. Asada and T. Kyotani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1542–1549 RSC .
W. Wu, J. Partridge and R. Bucknall, Energies, 2019, 12, 142 CrossRef .
L. Manjakkal, A. Pullanchiyodan, N. Yogeswaran, E. S. Hosseini and R. Dahiya, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902564 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Q. Li, J. Wang, J. Ye, G. Fu, L. Zhai and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 20991–21001 CrossRef CAS .
N. Echeverry-Montoya, J. Prías-Barragán, L. Tirado-Mejía, C. Agudelo, G. Fonthal and H. Ariza-Calderón, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2017, 14, 1600258 CrossRef .
O. Fasakin, J. K. Dangbegnon, D. Y. Momodu, M. Madito, K. O. Oyedotun, M. Eleruja and N. Manyala, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Zhang, P. Qi, M. Zhu, G. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Guo, H. Chen, B. Zhang and Z. Zhao, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Shang, Y. Xu, P. Li, J. Han, Z. Wu, Y. Tao and Q.-H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104531 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Seo and S. J. Park, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 164, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, W. Fan, D. Wang, L. Zhang, Y.-E. Miao, F. Lai and T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 423–432 RSC .
X. Yang, L. Kong, M. Cao, X. Liu and X. Li, Ind. Crop. Prod., 2020, 145, 112100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, L. Shabnam, S. N. Faisal and V. G. Gomes, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101152 CrossRef .
S. Long, Y. Feng, F. He, J. Zhao, T. Bai, H. Lin, W. Cai, C. Mao, Y. Chen and L. Gan, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105973 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, H. Peng, H. Zhang, J. Kang, C. Zhu, G. Delgado, D. Byrne, S. Faulkner, M. Freyman and X. Lu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3731–3737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and S. J. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 486, 287–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Kumar, P. Prakash, A. Srinivasan and C. Karuppiah, J. Power Sources, 2021, 482, 228892 CrossRef .
R. Awata, M. Shehab, A. El Tahan, M. Soliman and S. Ebrahim, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 347, 136229 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ovhal, N. Kumar, S.-K. Hong, H.-W. Lee and J.-W. Kang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 828, 154447 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Yang, H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, M. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Yang and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 357, 136855 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Kim, B. Lee, M. Li, S. Noda, C. Kim, J. Kim, W.-J. Song, S. W. Lee and O. Brand, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5659–5667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, J. I. Kim and S. J. Park, Energy, 2014, 78, 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, F. Qin, Z. Guo, J. Wang and W. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135270 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Heo, M. Park, W.-S. Kang, K. Y. Rhee and S.-J. Park, Composites, Part B, 2019, 159, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shimanoe, T. Mashio, K. Nakabayashi, T. Inoue, M. Hamaguchi, J. Miyawaki, I. Mochida and S.-H. Yoon, Carbon, 2019, 158, 922–929 CrossRef .
C.-M. Yang and B.-H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 749, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1978–1987 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pant, M. Park, G. P. Ojha, J. Park, Y. S. Kuk, E. J. Lee, H. Y. Kim and S. J. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 522, 40–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Shiraishi, in Carbon Alloys, ed. E.-I. Yasuda, M. Inagaki, K. Kaneko, M. Endo, A. Oya and Y. Tanabe, Elsevier Science, Oxford,  2003 DOI:10.1016/B978-008044163-4/50027-9, pp. 447–457 .

          M. Inagaki and F. Kang, in Materials Science and Engineering of Carbon: Fundamentals, 2nd edn, ed. M. Inagaki and F. Kang, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  2014 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-800858-4.00003-6, pp. 219–525 .
X.-Y. Luo, Y. Chen and Y. Mo, New Carbon Mater., 2021, 36, 49–68 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Hou, W. Xu, G. Duan, S. He, K. Liu and S. Jiang, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 173–200 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, X. Yang, S. Zhang and W. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227678 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
S. Kumar, G. Saeed, L. Zhu, K. N. Hui, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, C. Xia, A.-H. Emwas, D. H. Anjum, X. Miao and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, F. Qu, G. Wang and X. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 724, 695–702 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Reddy, K. Mallikarjuna, M. Kumar, M. C. Sekhar, Y. Suh and S. H. Park, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 3312–3321 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yi, T. T. Wei, J. Mei, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. G. Liu, S. Luo, H. Liu, Y. Lu and Z. Guo, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2020, 4, 1900137 CrossRef CAS .

          B. De, S. Banerjee, K. D. Verma, T. Pal, P. Manna and K. K. Kar, Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor Materials II, Springer,  2020, pp. 89–111 Search PubMed .
G. P. Ojha, B. Pant, S. J. Park, M. Park and H. Y. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 494, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, Z. Qin, T. Li, F. Zeng, Y. Chen and N. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 356, 136841 CrossRef CAS .
R. Khan and Y. Nishina, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13718–13724 RSC .
M. Ö. Alaş, A. Güngör, R. Genç and E. Erdem, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12804–12816 RSC .
S. Ishaq, M. Moussa, F. Kanwal, M. Ehsan, M. Saleem, T. N. Van and D. Losic, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 5974 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, H. I. Lee and S. J. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D.-E. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Arbizzani, Y. Yu, J. Li, J. Xiao, Y.-Y. Xia, Y. Yang, C. Santato, R. Raccichini and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227636 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hussain, G. Nagaraju, S. C. Sekhar and J. S. Yu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 405–417 CrossRef .
G. Sun, Y. Xiao, B. Lu, X. Jin, H. Yang, C. Dai, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7239–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Y. L. Teo, L. Muniandy, E.-P. Ng, F. Adam, A. R. Mohamed, R. Jose and K. F. Chong, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, J. Shen, P. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15441–15447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang and S. J. Park, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 835, 155270 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, E. Goikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P. L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin and P. Simon, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 419–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lethien, J. Le Bideau and T. Brousse, Energy Environ. Sci, 2019, 12, 96–115 RSC .
X. Yue, J. Kiely, D. Gibson and E. M. Drakakis, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2020, 67, 2411–2421 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conway, J. M. Bockris and I. Ammar, Trans. Faraday Society, 1951, 47, 756–766 RSC .
Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3560–3573 RSC .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .

          A. W. Adamson, Physical Chemistry of surfaces, 1990.

          S.-J. Park, in Interface Forces and Fields: Theory and Applications, ed. J.-P. Hsu, Marcel Dekker, Inc, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Yan and Z. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 729–762 RSC .
S.-Y. Lee, R. B. Moore and R. L. Mahajan, Carbon, 2021, 171, 585–596 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and S. J. Park, Carbon, 2017, 122, 287–297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Park, H. Y. Kim and S. J. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 500, 155–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Laheäär, A. Arenillas and F. Béguin, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 220–229 CrossRef .
C. Decaux, C. Matei Ghimbeu, M. Dahbi, M. Anouti, D. Lemordant, F. Béguin, C. Vix-Guterl and E. Raymundo-Piñero, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 130–140 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, P.-L. Taberna, O. Crosnier, R. Dugas, P. Guillemet, Y. Scudeller, Y. Zhou, F. Favier, D. Bélanger and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laheäär, P. Przygocki, Q. Abbas and F. Béguin, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 21–25 CrossRef .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, H. Shao, Z. Lin, C. Merlet, G. Feng, J. Zhu and P. Simon, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Patil, N. Kitiphatpiboon, X. An, X. Hao, S. Li, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 52749–52762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Dong, B. Ding, Y. Wang, X. Hao, H. Dou, Y. Xia and X. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 71–90 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. P. Zhao and Y. Lei, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 74–84 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Shen, S. X. Xu, Y. X. Xie, M. Sanghadasa, X. H. Wang and L. W. Lin, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2017, 26, 949–965 CAS .
D.-Y. Wu and J.-J. Shao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 557–583 RSC .
S. Alipoori, S. Mazinani, S. H. Aboutalebi and F. Sharif, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101072 CrossRef .
H. Du, Z. Wu, Y. Xu, S. Liu and H. Yang, Polymers, 2020, 12, 297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, R. Peng, Z. Fan and Y. Lin, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 23, 100900 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, Y. Zhang and M. Shen, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 44, 103299 CrossRef .
M. Wu, K. Yao, D. Li, X. Huang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, E. Song, J. Yu and X. Yu, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100786 CrossRef .
S. A. Delbari, L. S. Ghadimi, R. Hadi, S. Farhoudian, M. Nedaei, A. Babapoor, A. S. Namini, Q. Van Le, M. Shokouhimehr and M. S. Asl, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 857, 158281 CrossRef .
S. Yadav and A. Devi, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 30, 101486 CrossRef .
Y. R. Son and S. J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 17601 CrossRef PubMed .
G. J. Yang and S. J. Park, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 741, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qiu, M. Li, C. Kang, J. Wei, F. Wang and R. Yang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, J. Yin, J. Meng, Y. Liu, M. Liao, T. Wu, M. Dresselhaus, Y. Xie, J. Wu and C. Lu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 2156–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, M. Göbel, P. Formanek, F. Simon, M. Sommer and S. Choudhury, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14052–14063 RSC .
K. S. Kim and S. J. Park, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 673, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
B. Batalla García, A. M. Feaver, Q. Zhang, R. D. Champion, G. Cao, T. T. Fister, K. P. Nagle and G. T. Seidler, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 014305 CrossRef .
I. Yang, S.-G. Kim, S. H. Kwon, M.-S. Kim and J. C. Jung, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 223, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Sylla, N. M. Ndiaye, B. Ngom, D. Momodu, M. Madito, B. Mutuma and N. Manyala, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 13673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, H. Wang, Q. Zhu, N. Sun, B. Anasori, L. Hu, F. Wang, Y. Guan and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 128–136 CrossRef .
D. T. Galhena, B. C. Bayer, J. C. Meyer, S. Hofmann and G. A. Amaratunga, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9246–9255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, C. Li, J. Bai, X. Sun and H. Liang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 22144–22154 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Sekhar, G. Nagaraju and J. S. Yu, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 58–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou and S. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11792 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y.-X. Liu, Y. Li, B.-W. Deng, B. Yin and M.-B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17257–17265 RSC .
Y.-R. Son and S.-J. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1020–1029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toufani, S. Kasap, A. Tufani, F. Bakan, S. Weber and E. Erdem, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12790–12800 RSC .
R. Zhong, M. Xu, N. Fu, R. Liu, X. Wang and Z. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 348, 136209 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohapatra, O. Muhammad, M. S. Sayed, S. Parida and J.-J. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135363 CrossRef CAS .
E.-A. Cho, S.-Y. Lee and S.-J. Park, Carbon Lett., 2014, 15, 210–213 CrossRef .
N. Joseph, P. M. Shafi and A. C. Bose, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 6558–6597 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, P. Samanta, P. Samanta, N. C. Murmu and T. Kuila, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 13056–13066 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, S. Li, Z. Li, J. Li, G. Zhang, L. Cao and H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 830, 154637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Tian, Z. Yin, C. Cui, W. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2019, 141, 467–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Qiao and K. Lian, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 6–21 CrossRef .
B. Pal, S. Yang, S. Ramesh, V. Thangadurai and R. Jose, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3807–3835 RSC .

          R. Ramachandran and F. Wang, in Supercapacitors-Theoretical and Practical Solutions, ed. L. Liudvinavičius,  2018, pp. 51–68 Search PubMed .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Chang, D. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Yang and B. Cao, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ye, H. Wang, J. Ning, Y. Zhong and Y. Hu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 57, 219–232 CrossRef .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Q. Huang, L. Niu, D. Wang, C. Yan, Y. She and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606679 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Lou, D. Chen, K. Jiang, W. Han and G. Shen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702829 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ye, H. Tan, S. Wu, K. Ni, F. Pan, J. Liu, Z. Tao, Y. Qu, H. Ji, P. Simon and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801384 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Brousse, S. Pinaud, S. Nguyen, P.-F. Fazzini, R. Makarem, C. Josse, Y. Thimont, B. Chaudret, P.-L. Taberna, M. Respaud and P. Simon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903136 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, C. Lethien, S. Pinaud, K. Brousse, R. Laloo, V. Turq, M. Respaud, A. Demortière, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, B. Chaudret, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2016, 351, 691–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cherusseri and K. K. Kar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9910–9922 RSC .
G. Wu, P. Tan, X. Wu, L. Peng, H. Cheng, C. F. Wang, W. Chen, Z. Yu and S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702493 CrossRef .
A. Amiri, K. Bashandeh, M. Naraghi and A. A. Polycarpou, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, T. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Liu, M. Qing and D. Xiao, Small, 2019, 15, e1803469 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Heo, J. W. Lee, Y. R. Son, J. H. Lee, C. S. Yeo, T. D. Lam, S. Y. Park, S. J. Park, L. H. Sinh and M. K. Shin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801854 CrossRef .
C. S. Yeo, Y.-J. Heo, M. K. Shin, J.-H. Lee, Y. Y. Park, S.-J. Mun, Y. A. Ismail, L. Hoang Sinh, S.-J. Park and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2021, 4, 8059–8069 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, L. Xie, L. Wang, W. Chen, W. Wei, X. Chen, S. Luo, L. Dong, Q. Dai, Y. Huang and L. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jang, T. Park, E. Kim, J. W. Park, D. Y. Lee and S. J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10563–10567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Na, J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, Y. Jung, K. Lee, J. S. Park, J. Y. Park, K. S. Song, S. B. Lee, T. Kim and S. J. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabl8631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Cong, J. Hu, H. Lu, L. Wang, H. Wang, O. I. Malyi, X. Pu, Y. Zhang and H. Shao, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106893 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wu, Y. H. Chen, K. J. Lian, X. A. Yu, Q. Q. Zhuang, Q. Yang, S. F. Liu, S. Liao, N. Li and H. Y. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 866, 158156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. X. Zhong, L. Cui, A. T. Zhang, J. M. Razal, W. R. Yang and J. Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1837–1848 RSC .
T. G. Yun, J.-S. Jang, J. Y. Cheong and I.-D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105776 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, H. Li, Y. Fu, R. Yuan and J. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 124820 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niu, R. Guo, L. Dang, J. Sun, Q. Li, X. He, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2020, 3, 7794–7803 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Xu, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, M. Wang, D. Yang, S. Li and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2112151 CrossRef .
D. Pandey, K. Sambath Kumar, L. N. Henderson, G. Suarez, P. Vega, H. R. Salvador, L. Roberson and J. Thomas, Small, 2022, 18, 2107053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Nardekar, K. Krishnamoorthy, S. Manoharan, P. Pazhamalai and S.-J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2022, 16(3), 3723–3734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ko, M. Kwon, W. K. Bae, B. Lee, S. W. Lee and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 536 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Su, L. Lai, R. Li, Y. Lin, H. Dai and X. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9379–9389 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sadak, W. Wang, J. Guan, A. K. Sundramoorthy and S. Gunasekaran, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4386–4394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, N. Li, T. Lv, Y. Yao, H. Peng, J. Shi, S. Cao and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 941–947 RSC .
Z. Lv, Y. Luo, Y. Tang, J. Wei, Z. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Qi, S. Pan, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704531 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, Z. L. Chen, T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li, H. L. Li and T. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, I. Echols, P. Flouda, Y. J. Chen, S. Y. Wang, X. F. Zhao, D. Holta, M. Radovic, M. J. Green, M. Naraghi and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 14068–14076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Zhu, T. Ouyang, Y. Chen, J. Yan, K. Zhu, K. Ye, G. Wang, K. Cheng and D. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Cheng and C. Meng, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 818–829 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Chen, H. Fan, Y. Zhang, X. Q. Liang, Q. G. Chen and X. H. Xia, Small, 2020, 16, 2003434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Peng, X. Y. Shen, Z. H. Song, W. Chen and X. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 463, 228202 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paleo, P. Staiti, A. Rocha, G. Squadrito and F. Lufrano, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226735 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Shinde, Y. Seo, C. Ray and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 308, 231–242 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Z. Qin, S. Hu, L. Yang, X. Xu, L. Ding and Y. Zhang, Carbon, 2020, 158, 711–718 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Liu, Z. Y. Zhao, A. Z. Xu, W. Li and Y. J. Qin, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 875, 159931 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Chen, Y. Shi, P. Chen, X. Tang, W. Jiang, Z. Zou and G. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 586, 152739 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, J. Huang, Y. Xiao, G. Zhang, C. Dai, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jung, J. R. Jeong, J. Lee, S. H. Lee, S.
Y. Kim, M. J. Kim, J. Nah and M. H. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, H. Lee, Y.-J. Kim and P. S. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 959–969 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, C. Song, J. Li, N. Yi, D. Qiu, K. Guo, C. Zhang, T. Pan, Y. Lin, H. Zhou, H. Long, H. Yang and H. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2022, 96, 107069 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, M. G. Gu, H. Jeong, E. Song, J. W. Jeon, K.-M. Huh, P. Kang, S.-K. Kim and B. G. Kim, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2021, 4, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
V. Rajendran, A. V. Mohan, M. Jayaraman and T. Nakagawa, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104055 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Zhu, P. Das, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, L. Chi, S. Liu and Z.-S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, G. Chen, X. Xiao, Z. Wang, T. Yang, Z. Xu, H. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Yan, N. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Small, 2021, 17, 2100956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, D. B. Ahn, J. Kim, E. Cha, B. S. Bae, S. Y. Lee and J. U. Park, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay0764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. He, J. Cao, H. Ding, C. Liu, J. Neilson, Z. Li, I. A. Kinloch and B. Derby, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32225–32234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, J. Huang, Q. He, L. Tan and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4273–4280 RSC .
D. D. Li, S. Yang, X. Chen, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107484 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Lai, C. Yang, R. Q. Lian, K. B. Chu, J. J. Qin, W. Zong, D. W. Rao, J. Hofkens, X. H. Lu and T. X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, H. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Yu, O. I. Malyi, X. Zhao, L. Wang, H. Wang, J. Peng, X. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Pan, G. Xing, C. Lu, Y. Tang and X. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd6978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Vaghasiya, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106990 CrossRef CAS .
T. Khudiyev, J. T. Lee, J. R. Cox, E. Argentieri, G. Loke, R. Yuan, G. H. Noel, R. Tatara, Y. Yu, F. Logan, J. Joannopoulos, Y. Shao-Horn and Y. Fink, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ovhal, N. Kumar, H. B. Lee, B. Tyagi, K. J. Ko, S. Boud and J. W. Kang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Weng, Q. Xu, Y. Hou, C. Zhao, S. Beirne, K. Shu, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace and J. M. Razal, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600166 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, Y. W. Zheng, L. Cui, D. D. Jia, D. Wei, R. K. Zheng, C. Barrow, W. R. Yang and J. Q. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 461–469 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. L. Wang, J. J. Shi, X. Y. Du, Q. H. Cheng, R. Xue, Q. Wang, M. Wang, L. M. Ruan and W. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901160 CrossRef CAS .
I. Karbhal, A. Basu, A. Patrike and M. V. Shelke, Carbon, 2021, 171, 750–757 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Cho, C. W. Chang-Jian, W. L. Syu, H. S. Tseng, K. C. Lee, J. H. Huang and Y. S. Hsiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 518, 146193 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sundriyal and S. Bhattacharya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38507–38521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sundriyal and S. Bhattacharya, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2019, 2, 1876–1890 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Jiang, H. Liang, W. R. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Y. Cao, J. M. Zhang, C. W. Li, J. Q. Liu and J. J. Gooding, Carbon, 2019, 146, 557–567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, B. Tian, S. Q. Li, C. Z. Jiang and W. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000022 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Xue, L. Gao, X. K. Hu, K. Cao, W. Z. Zhou, W. D. Wang and Y. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Chen, X. H. Liu, M. Z. Ouyang, P. Childs, N. Brandon and B. Wu, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 26, 100993 CrossRef .
W. B. Kang, L. Zeng, S. W. Ling, C. Z. Lv, J. F. Liu, R. X. Yuan and C. H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, Q. E. Zhang, S. C. Long, Y. X. Luo, P. K. Yu, Z. B. Tan, J. Bai, B. H. Qu, Y. Yang, J. Shi, H. Zhou, Z. Y. Xiao, W. J. Hong and H. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10437–10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Intelligence, Supercapacitors Market - Growth, Trends, and Forecast (2020–2025), 2020, 25–35 Search PubMed .
J. Sleppy, A. Silverstein and D. Moser, J. Fluid Flow, 2021, 8, 238–243 Search PubMed .
A. Castaings, W. Lhomme, R. Trigui and A. Bouscayrol, Appl. Energy, 2016, 163, 190–200 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Song, J. Q. Li, J. Hou, H. Hofmann, M. G. Ouyang and J. Y. Du, Energy, 2018, 154, 433–441 CrossRef .
H. Li, A. Ravey, A. N'Diaye and A. Djerdir, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 262–270 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, T. Sun, N. Kim, J. Jeong and S. W. Cha, Int, J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. - Green Technol., 2021, 8, 1739–1754 CrossRef .
N. Kularatna, K. Subasinghage, K. Gunawardane, D. Jayananda and T. Ariyarathna, Electronics, 2021, 10, 1697 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Bokhari, A. H. Siddique, P. C. Sherrell, X. Y. Yue, K. M. Karumbaiah, S. H. Wei, A. V. Ellis and W. Gao, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 2768–2784 CrossRef .
Do supercapacitors have a use in hybrid vehicles?, (https://www.lamborghinipalmbeach.com/blog/what-are-lamborghini-supercapacitors/).
B. Hurd, Green Car Rep., 2019 Search PubMed  , https://www.greencarreports.com/writer/10067612_byron-hurd.
R. Coppola and M. Morisio, ACM Comput. Surv., 2016, 49, 1–36 CrossRef .

          M. Salfer, H. Schweppe and C. Eckert,  2014 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-13257-0_27.
C. Hammerschmidt, 
            https://www.eenewsembedded.com/en/volvo-builds-small-e-car-series-for-siemens/
          , eeNews Automotive, 2013 Search PubMed .
Energy harvesting made possible with skin temperature, (https://www.printedelectronicsworld.com/articles/22903/energy-harvesting-made-possible-with-skin-temperature).
Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, H. Y. Guo, J. Wang, Y. L. Zi, W. D. Xu, J. N. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. G. Hu, L. P. Zhu, X. H. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. T. Zhang, M. Liao, H. Q. Lou, Y. J. Hu, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704261 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Manjakkal, W. T. Navaraj, C. G. Nunez and R. Dahiya, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802251 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, S. S. Nardekar, S. Sahoo and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Bloom energy microgrid solutions, (https://www.bloomenergy.com/resource/bloom-energy-microgrid-solutions/).

          Y. Han, W. Chen and Q. Li, in Smart Power Distribution Systems, ed. Q. Yang, T. Yang and W. Li, Academic Press,  2019, pp. 69–90 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-812154-2.00004-3 .
Flexcap Energy homepage, (https://flexcap.ca).
Batteries need supercapacitors for modern electronics, (https://www.arrow.com/en/research-and-events/articles/batteries-need-supercapacitors-for-modern-electronics).
Lamborghini hybrid uses supercapacitors in place of batteries, (https://www.electronicdesign.com/markets/automotive/article/21808589/lamborghini-hybrid-uses-supercapacitors-in-place-of-batteries).
MCCI selects CAP-XX supercaps for LoRa module for IoT and IIoT devices, (https://www.cap-xx.com/mcci-selects-cap-xx-supercaps-for-lora-module-for-iot-and-iiot-devices/).
Eliminate batteries in IoT devices using CAP-XX supercapacitors and powerfilm indoor solar energy harvesting, (https://www.cap-xx.com/eliminate-batteries-in-iot-devices-using-cap-xx-supercapacitors-and-powerfilm-indoor-solar-energy-harvesting/).
C. Gopi, R. Vinodh, S. Sambasivam, I. M. Obaidat and H. J. Kim, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101035 CrossRef .
H. Dai, G. Zhang, D. Rawach, C. Fu, C. Wang, X. Liu, M. Dubois, C. Lai and S. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 34, 320–355 CrossRef .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, B. Zhang, C. Bulin, R. Li and R. Xing, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Ji, H.-M. Cheng and R. S. Ruoff, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 5, 90–101 CrossRef .
V. C. Hoang, M. Hassan and V. G. Gomes, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 342–358 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, K. Li, S. Ren, Y. Dang, G. Liu, R. Zhang, K. Zhang, X. Long and K. Jia, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9793–9799 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee and R. L. Mahajan, Carbon, 2021, 181, 408–420 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Both are the first author and contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
	Seul-Yi Lee received her PhD degree in the Department of Chemistry from Inha University, South Korea (2013) where her research topics included the synthesis and characterization of carbonaceous nanomaterials. She then joined as a Research Associate at the Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science (ICTAS) and the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Virginia Tech (2014–2021) where she worked on mass production of graphene and its derivatives from coal and a variety of applications including thermal managements, biosensors, batteries, and structural applications. She is now working as a Research Scientist in the Department of Chemistry at Inha University. Her current research interests focus on carbonaceous materials and their hybrid composites towards meeting the grand challenges in the areas of energy and sustainability for the future.
	Soo-Jin Park received his PhD in Materials Chemistry from Institut de Chimie des Surfaces et Interfaces, CNRS, France (1992), under the supervision of Professor J. B. Donnet. He joined Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT) as a Principal Research Scientist, Republic of Korea (1996). Currently, he has been a full professor in the Department of Chemistry at Inha University, Republic of Korea, since 2005. His research has focused on the surfaces and interfaces of carbon, ceramic, polymer, and composite materials. In particular, his research group has worked on developing various nanoporous materials and their composites for Energy, Electronics, and Environments.

Broader context
With the rapid growth of the Internet of Everything (IoE) technology, there has been tremendous increasing demand for the next generation of flexible and miniaturized electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices. Flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSCs) have emerged as prime candidates for lightweight, wearable, and portable electronics, because they can perform a great auxiliary role for providing instant-charge to their role for intermittent use and frequent holstering for IoE technology. Further, the FSHSCs are highly attractive due to the superior mechanical flexibility, the satisfactory energy density, their merits of rapid charging rate with the time constant of a few seconds, large cycle life >100000 cycles, economic efficiency, and environmental friendliness. This review highlights the recent research progress in the design and application of FSHSCs for portable and/or wearable devices, classified according to the structures (yarn-, sheet-, and micro-structured types), with an emphasis on their state-of-the-art performance. Also, we discuss the challenges faced by the FSHSCs for expanding their use for future IoE applications.


 	Fig. 1  Conceptual illustration of the supercapacitor-powered Internet of Everything (IoE) technology.	 

 	Fig. 2  The development of supercapacitors based on their electrode materials and the charge storage mechanism (reproduced with permission from ref. 16, © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 3  Total number of published literature studied related to electrode materials for supercapacitors from 2011 to 2021. Search formulation: “supercapacitor”, “carbon, supercapacitor”, “hybrid, supercapacitor”, and “flexible solid state, supercapacitor”, search from Web of Science, as of February 10th, 2022.	 

 	Fig. 4  Taxonomy of supercapacitors.	 

 	Fig. 5  A Ragone plot of the specific energy and power densities of various energy-storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 and 89. © 2019 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co., © 2017 IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustrations of (a) the configuration of typical flexible solid-state hybrid supercapacitors (FSHSC) and (b and c) two types of FSHSC device.	 

 	Fig. 7  Typical device configurations of fiber SCs: (a) two parallel fibers; (b) two twisted fibers; (c) single coaxial fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, © 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Parallel yarn-type FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of the preparation of N-doped MGFs and their practical applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (b) the capacitance retention of the Co-NCFY and the schematic of the assembled FSHSCs and LED powered by the FSHSC devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138 © 2021 Elsevier; and (c) schematic illustration of the FSHSCs and the photograph of the three FSHSCs connected in parallel and series. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 © 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 9  Twistable and coaxial yarn-type structured FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of the electrode structures of conductive KTP sheets with different carbon nanomaterials, fabrication and the cross-section image of the yarn-type single electrode, and a photograph of the biscrolled electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (b) schematic illustration of the rGOF-based yarn-type FSHSC's continuous fabrication process via a roll-to-roll fast reduction process employing a twisting assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141 © 2021 ACS Publications; (c) schematic diagram of the hierarchical and porous rGO/PEDOT/PANI yarn-type FSHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © 2020 Springer; (d) fabrication scheme and images of the NAD/BQ/CNT yarn FSHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 © 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (e) schematics illustrating the synthesis process to prepare the MDC/DWNTY yarn FSHSC and the interfacial shear strength measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144 © 2022 AAAS; (f) cross-sectional views of the CFZHSC device and the textile-based device including TENG, and schematic illustration of the temperature sensor and Bluetooth module incorporated into the textile-based integrated device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145 © 2022 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Sheet-type structured FSHSCs: (a) schematic illustration of organism epidermis based FSHSCs and the synthetic process for plant-root inspired active materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. © 2021 Elsevier; (b) schematic diagram for the synthesis procedure and TEM image of NiCo2O4NSs@HfCNWs/CC, and the electron transportation and ion diffusion mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. © 2020 Elsevier; (c) schematic illustration and TEM image of coral-like PEDOT NT arrays on textile carbon fibers. Reproduced permission with ref. 150. © 2020 ACS Publications; (d) schematic diagram and wearable display of the quasi-solid-state ZIHC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. © 2022 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.; (e) schematic illustration of the stacking pattern of the anode and cathode carbon fiber mat to fabricate a large area energized composite, and the photographs of energized composites powering a toy drone propeller. Reproduced permission with ref. 152. © 2022 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co; and (f) integrated self-charging power system (SCPS) including MoS2 quantum sheet-based FSHSCs along with the schematic illustration of various low-powered electronic applications using the system and the circuit diagram of SCPC with an energy harvester and storage unit. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. © 2022 ACS Publications.	 


Yarn-type cell (1D)
rGO/single-walled carbon nanotubes/cellulose paper	−0.5 to 0.5	H2SO4/PVA	366 (25 mV s−1)	>99 (10000)	
140

Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polyaniline/rGO	0–0.8	H3PO4/PVA	535 (13.4 A g−1)	>99 (10000)	
142

rGO fibers/carbon-coated cellulose paper	−0.5 to 0.5	H2SO4/PVA	240 (100 mV s−1)	>99 (10000)	
141

Fe2O3 nanowires/Ni-coated carbonaceous yarn	−1 to 0	KOH/PVA	263 (10 mV s−1)	88 (10000)	
146

P-Doped GO/carbon fibers	−1.2 to 0	KOH/PVA	315 (0.4 A g−1)	91 (10000)	
139

NiCo2O4/GO/carbon fibers	−0.3 to 0.5	KOH/PVA	465 (0.8 A g−1)	87 (10000)	
139

Polyaniline/carbon nanotubes/graphene	0–0.8	H3PO4/PVA	232 (10 mV s−1)	90 (6000)	
159

Co3O4/porous carbon nanofibers	0–1	H2SO4/PVA	713 (1 mV s−1)	92 (8000)	
138

Double-walled CNT/MOFs	0–1	H3PO4/PVA	151 (1 A g−1)	88 (10000)	
144

CNT fiber/Zn/MOFs	0–1.8	Zn(CF3SO3)2/PVA	58 (100 mV s−1)	99 (10000)	
145

rGO/Ti3C2Tx/poly(diallyldimethylammonium)	1.2–2.4	LiCF3SO3/PMMA	237 (10 mV s−1)	81 (5000)	
160

Sheet-type cell (2D)
NiCo2O4 nanosheets/HfC nanowires/carbon cloth	−0.1 to 0.6	KOH/PVA	2102 (1 A g−1)	98 (5000)	
149

PEDOT nanotube arrays/textile carbon fibers	0–1	H2SO4/PVA	184 (0.5 A g−1)	88 (10000)	
150

NiFe2O4 nanocubes/rGO	−1 to 0.9	KNO3/PVA	488 (1 A g−1)	90 (10000)	
161

CoSi/activated carbons	−0.5 to 0.2	KOH/PVA	453 (0.5 A g−1)	89 (10000)	
162

NiCo2O4/rGO/activated carbon fibers	−0.2 to 0.55	KOH/PVA	1487 (3 mA cm−2)	88 (1000)	
85

PEDOT/mesoporous vanadium nitride arrays/carbon cloth	−1.2 to 0.2	KOH/PVA	226 (1 A g−1)	92 (5000)	
163

Fe3O4 nanoparticles/rGO/carbon cloth	−1.1 to 0	KOH/PVA	406 (1 A g−1)	94 (32000)	
155

Mesoporous Bi2MoO6 nanospheres/activated carbon cloth	0–0.8	KOH/PVA	345 (1 A g−1)	90 (10000)	
164

MnO2/carbon nanofibers/activated carbons/cotton textile	0–1.6	Na+/Na2SO4	130 (0.5 A g−1)	>99 (15000)	
165

WO3/multi-walled carbon nanotubes-coated carbon cloth	−0.6 to 0	LiClO4/PVA	430 (2 mA cm−2)	94 (5000)	
166

Polyaniline nanofiber arrays/GO/carbon cloth	0–1	H2SO4/PVA	743 (5 mV s−1)	90 (2000)	
167

rGO/PANI composites	−0.2 to 0.8	ZnCl2/PAM	198 (1 A g−1)	94 (10000)	
168

rGO/N2H4-graphene	0.3–1.6	Na2SO4/PAM	74 (5 mV s−1)	85 (8500)	
151

Co-hexacyanoferrate/GO sheets	0–2	Na2SO4/PVA	410 (10 A g−1)	99 (10000)	
169


 	Fig. 11  Micro-structured FSHSCs by etching, scribing, and inkjet/screen printing methods: (a) schematic illustration of fabricating the integrated FSHSC device via the laser etching method and the integrated FSHSC-wireless charging system, and the photograph of a car with the device running on the floor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. © 2021 Spring Nature Limited; (b) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the ZnO nanorod/rGO patterns on a PET film via the IR laser etching method and the SEM images of the patterned structure. Reproduced permission with ref. 174. © 2020 Springer Nature Limited; (c) schematic illustration of the fabrication of a flexible FSHSC on an elastomer rubber substrate by the inkjet method and the interdigitated FSHSC incorporated on a wrist worn sweat band for powering fitness monitoring devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. © 2019 Elsevier; (d) schematic illustration of the fabrication of inkjet-printed FSHSCs using aqueous printable MXene/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (MP) hybrid ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (e) schematic illustration of the fabrication of printed FSHSCs by a mask-assisted spray coating method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (f) schematic of the smart contact lens and DIW-based fabrication process of the monolithically integrated FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. © 2019 AAAS; (g) schematic illustration of the screen-printing process using graphene inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. © 2019 ACS Publications; and (h) schematic illustration of the fabrication of screen-printed planar FSHSCs and the solar-charging integrated devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. © 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for 3D printed FSHSCs with a 3D printer, 3D pen, and roll-to-roll production: (a) 3D printed coaxial V2O5/MWCNT-based FSHSC device with the direct coherent multi-ink writing technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. © 2021 AAAS; (b) fabrication of MXene (Ti3C2)@PPy-based FSHSCs using a 3D pen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. © 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (c) thermally drawn FSHSCs by activated carbons, carbon blacks, and PVDF using a 3D printer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.; (d) roll-to-roll process for 3D printing of transparent FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. © 2021 Cell Press; and (e) relationship between required energy for devices and length in FSHSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. © 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co.	 

Etching and scribing
PEDOT/PSS/reduced graphene oxide	0–1	H3PO4/PVA	10 (5 mV s−1)	95 (10000)	
187

NiCo2S4/activated carbon cloth	0–1.6	KOH/PVA	83 (1 A g−2)	82 (10000)	
188

MoS2/MXene film	0–0.8	ZnSO4/gelatine	76 (1 mV s−1)	98 (6000)	
189

Boron carbon nitride	0–1	H2SO4/PVA	273 (2 A g−1)	>99 (10000)	
190

PEDOT/PI-derived graphene	0–1	H2SO4/PC	138 (0.5 A g−1)	98 (4000)	
191

Inkjet and screen printing
MnO2/graphene oxide	0–1	LiCl/PVA	14 (10 mV s−1)	90 (9000)	
192

MnO2/reduced graphene oxide	0–1.8	KOH/PVA	249 (20 mA cm−2)	92 (20000)	
193

Mn3O4 nanosheet/carbonaceous glucose	0–1.3	Na2SO4/CMC	386 (1 A g−1)	93 (10000)	
180

CoS2/Ni3S4/reduced graphene oxide	0–1.5	KOH/PVA	144 (0.5 A g−1)	95 (10000)	
194

MnFe(CN)6/reduced graphene oxide	0–0.8	LiCl/PVA	467 (1 A g−1)	80 (5000)	
195

3D printing
Fe2O3/N-doped hierarchical carbon	0–3.5	EMIMBF4/PVdF-HFP	377 (2 mV s−1)	93 (10000)	
182

V2O5 nanowires/CNT	0–1.6	KOH/PVA	59 (75 mV s−1)	93 (12000)	
183

NiP/Porous graphene	0–1	KOH/PVA	13 (1.5 mA cm−2)	96 (5000)	
196

Graphene oxide aerogel	0–0.8	H2SO4/PAA	56 (0.3 A g−1)	81 (20000)	
23

MnO/carbon nanofiber	0–1.6	LiTFSI/PAN	208 (5 mV s−1)	—	
197

TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibril/CNT	0–0.9	H2SO4/PVA	63 (0.2 A g−1)	65 (20000)	
198

Polyaniline/reduced graphene oxide	0–0.8	H2SO4/PVA	423 (0.8 A g−1)	75 (1000)	
199


 	Fig. 13  Recent industrial trend of FSHSC development and the applications in IoE devices: (a) spatial efficiency of a cable-type FSHSC compared to the traditional cylindrical supercapacitors (Capacitech Energy, Inc.), (b) SOS pendant using a cable-type FSHSC as a power storage cell (Capacitech Energy, Inc.), (c) commercial product of a film-type FSHSC operating a white-light LED (Flexcap Energy, Ltd), (d) advanced supercapacitor-powered EV model of Lamborghini Sián FKP 37 (Automobile Lamborghini S.p.A), (e) a commercial power buffer device using supercapacitors equipped in wireless transmissions for IoT devices (LoRaWan® module), and (f) energy harvester-supercapacitor assembly using film type supercapacitors and solar cells for IoT designs (CAP-XX, Ltd and PowerFilm Solar Inc.). Reproduced with permission from ref. 209, 210, 216, 217, 229 and 233.	 

 	Fig. 14  Main components for the high-performance FSHSCs in IoE applications.	 
Footnote
† Both are the first author and contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
