 In situ transmission electron microscopy study of individual nanostructures during lithiation and delithiation processes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05768G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05768G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20072-20094
In situ transmission electron microscopy study of individual nanostructures during lithiation and delithiation processes

        
          
            Rujia 
            Zou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhe 
            Cui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Liu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Guoqiang 
            Guan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenlong 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanjie 
            He
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jianmao 
            Yang
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Junqing 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: hu.junqing@dhu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: qianliu@dhu.edu.cn
cResearch Center for Analysis and Measurement, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: yangjm@dhu.edu.cn
dChristopher Ingold Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H 0AJ, UK
Received 
      4th July 2017
    , Accepted 23rd August 2017First published on 23rd August 2017AbstractDirect observation of the nanostructural evolution of electrode materials is critical to understanding lithiation and delithiation processes during cycling of batteries. Due to its real-time monitoring and high spatial resolution, in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) plays an important role in understanding the reaction mechanism and dynamic processes in battery materials. This paper reviews the recent progress in using in situ TEM to study individual nanostructures in battery materials using an open-cell design, including for anode materials and cathode materials in lithium ion batteries, and Li–S batteries. Through in situ TEM, the fundamental science and reaction mechanisms, including phase transformations, electrode degradation, size effects, evolution of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) and nanostructures, and electrolyte decomposition of nanomaterial-based electrodes were observed during lithiation and delithiation processes. These characteristics will be very useful to the development of basic guidelines for the rational design of high-performance batteries. Finally, the challenges and perspectives of observing individual nanostructures using in situ TEM during electrochemical processes still need to be discussed and addressed.Rujia ZouRujia Zou is an Associate Professor at Donghua University, China. He received his PhD from Donghua University, followed by postdoctoral research at City University of Hong Kong. He has authored and co-authored more than 110 refereed journal publications and held over 20 patents. His current research focuses on materials phase transformations and structure–performance relationships. He uses in situ TEM as the primary approach and combines all other necessary techniques, including materials synthesis, nanofabrication, and electrical, mechanical, and optical measurements, to develop an atomic level understanding and control of materials processes for nanoelectromechanical systems, energy conversion, and energy storage applications.Junqing HuProf. Junqing Hu received his Ph.D. from the University of Science & Technology of China, in 2000. From 2000 to 2008, he worked at the City University of Hong Kong, and then the National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan. At present, he is a Full Professor at Donghua University, China. He has authored and co-authored more than 250 refereed journal publications and held over 40 patents. His current research interests focus on the synthesis, measurement of properties, and applications of 1D nanostructures.
1. Introduction
With the rising popularity of electric vehicles, increasing energy demand, and imminent climate change, there is significant emphasis on creating sustainable energy sources for the future. To achieve this goal, we need to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and turn to clean, renewable, energy sources such as solar and wind power.1–3 However, these are all intermittent and uncontrollable, and therefore higher demands are being made on the performance of batteries in order to meet the current energy demand. Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have attracted significant attention as they are being considered as the best power supply for storing and releasing energy electrochemically. Unfortunately, conventional LIBs have insufficient energy densities (theoretically, 350–400 W h kg−1 and practically, 100–220 W h kg−1),4 and these typically consist of lithium transition-metal oxide cathodes and graphite anodes. Such a low energy density is unable to meet the high-energy demands of power-intensive applications such as electrical vehicles, large portable electronics, and stationary energy storage in today’s world. In order to meet the increasing requirements of high-energy applications, new materials and chemistries must be developed to achieve high energy density, high power capability, a long lifetime, and cost effectiveness.5–10 With the endeavor of researchers, understanding of LIBs has undergone significant progress, e.g. in terms of understanding the phase transitions, structure expansion/contraction, and surface changes during electrochemical reactions.11–13 However, the relationships between the atomic mechanisms of lithiation and delithiation, size effects, decomposition and degradation, evolution of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), and reaction mechanics of nanomaterial-based electrodes are not well understood.14–17 In order to understand the fundamental science of electrochemical reactions and to improve battery design, it is very important to investigate the reaction kinetics, property responses, and microstructural evolution at the nanometer or atomic scale during battery operation. At present, various in situ techniques for battery studies are being developed, such as optical microscopy,18,19 scanning electron microscopy (SEM),20,21 transmission electron microscopy (TEM),22,23 X-ray diffraction (XRD),24,25 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR),26,27 scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM),28,29 and Raman spectroscopy.30,31 These studies using in situ techniques have provided important understanding of the phase transformations, reaction mechanics, and material degradation during electrochemical reactions in LIBs. However, these techniques are difficult to use to provide useful information, with real-time monitoring and high spatial resolution, about the morphological evolution of nanostructure growth during electrochemical reactions.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been developed as a powerful and essential tool for nanomaterial and micromaterial characterization with atomic resolution, and has been significantly enhanced and developed in recent years. However, conventional TEM studies have focused only on structural characterization under vacuum because of technical feasibility. Recently, an in situ TEM combined with TEM-scanning tunneling microscopy (TEM-STM) holder offered exceptional opportunities for monitoring the dynamic processes of various electrode materials, in real-time, during electrochemical reactions at a high spatial and temporal resolution.32–37 Depending on the experimental set-up of the nanobattery, the structural changes of the electrodes or the interface between a liquid electrolyte and a solid electrode can be observed during lithiation and delithiation cycles. This can bring new observations of reaction processes to light and provide a deep understanding of the fundamental properties of a new electrode material in LIBs. The development of the in situ TEM characterization also benefits from the technology of the TEM instrument combined with electron energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS), which have assisted many discoveries in dynamic materials processes at the atomic level by providing reliable chemical information during electrochemical reactions. In conclusion, techniques based on in situ TEM investigation are ideal tools to study the issues of electrochemical reactions within battery materials.
In this paper, we review recent progress in the in situ TEM of individual nanostructures during electrochemical reactions in LIBs (including anode materials, cathode materials, and Li–S batteries) using an open cell design. The reaction mechanism and dynamic processes occurring during lithiation and delithiation cycles can be visualized at high spatial resolution in real-time, and new discoveries and scientific implications (including reversible volume expansion, structural/morphological damage, phase transformations, etc.) were discussed from the in situ results to explore new electrode materials for advanced LIBs. Finally, we conclude and provide a future outlook by outlining the challenges and potential roles that in situ TEM can play in understanding the electrochemical processes in LIBs.
2. A nanobattery setup within in situ TEM
For in situ TEM studies of electrochemical processes, usually two forms of battery, either with the closed liquid-cell or open-cell configuration, are feasible to probe the structural, morphological, chemical and mechanistic evolution of materials during electrochemical reactions. However, each configuration has its own advantages and disadvantages.38 The open-cell configuration can offer high spatial resolution imaging and real-time analytical capabilities in order to understand the Li ion insertion processes and mechanisms. Therefore, the open-cell configuration is often selected for the investigation of the intrinsic structural changes and responses of materials to Li ion insertion and extraction. Huang et al. have successfully created a nanobattery for the first time using an open-cell configuration inside a TEM, which differs from the conventional sealed liquid-cell configuration.39Fig. 1 shows a schematic illustration of the open cell configuration with the nanobattery setup using a TEM-scanning tunneling microscopy (TEM-STM) holder, which can allow a direct study on the structural changes and evolution of individual nanostructured materials (including nanowires, nanoparticles, or nanosheets) at atomic resolution in real-time. For in situ TEM studies of electrode materials for LIBs, the key components of the nanobattery with an open-cell design include electrode materials (a positive and negative electrode), an organic liquid electrolyte, a Li source (e.g. a metallic Li discharged cathode), and conductive substrates (such as Cu and Au conductive probes). The electrode materials are decorated on the conductive probe, and a small piece of Li source with the electrolytes is attached to the tip of the opposite conductive probe using the TEM-scanning tunneling microscopy (TEM-STM) holder. By operating a piezoelectric motor on the TEM-scanning tunneling microscopy (TEM-STM) holder, the electrode materials come into contact with the Li source, and a bias voltage is arranged to drive Li ions to go through the electrolyte towards electrode materials to form the nanobattery. However, the most important technical obstacle is to present a proper electrolyte with a high vacuum level at 10−5 Pa into the TEM column. In most cases, due to a high vapor pressure the liquid electrolytes in LIBs, such as PC and DME, cannot be used directly in the TEM column. Currently, two types of open-cell configuration have been designed in order to solve the issue of electrolytes. In the first method, liquid electrolytes at a particularly low vapor pressure are dropped onto a Li source material to solve the issue of vapor pressure at a high vacuum level, as shown in Fig. 1a.40,41 In the other method, a thin solid Li2O electrolyte layer is used, which is easily formed on metallic Li when it is exposed to air for a very short period, as shown in Fig. 1b.42,43 The advantage of the open-cell configuration is that it allows the recording of structural changes and the observation of the evolution of individual nanostructured materials at atomic-scale resolution in real-time, and it is possible to concurrently acquire atomic-scale compositional analysis during the lithiation and delithiation process.44–50 Furthermore, the structural and chemical analyses required to verify the elemental distribution or binding energy, EELS, SAD, and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), are also more possible during or after lithiation and delithiation due to the unblocked position of the samples. Thus, many new phenomena and reaction mechanisms have been directly visualized and proposed for the intrinsic understanding of electrochemical reactions, and these will contribute to the improved design of electrode materials for high-performance LIBs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of an in situ TEM electrochemical reaction study using the open-cell configuration. (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ experimental setup on individual nanomaterials using an ionic liquid electrolyte. (b) Schematic diagram of the in situ experimental setup on individual nanomaterials using the solid electrolyte Li2O. The open-cell configuration may be adapted for studies such as the anode, the cathode, Li–S or other electrode materials in the nanobattery. 
3. Lithiation and delithiation of anode materials
The selection of electrode materials closely relates to their crystal structure, physical properties (specific capacity, thermal stability, mechanical stability, electrical conductivity, etc.), chemical properties (intercalation, conversion, reversibility) and many other factors.51,52 Nanomaterials of electrode materials can allow continuous electron conduction, shorten the diffusion distance of electrons and Li ions, and accommodate Li-induced stress.53,54 Thus, many electrode materials are constructed using nanomaterials, which show high power density, high energy density, and a long cycle life in LIBs.55–57 A great number of mechanistic studies on anode materials have improved the structure design and allowed performance enhancement using in situ TEM.58–60 On the basis of this knowledge, we will classify the discussed innovative anode materials in three main groups, using nanobattery setups, depending on their Li-ion battery performances and reaction mechanism: (1) intercalation/de-intercalation electrode materials, such as carbon nanotubes, porous carbon, graphene, TiO2, etc.; (2) alloy/de-alloy electrode materials, such as Si, Sn, Ge, SnO2, etc.; (3) conversion electrode materials, such as transition metal oxides (FexOy, CuO, MoO2, etc.), and metal sulphides (Co3S4, CuS, etc.).
3.1 Intercalation reaction mechanisms
Carbon materials with various morphologies have been recognized as appropriate anode materials for LIBs due to their advantages, such as ease of availability, stability in thermal, chemical, and electrochemical environments, low cost, and low volumetric change and structure degradation during lithiation and delithiation.61,62 Currently, commercialized graphite is the most widely used anode material for LIBs, but it cannot satisfy the requirements for high energy density batteries due to its relatively low theoretical specific capacity (372 mA h g−1).63 Recently, the capacity of CNTs and graphene was found to be higher than that of graphite due to their abundant active sites and unique physical properties.64,65In situ TEM on carbon nanomaterials is becoming a feasible characterization tool to understand the behavior inside electrodes using very direct structural and chemical evolution. As shown in Fig. 2, Liu et al. introduced the embrittlement of a multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) after lithiation and delithiation cycles.66 After lithiation for a few minutes, the surface of the MWCNT was coated with a thin Li2O layer with a thickness of around several nanometers, as shown in Fig. 2a and b. After delithiation, the thin Li2O layer still existed, which indicated the possible formation of a stable SEI layer on the MWCNT in the first cycle for LIBs.67 Due to the lithiation-induced effects, the MWCNT becomes brittle, and easily broke, with sharp crack edges under pressure (as shown by the white arrowhead), as shown in Fig. 2c and d. The lithiation-induced embrittlement phenomenon is ascribed to the mechanical effect of a “point-force” function caused by the intertubular Li that brings on the stretch of carbon–carbon bonds and applied strain, in addition to the carbon–carbon bond was weakened due to the chemical effect of electron transport from Li to the antibonding π orbital. The combined chemical and mechanical weakening brings on a significant decrease of the fracture strain in lithiated MWCNTs. Besides, the side walls of the MWCNT became distorted, and the interlayer spacing of MWCNTs increased from 0.34 to 30.36 nm (Fig. 2e–g) after lithiation. These results provide direct evidence and understanding of the degradation mechanism of MWCNT anodes in LIBs.
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM image showing the side contact between a MWCNT and the Li2O/Li electrode during the lithiation process. (b, c) The MWCNT was bent due to compression during the lithiation process. (d) A lithiated MWCNT brittle fracture under tension. (e) and (f) show EDP images of MWCNTs before and after lithiation. (g) A HRTEM image of a lithiated MWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright ACS 2011. 
Not all of the carbon materials became brittle due to the insertion of Li ions; the lithiated graphene nanoribbons showed robust mechanical properties, as reported by the Huang group.68,69Fig. 3 shows the typical deformation and structural evolution of few-layered graphene nanoribbons during lithiation processes (5–8 layers). Upon lithiation, the surface of the graphene nanoribbons was also coated by a thin Li2O layer (Fig. 3d and e). The thin Li2O layer also cannot be completely removed after the delithiation process, which indicated the formation of the stable SEI layers on graphene nanoribbons in the first cycle. The spacing between the sheets increased from 0.335 to 0.359 nm after complete lithiation (Fig. 3c and f), corresponding to an expansion of about 7.2%. Interestingly, the lithiated graphene nanoribbons were shown to be mechanically robust using tension and compression tests, as shown in Fig. 3g and h. During the compression test, the lithiated graphene nanoribbon gradually bent and buckled (Fig. 3g). However, the morphology and shape of graphene nanoribbon was almost fully recovered when the Li2O/Li electrode was drawn back into its original location, even after many compression/release cycles. The graphene nanoribbon was mechanically robust after lithiation, which is markedly different to the easy and brittle fracture of MWCNTs after lithiation. The mechanically robust nature of lithiated graphene nanoribbons is attributed to the weak coupling between the layer and layer deformations in the graphene nanoribbons of planar carbon layers. This is markedly different to the cylindrically confined MWCNTs, where the large tensile hoop stresses inside the closed carbon layers after interlayer lithium insertion bring about the ease of brittle fracture. These results indicate that mechanically robust graphene nanoribbons or graphene is definitely an excellent material for LIBs, as well as a stable scaffold.
 Fig. 3  (a) A TEM image showing the GNR. (b) The GNR with a clean surface. (c) An EDP image of a GNR. (d, e) TEM images showing lithiated GNR with the same morphology at a different magnification. (f) An EDP image of lithiated GNR. (g) The lithiated GNR bent under compression. (h) The lithiated GNR almost recovered to the original morphology after the mechanical load was removed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright Elsevier 2012. 
TiO2 is also a very promising intercalation reaction material for LIBs due to the abundance of raw materials, its chemical stability, non-toxicity, and low price.70 Gao et al. have reported the lithiation mechanism, and structural and chemical evolution of amorphous TiO2 nanotubes (a-TNTs) during the lithiation process, as shown in Fig. 4.71 Fully lithiated, partially lithiated, and unlithiated regions of the a-TNT are shown in Fig. 4a–c. Initially, lithium ions are facilitated from the Li2O/Li electrode to the surface of a-TNT, and then lithium ions intercalate into the nanotube, and this causes valence reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ leading to a LixTiO2 intercalation compound. The phase transformation of a-TNTs from amorphous to crystalline though atomic rearrangement by the increasing of the lithium ion concentration after the lithiation of the nanotube (Fig. 4d). This brings about the formation of crystalline islands of cubic structured Li2Ti2O4 in the amorphous LixTiO2 matrix. This phase transformation is related to local inhomogeneities in the Li ion distribution. The volume expansion of the a-TNT can be only 3% after full lithiation, and this shows excellent stability characteristics. In addition, a single-crystal rutile TiO2 nanowire was also investigated using in situ TEM by Kim et al.72 They have confirmed the theoretical prediction about the formation of an intermediate (monoclinic) phase, though full lithiation in fact corresponds to yet another phase of rock salt. This discovery is of great importance as it is direct experimental proof that rutile TiO2 nanostructures undergo a two-step lithiation process with an increasing Li-mole fraction in LixTiO2.
 Fig. 4  In (a) the TiO2 nanotube is fully lithiated, in (b) the TiO2 nanotube is partially lithiated and in (c) the TiO2 nanotube is still in the pristine state. (d) Shows the a schematic illustration of the TiO2 nanotube at various stages during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright ACS 2014. 
3.2 Alloy/de-alloy reaction mechanism
LIBs based on conventional intercalation electrode materials have played a critical role in enabling the widespread availability of consumer electronics and the emergence of electrical transportation, however, intercalation-type electrode materials will reach their performance limit in the near future.73 Significant advancements in battery performance are expected to come from different storage mechanisms at the materials level to fulfil the power demand of high energy consuming devices, to power electric vehicles and HEVs. Hence, the specific capacity is the fundamental parameter to be considered for novel anode active materials. The anode materials that build on the alloy/de-alloy reaction mechanism, such as, Si, Ge, Sn and SnO2, are of particular interest due to their high theoretical capacities and improved discharge potentials.74,75 Their specific theoretical capacity ranges from 783 mA h g−1 for SnO2 up to 4211 mA h g−1 for Si.76,77 Even though these alloy based materials can provide a larger specific capacity than graphite, the major drawback is the poor cycling life owing to the high volume expansion/contraction during cycles, causing a large irreversible capacity in the charge and discharge cycles. The first research work based on the alloy/de-alloy mechanism was the in situ TEM observation of an individual SnO2 nanowire anode, achieved by Huang et al. in 2010.39 However, Si possesses a capacity of 4200 mA h g−1, which is about ten times that of conventional graphite anode.78,79 Although many papers have reported lithiated LixSi phases and constantly improving cycling performance during the last decade, there is still a lack of fundamental understanding of some important issues during the Si lithiation reaction, such as the mechanical effects associated with the electrochemical lithiation process, what are the partially lithiated and fully lithiatied phases for Si during the lithiation process, etc. Using in situ TEM provided direct visualization and evidence of unprecedented material behaviors and reaction mechanisms of Si in real-time on the atomic scale.80–85 Since Si is representative of most alloy/de-alloy materials anodes in LIBs, the information gained from Si electrode materials provides valuable insights for the optimization of other alloy/de-alloy material anodes with enhanced performance.

3.2.1 
            In situ lithiation of Si nanowires. 
Electrochemical insertion of Li into crystalline Si will inevitably lead to the formation of amorphous LixSi, corresponding to electrochemical reaction induced solid state amorphization. Fig. 5 shows the charging process of the Si nanowire.86 During lithiation, the nanowire diameter expanded immediately (marked by the red arrows). The lithiation front not only propagated longitudinally along the nanowire axis direction, but also proceeded progressively along the nanowire radial direction, i.e., from the end of nanowire to another end of nanowire, and from the surface of nanowire to the center of the nanowire (Fig. 5a). As shown in Fig. 5b and c, the original Si nanowire and lithiated Si nanowire established that the single crystalline Si (c-Si) nanowire was partially changed into an amorphous LixSi (a-LixSi) alloy, seen from the electron diffraction patterns (EDPs). As lithiation time increases, the diameter of the c-Si core decreased while the diameter of the a-LixSi shell increased (Fig. 5d). After full lithiation, the total volume expansion of the Si nanowire was about 300%, which is close to the theoretical volume expansion from the single crystalline Si changing into amorphous LixSi during the lithiation reaction.
 Fig. 5  (a) A series of time-lapse TEM images showing the morphology change during the charging process. (b) and (c) EDP showing Si nanowire before and after the charging process. (d) TEM images showing the partly lithiated Si nanowire in a core–shell structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright ACS 2011. 
The lithiation rate of the Si anode is a critical factor of the rate performance in LIBs. However, the lithiation speed of the Si nanostructures is not constant, due to insufficient electron transport or the low electrical conductivity of the Si material.86,87 Usually, the lithiation is fast in the initial state, and slows down afterwards. Even after a prolonged charging time, a residual c-Si core inside a-LixSi was usually observed, possibly due to the poor electrical conductivity of the c-Si and sluggish electron/Li diffusivity, which constrains the extent of the lithiation reaction within the Si core. In such a case, this issue can be solved by C-coating or doping to create electron deficiencies throughout the whole Si nanostructure, which allows the complete lithiation of Si nanostructures. For example, Liu et al., studied intrinsic, P-doped, C-coated, and C-coated P-doped silicon nanowires.86 They discovered that the average speeds were about 2.3, 20.5, 27.5, and 117.4 nm s−1 during the lithiation process for the four different samples. The charging rate was obviously increased by the improved electronic conductivity from concurrent carbon coating and doping. Therefore, in order to reach the optimum lithiation rate and fully utilize the active Si, efficiently increasing the conductivity of the Si anode is very important.
The high capacity of Si active materials is accompanied by significant volume expansion (∼400%) due to the Li-ion reaction with Si, which can induce great stress that causes cracking and pulverization of Si anodes. In order to obtain a high electrochemical performance from the Si anode, a fundamental understanding of the structural and phase changes of various Si nanostructures during the lithiation and delithiation processes is required. Huang’s group detected that a Si nanowire in the [110] direction exhibits a dumbbell-shaped cross-section after lithiation, as shown in Fig. 6a.88 The unique dumbbell-shape can be caused by a different swelling rate along the crystal orientation. During lithiation processes, Li insertion rates in the [110] direction of the Si nanowire is obviously faster than those along the [111] direction Si nanowire, which causing a larger stress along [110] direction than that along the [111] direction on Si nanowires, as shown in Fig. 6b. As a result, the diameter of the Si nanowire along the [110] direction increases by over 200%, but the length along the [111] direction increases by less than 10% after full lithiation. In addition, the stress of the volume change of the Si nanowire leads to anisotropic swelling, causing the formation of the dumbbell-shaped morphologies of Si during the lithiation process. The anisotropic swelling suggests that, in Si nanostructures, the reaction kinetics of the lithiation process are determined by the reaction rate at the interface rather than by the diffusion of Li through the lithiated phase. Furthermore, the significant volume expansion will lead to cracking or fracture of the particle during cycling of Si, which shows particle size dependent lithiation behavior.89,90 A critical diameter of about 150 nm was found for Si nanoparticles by Liu et al.89 The Si nanoparticle anode showed a size expansion after becoming fully lithiated, which lead to the cracking or fracture of the particle via tensile hoop stress. The tensile hoop stress is caused by volume changes as diffusion directs lithium ions from the surface (a-LixSi shell) to the core of the Si nanoparticles. Interestingly, when the Si nanoparticles’ diameter was less than 150 nm, the Si nanoparticles showed robust properties, and no cracking or pulverization was observed during the lithiation process, as shown in Fig. 6c. As shown in Fig. 6d, the thickness of the a-LixSi shell’s anisotropic expansion changes gradually as the lithium ions diffuse from surface to core, and then the Li15Si4 nanostructure is obtained after full lithiation. Unlike the large particles, the tensile hoop stress from small particles is slight, and does not lead to cracking or pulverization of lithiated Si nanoparticles. However, when a large tensile hoop stress in short time was generated by fast reaction rate, the small Si nanoparticles will crack or pulverize, since there is not enough time to release the large tensile hoop stress in the a-LixSi surface. McDowell et al. also studied a-Si sphere during the lithiation and delithiation processes, and found special phenomena compared to the c-Si sphere.90 No cracking or pulverization in the surface of a-Si particles was found during the lithiation process, even when the diameters of a-Si particles were up to 870 nm, and these show a lower tensile hoop stress of a-Si nanoparticles than c-Si nanoparticles.
 Fig. 6  (a) A lithiated silicon nanowire showing anisotropic volumetric expansion causing it to form a dumbbell-shaped cross section. (b) 3D simulation of a progressively lithiated nanowire showing the development of the dumbbell-shaped cross section along the longitudinal direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright ACS 2011. (c, d) Electrochemical lithiation of two different sizes of Si nanoparticles with and without fracture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright ACS 2012. 


3.2.2 Coating effects on lithiation and delithiation of Si nanomaterials. 
The volume expansion and strain change induced by lithium insertion/extraction hinder the excellent stability and high energy density of many electrode materials, thus coating has become a key method to resolve the decreasing capacity and controlling volume expansion and strain change induced by lithiation, improving the cycle stability for many high energy density electrode materials. At present, various coatings are extensively used in composite material structure design for batteries, in order to enhance the cycling stability and capacity performance,91–94 however the mechanism and structural changes caused by the coating during electrochemical reactions need to be further monitored and studied. Pristine silicon nanomaterials normally have amorphous SiOx layers on the surface from the application of different synthetic methods. This layer is insulating by nature and may block the electron conduction that is necessary for lithiation. SiOx coating layers have recently been carefully studied for the effects of the Si nanomaterials on the lithiation behavior using in situ TEM.95,96 For example, the surface oxide SiOx layers transformed to Li2O and LixSi after lithiation. These Li2O islands can provide routes for electron conductivity.95 Wang et al. detailed studied the volume expansion of amorphous-Si nanotubes during electrochemical reactions, with different thicknesses of SiOx coating layers. They found that the inner surface of the amorphous-Si nanotubes was not undergoing inward expansion during the lithiation process of a-Si nanotubes with SiOx layers.96 Compared to this, with increasing the thickness of the SiOx coating on the outer surface of a-Si nanotubes, inward expansion will be induced, which reduces the overall outward expansion of the lithiated a-Si nanotubes. Our group have a detailed study on the design of SiOx effects on Si-void@SiOx nanowires and demonstrated that the outer surface of the robust SiOx backbone in Si-void@SiOx nanowires appropriately suppresses the volume expansion and leads to anisotropic swelling morphologies of Si nanowires during lithiation and delithiation.97 The top touches between one end of Si-void@SiOx nanowires and the Li/Li2O were studied during the lithiation and delithiation processes, as shown in Fig. 7a. The SiOx coating layer was first lithiated to form LiySiOx according to the electrochemical reaction mechanism of SiO2 with lithium ions.98 Then, lithiation propagated to the Si nanowire, and the reaction front (or touch point) propagated progressively along the axis of the nanowire. Intriguingly, the surface of the Si nanowire facing the hollow space was first lithiated, and the lithiation reaction was observed to gradually transfer from the contact with the hollow surface to the contact with SiOx surface during the lithiation process. After complete lithiation, the Si nanowire inside the Si-void@SiOx nanowire was completely amorphized to form a-LixSi by the lithiation reaction; the a-LixSi filled the entire hollow space inside the Si-void@SiOx nanowire. No cracking or fracture appeared during the whole lithiation reaction process, suggesting a key effect of the SiOx coating layer and void structure of the Si-void@SiOx nanowire of the lithiation process. The side contacts between the lateral Si@SiOx for the Si-void@SiOx nanowire and the Li/Li2O showed the same phenomenon, as shown in Fig. 7b. Based on the results of in situ experiments, a resilient and mechanically strong SiOx coating layer after lithiation and delithiation acts as a mechanical confinement that buffers the volume change and leads to anisotropic swelling morphologies of Si during the lithiation process. The resilient and robust SiOx coating layer is much better than a very hard or thick coating layer due to its effect of impeding the lithiation reaction or fragments during the lithiation process,99,100 resulting in a low volume expansion and high reversible capacity.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM images showing the tip contacts between the top of the Si-void@SiOx nanowire and the Li/Li2O during the lithiation process. (b) TEM images showing the side contacts between the side of Si-void@SiOx nanowire and during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2017. 
Carbon materials are widely used as conductive coating films in electrode materials, and have a variety of structures such as, tubes, wires, particles, and even 2D and 3D graphene.101,102 Carbon coating films on the Si surface has been used quite extensively in experiments aimed at achieving good cycling performance. Gu et al., have a detailed study on the lithiation processes of a composite of Si nanoparticles embedded in a carbon fiber, shown in Fig. 8.103 Lithiation of the composite of Si nanoparticles embedded in a carbon fiber leads to destruction and cracking of the carbon coating materials, as shown in Fig. 8a. Apparently, the carbon fiber was cracked in two places (as indicated by the arrows). The cracking direction of the carbon fiber is observed to be along the direction of the longitudinal fiber. As compared to the surface of the attached Si particles, the lithiation process of Si particles embedded in the carbon fiber was delayed (Fig. 8b and c). The same phenomenon as the amorphous silicon-coated carbon nanofiber (a-Si/CNF) composite has been also discovered by Huang’s group. The lithiation process of the a-Si coating layer occurred from the surface of the a-Si/CNF interface, and then propagated towards the center of the a-Si layer.104 Despite the high mechanical strength of the carbon coating layer, lithiation of the embedded Si nanoparticles can lead to the destruction and cracking of the carbon coating layer. The destruction and cracking of the carbon fiber owing to the volume expansion of the embedded Si nanoparticles following charge/discharge cycles will cause the disorder of the electron transmission path of the composite, leading to the performance degradation of the batteries. In addition, although embedding Si nanoparticles without space for volume expansion of Si during lithiation will lead to an excellent electrical contact among the particles and the carbon coating layer, the paused lithiation and cracking of the carbon coating layer will be certainly be damaging to the capacity retention and high charging rate of the battery. As the result of 2 years of research, Liu et al. designed silicon pomegranate composite structures, where an individual Si nanoparticle is encapsulated by a thin conductive carbon layer that provides enough space for the expansion and contraction of the Si nanoparticle during lithiation and delithiation processes.105 As a result, as electrode materials, silicon pomegranates composite structures can provide high areal capacitance and good capacity retention in supercapacitors, in which the areal capacity is even increased to the level of commercial LIBs.
 Fig. 8  (a) The morphological evolution of the particles attached to and embedded in the CNF during the lithiation process. (b) The embedded particles are delayed as compared with the particles attached to the CNF surface during the lithiation process. (c) The embedded particles in CNF lead to cracking of the CNF during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright ACS 2012. 
The observed lithiation behavior and structural evolution of the Si nanoparticle in a hollow carbon shell may drive improved designs of nanocomposite electrode materials based on Si and carbon. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have drawn intense attention for use as the anode material of LIBs, due to their hollow morphology, good electrical conductivity, high mechanical strength, and structural flexibility.106,107 Yu et al. designed Si nanoparticle (NP) filled carbon nanotubes synthesised via chemical vapor deposition.108 Due to the formation of a LixSi phase and the accompanying volume expansion, the size of the Si NPs obviously increased after lithiation, as shown in Fig. 9a. Typically, a volume expansion of ∼180% for the Si NPs (indicated by red arrows) is observed (Fig. 9b). The volume expansion of Si NPs during lithiation is restricted due to the mechanical confinement. The stress induced by lithiated Si NPs within CNTs may slow down and limit further lithium diffusion and result in an incomplete lithiation of the encapsulated Si NPs by forming LixSi (x < 3.75). Besides, due to the expansion of the Si NPs and the insertion of Li ions into the carbon layers, the diameter of the CNTs expanded from 49 nm to 56 nm after electrochemical lithiation, while the hollow tubular structure of the CNT was well preserved and there was no breakage due to its high mechanical strength and good flexibility (Fig. 9c and d). These results indicate that CNTs effectively restrain the lithiation-induced swelling and exfoliation of the Si NPs inside them.
 Fig. 9  Low-magnification TEM images of the (a) pristine and (b) lithiated Si nanoparticle filled CNT showing an obvious expansion of both the silicon nanoparticles and the CNT upon lithium insertion. HRTEM images of the Si nanoparticle filled CNT (c) before and (d) after lithiation, showing an increase of the angle between the carbon layers and tube axis the lithiation. The insets in (c) and (d) are Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) of the Si nanoparticles, indicating the existence of amorphous Si and LixSi before and after lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright ACS 2015. (e) Graphene-Si nanoparticles attached to the surface of Au wire and a second Li/LiO2 electrode. (f) The same graphene-Si nanoparticles after lithiation. (g) A schematic summary of lithiated graphene coated Si nanoparticles for both defective and non-defective cases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright Nature group 2015. 
Graphene, as another novel carbon material with a high charge carrier mobility, high theoretical surface area, high mechanical strength, and structural flexibility, has also been widely utilized to improve Si anodes.109,110 Many researchers have studied the electrochemical processes in Si nanoparticles coated by graphene using in situ TEM to understand the effects of graphene sheets on volume expansion, ion transport, and phase transformations of Si during lithiation.111,112 Li et al. reported the lithiation process of the cages of multilayered graphene-encapsulated Si microparticles.113 The graphene cage acts as a mechanically strong and flexible buffer during deep galvanostatic cycling, allowing the microparticles to expand and fracture within the cage while retaining electrical connectivity on both the particle and electrode level. Son et al. introduced the idea that graphene layers coated on the surface of Si accommodate the volume change of Si by the sliding process between adjacent graphene layers.114 After lithiation, the particles began to swell (Fig. 9e). Interestingly, two types of volume expansion were observed, namely defective particles and non-defective particles, as shown in Fig. 9f and g. In the cases of non-defective particles, where the Si particle was fully encapsulated by graphene and has no obvious defects, the volume expansion of the Si particle was about 220% after lithiation. Meanwhile, the interlayer distance of the graphene layers has obviously increased from 0.35 to 0.38 nm after Li intercalation. However, the Si nanoparticles were preserved by the layered characteristics of the graphene coating, and the Si nanoparticles become destroyed or cracked, suggesting a sliding protection process from graphene between the layers, as illustrated in Fig. 9g. However, just the opposite happened in the cases of defective particles. At the end of lithiation, the volume expansion of the Si particle swelled; the Si particle coated by graphene was damaged and cracked through the defect (Fig. 9g). As seen in the results below, the coating layer with the layered characteristic of graphene allows interlayer sliding upon volume expansion of the Si particle as well as being a highly conductive percolating network, resulting in an excellent capacity retention and high volumetric energy density for Si anodes in LIBs.
Metallic coating is another way to increase the electronic conduction of nanostructured Si. The metallic coating species should not react with Li and electrolyte, but metallic coating can result in a more stable electrolyte interface with fewer side reactions. McDowell et al. have studied in detail the effect of copper coating of Si on the volume expansion and morphological changes during lithiation and delithiation.115 Tensile hoop stress causes conformal copper coatings to fracture during lithiation without undergoing bending deformation. In addition, a copper coating plays a role in suppressing volume expansion during lithiation. This study’s results suggest that metallic coatings can be used to improve rate performance and to restrict or manage the volume expansion of the Si anode during charge/discharge process. Conductive polymers are resilient during the cycling of anode materials and efficiently provide a conductive pathway to all of the anode materials, as compared with metallic coatings. Recently, using a conductive polymer binder to encapsulate the anode materials has been shown to be a more efficient way to increase cycling stability and capacity. He et al. used in situ TEM to probe the functional mechanism of alucone coated silicon particles upon electrochemical cycling.95 Upon lithiation, the alucone coating becomes more conductive. The alucone coated Si nanoparticles show “balloon-like” fast and highly reversible lithiation behaviors due to the fast Li+/e− conductivity and mechanical resilience of the alucone coating, as shown in Fig. 10. In contrast to the insufficient delithiation in SiOx coated Si particles, the alucone coated Si particles show no pore formation and sufficient delithiation to irregular shaped amorphous Si. The electrical and mechanical benefits provided by the alucone coating improve the cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the battery. Gu et al. also revealed that the improved cycling performance of Si materials using a conductive polymer coating.116 Due to the reversible accommodation of the conductive polymer, volume changes between the Si and conductive polymer still allows good electrical contact during the expansion–contraction process. In contrast, the electrical contact between conventional Si materials and conductive carbon can fail, causing resistance increases in batteries. These results will be guide us in the design of new functional composites to obtain excellent performance as new electrode materials.
 Fig. 10  Schematics of surface reactions and cycling behaviors of silicon nanoparticles under different coating conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright ACS 2014. 


3.2.3 Other alloy/de-alloy materials. 
From what has been discussed above, the structural changes and volume expansion, the effects of coating films, element doping, and electrical conductivity during lithiation of crystalline Si structures have been commonly demonstrated, and this can function as a guide for other alloy/de-alloy materials. Over the past few years, other anode materials with the alloy/de-alloy reaction mechanism, such as Ge, Sn, SnO2, have been researched in detail during lithiation and delithiation cycling using in situ TEM.117–125 Despite the same reaction mechanism for alloy/de-alloy materials, a few problems are specifically different to Si materials in the electrochemical lithiation and delithiation cycling using in situ TEM. For example, Huang’s group reported, in detail, the lithiation and delithiation process of individual Ge nanowires,126,127 which showed different electrochemical characteristics compared to Si electrode materials. Firstly, the single crystalline Ge nanowire was gradually converted to an amorphous LixGe nanowire, from the Ge nanowire surface towards the center, during the lithiation process, as shown in Fig. 11a. After the delithiation process, the diameter of the nanowire has obviously increased. Simultaneously, the amorphous LixGe nanowire was gradually converted to a single crystalline nanowire, as shown in Fig. 11a–e. They noted that the volume expansion of Ge nanowires occurs in an axisymmetric manner in the radial directions during the lithiation process. This suggests that though they have the same growth direction and crystal structure as Si nanowires, the volume swelling of Ge nanowires due to the lithiation process showed quite small anisotropy compared with the Si nanowires. Secondly, reversible nanopores were generated to form a nanoporous amorphous Ge sponge inside individual Ge nanowires during lithiation and delithiation processes, as shown in Fig. 11f–k. Finally, the three dimensional network of the nanoporous amorphous Ge sponge is quite stable after multiple lithiation and delithiation cycles.
 Fig. 11  (a–e) The changes of morphologies of a Ge nanowire shown via a series of time-lapse TEM images during the lithiation process. (f–h) The changes of morphologies of a Ge nanowire shown in high magnification images at the same place . (i–k) EDPs showing the reversible phase transformation between the c-Li15Ge4 (lithiated) and a-Ge (delithiated) phases after the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright ACS 2011. 
SnO2 has also been extensively studied as an alloy/de-alloy material due to a high theoretical capacity.128,129 After lithiation, lithiation induces a transformation of the SnO2 into amorphous Li2O and nanocrystals of LixSn alloy.39 There is a large volume change (about 240% expansion) for this conversion reaction, which is primarily manifested as a lengthening of the nanowire. In order to accommodate the large radial expansion, about 45%, a high density of dislocations are nucleated at the c-SnO2/a-Li2O interface. These dislocations eventually terminate at the c-SnO2 surface about one to two nanowire diameters from the interface. The dislocation density is high enough to cause amorphization of the SnO2 near the reaction interface. Delithiation of the anode leads to the loss of Li from the LixSn nanocrystals, but no reduction of the a-Li2O. The volume change following delithiation is small. In a subsequent study, the application of coatings to the SnO2 NWs, in the form of carbon, aluminum, or copper, greatly alter the morphology and defect structure following lithiation.130 These coatings improve the electrical conductivity of the NWs, increasing the lithiation rate by about 3–12 times compared to that of the non-coated NWs and suppressing both the radial expansion and the generation of dislocations at the SnO2/Li2O interface. These results suggest that composite materials can be engineered to have remarkably different performance than the monolithic structures.

3.3 Conversion reaction mechanisms
The electrochemical reaction mechanism in conversion reactions involving these compounds together with lithium, implies the reduction (oxidation) of the transition metal along with the composition (decomposition) of lithium compounds (LixNy; here N = O, S and N) during lithiation and delithiation processes. Due to the participation of a large number of electrons in the conversion reactions, anode materials based on these compounds exhibit high theoretical capacities (500–1000 mA h g−1).131,132 Unfortunately, for the same reasons as the conversion materials, the unavoidable issues, for instance, the huge volume change, the large voltage hysteresis, and the low coulombic efficiency, affect the performance of the whole battery. Consequently, investigating their mechanisms and structural and chemical evolution during lithiation processes using in situ TEM is regarded as a vital step to better regulating and enhancing the performance.133–138

3.3.1 Metal oxides. 
Magnetite (Fe3O4) is one of the common metal oxides, and a promising candidate for an anode material due to it being inexpensive and non-toxic.139 The phase evolution of Fe3O4 in real-time at a high spatial resolution during the lithiation process is discussed in depth by He et al., as shown in Fig. 12.140 The dynamical phase evolution was monitored during the entire lithiation process (Fig. 12a and b). Both the intensity and position of the Bragg reflections obviously change during the lithiation process, which verifies the phase transformation from Fe3O4 to the Fe and Li2O composite. However, remarkably, the Bragg peaks of the Fe3O4 phase present a negative shift in reciprocal space during the initial stage of lithiation, corresponding to an increase in the lattice parameter of the Fe3O4 lattice by the insertion of Li+ ions (Fig. 12c). This lattice parameter increase is quantitatively consistent with the phase transition from Fe3O4 to LiFe3O4. The lattice expansion becomes more obvious as the reaction time increases, which indicates that the subsequent lithiation was through the conversion reaction from Fe and Li2O. Consequently, the first intercalation step follows the reaction generated the lithium-inserted LixFe3O4 phase. These regions will be further lithiated in the next conversion reaction, which is also accompanied by the extrusion of ultrafine metallic Fe nanoparticles to form a composite with the amorphous Li2O. Su et al. also observed the dynamic behaviors and the conversion mechanism of Fe2O3/graphene during the lithiation process.141 A single-crystalline Fe2O3 nanoparticle was observed to transform into a multi-crystalline nanoparticle composite consisting of many Fe nanograins embedded in a Li2O matrix. Interestingly, the delithiated product is found to be FeO instead of Fe2O3. The irreversible phase conversion could be due to the tired electrocatalytic activity of FeO compared with Fe nanograins.
 Fig. 12  (a) A series of time-lapse BF-STEM images showing phase evolution during lithiation: pristine Fe3O4 (red), Li-inserted LixFe3O4 (blue) and Fe + Li2O composite after conversion (green). Scale bar, 20 nm. (b) The projected areas of the three phases as a function of time. (c) The propagation speed of intercalation and conversion as a function of time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright Nature group 2016. 
CuO has also attracted particular interest as one of the promising metal oxide anode materials due to its high theoretical capacity (670 mA h g−1), low cost, and it being environmentally friendly.142 Su et al. reported detailed information on the phase and structural evolution of the lithiated CuO nanoparticles on graphene using a graphene layer as a stable scaffold.143 During the first lithiation, the surfaces and edges of the CuO nanoparticles were coated with thin shells in Fig. 13a, which were identified to be Li2O using electron diffraction (ED) analysis (Fig. 13c). From the HRTEM image of a lithiated CuO nanoparticle (Fig. 13b), it can be found that many Cu nanograins of 2–3 nm were formed in the lithiation process, which confirms the formation of Cu nanograins in the lithiation process. The dark contrast spots of Cu nanoparticles formed a connected network in the Li2O matrix, which suggests that the lithiation reaction involves the conversion of CuO to Cu nanograins along with the formation of Li2O. The newly formed Cu network can work as an efficient conductive pathway for electron transport into the CuO nanoparticle, while the Li2O provides a similar pathway for Li+ ions (Fig. 13d). During the first delithiation, the delithiated CuO nanoparticle became smaller in diameter. The volumetric expansion ratio of the first delithiated nanoparticle to the pristine one is 1.06, indicating an irreversible change in size (Fig. 13e and f). Interestingly, the ED pattern of the first delithiated nanoparticle, with the appearance of obvious rings, corresponds to Cu2O. This indicates a conversion from Cu into Cu2O rather than CuO after the first delithiation. Besides, several Cu nanograins aggregated and electrochemically converted to a single Cu2O nanograin after the first lithiation process. After the second lithiation process, the sizes of Cu nanograins are much larger than the Cu nanograins in the first lithiation (Fig. 13g and h). However, the nanograins in the fourth cycle show a similar size distribution as that in the third cycle, suggesting a stable conversion between Cu and Cu2O nanograins after the second cycle. This indicates that the CuO electrode undergoes a more reversible microstructural evolution after the second lithiation and delithiation cycle, which is beneficial for stable electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM images of CuO/graphene after lithiation. (b) A high magnification TEM image recorded from a lithiated CuO nanoparticle. The red circles indicate the formation of Cu grains. Inset of panel (b) is a HRTEM image of the Cu nanograins. (c) The ED pattern of the lithiated CuO. (d) A schematic illustration of the reaction front in a single CuO particle and the pathway for Li+ ions and electron transport. (e and f) The first lithiated and delithiated CuO nanoparticle. The size of a pristine CuO nanoparticle is about 120 nm. (g and h) The second lithiated and delithiated CuO nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright ACS 2015. 
These new findings of the importance of the evolution of phase and the mechanism was obtained during the lithiation process using in situ TEM and provide valuable guidance to improve the materials design in order to obtain excellent electrochemical performance for other metal oxide materials with conversion reaction mechanisms, e.g., ZnO,134,135 MoO3,144,145 Co3O4,146,147 and CeO2.148 For example, Li et al. found that lithiation of binary metal oxides proceeds with two typical mechanisms: insertion and conversion.145 Li intercalation in layered α-MoO3 leads to the formation of crystalline Li2MoO3 in the early stage of lithiation, and further Li insertion coverts LixMoO3 to metallic Mo and amorphous Li2O. The intercalation process is thermodynamically more favorable and is accompanied by a minor volumetric change, while the conversion reaction is kinetically slow and induces a large deformation. Su et al. revealed that Co3O4 transforms into many Co nanograins embedded in a Li2O matrix during the first lithiation.146 The subsequent electrochemical charge and discharge processes are established to be a reversible phase transition between CoO nanograins and Co nanograins. Pores within the Co3O4 nanoplates can accommodate the volume change, and benefit the stability of electrode and thus the electrochemical performance. Besides, Su et al. also found direct evidence that CeO2 nanoparticles showed volume, phase, and structural changes,148 while detailed analysis revealed a fully reversible phase transformation between fluorite CeO2 and cubic Ce2O3 during the lithiation and delithiation process.


3.3.2 Metal sulfides. 
Metal sulfides are considered as prominent candidates for high specific capacity LIBs due to higher electrical conductivity, thermal and mechanical stability, and richer redox chemistry than those of their corresponding metal oxides.149,150 Unfortunately, the low Li ion diffusivity and high volume change in the metal sulfides limits the high specific capacity during the lithiation and delithiation processes. To realize high areal capaciy of metal sulfides, many research scholars at home and abroad designed new electrode materials to increase their areal capacity and capacity retention for LIBs using in situ TEM studies. Cu’s group researched the structural and morphological transformations of Cu2S when it reacted with Li.151Fig. 14a is an image of Cu2S before reaction with lithium. In Fig. 14b the reaction process has started, and copper is being ejected and is accumulating as copper metal on the surface of particle 1. In Fig. 14c and d, the copper domain on the surface of particle 1 grows larger, and a new copper metal domain forms at the edge of particle 2 as copper is removed from this particle. Fig. 14e–g reveals the movement of a reaction front across particle 3 as copper is partially removed from this particle. Interestingly, the ejected copper metal is not deposited on the surface of particle 3, but instead it appears that the copper ions diffuse from particle 3 through the other particles to join with the already formed copper metal domains. In Fig. 14h, the reaction is complete, and the remaining copper has been ejected from particle 3 to form small copper domains attached to the surface of the newly formed Li2S particle. The transformation pathway during the reaction of the Cu2S crystals with lithium is quite different than that during the reaction of Co3S4 or FeS2 described in this article, according to in situ TEM investigations.151 For Cu2S, copper metal is extruded out of the crystal during the formation of a single Li2S domain, rather than forming the nanoscale mixture of Li2S and metal nanoparticles, while for Co3S4 and FeS2 the reaction with lithium results in a nanoscale mixture of Li2S and cobalt or iron nanoparticles.
 Fig. 14  A series of time-lapse TEM images of a group of larger Cu2S nanocrystals during lithiation. (a) A TEM image of three Cu2S crystals before lithiation. (b) The reaction with Li begins, and copper metal begins to form on the surface of particle 1 as copper is removed from this particle. (c, d) The copper metal domain on particle 1 grows larger, and copper is also removed from particle 2 to form a domain on the edge of this particle. (e–g) A reaction front (marked by arrows) sweeps across particle 3 as copper is partially removed from this particle to join with the already-formed copper metal domains on the other particles. (h) The remaining copper is ejected from particle 3 to form a multitude of copper metal domains on the surface of the particle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright ACS 2015. 
Su’s group discussed the detailed structural and phase transformations of Co9S8/Co fully filled closed and open CNTs during the lithiation and delithiation processes.152 For a Co9S8/Co nanowire filled closed CNT (Fig. 15a), the reaction started gradually from the front of the Co9S8/Co nanowire filled closed CNT during lithiation, causing the CNT to expand gradually. Owing to the existence of a short Co portion, the CNT shows intermittent swelling. Due to the mechanical strength of the carbon cap generated suppression stress, axial elongation is small, and radial directions have significant expansion. After becoming completely lithiated, a single-crystalline Co9S8 nanowire inside a CNT changes to a multi-crystalline nanowire consisting of a mixture of numerous Co nanograins embedded within a Li2S matrix, while the multi-crystalline nanowire is still restricted inside the CNT. In contrast, the lithiated filled Co9S8/Co nanowire elongates due to due to the large volume expansion from the single crystalline Co9S8 nanowire to a multi-crystalline nanowire consisting of a mixture of numerous Co nanograins embedded within a Li2S matrix during Li insertion, and the multi-crystalline nanowire is extruded out of the CNT while still keeping a similar diameter to that of an open CNT (Fig. 15b). Therefore, low radial expansion and large axial elongation for electrode materials made with filled open CNTs is found, which is notable for their electrochemical performance for LIBs during cycling. These results reveal that the electrode materials made from filled CNTs with closed ends are very beneficial for maintaining their original shape and decreasing the volume expansion during lithiation and delithiation cycles.
 Fig. 15  A schematic illustration of a Co9S8/Co-filled CNT with closed ends (a) and an open end (b) during the electrochemical lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright ACS 2013. 
Various other metal sulfides, showing a conversion reaction mechanism with lithium, have also been studied using in situ TEM. For instance, Chen et al. have obtained the reaction mechanism of FeS nanosheets during lithiation and delithiation processes.153 The FeS nanosheets converted to Fe nanoparticles of 2–3 nm embedded within a Li2S matrix after the first lithiation. Then the Fe and Li2S transformed into Li1.13FeS2 instead of FeS during the first delithiation. The reversible phase conversion between Fe/Li2S and Li1.13FeS2 dominated the following cycles. In order to find out the mechanism of carbon coating, the lithiation process of Fe–S nanoparticles filled inside a CNT has presented some interesting phenomena.154 During lithiation, the Li ions easily move along the CNT wall in the tube axis direction of Fe–S@CNT due to the open ends or structural defects of the CNTs, and then undergo an electrochemical reaction with pristine Fe–S nanoparticles in the CNT. As time passes, Li ions can transport from the Fe–S nanoparticle on interface of the CNT to the Fe–S nanoparticles on the inner surface of the CNT, resulting in the volume expansion of the Fe–S nanoparticles via Li reaction. Due to the high mechanical strength of the CNT, the lithium reaction speed is very slow at the Fe–S/CNT confinement interface compared with at the free surface. After full lithiation, the size of the Fe–S nanoparticles inside CNT increased due to Fe–S reacting to form nano-Fe and Li2S. Although volume expansion can be observed, the lithiated Fe–S nanoparticles showed no obvious cracks or fractures, and the Fe/Li2S compound is still confined in the CNT due to high mechanical strength and structural flexibility of the CNT, exhibiting a stable electrode structure after the electrochemical lithiation reaction.

4. Lithiation and delithiation of cathode materials
In the LIB techniques, the development of new electrode materials has been identified to be a key factor for their further advances. As discussed above, various anode materials have been substantially studied and great progress has been made in recent years. For instance, Si-based nanostructures showed much improved capacity and superior cyclability, e.g., a high specific capacity of ∼1200 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 97% after 1000 cycles has been achieved.15 Unfortunately, the capacity and cell voltage are determined by the cathode material in current LIB technology, as well as limiting Li transportation rate. The development of cathode materials with high specific capacity is severely lagging behind that of the anode materials; this has become extremely crucial for power-intensive energy storage applications of LIBs and has received much attention in recent decades.155–157 However, in order to implement the commercialization of cathode materials in LIBs, new cathode materials with a high energy/power density, high coulombic efficiency and long cycle life are required to be designed and developed. However, new cathode materials with high energy/power density, high coulombic efficiency and long cycle life seriously depend on structure/surface reconstructions, phase transitions, lattice expansion/contraction, and Li transition during electrochemical cycling. Therefore, understanding the structure–property relationships for each component and their synergistic behaviors using in situ TEM during electrochemical processes is essential for the design of new battery cathode materials.
Recently, in situ TEM studies have become an important approach to the study of the Li insertion/extraction in layered materials, and can obtain new information on structure/surface reconstructions and phase transition of the intercalation cathode materials.158,159 Due to advantages of being environmentally friendly, low cost, and having a good safety record, the spinel lithium manganese oxide (LiMn2O4) crystal is considered as one of the most promising cathode materials for LIBs.160 Lee et al. used a single LiMn2O4 nanowire with the [110] direction of the spinel cubic structure as the cathode, as shown in Fig. 16.161 A series of SAED patterns were observed during charge/discharge cycles. The SAED patterns came from a thin ILE layer coated on the LiMn2O4 nanowires at the area marked by a red circle, as shown in Fig. 16a. Before the charging process, the LiMn2O4 nanowire was in the cubic phase with the [110] direction, as shown in Fig. 16b. After the charging process, the cubic phase of the LiMn2O4 nanowire did not change (Fig. 16c). However, the cubic structure of the LiMn2O4 nanowire changed from the cubic phase to the tetragonal phase after the discharging process, as shown in Fig. 16d. Finally, the tetragonal phase of the LiMn2O4 nanowire recovered from the tetragonal phase to the cubic phase again in the next charging process (Fig. 16e). So, they found that the structure of LiMn2O4 nanowires was changed reversibly between the cubic and tetragonal phases during charging and discharging processes. In addition, due to the ILE covered nanowire surface, an orthorhombic layer was formed on the LiMn2O4 nanowire. The orthorhombic layer on the nanowire can release strain and mediates the transformation between the cubic and tetragonal phases during charging and discharging processes, which is important to avoid cracks or fractures appearing during the whole lithiation reaction process. That they witnessed a reversible phase transformation without cracks or fractures appearing during the whole lithiation reaction process supports the idea that LiMn2O4 nanowires are promising for high-performance batteries as a cathode material.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of a single LiMn2O4 nanowire before the lithiation process. The observation area is marked by a red circle. (b–e) SAED pattern of the LiMn2O4 nanowire during charge/discharge cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright ACS 2013. 
Nanostructured LiFePO4 (LFP) electrodes are also considered to be one of the most promising cathode materials for LIBs. Niu et al. used in situ TEM techniques to investigate the LFP nanowire electrode kinetics to obtain information on the solid solution zone (SSZ) during the lithiation process.162 A Li sublattice disordered SSZ quickly forms from the sharp LFP and FePO4 (FP) interface, and then reaches the size of 10–25 nm × 20–40 nm. The size of the SSZ, about 20 nm, is very stable and is maintained for hundreds of seconds at room temperature. Through different from the sharp interface that was studied,163,164 the wide SSZ shows no dislocations, which are considered to contribute to the high rate performance of the LiFePO4 cathode material. Besides, it is also observed that this disordered SSZ could control the phase transformation behavior of the cathode material during the lithiation process, even at high charging rates. These observations from in situ TEM confirm the presence of a Li-sublattice disordered SSZ under dynamic conditions, allowing a more accurate understanding and control of the SSZ, which may lead to improved electrochemical performance of cathode materials.
Vanadium oxides attract attention as cathode materials due to their intriguing advantages as a cathode material, such a high capacity, abundance in the earth’s crust and being of low cost.165,166 However, volume expansion/contraction of the V2O5 occurs during cycling, which leads to the solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) layer breakdown on the V2O5 surface, leading to poor cycling stability and low capacity. Our group reported a novel composite structure of V2O5 nanoparticles encapsulated in a 3D networked porous carbon matrix coated on carbon fibers (V2O5/3DC-CFs) to solve the problem of SEI layer breakdown.167 A schematic showing the configuration of in situ TEM observation for Li+ insertion and extraction processes is shown in Fig. 17a. Fig. 17b depicts the pristine V2O5/3DC composite before Li+ insertion processes. For the V2O5 nanoparticle at the edge of the composite (marked by the blue circle), discernible structural changes of V2O5 nanoparticles can be observed during Li+ insertion processes (Fig. 17c–e). A thin SEI layer could be observed after discharging for only a short time (Fig. 17c), and the thickness of SEI layer increased gradually during Li+ insertion processes. In a sharp contrast, no obvious SEI layer could be observed on the V2O5 particles within the 3DC structures (marked by the red circle), as demonstrated in Fig. 17f–h. During delithiation, the V2O5 nanoparticles slightly shrank in size, and the whole structure of the V2O5/3DC composite remained unchanged after delithiation finished, as shown in Fig. 3i. Interestingly, even after 10 lithiation and delithiation cycles (Fig. 17j), the V2O5 nanoparticles inside the matrix still had no obvious SEI layer formed on its surface (red circle), possibly due to the fact that the electrolyte only contacted with the outer surface of the robust ensemble of 3DC-CFs and did not access the inner pores of the 3DC structure. These observations suggest that the engineered 3DC structure can provide an electrolyte blocking layer to decrease significantly most of the direct SEI formation on the V2O5 nanoparticles inside 3DC structure, and thus lead to superior cycling performance of the composite.
 Fig. 17  (a) A schematic showing the configuration of in situ TEM observation during charge/discharge cycles. (b) TEM images of the pristine V2O5/3DC composite before lithium insertion. The red and blue circles indicate the V2O5 nanoparticles inside and at the edge of the 3DC matrix, respectively. (c–e) Morphological evolution of the V2O5 nanoparticles at the edge of the matrix during the Li+ insertion processes at 1, 5, and 20 min, respectively. (f–h) Morphological evolution of the V2O5 nanoparticles inside the 3DC matrix during the Li+ insertion processes at 1, 5, and 20 min, respectively. (i and j) TEM image of the V2O5/3DC composite after Li+ extraction processes in the first and tenth cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2017. 
5. Lithiation/delithiation in Li–S batteries
Sulfur is a promising cathode material for the next generation of lithium batteries with a high theoretical capacity of 1675 mA h g−1, which is two or three times higher than that of current LIBs. Besides, sulfur is naturally abundant, environmentally friendly, and inexpensive, which implies that Li–S batteries should be cheaper than current LIBs.168,169 However, sulfur suffers from a series of several serious problems due to compositional, phase and structural changes during cycling, involving large volume expansion/contraction during discharging–charging, the formation of soluble polysulfides and insoluble sulfides, and being electronically insulating.170 In order to fundamentally understand the several serious problems influencing the performance of Li–S batteries, it is important to obtain the electrochemical reaction mechanism of the S cathode during the charging and discharging processes using in situ TEM technology. Sulfur is sensitive to the electron beam due to the fact that S has a relatively low vapor pressure, therefore, a protective layer is fixed to the outside of the S to protect the S from radiation damage and high vacuum conditions in the TEM during the charge/discharge processes. CNTs are widely selected for high-rate and stable Li–S batteries due to their excellent electrical conductivities for fast electron transport and excellent mechanical flexibility able to accommodate the volume expansion and mitigate polysulfide diffusion. Kim et al. researched, in detail, the electrochemical reactions of S-filled CNTs.171Fig. 18 shows three selected TEM images of the S-filled CNT samples during the lithiation process and their corresponding EDP patterns. Initially, only a uniform crystalline phase of S partially filled the hollow CNT (Fig. 18a and d). During the lithiation process, the filled S inside CNT obviously changed from a dark to a light phase (Fig. 18b and c). The light region is a polycrystalline Li2S phase, as discovered from EDP patterns (Fig. 18e and f). As the lithiation process proceeds, all of the S inside the CNT was transformed to Li2S as observed by the obvious contrast seen from the TEM monitoring. Surprisingly, the EDP patterns demonstrate the possibility of a direct conversion of S into Li2S without the formation of soluble polysulfide phases (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8) in commonly used electrolytes during the lithiation process, which is beneficial to increase the utilization of S active materials in order to improve cycling stability. Yang et al., designed a carbon-coated sulfur material to gain a better understanding of solid-state Li–S batteries.172 During the lithiation process, the phase separation phenomenon of S/Li2S is obtained in the solid-state Li–S battery. This phase separation phenomenon is not only beneficial to reduce the diffusion distance but also provides an interface network between S and Li2S, which is favorable for the Li+ and electron diffusion during the lithiation process. In addition, both the pattern and EELS data also suggest the direct transformation from S into Li2S for carbon-coated sulfur materials without a measurable intermediate product of soluble polysulfide phases (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8), which is obviously different to that previously reported from the liquid Li–S batteries. These findings could provide valuable insights and give useful suggestions to the design of novel materials structures of solid-state Li–S batteries. Currently, fewer publications have been reported in the fields of Li–S batteries using in situ TEM due to S having a relatively low vapor pressure.171–173 The interest of in situ TEM technology is that it should offer opportunities for discovery and provide a better fundamental understanding of the electrochemical reactions of Li–S batteries. An in-depth understanding of the mechanism may provide new insights into how to improve the power density, cycle life, and commercialization of Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 18  (a–c) TEM images of S filled into a CNT during lithiation process and (d–f) their corresponding EDP patterns: panels (a) and (d) correspond to the sample before the initiation and panels (c) and (f) after the completion of the electrochemical reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2015. 
Due to sulfur having many technical challenges (e.g. highly soluble lithium polysulfides and volume changes), Li2S electrode materials instead of sulfur is a very popular idea in recent years, and this can overcome the disadvantages of sulfur in order to obtain a high capacity and excellent stable cycling performance.174–176 Tan et al., studied the evolution of Li2S/graphene in a nanocapsule configuration using in situ TEM.177Fig. 19a shows the evolution of the Li2S@graphene particle during the lithiation and delithiation processes for real-time observation, with a bias of 3.0 V. The diameter of the Li2S@graphene particle was around 430 nm before delithiation. The volume shrinking of Li2S@graphene particle was observed, and diameter was reduced to 395 nm (∼20%) after the first delithiation (Fig. 19b). During the following cycles (Fig. 19c–g), the particle size varied via volume shrinking/swelling between 390 and 405 nm, showing a small volume variation of ∼10%. Such low volume variation is beneficial to the structural stability of the Li2S@graphene, which brings on good cycle performance. In contrast, the Li2S particle without a graphene coating shows a severe structural variation during the lithiation and delithiation process, which leads to quick capacity fading due to decomposition and mass loss of the Li2S particle. In addition, the electrochemical behavior of the Li2S@graphene particle was investigated at a high rate (a larger bias of 6.0 V) during the lithiation and delithiation process. Surprisingly, the Li2S@graphene particle can still maintain a good structural stability for around dozen cycles, which guarantees the good electrochemical performance of Li2S@graphene at high rates.
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of a Li2S@graphene particle before any charge/discharge cycles. (b–g) The Li2S@graphene particle evolution through in situ TEM observation after different delithiation and lithiation cycles at an operating potential of 3 V. The size of the Li2S@graphene particle is indicated by dashed green lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright Nature group 2017. 
6. Conclusions and perspectives
With the recently urgent requirements in developing new electrode materials for high capacity Li batteries, development of in situ TEM technologies has received much research attention, as they are able to monitor the interrelated effects of phase transformations, volume expansion/contraction, and stress evolution, and are able to provide dynamic observation of these materials during cycling. In this review, we give a summary of the recent progress of individual nanostructures using in situ TEM for studying lithiation and delithiation process, including for anode materials, cathode materials, and S materials. It is now possible to realize atomic scale observations or the electrochemical processes and mechanical responses, such as effects due to the critical factors of size, geometry, the coating layer, the distribution of elements, interface structure, evolution of SEI layers, etc., for many new electrode materials. These phenomena have obviously increased the fundamental understanding of the dynamic structural and chemical evolution of electrode materials during electrochemical behaviors, and this is useful to the development of basic guidelines for the rational design of electrode materials for high-performance batteries.
The summary in this review has illustrated the great assistance of studying electrochemical with in situ TEM, but many topics are as yet unstudied in this field. Some important research areas and key challenges using in situ TEM are detailed here for future work.
(1) The electrolytes need to be precisely developed. First, although low vapor pressure ionic liquid electrolytes and a solid electrolyte of a thin Li2O layer are used as electrolytes in batteries, there is a great difference from the typical liquid electrolytes (such as PC and DME) in LIBs. Second, it has been noted that only very small amounts of ionic liquid or solid electrolyte are involved in the reaction at the contact points between electrode materials and electrolytes. Results from in situ TEM indicated that there were some differences from practical electrochemical behavior in LIBs. Third, in order to obtain TEM images at a high spatial resolution, the thickness of the electrolyte layer needs to be optimized. The spatial resolution has an obvious decrease when the thickness increases, making it difficult to get many details during charge and discharge process, such as the lithiation mechanisms, distribution of elements, interface structure, interface chemistry, evolution of SEI layers, etc.
(2) The distance between the Li-source electrode and the electrode material in the TEM can be shortened. In the real battery, the distance between the Li-source and the electrode material is generally controlled to the tens of micrometer range. So, attachment of the Li-source electrode and electrode material on conductive substrates (such as Cu and Au conductive probe) should be developed to decrease the distance for electrochemical tests using in situ TEM using open-cell configuration.
(3) The effects of the electron beam on the electrolyte and electrode materials need to be removed. Damaged electrode materials and electrolytes are inevitable in in situ experiments although all the HRTEM images were recorded at a low electron-beam. To resolve the concern of the electron beam effect, the electron beam needs to be weak enough for the radiation-induced destruction effect on the electrode materials and electrolytes to be minimized and removed. Otherwise, it will be difficult to get many details on the electrochemical mechanism evolution of the electrode materials using in situ TEM, and will only be able to obtain what happens to electrode materials during lithiation and delithiation processes.
(4) New in situ techniques should be developed in order to obtain more information about real batteries. First, the electrochemical behavior evolution of the electrode materials captured uing in situ TEM only reflects a short cycle study of an electrochemical system. Thus, electrochemical data or evolution for a large number of cycles of electrode materials lacks a direct evidence from an in situ nanobattery. Second, studying the evolution of SEI layers during the electrochemical processes is a key factor for improving the electrochemical performance of electrode materials. At present, those experiments using in situ TEM are mostly suited for investigating the structural and phase evolution of electrode materials, but it is different to obtain the evolution of the SEI layers due to the lack of development under the exact same conditions as in the real battery or the effect of electron-beam during electrochemical cycles. Third, the development of the in situ TEM characterization combined with more characterization technologies and manipulation platforms would enable more information to be obtained from an individual nanostructure or nanocomposite, such as changing the temperature and using in situ S/TEM. This information can be expected to serve as a guide for designing high power density, high energy, long life, and safe electrochemical storage devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51672044, 51472049 and 51602049), the Shanghai Pujiang Program (Grant No. 16PJ1400200), the Shanghai Sailing Program (Grant No. 17YF1400300), the Program Innovative Research Team in University (IRT_16R13), the DHU Distinguished Young Professor Program, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. We thank Dr Kaibing Xu for smoothing some grammatical errors in the manuscript.
References
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Grey and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 45 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
D. D. Vaughn II and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2861 RSC .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, D. P. Wang, X. Rui, B. Liu, K. Zhou, A. W. Law, Q. Yan, J. Wei and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Wang, H. J. Tang, L. J. Zhang, H. Ren, R. B. Yu, Q. Jin, J. Qi, D. Mao, M. Yang, Y. Wang, P. R. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. R. Wen, L. Gu, G. H. Ma, Z. G. Su, Z. Y. Tang, H. J. Zhao and D. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16050 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Tan, F. Wu, Y. F. Yuan, R. J. Chen, T. Zhao, Y. Yao, J. Qian, J. R. Liu, Y. S. Ye, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathiya, A. M. Abakumov, D. Foix, G. Rousse, K. Ramesha, M. Saubanère, M. L. Doublet, H. Vezin, C. P. Laisa, A. S. Prakash, D. Gonbeau, G. VanTendeloo and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, D. Y. Ren, H. F. Wang, Y. J. Hu, S. J. Guo, H. Y. Yuan, P. Hu, L. Zhang and C. Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Shon, H. S. Lee, G. O. Park, J. Yoon, E. Park, G. S. Park, S. S. Kong, M. S. Jin, J. M. Choi, H. Chang, S. Doo, J. M. Kim, W. S. Yoon, C. Pak, H. Kim and G. D. Stucky, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Cheng, T. Z. Hou, R. Zhang, H. J. Peng, C. Z. Zhao, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. N. Deng, H. Jiang, Y. J. Hu, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, H. L. Liu and C. Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603020 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Lin, Y. Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, J. Sun, H. T. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. D. Angelis, E. D. Fabrizio, R. P. Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Wu and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 435 CAS .
M. Arakawa, S. Tobishima, Y. Nemoto, M. Ichimura and J. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosso, C. Brissot, A. Teyssot, M. Dolle, L. Sannier, J. M. Tarascon, R. Bouchetc and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, S. Indris, M. Schulz, B. Gamer and R. Mönig, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
F. Orsini, A. Du Pasquier, B. Beaudoin, J. M. Tarascon, M. Trentin, N. Langenhuizen, E. De Beer and P. Notten, J. Power Sources, 1998, 76, 19 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Luo, H. Yang, P. F. Yan, J. J. Travis, Y. Lee, N. Liu, D. M. Piper, S. H. Lee, P. Zhao, S. M. George, J. G. Zhang, Y. Cui, S. L. Zhang, C. M. Ban and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Yang, Z. Y. Zhu, J. Ma, D. H. Xiao, X. Kui, Y. Yao, R. C. Yu, X. Wei, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and X. X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600806 CrossRef .
M. Balasubramanian, X. Sun, X. Q. Yang and J. McBreen, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 1 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, H. Y. Chen, X. Yu, L. Wu, K. W. Nam, J. Bai, H. Li, X. Huang and X. Q. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7170 RSC .
R. Bhattacharyya, B. Key, H. L. Chen, A. S. Best, A. F. Hollenkamp and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Key, R. Bhattacharyya, M. Morcrette, V. Seznec, J. M. Tarascon and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. Xin, K. He, J. C. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, Y. Q. Cheng, K. B. Yin, J. Luo, A. Sharafi, J. Sakamoto, J. C. Li, K. L. More, N. J. Dudney and M. F. Chi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kong, R. Kostecki, G. Nadeau, X. Song, K. Zaghib, K. Kinoshita and F. McLarnon, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 58 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Hardwick, P. W. Ruch, M. Hahn, W. Scheifele, R. Kotz and P. Novak, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Shen, M. Y. Ge, L. L. Luo, X. Fang, Y. H. Liu, A. Y. Zhang, J. P. Rong, C. M. Wang and C. W. Zhou, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhong, X. H. Liu, C. M. Wang, G. F. Wang, S. X. Mao and J. Y. Huang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 248302 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Luo, B. L. Zhao, B. Xiang and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Kang, D. Yau, W. Yu, W. Y. Li, Z. Y. Zhang, X. Yang, T. W. Ng, R. J. Zou, Y. B. Tang, W. J. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10146 RSC .
R. J. Zou, Z. Y. Zhang, M. F. g. Yuen, M. L. Sun, J. Q. Hu, C. S. Lee and W. J. Zhang, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e195 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, L. P. Wang, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. Liao, P. Sutter, K. H. Liu, D. P. Yu and E. G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wang, J. Mater. Res., 2015, 30, 326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Y. Fan, L. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kushima, X. H. Liu, G. Zhu, Z. L. Wang, J. Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Li, P. Wang, Q. Feng, M. M. Mao, J. B. Liu, S. X. Mao and H. T. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4102 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, S. L. Zhang, T. Zhu, J. Li and J. Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 722 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu and J. Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3844 CAS .
X. Y. Ma, W. Luo, M. Y. Yan, L. He and L. Q. Mai, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 165 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, F. F. Fan, J. W. Wang, H. R. Wang, S. Y. Tao, A. Yang, Y. Liu, H. B. Chew, S. X. Mao, T. Zhu and S. M. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Xia, Q. B. Zhang, F. Xu, H. Y. Ma, J. Chen, K. Qasim, B. H. Ge, C. Y. Zhu and L. T. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5861 CAS .
K. Cao, M. Kuang, Y. X. Zhang, J. B. Liu, H. T. Wang and L. Meng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 79, 36 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Yang, Z. Y. Zhu, J. Ma, D. H. Xiao, X. Kui, Y. Yao, R. C. Yu, X. Wei, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and X. X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600806 CrossRef .
D. Leblanc, C. M. Wang, Y. He, D. Bélanger and K. Zaghi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, Z. G. Wang, J. G. Connell, D. E. Perea, L. J. Lauhon, F. Gao and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sheng, Y. F. Xu, Y. X. Jiang, L. Huang, N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, I. Broadwell and S. G. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, T. Y. Tang and Y. L. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600374 CrossRef .
Y. M. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. H. Chen, Z. F. Ma, F. Pan, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. David, R. Bhandavat, U. Barrera and G. Singh, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Sun, G. Q. Xin, T. Hu, M. P. Yu, D. L. Shao, X. Sun and J. Lian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4526 CAS .
Y. M. Chen, X. Y. Yu, Z. Li, U. Paik and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600021 Search PubMed .
D. N. Qian, C. Ma, K. L. More, Y. S. Meng and M. F. Chi, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e193 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Xiao, M. Gu, H. Yang, B. Li, C. M. Zhang, Y. Liu, F. Liu, F. Dai, L. Yang, Z. Y. Liu, X. C. Xiao, G. Liu, P. Zhao, S. L. Zhang, C. G. Wang, Y. F. Lu and M. Cai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Zheng, S. W. Lee, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, K. Yan, H. B. Yao, H. T. Wang, W. Y. Li, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Myunga, K. Amineb and Y. K. Sunc, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 219 CrossRef .
M. M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250 RSC .
B. Guo, X. Wang, P. F. Fulvio, M. Chi, S. M. Mahurin, X. G. Sun and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lahiri, S. W. Oh, J. Y. Hwang, S. Cho, Y. K. Sun, R. Banerjee and W. Choi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Zheng, X. H. Liu, S. Huang, T. Zhu, J. Wang, A. Kushima, N. S. Hudak, X. Huang, S. Zhang, S. X. Mao, X. Qian, J. Li and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Kim, M. Kojima, H. Muramatsu, S. Umemoto, T. Watanabe, K. Yoshida, K. Sato, T. Ikeda, T. Hayashi, M. Endo, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, Small, 2006, 2, 667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, J. W. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Zheng, A. Kushima, S. Huang, T. Zhu, S. X. Mao, J. Li, S. L. Zhang, W. Lu, J. M. Tour and J. Y. Huang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3836 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, F. Ding, B. I. Yakobson, P. Lu, L. Qi and J. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Dylla, G. Henkelman and K. J. Stevenson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, M. Gu, A. M. Nie, F. Mashayek, C. M. Wang, G. M. Odegard and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1660 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, S. Y. Noh, A. Kargar, D. L. Wang, G. W. Grahama and X. Q. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9932 RSC .
H. W. Lee, Y. Z. Li and Y. Cui, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2016, 12, 37 CrossRef .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ko, P. Oh, S. Chae, W. Cho and J. Cho, Small, 2015, 11, 4058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, R. Qi, J. T. Zai, F. H. Du, C. Xue, Y. Jin, C. Y. Jin, Z. F. Ma and X. F. Qian, Small, 2016, 12, 5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, W. Yuan and G. Liu, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 193 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414 CrossRef CAS .
P. Warrier and C. A. Koh, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 040805 Search PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, I. Ryu, S. W. Lee, C. M. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wang, X. L. Li, Z. G. Wang, W. Xu, J. Liu, F. Gao, L. Kovarik, J. G. Zhang, J. Howe, D. J. Burton, Z. Y. Liu, X. C. Xiao, S. TVE hevuthasan and D. R. Baer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, N. Liu, M. McDowell, Y. Jin, Y. Cui and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 620 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, A. Kargar, D. L. Wang, G. W. Graham and X. Q. Pan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6929 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. H. Liu, B. M. Nguyen, J. Yoo, J. P. Sullivan, S. T. Picraux, J. Y. Huang and S. A. Dayeh, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. D. Lu, N. Liu, H. W. Lee, J. Zhao, W. Y. Li, Y. Z. Li and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, H. Zheng, J. W. Wang, J. H. Cho, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, J. P. Sullivan, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, F. F. Fan, H. Yang, S. L. Zhang, J. Y. Huang and T. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Zhong, S. Huang, K. Karki, L. Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, W. T. Liang, J. W. Wang, J. H. Cho, E. Epstein, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, T. Zhu, J. Li, J. P. Sullivan, J. Cumings, C. S. Wang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye, S. L. Zhang and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, L. Zhong, S. Huang, S. X. Mao, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel, C. M. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, Y. J. Hu, S. J. Guo, C. Y. Yan, P. S. Lee and C. Z. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Agyeman, K. Song, G. H. Lee, M. Park and Y. M. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600904 CrossRef .
W. Y. Li, Y. B. Tang, W. P. Kang, Z. Y. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Small, 2015, 11, 1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sim, P. Oh, S. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, D. M. Piper, M. Gu, J. J. Travis, S. M. George, S. H. Lee, A. Genc, L. Pullan, J. Liu, S. X. Mao, J. G. Zhang, C. M. Ban and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Liu, Y. He, F. F. Fan, Z. Zhang, S. X. Mao, C. M. Wang and T. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Cui, R. J. Zou, J. H. Zhang, K. B. Xu and J. Q. Hu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603754 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Song, S. Yoo, K. Kang, H. Heo, Y. M. Kang and M. H. Jo, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 229 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Luo, P. Zhao, H. Yang, B. R. Liu, J. G. Zhang, Y. Cui, G. H. Yu, S. L. Zhang and C. M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, D. S. Jung and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Liu, N. Li, M. D. Goodman, H. G. Zhang, E. S. Epstein, B. Huang, Z. Pan, J. Kim, J. H. Choi, X. J. Huang, J. H. Liu, K. J. Hsia, S. J. Dillon and P. V. Braun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, Y. Li, X. L. Li, S. Y. Hu, X. W. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and C. M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, X. H. Liu, K. J. Zhao, A. Palmer, E. Patten, D. Burton, S. X. Mao, Z. G. Suo and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, Z. D. Lu, J. Zhao, M. T. McDowell, H. W. Lee, W. T. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, C. S. Yoon, J. Y. Hwang, S. J. Kim, F. Maglia, P. Lamp, S. T. Myung and Y. K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2152 CAS .
Y. H. Huang, Q. Bao, B. H. Chen and J. G. Duh, Small, 2015, 11, 2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, C. Liu, P. X. Hou, L. L. Zhang, X. Y. Shan, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, E. Lidorikis, A. Lombardo, V. G. Kravets, A. K. Geim, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, G. Long, L. Huang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Luo, J. S. Wu, J. Y. Luo, J. X. Huang and V. P. Dravid, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3863 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ko, S. Chae, J. Y. Ma, N. Kim, H. W. Lee, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Li, K. Yan, H. W. Lee, Z. D. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Son, J. H. Park, S. Kwon, S. Park, M. H. Rümmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, H. J. Song, J. Ku, J. W. Choi, J. M. Choi, S. G. Doo and H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, C. M. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, X. C. Xiao, G. Liu, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu, N. D. Browning and C. M. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3684 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Liang, L. Hong, H. Yang, F. F. Fan, Y. Liu, H. Li, J. Li, J. Y. Huang, L. Q. Chen, T. Zhu and S. L. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Zhang, X. H. Liua, Y. C. Perng, J. Cho, J. P. Chang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Micron, 2012, 43, 1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Lu, Y. He, S. X. Mao, C. M. Wang and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28825 CAS .
M. T. Janish, D. T. Mackay, Y. L. Katherine, L. Jungjohann, C. B. Carter and M. G. Norton, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 589 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nie, L. Y. Gan, Y. C. Cheng, H. Asayesh-Ardakani, Q. Q. Li, C. Z. Dong, R. Z. Tao, F. Mashayek, H. T. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl, R. F. Klie and R. S. Yassar, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. H. Tan, P. Li, P. Kalisvaart, M. T. Janish, W. M. Mook, E. J. Luber, K. L. Jungjohann, C. B. Carter and D. Mitlin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, I. Ryu, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Extreme Mechanics Letters, 2015, 2, 15 CrossRef .
X. T. Lu, T. D. Bogart, M. Gu, C. M. Wang and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21889 CAS .
W. Liang, H. Yang, F. Fan, Y. Liu, X. H. Liu, J. Y. Huang, T. Zhu and S. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, S. Huang, S. T. Picraux, J. Li, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, H. Yang, D. E. Perea, J. G. Zhang, S. L. Zhang and C. M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Hu, Y. P. Ouyang, T. Liang, H. Wang, J. Liu, J. Chen, C. H. Yang, L. C. Yang and M. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605006 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Zhao, L. Zhang, R. Xia, Y. F. Dong, W. W. Xu, C. J. Niu, L. He, M. Y. Yan, L. B. Qu and L. Q. Mai, Small, 2016, 12, 588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Zhang, X. H. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Huang, T. Zhu, L. Gui, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yu, S. H. Lee, D. J. Lee, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Small, 2016, 12, 2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Liu, Y. Li, H. Y. Kang, T. Jin and L. F. Jiao, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 402 RSC .
K. E. Gregorczyk, Y. Liu, J. P. Sullivan and G. W. Rubloff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kushima, X. H. Liu, G. Zhu, Z. L. Wang, J. Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Su, Z. M. Dong, J. Zhang, G. H. Du and B. S. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 255705 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. M. Su, S. X. Wang, Y. L. Xiao, L. B. Yao, G. H. Du, H. Q. Ye and Y. Z. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3295 CAS .
Y. F. Yuan, A. M. Nie, G. M. Odegard, R. Xu, D. H. Zhou, S. Santhanagopalan, K. He, H. Asayesh-Ardakani, D. D. Meng, R. F. Klie, C. Johnson, J. Lu and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lia, D. D. Xiao, H. Zheng, X. L. Wei, X. Y. Wang, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, T. Yang and Q. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 194 CrossRef .
Y. R. Wang, L. Zhang, X. H. Gao, L. Y. Mao, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Small, 2014, 10, 2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Q. Yu, Q. P. Meng, Y. Z. Zhu, E. Y. Hu, K. Sun, H. Yun, X. Q. Yang, Y. M. Zhu, H. Gan, Y. F. Mo, E. A. Stach, C. B. Murray and D. Su, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Su, D. Xie, J. Zhang, G. H. Du and B. S. Xu, ACS Nano, 2016, 7, 9115 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Ma, K. Rui, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Du, D. S. Li, Q. Q. Wang, X. Huang, J. X. Zhu and W. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603500 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. M. Su, L. B. Yao, J. Zhang, G. H. Du and B. S. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23062 CAS .
W. W. Xia, Q. B. Zhang, F. Xu and L. T. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9170 CAS .
Y. H. Li, H. Sun, X. P. Cheng, Y. F. Zhang and K. J. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 95 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Su, J. Zhang, Y. S. Wu and G. H. Du, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 264 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Luo, J. S. Wu, Q. Q. Li, V. P. Dravid, K. R Poeppelmeier, Q. L. Rao and J. M. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 085402 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. M. Su, L. Chang, J. Zhang, G. H. Du and B. S. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4292 CAS .
X. H. Rui, H. T. Tan and Q. Y. Yan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9889 RSC .
X. D. Xu, W. Liu, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 604 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, Z. D. Lu, K. J. Koski, J. H. Yu, G. Y. Zheng and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Su, G. H. Du, J. Zhang, Y. J. Zhong, B. S. Xu, Y. H. Yang, S. Neupane, K. Kadel and W. Z. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Chen, K. Cao, C. C. Xing, Y. P. Hu, J. B. Liu, Y. He, J. Wang, A. Li and H. Y. Qin, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 688, 946 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, C. Liu, L. L. Zhang, P. X. Hou, F. Li, B. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600113 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Freire, N. V. Kosova, C. Jordy, D. Chateigner, O. I. Lebedev, A. Maignan and V. Pralong, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, D. Nordlund, Y. Y. Li, M. K. Quan, L. Cheng, T. C. Weng, Y. J. Liu, H. L. Xin and M. M. Doe, Nat. Energy, 2016, 11, 15004 CrossRef .
Y. K. Sun, Z. H. Chen, H. J. Noh, D. J. Lee, H. G. Jung, Y. Ren, S. Wang, C. S. Yoon, S. T. Myung and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bareño, M. Balasubramanian, S. H. Kang, J. G. Wen, C. H. Lei, S. V. Pol, I. Petrov and D. P. Abraham, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2039 CrossRef .
A. Boulineau, L. Simonin, J. F. Colin, E. Canévet, L. Daniel and S. Patoux, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. Oshima, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, K. Kim, H. M. Chang, R. Kanno and K. Takayanagi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. Oshima, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, K. Kim, H. M. Chang, R. Kanno and K. Takayanagi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24236 CAS .
J. J. Niu, A. Kushima, X. F. Qian, L. Qi, K. Xiang, Y. M. Chiang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai, D. A. Cogswell and M. Z. Bazant, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wang, H. J. Tang, L. J. Zhang, H. Ren, R. B. Yu, Q. Jin, J. Qi, D. Mao, M. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. R. Wen, L. Gu, G. H. Ma, Z. G. Su, Z. Y. Tang, H. J. Zhao and D. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16050 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. He, X. Y. Han, R. J. Zou, T. T. Zhao, Z. Weng, S. Ho-Kimura, Y. Lu, H. L. Wang, Z. X. Guo and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604903 CrossRef .
R. J. Zou, Q. Liu, G. J. He, M. F. Yuen, K. B. Xu, J. Q. Hu, I. P. Parkin, C. S. Lee and W. J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601363 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang and H. S. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 1488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Z. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. X. Zu and Y. S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. T. Lee, A. Magasinski, K. J. Zhao, Y. Liu and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501306 CrossRef .
Z. Z. Yang, Z. Y. Zhu, J. Ma, D. H. Xiao, X. Kui, Y. Yao, R. C. Yu, X. Wei, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and X. X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600806 CrossRef .
Z. L. Xu, J. Q. Huang, W. G. Chong, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Wang, L. M. Zhou and J. K. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602078 CrossRef .
K. P. Cai, M. K. Song, E. J. Cairnsv and Y. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hwa, J. Zhao and E. J. Cairns, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. H. Yu, W. Y. Li, P. C. Hsu, H. T. Wang, Y. M. Sun, H. B. Yao, Q. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Tan, R. Xu, Z. Y. Xing, Y. F. Yuan, J. Lu, J. G. Wen, C. Liu, L. Ma, C. Zhan, Q. Liu, T. P. Wu, Z. L. Jian, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Y. Ren, D. J. Miller, L. A. Curtiss, X. L. Ji and K. Amine, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17090 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Rujia Zou	Rujia Zou is an Associate Professor at Donghua University, China. He received his PhD from Donghua University, followed by postdoctoral research at City University of Hong Kong. He has authored and co-authored more than 110 refereed journal publications and held over 20 patents. His current research focuses on materials phase transformations and structure–performance relationships. He uses in situ TEM as the primary approach and combines all other necessary techniques, including materials synthesis, nanofabrication, and electrical, mechanical, and optical measurements, to develop an atomic level understanding and control of materials processes for nanoelectromechanical systems, energy conversion, and energy storage applications.
Junqing Hu	Prof. Junqing Hu received his Ph.D. from the University of Science & Technology of China, in 2000. From 2000 to 2008, he worked at the City University of Hong Kong, and then the National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan. At present, he is a Full Professor at Donghua University, China. He has authored and co-authored more than 250 refereed journal publications and held over 40 patents. His current research interests focus on the synthesis, measurement of properties, and applications of 1D nanostructures.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of an in situ TEM electrochemical reaction study using the open-cell configuration. (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ experimental setup on individual nanomaterials using an ionic liquid electrolyte. (b) Schematic diagram of the in situ experimental setup on individual nanomaterials using the solid electrolyte Li2O. The open-cell configuration may be adapted for studies such as the anode, the cathode, Li–S or other electrode materials in the nanobattery.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM image showing the side contact between a MWCNT and the Li2O/Li electrode during the lithiation process. (b, c) The MWCNT was bent due to compression during the lithiation process. (d) A lithiated MWCNT brittle fracture under tension. (e) and (f) show EDP images of MWCNTs before and after lithiation. (g) A HRTEM image of a lithiated MWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A TEM image showing the GNR. (b) The GNR with a clean surface. (c) An EDP image of a GNR. (d, e) TEM images showing lithiated GNR with the same morphology at a different magnification. (f) An EDP image of lithiated GNR. (g) The lithiated GNR bent under compression. (h) The lithiated GNR almost recovered to the original morphology after the mechanical load was removed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright Elsevier 2012.	 

 	Fig. 4  In (a) the TiO2 nanotube is fully lithiated, in (b) the TiO2 nanotube is partially lithiated and in (c) the TiO2 nanotube is still in the pristine state. (d) Shows the a schematic illustration of the TiO2 nanotube at various stages during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright ACS 2014.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A series of time-lapse TEM images showing the morphology change during the charging process. (b) and (c) EDP showing Si nanowire before and after the charging process. (d) TEM images showing the partly lithiated Si nanowire in a core–shell structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A lithiated silicon nanowire showing anisotropic volumetric expansion causing it to form a dumbbell-shaped cross section. (b) 3D simulation of a progressively lithiated nanowire showing the development of the dumbbell-shaped cross section along the longitudinal direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright ACS 2011. (c, d) Electrochemical lithiation of two different sizes of Si nanoparticles with and without fracture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright ACS 2012.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM images showing the tip contacts between the top of the Si-void@SiOx nanowire and the Li/Li2O during the lithiation process. (b) TEM images showing the side contacts between the side of Si-void@SiOx nanowire and during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2017.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The morphological evolution of the particles attached to and embedded in the CNF during the lithiation process. (b) The embedded particles are delayed as compared with the particles attached to the CNF surface during the lithiation process. (c) The embedded particles in CNF lead to cracking of the CNF during the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright ACS 2012.	 

 	Fig. 9  Low-magnification TEM images of the (a) pristine and (b) lithiated Si nanoparticle filled CNT showing an obvious expansion of both the silicon nanoparticles and the CNT upon lithium insertion. HRTEM images of the Si nanoparticle filled CNT (c) before and (d) after lithiation, showing an increase of the angle between the carbon layers and tube axis the lithiation. The insets in (c) and (d) are Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) of the Si nanoparticles, indicating the existence of amorphous Si and LixSi before and after lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright ACS 2015. (e) Graphene-Si nanoparticles attached to the surface of Au wire and a second Li/LiO2 electrode. (f) The same graphene-Si nanoparticles after lithiation. (g) A schematic summary of lithiated graphene coated Si nanoparticles for both defective and non-defective cases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright Nature group 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematics of surface reactions and cycling behaviors of silicon nanoparticles under different coating conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright ACS 2014.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–e) The changes of morphologies of a Ge nanowire shown via a series of time-lapse TEM images during the lithiation process. (f–h) The changes of morphologies of a Ge nanowire shown in high magnification images at the same place . (i–k) EDPs showing the reversible phase transformation between the c-Li15Ge4 (lithiated) and a-Ge (delithiated) phases after the lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) A series of time-lapse BF-STEM images showing phase evolution during lithiation: pristine Fe3O4 (red), Li-inserted LixFe3O4 (blue) and Fe + Li2O composite after conversion (green). Scale bar, 20 nm. (b) The projected areas of the three phases as a function of time. (c) The propagation speed of intercalation and conversion as a function of time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright Nature group 2016.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM images of CuO/graphene after lithiation. (b) A high magnification TEM image recorded from a lithiated CuO nanoparticle. The red circles indicate the formation of Cu grains. Inset of panel (b) is a HRTEM image of the Cu nanograins. (c) The ED pattern of the lithiated CuO. (d) A schematic illustration of the reaction front in a single CuO particle and the pathway for Li+ ions and electron transport. (e and f) The first lithiated and delithiated CuO nanoparticle. The size of a pristine CuO nanoparticle is about 120 nm. (g and h) The second lithiated and delithiated CuO nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright ACS 2015.	 

 	Fig. 14  A series of time-lapse TEM images of a group of larger Cu2S nanocrystals during lithiation. (a) A TEM image of three Cu2S crystals before lithiation. (b) The reaction with Li begins, and copper metal begins to form on the surface of particle 1 as copper is removed from this particle. (c, d) The copper metal domain on particle 1 grows larger, and copper is also removed from particle 2 to form a domain on the edge of this particle. (e–g) A reaction front (marked by arrows) sweeps across particle 3 as copper is partially removed from this particle to join with the already-formed copper metal domains on the other particles. (h) The remaining copper is ejected from particle 3 to form a multitude of copper metal domains on the surface of the particle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright ACS 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  A schematic illustration of a Co9S8/Co-filled CNT with closed ends (a) and an open end (b) during the electrochemical lithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright ACS 2013.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of a single LiMn2O4 nanowire before the lithiation process. The observation area is marked by a red circle. (b–e) SAED pattern of the LiMn2O4 nanowire during charge/discharge cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright ACS 2013.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) A schematic showing the configuration of in situ TEM observation during charge/discharge cycles. (b) TEM images of the pristine V2O5/3DC composite before lithium insertion. The red and blue circles indicate the V2O5 nanoparticles inside and at the edge of the 3DC matrix, respectively. (c–e) Morphological evolution of the V2O5 nanoparticles at the edge of the matrix during the Li+ insertion processes at 1, 5, and 20 min, respectively. (f–h) Morphological evolution of the V2O5 nanoparticles inside the 3DC matrix during the Li+ insertion processes at 1, 5, and 20 min, respectively. (i and j) TEM image of the V2O5/3DC composite after Li+ extraction processes in the first and tenth cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a–c) TEM images of S filled into a CNT during lithiation process and (d–f) their corresponding EDP patterns: panels (a) and (d) correspond to the sample before the initiation and panels (c) and (f) after the completion of the electrochemical reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of a Li2S@graphene particle before any charge/discharge cycles. (b–g) The Li2S@graphene particle evolution through in situ TEM observation after different delithiation and lithiation cycles at an operating potential of 3 V. The size of the Li2S@graphene particle is indicated by dashed green lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright Nature group 2017.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
