Recent advancements in heterostructured interface engineering for hydrogen evolution reaction electrocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA11646J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA11646J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6926-6956Recent advancements in heterostructured interface engineering for hydrogen evolution reaction electrocatalysis

        
          
            Hongxia 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiwei 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohui 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengyong 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huijuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yu 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aThe School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Power Transmission Equipment and System Security, Chongqing University, 174 Shazheng Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing City, 400044, P. R. China. E-mail: wangy@cqu.edu.cn
bThe School of Electrical Engineering, Chongqing University, 174 Shazheng Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing City 400044, P. R. China
Received 
      22nd October 2019
    , Accepted 30th January 2020First published on 31st January 2020AbstractSearching for a clean and renewable energy system is vital to alleviate the exacerbated environmental pollution problem while addressing the energy dilemma. With clean, renewable and high calorific value features, hydrogen has been identified as an ideal energy carrier to change the global energy structure and accomplish energy conversion in the future. A promising technique to generate hydrogen is water electrolysis, but rationally designing cost-effective and highly efficient catalysts to facilitate their widespread industrialization is still a formidable challenge. In the recent years, heterostructure materials have led to newer types of electrocatalysts owing to their unique physicochemical properties. Constructing heterostructures is regarded as a very important surface engineering aspect for the advancement of HER catalysts. Therefore, we present a review of the recent progress made in the fabrication of heterostructure materials toward HER in order to provide an insight into the catalytic properties of heterostructure catalysts. We start with the introduction of the HER mechanism and the evaluation standards for HER performance. Then, we summarize the synthetic strategies for preparing heterostructure catalysts as well as discussing their catalytic properties for HER. Finally, we discuss the opportunities and challenges for the future development of heterostructure catalysts from the perspectives of material design and synthesis.
1. Introduction
The substantial combustion of fossil fuels has resulted in massive CO2 emissions and consequent environmental issues over the past few decades.1,2 As the global energy demand is set to rise from 17 TW in 2010 to 27 TW by 2040,3 fossil fuel consumption will continuously grow, further increasing the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere. Although oil, coal, and natural gas can still supply the global energy demand in the forthcoming decades, their limited reserves and negative effects on the climate cannot fulfil long-term development goals.4–6 Therefore, we must search for a clean and renewable energy system to alleviate the already exacerbated environmental pollution problem while addressing the energy dilemma.7 For this reason, countries around the world have invested considerable efforts toward increasing their share of renewables and low-carbon sources of power, such as wind, solar, and tidal energies.8 Nevertheless, these renewable energies are usually intermittent as well as time- and weather-dependent, which causes low energy delivery efficiency and hinders their widespread utilization.9–11 Thus, other promising alternatives for energy storage and conversion are needed. Hydrogen, due to its zero-carbon feature and the highest gravimetric energy density, is deemed to be an ideal energy carrier to change the global energy structure in the future. Hydrogen can be directly utilized as a fuel gas to replace fossil fuels and can be used to store excess energy via an approach to integrate variable renewable electricity into the energy system.12 Therefore, developing a technology for hydrogen production is important and meaningful.
Generally, H2 can be produced from biomass, water, natural gas, or (gasified) coal.13 At present, it is mainly generated from the steam reforming of natural gas, which can release undesired carbon dioxide byproducts.14,15 Although biomass is renewable and can be converted into many liquid fuels including biodiesel, methanol, and ethanol, it cannot meet the hydrogen demand on a large scale. Thus, efficient and environment-friendly techniques to acquire hydrogen should be formulated such as photoelectrochemical and electrochemical water splitting techniques,16,17 which possess the advantages of unrestricted water source, high purity of hydrogen production, and practicability of massive production. However, owing to the higher flexibility, applicability, and hydrogen production efficiency as compared to those obtained from a photoelectrochemical water-splitting system, the electrochemical pathway of water splitting is more appealing. Since water electrolysis was firstly discovered by Troostwijk and Diemann in 1789, it has been widely studied by researchers around the world.18 However, until now, hydrogen production via electrochemical water splitting only takes less than 5% of the entire hydrogen supply.19 Therefore, facilitating electrochemical water splitting toward widespread industrialization is a formidable challenge. Water electrolysis comprises two half reactions: hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER).20 Water is very thermodynamically stable; therefore, water electrolysis needs to overcome the energy barrier of 237.2 kJ mol−1 under standard conditions and requires a cell voltage of 1.23 V. Therefore, highly active catalysts for HER and OER are necessary to improve the efficiency of water electrolysis, lower energy loss, and facilitate electrochemical water splitting toward widespread industrialization.
At present, the best catalysts for both HER and OER are noble-metal-based materials (e.g., Pt, Ir, and Ru), but their broad applications for hydrogen production are hindered by scarce reserves and exorbitant prices.21,22 To address this, considerable efforts have been directed toward improving the utilization efficiency of noble-metal-based catalysts and exploring highly efficient and earth-abundant catalysts, particularly HER catalysts. Many metal compounds, such as phosphides,23–25 sulfides,26–29 tellurides,30 carbides,31–33 metal alloys,34–36 and carbon-derived materials,37–41 have been reported to show high activity toward HER. The HER process occurs on the surface or interfaces of catalysts such that the surface electronic structure and catalyst properties determine its catalytic ability. Therefore, surface engineering plays a crucial role in promoting the HER performance. Among the various surface engineering strategies, increased efforts have been focused on introducing a heterointerface or heterojunction. For instance, Moon et al.42 reported that CoP/NiCoP/NC heterostructures showed promising HER performance with overpotential values of 75, 60, and 123 mV in 1 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4, and 1 M PBS, respectively, at 10 mA cm−2, which was caused by the strong interfacial coupling in the heterojunction of CoP and NiCoP, as well as the collective effects of the electronic structure. Recently, the construction of heterostructures by assembling different active components has been widely studied.43–48 Such heterostructures can significantly change the inherent catalytic activities of the individual composition to exhibit unique physicochemical properties toward certain reactions.
Heterostructure materials have led to the fabrication of newer types of electrocatalysts in the field of materials science. The construction of heterostructures is considered to be a very important surface engineering strategy to promote the advancement of catalysts with defined functions.49,50 Many concepts have been put forward for describing heterostructure materials, such as inorganic–semiconductor junctions,51 semiconductor–metal heterostructures,52 and semiconductor–carbon heterostructures.53 Generally, the term heterostructure can be defined as the structure with a heterointerface or heterojunction formed by stacking or stitching different compositions. The unique characteristics of heterostructure materials come from the sum of the functions contributed by the individual components and the interfacial interaction between the compositions.54–56 For the HER process, the unique features of heterostructure catalysts could result in improved or completely novel catalytic performances. In this review, we highlight the recent progresses made by our and earlier groups researching heterostructure materials in order to provide an insight into the properties of heterostructure catalysts. We firstly introduce the HER mechanism and the evaluation standards for HER catalytic performances. Learning about the synthesis methods of heterostructures is very important so that advanced heterostructures with special properties can be fabricated. Therefore, we firstly summarize the synthesis strategies for preparing HER heterostructure catalysts with an emphasis on vapor-transport-based methods, liquid exfoliation and self-assembly, hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, electrochemical deposition (ECD), and photodeposition, as shown in Fig. 1. Then, we discuss the catalytic properties of heterostructure catalysts for HER and present the roles played by heterostructures in enhancing the HER performance. Finally, we briefly conclude this review and discuss the opportunities and challenges for future research involving heterostructure catalysts with personal insights. We hope that this review can provide readers with a quick understanding of the recent development progress made in heterostructure catalysts for HER and provide some guidelines for the design and synthesis of heterostructure catalysts in the future.
 Fig. 1  Synthesis methods and catalytic properties of heterostructure catalysts for HER. 
2. Fundamentals of HER
2.1 HER mechanism
In a typical electrolyzer, there are three constituent parts: the electrolyte and two electrodes (cathode and anode) on which the catalysts are coated.57 The HER occurring at the cathode is a multistep process, which can change with the pH value of the electrolyte. In accordance with different media, the HER mechanism can be described by different pathways as follows:58,59
In acidic media, H3O+ + e− + * → H* + H2O, Volmer reaction(1) H* + H3O+ + e− → H2 + H2O + *, Heyrovsky reaction(2) H* + H* → H2 + 2*, Tafel reaction(3)
In neutral or alkaline media, H2O + e− + * → H* + OH−, Volmer reaction(4) H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH− + *, Heyrovsky reaction(5) H* + H* → H2 + 2*, Tafel reaction(6)where * represents an active site on the catalyst and H* is the hydrogen atom adsorbed on the active site. The HER may go through the Volmer–Heyrovsky or the Volmer–Tafel pathway in any medium. Regardless of the pathway, the reaction always proceeds through the adsorbed hydrogen atoms on the surface of the catalysts.60,61 Hence, the free energy of hydrogen adsorption is the key parameter for HER kinetics. As shown in Fig. 2, the HER catalytic activities of metal catalysts can be summarized in the “volcano plot”,62 which is a function of the exchange current density of the catalysts and the corresponding Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) of the absorbed hydrogen atoms. Pt is located on top of this volcano plot, with a ΔGH* value close to zero. This is the inherent reason why metal Pt exhibits superb activity toward HER. If the ΔGH* value of a catalyst is too negative, it can restrict the Tafel or Heyrovsky steps to evolve hydrogen molecules. On the contrary, if the ΔGH* value is too positive, the formation of hydrogen intermediates becomes difficult, slowing down the Volmer step. Therefore, an optimal HER catalyst should have moderate bonding energy of hydrogen intermediates (ΔGH* ≈ 0), binding hydrogen atoms neither too weakly nor too strongly.63,64 Many nonnoble metals, such as Mo, W, Co, Ni, etc., lie on the left-hand side of the volcano plot and possess excessively high H* adsorption strengths. Their compounds always show much lower HER activities when compared with that of Pt. However, by constructing heterostructures to bind one component with another, the surface electronic structure of nonnoble metal catalysts can be modified, resulting in moderate binding energy of hydrogen, which can be even similar to that of Pt.
 Fig. 2  Volcano plot of different metals in acidic media. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
2.2 Evaluation approaches for HER
To evaluate the catalytic activities of a certain HER catalyst, some important parameters need to be measured, such as overpotential, Tafel slope, turnover frequency, stability, etc. The basic values of these parameters and how to optimize them via heterostructured interface engineering will be briefly discussed in the following sections.

2.2.1 Overpotential. 
The HER process cannot only be motivated by the thermodynamic potential (or the reversible potential) due to the energy hindrances to the kinetics in a practical reaction system.19 To this end, additional potential is required to drive the HER process, which is called the overpotential (η). To be precise, overpotential can be defined as the difference between the actual potential applied (E) and the reversible potential (Er) of the reaction, as expressed by the equation η = E − Er.65 It is the most important parameter for the evaluation of HER performance.66 Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), which describes a function between the current density and overpotential, is usually performed to determine the overpotential value. Overpotential originates from the concentration overpotential, activation overpotential, and ohmic potential drop. The activation overpotential is related to the intrinsic properties of the applied electrocatalysts; its value can be decreased by using highly active heterostructure materials. However, the concentration overpotential arises from the sudden fall in the concentration of ions close to the electrode surface due to the sluggish diffusion rate, which can be relieved by stirring. In addition, there is certain inevitable uncompensated resistance (Ru) caused by the distance of the solution between the working and reference electrodes and the electrochemical interface in the measurement system that engenders the ohmic potential drop, yielding larger overpotential than the actual value. However, the ohmic potential drop can be countered via IR compensation, as expressed in the following equations:67 EIR = I × Ru(7) Ecorrected = Euncorrecttd − EIR(8)where I represents the electric current in the system and E represents the potential. For HER processes, in order to achieve the same current density (usually 10 mA cm−2), electrocatalysts with good performance often only need smaller overpotential. Hence, an ideal HER catalyst should have very low overpotential to achieve high efficiency.


2.2.2 Tafel slope and exchange current density. 
The Tafel slope of HER can be employed to obtain insights into the intrinsic kinetics of the catalyst. To clearly comprehend the Tafel slope, it is important to understand how this term is derived. The current–overpotential relationship at an electrical interface can be typically conveyed by the Butler–Volmer equation (eqn (9)):68,69 j = j0 [exp(αAnF/RT × η) − exp(−αCnF/RT × η)](9)where j represents the current density, j0 is the exchange current density, αA and αC are the transfer coefficients of an electrochemical reaction in the anodic and cathodic directions, respectively, n is the number of electrons transferred, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature in Kelvin. In particular, in the area of high overpotential (η > 0.005 V), the Butler–Volmer equation can be simplified to get the Tafel equation (eqn (10)): lnj = lnj0 + (αAnF/RT) × η(10)

Eqn (10) is in the format y = bx + a, yielding a line when plotting overpotential vs. log|current density|; this is named the Tafel plot. Therefore, the Tafel slope can be defined as follows: Slope(dlogj/dη) = 2.303RT/αAnF.(11)
Based on these relationships, the Tafel plot can be commonly acquired by replotting the LSV curves into a plot (η vs. log|j|) in the actual calculation, and the Tafel slope is the slope of the linear region. Generally, the Tafel slope can be used to indicate the kinetics of the electrochemical process. Notably, for HER, the Tafel slope of a catalyst is related to the reaction mechanism, indicating the probable reaction pathway and the rate-determining step. Previous studies have revealed that the HER kinetic models include three principle steps: Volmer, Heyrovsky, and Tafel as the rate-determining steps with corresponding Tafel slopes of 120, 40, and 30 mV dec−1 obtained in the range of low overpotential values/current densities.58 For instance, Fu et al. reported a N0.08-G/V8C7 catalyst, which showed a low Tafel slope of 60.8 mV dec−1 in an alkaline electrolyte.70 Therefore, the HER occurring on the surface of N0.08-G/V8C7 can be considered to proceed via the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway and the Heyrovsky step is the rate-limiting step. This also indicates the faster water dissociation kinetics of N0.08-G/V8C7 (Volmer step). Regardless of the mechanism of the catalytic reaction, it is closely related to the surface electronic structure and bond strength of the adsorbed reactants/intermediates. By constructing heterostructures, the surface electronic structure can be modified to afford the optimal bond strength of the reactants/intermediates, facilitating the sluggish step during the HER process and yielding a lower Tafel slope. Further, constructing heterostructures can increase the conductivity of catalysts to accelerate the HER kinetics and reduce the Tafel slope.
In addition, the exchange current density (j0) can be determined by extrapolating the linear part of the Tafel plot to its intercept with the X-axis. At equilibrium, when the current density of the anodic reaction equals that of the cathodic reaction, this value is called the exchange current density that reflects the ability of an electrode reaction to gain or lose electrons. The internal factor that affects the activation overpotential is the value of the exchange current density. A high exchange current density indicates that the HER process on the electrode proceeds at a higher rate, and it also indicates the easier polarization of the electrode, which leads to lower force (activation overpotential) to drive the electrode reaction. Nevertheless, how does the exchange current density increase with heterostructured interface engineering? This is still related to the regulation of the surface electronic structure of the catalyst and the improvement in the conductivity and active sites, which can accelerate the HER kinetics.


2.2.3 Stability. 
For the evaluation of the HER performance, stability is a much significant parameter that must be discussed, which suggests the long-term ability to maintain the original catalytic activity of the electrocatalysts. Generally, there are two approaches available to measure stability. One is to perform continuous CV cycling, which should usually be tested by using thousands of cycles. In the case of this method, LSV curves of a stable catalyst should only marginally change before and after the measurement. The other is to conduct chronopotentiometric or chronoamperometric measurements, which are usually tested at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 or applied overpotential. The stability of a catalyst is of great significance for practical applications. However, during the catalytic process, agglomeration, peeling, corrosion, and structural damage of the active components of the catalyst can cause a decrease in stability. By heterostructured interface engineering, these problems can be ameliorated for obtaining better stability. We will comprehensively discuss this in the fourth and fifth sections.

2.3. Role of density functional theory (DFT)
The HER process occurs on the surface or interfaces of the catalysts. Therefore, understanding the surface characteristics of a heterostructure catalyst is significant. Besides some X-ray-based characterization techniques that have been used to explore the variations in the charge density of the heterointerfaces, DFT is also a very powerful technique to visualize the electronic structure, describe the behavior of electrons, and understand the reaction mechanism of a heterostructure catalyst for HER. In this section, we will briefly explain the role of DFT in the study of heterostructure catalysts.

2.3.1 Calculation of ΔGH*. 
As we mentioned above, ΔGH* is an important parameter to determine the performance of a catalyst for HER, which can be reasonably calculated by DFT calculations based on the well-developed computational quantum chemistry theory. Most studies on heterostructure catalysts include the calculation of ΔGH* to prove the changes occurring in the surface electronic structure. By simulating the possibly generated intermediates of hydrogen adsorption, reduction, and desorption processes, the ΔGH* value can be calculated as follows:71,72ΔGH* = ΔEH* + ΔEZPE − TΔSwhere ΔEH* is the hydrogen chemisorption energy, ΔEZPE is the zero-point energy difference between the adsorbed and gas phases, and TΔS is the entropy change of H*.


2.3.2 d-Band center theory. 
The ΔGH* value simply reflects the state of the surface electronic structure. For transition-metal-based heterostructure catalysts, to comprehensively understand the inherent surface adsorption ability of H*, which is closely related to the metal d-orbital levels, the d-band center (εd) theory is meaningful. This theory was developed by taking into account the adsorbed H* state by itself, while paying attention to bond breakage during the HER process, which may cause energy-level realignment. When H* adsorbs on the surface of the metal catalysts to form the metal–hydrogen (M–H) bond, the H* orbital has an interaction with the metal d-orbital to lead to a fully filled bonding orbital with low energy and a partially filled antibonding orbital with high energy, where the M–H bond strength is influenced by the occupancy of the antibonding orbital.73,74 Lower antibonding orbital occupancy can result in higher bond strength. In addition, the position of the d-band center and the metal's Fermi level also influence the M–H bond strength. When the metal's Fermi level is closer to the d-band center, the antibonding orbital is higher because of which its occupancy is decreased, resulting in stronger H* adsorption. One purpose of heterostructured interface engineering is to modify the surface electronic structure and H* adsorption strength. Herein, by calculating the local d-band states of the metal surface with its Fermi level, the ability of H* adsorption of a heterostructure catalyst can be reasonably predicted and evaluated. In addition, the DOS/PDOS of the transition metals can also supply useful information of the bonding mechanism and electron transfer, which clearly presents the electron states in the different orbitals of each atom.75 Therefore, constructing heterostructures to modify the d-band center and surface electronic structure is an efficient strategy to obtain a catalyst with optimal adsorption strength.

3. Synthesis approaches of heterostructure catalysts for HER
A wide range of synthesis approaches to prepare heterostructure materials have been successfully explored,76 such as mechanical exfoliation and aligned transfer,77–79 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),80–83 liquid exfoliation and self-assembly,84–86 ECD,44,87etc. Each method has its own advantages and disadvantages. The route chosen to prepare the heterostructure materials determines their size, structure, and shape, consequently influencing their physiochemical characteristics such as interfacial interactions, electronic band structure, and electric density. In the fabrication of heterostructure materials for HER, there are a few common methods that we would emphasize as follows.
3.1 Vapor-transport-based methods

3.1.1 CVD. 
CVD is a useful method to prepare heterostructure materials with high quality and controllable size, in which chemical vapors react in the gaseous phase to form solid products that can be deposited on the matrix or can directly react on the surface of the substrate to generate the final product. In the CVD process, parameters such as pressure, temperature, and gas flow rate have a considerable influence on the growth of the heterostructure materials, but they can be adjusted to an optimal value according to certain materials.83 Moreover, substrates on which the product is deposited is also very important in the CVD growth, which may not only provide a place to deposit the materials and assist the growth process but also affect the final morphology and properties of the materials. There are several types of commonly used templates such as metal-based substrates,50 SiO2/Si substrates,88 and carbon-based substrates.89 The CVD method is suitable for preparing two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) heterostructure catalysts for HER. For example, Tang and co-workers reported a two-step sequential CVD method to prepare a 3D mesoporous graphene/nitrogen-doped MoS2 heterostructure catalyst (G@N-MoS2).90Fig. 3a and b show the synthesis route of G@N-MoS2. First, a thin layer of graphene was fabricated on the surface of the MgO template in a CH4/Ar atmosphere at 950 °C. The subsequent step was the deposition of N-MoS2 on the graphene-formed substrate taking sulfur, MoCl5, and NH3 as the precursor materials at 800 °C. Finally, the MgO templates could be removed with HCl etching to yield the 3D mesoporous G@N-MoS2 heterostructures. The SEM (Fig. 3c) and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) (Fig. 3d) images show that the as-prepared G@N-MoS2 possesses hexagonal morphology inherited from the MgO templates and nanoscale N-MoS2 uniformly distributed over the graphene framework. The HRTEM image (Fig. 3e and f) reveals that N-MoS2 is in layer-by-layer stacking with each layer having a length smaller than 20 nm tiled underneath the graphene. The as-synthesized G@N-MoS2 heterostructure has the advantages of enriched edge sites and intimate interfacial interaction, which can modify the hydrogen binding and decrease the Tafel slope, leading to the favorable adsorption energy of H* and accelerated HER kinetics.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of 3D mesoporous G@N-MoS2 heterostructures. (b) Schematic representation of G@N-MoS2. C atoms are indicated in gray; Mo atoms, green; S atoms, yellow; and N atoms, red. (c) SEM image of G@N-MoS2. (d) HAADF-STEM image of G@N-MoS2. (e and f) HRTEM images of G@N-MoS2. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process. (h and i) AFM images of MG IPA-2 and corresponding thickness of the nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 


3.1.2 Vapor–solid reaction. 
Unlike CVD, where the function of the solid substrate is to provide a place to deposit the products or assist the growth process, in the vapor–solid reaction, the vapor-phase reactants directly react with the solid precursors to form the final products in the tube furnace. The solid precursors usually are metal-based materials. This method can easily realize the process of reduction,91 sulfurization,92 selenization, phosphidation,93,94 carbonization,95etc. It is one of the most widely used methods to synthesize heterostructure materials for HER. Wang et al. reported a WxC@WS2 catalyst on carbon fibers (CFs)96 obtained by the carbonization of the precursors of WS2 nanotubes on CFs using methane as the carbon source. They also found that the carbonization time influenced the morphology and composition of WxC@WS2. The vapor–solid reaction method is also beneficial to maintain the general size and morphology of the precursors. For example, we synthesized NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C heterostructure catalyst by using the vapor–solid reaction.97 After the reduction and sulfurization processes, the NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C heterostructure still maintained the urchin-like morphology, which was conducive to improve the specific surface area and expose more active sites.
Vapor-transport-based methods are useful to obtain high-quality heterostructure materials with large areas, which renders them to be important approaches for fundamental research. However, the lower yield of the product and high cost limit their commercial applications.

3.2 Liquid exfoliation and self-assembly
Exfoliation is a relatively simple approach to obtain 2D materials. In particular, bulk materials composed of weakly stacked 2D flakes can be easily disassembled into layered structures with atomic-level thicknesses by using this method. Generally, exfoliation methods include mechanical exfoliation and liquid exfoliation, which take advantage of mechanical forces and liquid-/ion-assisted delamination, respectively. In the synthesis of HER heterostructure materials, particularly for graphene-98 or layered-transition-metal-dichalcogenides-based99 heterostructures, liquid exfoliation is a typical method that is easy to operate and can yield stable products at a larger scale. After the liquid exfoliation process, the exfoliated flakes can be applied to form heterostructures through the self-assembly behavior,100,101 reduction reaction,102etc.
The combination of liquid exfoliation and self-assembly is a common strategy to prepare layered 2D–2D heterostructure materials. For example, Li and co-workers fabricated a heterostructure comprising MoSe2 nanosheets combined with black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets (MoSe2-BP) via the liquid exfoliation and self-assembly method.99 They obtained the MoSe2 and BP nanosheets from bulk MoSe2 and BP precursors, respectively, by means of the liquid exfoliation method. Then, the exfoliated MoSe2 and BP nanosheets were blended in tetrahydrofuran, which formed MoSe2-BP heterostructures driven by van der Waals interactions. This heterostructure combined the merits of both MoSe2 and BP nanosheets, yielding high stability and enhanced catalytic activity toward HER. Utilizing a single solvent may not be sufficient to achieve high exfoliation efficiency. Therefore, to improve the exfoliation efficiency, Xu et al. reported a liquid-phase salt-assisted method to prepare MoS2/graphene (MG) composites.103 They used sodium tartrate as the assistant salt and N-methyl pyrrolidone (or isopropanol) as the solvent to increase the exfoliation efficiency, as shown in Fig. 3g. The interlayer spacing of MoS2 and graphite can be enlarged by the salt and solvent molecules, thereby weakening the van der Waals forces in the interlayer of MoS2 and graphite. This results in exfoliation after further sonication. Finally, MG heterostructures can be formed by the self-assembly behavior. The AFM images (Fig. 3h and i) reveal that the exfoliated flakes from MG IPA-2 exhibit thicknesses of 0.4 and 0.6 nm, which are consistent with the theoretical thicknesses of graphene and MoS2, respectively.
Although the utilization of suitable solvents is helpful to improve the exfoliation efficiency, layer thickness is still difficult to control. Advanced strategies should be developed to obtain exfoliated flakes with uniform thickness in the future. Moreover, the lateral dimensions of the obtained 2D flakes usually depend on the bulk materials. This method is only suitable to obtain 2D heterostructure materials with a layered structure. Herein, the application of liquid exfoliation and self-assembly method is limited.
3.3 Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
Hydrothermal (or solvothermal), one of the bottom-up synthesis approaches, is a process in which precursor materials react under high temperature and high pressure. By changing the reaction temperature, reaction time, and concentration of precursor materials in the hydrothermal or solvothermal synthesis method, products with different sizes and morphologies can be obtained. When compared with CVD, the hydrothermal/solvothermal method exhibits a higher possibility to realize the commercial production of heterostructure materials at a larger scale owing to its mild reaction conditions. Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis is a widely used effective strategy to prepare heterostructure catalysts for HER. For instance, Yang and co-workers reported a one-pot hydrothermal synthesis process (as shown in Fig. 4a) to fabricate the WS2/rGO heterostructure.41 This is a typical hydrothermal synthesis route. Precursor materials such as thioacetamide (TAA), WCl6, and graphene oxide (GO) were dispersed in the solvents and then transferred into a reactor. After the reaction process, the system was cooled down for consequent filtering, washing, and drying. In this synthesis process, GO not only served as the template for WS2 growth but it was also reduced and afforded an intimate interfacial interaction with the WS2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of WS2/rGO heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the synthesis process of MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. 
Other than GO, there are other kinds of templates such as metal foam104 and carbon-based microstructures.105 Therefore, another advantage of the hydrothermal method is its compatibility with many substrates. Using carbon paper as the substrate, Liang and co-workers prepared ultrathin TiO2/MoS2 heterolayers on carbon paper by means of a hydrothermal approach.106 Guo and co-workers took the freshly prepared CoSe2/DETA nanobelts as the substrates to synthesize MoS2/CoSe2 heterostructures via the solvothermal synthesis method.107 Zhang and co-workers prepared MoS2/Ni3S2 heterostructures using commercial nickel foam as the template by means of a one-pot solvothermal reaction.108 Although the hydrothermal/solvothermal process is very convenient, it requires a larger amount of time and consumes much higher energy to maintain the reaction temperature. Therefore, modified hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis has been formulated, such as the microwave-assisted method, which consumes less time and energy to prepare the heterostructure materials. For example, Hu et al. reported that they prepared hierarchical MoS2/NiCo-LDH (layered double hydroxides) heterostructures on carbon fiber paper (CFP) templates via a two-step microwave hydrothermal approach.109 The diagram of the synthesis process is shown in Fig. 4b. The first microwave hydrothermal step was the growth of vertical MoS2 sheets on the CFP templates, followed by the second step involving the growth of NiCo-LDH on the MoS2 surface. The as-prepared MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructure materials exhibit vertically aligned sheet morphology on the CFP substrate.
Generally speaking, the hydrothermal/solvothermal method is a promising synthesis approach. It can overcome the problems of crystal transformation, decomposition, and volatilization occurring in certain high-temperature processes, with low cost and wide range of utilization. Nevertheless, the hydrothermal method has not been comprehensively studied with regard to the nucleation process and control over the factors affecting the crystal growth process, which have not yielded satisfactory conclusions. Otherwise, the hydrothermal/solvothermal process necessitates the high-pressure condition, which makes it more dependent on the production equipment and hinders its industrial applications. Therefore, the development of the hydrothermal/solvothermal method would necessitate lowering the temperature and pressure of the reaction.
3.4 ECD
ECD synthesis is an attractive method for the preparation of heterostructure catalysts for HER due to its advantages, namely, versatility and mild reaction conditions that do not necessitate the use of high pressure, high temperature, and polluting gases. It is suitable for a broad range of compositions and it can offer nanometer precision for crystal growth modification, which is difficult to realize by using other methods. Moreover, the other advantage of ECD is that morphology and size can be easily controlled by adjusting the deposition temperature, molar ratios, and applied current/voltage. In a typical ECD system, metal precursors are dissolved in the electrolyte solution and then electrochemically reduced to deposit on the templates under an applied voltage, which has a considerable impact on the nucleation growth rate. Using the ECD approach, Xing and co-workers synthesized a heterostructure material of Ni-WN nanowires (NWs) on carbon cloth (Ni-WN/CC).110 After the synthesis of WN/CC by the hydrothermal method, the ECD process of Ni was performed in a three-electrode system, where WN/CC, Ag/AgCl electrode, and graphite plate were used as the working electrode, reference electrode, and counter electrode, respectively. The final products exhibited strong synergistic effects involving Ni and WN in order to catalyze the HER process. ECD is usually a multistep process or combined with other synthesis methods. Cai and co-workers used a three-step synthesis strategy (Fig. 5a) to prepare 3D Ni2P nanosheet/graphene/nickel foam (Ni2P-G/NF) heterostructures.111 The first step was the ECD of graphene on Ni foam (G/NF). Then, Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were electrochemically deposited on G/NF. Finally, the phosphidation of Ni(OH)2-G/NF was effected via the vapor–solid reaction. The obtained Ni2P-G/NF heterostructure exhibited enhanced activity toward HER when compared with that produced by Ni2P/NF.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of Ni2P-G/NF. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the synthesis of the MoSe2–NiSe heterostructure. (c) XRD patterns of pure MoSe2 flowerlike nanosheets, pure NiSe nanoplates, and MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrids. (d–f) TEM images of the MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrids. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
ECD synthesis has been verified to be a simple, green, and effective approach. However, an improved ECD method has been reported by Wang and co-workers. They introduced supergravity into the ECD synthesis process to prepare a heterostructure catalyst of Ni nanoparticles (NPs) supported by rGO on Ni foam (Ni-rGO/Ni foam).87 In contrast to traditional ECD, supergravity electrodeposition possesses the merits of fast blending and mass transfer to refine Ni NPs and protect them from aggregating, thereby improving the specific surface area of Ni-rGO/Ni foam. Further, it has been observed that the interfacial adhesion strength between the Ni NPs and rGO sheets can be considerably improved by using a higher voltage in the process of supergravity electrodeposition than that used in traditional ECD. This result indicates that supergravity electrodeposition is a potentially helpful method to adjust the intrinsic activity of heterostructure catalysts for HER.
3.5 Photodeposition
For noble-metal-based materials, the photodeposition method is effective to obtain a heterostructure catalyst with low loading and highly dispersed sites of noble metals, where light is assimilated by the substrate to produce photoelectrons and reduce the salt solution at the interface between the substrate and solution. For example, Lin et al. prepared a Pt single atom and cluster catalyst on functionalized multiwall carbon nanotubes (Pt/f-MWCNTs) via the photodeposition method.112 The Pt loading of Pt/f-MWCNTs was only 0.323 wt%, which is much lower than that of Pt/C (20 wt%). However, the activity and stability of Pt/f-MWCNTs are better that those of Pt/C. Further, Zhou et al. used a room-temperature photodeposition method to synthesize highly dispersed Pt clusters decorated on MoO2 nanosheets.113 However, this method requires the substrate that can generate photoelectrons to promote the reduction reaction, which is not suitable for the preparation of most HER catalysts.
3.6 Other approaches
In addition to the synthesis approaches mentioned above, some other methods have also been investigated to prepare heterostructure catalysts for HER, including the high-energy ball-milling method,114 seed-mediated growth method,115in situ electrooxidation method,116 and microwave irradiation method.117 These approaches possess their own unique characteristics and we will briefly introduce them.
Khen Oh and co-workers synthesized a MoSe2, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ (LSC), and Ketjen black (KB) carbon heterostructure catalyst (denoted as LSC&MoSe2) via the high-energy ball-milling method.114 KB carbon, as-prepared LSC, and MoSe2 were ground in a planetary ball-mill system. In order to determine the optimal ratio for LSC&MoSe2 heterostructure electrocatalysts, different weight ratios of LSC:MoSe2:KB were ground; electrochemical analyses revealed the optimal ratio of LSC:MoSe2:KB to be 6:3:1. The fabrication of the LSC&MoSe2 heterostructures resulted in synergetic functions, such as improved surface adsorption capability, favorable kinetics, and decreased charge transfer resistance, thereby further promoting the catalytic activity toward HER. Wang and co-workers formulated a generic method to prepare noble metal–metal oxide dumbbell-shaped NP heterostructures by the seed-mediated solvothermal growth method, which can be applied for Au, Ag, Pt, or AuAg alloys and iron-cobalt oxides.115 Zhou and co-workers used a colloidal epitaxial growth method to prepare MoSe2–NiSe heterostructures.118 As shown in Fig. 5b, the growth process comprised two synthesis steps, namely, the synthesis of MoSe2 flowerlike nanosheets and the subsequent growth of NiSe crystallites on the surface of MoSe2 nanosheets by hot injection. The successful preparation of MoSe2–NiSe heterostructure catalysts was proven by XRD measurements. As shown in Fig. 5c, the XRD patterns reveal that both MoSe2 and NiSe exhibit the hexagonal phase in their prepared materials. Further, the SEM and TEM images (Fig. 5d–f) reveal that the MoSe2–NiSe heterostructures possess the morphology of flowerlike nanosheets. It should be noted that their strategy can be used for the preparation of other metal selenides grown on MoSe2 flowerlike nanostructures under similar conditions. This synthesis approach can be an effective strategy to construct heterostructure catalysts for HER with improved catalytic performances.
Furthermore, there are certain other interesting but less-commonly applied strategies for the preparation of heterostructure catalysts, such as sacrificial-counter-electrode method,119 galvanic displacement,120,121 and ion exchange.122 For instance, Yang et al. reported a modified sacrificial-counter-electrode method to fabricate Pd,O-codoped MoSx clusters on CNTs (sub-MoSx/CNTs/Pdgly).119 When performing potential cycling in a three-electrode system, Pd wire was used as the sacrificial counter electrode to synthesize sub-MoSx/CNTs/Pdgly. The obtained heterostructure catalyst showed promising HER performance and stability in 0.5 M H2SO4. Krstajić and co-workers designed a novel galvanic displacement strategy to prepare Pd NPs on the walls of TiO2 nanotubes (Pd@TNT).120 In this synthesis process, TiO2 nanotubes were electrochemically protonated, which acted as both reducing agent and substrate for the deposition of Pd NPs. The resultant Pd@TNT heterostructure catalyst possessed highly ordered Pd NPs at fairly low Pd loading. Lee et al. utilized the galvanic displacement method to fabricate a heterostructure catalyst of Os NPs anchored on Si NWs (denoted as Os/Si). Besides the Os/Si heterostructure, they also synthesized other metal (Rh, Pt, Pd, Re, Ru, Au, or Ag)/Si heterostructures.121 Surprisingly, Park and co-workers found that the intermediate of the Pd13Cu3S7/Cu2−xS heterostructure could be formed via the ion-exchange method. That is, ion exchange is also a potential method to fabricate heterostructure catalysts.122
In summary, we have introduced some commonly or not so commonly used strategies for the preparation of heterostructure catalysts for HER in this section. These methods have their own advantages and disadvantages (listed in Table 1). Although the catalysts synthesized by using these methods show good catalytic activity and stability, there is still a long way to go for their large-scale industrialization. Hence, the ultimate goal of synthesis research is to formulate a method that is suitable for industrial applications. Among the commonly used methods, the hydrothermal/solvothermal method may be the most promising one for the preparation of nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts owing to its low cost, high universality, and high yield. Furthermore, other common methods usually include more than two synthesis steps, which may increase the production cost. However, the hydrothermal/solvothermal method can realize the one-pot synthesis of heterostructure catalysts, which is inspiring. However, this method is not economic for the fabrication of noble-metal-based heterostructures due to solvent loss. A promising approach for noble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts is the ball-milling method. This method possesses the merits of simplicity, high efficiency, and economy. More importantly, it has no amplification effect. He et al. reported that they realized the kilogram-scale fabrication of noble-metal-based single-atom heterostructures, which is surprising.123 The industrial synthesis of noble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts is expected to realize promising catalytic activity and stability. We believe that the industrial synthesis of heterostructure catalysts with well-designed structures and improved functions will make renewed progress in the future.
Table 1 The advantages and disadvantages of various synthesis methods




Synthetic methods
Advantages
Disadvantages
Application




Vapor transport based methods
1. High quality and purity
1. Low yield and high cost
Any material


2. Good control over growth and thickness
2. Requires high temperature


3. High universality
3. High energy consumption




4. Very time-consuming process


Liquid exfoliation and self-assembly
1. Simple operation
1. Only applicable to the materials with layered structure
Materials with layered structure


2. No demand on sophisticated instruments
2. Difficult to control over layer thickness and lateral dimensions


3. High yield
3. Introduction of unwanted defects


Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
1. High compatibility with many substrates
1. No systematic control over length
Any material, but not economic for noble metal based catalysts


2. Possible to realize large-scale production
2. Lack of in-depth study on the nucleation process


3. Applicable to any material
3. Needs high pressure condition


4. Controlled working conditions




Electrochemical deposition
1. High purity and high yield
1. The application is limited to deposit metals
Metal/metal compounds (substrates)


2. Mild synthetic conditions
2. Corrosive electrolytes may be required


3. Economic and versatile
3. External stimulus is required


4. Simplicity of scaling up




Ion-exchange
1. High yield
1. Require harsh chemical conditions
Metal compounds/metal compounds


2. Low energy consumption
2. Products are normally polycrystalline in nature




3. Low control over size


High-energy ball milling
1. Simplicity of operating
1. Low controllability over the particle size distribution
Metal (metal compounds)/substrates


2. High production efficiency
2. Poor understanding of the conversion between mechanical energy and chemical


3. Low reaction temperature
3. Many synthesis control parameters yet to be fully explored


4. Possibility to realize the large-scale production






4. Properties of heterostructure catalysts for HER
The HER process occurs on the surface or interfaces of catalysts, where the catalyst can supply active sites enabling the water molecules/hydrion catalyzed to form hydrogen molecules.124 The surface electronic structure and catalyst properties determine the eventual catalytic ability. Therefore, surface modification plays a crucial role in promoting the HER performance and enhance the stability. Among the various surface engineering strategies, considerable efforts have been focused on improving the HER activity of catalysts by introducing a heterointerface or heterojunction, which can modify the electronic structure in order to adjust the surface properties of the catalyst. In this section, we will discuss the effects of heterostructure catalysts in the HER process, such as the modification of electronic structure, synergistic effect, and support effect, on the basis of the different kinds of metal compounds.
4.1 Noble-metal-based heterostructures
Although considerable progress has been made in the research of earth-abundant catalysts to improve their HER performance, materials based on noble metals (such as Pt, Ru, Ir, etc.) are still the preferred electrocatalysts for HER due to their fast reaction kinetics and unparalleled performance. However, the broad use of noble-metal-based catalysts for the hydrogen economy are limited by their exorbitant costs and scarce reserves. In order to improve the utilization efficiency and realize the extensive utilization of noble-metal-based catalysts, heterostructured interface engineering has been widely studied as an effective strategy. Coupling noble-metal-based composition with a proper support to form heterointerfaces is a common method to realize this strategy. For example, Huang et al. reported the epitaxial growth of Pt NPs on MoS2 nanosheets (Pt–MoS2).125 They found that under the same Pt loading, the HER catalytic performance of the Pt–MoS2 heterostructure catalyst was better than that of commercial Pt catalysts under acidic conditions. Hou et al. also designed CF-supported Pt NPs/MoS2 nanosheets heterostructure catalyst for HER under the acidic condition.126 Wang et al. reported the precise tuning of the platinum-nickel/nickel sulfide interface for synergistic HER catalysis in alkaline media.127 Both these heterostructure catalysts exhibited higher HER activity than that obtained from commercial Pt/C with lower Pt loading. The improvement in the HER performance is closely related to the synergistic effect, electron structure control, and support effect of the heterostructure catalysts.

4.1.1 Synergistic effect. 
The presence of a heterointerface in the heterostructure catalysts can yield electrocatalytic properties distinct from those of their individual components, which can be called the “synergistic effect” or “ensemble effect”. This synergistic effect can effectively integrate the multiple advantages of each component, resulting in a much improved catalytic performance. The synergistic effects of the heterointerfaces between Pt and other metal compounds have been widely investigated. The catalytic activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions can be proven to be lower than that under acidic conditions owing to the slow kinetics of water dissociation. To this end, promoting the ability of water adsorption/dissociation by the synergistic effect is a promising approach to fasten the HER kinetics of Pt-based catalysts in alkaline media. For example, Wang et al. synthesized a Pt-decorated Ni3N nanosheet heterostructure catalyst with superior performance in alkaline media.128 They claimed that metallic Ni3N could eliminate Schottky barriers and lower the overpotential of the HER process. Moreover, Ni3N nanosheets could offer active sites for water dissociation, while Pt played the role of an active center for the formation of H2. Therefore, owing to the synergistic effect, the HER performance of Pt-decorated Ni3N nanosheet heterostructure is better than that of pure Ni3N and Pt/C.
Some studies have proven that oxides/hydroxides can serve as effective promoters for the breaking of the O–H bond, further improving the HER performance. For instance, Lao et al. reported a Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructure catalyst applied in alkaline media.129Fig. 6a shows the TEM image of 20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 (Pt mass ratio is 20 wt%), indicating that Pt NPs were uniformly distributed on Ni(HCO3)2. As shown in Fig. 6b, 20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructure catalyst exhibited better HER activity than Pt NPs at the same Pt loading, which proved the key role of Ni(HCO3)2 in enhancing the catalytic activity of Pt in alkaline media. They have proposed a possible HER mechanism of Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 in alkaline media (Fig. 6c). Ni(HCO3)2 could supply active sites for the adsorption/dissociation of water molecules to form H intermediates, while Pt NPs are treated as the active center for the adsorption/recombination of H intermediates. Therefore, Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 could accelerate the Volmer step (water dissociation), lower the Tafel slope, and further improve the HER activity. Further, the better stability of 20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 than that of 20% Pt + Ni(HCO3)2 indicated the importance of the interaction between Pt and Ni(HCO3)2. It should be noted that the strong electronic interaction between Pt and Ni(HCO3)2 was confirmed by X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements. The strong coupling between Pt and Ni(HCO3)2 could protect Pt NPs from aggregating and therefore improve the long-term durability. These ensemble effects ensure that the Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructure exhibited superior catalytic activity and stability in alkaline media over commercial Pt/C.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the 20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructure. (b) Geometric LSV curves of various catalysts in 1 M KOH. (c) Schematic illustration of a possible HER mechanism to reveal the improved performance of Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructures in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d and e) TEM images of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2; scale bars in (d) and (e) are 100 and 5 nm, respectively. Room-temperature LSV curves of catalysts in (f) 1 M KOH and (g) 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. 
In addition to Ni(HCO3)2, designing a heterostructure that coupled Pt-based components with Ni(OH)2 is a more common strategy for promoting the catalytic activity of Pt-metal-based catalysts by using the synergistic effect. Wang et al. constructed a heterostructure of Pt nanocrystals with 2D Ni(OH)2 (denoted as Pt@2D-Ni(OH)2) and investigated their catalytic applications.102 It was found that the Pt@2D-Ni(OH)2 heterostructure catalyst exhibited improved HER activity under the alkaline condition as compared to pure Pt and Ni(OH)2. Their DFT calculation results proved the synergistic effect between the Pt nanocrystals and 2D-Ni(OH)2 in promoting the HER performance. Subbaraman et al. modified pure Pt surfaces and Pt-island/Pt(111) surfaces with Ni(OH)2 clusters and found the enhancement of Ni(OH)2 on the HER performance in alkaline media.130 They assumed that Ni(OH)2 edges facilitated the water dissociation step to produce hydrogen intermediates, which were then adsorbed onto the nearby Pt surfaces and recombined into H2, which is a synergistic effect. To fabricate the highly active heterostructure electrocatalyst for HER in alkaline media, Yin et al. synthesized 1D ultrathin Pt NWs grown on the surface of 2D single-layered Ni(OH)2 (Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2),131 with changing lengths of 10–50 nm and approximate diameters of 1.8 nm (Fig. 6d and e). As shown in Fig. 6f and g, Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2 heterostructures exhibited enhanced HER activity in both 1 and 0.1 M KOH solutions in comparison with those obtainable from commercial Pt/C. It also possessed a much higher mass current density, which was 4.35 times in 1 M KOH and 4.50 times in 0.1 M KOH as compared to that obtained from commercial Pt/C. In addition, single-layered Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were found to considerably improve the HER stability in both alkaline and basic media. After testing for 4000 s, Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 maintained 85.4% and 90.3% of the initial activities in 1 and 0.1 M KOH, respectively. This enhanced stability can be attributed to the asymmetry of ultrathin Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, which effectively suppressed physical ripening and dissolution during long-term HER processes. Although the stability of Pt NPs/SL-Ni(OH)2 was improved, it was still not sufficiently high.
The ensemble effect of cobalt hydroxide heterostructures in promoting the HER activity in an alkaline solution has been studied by Wang et al. They prepared a heterostructure of ultrafine PtO2 (NPs) anchored on Co(OH)F NWs on a Ti mesh (noted as PtO2–Co(OH)F NA/TM).132Fig. 7a clearly shows the well-overlapped lattice fringes of PtO2 and Co(OH)F, suggesting the atomic coupling between PtO2 and Co(OH)F. The Pt loading of this catalyst is 54 μg cm−2 requiring overpotential of 39 mV at 4 mA cm−2, which is superior than that of commercial Pt/C (20 wt%) in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 7b). Further, the Tafel slope of PtO2–Co(OH)F NA/TM also exhibited the smallest value of 63 mV dec−1. As shown by the DFT calculations, the interfaces of PtO2–Co(OH)F not only promote the adsorption and dissociation of water molecules but also accommodate the binding energy of H* to a desirable value (Fig. 7c and d), thereby expediting the kinetics of the HER process and lowering the Tafel slope. Furthermore, PtO2–Co(OH)F NA/TM exhibited a small loss of HER activity via potentiometric testing for 50 h. Xing et al. synthesized a Pt–Co(OH)2/CC heterostructure catalyst with a low Pt loading value of 5.7 wt%, showing outstanding catalytic HER performance and stability due to the synergistic effect of highly used Pt and Co(OH)2.133
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of PtO2–Co(OH)F. (b) LSV curves of catalysts in 0.1 M KOH. (c) Calculated free energies of H2O adsorption and dissociation on PtO2(111) and the interface between PtO2 and Co(OH)F. (d) Free energy diagrams for HER on PtO2(111), Co(OH)F, and the PtO2–Co(OH)F interface. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Trend in overpotential for HER is shown as a function of the 3d transition elements in alkaline media. The elements are arranged in order of their oxophilicity from Mn to Ni. Pt is shown for reference. Top inset: a comparison of HER polarization curves for catalysts. Bottom inset: a schematic showing the HER. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. 


4.1.2 Electron structure control. 
The presence of heterointerfaces in heterostructure catalysts inevitably cause a change in the surface electronic structure, which can modify the adsorption and desorption free energies of the reactant/intermediate species. The binding strength of the reactant/intermediate species on the surface of the catalyst can considerably influence the HER performance. Subbaraman et al. deposited 3d-M metal (oxy)hydroxide clusters (M: Ni, Co, Fe, or Mn) on the surface of Pt(111) to form heterointerfaces.134 A general notation of M2+δOδ(OH)2−δ was used to encompass all the possible surface chemistry of 3d-M metal (oxy)hydroxide, which was varied with the applied voltage. Fig. 7e shows the HER performance of M2+δOδ(OH)2−δ/Pt(111) heterostructure catalysts in an alkaline solution, where the catalytic activity followed the trend of Ni(OH)2/Pt(111) > Co(OH)2/Pt(111) > Fe2+δOδ(OH)2−δ > Mn(OH)2/Pt(111), which is related to the binding strength of OHad–M2+δ. In their work, Fe and Mn (oxy)hydroxides were found to possess the excessively high binding strength of OHad species on the catalyst surfaces, which may hinder the re-adsorption process of water molecules. They also found that the Ni(OH)2/Pt(111) heterointerfaces showed the best HER activity owing to the optimal balance between the dissociation and adsorption of the reactant species, together with the optimal Pt–Had energetics.
The modification of the surface electronic structure is closely related to the charge transfer along the heterointerfaces via their band structure alignment. Jiang's group reported the synthesis of ultrathin Pt3.21Ni (3.21 represents the atomic ratio of Pt/Ni) NWs on Ti3C2 nanosheets (denoted as Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2). The Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 heterostructure catalyst showed enhanced catalytic activity toward HER in both acidic and alkaline media, which is even more active than commercial Pt/C. It should be noted that the improvement in the HER performance could be ascribed to the electron transfer between the PtNi NWs and Ti3C2 nanosheets, which was confirmed by the results of the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses and DFT calculations. The electron transfer could modify the electronic structure and further optimize the free energy for hydrogen adsorption on the surface of Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 to improve the HER kinetics and decrease the Tafel slope. However, Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 showed low stability. In particular, under the basic condition, an obvious decrease in activity can be observed and only 27% activity remained after 2 h, which might be ascribed to the considerable morphological changes in MXenes and NWs under corrosive conditions.
In addition to Pt, other noble metals, such as Ru, Pd, Ir, Rh, etc., have been applied in constructing heterostructure catalysts. For instance, Qi et al. fabricated a heterostructure with Pd nanodisks (NDs) assembled on the basal plane of defect-rich (DR) MoS2 (Pd ND/DR-MoS2).135 The Pd ND/DR-MoS2 heterostructures exhibited small onset overpotential of 40 mV, small Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1, and extremely high exchange current density (426.58 mA cm−2) in acidic media. The surface-state modulation of MoS2 after Pd adsorption was investigated by DFT calculations. The H adsorption free energy was optimized. Further, the density of states (DOS) proved that the electron states near the Fermi level considerably increased, which caused the enhanced electrical conductivity of MoS2, reduced the resistance for charge transfer, and accelerated the reaction kinetics, resulting in lower overpotential and reduced Tafel slope and higher exchange current density. Otherwise, Pd ND/DR-MoS2 possessed considerable stability and long-term durability due to the strong covalent bonding between Pd NDs and DR-MoS2, which prevented the peeling and aggregating of Pd NDs. Cheng et al. reported a Rh–MoS2 heterostructure that possessed Pt-like HER activity in an acidic solution with overpotential of 47 mV at 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slope of 24 mV dec−1, and robust HER durability.136 Such a small Tafel value suggested that the HER process occurring on the surface of Rh–MoS2 might follow a different reaction mechanism. They did find an interesting phenomenon of the hydrogen spillover effect in which the hydronium ion could be quickly captured by Rh with strong H adsorption to form the absorbed H atoms, which migrated to the MoS2 surface with fast H2-desorption capability and finally becoming H2 molecules. In general, constructing the heterointerface between Rh and MoS2 could significantly promote the HER performance: changing the reaction mechanism and decreasing the corresponding Tafel slope. The electronic interaction between Rh and MoS2 also protects the structure of the catalyst from destruction, yielding high stability that could maintain a constant current density for more than 20 h at the potential of −200 mV.
For the core–shell heterostructure catalyst, the catalytic activity mainly originated from the shell component, while the core component induced its effect by modifying the electronic structure of the shell. Yu et al. conducted a systematic investigation of the HER properties of various noble-metal-phosphides-based core–shell heterostructure hybrids in both acidic and alkaline media.137 They used a general approach to prepare the core–shell structures with different noble metal phosphide NPs covered by ultrathin N,P-codoped graphitic carbon shells (MPx@NPGC, where MPx = RhP2, RuP2, PtP2, IrP2, and Pd5P2). Due to the coupling effect, some electrons of the noble metal phosphide core would get transferred to the carbon shell, changing the electronic structure of the carbon shell and further influencing the HER activity. It was found that the HER activities of the MPx@NPGC heterostructure catalysts increased in the order of PtP2@NPGC < IrP2@NPGC < RuP2@NPGC < Pd5P2@NPGC < RhP2@NPGC in 0.5 M H2SO4 and Pd5P2@NPGC < IrP2@ NPGC < PtP2@NPGC < RhP2@NPGC < RuP2@NPGC in 1 M KOH owing to the different electron transfer numbers from the inner metallic core to the outer carbon shell. The optimal charge transfer between the RhP2 core and the carbon shell optimized the free energy of hydrogen adsorption, making RuP2@NPGC exhibit better HER activity. Otherwise, the carbon shell could protect the metal phosphide from directly coming into contact with the corrosive electrolyte, which improved the operating stability.
Moreover, Zhong et al. reported the novel triple-phase heterointerface fabrication of NiO/Ru@Ni with NiO and Ru NPs grown on porous nickel supports (PNS) (NiO/Ru@PNS).116 As shown in Fig. 8a, the NiO/Ru@Ni heterostructure showed small overpotential of 39 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 75 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH due to synergistic catalysis. To demonstrate the effect of the triple-phase interface of NiO/Ru@PNS, they also prepared a Ru@NiO@PNS sample with two-phase heterointerfaces, which showed lower HER activity (Fig. 8b). The HER processes and free energy diagram of Ru@NiO@PNS and NiO/Ru@PNS are shown in Fig. 8c–f. It was believed that the triple-phase heterointerfaces considerably decreased the energy barrier of the Volmer step and promoted the subsequent Heyrovsky step, further leading to faster HER kinetics and lower Tafel slope. This could be attributed to the enhanced electron transfer pathway on the triple-phase heterointerfaces. Furthermore, the polarization curves only exhibited a marginal shift to higher overpotential after testing for 80 h under different current densities. This high stability could be attributed to the high chemical composition stability of NiO/Ru@PNS, which made Ru NPs maintain their metallic structure with no aggregation.
 Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves of the PNS, Ru@PNS, NiO/Ru@PNS, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (b) LSV curves of Ru@NiO@PNS and NiO/Ru@PNS in 1 M KOH. Schematic illustrations of (c) Ru@NiO@PNS and (d) NiO/Ru@PNS. Free energy diagrams of the Volmer–Tafel and Volmer–Heyrovsky pathways for (e) Ru@NiO@PNS and (f) NiO/Ru@PNS. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.2 Nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts
To realize the hydrogen economy without the hindrances of high cost and scarce reserves suffered by noble-metal-based catalysts, there are mainly two strategies. One is to improve the utilization efficiency of noble-metal-based electrocatalysts, which implies achieving similar or better HER activity with less noble metal loading (as discussed in Section 4.1). The other strategy is to explore noble-metal-free electrocatalysts with highly efficient or Pt-like HER performances, which have also been widely reported. Among the various methods employed for promoting the HER activities of noble-metal-free materials, the fabrication of heterostructures possesses its unique advantages and characteristics.

4.2.1 Support effect. 
Constructing a heterostructure can not only modify the electron structure by electron transfer on the heterointerface, making the catalyst exhibit a more suitable adsorption strength of H*, but also lead to enhanced properties, such as more exposed active sites, higher conductivity, higher mass transfer efficiency, etc., which can be called the support effect. Otherwise, the strong binding between the two components can protect the active components from agglomeration, peeling, corrosion, and structural damage during the long-term process. We will discuss the support effect with an emphasis on graphene-based heterostructure catalysts.
In 2004, Geim et al. developed a simple method to obtain single-layered graphene only by performing an exfoliating process with the utilization of tape.138 Since then, graphene, a 2D nanosized material with a hexagonal honeycomb lattice composed of sp2-hybridized orbitals of carbon atoms, has attracted increased attention for various applications as a promising material with the unique properties of high stability, mechanical flexibility, and charge carrier mobility.139 However, graphene also exhibits certain drawbacks. In the field of HER catalysis, graphene-based components (graphene, GO, and rGO) are usually integrated with other materials as a substrate to construct heterostructures, which can not only take the advantages of its merits but also overcome its disadvantages by being modified by other components. Yan et al. reported that graphene-based supports lacked appropriate holes on the basal plane for high mass-transfer demand.140 In this regard, they synthesized a Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr heterostructure. It was found that H3PMo12O40 could supply Mo species and catalyze the adjacent rGO in situ that gets decomposed to form holey reduced graphene oxide (HGr). The final Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr heterostructure catalyst showed superior HER performance with small onset potential values of 11 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 18 mV in 1 M KOH (Fig. 9a and b) due to the high mass-transfer ability of HGr and the synergistic effect of Mo2N, Mo2C, and HGr. Similarly, Ito et al. prepared a porous NiMo heterostructure (NiMo-NHG) with nanosized holey N-doped graphene layers covered on its surface and systematically studied the interaction of NiMo and the graphene coating in acidic media.141 According to the experiment and DFT calculation results (Fig. 9c and d), they found that the graphene covering with nanosized holes not only significantly protected the porous NiMo from dissolution in acidic solutions and improved the durability of NiMo-NHG but also showed interactions with the NiMo surface adjacent to the hole fringe that could tune the electronic structures of the heterointerfaces, improve the electron transfer rate, and further promote the HER performance.
 Fig. 9  LSV curves of the samples in (a) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (b) 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Gibbs free energy profiles calculated by DFT for catalysts for NiMo composites with and without graphene covering, giving the calculated free energy diagram of HER at the equilibrium potential for a Pt catalyst, Ni(111), and NiMo(100) with and without a graphene coating or graphene with ∼1 nm nanohole and a graphene sheet. (d) Bader charge population analysis of NiMo(100) covered by graphene with ∼1 nm nanohole. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM and (f) HRTEM images of the MoS2/rGO heterostructure. (g) Polarization curves of catalysts and (h) corresponding Tafel plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 on glassy carbon electrodes with catalyst loading of 0.28 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic illustration of the HER-activity-enhancing mechanism of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest in alkaline media. (j) Tafel plots of the samples. (k) Stability tests of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 at 20 mA cm−2. Inset shows the SEM image after 240 h of HER. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
The construction of graphene-based heterostructures to expose more active sites has also been a valid approach for enhancing the HER activities. Li et al. synthesized a MoS2/rGO heterostructure with MoS2 NPs uniformly anchored on rGO nanosheets (Fig. 9e).45 As revealed in the high-resolution TEM image of MoS2/rGO (Fig. 9f), MoS2 NPs were flatly decorated on rGO and possessed abundant open edges. The MoS2/rGO heterostructure catalyst exhibited formidable HER performance with small overpotential of about 0.1 V at 10 mA cm−2 and small Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 (Fig. 9g and h), which were better than those of MoS2 NPs and rGO. They declared that the formation of highly dispersed MoS2 NPs could be ascribed to the strong chemical and electronic coupling between the rGO sheets and MoS2 NPs. Consequently, a large amount of accessible edges supplied by the highly dispersed MoS2 on rGO could act as the active sites to promote the HER process. Moreover, the MoS2/rGO heterostructure showed much lower Faradaic impedance (Zf ≈ 250 Ω) than pure MoS2 particles (Zf ≈ 10 kΩ), indicating the largely faster HER kinetics of MoS2/rGO. Furthermore, MoS2/rGO possessed considerable durability. After operating for 24 h at the potential of 132 mV, there was no obvious decrease in the current density. This outstanding stability could be attributed to the strong binding of MoS2 and rGO, which protected the active MoS2 from getting exfoliated.
Moreover, constructing heterostructures on rGO can protect the active components from aggregation and further increase the number of exposed active sites. Konkena et al. engineered a MoSSe@rGO heterostructure composite.100 It was found that rGO introduced to MoSSe nanosheets could effectively lower the aggregation of MoSSe nanosheets, maximizing the number of exposed active edges. Moreover, they claimed that rGO not only served as an electrically conducting substrate to improve the charge transfer but also promoted the adsorption of H species on the active edge sites. Therefore, the synergistic effect of MoSSe@rGO heterostructure led to faster HER kinetics and lower Tafel slope and overpotential in acidic media when compared with those obtainable from pure MoSSe.
The most important properties imparted by the graphene component to the heterostructure catalyst are high stability, enhanced electronic conductivity, large specific surface area, and fast charge transfer kinetics on the heterointerface. As mentioned above, the introduction of graphene-based components into the heterostructure can effectively enhance the HER activities. Other hybrid catalysts with graphene-based components have also been reported, including MoCx NPs in N,S-codoped graphene,6 CoS2 NS/rGO/CNTs,142 MoS2 particles on graphene,143 WS2/rGO hybrid,41 treelike NiS2/MoS2-rGO hybrid,144 Cu–MoS2/rGO,145 Ni–Fe hydroxide nanosheet on defective graphene,98etc. In most of these cases, graphene-based components in the heterostructures only act as the conductive and protective substrates for the well-dispersed nanostructures to expose more active sites, a medium that supplies fast electron transport in the heterointerfaces or a tunable composition to modulate the electronic structure. There are few reports in which it has been shown that graphene-based components in the heterostructures can act as active sites to catalyze the HER process. In 2016, Jia et al. prepared a 2D graphene catalyst with carbon defects and found that this material exhibited promising electrocatalytic performance.146 Recently, Wang et al. reported the synthesis of 3D graphene networks with abundant sharp edge sites and their high activities toward HER.147 These results suggest that graphene materials can directly catalyze the HER process in some cases. Therefore, constructing a heterostructure with graphene materials with direct electrocatalytic ability may be a potential field to offer an additional electrocatalytic function.


4.2.2 Synergistic effect. 
As mentioned above, the synergistic effect is effective in improving the catalytic performance of heterostructure catalysts. Xu and co-workers prepared ultrathin Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 heterostructure nanosheets via a one-step electrodeposition method.148 The Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 catalyst exhibited smaller overpotential of 50 mV in alkaline media when compared with pure Ni(OH)2 and Ni3S2. As shown in Fig. 9i, the high porosity of Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 on the NF substrate could facilitate the electron transfer efficiency and supply an easier pathway for gas bubble escape, which may help in reducing the resistance for lower overpotential and faster HER kinetics. However, the main factor for the improved HER performance was the synergistic effect of Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2. The individual Ni3S2 exhibited weaker adsorption ability toward OH− to cleave the HO–H bonds for generating H* intermediates. After coupling with Ni(OH)2, Ni(OH)2 could effectively dissociate H2O molecules into H* intermediates due to its strong capability of OH− adsorption. Consequently, owing to the low hydrogen production barrier of Ni3S2, the H* intermediates migrated toward the nearby Ni3S2 and further recombined into H2 molecules. Therefore, the fabrication of Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 heterostructure expedited the water dissociation kinetics and resulted in a lower Tafel slope of 49 mV dec−1, which is much lower than those of Ni(OH)2 (60 mV dec−1) and Ni3S2 (99 mV dec−1) (as shown in Fig. 9j). In addition, Fig. 9k shows that Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 exhibited excellent long-time stability. After operating for 240 h, there were no obvious potential decrease and morphological changes.
Chen's group reported the preparation of Ni(OH)2–CoS2 hybrid NWs on carbon cloth (Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC) and applied it for HER catalysis in alkaline media.149 As shown in Fig. 10a and b, the Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC catalyst showed enhanced HER performance with overpotential of 99 mV at 20 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 118 mV dec−1. Fig. 10j shows the reaction pathway of HER in alkaline media, which includes the dissociation of activated water to form H* intermediates and the formation of H2 from H*. In order to understand the synergistic effect of the Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC interfaces on the HER mechanism, they also carried out DFT calculations (Fig. 10c–f). They found that the activated water adsorption energy was lowered from 1.67 eV in CoS2/CC to 0.15 eV in Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC and the binding free energy of H* was raised from −4.03 eV in CoS2/CC to −1.13 eV in Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC. Ni(OH)2 played the role of an active center for water dissociation to produce hydrogen intermediates, which were subsequently absorbed on nearby CoS2 sites to generate hydrogen. The synergistic effect between Ni(OH)2 and CoS2 promoted the alkaline HER kinetics of Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC. Further, the Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC heterostructure catalyst exhibited good stability. After operating for 30 h at overpotential of 98 mV, Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC still maintained its initial catalytic activity. Similarly, Zhao et al. reported an epitaxial Ni(OH)2/MoS2 heterostructure catalyst with improved HER activity in 1 M KOH.150 The introduction of Ni(OH)2 clusters could offer additional active sites for water dissociation, while MoS2 served as the adsorption and combination sites for H* intermediates. This synergistic effect eventually resulted in enhanced Volmer step (the step of water adsorption/dissociation) to yield a lower Tafel slope of 105 mV dec−1 as compared to that of MoS2 (124 mV dec−1).
 Fig. 10  (a) LSV curves and (b) Tafel plots of various catalysts at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH. (c) Schematic illustration of water activation, H* intermediate formation, and hydrogen generation processes of CoS2/CC and Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC. (d) Isosurfaces of the local charge density difference at the Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC interface. The free energy diagram of (e) Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC and (f) CoS2/CC. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) SEM images of CoP–CeO2/Ti. (h) Polarization curves of the catalysts at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH. (i–k) Models of CoP(211)/CeO2(111) (pink, blue, yellow, and red balls represent P, Co, Ce, and O atoms, respectively). (l) DFT-calculated reaction energy diagram of water dissociation for CoP(211) and CoP(211)/CeO2(111). (m) DFT-calculated ΔGH* values for CoP(211), CeO2(111), CoP(211)/CeO2(111), and Pt systems. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (n–p) HRTEM, (q) HAADF-STEM, and (r) SAED images of the interface of V8C7 with graphene. LSV curves of V8C7 NMs/GR, V8C7 NMs, V8C7@C, Pt/C, and KB carbon (s) in 1 M KOH and (t) in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
Some metal oxides such as TiO2,151 NiO,152 MoO2,153 and CoOx,154 which possess good water affinity, have been widely applied for the construction of heterostructure catalysts to promote the water adsorption/dissociation process under alkaline conditions. For instance, Zhang et al. fabricated a heterostructure catalyst of CoP–CeO2 nanosheets on a Ti mesh (Fig. 10g).94 As shown in Fig. 10h, the CoP–CeO2/Ti catalyst exhibited improved HER performance in alkaline media with much lower overpotential of 43 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 45 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH when compared with those of CoP/Ti. This result proved that the introduction of CeO2 could effectively enhance the HER performance by promoting the adsorption/dissociation process of water molecules. To further confirm the intrinsic mechanism of the CoP–CeO2/Ti heterostructure, the authors conducted DFT calculations on the CoP(211) and CoP(211)/CeO2(111) systems (Fig. 10i–m). They found that the interaction of CoP/CeO2 heterointerfaces could significantly decrease the energy barrier for water dissociation from 1.74 to 1.06 eV. Via the Bader charge analysis, they claimed that CoP could serve as charge donors to transfer approximately 0.1e− of the Co atom to CeO2, thereby making these Co sites more active. In addition, the ΔGH* values of CoP(211), CeO2 (111), and CoP(211)/CeO2 (111) systems revealed that the coupling of CoP and CeO2 modified ΔGH* to achieve its optimal value (−0.18 eV), which is very close to that of Pt. In conclusion, the synergistic effect of the CoP–CeO2/Ti heterostructure catalyst promoted the water dissociation step, and the binding energy of the hydrogen species could be tuned by the heterosurface interaction, consequently improving the HER activities in alkaline media. Moreover, CoP–CeO2/Ti also exhibited better stability with less increased potential of 16 mV than that of CoP/Ti (27 mV) after 100 h of continuous electrolysis. In addition to metal oxides and hydroxides, Jin et al. fabricated a heterostructure catalyst involving 2D graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and 2D molybdenum nitride (C3N4@MoN) with dual active sites. They found that the synergistic effect resulted in favorable OH adsorption on molybdenum nitride and optimized H adsorption on g-C3N4, thereby promoting the HER kinetics in alkaline media.


4.2.3 Electron structure control. 
As discussed in Section 2.1, the adsorbate binding energy of the reactant species have a considerable influence on the HER kinetics, which should be neither too weak nor too strong. The construction of heterostructures by assembling different active components could adjust the electronic structure of the metals to offer moderate binding energy of hydrogen, thereby improving the HER performance. For example, we reported a NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C core–shell heterostructure catalyst with highly effective HER performance under the acidic condition.97 NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C exhibited overpotential of 41 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 39.2 mV dec−1, surpassing pure NiCo2@C and Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C. To further understand the enhanced HER performance of NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C, we conducted DFT calculations. The results revealed that the binding energy of H* on the surface of NiCo2@C was too strong, while the binding energy of H* on the surface of Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C was too weak, but NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C exhibited the optimal adsorbate binding energy of intermediate H* due to the electronic structure modification of the heterointerfaces. NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C also showed considerable stability, which maintained the overpotential with nearly no change for 200 h, while NiCo2@C exhibited a relative increase under the same conditions. The excellent durability of NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C might be ascribed to the surface modification of the NiCo2 core, which ameliorated the negative effect of the irreversible reaction of the Ni-based component in a corrosive acidic medium; further, the highly graphitized carbon also protected it from aggregation to provide sufficient active sites and high stability.
Further, we reported a V8C7 nanomeshes/graphene heterostructure (V8C7 NMs/GR) with the epitaxial growth of graphene on a special crystal face of V8C7.70 We found that the epitaxially grown graphene exhibited the desired thickness of ∼0.69–0.74 nm (Fig. 10n–p). As shown in the HAADF-STEM image and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. 10q and r, respectively), it was evident that V8C7 exposed the highly active facet (023), and the crystal lattice orientation of V8C7 (400) exhibited a highly coherent relationship with that of graphene (100). It was believed that graphene could not only orderly grow along the specific crystal lattice of V8C7 but also exhibit strong interactions with V8C7. As expected, the V8C7 NMs/GR heterostructure catalyst showed better HER performance with smaller overpotential of 156 mV in 1 M KOH and 52 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 10 mA cm−2 as compared to V8C7 NMs and V8C7@C (V8C7 decorated by low crystallinity of carbon or amorphous carbon layer) (Fig. 10s and t). The improved HER performance could be attributed to the strong electronic interaction of the heterointerfaces between V8C7 and highly conductive graphene, dramatically decreasing the energy barriers of the HER process, which was confirmed by the DFT calculations. Owing to the electronic transfer between graphene and V8C7, V8C7 NMs/GR showed favorable activated water adsorption energy and hydrogen adsorption energy, thereby facilitating the water dissociation step and production of subsequent hydrogen, respectively. Moreover, due to the effective protection of graphene that significantly reduced the corrosion of V8C7 in acidic and alkaline solutions, V8C7 NMs/GR displayed excellent durability with marginal performance loss after cycling for 2500 cycles.
The HER process occurs with the transmission of electrons. Therefore, the surface electron density of the catalysts has a considerable impact on the HER performance. As mentioned above, the heterointerfaces of the heterostructure catalyst have been demonstrated to be effective to modulate the electronic structure. In fact, the heterointerfaces are also helpful in tuning the electron density. For the reduction reaction like HER, an electron-rich catalyst is more beneficial owing to its better charge-donating ability to the reactants. For example, Wang et al. prepared a WxC@WS2 heterostructure on CFs for HER in acidic media.96 They found that the WxC@WS2 heterostructure with Ravenala-leaf-like nanoribbons could be obtained when the reaction time was raised to 20 min (denoted by WxC@WS2-20) (Fig. 11a). According to the XPS measurements, the occurrence of the new peaks of S 2p in WxC@WS2-20 might be attributed to the electronic redistribution near the S atoms, which strongly proved the charge transfer of the heterointerface of WxC and WS2. They claimed that such charge transfer played a key role in improving the HER activity of WxC@WS2. As shown in Fig. 11b and c, WxC@WS2-20 exhibited much better HER performance than WxC-60 and WS2. DFT calculation results showed that 0.12e− was transferred from the outermost W of W2C to WS2 when WS2 was coupled with W2C (Fig. 11d). The electron loss of W indicated its decreased ability to bind to H atoms, which is more beneficial for the desorption of hydrogen. DOS analysis (Fig. 11e) revealed that the interfacial W of W2C in WxC@WS2 exhibited an apparently reduced DOS around the Fermi level in comparison with that on the surface of pure WxC, which suggested that interfacial W possessed more suitable ΔGH* value. These results prove that the interaction and charge redistribution on the heterointerfaces between WxC and WS2 facilitate the dynamic process to lower the Tafel slope. Moreover, after performing the electrocatalysis tests for 10 h at potential of −150 mV, there was no obvious decrease in the current density of WxC@WS2. Ma and co-workers reported a multi-interfacial Ni/WC hybrid NPs on N-doped carbon sheets (Ni/WC@NC) with striking kinetic metrics in a wide pH range. They claimed that the Ni/WC@NC catalyst could expose abundant active sites and exhibit higher mass transport ability including multiple heterointerfaces to accelerate the HER kinetics. Otherwise, the interfacial properties of Ni/WC induce the electron transfer pathway from WC to Ni, which induced Ni to have more electron-rich states, thereby optimizing H adsorption on the Ni center and improving the HER activity.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of WxC@WS2-20. (b) Polarization curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of various electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Charge redistribution in the WxC@WS2 heterostructure. The arrows denote the electron transfer direction. Blue, red, and yellow balls denote the W, C, and S atoms. (e) DOS comparison of W on the surface and interface around the Fermi level. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Different components possess different affinity of electrons, resulting in electron donation or acceptance behaviors on the heterointerface of the heterostructure. The movement of electrons can lead to the partial electron deficiency of one component and partial electron accumulation of the other component in a heterostructure catalyst, which is helpful to engineer a bifunctional electrocatalyst, simultaneously promoting the HER and OER processes. For example, Oh et al. designed a bifunctional heterostructure catalyst comprising LSC, MoSe2, and KB carbon toward water splitting.114 This heterostructure catalyst (denoted as LSC&MoSe2) showed higher HER and OER activities than those of pure MoSe2 and the heterostructure of LSC and KB (denoted as LSC) in alkaline media. The overpotential of the LSC&MoSe2 heterostructure was −0.2 V for HER and 1.52 V vs. RHE for OER, which were smaller than those of LSC (−0.33 V for HER and 1.54 V for OER) (Fig. 12a and b). The XPS results and HRTEM image analysis (Fig. 12c–e) reveal that the phase transformation partly occurs in MoSe2 from the 2H phase to the 1T phase during the fabrication process of the LSC&MoSe2 heterostructure, which could be ascribed to the charge transfer from Co to Mo (the schematic diagram for the proposed charge transfer process is shown in Fig. 12f). To theoretically clarify the improved performance, they conducted the DFT calculations to study the phenomenon of electron transfer on the heterointerface of LSC&MoSe2. As shown in Fig. 12g and h, it was found that the LSC transferred an amount of 0.772e− into MoSe2 according to the Bader charge analysis. On one hand, due to charge transfer occurring in the heterointerface, the εd value of Co in the LSC increased by approximately 0.1 eV with respect to the Fermi level, which made the LSC more electrophilic and strengthened the OH− affinity, thereby promoting the OER process. On the other hand, the εd value of Mo in 2H-MoSe2 significantly shifted downward to about 0.9 eV with respect to the Fermi level, suggesting the additional electrons diverted to 2H-MoSe2, which could impel the phase transformation in accordance with the XPS results. The phase transformation of MoSe2 from the semiconducting 2H phase to the metallic 1T phase could close the energy gap to enhance the conductivity, further expediting the reaction process as well as lowering the overpotential and Tafel slope. Therefore, the LSC&MoSe2 heterostructure exhibited excellent bifunctional catalytic properties. When the LSC&MoSe2 heterostructure catalyst was used as the cathode as well as the anode in an alkaline electrolyzer, LSC&MoSe2‖LSC&MoSe2 exhibited long-term stability over 1000 h at a small operating voltage, which could be comparable to that of Pt/C‖IrO2.
 Fig. 12  (a) HER and (b) OER polarization curves of various catalysts measured in N2-saturated 1 M KOH. (c) HRTEM image of LSC&MoSe2, indicating the presence of both 2H- and 1T-phase MoSe2. (d) Enlarged region of 2H-MoSe2 shown with a schematic lattice structure, illustrating the hexagonal crystal structure with Mo–Mo interatomic distance of 0.28 nm. (e) Enlarged region of 1T-MoSe2 shown with a schematic lattice structure, indicating the Mo–Mo (0.563 nm) and Se–Se (0.324 nm) interatomic distances. (f) Schematic diagram of the proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC. (g) Optimized structure of LSC&2H-MoSe2 heterostructure. The red-shaded box represents the fixed atoms in the two bottommost layers. The blue arrow indicates the direction of charge transfer from LSC to MoSe2. (h) Spin-up and spin-down projected density of states (PDOS) on the following species: Co-3d in LSC (blue dotted line), Co-3d in LSC&2H-MoSe2 (blue solid line), Mo-4d in 2H-MoSe2 (red dotted line), and Mo-4d in LSC&2H-MoSe2 (red solid line). The vertical lines represent the position of εd for each species. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
In summary, various heterostructure materials show unique HER catalytic characteristics, which can be attributed to the sum of the interactions contributed by the individual components, resulting in higher stability, higher electronic conductivity, more active sites, and faster charge transfer kinetics on the heterointerface. There is no doubt that designing rational heterostructure catalysts is an effective strategy to improve the HER performance. However, in terms of synthesis, industrial applications, and mechanism exploration of the heterostructure catalysts, certain challenges still persist.

5. Role of heterostructures for improving the HER activity and stability
Heterostructure materials exhibit unique HER catalytic properties, such as the synergistic effect, electron structure control, support effect, etc. These effects of the heterostructure catalysts are the reasons why they exhibit such good performance when compared with the individual components. These unique properties of the heterostructure catalysts finally result in faster charge transfer kinetics, more active sites, better catalytic activity, and higher stability, which are necessities for the HER catalysts. Therefore, we can conclude the role played by heterostructures in enhancing these properties.
5.1 Efficient electron transfer
Fast electron transfer is important to improve the reaction kinetics and avoid unnecessary resistance in the HER process. A catalyst with efficient electronic conductivity can facilitate charge transfer throughout the process. By heterostructured interface engineering, reducing the size of the active components and coupling them with conductive substrates (such as carbon-based materials and nickel foam, etc.) can significantly boost the electron conductivity. Theoretically, the Fermi energy level is the driving force for charge transport. A higher electron density around the Fermi energy level can result in higher conductivity. Therefore, the electron interaction of the heterointerface may modify the electron structure of the components, realizing a suitable Fermi energy level and therefore inducing higher conductivity.
5.2 Abundant active sites
Abundant active sites can guarantee sufficient contact between the electrolytes/reactants and catalysts, thereby expediting the HER process. By rationally undertaking heterostructured interface engineering, heterostructure catalysts can realize nanosize and nanostructure control and hybridization with the substrates with large specific surface areas to expose more active sites. However, some active materials, especially the nanosizing component, can easily aggregate to the large-scale bulk state that can peel off during the reaction process, which can markedly reduce the number of active sites, leading to lower HER kinetics as well as higher overpotential and Tafel slope. However, on the heterointerfaces of the heterostructure catalysts, there is strong binding between the two components or between the active components and substrates, which is sufficient to protect the catalyst from aggregation and peeling, thereby maintaining sufficient numbers of exposed active sites. In addition, constructing a heterostructure with metal oxide/(oxy)/hydroxide structure or other components with high OH affinity can induce additional active sites for the water dissociation step, thereby leading to diverse active sites in a single catalyst.
5.3 Promising catalytic activity
The intrinsic surface electronic structure governs the catalytic activity of HER catalysts to a large extent. The fabrication of heterointerfaces in the heterostructure catalysts can effectively change the surface electronic structure of the catalyst and then modify the adsorption and desorption free energies of the reactant/intermediate species. As mentioned above, the inherent surface adsorption ability of H* is closely related to the metal d-orbital levels, as per the d-band center theory. When the metal's Fermi level is closer to the d-band center, it can result in stronger H* adsorption. In the heterostructure catalyst, there exists strong electron interaction on the heterointerface, which may change the electron density of the metal atoms and lead to a shift in the d-band center (shift down or shift up), thereby tuning the H* adsorption strength. Therefore, constructing heterostructure catalysts to modify the d-band center and electron transfer is an efficient way to obtain the optimal adsorption/desorption strength, ultimately accelerating the sluggish step during the HER process. In addition, constructing heterostructures may induce additional active sites. In particular, for alkaline electrocatalysis, heterostructure catalysts based on metal oxide/(oxy)hydroxide can provide active sites for the water dissociation step to accelerate the sluggish step, leading to better HER performance.
5.4 Long-term stability
Stability is significant for the practical applications of a catalyst, which suggests the long-term ability to maintain the original catalytic activity of the electrocatalysts. Commonly, the strong binding strength between the different components of a heterostructure catalyst accounts for their worthwhile chemical and mechanical stabilities, which reduce the agglomeration, peeling, and structural damage of the catalyst. The HER process usually occurs under highly corrosive basic or acidic conditions; the active component may get corroded or dissolved to decrease the catalytic activity. By heterostructured interface engineering, constructing a core–shell structure or coating with carbon-based materials can ameliorate corrosion and dissolution during the long-term catalytic process, thereby improving the stability.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Heterostructure materials can be a new type of electrocatalysts in the field of materials science. Constructing heterostructures has been considered to be a very important surface engineering aspect in order to promote the advancement of catalysts with defined functions. In this review, we present the recent progresses made in heterostructure materials toward HER with the emphasis on the synthesis methods and catalytic properties of the heterostructure catalysts. We introduced several kinds of common and uncommon synthesis approaches, such as vapor-transport-based methods, liquid exfoliation and self-assembly, hydrothermal/solvothermal method, ECD, high-energy ball-milling methods, etc. We also shed light on the worthwhile HER catalytic activity of heterostructure catalysts, which can be attributed to the improved electronic conductivity, increased active sites, synergistic effect, and modified electronic structure on the heterointerfaces. Some recent heterostructure catalysts for HER are summarized in Tables 2 and 3. Although many studies have demonstrated the improvement in HER performance by the rational design of heterostructure catalysts, there still exist some challenges to further develop heterostructure catalysts. The important purpose of such studies on HER heterostructure catalysts is to realize the real industrial applications. However, the activity of nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts and the production costs for both noble-metal- and nonnoble-metal-based catalysts are still far from the requirement of practical applications. Therefore, from the perspective of industrial applications of heterostructure catalysts, we have proposed certain strategies for the fabrication of heterostructure catalysts in the future.
Table 2 Noble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts for HER in acidic and alkaline media




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Electrolyte
Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)


Prepared
Pt/C
Prepared
Pt/C




Pt/MoS2 (ref. 156)
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 M H2SO4
31
21
52
32


Pt Cs/MoO2 NSs-L113
Photodeposition
0.5 M H2SO4
47
38
32.6
31.2


Pt/f-MWCNTs112
Photodeposition
0.5 M H2SO4
43.9
45.2
30
31


Pt–FeNi@C157
Solvothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
—
—
26.1
25.1


Pt SASs/AG158
Microwave reduction
0.5 M H2SO4
57
<57
55
39


EG-Pt/CoP-1.5 (ref. 159)
Chemical reduction
0.5 M H2SO4
21
>21
42.5
31


Pt SA/m-WO3−x160
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
47
<47
45
26


Pt@MoS2/NiS2 (ref. 161)
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO
34
—
40
30


Pt/NiS@Al2O3 (ref. 162)
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO
34
∼34
35
30


Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 (ref. 163)
Hot-injection
0.5 M H2SO
18.5
37.6
13.3
30


CPt@ZIF-67 (ref. 164)
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO
50
55
27.1
35.5


Ru/CoP165
Chemical reduction
0.5 M H2SO
11
8
31
29


RuSx/S-GO166
Hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
31
28
40
27


Ru–RuO2/CNT167
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
63
53
31
38


RuSA N-S-Ti3C2Tx168
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
76
53
90
29


Rh–MoS2 (ref. 136)
Hot-injection
0.5 M H2SO4
47
26
24
30


Ni@Ni2P-Ru169
Sol–gel method
0.5 M H2SO4
51
38
35
31


Ir@N-G-750 (ref. 170)
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
19
23
26
28


IrNi@OC-430 (ref. 171)
Hydrothermal and CVD
0.5 M H2SO4
95 (100 mA cm−2)
>95 (100 mA cm−2)
18
24


IrCo@NC-T172
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
24
35
23
30


Sub-MoSx/CNTs/Pdgly119
Sacrificial-counter-electrode method
0.5 M H2SO4
23
34
18
30


RhPx@NPC173
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
22
32
32
29


RhP2@NPGC137
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
78
<78
30
35


PAH@Rh-NSNSs/CNT174
Hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
5
>5
30
31


Pd@TNT-80 (ref. 120)
Galvanic displacement
1 M HClO4
38
33
13
16


Pd@RuOx/NCNT175
Atomic layer deposition
0.5 M H2SO4
33
<33
33.1
35.6


Pd ND/DR-MoS2 (ref. 135)
Solvothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
40
>40
41
30


Pd13Cu3S7 NPs/C122
Ion-exchange
0.5 M H2SO4
64
<64
49.6
26.4


Os/SiNW121
Ion-exchange
0.5 M H2SO4
43
25 (40% Pt/C)
24
30 (40% Pt/C)


20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 (ref. 176)
Hydrothermal and solution-phase reduction
1 M KOH
27
44
45
108


Pt–Co(OH)2/CC133
Hydrothermal and electrodeposition
1 M KOH
32
—
70
68


Pt–Ni(OH)2 nano-networks177
Electroless deposition and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
—
—
55.8
140


Pt–Ni/rGO178
Solvothermal
1 M KOH
78
124
53
78


NiPt3@NiS NF179
Solvothermal
1 M KOH
12
22
24
31


PtRu NCs/BP180
Chemical reduction
1 M KOH
22
77
19
46


Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 (ref. 163)
Hot-injection
1 M KOH
—
—
39.5
38.5


NiPt3@NiS/NF179
Hot injection
1 M KOH
12
10 (100% Pt)
24
31 (100% Pt)


Ni3N/Pt128
Electrodeposition
1 M KOH
83 (50 mA cm−2)
194 (50 mA cm−2)
36.5
50.6


CoNPA@TiO2@Pt181
Atomic layer deposition
1 M KOH
29
36
42
—


Ru/Ni(OH)2/NF182
Spontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction
1 M KOH
25
—
47
45


NiO/Ru@PNS116

In situ electro-oxidation process
1 M KOH
39
31
75
58


Ru–MoS2/CNT183
Thermal annealing
1 M KOH
50
<50
62
32


Ru–RuO2/CNT167
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
12
26
30
46


1 M PBS
48
>48
35
104


Ru@Co-SAs/N-C158
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
7
40
30
46


1 M PBS
55
—
82
71


Ru-HPC184
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
—
—
33.9
41


Ru/WNO@C185
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
2
27
33
42


Ru1Ni1 NCNFs186
Electrospinning and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
<37
37
30
30


Ru NCs/BNG187
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
14
26
28.9
38.2


RuP2@NPGC137
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
108
25
30
35


[Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx @GN]/GN188
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
7.5
40
20
79


rGO-MoO3−x-MoRu189
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
20
27
25
39


Ir@N-G-750 (ref. 170)
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
43
>43
35
37


RhPx@NPC173
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
69
<69
80
30


1 M PBS
38
<38
56
37




Table 3 Nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts for HER in acidic and alkaline media




Catalysts
Synthetic method
Electrolyte
Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)


Prepared
Pt/C
Prepared
Pt/C




CoS2@MoS2/RGO43
Hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
98
<98
37.4
29.8


PEI@NiP2-CC190
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
44
15
33.2
30


GGNR@MoS2 (ref. 191)
Freeze-drying method
0.5 M H2SO4
183
<183
49
31


CoS2/RGO-CNT142
Hydrothermal and vacuum filtration
0.5 M H2SO4
142
—
51
—


CoP/NiCoP NTs192
Solid-state phase transformation
0.5 M H2SO4
125
<125
71
31


(CoMo)S2/RGO193
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
100
38
60.8
31


Co2−xNixP/N-C NFs194
Electrospinning and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
100
<100
35
30


Co3S4/CoP93
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
86
<86
45
34


CoS2/MoS2/RGO195
Hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
160
<160
56
30


CoP/NiCoP/NC42
Co-precipitation, electrostatic self-assembly, and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
60
39
58
34


CoP/Ni5P4/CoP196
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO
33
31
43
30


CS@CNC NAs/CC197
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
84
35
38
32


MoS2/graphene198
Liquid-phase salt-assisted co-exfoliation
0.5 M H2SO4
—
—
61
34


MoS2@graphene153
Hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
132
51
45
33


MoP/NPG199
Space-confined growth and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
148
<148
49
30


Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr140
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
157
<157
55
30


Mo2C@MoS2NS46
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
67
<67
37
30


NiS2/MoS2-RGO144
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
172
<172
51
36


NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C97
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
41
—
39.2
30.1


Ni/WC@NC200
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
53
<53
45.3
30


Mo2C@NPC/NPRGO201
Thermal annealing
0.5 M H2SO4
34
40
33.6
30


MoS2/CoS2 NTs202
Template-engaged hydrothermal
0.5 M H2SO4
90
<90
30
28


WxC@WS2 (ref. 96)
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
146
<146
61
32


WS2/W203
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
108
<108
46.8
28


WS2/Ni5P4–Ni2P204
CVD
0.5 M H2SO4
94
51
74
31


C3N4@MoN205
Vapor–solid reaction
0.5 M H2SO4
90
<90
47.5
33.7


V8C7 NMs/GR70
CVD
0.5 M H2SO4
52


48.3




Ni/NiO@C206
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
64
46
55
39


Ni(OH)2@CuS207
Coordinating etching and precipitating
1 M KOH
95
<95
48
104


Ni(OH)2@MoS2@CC44
Electrodeposition
1 M KOH
119
<119
60
32


Ni2−xMoxP/NiMoO4−yNF208
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
∼36
—
53
59


Ni2P–NiSe2/CC209
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
66
47
72.6
35.7


FeNiP/PG210
Microwave irradiation
1 M KOH
173
<193
50.3
—


NiO/Ni-CNT211
Hydrolysis and thermal annealing
1 M KOH
<100
—
82
—


NiFe-LDH/MXene/NF212
Electrodeposition
1 M KOH
132
70
70
32


Ni3V2O8/NRGO213
Galvanic displacement
1 M KOH
43
16
54.8
30.3


Ni@NCNT/NiMoN/NF214
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
15
11
83
30


Ni2P–Cu3P@NiCuC215
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
78
<78
173
<173


CoMnP/Ni2P/NiFe216
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
87
42
95
58


CoMoO4–Co2Mo3O8 (ref. 217)
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
57
—
55
32


Co/Co2P@ACF/CNT HNCs218
Chemical etching and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
78
32
49
37


Co2N/Co/CF219
Electrodeposition and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
12
<12
41.6
73.3


Co3O4/MoS2 (ref. 220)
Hydrothermal
1 M KOH
205
42
128
98


Co3S4@MoS2 (ref. 221)
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
136
57
74
45


O-doped Co2P/CuO NWs/CF222
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
101
<101
69.4
52.5


Co@CoMoO4 NA223
Chemical bath deposition
1 M KOH
46
31
85
53


Mo2C@MoS2 NS46
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
86
<86
39
—


MoSe2/SnS2 (ref. 224)
Hydrothermal
1 M KOH
285
—
109
—


CoMoNiS–NF-xy225
Hydrothermal
1 M KOH
117
92
85
—


MoC–Mo2C/PNCDs226
Ion-exchange and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
121
—
60
—


CoP/NiCoP NTs192
Solid-state phase transformation
1 M KOH
133
<133
88
65


NiS2/MoS2-RGO144
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
144
<144
82
41


P–Mo–Ni(OH)2 NSAs227
Plasma enhanced CVD
1 M KOH
22
<22
80
34


Ni-rGO87
Electrodeposition
1 M NaOH
36
—
77
—


Ni3Cu1@NG-NC228
Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
122
80
84.2
45.2


V8C7 NMs/GR70
CVD
1 M KOH
156
86
89.4
52.4


Mn–O@Co–P/CC229
Hydrothermal
1 M KOH
106
—
56
—


TiO2/NiFeS230
Atomic layer deposition
1 M KOH
107
—
69
—


C3N4@MoN205
Vapor–solid reaction
1 M KOH
110
<110
57.8
35.6




Noble-metal-based heterostructure materials have been proven to show fast reaction kinetics and superior HER performance over that of commercial Pt/C. However, Pt mass loading has not been significantly decreased to meet the demand of economical hydrogen production. Further, the stability is not sufficiently high for long-term electrocatalysis. Therefore, it is still an important research area to improve the utilization efficiency of noble metals and improve the stability in the future, such as the construction of noble metal “quantum islands” heterostructures, which are nanosized flakes with the thickness of several atomic layers. When compared with the reported noble-metal-based NPs or clusters-based heterostructures, quantum islands can provide more active sites with less metal loading. In comparison with noble-metal-based quantum dots, quantum islands have stronger electronic interaction with supports on the heterointerfaces. In addition, quantum islands are partially encapsulated, which can improve the stability of catalysts. Therefore, quantum-islands-based heterostructure catalysts have great research value. Moreover, although most nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts exhibit enhanced HER performance, their catalytic performance and long-term stability cannot meet industrial requirements, as well as the fact that their large-scale synthesis is difficult to realize. For graphene materials, recent studies have demonstrated that graphene-based catalysts possess promising catalytic activities toward HER processes in some cases, not only as substrates or inactive components.146,147 Therefore, the construction of a heterostructure with active graphene materials that possess direct electrocatalytic ability may be a potential field to offer an additional electrocatalytic function, which also possesses the possibility of large-scale production. Moreover, the design of quantum-islands-based heterostructures is also an effective method to develop nonnoble-metal-based catalysts. It should be pointed out that such heterostructure catalysts not only need to have improved shape and size uniformity but also demand large-area alignment. Regardless of being made for noble or nonnoble metals, quantum-islands-based heterostructure catalysts are definitely a promising strategy for developing heterostructure materials in the coming years despite the current limitations in the optimization of morphology and components. In addition, an economic synthesis technique with easy operation is vital for the industrial production of heterostructure catalysts. For the preparation of nonnoble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts, the hydrothermal or solvothermal method may be the most promising approach owing to its low cost, high universality, and high yield, which may also be realized by the one-pot synthesis of heterostructure catalysts. However, this method is not economical for the fabrication of noble-metal-based heterostructures due to solvent loss. A promising approach for fabricating noble-metal-based heterostructure catalysts is the high-energy ball-milling method. The further modification of both these synthesis methods can yield the economic industrial synthesis of heterostructure catalysts with promising catalytic activity and stability.
Some X-ray-based measurement technologies, such as XPS, XANES, and EXAFS, have been widely used to confirm the modification of electronic structure,108,129,155 but these techniques cannot directly explain the physicochemical phenomenon occurring on the heterointerfaces as well as the intrinsic mechanism of the HER process. In situ characterization techniques have been developed to realize the real-time observation of a reaction process. The development of in situ characterization techniques can offer direct proofs to clarify the real effects of heterointerfaces, which are vital for the in-depth mechanism investigation as well as possibly providing newer insights into the design of heterostructure catalysts with promising HER performance. Moreover, combining experimental study with theoretical calculations is very meaningful to fundamentally explore the relationships between the heterostructure and enhanced catalytic performance. On one hand, DFT calculations can offer information regarding the binding energy of the adsorbate species and charge density on the heterointerface, which can facilitate the analysis of the intrinsic mechanism and predict the HER performance of the catalyst. However, the mechanism of a relatively complex heterostructure catalyst is considerably difficult to be accurately demonstrated. Therefore, it becomes necessary to further develop the theoretical calculations for guiding the experimental synthesis process. On the other hand, synthesis approaches should be developed to better control the size, morphology, and anchoring positions of each component. For example, substrates or one component can be modified by organic or inorganic groups to show the chemical activity for coupling or binding with other constituents. Otherwise, the development of synthesis methods should also consider the possibility of large-scale industrial production. Overall, we believe that the development of theoretical methodologies and characterization techniques can provide a promising contribution toward the investigation of the intrinsic mechanism and function of heterointerfaces in the future. Further, the rational design and synthesis of heterostructure materials are attractive and challenging methods to develop electrocatalysts with high catalytic activity for electrochemical water splitting and also provide the possibility of realizing economical hydrogen production at a larger scale.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (0301005202017, 2018CDQYFXCS0017, 106112017CDJXSYY0001), Thousand Young Talents Program of the Chinese Central Government (Grant No. 0220002102003), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. U19A20100, 21971027, 21373280, 21403019), Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS) and Hundred Talents Program at Chongqing University (Grant No. 0903005203205), The State Key Laboratory of Mechanical Transmissions Project (SKLMT-ZZKT-2017M11).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Tan, L. Fang, X. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 568–575 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
Q. Gao, W. Zhang, Z. Shi, L. Yang and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802880 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. Yang, D. K. J. A. Wanigarathna and B. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700353 CrossRef .
M. Wang, L. Chen and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6763–6778 RSC .
N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1513–1524 CrossRef .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, J. Dai, Y. Chen, H. Sun, W. Zhou, M. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. Wang and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 149 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Sun, F. Qin, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2551 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu and R. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2860–2868 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhu, X. Dong, Z. Liu, G. Zhang, W. Jin and N. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7137–7139 RSC .
A. Konieczny, K. Mondal, T. Wiltowski and P. Dydo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 264–272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700090 CrossRef .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 476, 90–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
J. Zhu, Z.-C. Wang, H. Dai, Q. Wang, R. Yang, H. Yu, M. Liao, J. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Wei, N. Li, L. Du, D. Shi, W. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1348 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Shao, K. Lu and X. Huang, Small
Methods, 2019, 3, 1800545 CrossRef .
J. M. McEnaney, J. C. Crompton, J. F. Callejas, E. J. Popczun, A. J. Biacchi, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4826–4831 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Xu, C. Li, D. Wu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1803970 CrossRef .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, G. Cheng, S. Chen, W. Luo and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4679–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, Q. Zhang and C. Yuan, Carbon, 2016, 98, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, W. Xu, S. Zhu, Z. Cui, X. Yang and A. Inoue, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Yang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Li, S. Min, J. Ming, K.-W. Huang, W. Zhang and L.-J. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 470–478 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
L. Yang, H. Xu, H. Liu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900113 CrossRef .
Q. Gong, Y. Wang, Q. Hu, J. Zhou, R. Feng, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, F. Chen, N. Han, Y. Li, C. Jin, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Ren, L. Chen, C.-C. Weng, G.-G. Yuan and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33276–33286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Yu, G.-D. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10752–10757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Faber, M. A. Lukowski, Q. Ding, N. S. Kaiser and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21347–21356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, L. Xiao, C. Yang, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 3055–3060 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shetty, M. Mohamed Jaffer Sadiq, D. K. Bhat and A. C. Hegde, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 796, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Tang, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14305–14312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, J. Wang, Y. Nie and Z. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, X. Han, W. Sun, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, F. Cheng, Q. Yan, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 12802–12807 CrossRef .
D. Y. Chung, S. W. Jun, G. Yoon, H. Kim, J. M. Yoo, K.-S. Lee, T. Kim, H. Shin, A. K. Sinha, S. G. Kwon, K. Kang, T. Hyeon and Y.-E. Sung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6669–6674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Voiry, S. J. Ahn, D. Kang, A. Y. Kim, M. Chhowalla and H. S. Shin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13751–13754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Boppella, J. Tan, W. Yang and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807976 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, L. Gan, C. Shang, E. Wang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1602699 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Fang, X. Yang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, P. Wang, Q. Zhang, B. Huang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Dai, X. Qin and X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 422–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Liu, X. Yin and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4506–4524 RSC .
P. Das, Q. Fu, X. Bao and Z.-S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21747–21784 RSC .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. Paul Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mieszawska, R. Jalilian, G. U. Sumanasekera and F. P. Zamborini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10822–10823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
P. Solís-Fernández, M. Bissett and H. Ago, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4572–4613 RSC .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, J. Wang and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13509–13537 RSC .
T. Kwon, M. Jun, J. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5090–5110 RSC .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, S. Kegnæs, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5577–5591 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
A. Hamnett, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2689 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. Sam Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
K. Ojha, S. Saha, P. Dagar and A. K. Ganguli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6777–6799 RSC .
W. Fu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, M. He, L. Fang, X. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Li, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 369, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(2), 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cilpa-Karhu, O. J. Pakkanen and K. Laasonen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 13569–13577 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23782–23802 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Zhang and X. Wang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700118 CrossRef .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Hu, G. Haider, Y.-M. Liao, P. K. Roy, R. Ravindranath, H.-T. Chang, C.-H. Lu, C.-Y. Tseng, T.-Y. Lin, W.-H. Shih and Y.-F. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703549 CrossRef PubMed .
V. E. Calado, G. F. Schneider, A. M. M. G. Theulings, C. Dekker and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 103116 CrossRef .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Gong, Z. Hu, G. Brunetto, Y. Yang, G. Ye, Z. Zhang, S. Lei, Z. Jin, E. Bianco, X. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Lou, D. S. Galvão, M. Tang, B. I. Yakobson, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10656–10661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Fathi, L. Chen, A. Abbas, Y. Ma and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6119–6127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Xie, B. Anasori, A. Sarycheva, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, L. Miao, J. Jiang and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1846–1850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, A. Behranginia, T. Foroozan, M. Asadi, K. Kim, F. Khalili-Araghi and A. Salehi-Khojin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9898–9905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Li, M. Xia, Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Ma, X. Qin and G. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 220–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, F. Li, W. Chen, Q. Xiang, Y. Ma, H. Zhu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang, T. Deng and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803151 CrossRef PubMed .
L. An, L. Huang, P. Zhou, J. Yin, H. Liu and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6814–6822 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, L. Zhong, B. Zhang, H.-F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705110 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Yu, G.-D. Li, Y. Sun, T. Asefa, W. Chen and X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10752–10757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Nikam, A.-Y. Lu, P. A. Sonawane, U. R. Kumar, K. Yadav, L.-J. Li and Y.-T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23328–23335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, L. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Wang, W. Zhong and Y. Du, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11891 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1985–1990 RSC .
H. Lin, Z. Shi, S. He, X. Yu, S. Wang, Q. Gao and Y. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3399–3405 RSC .
F. Wang, P. He, Y. Li, T. A. Shifa, Y. Deng, K. Liu, Q. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, L. Sun and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605802 CrossRef .
C. Yin, J. Deng, L. Fang, Y. Wang, X. Yang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2018, 365, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, D. Liu, N. Yang, J. Wang, M. Huang, L. Liu, X. Peng, G. Wang, X.-F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
B. Konkena, J. Masa, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 46–53 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L. Liu, Z. Zhu, P. Papakonstantinou, J. Hu, H. Liu and M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 625–633 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. Zeng, C. Lin, M. Giroux, L. Jiang, Y. Han, J. Greeley, C. Wang and J. Jin, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y. Gu, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Shang, Y. Zhu, B. Zhou, L. Zhu and X. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 355–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Li, A. Hähnel, V. Naumann, C. Lin, S. Azimi, S. L. Schweizer, A. W. Maijenburg and R. B. Wehrspohn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706847 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Wang, M. Gong, H.-L. Chou, C.-J. Pan, H.-A. Chen, Y. Wu, M.-C. Lin, M. Guan, J. Yang, C.-W. Chen, Y.-L. Wang, B.-J. Hwang, C.-C. Chen and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1587–1592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, C. Wang, P. Zhao, Y. Wang, L. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Hu, Z. Lu, Z. Xu, Y. Ma, T. Chen, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6084–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, C. Shang and E. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2504–2507 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Pohl, B. Rellinghaus, R. Dong, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, D. Wang, Q. Li, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 729–733 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-x. Cai, X.-h. Song, Y.-r. Wang and X. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1665–1671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, Y. Zhang, L. Tang, C. Liu, X. Gao, M. Sun, J. Zheng, M. Ling, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103849 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Jia, A. Wang, L. Zhao, T. Xiong, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Yin, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Q. Zhou, S. Li, L. Cao, J. Li, Z. Shen, H. Ma, J. Liu, M. Lu and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2344–2350 RSC .
A. Kagkoura, M. Pelaez-Fernandez, R. Arenal and N. Tagmatarchis, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1489–1496 RSC .
X. Zhou, Y. Liu, H. Ju, B. Pan, J. Zhu, T. Ding, C. Wang and Q. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1838–1846 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, X. Zhou, H. Nie, X. Xu, X. Zheng, J. Hou, H. Duan, S. Huang and Z. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15599–15606 RSC .
U. Lačnjevac, R. Vasilić, T. Tokarski, G. Cios, P. Żabiński, N. Elezović and N. Krstajić, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 527–538 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, X. Fan, F. Liao, S. Lu, Y. Li, L. Liu, Y. Li, H. Lin, M. Shao and S.-T. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 284–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, H. Jin, J. Lee, A. Oh, B. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6884–6892 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Y. Deng, Y. Zhang, Q. He, D. Xiao, M. Peng, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, R. Luo, T. Gan, H. Ji and D. Ma, Cell Reports Physical Science, 2019, 100004,  DOI:10.1016/j.xcrp.2019.100004 .
W. Gao, Z. D. Hood and M. Chi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 787–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, S. Bao, M. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1444 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hou, W. Zhou, X. Liu, K. Zhou, J. Xie, G. Li and S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Wan, S. Guo, G. Lu, J. Yao and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601390 CrossRef .
M. Lao, K. Rui, G. Zhao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 5486–5491 CrossRef .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Wang, X. Li, H. Wang, X. Sun, L. Chen and Q. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 810–813 RSC .
Z. Xing, C. Han, D. Wang, Q. Li and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7131–7135 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, S. Yu, Q. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Fan, W. Zheng and X. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4025–4031 RSC .
Y. Cheng, S. Lu, F. Liao, L. Liu, Y. Li and M. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700359 CrossRef .
J. Yu, X. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Ni, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2645–2653 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cai and G. Yu, Small Methods, 2019, 1900071 CrossRef .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, Y. Jiao, A. Wu, C. Tian, X. Zhang, L. Wang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704156 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ito, T. Ohto, D. Hojo, M. Wakisaka, Y. Nagata, L. Chen, K. Hu, M. Izumi, J.-i. Fujita and T. Adschiri, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3579–3586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, X. Han, W. Sun, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, F. Cheng, Q. Yan, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12594–12599 CAS .
Y. Li, B. He, X. Liu, X. Hu, J. Huang, S. Ye, Z. Shu, Y. Wang and Z. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 8070–8078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Guo, S. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Chen, K. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Xue and X. Zhou, Catal. Lett., 2019, 149, 1197–1210 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. Zhang, J. Li, X. Lin, X. Li, Y. Fang, J. Huang, W. Li, M. Tian, J. Jin and R. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 292, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X.-B. Li, L. Gao, H.-L. Wu, J. Yang, L. Cai, T.-B. Ma, C.-H. Tung, L.-Z. Wu and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 192–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. Hu and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Ren, R. Ge, W. Teng, X. Sun and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16632–16637 RSC .
G. Zhao, Y. Lin, K. Rui, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19074–19081 RSC .
J.-X. Feng, H. Xu, Y.-T. Dong, X.-F. Lu, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2960–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M.-C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M.-C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D.-Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, Z. Liao, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, E. Zschech and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Chen, C. H. Wang, K. Sasaki, N. Marinkovic, W. Xu, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 943–951 RSC .
W. Ren, H. Zhang and C. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 316–322 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fan, C. Qin, X. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Ge, S. Wang, X. Yuan, S. Wang and X. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24347–24355 RSC .
S. Yuan, Z. Pu, H. Zhou, J. Yu, I. S. Amiinu, J. Zhu, Q. Liang, J. Yang, D. He, Z. Hu, G. Van Tendeloo and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H.-X. Liu, W. Gou, M. Zhang, Z. Xia, S. Zhang, C.-R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2298–2304 RSC .
J. Park, S. Lee, H.-E. Kim, A. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Ye, J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16038–16042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guan, Y. Feng, J. Wan, X. Yang, L. Fang, X. Gu, R. Liu, Z. Huang, J. Li, J. Luo, C. Li and Y. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800697 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Feng, Y. Guan, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, J. Li, Z. Jiang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11783–11789 RSC .
Y. Jiang, X. Wu, Y. Yan, S. Luo, X. Li, J. Huang, H. Zhang and D. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805474 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qin, X. Han, S. Gadipelli, J. Guo, S. Wu, L. Kang, J. Callison and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6543–6551 RSC .
J. Xu, T. Liu, J. Li, B. Li, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, I. Amorim, W. Li and L. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1819–1827 RSC .
P. Li, X. Duan, S. Wang, L. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Duan, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2019, 15, 1904043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Li, P. Cai, Y. Li and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 576–583 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H.-C. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and J.-H. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Zhao, D. Xu, Y. Li, J. Bao and Z. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2731–2734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, B. Feng, W. Li, Y. Niu, Y. Yu, S. Lu, C. Zhong, P. Liu, Z. Tian, L. Chen, W. Hu and C. M. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 117–126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, C. Wang, P. Jiang, K. Yang, J. Lu, M. Huang, S. Chen, J. Wang and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15079–15088 RSC .
P. Jiang, J. Chen, C. Wang, K. Yang, S. Gong, S. Liu, Z. Lin, M. Li, G. Xia, Y. Yang, J. Su and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705324 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-Q. Chi, X.-J. Zeng, X. Shang, B. Dong, Y.-M. Chai, C.-G. Liu, M. Marin and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901790 CrossRef .
J. Bai, S.-H. Xing, Y.-Y. Zhu, J.-X. Jiang, J.-H. Zeng and Y. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 385, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z.-J. Zhao, M. Norouzi Banis, L. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Song, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, R. Li, M. Zheng, J. Gong and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24397–24406 RSC .
M. Lao, K. Rui, G. Zhao, P. Cui, X. Zheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5432–5437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Records, Y. Yoon, J. F. Ohmura, N. Chanut and A. M. Belcher, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, Y. Wang, J. Li and J. Liu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2019, 21, 13 CrossRef .
C. Panda, P. W. Menezes, S. Yao, J. Schmidt, C. Walter, J. N. Hausmann and M. Driess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13306–13310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Pei, J. He, K. Liu, W. Qi, X. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Gao, J. He, J. Zhao, J. Hu, T.-S. Chan, Z. Li, G. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10870–10875 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, D. Li, H. Zhao, A. Dimitrova, L. Li, Y. Fang, S. Krischok, W. Shi and Y. Lei, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Q. Chen, X. Yang, C.-C. Hou, K. Li and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11062–11068 RSC .
X. Zhang, F. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang and R. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900090 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Qiu, Z. Liang, W. Guo, S. Gao, C. Qu, H. Tabassum, H. Zhang, B. Zhu, R. Zou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
L.-N. Zhang, Z.-L. Lang, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2569–2580 RSC .
M. Li, H. Wang, W. Zhu, W. Li, C. Wang and X. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 1901833 Search PubMed .
S. Ye, F. Luo, T. Xu, P. Zhang, H. Shi, S. Qin, J. Wu, C. He, X. Ouyang, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 104301,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.104301 .
J. N. Tiwari, A. M. Harzandi, M. Ha, S. Sultan, C. W. Myung, H. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, P. Thangavel, A. N. Singh, P. Sharma, S. S. Chandrasekaran, F. Salehnia, J.-W. Jang, H. S. Shin, Z. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900931 CrossRef .
S. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zheng, S. Zhang, X. Mu, C. Chen, J. Ma and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14466–14472 RSC .
Y. Ding, B.-Q. Miao, Y.-C. Jiang, H.-C. Yao, X.-F. Li and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13770–13776 RSC .
Z. Sun, W. Fan and T. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 250, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, K. Sun, S. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Cheng, W.-C. Cheong, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Pan and C. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901213 CrossRef .
L. X. Chen, Z. W. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 118012 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mo, W. Zhang, L. He, X. Yu and Q. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 620–627 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Liu, X. Shang, W.-K. Gao, B. Dong, J.-Q. Chi, X. Li, K.-L. Yan, Y.-M. Chai, Y.-Q. Liu and C.-G. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 412, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Mishra, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, K. Dahal, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2246–2252 RSC .
Q. Hou, Y. Wu, S. Zhou, Y. Wei, J. Caro and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, L. Yu, C. Ma, B. Nan, R. Si, Y. Tu, J. Deng, D. Deng and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 611–616 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ge, J. Huo, T. Liao, Y. Liu, M. Zhu, Y. Li, J. Zhang and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118196 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Ma, Z.-L. Lang, L.-K. Yan, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, K. Feng, Y.-J. Xia, J. Zhong, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2114–2123 RSC .
J.-S. Li, Y. Wang, C.-H. Liu, S.-L. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-H. Dai, Y.-F. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang, Z. G. Yu, Y. Zhang, C. Tang, H. L. Seng, Z. W. Seh, Y.-W. Zhang, S. J. Pennycook, H. Gong and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13339–13346 RSC .
J. Li, W. Hong, C. Jian, Q. Cai and W. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 320–326 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu, W. Chen, H. Wang, H. Pan and D. H. C. Chua, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, X. Liu, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 690–697 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Y. Lin, B. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Duan, D. Chen and L. Song, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 602–610 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Q. Liu, H.-R. Wen, G. Ying, Y.-W. Zhu, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Hu, H. Yin, G. Cao, H. Wen, J. Wang and P. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 444, 227311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, Y. Li and Q. Hao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118245 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bu, W. Chen, M. F. Aly Aboud, I. Shakir, J. Gu and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14526–14535 RSC .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M.-C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M.-C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D.-Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, J. Liu, F. Sun, P. Yang and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103880 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karmakar and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15054–15061 RSC .
Y. Gong, L. Wang, H. Xiong, M. Shao, L. Xu, A. Xie, S. Zhuang, Y. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Chen and P. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13671–13678 RSC .
L. Yu, J. Zhang, Y. Dang, J. He, Z. Tobin, P. Kerns, Y. Dou, Y. Jiang, Y. He and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6919–6928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bu, R. Wei, W. Gao, C. Lan and J. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12325–12332 RSC .
Z. Liu, C. Zhan, L. Peng, Y. Cao, Y. Chen, S. Ding, C. Xiao, X. Lai, J. Li, S. Wei, J. Wang and J. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16761–16769 RSC .
F. Wang, L. Hu, R. Liu, H. Yang, T. Xiong, Y. Mao, M. S. Balogun, G. Ouyang and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11150–11159 RSC .
F. Song, W. Li, J. Yang, G. Han, T. Yan, X. Liu, Y. Rao, P. Liao, Z. Cao and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muthurasu, V. Maruthapandian and H. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, Z. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, Y. Bando and Y. Yamauchi, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Luyen Doan, D. T. Tran, D. C. Nguyen, H. Tuan Le, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118268 CrossRef .
R. Xiang, Y. Duan, L. Peng, Y. Wang, C. Tong, L. Zhang and Z. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Wang, M. Lao, K. Rui, X. Zheng, H. Yu, J. Ma, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103918 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Yao, Z. Yu, S. M. Islam, H. He, M. Yuan, Y. Yue, K. Xu, W. Hao, G. Sun, H. Li, S. Ma, P. Zapol and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10417–10430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900699 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Tang, L. Yu and X.-Y. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118154 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H.-Q. Peng, J. Cheng, K. Zhang, D. Chen, D. Shen, S. Wu, T. Jiao, X. Kong, Q. Gao, S. Bu, C.-S. Lee and W. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1901545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, Z. Wang, X. Long, Y. An, H. Lin, Z. Xing, M. Ma and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22530–22538 RSC .
Y. Xue, Z. S. Fishman, Y. Wang, Z. Pan, X. Shen, R. Yanagi, G. S. Hutchings, M. Liu, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, E. I. Altman and S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20696–20705 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis methods and catalytic properties of heterostructure catalysts for HER.	 
H3O+ + e− + * → H* + H2O, Volmer reaction	(1)
H* + H3O+ + e− → H2 + H2O + *, Heyrovsky reaction	(2)
H* + H* → H2 + 2*, Tafel reaction	(3)
H2O + e− + * → H* + OH−, Volmer reaction	(4)
H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH− + *, Heyrovsky reaction	(5)
H* + H* → H2 + 2*, Tafel reaction	(6)

 	Fig. 2  Volcano plot of different metals in acidic media. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
EIR = I × Ru	(7)
Ecorrected = Euncorrecttd − EIR	(8)
j = j0 [exp(αAnF/RT × η) − exp(−αCnF/RT × η)]	(9)
lnj = lnj0 + (αAnF/RT) × η	(10)
Slope(dlogj/dη) = 2.303RT/αAnF.	(11)
ΔGH* = ΔEH* + ΔEZPE − TΔS

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of 3D mesoporous G@N-MoS2 heterostructures. (b) Schematic representation of G@N-MoS2. C atoms are indicated in gray; Mo atoms, green; S atoms, yellow; and N atoms, red. (c) SEM image of G@N-MoS2. (d) HAADF-STEM image of G@N-MoS2. (e and f) HRTEM images of G@N-MoS2. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process. (h and i) AFM images of MG IPA-2 and corresponding thickness of the nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of WS2/rGO heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the synthesis process of MoS2/NiCo-LDH heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of Ni2P-G/NF. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the synthesis of the MoSe2–NiSe heterostructure. (c) XRD patterns of pure MoSe2 flowerlike nanosheets, pure NiSe nanoplates, and MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrids. (d–f) TEM images of the MoSe2–NiSe nanohybrids. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

Vapor transport based methods	1. High quality and purity	1. Low yield and high cost	Any material
2. Good control over growth and thickness	2. Requires high temperature
3. High universality	3. High energy consumption

	4. Very time-consuming process
Liquid exfoliation and self-assembly	1. Simple operation	1. Only applicable to the materials with layered structure	Materials with layered structure
2. No demand on sophisticated instruments	2. Difficult to control over layer thickness and lateral dimensions
3. High yield	3. Introduction of unwanted defects
Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	1. High compatibility with many substrates	1. No systematic control over length	Any material, but not economic for noble metal based catalysts
2. Possible to realize large-scale production	2. Lack of in-depth study on the nucleation process
3. Applicable to any material	3. Needs high pressure condition
4. Controlled working conditions	

Electrochemical deposition	1. High purity and high yield	1. The application is limited to deposit metals	Metal/metal compounds (substrates)
2. Mild synthetic conditions	2. Corrosive electrolytes may be required
3. Economic and versatile	3. External stimulus is required
4. Simplicity of scaling up	

Ion-exchange	1. High yield	1. Require harsh chemical conditions	Metal compounds/metal compounds
2. Low energy consumption	2. Products are normally polycrystalline in nature

	3. Low control over size
High-energy ball milling	1. Simplicity of operating	1. Low controllability over the particle size distribution	Metal (metal compounds)/substrates
2. High production efficiency	2. Poor understanding of the conversion between mechanical energy and chemical
3. Low reaction temperature	3. Many synthesis control parameters yet to be fully explored
4. Possibility to realize the large-scale production	


 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the 20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructure. (b) Geometric LSV curves of various catalysts in 1 M KOH. (c) Schematic illustration of a possible HER mechanism to reveal the improved performance of Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 heterostructures in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d and e) TEM images of Pt NWs/SL-Ni(OH)2; scale bars in (d) and (e) are 100 and 5 nm, respectively. Room-temperature LSV curves of catalysts in (f) 1 M KOH and (g) 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of PtO2–Co(OH)F. (b) LSV curves of catalysts in 0.1 M KOH. (c) Calculated free energies of H2O adsorption and dissociation on PtO2(111) and the interface between PtO2 and Co(OH)F. (d) Free energy diagrams for HER on PtO2(111), Co(OH)F, and the PtO2–Co(OH)F interface. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Trend in overpotential for HER is shown as a function of the 3d transition elements in alkaline media. The elements are arranged in order of their oxophilicity from Mn to Ni. Pt is shown for reference. Top inset: a comparison of HER polarization curves for catalysts. Bottom inset: a schematic showing the HER. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2012, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves of the PNS, Ru@PNS, NiO/Ru@PNS, and Pt/C in 1 M KOH. (b) LSV curves of Ru@NiO@PNS and NiO/Ru@PNS in 1 M KOH. Schematic illustrations of (c) Ru@NiO@PNS and (d) NiO/Ru@PNS. Free energy diagrams of the Volmer–Tafel and Volmer–Heyrovsky pathways for (e) Ru@NiO@PNS and (f) NiO/Ru@PNS. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  LSV curves of the samples in (a) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (b) 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Gibbs free energy profiles calculated by DFT for catalysts for NiMo composites with and without graphene covering, giving the calculated free energy diagram of HER at the equilibrium potential for a Pt catalyst, Ni(111), and NiMo(100) with and without a graphene coating or graphene with ∼1 nm nanohole and a graphene sheet. (d) Bader charge population analysis of NiMo(100) covered by graphene with ∼1 nm nanohole. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM and (f) HRTEM images of the MoS2/rGO heterostructure. (g) Polarization curves of catalysts and (h) corresponding Tafel plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 on glassy carbon electrodes with catalyst loading of 0.28 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic illustration of the HER-activity-enhancing mechanism of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 nanoforest in alkaline media. (j) Tafel plots of the samples. (k) Stability tests of the Ni(OH)2/Ni3S2 at 20 mA cm−2. Inset shows the SEM image after 240 h of HER. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) LSV curves and (b) Tafel plots of various catalysts at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH. (c) Schematic illustration of water activation, H* intermediate formation, and hydrogen generation processes of CoS2/CC and Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC. (d) Isosurfaces of the local charge density difference at the Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC interface. The free energy diagram of (e) Ni(OH)2–CoS2/CC and (f) CoS2/CC. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) SEM images of CoP–CeO2/Ti. (h) Polarization curves of the catalysts at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M KOH. (i–k) Models of CoP(211)/CeO2(111) (pink, blue, yellow, and red balls represent P, Co, Ce, and O atoms, respectively). (l) DFT-calculated reaction energy diagram of water dissociation for CoP(211) and CoP(211)/CeO2(111). (m) DFT-calculated ΔGH* values for CoP(211), CeO2(111), CoP(211)/CeO2(111), and Pt systems. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (n–p) HRTEM, (q) HAADF-STEM, and (r) SAED images of the interface of V8C7 with graphene. LSV curves of V8C7 NMs/GR, V8C7 NMs, V8C7@C, Pt/C, and KB carbon (s) in 1 M KOH and (t) in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of WxC@WS2-20. (b) Polarization curves and (c) corresponding Tafel plots of various electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Charge redistribution in the WxC@WS2 heterostructure. The arrows denote the electron transfer direction. Blue, red, and yellow balls denote the W, C, and S atoms. (e) DOS comparison of W on the surface and interface around the Fermi level. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) HER and (b) OER polarization curves of various catalysts measured in N2-saturated 1 M KOH. (c) HRTEM image of LSC&MoSe2, indicating the presence of both 2H- and 1T-phase MoSe2. (d) Enlarged region of 2H-MoSe2 shown with a schematic lattice structure, illustrating the hexagonal crystal structure with Mo–Mo interatomic distance of 0.28 nm. (e) Enlarged region of 1T-MoSe2 shown with a schematic lattice structure, indicating the Mo–Mo (0.563 nm) and Se–Se (0.324 nm) interatomic distances. (f) Schematic diagram of the proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC. (g) Optimized structure of LSC&2H-MoSe2 heterostructure. The red-shaded box represents the fixed atoms in the two bottommost layers. The blue arrow indicates the direction of charge transfer from LSC to MoSe2. (h) Spin-up and spin-down projected density of states (PDOS) on the following species: Co-3d in LSC (blue dotted line), Co-3d in LSC&2H-MoSe2 (blue solid line), Mo-4d in 2H-MoSe2 (red dotted line), and Mo-4d in LSC&2H-MoSe2 (red solid line). The vertical lines represent the position of εd for each species. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 


Pt/MoS2 (ref. 156)	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 M H2SO4	31	21	52	32
Pt Cs/MoO2 NSs-L113	Photodeposition	0.5 M H2SO4	47	38	32.6	31.2
Pt/f-MWCNTs112	Photodeposition	0.5 M H2SO4	43.9	45.2	30	31
Pt–FeNi@C157	Solvothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	—	—	26.1	25.1
Pt SASs/AG158	Microwave reduction	0.5 M H2SO4	57	<57	55	39
EG-Pt/CoP-1.5 (ref. 159)	Chemical reduction	0.5 M H2SO4	21	>21	42.5	31
Pt SA/m-WO3−x160	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	47	<47	45	26
Pt@MoS2/NiS2 (ref. 161)	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO	34	—	40	30
Pt/NiS@Al2O3 (ref. 162)	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO	34	∼34	35	30
Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 (ref. 163)	Hot-injection	0.5 M H2SO	18.5	37.6	13.3	30
CPt@ZIF-67 (ref. 164)	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO	50	55	27.1	35.5
Ru/CoP165	Chemical reduction	0.5 M H2SO	11	8	31	29
RuSx/S-GO166	Hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	31	28	40	27
Ru–RuO2/CNT167	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	63	53	31	38
RuSA N-S-Ti3C2Tx168	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	76	53	90	29
Rh–MoS2 (ref. 136)	Hot-injection	0.5 M H2SO4	47	26	24	30
Ni@Ni2P-Ru169	Sol–gel method	0.5 M H2SO4	51	38	35	31
Ir@N-G-750 (ref. 170)	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	19	23	26	28
IrNi@OC-430 (ref. 171)	Hydrothermal and CVD	0.5 M H2SO4	95 (100 mA cm−2)	>95 (100 mA cm−2)	18	24
IrCo@NC-T172	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	24	35	23	30
Sub-MoSx/CNTs/Pdgly119	Sacrificial-counter-electrode method	0.5 M H2SO4	23	34	18	30
RhPx@NPC173	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	22	32	32	29
RhP2@NPGC137	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	78	<78	30	35
PAH@Rh-NSNSs/CNT174	Hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	5	>5	30	31
Pd@TNT-80 (ref. 120)	Galvanic displacement	1 M HClO4	38	33	13	16
Pd@RuOx/NCNT175	Atomic layer deposition	0.5 M H2SO4	33	<33	33.1	35.6
Pd ND/DR-MoS2 (ref. 135)	Solvothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	40	>40	41	30
Pd13Cu3S7 NPs/C122	Ion-exchange	0.5 M H2SO4	64	<64	49.6	26.4
Os/SiNW121	Ion-exchange	0.5 M H2SO4	43	25 (40% Pt/C)	24	30 (40% Pt/C)
20% Pt/Ni(HCO3)2 (ref. 176)	Hydrothermal and solution-phase reduction	1 M KOH	27	44	45	108
Pt–Co(OH)2/CC133	Hydrothermal and electrodeposition	1 M KOH	32	—	70	68
Pt–Ni(OH)2 nano-networks177	Electroless deposition and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	—	—	55.8	140
Pt–Ni/rGO178	Solvothermal	1 M KOH	78	124	53	78
NiPt3@NiS NF179	Solvothermal	1 M KOH	12	22	24	31
PtRu NCs/BP180	Chemical reduction	1 M KOH	22	77	19	46
Pt3.21Ni@Ti3C2 (ref. 163)	Hot-injection	1 M KOH	—	—	39.5	38.5
NiPt3@NiS/NF179	Hot injection	1 M KOH	12	10 (100% Pt)	24	31 (100% Pt)
Ni3N/Pt128	Electrodeposition	1 M KOH	83 (50 mA cm−2)	194 (50 mA cm−2)	36.5	50.6
CoNPA@TiO2@Pt181	Atomic layer deposition	1 M KOH	29	36	42	—
Ru/Ni(OH)2/NF182	Spontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction	1 M KOH	25	—	47	45
NiO/Ru@PNS116	
In situ electro-oxidation process	1 M KOH	39	31	75	58
Ru–MoS2/CNT183	Thermal annealing	1 M KOH	50	<50	62	32
Ru–RuO2/CNT167	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	12	26	30	46
1 M PBS	48	>48	35	104
Ru@Co-SAs/N-C158	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	7	40	30	46
1 M PBS	55	—	82	71
Ru-HPC184	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	—	—	33.9	41
Ru/WNO@C185	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	2	27	33	42
Ru1Ni1 NCNFs186	Electrospinning and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	<37	37	30	30
Ru NCs/BNG187	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	14	26	28.9	38.2
RuP2@NPGC137	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	108	25	30	35
[Ru(SA) + Ru(NP)@RuNx @GN]/GN188	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	7.5	40	20	79
rGO-MoO3−x-MoRu189	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	20	27	25	39
Ir@N-G-750 (ref. 170)	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	43	>43	35	37
RhPx@NPC173	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	69	<69	80	30
1 M PBS	38	<38	56	37


CoS2@MoS2/RGO43	Hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	98	<98	37.4	29.8
PEI@NiP2-CC190	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	44	15	33.2	30
GGNR@MoS2 (ref. 191)	Freeze-drying method	0.5 M H2SO4	183	<183	49	31
CoS2/RGO-CNT142	Hydrothermal and vacuum filtration	0.5 M H2SO4	142	—	51	—
CoP/NiCoP NTs192	Solid-state phase transformation	0.5 M H2SO4	125	<125	71	31
(CoMo)S2/RGO193	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	100	38	60.8	31
Co2−xNixP/N-C NFs194	Electrospinning and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	100	<100	35	30
Co3S4/CoP93	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	86	<86	45	34
CoS2/MoS2/RGO195	Hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	160	<160	56	30
CoP/NiCoP/NC42	Co-precipitation, electrostatic self-assembly, and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	60	39	58	34
CoP/Ni5P4/CoP196	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO	33	31	43	30
CS@CNC NAs/CC197	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	84	35	38	32
MoS2/graphene198	Liquid-phase salt-assisted co-exfoliation	0.5 M H2SO4	—	—	61	34
MoS2@graphene153	Hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	132	51	45	33
MoP/NPG199	Space-confined growth and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	148	<148	49	30
Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr140	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	157	<157	55	30
Mo2C@MoS2NS46	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	67	<67	37	30
NiS2/MoS2-RGO144	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	172	<172	51	36
NiCo2@Ni1/3Co2/3S2@C97	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	41	—	39.2	30.1
Ni/WC@NC200	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	53	<53	45.3	30
Mo2C@NPC/NPRGO201	Thermal annealing	0.5 M H2SO4	34	40	33.6	30
MoS2/CoS2 NTs202	Template-engaged hydrothermal	0.5 M H2SO4	90	<90	30	28
WxC@WS2 (ref. 96)	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	146	<146	61	32
WS2/W203	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	108	<108	46.8	28
WS2/Ni5P4–Ni2P204	CVD	0.5 M H2SO4	94	51	74	31
C3N4@MoN205	Vapor–solid reaction	0.5 M H2SO4	90	<90	47.5	33.7
V8C7 NMs/GR70	CVD	0.5 M H2SO4	52	
	48.3	

Ni/NiO@C206	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	64	46	55	39
Ni(OH)2@CuS207	Coordinating etching and precipitating	1 M KOH	95	<95	48	104
Ni(OH)2@MoS2@CC44	Electrodeposition	1 M KOH	119	<119	60	32
Ni2−xMoxP/NiMoO4−yNF208	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	∼36	—	53	59
Ni2P–NiSe2/CC209	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	66	47	72.6	35.7
FeNiP/PG210	Microwave irradiation	1 M KOH	173	<193	50.3	—
NiO/Ni-CNT211	Hydrolysis and thermal annealing	1 M KOH	<100	—	82	—
NiFe-LDH/MXene/NF212	Electrodeposition	1 M KOH	132	70	70	32
Ni3V2O8/NRGO213	Galvanic displacement	1 M KOH	43	16	54.8	30.3
Ni@NCNT/NiMoN/NF214	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	15	11	83	30
Ni2P–Cu3P@NiCuC215	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	78	<78	173	<173
CoMnP/Ni2P/NiFe216	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	87	42	95	58
CoMoO4–Co2Mo3O8 (ref. 217)	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	57	—	55	32
Co/Co2P@ACF/CNT HNCs218	Chemical etching and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	78	32	49	37
Co2N/Co/CF219	Electrodeposition and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	12	<12	41.6	73.3
Co3O4/MoS2 (ref. 220)	Hydrothermal	1 M KOH	205	42	128	98
Co3S4@MoS2 (ref. 221)	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	136	57	74	45
O-doped Co2P/CuO NWs/CF222	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	101	<101	69.4	52.5
Co@CoMoO4 NA223	Chemical bath deposition	1 M KOH	46	31	85	53
Mo2C@MoS2 NS46	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	86	<86	39	—
MoSe2/SnS2 (ref. 224)	Hydrothermal	1 M KOH	285	—	109	—
CoMoNiS–NF-xy225	Hydrothermal	1 M KOH	117	92	85	—
MoC–Mo2C/PNCDs226	Ion-exchange and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	121	—	60	—
CoP/NiCoP NTs192	Solid-state phase transformation	1 M KOH	133	<133	88	65
NiS2/MoS2-RGO144	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	144	<144	82	41
P–Mo–Ni(OH)2 NSAs227	Plasma enhanced CVD	1 M KOH	22	<22	80	34
Ni-rGO87	Electrodeposition	1 M NaOH	36	—	77	—
Ni3Cu1@NG-NC228	Hydrothermal and vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	122	80	84.2	45.2
V8C7 NMs/GR70	CVD	1 M KOH	156	86	89.4	52.4
Mn–O@Co–P/CC229	Hydrothermal	1 M KOH	106	—	56	—
TiO2/NiFeS230	Atomic layer deposition	1 M KOH	107	—	69	—
C3N4@MoN205	Vapor–solid reaction	1 M KOH	110	<110	57.8	35.6

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
