Enhanced IR-driven photoelectrochemical responses of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures by up-conversion UV/visible light irradiation   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR00477D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR00477D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8525-8535Enhanced IR-driven photoelectrochemical responses of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures by up-conversion UV/visible light irradiation†

        
          
            Joo-Won 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ki-Hyun 
            Cho
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Joon-Soo 
            Yoon
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yun-Mo 
            Sung
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Korea University, Anam-ro 145, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ymsung@korea.ac.kr
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA
Received 
      16th January 2020
    , Accepted 7th March 2020First published on 9th March 2020AbstractWe, for the first time, report the development of infrared (IR)-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells using up-conversion glass-ceramics as substrates, which is different from the previous strategies of decorating photocatalysts with up-conversion (UC) rare earth-doped fluoride nanoparticles to utilize IR light. Our approach is more efficient since the use of UC glass-ceramics as substrates of photocatalysts could overcome the chemical instability of fluoride nanoparticles, the blockage of incident light, and the limited exposure of photocatalysts to liquid electrolytes. Oxyfluoride glass-ceramics bearing (Yb,Er)-doped YF3 and (Yb,Tm)-doped YF3 nanocrystals turned out to generate UC green and ultraviolet/blue emissions, respectively, under 980 nm illumination. High-density ZnO nanorods were grown on the up-conversion glass-ceramic substrates by the hydrothermal method and they were subsequently overcoated with CdSe nanocrystals to obtain CdSe/ZnO heterostructures by the chemical bath deposition method. CdSe nanoparticles were excited by both the UC UV emission from Tm and the visible emission from Er and Tm, while ZnO nanorods were excited mostly by the UC UV emission from Tm. Because of the difference in the UC emissions from Er and Tm, two distinct carrier transportations, sensitization and type-II cascade, occurred in the identical CdSe/ZnO heterostructures. Eventually, CdSe/ZnO fabricated on the glass-ceramics bearing (Yb,Tm)-doped YF3 showed increased photocurrent density compared to that fabricated on the glass-ceramics bearing (Yb,Er)-doped YF3 due to the charge separation activated by the type-II cascade structure.
Introduction
The explosive increase in global fossil fuel consumption has caused energy shortage and environmental disruption such as air and water pollution and global warming. Hydrogen has been known as an alternative clean energy source and it has 3–4 times higher energy density compared to the current fossil fuels. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting for hydrogen gas generation powered by solar energy is regarded as one of the most promising alternative energy production strategies due to its sustainability and eco-friendliness. After the first demonstration of the PEC water splitting process using TiO2 as a working electrode, many progressive approaches have been suggested to increase the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency.1 Metal oxide semiconductors such as TiO2, Fe2O3, WO3, and ZnO in various forms such as bulk, thin film, powder, nanorods/nanowires, and nanotubes have been intensively explored because of their photochemical stability and facile synthetic routes.2–8 However, they reveal the limited visible light absorption due to the intrinsic large energy band gap9,10 and unfavorable electrochemical potential of energy bands,11,12 which seriously limit their wide applications as photoelectrode materials for water splitting. To overcome these drawbacks, extensive attempts have been employed, for instance, dye-sensitization,13 surface plasmon resonance,14 impurity doping,15 and type-II cascade structure.16 More recently, cadmium chalcogenides have been studied to overcome the limitation in the visible light absorption abilities of metal oxides.17,18
Despite the attempts made to extend light absorption spectra of photoelectrodes, most of the PEC research studies remain focused on the use of ultraviolet (UV) and visible range light, and the use of infrared (IR) range light that constitutes ∼50% of the total solar spectrum is still excluded. Recently, scattered results have been reported about PEC performances under IR illumination with the aid of the up-conversion (UC) materials. M. Zhang et al. constructed α-Fe2O3/(Er,Yb):NaYF4 heterostructures and demonstrated that the UC green emission from Er stimulated by IR could activate α-Fe2O3 films.19 Chen et al. decorated ZnO nanorods (NRs) with the multi-shells of CdTe/Au/(Er,Yb):NaYF4 and reported the effects of Au-decorated (Er,Yb):NaYF4 nanoparticles (NPs) on the PEC performances.20 X. Zhang et al. synthesized carbon quantum dot (CQD)-sensitized CdSe/TiO2 NR structures and investigated the effects of the UC properties of CQD on the PEC hydrogen generation of CQD/CdSe/TiO2 NR photoelectrodes.21 However, all the reports listed above present similar structures of UC nanoparticle-decorated photocatalysts, and reveal critical drawbacks as follows. First, although fluoride crystals can serve as excellent cages for rare earth (RE) elements for UC emission due to their low phonon energy,22 they exhibit poor chemical stabilities under aqueous conditions.23 Second, UC nanoparticles including RE-doped fluoride crystals or CQDs covering the surface of photocatalysts can form light-shielding layers. Third, the UC nanoparticles will reduce the surface contact area between the photocatalysts and liquid electrolytes and in turn decrease photocatalytic abilities.
By using glass-ceramics bearing RE-doped fluoride nanocrystals as substrates of photocatalysts and a UC light emission source, these three critical problems of fluoride crystal-decorated photocatalysts mentioned above can be completely resolved. Bulk glass-ceramics bearing fluoride crystals, called oxyfluoride glass-ceramics, have gained increasing attention as host materials for RE-doped fluoride crystals.24 Recently, a dual phase precipitation and in situ nanocrystallization in oxyfluoride glass-ceramics have been studied for efficient UC light emission.25,26 The mother glass matrices can protect RE-doped UC fluoride crystals against physical and chemical attacks. Also, they can precipitate UC fluoride crystals on a nanometer scale and with high density, resulting in the intense up-conversion visible or UV light emission. Herein, we report the PEC performances of CdSe QDs/ZnO NR heterostructures constructed on the UC glass-ceramics under 980 nm illumination. Two UC glass-ceramics were employed; one has YF3 nanocrystals doped with Yb3+ and Er3+ (GC-Er) and the other has YF3 nanocrystals doped with Yb3+ and Tm3+ (GC-Tm). Green and UV/blue UC light emissions were generated by GC-Er and GC-Tm, respectively. GC-Er induced the sensitization-like carrier transportation between CdSe QDs and ZnO NRs by stimulating mostly CdSe by UC green light emission, while GC-Tm induced the type-II cascade-like charge separation by stimulating both CdSe and ZnO by UC blue and UV light emissions. To the best of our knowledge, UC glass-ceramics were, for the first time, employed not only as substrates of PEC cells but also as a UV and visible light source to activate the photoelectrodes through UC emissions under 980 nm illumination.
Experimental
Materials
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Silicon dioxide (SiO2), aluminum oxide (Al2O3), sodium fluoride (NaF), yttrium fluoride (YF3), ytterbium fluoride (YbF3), erbium fluoride (ErF3), and thulium fluoride (TmF3) were used for the preparation of UC oxyfluoride glass-ceramics. Zinc(II) acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O), zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O), and hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4) were used for the synthesis of ZnO NRs. Cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd(NO3)2·6H2O), sodium sulfite (Na2SO3), and selenium (Se) were used to decorate ZnO NRs with CdSe QDs. Sodium selenosulfate (Na2SeSO3) solution was synthesized following a reported preparation method.27
Preparation of UC glass-ceramics
UC glass-ceramics were prepared based on the method described in another literature.28 Precursor powders were hand mixed using an agate mortar and pestle with the following nominal composition (in mol%), 43.4SiO2–28Al2O3–17NaF–15.45YF3–0.85YbF3–0.2XF3 (X = Er and Tm). The weight of the target glass was 20 g and the glass was melted in a Pt crucible with an alumina cover at 1500 °C for 30 min. The glass melt was poured onto a brass plate at room temperature and pressed by another brass plate. The as-synthesized glasses were heat-treated at 700 °C for 2 h to induce the optimized formation of YF3 nanocrystals doped with (Yb3+,Er3+) (GC-Er) and (Yb3+,Tm3+) (GC-Tm). If the reaction time exceeds 2 h for maximized precipitation, glass-ceramics become opaque due to the crystallization of glass matrices. Also, insufficient reaction temperature or time eventually results in the lack of YF3 precipitation. Then, GC-Er and GC-Tm glass-ceramics were cut into 1 × 2×0.2 cm3 slices and polished (Fig. 1a) to be used as substrates for the growth of ZnO NRs.
 Fig. 1  Digital photographs of (a) GC-Tm and GC-Er, (b) ZnO NRs grown on Tm and Er substrates, and (c) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs fabricated on Tm and Er substrates. (d) Schematic diagrams of CdSe/ZnO structures grown on Tm and Er substrates with crystallized YF3 nanoparticles. 
ITO sputtering and fabrication of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures
Indium–tin oxide (ITO) transparent conducting oxide (TCO) thin films were deposited onto GC-Er and GC-Tm glass-ceramic substrates via RF sputtering to prepare the conductive substrates for PEC cell fabrication. The ITO target was 2 inches in diameter and the distance between the ITO target and GC-Er and GC-Tm was set to be 10 cm. The chamber was evacuated to 10−6 Torr before sputtering. The ITO thin films were deposited for 15 m at 80 W RF power. From now on, the ITO-coated GC-Er and GC-Tm are called Er substrates and Tm substrates, respectively. The CdSe QD-decorated ZnO NR arrays were fabricated following the well-known hydrothermal and CBD (chemical bath deposition) methods.29,30 Firstly, ZnO seed layers were deposited on the Er and Tm substrates by spin-coating 5 mM zinc acetate dihydrate dissolved in ethanol solution and subsequently heat-treated at 350 °C for 20 min under ambient conditions. Then, Er and Tm substrates containing ZnO seeds were loaded into the Teflon-lined autoclaves, pointing the bottom at an angle of 45 degrees. The precursor solution consisting of 25 mM zinc nitrate hexahydrate and 25 mM hexamethylenetetramine dissolved in deionized water was added into the autoclave and ZnO NR arrays were grown at 90 °C for 4 h. Subsequently, Er and Tm substrates with ZnO NR arrays (Fig. 1b) were immersed in the solution of 10 mM cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate and 25 mM sodium selenosulfate dissolved in deionized water to decorate the ZnO NR surface with CdSe QDs (Fig. 1c). CdSe QD deposition was conducted at 65 °C for 15 min and this deposition process was repeated once again to ensure the CdSe decoration. The configurations in Fig. 1d describe the final features of CdSe QDs/ZnO NR heterostructures realized on the Tm and Er substrates for utilizing UC emission under IR illumination.
Morphological, structural, and optical characterization
The crystallinity of glass-ceramics and CdSe/ZnO heterostructures was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD: Rigaku D/Max-2500 V/PC, Japan). Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; S-4300, Hitachi, Japan) was used to observe the morphological features of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures. High-resolution field-emission transmission electron microscopy (HRFETEM; FEI Tecnai G2 F30, 300 kV) was employed to investigate the microstructures of YF3 nanocrystals in UC glass-ceramics and CdSe/ZnO heterostructures. The light absorbance of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures was recorded by UV-visible spectrometry (V-530, JASCO, Japan). The UC photoluminescence of GC-Er and GC-Tm was observed using a monochromator (MonoRa-500i, Dongwoo Optron, South Korea) with a 980 nm laser diode (IRM980TA-150R, Shanghai Laser & Optics Century, China) as an excitation source.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
PEC measurements were carried out by a conventional 3-electrode set-up with 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 7). A Pt plate and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) were selected as a counter electrode and a reference electrode, respectively. Er and Tm substrates were covered with waterproof epoxy resin, except the area of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures. Before epoxy covering, a conductive junction was formed using a silver paste between the exposed ITO films and Cu wires. The I–V characteristics were measured using a potentiostat (Ivium-n-Stat, Ivium Technologies, the Netherlands) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The light source was a 980 nm laser with 100 mW cm−2. The potentials were measured with respect to the SCE and converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), according to the following Nernst equation:ERHE = ESCE + 0.05916 × pH + (ESCE)0
Results and discussion
The crystallinity of GC-Er and GC-Tm was determined by XRD, as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 shows X-ray diffraction only from YF3 crystals in the orthorhombic phase (JCPDS #74-0911) and no other crystalline phases were identified. The volumetric densities of the precipitated YF3 crystals in the glass matrices were roughly calculated to be 30% from XRD data by the following formula: volume fraction of the crystalline phase = area of crystalline phase/(area of crystalline phase + area of amorphous phase).28 Both the XRD patterns of GC-Er and GC-Tm seem almost identical due to the same diffraction from YF3 crystals. The average particle size of YF3 crystals in the mother glass was estimated to be ∼30 nm using the Scherrer equation. The overall morphologies of the sodium aluminosilicate mother glass matrices bearing YF3 nanoparticles were demonstrated by TEM, as shown in Fig. 3. TEM images demonstrate that the nanocrystals with a diameter of ∼25–35 nm are precipitated in the glass matrices with high density. Also, fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns in the inset show the diffraction only from YF3 crystals, which is consistent with the XRD data of Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of GC-Er and GC-Tm heat-treated at 700 °C. 
 Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) GC-Er and (b) GC-Tm. HRTEM images of (c) GC-Er and (d) GC-Tm. The insets show the corresponding FFT patterns. 
The UC light emission properties of GC-Er and GC-Tm were recorded via the conventional photoluminescence (PL) measurements with a 980 nm laser. From the PL spectra in Fig. 4a, GC-Tm shows the UC blue (∼455 nm and ∼480 nm) and UV (∼348 nm and ∼365 nm) emissions, while GC-Er dominantly exhibits the UC green emission (∼550 nm). The digital photographs of UC luminescence from GC-Er and GC-Tm are shown in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. The distinct UC emission properties could originate from the different doping species, Er and Tm. In our case, the sodium aluminosilicate mother glass matrices provide the physically and chemically stable environment to YF3 nanocrystals. The rare earth ions (Yb, Er, and Tm) can easily be doped in Y3+ sites during the crystallization of YF3.31 Yb ions usually absorb the IR laser light and the absorbed energy can be transferred to Er or Tm for the occurrence of UC luminescence. It is well known that the UC green emission occurs when rare earth ions of Yb3+ and Er3+ are doped in YF3 crystals and UV/blue emissions occur when Yb3+ and Tm3+ are doped.32,33 To further investigate the excitation power-dependent UC emission intensity of GC-Er and GC-Tm, UC illuminations were measured with various excitation laser powers (6.3, 17.1, 28.6, 40, 68, 100, 124 and 150 mW). As shown in Fig. 4e and f, both GC-Er and GC-Tm show the increasing UC emission intensities with the increase of laser power. In general, the UC emission intensity (IUC) is presented as IUC ∝ PNex, where Pex is the excitation laser power and N is the photon numbers, which take part in generating a photon for UC emission.34 From the slopes of UC green emission and UC blue emission in Fig. 4d, the photon numbers N are determined to be about 1.5 in both GC-Er and GC-Tm. The photon numbers N could vary from 1 to 2 in the case of UC green emission and could vary from 1 to 3 in the case of UC blue emission.34–38
 Fig. 4  (a) Up-conversion emission spectra of GC-Er and GC-Tm. Digital photographs showing the (b) up-conversion green emission from GC-Er and (c) up-conversion blue emission from GC-Tm. (d) Log–log plots of UC emission intensity versus excitation laser power for GC-Er and GC-Tm. Laser power-dependent UC emission spectra of (e) GC-Er and (f) GC-Tm excited using a 980 nm laser. 
To utilize GC-Er and GC-Tm as UC substrates, ITO thin film deposition was conducted on GC-Er and GC-Tm by RF sputtering. The ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NR heterostructures were synthesized on Er and Tm substrates. The overall crystallinity of the ZnO/UC substrate and the CdSe/ZnO//UC substrate was analyzed by XRD patterns shown in Fig. 5. Both CdSe/ZnO//UC and ZnO/UC samples present diffractions from the wurtzite phase ZnO (JCPDS #36-1451) with an abnormally intense (002) peak at 2θ = 34.42°, which is due to the preferential growth of ZnO NR arrays in the [002] direction. Also, both CdSe/ZnO//UC and ZnO/UC samples exhibit the typical XRD patterns of ITO thin films and relatively weak-intensity diffraction peaks from YF3 crystals in the glass-ceramics. In Fig. 5a, however, the diffractions from CdSe QDs are not clearly detected due to the overlapping with the intense characteristic diffraction peaks of ZnO NRs.30Fig. 5b shows the blown-up XRD patterns of ZnO and CdSe/ZnO in the range from 20 to 40 degrees. The ZnO (002) diffraction peak from ZnO NRs presents relatively higher intensity than that of the ITO peak centered at 31.08°. After the CdSe QD decoration, however, the ZnO (002) peak shows almost the same intensity as that of the ITO peak because of X-ray scattering by CdSe QDs.30 Also, the very low-intensity diffraction of CdSe (JCPDS #77-2307) (top) was identified by comparing with the diffraction from bare ZnO NRs (bottom) in Fig. 5b. This low-intensity diffraction could be due to the small relative volume and the small dimension of CdSe QDs. The crystallinity of CdSe QDs was further investigated using HRTEM FFT pattern analyses.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs grown on UC substrates and (b) blown-up XRD patterns of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs ranging from 20° to 40°. I, Z, Y and C denote ITO, ZnO, YF3 and CdSe, respectively. 
SEM cross-sectional images and the results of EDS (energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) analysis shown in Fig. 6 obviously reveal the morphological and compositional differences between ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. ITO thin films were deposited on GC-Er and GC-Tm with a thickness of ∼500 nm and ZnO NRs with a length of ∼1.5 μm stand vertically on the ITO thin films before and after the CdSe QD decoration, as shown in Fig. 6. Zn, O, Cd, and Se were detected from CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs, while only Zn and O were detected from ZnO NRs. The compositional ratio of CdSe to ZnO was roughly found to be 1:4, as shown in the inset of Fig. 6d. To further visualize the CdSe/ZnO/ITO/GC structure and its elemental distribution, elemental EDS mapping was conducted, as shown in Fig. S1.† The SEM images in Fig. S1† confirm the sequential structure of ITO, ZnO and CdSe on the glass-ceramic substrates. Fig. S1a and S1b† clearly show that the bottom GC-Er and GC-Tm are composed of Si, Al, Y and O, which are the raw materials of glass-ceramics. Yb, Er and Tm could not be identified due to their low contents in glass-ceramics. Elemental distribution of ITO, ZnO and CdSe through EDS mapping confirmed that they are properly arranged, as shown in Fig. 1d, except that Se element is seen at the bottom glass-ceramics. The observed Se distribution at the bottom glass-ceramics originated from the Al content of the glass matrix because the EDS results from Al and Se elements are overlapped in general. The microstructures and crystallinity of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs were investigated via HRTEM and FFT analyses. ZnO nanorods with a diameter of ∼60–80 nm show the longitudinal growth in the [002] direction, as shown in Fig. 7. In CdSe/ZnO heterostructures, ZnO nanorods are coated with CdSe QDs with a diameter of about 10 nm. The crystal structure of CdSe QDs was identified to be wurtzite via FFT analyses (Fig. 7d inset).
 Fig. 6  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) ZnO NRs and (b) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The insets show a plan view of each sample. EDS analysis of (c) ZnO NRs and (d) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The insets show the calculated weight and atomic percentage of elements. 
 Fig. 7  TEM images of (a and c) ZnO nanorods and (b and d) ZnO nanorods decorated with CdSe QDs. The insets show the FFT patterns of the corresponding samples. (e) HRTEM image of CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The yellow dashed line denotes the interface between ZnO and CdSe. 
The light absorption properties of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs are shown in Fig. 8. ZnO NRs start to show light absorption at about 575 nm and strong absorption only at the UV region. The visible light absorption in ZnO could be due to crystalline defects such as oxygen vacancies, zinc interstitials, etc. commonly occurring especially during low-temperature wet chemical synthesis. The photoluminescence (PL) of bare ZnO NRs obviously shows the defect light emission ranging from 450 to 725 nm (Fig. 8a inset). The occurrence of photocurrent from bare ZnO grown on Er substrates illuminated using a 980 nm laser could be ascribed to the defect-level excitation by the UC visible light emission at ∼550 nm and ∼410 nm from Er substrates.
 Fig. 8  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra and (b) plots of absorbance square with respect to the photon energy of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on Er, Tm substrates and ITO substrates without UC NPs. The inset shows the PL of bare ZnO NRs. 
CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs exhibit the enhanced visible range light absorption compared to the bare ZnO NRs due to the contribution of CdSe with a small energy band gap of ∼1.74 eV.39 CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs grown on both Er and Tm substrates reveal almost identical light absorption properties, implying their high reproducibility in the fabrication of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 8a. Also, CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on the bare ITO substrate without UC nanoparticles showed almost the same light absorption spectrum, which means that UC nanoparticles have no effect on the absorption of CdSe/ZnO heterostructures in the ultraviolet and visible range. Fig. 8b shows Tauc plots obtained from the absorbance square versus photon energy of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The absorbance square was chosen in Fig. 8b because both CdSe and ZnO have the direct absorption band gaps. The optical energy band gaps of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs turned out to be about 3.2 eV (388 nm) and 1.8 eV (688 nm), respectively, through the extrapolation of linear regions in each Tauc plot. Fig. 8a shows that the estimated energy band gap of CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs was mainly attributed to that of CdSe QDs. The determined energy band gap value of 1.8 eV is slightly higher than that of bulk CdSe (1.74 eV), because the size of CdSe QDs (∼10 nm in diameter) is barely smaller than the Bohr exciton radius (5.4 nm) of CdSe and therefore the quantum confinement could barely occur.

Fig. 9 shows the current density versus time graphs under chopped 980 nm illumination at an interval of 30 s. The PEC performances of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs synthesized on Er and Tm substrates were recorded using the potential versus 1.23 V with respect to the RHE. ZnO NRs on Er and Tm substrates are named ZnO-Er and ZnO-Tm, respectively. Furthermore, CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on Er and Tm substrates are termed CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm, respectively. ZnO-Er and ZnO-Tm exhibit the photocurrent densities of ∼0.03 μA cm−2 and ∼0.2 μA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 9a). The Er substrate generates strong UC green emission at 550 nm together with emission at 410 nm (Fig. 4a). As described in the previous section, ZnO NRs can absorb both 550 and 410 nm emissions due to their intrinsic crystalline defects. However, the degree of visible light absorbance of ZnO NRs is very low compared to that of UV light, explaining that UC visible light emission from GC-Er can generate only a very low photocurrent density from ZnO NRs. In contrast, ZnO-Tm shows higher photocurrent density than ZnO-Er because Tm substrates generate stronger intensity UV emission (348 and 365 nm) than Er substrates together with blue emission (∼455 nm and ∼480 nm) through the UC process.
 Fig. 9  Photocurrent densities of (a) ZnO-Er and ZnO-Tm and (b) CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm under 980 nm illumination. (c) I–V curves of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm. For comparison, ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on ITO substrates without UC NPs are inserted. 
The photocurrent densities of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm were found to be about 0.65 μA cm−2 and 1.4 μA cm−2, respectively. The PEC performances of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm were improved in comparison with those of ZnO-Er (0.03 μA cm−2) and ZnO-Tm (0.2 μA cm−2), as shown in Fig. 9a and b. This can be explained by the enhanced visible light absorption of CdSe/ZnO due to the small energy band gap (∼1.8 eV) of CdSe QDs. Both CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm could be excited by the UC visible emission from Er and UC UV and visible emissions from Tm substrates. To confirm that the photoresponses were originated only from UC emissions of GC-Er and GC-Tm, ZnO and CdSe/ZnO heterostructures were grown on the bare ITO substrate without UC nanoparticles. Both ZnO and CdSe/ZnO on the bare ITO substrate showed no photocurrent densities under 980 nm illumination.
One notable thing is that the photocurrent density of CdSe/ZnO-Tm is higher than that of CdSe/ZnO-Er and even higher than the photocurrent density sum (0.85 μA cm−2) of ZnO-Tm and CdSe/ZnO-Er. As aforementioned, CdSe QDs can absorb the UC visible emissions from Er substrates including ∼410 nm, ∼550 nm, and ∼660 nm in the case of CdSe/ZnO-Er, while ZnO NRs can barely absorb a little portion of these UC visible emissions due to their intrinsic crystalline defects. In contrast, ZnO-Tm can be excited by UC ultraviolet emissions (348 and 365 nm). To summarize, almost 100% UC emissions (visible) from the Er substrate can be absorbed by CdSe/ZnO-Er and partial UC emissions (UV + visible) from the Tm substrate can be absorbed by ZnO-Tm. Therefore, at a glance the sum of the photocurrent density of CdSe/ZnO-Er and that of ZnO-Tm should exceed the photocurrent density of CdSe/ZnO-Tm. However, the photocurrent density of CdSe/ZnO-Tm (1.4 μA cm−2) exceeds the photocurrent density sum of CdSe/ZnO-Er and ZnO-Tm (0.85 μA cm−2). This difference can be explained by the charge separation between CdSe and ZnO of CdSe/ZnO-Tm. In the case of CdSe/ZnO-Er, UC visible light can mainly excite CdSe only and the excited electrons can be injected into the conduction band of ZnO or recombine with the holes within CdSe QDs. The injected electrons in ZnO can move to the ITO electrode to develop photocurrent; however, some of them may also recombine with the holes in ZnO. So, a relatively low photocurrent density of 0.65 μA cm−2 was obtained from CdSe/ZnO-Er. On the other hand, in the case of CdSe/ZnO-Tm both CdSe and ZnO can be excited by UC visible and UV emissions from Tm, and thus not only a higher number of excitons can occur than in CdSe/ZnO-Er but also electron–hole charge separation can occur between CdSe and ZnO. As a result, there is an increased photocurrent density of ∼1.4 μA cm−2 for CdSe/ZnO-Tm.
The I–V curves of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm are shown in Fig. 9c under chopped 980 nm illumination. The current density was measured versus the potential with respect to the RHE. Both CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm showed immediate photoreaction to the 980 nm laser. CdSe/ZnO-Tm exhibits higher current density than that of CdSe/ZnO-Er during IR illumination. This photocurrent density difference between CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm gradually increases as the potential increases. Almost the same dark current density was determined for CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm without a laser source.
The laser power-dependent current densities of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm were measured, as shown in Fig. S2a and S2b.† As mentioned before, GC-Er and GC-Tm turned out to exhibit the excitation power-dependent UC emissions, as shown in Fig. 4d. Thus, with the increase of 980 nm laser power, the current densities of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm also increase. In Fig. S2c,† CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm showed slopes of about 1.5 in log–log plots, which originated from the excitation power-dependent UC emission intensity. These results, excitation power-dependent UC emission intensity and current density, strongly support the IR-driven photoresponses.
Schematic diagrams showing the photocurrent occurrence in our PEC cells, CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm are shown in Fig. 10. Er and Tm substrates were prepared and CdSe QD/ZnO NR heterostructures were grown on them. The major UC light emissions of Er and Tm substrates were green and blue/UV, respectively. UC emissions from Er substrates can be absorbed by CdSe QDs, but the band-to-band excitation of ZnO NRs cannot occur on Er substrates. Therefore, the energy band structure of CdSe/ZnO-Er under 980 nm illumination could be similar to that of the CdSe QD-sensitized ZnO, as shown in Fig. 10a. In contrast, in the case of CdSe/ZnO-Tm, UC UV emissions can be absorbed by both ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs, and furthermore CdSe QDs can be excited by blue emissions from Tm substrates (Fig. 10b). Charge separation spontaneously occurs in the case of CdSe/ZnO-Tm. Therefore, the type-II cascade energy band structure could be formed by the excitation of both CdSe and ZnO.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams showing the energy band structures and carrier transportation of (a) CdSe/ZnO-Er and (b) CdSe/ZnO-Tm. 
Before the comparative evaluation of the effectiveness of sensitization and the type-II cascade band structure, it needs to be clarified that both Yb–Er and Yb-Tm exhibit similar energy transfer efficiencies in the glass-ceramics. J. Pisarska et al. reported that both Yb–Er and Yb-Tm showed the energy transfer efficiencies higher than 91%.40 Also, both Yb–Er and Yb-Tm generally show somewhat similar UC quantum yields in fluoride materials. When the excitation laser power is very high (>4 W cm−2), both Yb–Er and Yb-Tm show similar UC quantum yields about 8%, even though Yb–Er shows a slightly higher efficiency. When the excitation power is not high enough (<4 W cm−2), Yb–Er and Yb-Tm show almost the same UC quantum yield less than 4%.41 Thus, it can be assumed that Er and Tm substrates show very similar UC emission efficiencies, because of the identical glass composition including the same rare earth ratio (Er/Yb and Tm/Yb) and very similar energy transfer efficiencies of Er/Yb and Tm/Yb. Even though both samples have the same CdSe/ZnO heterostructures, CdSe/ZnO-Tm showed a photocurrent density of 1.4 μA cm−2 and CdSe/ZnO-Er showed a photocurrent density of 0.65 μA cm−2. Depending upon the light sources, UC green emissions from Er and UC blue/UV emissions from Tm, the identical CdSe/ZnO band structures show totally different carrier transportation, simple sensitization and type-II charge separation, respectively, although the total UC spectrum energy absorbed by CdSe/ZnO is almost the same. It is well known that dye-sensitized TiO2 solar cells benefit from the extended visible light absorption spectrum.42 In the case of CdSe/ZnO-Er, most of the UC emissions would be absorbed by CdSe QDs and the generated electrons and holes in CdSe QDs will migrate to ZnO NRs and electrolytes, respectively (Fig. 10a). However, an intense electron–hole recombination process can occur before the migration of electrons and holes within CdSe QDs. In contrast, the effective charge separation, meaning considerably reduced recombination, would be promoted by the type-II cascade energy band structure of CdSe/ZnO-Tm. Also, CdSe QDs increase the visible light absorption spectrum. As a result, CdSe/ZnO-Tm exhibits increased photocurrent density due to the extended light absorption spectrum and the promoted charge separation.
Conclusions
In summary, UC glass-ceramics were used, for the first time, for the photoelectrode substrates instead of decorating light absorbing photocatalysts with UC nanoparticles. This strategy is beneficial for photocatalysts, because they are highly exposed to both high-intensity light and liquid electrolytes. We successfully prepared two types of UC substrates, one is the Er substrate, which shows UC green emission, and the other is the Tm substrate with blue/UV UC emissions. Bare ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs were grown on Er and Tm substrates. CdSe/ZnO-Tm exhibited higher photocurrent density than CdSe/ZnO-Er, which can be explained by the different carrier transportation mechanisms originated from different UC emissions. In the case of CdSe/ZnO-Er, CdSe QDs are only excited by most of the UC emissions from Er and sensitize ZnO by electron injection. However, this sensitization suffers from electron–hole recombination, resulting in a low photocurrent density. On the other hand, both ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs can be excited by the UC emissions of Tm in CdSe/ZnO-Tm. Not only the light absorption extended to the visible range but also the effective charge separation between CdSe and ZnO due to the type-II cascade band structure are beneficial for CdSe/ZnO-Tm. Therefore, CdSe/ZnO-Tm shows an increased photocurrent density under 980 nm illumination. Additionally, the excitation power-dependent UC emission and the corresponding current density were investigated under 980 nm laser illumination, which supports the IR-driven photoresponses. Further enhancement in the photocurrent density under IR illumination will be possible through the optimization of UC emission properties and an increase of UC nanoparticle density using fused silica with no glass crystallization as a matrix for UC nanoparticles. This study introduces a way to best utilize IR light energy for PEC cells that occupies ∼50% of the solar spectrum and has been mostly neglected for solar energy conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grants funded by the Korean government (NRF-2016R1E1A1A01942834 and NRF-2020R1H1A2013378). The authors thank Dr Baik, H. of the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI) for kindly providing access to their FETEM. The authors also thank the Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI) for HR-SEM measurements.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Nature, 1975, 257, 383–386 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Lindgren, J. He, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5686–5696 CrossRef CAS .
K. Keis, L. Vayssieres, H. Rensmo, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A149–A155 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Pei, L. Y. Ding, H. Lin, S. X. Weng, Z. Y. Zheng, Y. D. Hou and P. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10099–10102 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Cui, F. Huang and X. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 16668–16672 RSC .
H. Tang, F. Lévy, H. Berger and P. E. Schmid, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 7771–7774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, F. Ren, J. Zhou, G. Cai, L. Cai, Y. Hu, D. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Guo and S. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
P.-Q. Wang, Y. Bai, P.-Y. Luo and J.-Y. Liu, Catal. Commun., 2013, 38, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760–775 RSC .
N. L. Tarwal and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6510–6516 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shen, J. Chen, L. Cai, F. Ren and L. Guo, J. Materiomics, 2015, 1, 134–145 CrossRef .
M. G. Mali, H. Yoon, B. N. Joshi, H. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab, D. C. Lim, S. J. Ahn, C. Nervi and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21619–21625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cho and Y. M. Sung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H382–H388 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Cho and Y. M. Sung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 176–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Lin, T. J. Mullen, W. F. Lin, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan, T. E. Patten, D. Wang and G. Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3188–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chen, H. M. Chen, C.-J. Chen and R.-S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7917–7919 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11529–11533 RSC .
J. H. Zeng, J. Su, Z. H. Li, R. X. Yan and Y. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2119–2123 CrossRef CAS .
O. Plohl, B. Majaron, M. Ponikvar-Svet, D. Makovec and D. Lisjak, Acta Chim. Slov., 2015, 62, 789–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Sung, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Peng, X. Li, J. Zhong, H. Huang and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30053–30064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Wang, J. Lin and D. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22359–22368 RSC .
J. Luo, H. Wei, F. Li, Q. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3464–3466 RSC .
D. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Yu and P. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 051920 CrossRef .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Y. Wang, K. Zheng, T. Guo, Y. Yu and P. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 251903 CrossRef .
H. Lin, D. Chen, M. Niu, Y. Yu, P. Huang and Y. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, G. Chen, R. Fan, L. Yang, C. Liu, S. Hao, M. J. Sailor, H. Ågren, C. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 753–757 RSC .
Y.-P. Peng, W. Lu, P. Ren, Y. Ni, Y. Wang, P. Yan, Y.-J. Zeng, W. Zhang and S. Ruan, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 497 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Challenor, P. Gong, D. Lorenser, M. J. House, R. C. Woodward, T. S. Pierre, M. Fitzgerald, S. A. Dunlop, D. D. Sampson and K. S. Lyer, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 16780–16787 RSC .
L. Tian, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, Y. Cui, Z. Liang, J. Zhang and X. Xu, Materials, 2014, 7, 7289–7303 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ju, F. Song, Y. Han, W. Cui, A. Zhou, S. Liu, X. Wang, M. Feng and C. Ming, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 448 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, X. Wu, Z. Tang, Z. Xi, Z. Chen, P. Hu, Y. Yu, H. Yan and Y. Liu, J. Nanomater., 2015, 598734 Search PubMed .
S. Christodoulou, F. Rajadell, A. Casu, G. Vaccaro, J. Q. Grim, A. Genovese, L. Manna, J. I. Climente, F. Meinardi, G. Rainò, T. Stöferle, R. F. Mahrt, J. Planelles, S. Brovelli and I. Moreels, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pisarska, W. Ryba-Romanowski, G. Dominiak-Dzik, T. Goryczka and W. A. Pisarski, Opt. Appl., 2005, 35, 837–842 CAS .
G. Chen, W. Shao, R. R. Valiev, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, G. S. He, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1760–1766 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00477dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Digital photographs of (a) GC-Tm and GC-Er, (b) ZnO NRs grown on Tm and Er substrates, and (c) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs fabricated on Tm and Er substrates. (d) Schematic diagrams of CdSe/ZnO structures grown on Tm and Er substrates with crystallized YF3 nanoparticles.	 
ERHE = ESCE + 0.05916 × pH + (ESCE)0

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of GC-Er and GC-Tm heat-treated at 700 °C.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) GC-Er and (b) GC-Tm. HRTEM images of (c) GC-Er and (d) GC-Tm. The insets show the corresponding FFT patterns.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Up-conversion emission spectra of GC-Er and GC-Tm. Digital photographs showing the (b) up-conversion green emission from GC-Er and (c) up-conversion blue emission from GC-Tm. (d) Log–log plots of UC emission intensity versus excitation laser power for GC-Er and GC-Tm. Laser power-dependent UC emission spectra of (e) GC-Er and (f) GC-Tm excited using a 980 nm laser.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs grown on UC substrates and (b) blown-up XRD patterns of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs ranging from 20° to 40°. I, Z, Y and C denote ITO, ZnO, YF3 and CdSe, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) ZnO NRs and (b) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The insets show a plan view of each sample. EDS analysis of (c) ZnO NRs and (d) CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The insets show the calculated weight and atomic percentage of elements.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of (a and c) ZnO nanorods and (b and d) ZnO nanorods decorated with CdSe QDs. The insets show the FFT patterns of the corresponding samples. (e) HRTEM image of CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs. The yellow dashed line denotes the interface between ZnO and CdSe.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra and (b) plots of absorbance square with respect to the photon energy of ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on Er, Tm substrates and ITO substrates without UC NPs. The inset shows the PL of bare ZnO NRs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocurrent densities of (a) ZnO-Er and ZnO-Tm and (b) CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm under 980 nm illumination. (c) I–V curves of CdSe/ZnO-Er and CdSe/ZnO-Tm. For comparison, ZnO NRs and CdSe QDs/ZnO NRs on ITO substrates without UC NPs are inserted.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams showing the energy band structures and carrier transportation of (a) CdSe/ZnO-Er and (b) CdSe/ZnO-Tm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00477d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
