The photoreaction of TiO2 and Au / TiO2 single crystal and powder surfaces with organic adsorbates. Emphasis on hydrogen production from renewables  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1GC15992E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1GC15992E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2012, 14, 260-280Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsThe photoreaction of TiO2 and Au/TiO2 single crystal and powder surfaces with organic adsorbates. Emphasis on hydrogen production from renewables

        
          
            Karen A. 
            Connelly
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hicham 
            Idriss
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
bSABIC T&I, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: h.idriss@abdn.ac.uk
Received 
      11th August 2011
    , Accepted 26th October 2011First published on 5th December 2011AbstractTiO2 and TiO2-based materials are prototypes for photo-catalytic reactions as they have been shown for many decades to be active for total oxidation of hydrocarbons to clean the environment. In the last decade or so there has been a shift in the objectives for photoreactions mainly towards hydrogen production from renewables. Here we review the fundamentals behind the reactivity of model TiO2 surfaces with simple organic compounds in the dark and under photo-irradiation, then we consider the case of ethanol photo-reaction to hydrogen at its fundamental and applied levels. The review starts with an overview of the bulk and surface structures of rutile TiO2, as it is the most studied phase in surface science despite its lower activity for hydrogen production compared to the anatase phase. We then focus on the gold/TiO2 system where both phases (anatase and rutile) of TiO2 have received more attention. In the gold/TiO2 system emphasis is mainly devoted to understanding the effect of particle dimensions on the electronic conduction as well as the oxidation state of Au particles. The most recent observation using environmental X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy indicated the absence of charge transfer from the support to the metal. The photoreaction of ethanol is presented in more detail. The rate for hydrogen production on Au/TiO2 catalysts does not change if TiO2 particles are of macro-size or nano-size once normalised by surface area. Also, it was clearly seen that Au/TiO2 anatase is about two orders of magnitudes higher compared to a similar system where TiO2 is in the rutile phase. The mechanism for hydrogen production is presented and discussed on the metal/semiconductor systems. Of particular interest is the observation of synergistic effect between the anatase and rutile nanoparticles and one explanation involving electron transfer from one phase to the other is invoked.Karen A. ConnellyKaren A. Connelly is a PhD student funded by the Energy Futures Scholarship at the University of Aberdeen. She is currently researching “The dark and photoreactions of ethanol over TiO2 for the production of hydrogen” using both single crystal and powder samples.Hicham IdrissHicham Idriss has obtained his BSc (1984), MSc (1985), PhD (1987) and habilitation (1997) from the University of Strasbourg (France) and had postdoctoral and research associate positions at the University of Delaware and University of Illinois, Urbana (USA). He joined the Chemistry Department, University of Auckland (New Zealand) in 1995 as a senior Lecturer then became Associate Professor in 2002. In 2008 he moved to the University of Aberdeen (UK) to become Aberdeen Energy Futures Chair and Professor of Chemistry. In 2011 he moved to SABIC (Riyadh) as a chief scientist to work on hydrogen production using solar energy.
1. Introduction
1.1 Drivers for hydrogen production
Hydrogen as an energy carrier has the potential to revolutionise the way in which we meet our energy needs on a global scale. As a fuel, hydrogen boasts great versatility from direct use in internal combustion engines, gas turbines or fuel cells for both distributed heat and electricity generation needs.1 The main challenge in the harnessing of hydrogen to rival electricity as the energy carrier of choice is not related to the abundance of hydrogen available to us, but rather in its lack of natural availability as diatomic H2 molecules. Due to its high reactivity, hydrogen is more commonly bonded to other elements, for example oxygen and/or carbon, in the form of water and hydrocarbons. The production of hydrogen from these compounds is in contention with the laws of thermodynamics and therefore requires additional energy to break these naturally occurring bonds.2 The greatest advantage of H2 as a fuel source is that upon oxidation with either air or oxygen the energy stored within the H–H bonds is released producing only H2O as the end product.3 This, combined with the energy value of hydrogen being 122 kJ g−1 (around 2.75 times greater than for hydrocarbon fuel combustion), gives clear advantages for the use of hydrogen as a fuel.4
Currently the most economically and energetically viable hydrogen production methods are from unsustainable hydrocarbon (natural gas) reforming. However even methane reforming is currently around 4 times more expensive than current methods for producing gasoline with the same energy value.5 The more integral problem with steam methane reforming is that it is clearly unsustainable in the long term. More sustainable methods, such as those utilising renewable feedstocks such as biomass or water, are presently unfeasible due to economics, incomplete technologies and/or low production yields. However due to the inexhaustible global supply of water, as well as the greater accessibility of biomass to the majority of the population in comparison to hydrocarbons, the benefits of using a purely renewable feedstock for H2 production has far reaching implications. Although a hydrogen economy is not a new idea, because of the foreseeable depletion of fossil fuels (contributing about 80% of the present world energy demand) and associated environmental harms, hydrogen is been viewed as energy carrier for the future. There is also a need to cut down the utilization of fossil fuels because they are responsible for global climate change mainly due to the emission of pollutants including COx, NOx, SOx, CxHy, soot, ash, tars and other organic compounds released into the atmosphere as a result of their combustion. Therefore, increasing focus is being placed on clean energy alternatives. Hydrogen is not a primary energy source, but rather serves as a medium through which primary energy sources (such as nuclear and/or solar energy) can be stored, transmitted and utilized. As an energy carrier, it is especially attractive due to its potential to be used to power chemical fuel cells, although if possible routes are available it is poised to substantially contribute in chemical industry for major chemical compounds such as methanol synthesis, higher hydrocarbons and ammonia. In addition, it is also used as a fuel in rocket engines and as a coolant in some electrical generators. At present hydrogen is produced mainly from fossil fuels, biomass and water.6
The methods of hydrogen production from fossil fuels include: steam reforming of natural gas,7–9 thermal or thermo-catalytic cracking of natural gas,10–12 catalytic partial oxidation of heavier hydrocarbons13,14 and coal gasification; such as thermal pyrolysis and supercritical water gasification;15–22 the methods of hydrogen production from biomass include: steam reforming,23–25 partial oxidation of ethanol,26–30 and pyrolysis or gasification31–36 (which produces a mixture of gases, i.e. H2, CH4, CO2, CO, N2); while the methods of hydrogen production from water are: electrolysis,37 photolysis,38 thermo-chemical processes,39 and biological production.40
Among the above-listed processes, nearly 90% of hydrogen is produced by the steam reforming of natural gas or light oil fractions. Coal gasification and electrolysis of water are among other industrial methods for hydrogen production. These industrial methods mainly consume fossil fuel as energy source, and sometimes hydroelectricity. Although the technique of hydrogen production by the steam reforming of natural gas is mature it cannot guarantee long-term strategy for the hydrogen economy because it is neither sustainable nor clean. The hydrogen production through the electrolysis of water is not an energy efficient process as hydrogen obtained through this process carries less energy than the energy input to produce it. Thus, researchers around the world have been focusing on the development of new methods to produce hydrogen from renewable resources. Biomass is considered a renewable energy source because plants store sun energy through photosynthesis process and can release this energy when subjected to an appropriate chemical process, i.e. biomass burning. In this way, biomass functions as a sort of natural energy reservoir on earth for storing solar energy.
1.2 Photo-catalysis for hydrogen production
The worldwide availability of solar energy is ∼4.3 × 1020 J h−1, with the most advantageous method of optimising the capture, conversion and storage of this energy through the generation of H2.3 One approach in achieving this is through the photo-catalytic conversion of a suitable sustainable feedstock; chief among them is water but biomass products such as bio-ethanol have shown to be easier to convert, although as of yet these processes are not financially or energetically viable. TiO2 as a photo-catalyst for this process has several advantages over other potential photo-catalysts; it is abundant, non-corrosive, has surface stability, is environmentally friendly and is cost effective meaning that its use has greater long-term sustainability than many other photo-catalyst contenders.41
Research into the use of TiO2 as a means for generating hydrogen was initially accelerated by the work of Fujishima and Honda in the 1970s. This work involved photo-catalysis to break down H2O using an electrochemical cell with a TiO2 electrode connected to a platinum electrode through an external circuit. Fujishima and Honda found that when the TiO2 electrode was exposed to UV light a current was established. This was due to the formation of electron-hole pairs, with the current direction indicating that the oxidation reaction occurred at the TiO2 electrode and the reduction reaction at the platinum electrode.42 Since then this discovery has led to a proliferation of work conducted in the field of photocatalysis for the intention of hydrogen generation.
Since then many studies were devoted to understand and design photo-catalysts for water splitting to hydrogen and oxygen. A large part of these studies has been compiled in a review in 2009 by Kudo and Miseki.43 While extracting hydrogen from water is the ultimate objective, research in this direction is still to provide an active and stable photo-catalyst. The reaction of alcohols on the other hand is far easier because alcohols are hole scavengers and therefore higher hydrogen yields are obtained. Among alcohols, ethanol is the most interesting because it is mostly made by fermentation of crops ensuring its renewable cycle. In this review we will first focus on the fundamentals behind the photoreaction, then we will turn our attention to case studies of model surfaces of TiO2 before presenting the photo-catalytic production of hydrogen from ethanol on real catalytic materials.
The most important semiconductor used for photoreaction is TiO2. It is also the most understood metal oxide catalyst because its conductivity has allowed over the years spectroscopic and microscopic studies to be conducted. Because of these two reasons, high activity and electronic conductivity, TiO2 has been the prototype surface for the last two decades or so. Before reviewing some of the photo-catalysis on single crystal TiO2 surfaces it is worth presenting a brief introduction on the atomic structure of bulk TiO2 materials.
2.1 Semiconductor atomic structure
There are essentially an infinite number of atoms within a solid and therefore the overlap of individual atomic orbitals and electronic states results in the formation of continuous electronic band structures. This leads to the creation of the valence band (VB) and the conduction band (CB), with the energy level of these bands determining a materials capability of undertaking photo-catalysis.
For a semiconducting transition metal oxide such as TiO2 the level of these bands is determined by the bonding and anti-bonding behaviour of the electrons within the molecular orbitals (MO) that are formed.44 The lower energy bonding MOs broaden into the VB, which will be completely filled by electrons at 0 K. The higher energy anti-bonding MOs broadens into the CB, which for d0 transition metal oxides such as Ti4+ in TiO2, is completely empty at 0 K.44,45 Between the VB and CB is the bandgap as shown in Fig. 1. The electronic band structure that forms within semiconductors has a bandgap which is small enough to allow for electron excitation from the VB to the CB through the absorption of photons. The bandgap of rutile TiO2 is 3.0 eV (400 nm) and therefore a photoreaction involving TiO2 requires photons with energy equal to or greater than 3.0 eV. In other words, only light with wavelengths of less than 400 nm can provide photons with the necessary energy for photo-excitation in rutile.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of an n-type semiconductor such as TiO2 at ground state. 
Within a semiconductor bandgap lies the Fermi level (Ef) whereby in an ideal semiconductor the density of states (DOS) is zero. At 0 K all energy states below the Ef are occupied by electrons, relating to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), and energy levels above it are empty, relating to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).46 The position of the Ef within the semiconductor bandgap is dependent upon temperature as well as whether the semiconductor is extrinsic or intrinsic. For an n-type semiconductor such as TiO2 the Ef is found just below the CB minimum, Fig. 1, due to the formation of O vacancies within the bulk introducing occupied energy levels into the otherwise empty band gap. Due to the Ef position being determined by the energy distribution of the electrons it is an important attribute in determining the electrical and thermal properties of the solid.47
2.2 Elementary steps for photoreaction over TiO2
When a photon of adequate energy is absorbed by the catalyst substrate, an electron (e) from the occupied VB gains the required energy to cross the bandgap and move to the CB which was previously empty.44 The unoccupied electronic state left behind in the VB is now effectively positively charged and referred to as a hole (h). The described photo-catalytic process is shown by eqn (1): TiO2 + UV photons → e + h(1)
The process of photo-excitation in eqn (1) competes with the process of recombination between the newly excited electron-hole pairs. When an electron is photo-excited from the VB to the CB it can diffuse to the surface allowing for charge transfer to an adsorbate or can become trapped within an electron trap in the band gap.48 If neither of these processes occurs within the excited electron’s lifespan, deactivation of the electron-hole pair will occur with the release of either heat or photons. The probability of electron-hole recombination is therefore directly influenced by charge separation and the mobility and lifespan of the electrons and holes. These competing processes are shown in Fig. 2, together with other processes as described in the figure.
 Fig. 2  Representation of the major processes occurring in a semiconductor (with noble metal deposits) following photo-excitation; TM for transition metal. 
In the following we will treat the atomic and electronic structure of rutile TiO2 as a prototype semiconductor. It is to be emphasised that of the two common polymorphs of TiO2 (anatase and rutile) the anatase phase is more active for photoreaction in general43 and in particular for the production of hydrogen from water by photo-electro-chemical methods49 as well as organic compounds such as alcohols.50 However in surface science the rutile TiO2 single crystals (in particular the (110) oriented surface) has received considerable attention and is therefore the most understood. The main reason behind this is the ease by which the rutile phase can be prepared while the anatase phase single crystals are more difficult to make49 or to obtain naturally with high purity.51 It is true that in the last few years there has been an emerging interest of TiO2 anatase single crystals [ref. 52–54 among others], however none of this work has been applied for the hydrogen production.
2.3 Rutile structure

2.3.1 Bulk structure of rutile. 
The rutile bulk lattice is tetragonal, consisting of a slightly distorted octahedral formation of titanium (Ti4+) cations surrounded by six oxygen (O2−) anions in with each adjacent octahedra share one O2− anion along the [110] index direction,55Fig. 3. In each octahedral configuration the Ti–O bonds at the apices of the octahedron are slightly longer (1.962 Å) than the other Ti–O bonds (1.938 Å) and are stacked so that they alternate by 90° resulting in threefold coordination of the oxygen (O3c) atoms within the bulk structure of rutile.56,57
 Fig. 3  Bulk structure of rutile TiO2. Ti cations represented by small grey spheres and O2− anions by large red spheres. 


2.3.2 Geometric structure of the rutile (110) surface. 
The rutile (110)–(1x1) surface is the most thermally stable rutile surface and is therefore also the most extensively investigated; the surface structure is shown in Fig. 4. This (110)–(1x1) structure is in agreement with the concepts of both autocompensation and non-polarity.56 Its surface contains two differently coordinated titanium atoms and two differently coordinated oxygen atoms. Along the [001] crystallographic orientation rows of Ti atoms with sixfold coordination (Ti6c), as seen in the bulk, alternate with rows of fivefold coordinated Ti (Ti5c) atoms which have one dangling bond at 90° to the surface. Between the Ti atoms within the main surface plane are O3c atoms, as seen in the bulk, whilst twofold coordinated O (O2c) atoms (bridging oxygens) lie in the plane above.56
 Fig. 4  Ball and stick model of a side view of the relaxed TiO2 rutile (110) surface with surface atom coordination labelled. Ti cations represented by light gray spheres and O2− anions by red spheres. 
Surface energy (J m−2), governed by the coordinative un-saturation of the surface atoms, has the greatest influence over surface stability and reactivity. The coordination number of rutile (110) surface atoms most closely resembles that of the coordination number of the rutile bulk structure and therefore has the lowest surface energy and greatest surface stability of any of the rutile surfaces.57–59 Despite the reduced surface reactivity induced by the greater surface stability of the rutile (110) surface in comparison to other rutile crystal orientations it has advantages for use in UHV photocatalytic experimentation as it is thermally stable and does not reconstruct at the elevated temperatures required for crystal annealing.60


2.3.3 Electronic structure of the rutile (110) surface. 
Integral to the reactivity of coordination complexes such as rutile TiO2 is the part covalent, part ionic nature of the bonding. Bonding arises from the Ti cations interacting with the three lone electron pairs of the O atoms forming coordinate dative covalent bonding.55 Upon creating the (110) rutile surface the covalent nature of surface bonding arises from autocompensation of the surface creating an excess +4 charge related to the Ti dangling bonds which are neutralised by the −2 charge on the O dangling bonds resulting in an overall charge neutrality of the surface.55 However the surface bonds also have a strongly ionic character due to electron donation from Ti atoms leading to localisation of charge around the more electronegative O2− anions.55 This strongly localised charge distribution results in the rutile VB being predominantly occupied with O2p electrons (those in the HOMO) and the CB filled with the empty Ti3d states (those in the LUMO).45 Within a tetrahedral structure, bonding of Ti with O atoms results in varying degrees of overlap between the differing orientations of the O2p and Ti3d orbitals resulting in orbital hybridisation. The overlap of localised sp2 hybrids in TiO2 creates a combination of occupied bonding orbitals and empty antibonding orbitals. Due to the greater electronegativity of the O anions in relation to the Ti cations bonding orbitals are concentrated on the O atom and the antibonding orbitals on Ti atoms.44
The presence of O ligands bonded to the Ti centre induces an energy level increase of the Ti3d orbitals and results in degeneracy of the Ti3d orbitals. The difference in orbital interaction is caused by the differing orientations of the Ti orbitals resulting in a variance in the amount of overlap between them and the ligand orbitals. The splitting of the Ti3d orbitals due to these interactions is known as crystal-field splitting. The octahedral symmetry of TiO2 has the 6 ligands orientated along the x, y and z axis, as exhibited in Fig. 5. The dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals have greatest interaction with the O ligands due to their electron density being concentrated along the x, y and z axes, whilst the dxz, dyz and dxy orbitals have their electron density concentrated between the axes and therefore have less interaction with the ligand orbitals. This is the basis of the creation of two degenerate d-orbitals: a lower energy triply degenerate orbital (t2g) and a higher energy doubly degenerate orbital (eg).61 Due to the Ti eg orbitals pointing directly towards neighbouring O px and O py orbitals, hybridised covalent σ bonds are formed between them, whilst the t2g orbitals point between neighbouring O pz orbitals and therefore form weaker π bonding as shown in Fig. 5.62
 Fig. 5  Molecular orbital diagram of an octahedral complex such as TiO2 exhibiting the degeneracy of the Ti3d orbitals and the level of orbital hybridisation between Ti and O orbitals with the orientations of the Ti3d orbitals illustrated above. Taken from ref. 62. 
The hybridisation contribution of the O2p and degenerate Ti3d orbitals to the bulk DOSs for TiO2 is shown in Fig. 6.63 It can be seen from the calculated DOS that the CB is dominated by Ti3d orbitals and the VB by O2p orbitals with a band gap between them where the DOS is zero. However there is some hybridisation or covalent mixing of these Ti and O energy levels in the VB which is seen to be greater in the lower energy bonding part than the upper non-bonding part,44 The degree of hybridisation of the Ti–O orbitals has been determined using resonant photoemission by tuning the photon energy through the Ti 3p → 3d optical absorption edge. Resonant photoemission was observed for the O2p orbitals from this process indicating that there is a strong degree of metal-cation orbital hybridisation,64 The presence of either defects or impurities introduced by doping can have an extensive effect on the surface electronic structure.
 Fig. 6  Bulk DOS of TiO2 calculated from partial O and Ti DOSs. The Oz,y,x DOS contributions are shown individually as well as the individual Ti eg and t2g contributions. Taken from ref. 63. 


2.3.4 Electronic states of defects. 
In its stoichiometric form the rutile phase of TiO2 is an insulating material. However reducing the rutile surface leads to the formation of oxygen deficiencies, decreasing the atomic coordination numbers and therefore adjusting the electron count, resulting in a semi-conductive material and allowing for adsorption to occur at these defect sites, if the acceptor levels allow.65,66 Naturally occurring rutile is almost always in a reduced state but more controlled defect surface coverage can be produced either by thermal annealing at sufficiently high temperature or through electron bombardment.67 There are a variety of surface point defect types that can be created on the rutile surface such as doubly charged oxygen vacancies, as well as extended defects such as steps, ridges, terraces and crystallographic shear planes.56,68,69 The presence of these defects affects local composition and charge as well as modifying the coordination number of adjacent atoms. These alterations consequently result in localised changes of electron density and modify the electronic DOSs in the bandgap.67,70
The defects of primary concern for surface adsorption/desorption reactions are oxygen vacancies (Ov). The extent of Ov coverage is considerably dependent upon the reduced state of the crystal bulk.65 The rutile (110) surface has a maximum defect coverage concentration of around 10% after which the surface begins partially reconstructing.68 Surface Ov defects can be created at either bridging oxygen sites, as shown in Fig. 7, or at planar oxygen sites, however bridging oxygen defects are created more easily due to the lower degree of atomic coordination that they have.
 Fig. 7  Ball and stick model of the TiO2 rutile (110) surface with bridging Ov defects shown. Ti cations represented by small red spheres and O2− anions by large grey (in-plane), black (bridging oxygen) and pink (oxygen adatom) spheres. Taken from ref. 74. 
The presence of surface Ov defects is accompanied by the introduction of associated electronic defect states. The two excess electrons from the Ov occupy the empty Ti3d derived states at the bottom of the CB therefore pushing the Ef up to the CB edge. These altered electronic states result in neutralising the charge within the semiconductor as well as acting as charge carrier traps.55,71–73 The introduction of energy states associated with Ov defects into the band gap is observed in the angle-integrated UPS spectra in Fig. 8 for the stoichiometric and reduced (110) surface. The broad peak between 3.5 and 9.5 eV below the Ef represents the O2p dominated VB with the peak at around 7.5 eV corresponding to the bonding orbitals and the 5.5 eV peak corresponding to the non-bonding orbitals which are observed for both the stoichiometric and reduced structure. For the reduced surface a second peak area around 1 eV below the Ef is observed which corresponds to Ov defect creation and is shown to have a Ti3d derived nature due to the excess −2 charge occupying the previously empty Ti3d orbital.64
 Fig. 8  Series of angle integrated UPS spectra taken for photon energies between 30 and 76 eV for both the stoichiometric and reduced TiO2 (110). Taken from ref. 64. 
The increase in surface reactivity observed as a consequence of Ov defect formation is due both to producing sites with lower coordination as well as from the alteration of the electron count by two electrons.55 The exact mechanism for the increased surface reactivity observed due to oxygen deficiency is still debated. It has been suggested that the −2 excess charge remains at the Ov site creating helium-type donor states, however this theory is now largely disregarded;55 that the excess −2 charge is accommodated as a localised electron charge spread out over the near area of the Ov site and resulting in the two closest Ti4+ cations to be reduced to Ti3+, or more recently it has been suggested that the O deficiency arises from interstitial Ti.
The most recent theory attributing the Ti3d defect band gap state to near surface interstitial Ti cations rather than Ov defects or bridging hydroxylates was proposed by Wendt et al. using STM and UPS on stoichiometric, reduced and hydroxylated rutile (110) surfaces. This work stemmed from observations that Ti interstitials in reduced TiO2 undergo diffusion to the crystal surface upon oxygen exposure at increased temperatures.74 Wendt et al. found that on the (110) rutile surface the gap state originally attributed to bridging Ov defects was not altered after the vacancy had been removed by oxygen adsorption and therefore proposed that this gap state must originate from extra interstitial Ti atoms at the near surface. Furthermore they observe an oxygen dissociation channel associated with surface Ti troughs rather than with the Ov defects. Based on these observations it was proposed that near-surface Ti interstitials must influence the crystal surface and their redox interactions with adsorbates due to the provision of electronic charge from Ti interstitials for oxygen adsorption and desorption.74
A number of other studies determined that the Ti3d defect band gap state is attributable to Ov defects as proposed by Petrik et al. using STM, TPD and electron stimulated desorption (ESD).69 For these experiments electron bombardment was used rather than thermal annealing so as to control the surface defect coverage whilst keeping the concentration of subsurface Ti3+ interstitials constant. These results showed that the amount of adsorbed molecular O2 is closely related to the amount of surface defects. This indicates that the surface reactivity in relation to O2 is fundamentally controlled by electron-donating species such as Ov defects, rather than subsurface Ti3+ interstitials.75 Yim et al. are also in agreement with an Ov-related Ti3d band gap defect state by using STM and UPS and also creating defect sites with electron bombardment. The UPS data gives a clear indication that the population of the Ti3d defect band gap state is directly dependent upon the concentration of bridging Ov defects.76

2.4 Au/TiO2
Photo-production of hydrogen from ethanol over the clean rutile TiO2 surface has not been sufficiently efficient, indicating that hydrogen ion reduction and hydrogen-hydrogen recombination rates are weak on this semiconductor surface2 unlike photo-oxidation processes.77 The introduction of transition metals such as Au nanoparticles (NPs) dispersed on the TiO2 surface has been found to increase reaction efficiency by inhibiting electron-hole recombination, as shown in Fig. 9, and reducing the over-potentials for the generation of H2.78 Whether the photocatalytic properties of supported metal NP's on TiO2 are more critically dependent upon the Au particle morphology such as the size, shape and thickness of the NPs or due to support effects such as charge transfer is still open to debate.79,80 A detailed study of the effect of both the polymorph of TiO2 (anatase or rutile) and the effect of Au particle size was also studied.50 It was found that the rate of hydrogen production from ethanol Au particles of similar sizes deposited on TiO2 anatase is two orders of magnitudes higher than that on TiO2 rutile. The reason is invoked as due to electron-hole recombination rates (the electron-hole recombination rate is far slower on TiO2 anatase compared to that on TiO2 rutile and therefore there are more excited electrons available to be transferred from the conduction band to the Au particles, which are then transferred to the hydrogen ions in the case of TiO2 anatase). It was found that the rate of hydrogen production normalised to the amount of available surface Au is not dependent on their particle size in the 3–12 nm range. Of course the same rate decreases when the particle size further increase but this common to catalytic reactions involving both the support (in this case TiO2) and a transition metal.50
 Fig. 9  Enhancement of photo-excitation due to Au NPs acting as electron acceptors. Adapted from ref. 78. 

2.4.1 Size effects of Au NPs on TiO2. 
Initial work by Haruta et al.81 ascertained that highly dispersed Au NPs on reducible metal oxide supports showed greater enhancement of particular catalytic reactions than for larger sized deposits of gold. In their work81 it was found that Au deposited by a variety of methods (including vapour deposition) resulted in hemispherical NPs with those of <5 nm diameter found to optimise the catalytic activity of various surface reactions. Valden et al.82 investigated this particle size effect by measuring the surface oxidation reaction of CO over the Au dispersed TiO2 surface with Au NP sizes ranging from 1–6 nm. It was found that Au NPs of 3.5 nm in size induced maximum enhancement of the surface reaction with only very little enhancement of the reaction observed for NPs of 6 nm, as observed in Fig. 10a. Scanning Tunnelling Spectroscopy (STS) was used to calculate the variation in band gap with Au cluster diameter by measuring the tunnelling current as a function of the bias voltage, as shown in Fig. 10b. The band gap measured for 3.5 nm NPs is between 0.2–0.6 eV with corresponding topographic scans showing a 2 atom layer 3D cluster structure. For NPs of <2 nm diameter larger band gaps up to ∼1.4 eV were measured with mostly a 2D layer topography and NP clusters with diameters >5 nm exhibited metallic properties with no band gap states observed. The authors attributed these observations to quantum size effects and proposed that NP thickness may be the key mechanism for enhanced reactivity due to a metal to non-metal transition.
 Fig. 10  (a) CO oxidation activity as a function of Au cluster size on TiO2, (b) cluster band gap as a function of Au cluster size on TiO2, represents 2D clusters, represents 3D clusters two atom layers in height and represents 3D clusters with three atom layers or greater in height. Taken from ref. 82. 
Lai et al.83 replicated the observed enhancement of Turn Over Frequency (TOF) of the CO oxidation reaction for both precipitation synthesized and vapour deposited Au NPs of ∼3 nm in size, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Turnover frequency (TOF) of CO oxidation as a function of Au cluster size on the TiO2 surface. The Y axis on the left hand side is for Au deposited on powder TiO2 and Y-axis on the right hand side is for Au deposited on TiO2(110) rutile surface. Taken from ref. 83. 
Using TiO2 powder Subramanian et al.80 provided evidence for Ef shifts toward the CB in the Au/TiO2 system corresponding favourably with decreasing Au particle size. The redox couple for C60/C60− was used as a probe for determining the Ef of the semiconductor. A mixture of known TiO2 and Au NPs were irradiated with UV light with a known amount of C60 added to the suspension. Upon equilibration of the C60/C60− redox couple with the TiO2 system the apparent Ef for the Au/TiO2 suspension was determined with varying Au NP size. The Ef determined for TiO2 alone was −230 mV, with the addition of Au NPs increasing the negativity of the Ef to −250 mV for 8 nm Au, −270 mV for 5 nm Au and −290 mV for 3 nm Au. The calculated increase in negativity moves the Ef closer to the CB due to the greater accumulation of electrons at the Au NPs, as shown in Fig. 12. Upon UV irradiation electrons are excited into the TiO2 CB and transferred to the Au NPs until equilibrium is reached. As the Au Ef is raised to a more negative potential the resultant composite Ef moves towards the CB of the semiconductor. This composite system is therefore more reductive than TiO2 alone and improves the photocatalytic reactivity of the semiconductor.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the equilibration of TiO2 and Au NPs with the redox couple before and after UV irradiation. Taken from ref. 80. 


2.4.2 Binding sites of Au NPs on TiO2. 
Defect sites are known to play an important role in the nucleation and growth of Au NPs on the rutile surface. The UPS spectra in Fig. 13 show a peak at around 0.9 eV below the Ef, representing the defect energy state associated with reduced Ti3+ cations produced from the removal of a bridging oxygen. The second UPS spectrum confirms that the 0.9 eV peak belongs to this defect state as it is removed with increased exposure to O2. The first spectrum demonstrates that with increased Au coverage the Ti3+ peak is suppressed indicating that Au deposition on the reduced rutile surface initially occurs by nucleation at Ov defects and suggesting that bonding between Au and Ti3+ has occurred.84 The donation of excess electron density from the reduced rutile surface to Au NPs is therefore considered to be the main mechanism for the greater binding energy of Au onto the reduced surface in comparison with the stoichiometric surface.85
 Fig. 13  UPS spectra for a reduced TiO2 (110) surface with varying degrees of Au coverage at room temperature and UPS spectra for a reduced TiO2 (110) surface after exposure to O2 at varying pressures. Taken from ref. 84. 
Differences in the binding energy of Au NPs on the reduced rutile surface were observed when varying the Au surface coverage, with higher surface coverage crudely correlated to an increase in the mean NP cluster radius. Jiang et al. used direct XPS evidence to conclude that charge transfer from the reduced TiO2 surface to Au clusters does play a crucial role in core level binding energy.86 In this work varying amounts of Au were deposited on both stoichiometric and reduced TiO2 (110) surfaces and XPS Au 4f7/2 signals measured for each Au surface coverage. On the stoichiometric surface a downward core level binding shift with increased surface coverage of Au was observed, as shown in Fig. 14. The authors indicate that this is due to particle size effects.87 For the reduced surface the same downward shift of the core level binding energy was observed for Au thickness coverage of up to 1.5 Å after which the binding energy shifts upwards. The downward shift observed for the reduced surface can be linked to a combination of both particle size effects and charge transfer from Ov defects to the Au clusters. This charge transfer creates negatively charged Au clusters, which along with particle size effects, contributes to a decrease in their core level binding energy. Due to limited defect availability on the reduced surface charge transfer diminishes with increased Au deposition until no charge transfer occurs resulting in the relative upward shift of the core level binding energy. These results are in contrast to another more recent one using elevated-pressure reaction conditions over Au/TiO2 (110) rutile surface, ambient-pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS).88 The authors found that while the Ti2p and O1s peaks shifted to lower binding energy (by up to 0.5 eV) when compared to UHV conditions, upon exposure of the surface to O2 (up to 1 Torr), the Au 4f did not shift. The authors attributed the shift of the Ti2p and O1s to band bending of the support (TiO2).88 To date there are no reported experiments that have investigated by core level spectroscopy the effect of charge transfer from the support to the metal under photo-excited conditions.
 Fig. 14  Au 4f XPS for Au deposition on the stoichiometric (left) and reduced (right) TiO2 (110) surface. Thickness of Au deposited is (a) 0, (b) 0.125, (c) 0.25, (d) 0.50, (e) 1.0, (f) 1.5, (g) 2.0, (h) 3.0, (i) 5.0, and (j) 10.0 Å. Taken from ref. 87. 

2.5 Surface reactions
Two main concepts are associated with surface catalysis on reducible metal oxides: acid–base reactions and redox reactions. Acid–base reactions arise due to the alternation of charge within metal oxides, and redox reactions occur when the electronic configuration of the surface is altered due to the introduction of defects.89 Both processes are fundamentally different in their mechanisms, however both processes can be interrelated.
On the TiO2 surface, Ti cations and O anions are described as Lewis acid and Lewis base sites, respectively, with high electron density molecules (Lewis bases) adsorbing at cation sites and electron accepting molecules (Lewis acids) reacting at anion sites.89 TiO2 is predominantly acidic, however, altering the level of surface reduction results in the modification of surface cation acidity and anion basicity. For a reducible oxide surface such as TiO2, excess electrons associated with defect states reduce surface cations and therefore decrease surface acidity at these cation sites. For both acid–base and redox reactions the adsorption of one reactant onto one surface site will result in molecular or non-dissociative adsorption or alternatively may involve more complex interface reactions that involve the breaking of reactant bonds to produce an adsorbed reactant on two or more surface sites namely dissociative adsorption.90
Acid–base reactions occur when there has been electron transfer between the adsorbate and the catalyst surface. An important aspect of acid–base surface reactions is the protonation of surface oxygen which regularly occurs during the dissociation of water molecules. This is typically observed at defect sites such as at Ov defects, where dissociated water transfers a proton to a surface oxygen atom thereby producing two hydroxyl groups and rendering the surface O less nucleophilic.60,91 In all acid–base reactions the formal oxidation state of all the atoms remains unaltered.

2.5.1 Adsorption and desorption pathways. 
The capability of individual surface sites to bond with the adsorbate is dependent upon the symmetry, energy and nature of the electronic states located at these surface sites.46 Adsorption is an exothermic process and only occurs when the attractive interaction between an adsorbate and catalyst surface is stronger than the disordering effect caused by thermal motion. Two main types of adsorption are observed to occur on the catalyst surface: physisorption and chemisorption. Physisorption, or physical adsorption, is defined by the interactive van der Waal's forces between the adsorbate and surface molecules or ions resulting in weak adsorption. Physisorption bonds are typically characterised by adsorption energies <50 kJ mol−1 and are easily reversed. Physisorbed adsorbates can undergo diffusion on the catalyst surface and are generally not bound to any specific site.92,93 Chemisorption, or chemical adsorption, occurs when the MOs of the adsorbate overlap with those of the surface atoms allowing for the creation of chemical bonding via electron sharing. The formation of chemisorbed bonds usually only occurs when an activation barrier has been overcome. This bonding results in the creation of a surface complex which is characterised by adsorption energies >50 kJ mol−1 and therefore has stronger adsorption onto the catalyst surface and are consequently more difficult to reverse.92,93 Usually also observed with chemisorption is the weakening of the adsorbate intramolecular bonds which results in dissociation of chemisorbed molecules.
As well as the metal oxide surface structure being important in determining adsorption mechanics, the alcohol reactant structure is also significant in determining the selectivity of alcohol decomposition.94 The chemical interaction of ethanol with other solids is largely associated with the presence of the hydroxyl group which has the effect of making ethanol molecules slightly basic.95 The level of acidity of any given alcohol, and therefore its adsorption mechanics, is known to be dependent on both its polarisability as well as its inductive effects. In the gaseous phase, the inductive effect created by the electron-releasing capability of the alkyl (–CH3) group is reduced and therefore ethanol is less acidic than it would be in solution. Polarisability is negligible in solution, however in the gas phase it may become more important as the negative charge on the oxygen is not dispersed as it is in solution. These opposing polarisability and inductive effects will influence the adsorption mechanics of ethanol molecules on the TiO2 surface.96
There has so far been no research conducted into the photo-production of hydrogen from ethanol over the rutile single crystal surfaces. However work has been conducted on the general photoreaction/oxidation of ethanol over the single crystal rutile (110) surface as well as more extensive research into the reactions of acetic acid, acetaldehyde, acetone and carboxylic acids, as well as for smaller molecules such as H2O, O2, H2 and CO, over this surface. We will review some of the reactions over TiO2 single crystal surface before focusing on hydrogen production over real catalysts.

2.6 Simple molecule reactions over rutile TiO2 (110) surfaces

2.6.1 H2O on TiO2. 
The adsorption mode of H2O over the rutile (110) surface at room temperature (RT) and below have been studied experimentally using UPS,97 TPD,98,99 XPS98 and DFT.100 At 160 K the adsorption model proposed for H2O is molecular at Ti5c sites on the oxidised surface, as well as at Ov defects on the reduced surface. Dissociation of the water molecule can then occur in both cases by a proton binding to a neighbouring oxygen atom. Heating to 200 K results in the majority of the molecularly adsorbed water desorbing and by 320 K most OH species have also been desorbed from the surface.97 Using DFT calculations, Lindan et al.100 have produced adsorption energies that are compatible with these experimental results and are consistent with a mixed state in which molecular and dissociated water occurred at monolayer (ML) coverage. The adsorption energies were, however, very close for the fully dissociated water (0.99 eV) and the mixed state (1.01 eV) and the difference with the molecular adsorption is still very small (0.91 eV). Therefore water appears to be adsorbed molecularly on defect-free TiO2(110) rutile surface.


2.6.2 O2 on TiO2. 
Exposing a reduced rutile surface to O2 results in the quenching of Ov sites on the surface, therefore creating a more oxidised surface. On the rutile (110) surface at 28 K, O2 is molecularly adsorbed at Ov sites with O2 coverage dependent upon the number of available surface Ov defects.101 Upon annealing the molecularly adsorbed O2 then undergoes dissociation. Epling et al. postulated four mechanisms for the dissociative adsorption of O2 at Ov sites: O2 dissociation and the filling of two Ov defects, the filling of a single Ov with the second O atom either diffusing into the bulk or being released into the gas phase or the filling of a single Ov with the second atom remaining on the surface as an adatom. TPD results from the rutile surface exposed to water and ammonia showed an increase in the desorption temperatures for these reactants on the pre-oxidised surface as compared to the reduced surface. In order to influence surface reactions in this way Epling et al. deduced that O2 dissociation at an Ov must be accompanied by the binding of the second atom at another surface site, most likely a Ti5c atom. This view, however, does not consider the effect of electronic structure on the adsorption process. For example, Pauli repulsion can be behind destabilisation of NH3 adsorbed on oxygen-defected surface or may even prevent it from adsorbing on these sites. The presence of surface O adatoms is currently the most widely accepted view as based on numerous STM studies that have identified spots on the Ti5c4+ sites upon healing of the Ov defects.102


2.6.3 H2 on TiO2. 
Adsorption of H2 on the rutile (110) surface has only been found to occur at Ov sites which act as electron donors and create H+ surface ions.48 On the defect-free surface H2 adsorption is not observed due to the high activation energy required for breaking hydrogen bonding and the absence of the electronic charge transfer afforded by the presence of Ov defects. Early work by Göpel et al.,103 has indicated that at 300 K dissociative adsorption of H2 occurred at the Ov-associated Ti5c3+ sites. Ionic titanium hydride bonds are formed with H2 dissociation occurring due to the transfer of two electrons from the Ov. Surface coverage for H2 adsorption has been found to be low on the rutile (110) surface with a maximum fractional coverage of 0.005 ML indicating that only minimal amounts of H2 can be adsorbed onto this surface.99


2.6.4 CO and CO2 over TiO2. 
CO molecules have weak binding onto Ti cations on the defect-free rutile (110) surface, however the presence of Ov sites on this surface greatly enhances adsorption.48 This enhanced adsorption is due to the occurrence of electron back-donation from Ov-associated Ti3+ ions into the π* orbitals of the CO molecule.46 Using TPD, Raupp et al.104 found that CO dosed onto the surface at 150 K molecularly desorbed at around 200 K. At temperatures between 300 and 370 K, Göpel et al.103 observed more strongly bound molecular CO adsorption which upon annealing yielded a small amount of desorbed CO2 due to the removal of surface O atoms, effectively reducing the rutile surface. On nearly defect-free TiO2(110) surface physisorption of CO was studied using beam reflection and temperature programmed desorption techniques. A sticking coefficient of about 0.75 was found independent of coverage suggesting that adsorption occurs via a precursor-mediated mechanism. At low coverage (0 to 0.5 CO/Ti4+), CO molecules bind through the C to fivefold-coordinated Ti4+ cations. The adsorption occurs preferentially on the Ti4+ sites that do not have neighbouring adsorbates. This arrangement minimizes the repulsive interactions between the adsorbed molecules along Ti4+ rows. At higher CO coverage (>0.5 ML), the nearest-neighbour Ti4+ sites become occupied. The close proximity of the adsorbates results in strong repulsion thus giving rise to a significant shift of the TPD leading edge with increasing coverage. The repulsive adsorbate-adsorbate interactions are most likely due to alignment of CO dipole moments.105 Göpel et al. further reported that CO2 weakly adsorbed to the rutile (110) surface with adsorption uninfluenced by surface defect density. Due to this, CO2 desorption has commonly been used as a probe for measuring the extent of surface defect coverage on the rutile (110) surface.106


2.6.5 Photoreaction of O2 over TiO2. 
The photoreaction of O2 on the surfaces of TiO2(110) rutile single crystal deserves a particular attention because of its fundamental nature that motivated considerable studies, in particular by Yates et al. for over a decade.107–111
The first thing to consider is that O2 molecularly adsorbs on surface O defects that are charged with electrons. Upon adsorption, the O2 molecule becomes negatively charged (O2−(a)). Yates and co-workers summarised the process that occur upon UV excitation of O2-adsorbed TiO2 surface as follows:108 hν + TiO2 → e + h [k1Fhν](2) h + T → (hole capture) [k2](3)e + h → (heat or luminescence on recombination sites) [k3] h + O2− → O2(g) [k4](4)where e and h are generated electrons and holes upon UV excitation, T is a hole trap, g is gas phase and the rate constants k1 to k4 are given in brackets.
The rate of desorption of O2 in the gas phase, using the steady state approximation, is therefore expressed by the following equation: (5)The equation comes from the rate of [h], d[h]/dt, is equal to k1Fhν − k3[h][e] = 0; neglecting step (2). Therefore the concentration of holes [h] is: (6)from which eqn (5) is obtained.
Because k1 and k3 are intrinsic to TiO2 (at sufficiently high photon flux) they can be considered constant, and therefore monitoring the rate of desorption as a function of O2 coverage may be used to obtain k2. The interesting point is that the calculated rate constant was found to vary by a factor of 100 or more as the chemisorbed O2 is photo-desorbed. Yates and co-workers interpreted this as due to a fractal kinetic process made by hole neutralisation by percolating electrons present at O-vacancy defects (which do not contain O2−(a)).
The main idea is that, as the coverage of adsorbed oxygen decreases, the surface density of the overlapping filled electronic states at vacancy sites increases; this in turn results in decreasing the rate coefficient for O2 photo-desorption with time.
In another very interesting work Yates et al. studied the effect of UV excitation on the photo-desorption of O2 and compared it to the same reaction upon electron excitation (Fig. 15).107 The authors determined the kinetics of electron-hole recombination by monitoring the desorption of molecular O2 from the rutile TiO2 (110) surface induced firstly by an electron flux and secondly by a photon flux. Under conditions of constant O2 coverage, the rate of desorption as seen above is dependent on the relationship between hole concentration and the incident electron or photon flux. The plots derived from the photo-desorption of O2 as observed in Fig. 16 show that electron stimulated desorption (ESD) and photon stimulated desorption (PSD) have differing kinetic orders. In Fig. 16a electron-stimulated O2 desorption is proportional to the first power of the electron flux indicating that hole depletion has first-order recombination kinetics.107 In Fig. 16b the photon flux results in 2 branches of desorption both of which adhere to a second order rate law as they show a linear function of the square root of the photon flux (Fhv1/2).108
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram showing the electron transport postulated to occur through the extended filled electronic states surrounding O-vacancy sites. From ref. 109. 
 Fig. 16  Plots of O2 photodesorption over the rutile (110) surface as a function of (a) incident electron flux (Fe) and (b) the square root of the incident UV photon flux (Fhv1/2). Taken from ref. 107. 
To understand this we need to invoke again the above equations (2) to (6) but add to them a fifth one related to electron trapping: e + T+ → T (ke)(7)where T+ is an electron trap center and ke is the associated rate constant for the reaction.
Now in the case of electron excitation and using the steady state approximation, d[h]/dt = k1Fe − k2[h][T] = 0, where in this case Fe (electron flux) has substituted for Fhν from which [h] = k1Fek2[T] is obtained. Therefore the overall rate of O2 desorption is: (8)Considering that the hole trap concentration [T] is constant, then [h] is proportional to the electron flux.
The difference in reaction order observed for the two experiments is due to the difference in absorption length of the incident electrons and photons. The electron flux of 100 eV has an electron inelastic mean free path of ∼5.6 Å whilst UV light with an energy of 3.4 eV has an absorption length of ∼103 Å. Electrons are therefore absorbed in the near surface where there are a larger number of defects and charge trapping sites when compared with the bulk whilst photons will penetrate more deeply.107 Electron-hole recombination in the near-surface is most likely to be due to Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) mechanisms whereby electrons or holes are trapped within trapping sites in the band gap formed due to the non-degeneracy of the semiconductor.109 SRH recombination mechanisms are typically of first order as observed for electron-stimulated O2 desorption. For photon-induced desorption the longer absorption length indicates that PSD is governed by deeper CB to VB electron-hole recombination mechanisms which are characteristically of second order as observed for the photon-stimulated O2 desorption.107
Along with suitable electron-hole dynamics and the availability of trapping sites for photo-excited charge, any photoreaction also requires the transfer of this charge to the adsorbate.107 Successful charge separation and subsequent migration of electrons and holes to the semiconductor surface can either reduce or oxidise surface adsorbates. These reduction/oxidation reactions are dependent upon the redox potential of the adsorbate on the catalyst surface relative to the VB and CB. The energy level of the CB minimum represents the photoelectron reduction potential, whilst the top energy level of the VB represents the oxidation potential of the photo-holes. Thermodynamic requirements demand that for the surface photoreaction to commence the base of the CB needs to be more negative than the redox potential of the acceptor species, whilst the top of the VB needs to be more positive than the redox potential of the acceptor species (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  VB and CB positions of several selected semiconductors with selected redox couple potentials at pH 0. 
When all conditions are favourable and recombination is avoided, photon-induced excitation of an electron from the VB into the CB can result in further charge migration to adsorbates at the semiconductor surface interface.

2.7 Ethanol reaction behaviour over TiO2
Barteau stated early on that the general behaviour of alcohols is that of immediate dissociative adsorption on metal oxides. This leads to the formation of an alkoxide bonded to the surface cation with the corresponding proton bound to a surface anion (oxygen) as is typical of acid–base chemistry.60 This expected principal interaction occurs between the adsorbate and the surface at the O2p levels and the empty states of the Ti3d levels of TiO2 resulting in the formation of these stable alkoxide species.112 In the case of ethanol adsorption over TiO2, this de-protonation would produce ethoxide (CH3CH2O−) species bonded to Ti cations and a hydrogen ion bonded to the O− anion as shown by eqn (2). C2H5OH(g) + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3CH2O–Ti(ad) + H–O(ad)(9)where (g) is gas, (ad) is adsorbed and (s) is the surface.
The deprotonation of ethanol on the rutile (110) surface has been shown experimentally by many workers including Jayaweera et al.112 In this work it was found that adsorption of ethanol over TiO2 is dissociative and has a surface saturation of around 0.5 ML with respect to surface Ti atoms. The coverage was estimated from the attenuation of the XPS O1s and Ti2p peaks of surface caused by screening of surface O and Ti atoms due to adsorption. It is proposed that due to the length of the CH3CH2– of ethoxides, two neighbouring ethoxide species will undergo repulsion effectively leaving every alternate Ti cation site free.
Following the formation of stable ethoxide species on the rutile (110) surface, Jayaweera et al. found that with increased UV exposure time in the presence of O2 in the gas phase a decrease in the XPS peak areas of the C1s ethoxide species was observed as well as the introduction of a new peak attributed to RCOO– species. These changes have been explained by the formation of reactive oxygen radicals on the TiO2 surface due to the transfer of photoexcited electrons from the TiO2 VB to the CB, as shown in eqn (10) and (11). The further reaction of O2− with ethoxide species may then produce acetaldehyde and acetate as shown in eqn (12): TiO2 + UV → e− + h+(10) e− + O2(g) → O2−(ad)(11) O2−(ad) + CH3CH2O(ad) → HO2(ad) + CH3–CHO˙ (ad) → + O(ad) or O2(g) → CH3COO(ad) →→ CO2(g) + H2O(g)(12)→→ denotes unidentified intermediate reaction step(s).108
Generally on single crystal metal oxide surfaces alkoxide intermediates can either recombine with the dissociated proton to reform alcohol molecules, upon heating, which may then desorb, or can decompose by either dehydrogenation to produce aldehydes or by dehydration to produce alkenes. The dehydration route is favoured on reducible surfaces such as TiO2 due to the abstraction of oxygen atoms from surface ethoxides by surface Ov sites. A reduced surface therefore encourages selectivity towards dehydration products.60
The dehydration of ethanol to form ethylene was early on shown in a work by Gamble et al.113 Ethanol and deuterated ethanol were dosed onto the TiO2 rutile (110) single crystal surface and subsequent desorption measured using TPD. The TPD data showed desorption peaks for ethanol and ethylene at 650 K in an approximately 1:1 ratio. This suggests that the adsorbed ethoxide groups underwent β-hydride elimination with subsequent breaking of the carbon–oxygen bond and release of ethylene gas as shown in eqn (13). More recent work was conducted by Nadeem et al. on the same surface.114 The authors observed acetaldehyde in addition to ethylene in line with previous work on other TiO2 rutile surfaces. Because ethylene is formed due to ethanol/ethoxide adsorption on oxygen vacancies, its yield is largely dependent on the history of the surface and the number of these oxygen vacancies prior and during the TPD. CH3CH2O–Ti (ad) → C2H4(g) + H–O(ad)(13) CH3CH2O–Ti (ad) + H–O(ad) → C2H5OH(g) + O(s)(14)
In the same work Nadeem et al. conducted UV experiments similar to those conducted by Jayawera et al.,108 but this time using on-line mass spectrometry rather than XPS. The authors found that upon UV excitation in the presence gas-phase oxygen molecules acetaldehyde desorbs (Fig. 18). The same authors also found that the amount desorbed has a square root dependency on O2 pressure and this was interpreted as due to surface saturation by O2 molecules at high pressures in a Langmuir-type behaviour.
 Fig. 18  Acetaldehyde desorption as a function of time upon UV excitation (360 nm) over a rutile TiO2(110) surface pre-saturated with ethanol at 300 K. The same experiment was repeated at different O2 pressures as indicated on each spectrum. The surface was cleaned between each experiment. Adapted from ref. 115. 
2.8 Acetone reaction behaviour over TiO2
The photochemical mechanisms of acetone are of great interest to researchers due to acetone being a common organic reactant, intermediate or product as well as an air-borne contaminant. Henderson115 used TPD and HREELS to determine acetone adsorption and desorption processes on the reduced and oxidised rutile TiO2 (110) surface. TPD analysis for the reduced surface showed a coverage dependence for desorption with a downward shift in the leading edge of the d6-acetone desorption spectra with increased coverage indicating destabilisation of acetone–Ti4+ sites due to intermolecular acetone repulsions. For the oxidised surface the TPD data showed a first-order desorption peak. Henderson found no evidence that suggested that Ov sites are the binding sites for acetone adsorption or that they were sites that lead to greater binding of acetone to the surface. He suggests that the reason Ov sites are not preferential sites for acetone stabilisation is due to the π* acceptor orbitals of acetone being too high in energy to overlap with the electronic levels of the Ov sites. HREELS revealed that acetone was molecularly adsorbed, as shown in Fig. 19 (left), in a η1 coordination to Ti4+ sites. Based on the C–O stretching frequency measured by HREELS, which is consistent with a C–O bond somewhere between a single and a double bond, Henderson suggested a poly-acetone surface species is formed, as shown in Fig. 19 (right), whereby molecularly or dissociatively co-adsorbed oxygen attacks the carbonyl carbon of an adjacent molecularly adsorbed acetone resulting in the rehybridisation of the carbonyl π system.
 Fig. 19  (left) η1 acetone, (right) poly-acetone. Taken from ref. 118. 
Further work by Henderson116 using TPD on the effects of co-adsorption of water with acetone shows that on the reduced surface increased water coverage following acetone adsorption lead to an increase in the amount and degree of surface acetone destabilisation. An exponential fit of this data is shown in Fig. 20 comparing the fraction of d6-acetone desorption from both the reduced and oxidised surfaces.
 Fig. 20  Exponential fit of TPD peak area data from mass 46 showing the fraction of d6-acetone desorbing above 275 K (above the water layer TPD feature) as a function of water coverage. Taken from ref. 116. 
Henderson suggests that acetone on the pre-oxidised surface has greater resistance against water displacement due to the acetone–oxygen complex formed from reactive surface oxygen species which has greater stability than the molecularly adsorbed acetone species observed on the reduced surface.
Further work by Henderson117 uses post-irradiation TPD to show the photodesorption products of acetone on the rutile (110) surface. The TPD spectra in Fig. 18 reveals thermally activated decomposition (>175 K) of acetone on the surface that with increased UV exposure produced acetate groups on the surface which then undergo desorption as ketene at around 620 K. The inset in Fig. 21 shows changes in surface coverage of acetone and ketene with increased UV exposure. The acetone coverage can be taken as an absolute coverage and the exponential decay of acetone can therefore be described as a first-order process. The ketene curve cannot be taken as absolute coverage, but the increase of this curve as that for acetate decays indicates that ketene is the only detectable C-containing product of acetone following UV irradiated TPD.
 Fig. 21  TPD spectra of mass 42 for 1 ML surface coverage of acetone on rutile (110) at 95 K irradiated with UV light for varying lengths of time in 5 × 10−7 Torr O2. Inset shows TPD peak area data for acetone and ketene as a function of UV exposure. Taken from ref. 117. 
Photodesorption experiments using d0-acetone on the rutile (110) surface showed that upon UV irradiation a strong spike in the signal occurred for mass 15, as well as lesser spikes for masses 13 and 14. The ratio of these three peaks was consistent with the gas phase spectrum of methyl radicals. This experiment was repeated using d6-acetone as the adsorbate which showed a spike in the signal upon UV irradiation for mass 18 but not mass 20. This further indicates that the photo-desorbed products produced from the cleaving of the C–C bond were methyl radicals rather than methane. From data obtained before and after photo-desorption experiments of methyl radical ejection a plot of the photo-oxidation cross-section of acetone was obtained, as shown in Fig. 22, where a faster initial acetone photo-oxidation rate was followed by a second slower rate.
 Fig. 22  Acetone photo-oxidation cross section plot obtained from methyl radical photo-desorption trace. Taken from ref. 117. 
Henderson suggests that the observed methyl radical ejection requires the formation of poly-acetone, as shown in Fig. 19, through the interaction of adsorbed acetone and co-adsorbed oxygen molecules or atoms, as shown in eqn (15). The fast acetone photo-oxidation rate is then represented by eqn (16): η1-acetone(ad) + O/O2(ad) → poly-acetone(ad)(15) Fast: poly-acetone(ad) + UV → acetate(ad) + CH3(g)(16)
Since the initial photo-oxidation rate in the first few seconds of UV excitation was over 2 orders of magnitude faster than later on, it can be assumed that the slower photo-oxidation rate is not limited by the flux of electron-hole pairs to the surface as photon flux remained constant over the period of UV exposure. An exception to this would be if the poly-acetone complex was directly excited by UV light during the initial fast rate followed by some TiO2-mediated excitation during the second slower rate. It is presumed for the slower photooxidation rate that the rutile surface's ability to regenerate the poly-acetone species is the mechanism that limits this rate. This process is determined by eqn (17) to (20): Slow: TiO2 + UV → e−/h+ pairs(17) Ti4+ + e− → Ti3+(18) O2(g) + Ti3+ → O2−(ad) + Ti4+(19) O2−(ad) + η1-acetone(ad) →→ poly-acetone(ad)(20)From eqn (10) to (13) it can be seen that the slower rate depends upon the rutile ability to generate electron-hole pairs under UV excitation; transport and trapping of excited electrons at surface Ti3+ sites; subsequent access of O2 to Ti3+ sites and finally the regeneration of the poly-acetone species.
2.9 Acetaldehyde reaction behaviour over TiO2 (110) surface
Zehr and Henderson118 have conducted Photo Stimulated Desorption (PSD) and TPD over the rutile TiO2 (110) single crystal surface to investigate the thermal and UV-induced surface reactions of acetaldehyde. TPD analysis of both the reduced and pre-oxidised surfaces showed, when both surfaces were exposed to gaseous O2, some acetaldehyde decomposition occurred, caused by a reaction involving oxygen, and resulted in the formation of surface acetates. On the oxidised surface the acetates were further seen to thermally decompose to form ketene which desorbed from the surface at ca. 700 K. The oxidation of acetaldehyde to acetate has a low enough activation barrier so as to allow this reaction to occur on the RT O2-dosed rutile (110) surface. The formation of adsorbed acetate accounted for <10% of total acetaldehyde adsorption. PSD on the oxidised surface upon UV exposure showed a large signal for methyl radicals as previously observed in the photo-oxidation of acetone on the rutile (110) surface.117 Following methyl ejection a C1 fragment is left upon the surface which after reaction with oxygen makes formate species that decompose at about 550 K. As was observed for methyl ejection from the acetone-saturated surface,117 the presence of co-adsorbed oxygen as well as a pre-heated surface was required for acetaldehyde photochemistry to occur. As proposed for the acetone-saturated surface, the thermal reaction shown in eqn (21), producing a photoactive acetaldehyde-oxygen complex, is expected to be a precursor for acetaldehyde photo-dissociation upon exposure to UV light (eqn (22)). η1-acetaldehyde(ad) + O/O2(ad) → acetaldehyde-oxygen complex(ad)(21) acetaldehyde-oxygen complex(ad) + UV → CH3(g) + formate(ad)(22)
2.10 Acetic acid reaction behaviour over TiO2 (110) surface
The general interaction of carboxylic acids over transition metal oxide surfaces at RT is through dissociative adsorption (luminescence, Shen, Philip's work). Guo et al.119 determined a while ago from LEED and ESDIAD patterns of acetic acid dosed onto the rutile TiO2 (110) surface that dissociation of the O–H bond occurred resulting in ordered acetate and hydroxyl groups, as shown in eqn (23): CH3COOH(g) + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3COO–Ti(ad) + H–O(ad)(23)
From the observed (2x1) LEED pattern coverage was taken to be 0.5 ML in relation to the surface density of Ti4+ ions, with the distance between acetates in the [001] direction being double the unit cell length of the clean rutile surface. Analysis of the signal from the ESDIAD patterns of the (2x1) adsorbate layer indicated that acetates were adsorbed onto the rutile surface with their major molecular axis perpendicular to the surface normal in a bridging form. In a later work by Guo et al.,120 STM images further supported the bridging form for acetate adsorption. The acetates were observed along the [001] direction correlating in position to bright rows on the clean surface. The distance observed between acetates was equal to double the clean rutile surface unit cell length with the distance between acetates along the [10] direction equal to the corresponding unit cell of the clean surface.
Idriss et al.121 used XPS on the acetic acid-dosed rutile (110) surface in order to compare temperature effects on the surface coverage of acetates both in the presence and absence of O2 as well as under both dark and UV conditions. Firstly acetic acid was dosed onto the rutile surface at 300 K under dark conditions and the surface temperature increased. Upon heating, a decrease in the number of surface acetates was observed with almost full acetate desorption by 600 K. On exposing the acetate saturated surface to UV light without O2 exposure there is only a slight decrease observed in the C(1s) peaks that are attributed to –CH3 and COO– groups indicating that neither the rutile surface in-plane nor bridging oxygens are involved in this photoreaction. However in the presence of oxygen UV exposure produces a noticeable reduction in the C(1s) XPS peaks indicating that the presence of gas-phase oxygen, as either physisorbed oxygen or oxygen atoms adsorbed at Ov sites, is vital for acetate photodecomposition. Idriss et al. argue that any Ov sites on the surface will have been healed by acetic acid adsorption and therefore be unavailable for oxygen molecules or ad-atoms to adsorb to. Idriss et al. state that it is more likely that oxygen adsorption is photon stimulated with enhanced electron transfer from the rutile CB to surface oxygen molecules creating O2− radical species. These radicals then react directly with the adsorbed acetates. Plotting the calculated C(1s) XPS peak areas as a function of UV illumination time in the presence of O2 shows that the acetate decays linearly. This indicates that the photoreaction cross-section is not sensitive to the initial surface acetate coverage and that adsorption of acetates and O2 are not in competition for the same adsorption sites.
Further work on the rutile (110) surface conducted by Uetsuka et al.122 used trimethyl acetic acid as the reactant. Upon trimethyl acetic acid adsorption at RT trimethyl acetate (TMA) anions are formed on the surface. Adsorption is observed via deprotonation of the trimethyl acetic acid with TMA anions bridging two surface Ti4+ atoms and the proton binding to a bridging O2−. The main surface reaction following UV excitation is shown in eqn (24) involving the capture of a hole from the rutile VB and leading to the decomposition of TMA to tert-butyl radicals: (CH3)3CCOO−(ad) + h+ → (CH3)3C(ad) + CO2(g)(24)The tert-butyl radicals then subsequently desorb as isobutene. The corresponding electron (to the hole trapped by TMA in eqn (24)) is trapped at a surface Ti causing its reduction from Ti4+ to Ti3+. UV photodesorption experiments of the TMA-covered surface revealed that in the absence of O2 isobutene desorption monotonically decays as a function of irradiation time. Exposure of the surface to O2 under dark conditions increased isobutene desorption indicating that anaerobic decay of the reactants cannot be attributed to their disappearance on the surface. Consequently Uetsuka et al.122 suggested that the electrons that cause the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ undergo recombination with holes and therefore cease the reaction in eqn (24). Upon exposure of the surface to O2 the electrons trapped at Ti3+ sites are removed by adsorbed O2 and therefore become unavailable for recombination, allowing isobutene desorption to continue. From STM images taken in this study it was observed that local TMA coverage could go from zero to saturation within a few lattice units and that the TMA was heterogeneously desorbed across the surface upon UV irradiation. This indicates that recombination of trapped electrons with holes is localised rather than delocalised. Delocalised recombination would be accompanied by a laterally uniform concentration of holes and therefore a more homogeneous coverage of TMA which is not observed. This work by Uetsuka et al.122 indicates that the redox reaction of TMA over the rutile (110) surface is spatially modulated with the photo-oxidation rate of TMA increased when parts of the surface have free sites for O2 adsorption. Adsorbed O then has the ability to accept electrons from Ti3+ which would otherwise be lost to electron-hole recombination and prevent isobutene desorption.
Wilson & Idriss123 studied the photoreaction of acetic acid over the rutile (001) surface reconstructions {011} and {114}. On these surfaces the same mode of adsorption for acetic acid as previously shown in eqn (23) was observed. Upon UV excitation, steady-state reactions on both the {011} and {114} surface reconstructions resulted in the reaction products of CO2, CH4 and ethane (the photo-Kolbe reaction). When no background O2 pressure is present a spike in ethane desorption was observed with a subsequent decrease over time as shown in Fig. 23. By increasing the O2 pressure with continued UV illumination the signal for ethane as shown in Fig. 23 was steady. These results indicate that the formation of ethane consumes oxygen from the lattice.
 Fig. 23  A. Steady-state acetic acid reaction on the {011} surface reconstruction with open triangle representing UV light on and the closed triangle UV light off. B. Steady-state acetic acid reaction to ethane on the {011} surface reconstruction with increasing O2 pressure.123 
Due to both surfaces yielding the same reaction products upon exposure to UV light, the local arrangement of the surface atoms had no effect on reaction product selectivity. However, the {011} surface was found to have a greater reactivity for the formation of ethane than the {114} surface. The different arrangement of surface atoms for the {011} and {114} reconstructions affects the surface reactions occurring due to the differing electronic properties associated with these atomic arrangements such as changing the dielectric constant or surface band gap. The quantum yield of a photoreaction is related to the depletion layer124 and therefore Wilson et al. calculated that the depletion layer in the {011} reconstructed surface is around three times larger than in the {114} reconstruction indicating that photo-induced electrons and holes at the {011} reconstruction will have reduced recombination rates as compared to the {114} reconstruction.
2.11 Photo-production of hydrogen from ethanol on real catalysts
There is a non-negligible amount of work conducted to make hydrogen from ethanol over M/TiO2 powder using photo-catalytic processes.2,50,114,125–135 Among the factors affecting the reaction is the metal loading,50,125 with some attempts made to correlate particle size with photoreaction efficiency,50,131 to the polymorph nature of TiO2 (anatase versus rutile,50 brookite versus anatase,132 mixed phases132,135) as well as to the particle size of the support.133 Some of these results are presented in more details below.
Nadeem et al.131 recently conducted work comparing the dark and photocatalytic reactions of ethanol over Au particles deposited on TiO2 anatase nano- (ca. 10 nm) and micro- (∼0.15 μm) particle catalysts (Fig. 24). The Au particles were of uniform and similar dimension with mean particle sizes of ∼5 nm and ∼7 nm on the micro- and nano-sized TiO2 respectively.
 Fig. 24  TEM images of 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase microparticles (A and B) and of 2 wt% Au/TiO2 nano-particles (C and D). Images A and B show two different areas of the micro-particle catalyst at two different magnifications. Images C and D show the same area of nano-particle catalyst conducted in bright and dark field modes to highlight the presence of Au particles (D). The arrows indicate unambiguous Au particles in images B and D. Note: the rectangles in images B and D are of the same size (45 × 65 nm2). From ref. 135. 
IR spectra were recorded at 300 K for the modes of adsorbed species as a function of surface temperature under dark conditions, as shown in Fig. 25. As can be seen from Table 1 showing the IR band assignment on 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles, as well as those previously reported for pure TiO2 anatase136 and CeO2,137 there was no noticeable difference between the IR bands observed for 2 wt% Au/TiO2 and those obtained for TiO2. This indicated that the mode of ethanol adsorption in the presence of Au is not altered as seen by IR. Also using IR the effect of reaction temperature on the dissociatively adsorbed ethoxide species was monitored. Up to 615 K a steady but small decrease in the number of surface ethoxides was observed with a sharp loss of surface ethoxides subsequently seen after. At 675 K less than 10% of ethoxides were present on the surface which related to the formation of surface carbonates.
Table 1 IR band assignments for ethanol adsorbed on Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles with those reported in the literature for adsorption on TiO2 anatase132 and CeO2133




Modes
TiO2 anatase136
Au/TiO2 (this work)
Au/CeO2137





ν O–C/ν C–C (cm−1)
1150
1150 (shoulder)
1109


1100
1120
1065


1070
1070
1038




1050





δ CH3 (cm−1)
1360
1375
1362



ν
s CH3 (cm−1)
2875
2870
2875



ν
a CH2 (cm−1)
2930
2930
2933



ν
a CH3 (cm−1)
2975
2970
2971




 Fig. 25  Effect of temperature on the population of surface ethoxides and other minor reaction intermediates on 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles. The surface was first dosed with ethanol at 300 K, then heated to the indicated temperatures under dynamic vacuum for a few seconds and cooled to 300 K to collect the spectra. From ref. 135. 
Nadeem et al. then performed ethanol TPD on a H2 reduced catalyst under continuous flow (1 atm) at 673 K, Fig. 26. The product profile gained was dominated by a wide temperature peak for un-reacted ethanol desorption from 370 K to 650 K. Ethanol desorption occurs due to the recombination of surface ethoxides with H+ ions gained from the hydroxyl groups that are formed when ethanol dissociatively adsorbs. However some of these hydroxyl groups will desorb as water molecules. Over the temperature range 650–670 K many products were seen to desorb including acetaldehyde, ethylene, CO, CO2 and additional water. The ratio of the dehydrogenation reaction from ethanol forming acetaldehyde to the dehydration reaction from ethanol forming ethylene is around 2. Photo-catalytic reactions were also run on both the micro- and nano-anatase monitoring hydrogen production as a function of UV irradiation time, as shown in Fig. 27. Following the induction period the slopes of the lines were roughly equivalent with the nano-sized catalyst, showing hydrogen production around an order of magnitude higher than for the micro-sized catalyst. Following normalisation of the data with respect to surface area both catalysts produces a similar specific reaction rate. From this data it was indicated that the specific reaction rate is independent of the support particle size and that this indicates that the rate of the reaction simply tracks the number of Au NPs on the support. Normalisation of the reaction rate to surface area could mean that electron transfer within the anatase support is unaffected by moving from nano- to micro- (bulk) sized particles (see Table 2 for details on the catalysts). The delocalisation or localisation of electronic wave functions is thought to be an important feature for electron transfer within TiO2 with the e−–h+ recombination rate decreased in localised states. Density Functional Theory (B3LYP) is a computational method known to give acceptable band gap separation in TiO2. Computations of the HOMO and LUMO electronic levels of TiO2 anatase (Ti21O70H54) and rutile (Ti23O80H68) clusters138 has shown that the electronic wave functions are delocalised unless electrons are injected directly into the clusters. Furthermore using a similar computational method it was found that local defect states are only seen in the band gap for TiO2 particles of 1 nm and less.139 These computational results combined with the experimental results from Nadeem et al. indicate that for any marked change to be observed in the electronic properties of TiO2 NPs they must be of 1 nm or less in size. The other photoreaction products as monitored by TPD showed that the principal reaction is of dehydrogenation of ethanol to acetaldehyde: CH3CH2OH → CH3CHO + H2(25)However some of the acetaldehyde produced decomposes to CH4 and CO.
Table 2 Surface and bulk properties of 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano- and micro-particles




Catalyst
BET (m2 g−1catal)
XPS Au4f/Ti2p
Mean Au particle size (nm)
TiO2 particle size (nm)




Au/TiO2 (nano-)
105
0.016

ca. 7

ca. 10


Au/TiO2 (micro-)
10
0.046

ca. 5

ca. 150




 Fig. 26  Temperature programmed desorption after ethanol adsorption at saturation coverage at 300 K on 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles. Taken from ref. 135. 
 Fig. 27  Hydrogen formation as a function of time during the photocatalytic reaction of ethanol over 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles and 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase micro-particles at 300 K. Catalyst concentration = 6.5 mg/100 mL. Taken from ref. 135. 
The overall process of the photoreaction of ethanol producing acetaldehyde and hydrogen that is postulated to be occurring is shown in Scheme 1. Firstly irradiation of the surface with UV light lead to the excitation of electrons from the VB to the CB, with a fraction of these electrons in the CB then transferred to Au NPs. H+ ions may be present at these Au NPs following the de-protonation reaction of ethanol to form ethoxides (eqn (9)) and the reaction of ethoxides forming the de-protonated form of α-hydroxyethyl radicals (reaction 2a, Scheme 1) and acetaldehyde (reaction 2b, Scheme 1). From these two reactions an ethanol molecule will have injected two electrons into the TiO2 CB. In the case of TiO2 the time lag between these two electron injections is very fast. If the time lag was slow we may expect to see the radical made in reaction 2a combine to give 2,3-butanediol as has been observed for ZnS NPs,140 however this compound was not detected for TiO2. Once acetaldehyde has been formed it was then removed from the surface due to its adsorption energy being smaller than that of ethanol.
 Scheme 1  A representation of the reactions involved in hydrogen production from ethanol over Au/TiO2 under photo-excitation. The two hydrogen ions formed in reaction (1) and (2a) are reduced by two electrons upon their transfer from the CB to Au particles. Ethoxides inject two electrons into the VB and acetaldehyde is consequently formed. The position of Au particles with respect to the CB is approximate as this varies with the particle size; see ref. 135 for more details. 
In a more recent work the same authors50 have studied the effect of Au particle size deposited on TiO2 anatase and rutile of the same size. Two main observations are worth mentioning. First the rate for hydrogen production is about two orders of magnitudes higher on Au deposited on anatase nanoparticles when compared to that on Au particles deposited on rutile nanoparticles. The authors interpreted this as due to the fast electron-hole recombination rate on rutile compared to that on anatase.50 The second important observation is that Au particle size has no noticeable effect on the reaction rate in the 3 to 12 nm range. The authors did not study the effect of Au particle size smaller than 3 nm though.
It is worth addressing in this last section the combined effect of more than one phase of TiO2 on the reaction. This effect is commonly known as synergism or the synergistic (or synergic) effect; two substances together have a more pronounced effect on a particular system compared the sum of the effects for each substance separately. This effect has received some attention in the case of TiO2 when it was realised that Degusa P25 TiO2 (which is composed of 80% anatase and 20% rutile) is more active for the many photo-excited reactions than the equivalent sum of the anatase and rutile phases. For example, in a work by Zhang et al.141 it was reported that making TiO2 anatase nano-particles on top of TiO2 rutile particles resulted in a four times enhancement of the normalised rate per unit area for hydrogen photo-production from water/methanol when compared to TiO2 anatase alone. The reason for this was invoked as due to the formation of surface junction promoting the spatial charge separation in the surface region. This surface junction would facilitate the transfer of the photo-generated electron from the conduction band of the rutile phase to trapping sites on the anatase surface which results in improvement of the charge separation efficiency and therefore enhances the photo-catalytic activity. In another work by Hurum et al.,142 a study by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) was conducted on TiO2 P25 under photo-illumination. The authors identified an anatase-rutile interface trapping site at the distorted interfacial region at g = 1.979. Upon band-gap illumination holes appear at the surface and preferentially recombine with electrons with electrons in surface trapping sites. In other words in the mixed-phase TiO2, photo-generated holes are trapped exclusively on the particle surface. In another recent paper by other workers the production of hydrogen over Pt/TiO2 was studied over TiO2 anatase, brookite and a mixture of both.132 The authors have found that Pt deposited on TiO2 brookite has higher activity when compared to Pt deposited on TiO2 anatase. The authors attribute the difference as due to the higher conduction band level of the brookite structure compared to that of the anatase. The authors also found that when both phases are present the rate of hydrogen production was higher than that observed on a single phase. Equally important the authors observed that the production is sensitive to the surface area in the case of brookite anatase mixture with smaller surface area giving higher activity particularly once normalised to the same unit areas. They interpreted this as due to crystallinity effect.
In a similar work but focusing on the anatase and rutile phase other workers have found that the presence of both phases also had a positive effect on hydrogen production.134 The authors gave the following explanation (Scheme 2): Because the band gap of the rutile phase is about 0.2 eV smaller than that of the anatase the number of charge carriers is higher. At the interface between the anatase, rutile and Au particles electrons can migrate from one particle to other. An electron initially excited from the valence band to the conduction band in the rutile structure may migrate to the anatase particle and benefits from a far slower electron-hole recombination rate. Therefore the rutile is simply acting as an electron reservoir for the anatase phase at the interface.
 Scheme 2  Postulated explanation for the enhancement of the reaction rate for hydrogen production from ethanol over Au/TiO2 (anatase + rutile). Au particles at the interface between the anatase and rutile phases will benefit from the higher charge carriers number (n) in rutile and the slower electron-hole recombination rate (Rrec(e−–h+)) in the anatase phase. Taken from ref. 134. 
Conclusions
The photoreaction of organic compounds over TiO2 and noble metal/TiO2 is rich in many fundamental principles in addition to its important applied aspect for energy generation from renewable systems using renewable sources (such as light from the sun). On model systems the photo-oxidation principles are presented, in particular the role of adsorbed oxygen atoms and surface oxygen defects on the reaction rates. For the photo-production of hydrogen from ethanol the Au/TiO2 system has shown three interesting non-correlations: the absence of charge transfer for the support to the metal, the absence of particle size effect on the photoreaction up to 12 nm size and the absence of particle size effect of TiO2 in the 10 to 150 nm size range. On the contrary the presence of the bulk effect is clearly seen with two orders of magnitudes difference in the reaction rate between the anatase and the rutile (for hydrogen production) and a possible synergistic effect between both phases. It is worth mentioning that the complete conversion of ethanol is not achieved and only one third of the hydrogen is extracted with the present knowledge. The challenge will be in designing photo-catalysts for hydrogen production that are capable of breaking the carbon-carbon bond at the operating (ambient) conditions. The reaction mechanism for hydrogen production is presented. Molecular hydrogen is formed via electron transfer from the conduction band to the gold particles while a successive two electrons transfer from ethanol to the valence band occurs.
References
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov, W. F. David and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4356 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Yang, C. H. Chang and H. Idriss, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 67, 217 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, F. del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35 CAS .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. V. Buchanan, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 39 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Armor, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 176, 159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. Czernik and E. Chornet, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rioche, S. Kulkarni, F. C. Meunier, J. P. Breen and R. Burch, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 61, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Fatsikostas, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Chem. Commun., 2001, 851 RSC .
M. Steinberg and H. C. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1989, 14, 797 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Callahan, in Proceedings of 26th Power Sources Symposium, Red Bank, N.J.,  1974, pp. 181 Search PubMed .

          J. Pohleny, N. Scott, Vol. U.S. Patent No 3 (Ed.: (UOP).), 1966, pp. 284 .
D. K. Liguras, K. Goundani and X. E. Verykios, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 419 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hohn and Y. C. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 927 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. Czernik, D. Montane, M. Mann and E. Chornet, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rapagnà, N. Jand and P. U. Foscolo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 551 CrossRef .
S. Turn, C. Kinoshita, Z. Zhang, D. Ishimura and J. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 641 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, S. Z. Wang, D. H. Xu, Y. M. Gong, H. H. Ma and X. Y. Tang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Calzavara, C. Joussot-Dubien, G. Boissonnet and S. Sarrade, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lu, L. J. Guo, C. M. Ji, X. M. Zhang, X. H. Hao and Q. H. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 822 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Matsumura, J. Stenberg and M. J. Antal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1996, 35, 2522 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Antal, S. G. Allen, D. Schulman, X. Xu and R. J. Divilio, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 4040 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. Czernik and E. Chornet, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rioche, S. Kulkarni, F. C. Meunier, J. P. Breen and R. Burch, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 61, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Fatsikostas, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Chem. Commun., 2001, 851 RSC .
D. K. Liguras, K. Goundani and X. E. Verykios, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 419 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hohn and Y.
C. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 927 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scott, M. Goeffroy, W. Chiu, M. Blackford and H. Idriss, Top. Catal., 2008, 51, 13 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Sheng, A. Yee, G. A. Bowmaker and H. Idriss, J. Catal., 2002, 208, 393 CrossRef CAS .
H. Idriss, Platinum Met. Rev., 2004, 48, 105 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. Czernik, D. Montane, M. Mann and E. Chornet, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rapagnà, N. Jand and P. U. Foscolo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 551 CrossRef .
S. Turn, C. Kinoshita, Z. Zhang, D. Ishimura and J. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 641 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, S. Z. Wang, D. H. Xu, Y. M. Gong, H. H. Ma and X. Y. Tang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Calzavara, C. Joussot-Dubien, G. Boissonnet and S. Sarrade, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lu, L. J. Guo, C. M. Ji, X. M. Zhang, X. H. Hao and Q. H. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 822 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lede, F. Lapicque, J. Villermaux, B. Cales, A. Ounalli, J. F. Baumard and A. M. Anthony, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 939 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Baykara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 1451 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Hall, M. W. W. Adams, P. Morris and K. K. Rao, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1980, 295, 473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, K. H. Leung, D. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .

          V. E. Henrich and P. A. Cox ( 1994) The Surface Science of Metal Oxides, Cambridge University Press, pp. 103 & 167 Search PubMed .

          J. Keeler and P. Wothers ( 2006) Why Chemical Reactions Happen, Oxford University Press, p. 61 Search PubMed .

          K. W. Kolasinski ( 2004) Surface Science: Foundations of Catalysis and Nanoscience, John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., p. 13 & 96 Search PubMed .

          W. P. Atkins and J. de Paula ( 2002) Atkins' Physical Chemistry, Oxford University Press, p. 795 Search PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Jr. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716 CrossRef CAS .
M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. A. Nadeem, M. A. Keane, R. F. Howe, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Nature Chemistry, 2011, 3, 489 CAS .
W. Hebenstreit, N. Ruzycki, G. S. Herman, Y. Gao and U. Diebold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 62, R16334 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Gong, A. Selloni, O. Dulub, P. Jacobson and U. Diebold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 370 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hengerer, B. Bolliger, M. Erbudak and M. Grätzel, Surf. Sci., 2000, 460, 162 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Gong, A. Selloni, M. Batzill and U. Diebold, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 665 CrossRef CAS .
G. von Oertzen and A. R. Gerson, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 324 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Lin, Y. Li, K. Ding and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19270 CrossRef CAS .

          G. I. N. Waterhouse and H. Idriss ( 2009) Environmentally Benign Photocatalysts, Springer, p. 1338 Search PubMed .

          H. Idriss, Model Systems in Catalysis: From Single Crystals and Size-Selected Clusters to Supported Enzyme Mimics, Chapter 7, Editor R. M. Rioux, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. A. Barteau, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1413 CrossRef CAS .

          A. K. Brisdon ( 1998) Inorganic Spectroscopic Methods, Oxford University Press, p. 58 & 74 Search PubMed .
B. Jiang, J. M. Zuo, N. Jiang, M. O'Keefe and J. C. Spence, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 2003, 59, 341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munnix and M. Schmeits, Phys. Rev. B, 1984, 30, 2202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Jeng and V. E. Henrich, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 43, 12004 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calatayud, M. Markovits, B. Menetrey, B. Mguig and C. Minot, Catal. Today, 2003, 85, 125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Wen, D. Cao, Y. Li, J. Wang and H. Jiao, Surf. Sci., 2005, 577, 69 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yu and J. Woods Halley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 51, 4768 CrossRef CAS .
O. Dulub, M. Batzill, S. Solovev, E. Loginova, A. Alchagirov, T. E. Madey and U. Diebold, Science, 2007, 317, 1052 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Hudson ( 1998) Surface Science: An Introduction, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., p. 20 Search PubMed .

          B. C. Gates and H. Knozinger ( 2000) Impact of surface science on Catalysis, Academic Press, p. 263 Search PubMed .
O. Dulub, C. Di Valentin, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 4407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Matthiesen, S. Wendt, J. Hansen, G. K. H. Madsen, E. Lira, P. Galliker, E. K. Vestergaard, R. Schaub, E. Laegsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 517 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo, H. Orita and H. Nozoye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wendt, P. T. Sprunger, E. Lira, G. K. H. Madsen, Z. Li, J. Hansen, J. Matthiesen, A. Blekinge-Rasmussen, E. Laegsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2008, 320, 1755 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Petrik, Z. Zhang, Y. Du, Z. Dohnalek, I. Lyubinetsky and G. Kimmel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12407 CAS .
C. M. Yim, C. L. Pang and G. Thornton, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 036806–01 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rohmann, Y. Wang, M. Muhler, J. Metson, H. Idriss and C. Wöll, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 460, 10–12 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mogyorosi, A. Kmetyko, N. Czirbus, G. Vereb, P. Sipos and A. Dombi, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2009, 98, 215 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Cuenya, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3127 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1998, 281, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 162, 33 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen and D. W. Goodman, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vijay, G. Mills and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, W. Zhang, L. Jin, F. Xu, J. Zhu and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12434 CAS .
A. Howard, D. N. S. Clark, C. E. J. Mitchell, R. G. Edgell and V. R. Dhanak, Surf. Sci., 2002, 518, 210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porsgaard, P. Jiang, F. Borondics, S. Wendt, Z. Liu, H. Bluhm, F. Besenbacher and M. Salmeron, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 2314 Search PubMed .
H. Idriss and M. A. Barteau, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 261 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Idriss ( 2008) Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis Vol. 4, ed. G. Ertl, H. Knozinger, F. Schuth, J. Weitkamp, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., p. 1338 Search PubMed .
X. Gong, N. Khorshidi, A. Stierle, V. Vonk, C. Ellinger, H. Dosch, H. Cheng, A. Selloni, Y. He, O. Dulub and U. Diebold, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 138 CrossRef CAS .

          S. L. M. Schroeder, and M. Gottfried, ( 2002) Temperature-Programmed Desorption (TPD) Thermal Desorption Spectroscopy (TDS), available from: http://userpage.chemie.fu-berlin.de/~pcprakt/tds.pdf, [accessed 2nd June 2010].

          P. A. Webb ( 2003) Introduction to Chemical Adsorption Analytical Techniques and their Applications to Catalysis, MIC Technical Publications, available from http://www.micromeritics.com/Repository/Files/intro_to_chemical_adsorption.pdf [accessed 2nd June 2010].
K. S. Kim and M. A. Barteau, Langmuir, 1988, 4, 533 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Tedder And Nechvatal, ( 1966) Basic Organic Chemistry, A mechanistic Approach, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., p. 41 Search PubMed .
L. Kieu, P. Boyd and H. Idriss, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2002, 188, 153 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Kurtz, R. Stockbauer and T. E. Madey, Surf. Sci., 1989, 218, 178 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci., 1996, 355, 151 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Hugenschmidt, L. Gamble and C. T. Campbell, Surf. Sci., 1994, 302, 329 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. D. Lindan, N. M. Harrison and M. J. Gillan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 762 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Epling, C. H. F. Peden, M. A. Henderson and U. Diebold, Surf. Sci., 1998, 412–413, 333 CrossRef .
E. Lira, J. Ø. Hansen, P. Huo, R. Bechstein, P. Galliker, E. Lægsgaard, B. Hammer, S. Wendt and F. Besenbacher, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1945 CrossRef CAS .
W. Göpel and G. Rocker, Phys. Rev. B, 1983, 28, 3427 CrossRef .
G. B. Raup and J. A. Dumesic, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 5240 CrossRef .
Z. Dohnlek, J. Kim, O. Bondarchuk, J. M. White and B. D. Kay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6229 CrossRef .
T. L. Thompson, O. Diwald and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11700 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3098 CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18230 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7431 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6631 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Yates, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1605 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Jayaweera, E. L. Quah and H. Idriss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1764 CAS .
L. Gamble, L. S. Jung and C. T. Campbell, Surf. Sci., 1996, 348, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nadeem, J. M. R. Muir, K. A. Connelly, B. T. Adamson, B. J. Metson and H. Idriss, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7637 RSC .
M. A. Henderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18932 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3443 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12062 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Zehr and M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 2238 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, I. Cocks and E. M. Williams, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 2924 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo and E. M. Williams, Surf. Sci., 1999, 433–435, 322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Idriss, P. Legare and G. Maire, Surf. Sci., 2002, 515, 413 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uetsuka, H. Onishi, M. A. Henderson and M. J. White, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10621 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Wilson and H. Idriss, J. Catal., 2003, 214, 46 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Wilson and H. Idriss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11284 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zou, C. Chen, C.-J. Liu, Y.-P. Zhang, Y. Han and L. Cui, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3437 CrossRef CAS .

          A. M. Nadeem, G. I. N. Waterhouse, J. B. Metson and H. Idriss, Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology V, Book Series: Proceedings of SPIE-The International Society for Optical Engineering,  2010, Vol. 7770. Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, G. Lu and S. Li, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3437 CrossRef .
C. M. Rangel, R. A. Silva, V. R. Fernandes and T. I. Paiva, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2009, 12, 167 CAS .
M. C. Wu, J. Hiltunen, A. Sapi, A. Avila, W. Larsson, H. C. Liao, M. Huuhtanen, G. Toth, A. Shchukarev, N. Laufer, A. Kukovecz, Z. Konya, J. P. Mikkola, R. Keiski, W. F. Su, Y. F. Chen, H. Jantunen, P. M. Ajayan, R. Vajtai and K. Kordas, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5025 CrossRef CAS .
N. Strataki, N. Boukos, F. Paloukis, S. G. Neophytides and P. Lianos, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 639 CAS .
G. R. Bamwenda, S. Tsubota, T. Nakamura and M. Haruta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 89, 177 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tarek, A. Kandiel, L. Feldhoff, R. D. Robben and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2050 CrossRef .
G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. Murdoch, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 9, 113 Search PubMed .
M. Scott, M. A. Nadeem, G. I. N. Waterhouse and H. Idriss, Mater. Res. Soc. Proc., 2011, 1326 DOI:10.1557/opl.2011.1118 .
M. A. Nadeem, M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, J. B. Metson, M. A. Keane, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 250 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. M. Hossein, N. Sheppard, M. I. Zaki and R. B. Fahim, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 2661 RSC .
P. Y. Sheng, G. A. Bowmaker and H. Idriss, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 261, 171 CrossRef CAS .
V. Blagojevic, Y. R. Chen, M. Steigerwald, L. Brus and R. A. Friesner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19806 CAS .
M. J. Lundkvist, M. Nilsing, P. Persson and S. Lunell, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2006, 106, 3214 CrossRef .
B. R. Miller, S. Majoni, R. Memming and D. Meissner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2501 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hurum, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 977 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Karen A. Connelly	Karen A. Connelly is a PhD student funded by the Energy Futures Scholarship at the University of Aberdeen. She is currently researching “The dark and photoreactions of ethanol over TiO2 for the production of hydrogen” using both single crystal and powder samples.
Hicham Idriss	Hicham Idriss has obtained his BSc (1984), MSc (1985), PhD (1987) and habilitation (1997) from the University of Strasbourg (France) and had postdoctoral and research associate positions at the University of Delaware and University of Illinois, Urbana (USA). He joined the Chemistry Department, University of Auckland (New Zealand) in 1995 as a senior Lecturer then became Associate Professor in 2002. In 2008 he moved to the University of Aberdeen (UK) to become Aberdeen Energy Futures Chair and Professor of Chemistry. In 2011 he moved to SABIC (Riyadh) as a chief scientist to work on hydrogen production using solar energy.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of an n-type semiconductor such as TiO2 at ground state.	 
TiO2 + UV photons → e + h	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Representation of the major processes occurring in a semiconductor (with noble metal deposits) following photo-excitation; TM for transition metal.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bulk structure of rutile TiO2. Ti cations represented by small grey spheres and O2− anions by large red spheres.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ball and stick model of a side view of the relaxed TiO2 rutile (110) surface with surface atom coordination labelled. Ti cations represented by light gray spheres and O2− anions by red spheres.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular orbital diagram of an octahedral complex such as TiO2 exhibiting the degeneracy of the Ti3d orbitals and the level of orbital hybridisation between Ti and O orbitals with the orientations of the Ti3d orbitals illustrated above. Taken from ref. 62.	 

 	Fig. 6  Bulk DOS of TiO2 calculated from partial O and Ti DOSs. The Oz,y,x DOS contributions are shown individually as well as the individual Ti eg and t2g contributions. Taken from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ball and stick model of the TiO2 rutile (110) surface with bridging Ov defects shown. Ti cations represented by small red spheres and O2− anions by large grey (in-plane), black (bridging oxygen) and pink (oxygen adatom) spheres. Taken from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 8  Series of angle integrated UPS spectra taken for photon energies between 30 and 76 eV for both the stoichiometric and reduced TiO2 (110). Taken from ref. 64.	 

 	Fig. 9  Enhancement of photo-excitation due to Au NPs acting as electron acceptors. Adapted from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) CO oxidation activity as a function of Au cluster size on TiO2, (b) cluster band gap as a function of Au cluster size on TiO2, represents 2D clusters, represents 3D clusters two atom layers in height and represents 3D clusters with three atom layers or greater in height. Taken from ref. 82.	 

 	Fig. 11  Turnover frequency (TOF) of CO oxidation as a function of Au cluster size on the TiO2 surface. The Y axis on the left hand side is for Au deposited on powder TiO2 and Y-axis on the right hand side is for Au deposited on TiO2(110) rutile surface. Taken from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the equilibration of TiO2 and Au NPs with the redox couple before and after UV irradiation. Taken from ref. 80.	 

 	Fig. 13  UPS spectra for a reduced TiO2 (110) surface with varying degrees of Au coverage at room temperature and UPS spectra for a reduced TiO2 (110) surface after exposure to O2 at varying pressures. Taken from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 14  Au 4f XPS for Au deposition on the stoichiometric (left) and reduced (right) TiO2 (110) surface. Thickness of Au deposited is (a) 0, (b) 0.125, (c) 0.25, (d) 0.50, (e) 1.0, (f) 1.5, (g) 2.0, (h) 3.0, (i) 5.0, and (j) 10.0 Å. Taken from ref. 87.	 
hν + TiO2 → e + h [k1Fhν]	(2)
h + T → (hole capture) [k2]	(3)
e + h → (heat or luminescence on recombination sites) [k3]
h + O2− → O2(g) [k4]	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram showing the electron transport postulated to occur through the extended filled electronic states surrounding O-vacancy sites. From ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 16  Plots of O2 photodesorption over the rutile (110) surface as a function of (a) incident electron flux (Fe) and (b) the square root of the incident UV photon flux (Fhv1/2). Taken from ref. 107.	 
e + T+ → T (ke)	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 17  VB and CB positions of several selected semiconductors with selected redox couple potentials at pH 0.	 
C2H5OH(g) + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3CH2O–Ti(ad) + H–O(ad)	(9)
TiO2 + UV → e− + h+	(10)
e− + O2(g) → O2−(ad)	(11)
O2−(ad) + CH3CH2O(ad) → HO2(ad) + CH3–CHO˙ (ad) → + O(ad) or O2(g) → CH3COO(ad) →→ CO2(g) + H2O(g)	(12)
CH3CH2O–Ti (ad) → C2H4(g) + H–O(ad)	(13)
CH3CH2O–Ti (ad) + H–O(ad) → C2H5OH(g) + O(s)	(14)

 	Fig. 18  Acetaldehyde desorption as a function of time upon UV excitation (360 nm) over a rutile TiO2(110) surface pre-saturated with ethanol at 300 K. The same experiment was repeated at different O2 pressures as indicated on each spectrum. The surface was cleaned between each experiment. Adapted from ref. 115.	 

 	Fig. 19  (left) η1 acetone, (right) poly-acetone. Taken from ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 20  Exponential fit of TPD peak area data from mass 46 showing the fraction of d6-acetone desorbing above 275 K (above the water layer TPD feature) as a function of water coverage. Taken from ref. 116.	 

 	Fig. 21  TPD spectra of mass 42 for 1 ML surface coverage of acetone on rutile (110) at 95 K irradiated with UV light for varying lengths of time in 5 × 10−7 Torr O2. Inset shows TPD peak area data for acetone and ketene as a function of UV exposure. Taken from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 22  Acetone photo-oxidation cross section plot obtained from methyl radical photo-desorption trace. Taken from ref. 117.	 
η1-acetone(ad) + O/O2(ad) → poly-acetone(ad)	(15)
Fast: poly-acetone(ad) + UV → acetate(ad) + CH3(g)	(16)
Slow: TiO2 + UV → e−/h+ pairs	(17)
Ti4+ + e− → Ti3+	(18)
O2(g) + Ti3+ → O2−(ad) + Ti4+	(19)
O2−(ad) + η1-acetone(ad) →→ poly-acetone(ad)	(20)
η1-acetaldehyde(ad) + O/O2(ad) → acetaldehyde-oxygen complex(ad)	(21)
acetaldehyde-oxygen complex(ad) + UV → CH3(g) + formate(ad)	(22)
CH3COOH(g) + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3COO–Ti(ad) + H–O(ad)	(23)
(CH3)3CCOO−(ad) + h+ → (CH3)3C(ad) + CO2(g)	(24)

 	Fig. 23  A. Steady-state acetic acid reaction on the {011} surface reconstruction with open triangle representing UV light on and the closed triangle UV light off. B. Steady-state acetic acid reaction to ethane on the {011} surface reconstruction with increasing O2 pressure.123	 

 	Fig. 24  TEM images of 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase microparticles (A and B) and of 2 wt% Au/TiO2 nano-particles (C and D). Images A and B show two different areas of the micro-particle catalyst at two different magnifications. Images C and D show the same area of nano-particle catalyst conducted in bright and dark field modes to highlight the presence of Au particles (D). The arrows indicate unambiguous Au particles in images B and D. Note: the rectangles in images B and D are of the same size (45 × 65 nm2). From ref. 135.	 


ν O–C/ν C–C (cm−1)	1150	1150 (shoulder)	1109
1100	1120	1065
1070	1070	1038

	1050	


δ CH3 (cm−1)	1360	1375	1362

ν
s CH3 (cm−1)	2875	2870	2875

ν
a CH2 (cm−1)	2930	2930	2933

ν
a CH3 (cm−1)	2975	2970	2971

 	Fig. 25  Effect of temperature on the population of surface ethoxides and other minor reaction intermediates on 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles. The surface was first dosed with ethanol at 300 K, then heated to the indicated temperatures under dynamic vacuum for a few seconds and cooled to 300 K to collect the spectra. From ref. 135.	 
CH3CH2OH → CH3CHO + H2	(25)

Au/TiO2 (nano-)	105	0.016	
ca. 7	
ca. 10
Au/TiO2 (micro-)	10	0.046	
ca. 5	
ca. 150

 	Fig. 26  Temperature programmed desorption after ethanol adsorption at saturation coverage at 300 K on 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles. Taken from ref. 135.	 

 	Fig. 27  Hydrogen formation as a function of time during the photocatalytic reaction of ethanol over 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase nano-particles and 2 wt% Au/TiO2 anatase micro-particles at 300 K. Catalyst concentration = 6.5 mg/100 mL. Taken from ref. 135.	 

 	Scheme 1  A representation of the reactions involved in hydrogen production from ethanol over Au/TiO2 under photo-excitation. The two hydrogen ions formed in reaction (1) and (2a) are reduced by two electrons upon their transfer from the CB to Au particles. Ethoxides inject two electrons into the VB and acetaldehyde is consequently formed. The position of Au particles with respect to the CB is approximate as this varies with the particle size; see ref. 135 for more details.	 

 	Scheme 2  Postulated explanation for the enhancement of the reaction rate for hydrogen production from ethanol over Au/TiO2 (anatase + rutile). Au particles at the interface between the anatase and rutile phases will benefit from the higher charge carriers number (n) in rutile and the slower electron-hole recombination rate (Rrec(e−–h+)) in the anatase phase. Taken from ref. 134.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
