Nanostructured anode materials for lithium ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA04980B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA04980B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454-2484Nanostructured anode materials for lithium ion batteries

        
          
            Poulomi 
            Roy
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Suneel Kumar 
            Srivastava
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, Ranchi 835215, Jharkhand, India. E-mail: poulomiroy@yahoo.com
bDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, West Bengal, India. E-mail: sunit@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in;  Fax: +91-3222-28303;   Tel: +91-3222-283334
Received 
      20th September 2014
    , Accepted 1st December 2014First published on 2nd December 2014AbstractHigh-energy consumption in our day-to-day life can be balanced not only by harvesting pollution-free renewable energy sources, but also requires proper storage and distribution of energy. In this regard, lithium ion batteries are currently considered as effective energy storage devices and involve the most active research. There exist several review articles dealing with various sections of LIBs, such as the anode, the cathode, electrolytes, electrode–electrolyte interface etc. However, the anode is considered to be a crucial component affecting the performance of LIBs as evident from the tremendous amount of current research work carried out in this area. In the last few years, advancements have been focused more on the fabrication of the nanostructured anode owing to its special properties, such as high surface area, short Li+ ion diffusion path length, high electron transportation rate etc. As the work in this area is growing very fast, the present review paper deliberates the recent developments of anode materials on the nanoscale. Different types of anode materials, such as carbon-based materials, alloys, Si-based materials, transition metal oxides, and transition metal chalcogenides, with their unique physical and electrochemical properties, are discussed. Various approaches to designing materials in the form of 0, 1 and 2D nanostructures and their effect of size and morphology on their performance as anode materials in LIBs are reviewed. Moreover, the article emphasizes smart approaches for making core–shell particles, nanoheterostructures, nanocomposites or nanohybrids with the combination of electrochemically active materials and conductive carbonaceous or electrochemically inactive materials to achieve LIBs with high capacity, high rate capability, and excellent cycling stability. We believe the review paper will provide an update for the reader regarding recent progress on nanostructured anode materials for LIBs.Poulomi RoyPoulomi Roy received her M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, India in 2002 and obtained her PhD in Inorganic Nanomaterials from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India in 2007. She spent 2008–2011 at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany as a postdoctoral research fellow, where she worked on the development of self-organized TiO2-based nanostructures and their various applications. Currently, she is working as an Assistant Professor at Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, India. Her current research interests include the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage devices.Suneel Kumar SrivastavaSuneel Kumar Srivastava was born in 1954 in Ismilepur (Sitapur), Uttar Pradesh. He received his M.Sc. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Lucknow University, Lucknow. Subsequently, he completed his post graduate diploma in ‘High pressure technology and technical gas reactions’ and Ph.D in the field of ‘Solid state chemistry’ from Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur in 1979 and 1986, respectively. He also carried out his post-doctoral work as a DAAD Fellow in Technical University, Karlsruhe (1988–89, 2003, 2006), University of Siegen (1994, 1999), Technical University, Munchen (2009) and Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research, Dresden (2013) Germany, and University of Nantes, France (2003, 2007). He is currently Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. His research interests are in the fields of zero, one and two dimensional semiconducting and magnetic nanomaterials for their applications in energy and the environment, polymers and polymer blends and their structure–property relationships. He has guided 13 Ph.D. students and published about 120 research papers in referred journals.
1. Introduction
The steady increase in energy consumption in many sectors is a direct reflection of the economic growth of a country. However, this field has become challenging due to the unsustainable nature of non-renewable energy resources and the need to control CO2 emission associated with global warming. Therefore, alternative environmentally friendly renewable energy sources, such as solar cells, wind energy, hydropower etc. have been extensively explored. Concurrently, technology for storing energy as well as a proper distribution of energy is urgently required due to the unpredictable nature of renewable electricity sources. Therefore, a considerable amount of research has been focused in recent years on the development of materials for applications in energy storage devices.
In this regard, batteries and electrochemical capacitors can both act as portable or stationary stores of electric power. Accordingly, technologies have been developed for nickel–cadmium, nickel–metal hydride, lead acid, lithium ion batteries etc.1,2 In this context, rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) with high charge–discharge current rates were found to be very promising since their first commercial launch by Sony,3 for their application in different portable electronic devices. Their development has been extended to next generation energy storage devices with high power and high energy density for use in large scale applications with electric and hybrid electric vehicles (EVs and HEVs).4–6 The US company General Motors first released the electric car EV-1 in 1996, based on a lead acid battery.7 However, due to the low energy density of the lead acid battery, the second generation EV was released in 1999 based on a nickel hydride battery. The possibilities of permanent damage to the nickel hybrid battery on complete discharging limits its extensive use in EVs. After successful application in portable electronic devices, LIBs were also utilized in making EVs in order to get high power and high energy density, though due to the toxic nature of cobalt-containing cathodes and other safety issues, LIB-based EVs are still under development.7 A HEV market evolution in Fig. 1 shows a steady increase in the use of HEV worldwide since 2005, as reported by Scrosati et al.,8 which clearly indicates a fast shifting towards technological innovation.
 Fig. 1  HEV market evaluation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Though as per the current status performance wise EVs are not superior but equal to gasoline cars, in terms of fuel economy, availability of fuel/oils and most importantly as clean energy it solves the problem of global warming, protecting earth.7 Therefore, large amount of funds have been invested in R&D to promote the development of LIBs in several countries such as the United States, Europe and Japan.8
Compared to other conventional batteries, LIBs are light weight, more compact, work at an operating voltage of ∼4 V, and deliver with a specific energy ranging between 100 W h kg−1 and 150 W h kg−1 and capacity ranging from 700 to 2400 mA h for a single cell (battery).9 Comparative plots of cell voltage vs. % of capacity discharged of different conventional batteries are shown in Fig. 2.10
 Fig. 2  A comparative study of battery discharge curves showing the variation of operating voltage vs. fraction of available capacity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2009 Springer. 
In order to achieve high performance rechargeable LIBs, several research studies have been carried out. A very rapid growth in the exploration of various sections of LIBs can be noticed from the plot of publication numbers by year, presented in Fig. 3. This shows the importance and inevitable usefulness of the field. The present review paper will mainly focus on the nanostructured anodes in the lithium ion battery and will survey use of different materials, nanoscale design of anodes and their effect on the performance of LIBs. The review paper not only discusses the success of using a nanoscale anode material but the limitations encountered are also highlighted.
 Fig. 3  A plot of publication numbers by year, obtained by searching with keywords ‘lithium ion battery’ (data source: http://www.scopus.com). 
Initially, it describes the classical electrochemistry of LIBs, mentioning the thermodynamic as well as kinetic aspects of ion transportation phenomena during the lithiation–delithiation process. Furthermore, the advantages of using nanostructured anode materials (carbonaceous, transition metal oxides, layered type transition metal dichalcogenides) in LIBs have been highlighted. Also, recent progress in designing complex nanoheterostructures, nanocomposites and hybrid materials with proper combinations has been reviewed.
2. Electrochemistry of lithium ion battery
A lithium ion battery consists of three major components: anode, cathode and an electrolyte and works by converting chemical energy into electrical energy. The choice of electrode depends upon their electrochemical potential values (μA for the anode and μC for the cathode) as well as their positions relative to the HOMO–LUMO energy gap (Eg) of the electrolyte. For a stable cell, μA must be lower in energy than the LUMO of the electrolyte, otherwise the electrolyte will be reduced, and on the other hand μC should be higher in energy than the HOMO of the electrolyte to inhibit the oxidation of the electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 4a.11 The high-energy storage density can be achieved in a cell with maximum electrochemical potential difference of anode and cathode as well as their high lithium intercalation ability, though at the same time the stability of electrolyte should not be overlooked.12
 Fig. 4  (a) Relative energy diagram of electrode potentials and electrolyte energy gap in LIBs; (b) schematic diagram of the lithium intercalation–de-intercalation reaction mechanism in a rechargeable lithium-ion battery containing solid electrodes and a liquid electrolyte. 
In a conventional first generation LIB, graphite is used as the anode and the cathode is usually made of layered LiCoO2 as an intercalation host for Li+, separated by a porous permeable membrane, which only allows Li+ ions but prevents a short circuit due to direct contact of electrodes. On charging, the Li+-ion de-intercalates from the lithium metal oxide (e.g. LiCoO2) and passes through the Li-ion conductive electrolyte and intercalates to the layered graphite. The schematic diagram shown in Fig. 4b describes the mechanism in the LIB. The lithium ion and electron generation occurs through the following reactions: Cathode: LiCoO2 ↔ LixCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−(1) Anode: 6C + xLi+ +xe− ↔ LixC6(2)
The electrons travel through the external electrical circuit in order to couple with the extra positive charge (Li+) in the electrode. In the discharging process, the reverse mechanism occurs. Selection of a suitable electrolyte for a pair of electrodes in LIBs is another important aspect. Mostly aprotic organic solvents mixed with Li-salts are commonly used as electrolytes in LIBs, e.g. alkyl carbonates (ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonates (PC), diethyl carbonate (DEC)) mixed with lithium salts hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) or lithium perchlorate (LiClO4).13 Other than the energy gap of solvents, parameters such as viscosity and dielectric constants to dissolve the solutes completely play a very important role in obtaining a stable rechargeable cell.
The cell capacity is related to the total charge transferred in the electrode–electrolyte interface, which depends on the current passed through the external circuit during the charging–discharging process. At high current, during rapid charging the rate of ion transfer across the electrode–electrolyte interface occurs in a diffusion-controlled mechanism.14 It is predicted that Li may accumulate on the negative electrode and the electrolyte interface when the Li-ion flux during the charge transfer reaction becomes higher than the Li-ion diffusion flux into the negative electrode.15,16 The massive dendritic growth of Li can be observed when the lithium ion concentration exceeds a certain saturation level (0.077 mol cm−3). Such deposition leads to deformation underneath the electrode surface, and causes internal short and thermal runway of the battery.15 Moreover, the dead Li deposited on the electrode surface creates internal resistance in the cell and the changes at the electrode surfaces alter the rate, due to slow diffusion of the Li+-ion at the interface, resulting in irreversible capacity fading. The electrochemical decomposition of the electrolyte at the electrode–electrolyte interface is also responsible for capacity fading, forming the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer on the active material. Though the SEI layer leads to irreversible capacity fading in a cell, it also acts as a protective layer against further decomposition of the electrolyte at the electrode–electrolyte interface.9,10 The characteristic Coulombic efficiency associated with capacity fading can be calculated as the fraction of the electrical charge stored during charging that is recoverable during discharge after each cycle .
3. Advantages of the nanostructured anode
The selection of materials intimately depends on their crystal structure, physical properties (specific capacity, electrical conductivity, mechanical stability etc.), chemical properties (intercalation, reversibility) and many other factors. Other than the structure and properties of materials, size and shape of materials affect the performance of LIBs. The first generation anode materials were basically micrometer-sized particles where the Li intercalation–de-intercalation reactions occur. The rate of intercalation–deintercalation of the lithium ion strongly depends upon its diffusivity.17 The Li-ion diffusion in a host material is associated with the Li-ion diffusion coefficient and diffusion length in the material. In an indirect way diffusivity or diffusion length is represented as:τ = Lion2/DLiwhere Lion is the diffusion length and DLi is the diffusion coefficient.18 While DLi depends upon the nature of the material, the Lion depends upon the size of the material. Thereby the strategy to achieve high energy and high power or fast Li intercalation–deintercalation depends, to a certain extent, on controlling the size of the materials. For example, rutile TiO2, which has a low diffusion coefficient of 10−15 cm2 s−1, is believed to accommodate a negligible amount of Li ions at room temperature.6 However, significant changes can be observed for 5–15 nm sized rutile TiO2 nanoparticles showing a full loading of lithium (x > 1 in LixTiO2) and about 0.7 Li per rutile TiO2 insertion–removal in subsequent cycles.6,19 Miniaturization of electrode materials also allows a large surface area in contact with the electrolyte, resulting in higher charge–discharge rates.20–22 However, reduction of the material size has not been found to always be beneficial. The very fast Li+ intercalation–deintercalation often leads to undesirable side reactions and damage to the battery life. Consequently, in the past few years, nanomaterials of different morphologies have been investigated for their applications as anodes in LIB.
3.1 Nanoparticles
Although nanostructured materials, especially zero dimensional nanoparticles, have proven to be very effective in LIBs, their performance is limited by various factors. For example, volume expansion and cracking of nanoparticles due to repeated Li+ ion insertion and removal over several cycles are major issues, reducing the cyclability and thereby the battery life.17 Both electron and Li+ ion transportation through the nanoparticulate layers can be restricted due to random walk as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, the grain boundaries and voids in between the nanoparticles limit the battery performance, reducing electrical conductivity.17,20 The higher surface area of the nanoparticles and access of the electrolytes trigger secondary reactions involving electrolyte decomposition and formation of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) films at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte, though, formation of such an SEI film in the graphite anode inhibits exfoliation, and consumes excessive charge supplied by the cathode, exhibiting  low coulombic efficiency and capacity loss.17,23 Several successful works on utilizing nanoparticles over micro/submicro particles are reported as anode materials in LIBs. Cheng et al.24 studied the performances of NiO nanoparticles and sub-microparticles as anodes in LIBs and found that Nano-NiO was able to deliver more energy than SubM-NiO. Morphology-dependent performances of CuO anodes were also reported by Wang et al.25 They prepared leaf-like CuO, oatmeal-like CuO, and hollow-spherical CuO nanostructures with controllable morphologies via solvothermal and calcination processes. It was observed that leaf-like CuO and oatmeal-like CuO nanostructures exhibited decent electrochemical properties due to full penetration of the electrolyte and availability of a larger CuO–electrolyte contact area. However, a decrease in reversible capacity values (563.8 to ∼500 mA h g−1 for leaf-like CuO and 637.7 to ∼260 mA h g−1 for oatmeal-like CuO after 55 cycles) during cycling was observed. In contrast, CuO hollow spheres showed an increase in reversible capacity (from 467.7 to 543.9 mA h g−1 after 55 cycles) as the void space inside served as an effective elastic buffer to relieve the volume expansion during lithium-ion uptake/release and accommodate the strain in the CuO particles.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of electronic transportation through 0D, 1D nanostructures: (a–c) electron random walk through grain boundaries of bare nanoparticles (a), through carbon binders blended with nanoparticles (b), and through carbon coating on to the nanoparticles (c); (d and e) 1D electron transportation through randomly distributed nanorods (d) and directly grown nanorods (e) on to the current collector. 
An approach to improvise the electron or ionic conductivity through the nanoparticulate films is the addition of conductive coating involving carbon or conductive polymer on nanoparticles.26,27 Such a coating allows electrons or ions to travel through the conductive boundary of nanoparticles, avoiding the interfacial resistance in between the nanoparticles as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, coating leads to stabilized SEI films on anodes, prevents direct contact of the electroactive material with electrolytes and inhibits cracking, resulting in improved rate and cycling performance.23 However, the addition of a conductive binder leads to poor packing density of electrodes, limiting the volumetric energy density.23
Though graphite is known to be a good anode material in LIBs, it has been coated with metallic Ni nanoparticles in order to further improve the electrical conductivity.28–30 Such a system not only shows an increase in exchange current densities and diffusion coefficients of the lithium ions, but also exerts a decrease in the charge-transfer resistance and the surface film resistance in comparison with bare graphite, exhibiting less capacity loss over a 10 day storage period.29 Other metals, such as Cu, Ag, and Al can also be used as coating onto the graphite surface.31–34 A small quantity of Co metal deposition on SnO2 nanoparticles improved the performance of the LIB significantly and exhibited an exceptional reversible capacity of 810 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles.35 Other than metal coating, coating with electronically conductive metal oxides, say RuO2 coating on TiO2 nanoparticles, is also reported and is found to have high capacity and extremely good power performance.36 However, use of expensive RuO2 coating on TiO2 nanoparticles can be avoided by using a graphene layer on nanostructured TiO2.37 Various reports are available on carbon coated Li4Ti5O12 particles as the anode material in order to attain high electrochemical performances.38–41 Zhao et al.39 fabricated N-doped carbon coated Li4Ti5O12 particles using an ionic liquid as the precursor of N-doped carbon, simply by mixing Li4Ti5O12 particles with the ionic liquid followed by pyrolysis of the ionic liquid. The material showed a considerable improvement, delivering a reversible capacity of 161 mA h g−1, 145 mA h g−1 and 129 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.5 C, 5 C and 10 C, respectively, with very good capacity retention; meanwhile the uncoated sample only delivers 60 mA h g−1 and 15 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 5 C and 10 C, respectively.26,39 Nanosized Sn metal particles encapsulated within spherical hollow carbon is another very interesting example of a promising material to be used as an anode in LIBs, exhibiting good cyclability preventing agglomeration of Sn nanoparticles and high volumetric energy density.42,43
The conductive polymers, such as polythiophene, polypyrrole and polyaniline have also been used as effective coatings for nanoparticles.44–46 Such a polymer coating not only helps to improve the electrical conductivity, but prevent direct contact of the electrolyte with electroactive materials and minimizes the SEI layer thickness; it also proved to be very good binder due to its elasticity.27 The polymer coating on the graphite surfaces was found to be very promising as it effectively improves the electrochemical performance of the composite in terms of its coulombic efficiency in the first cycle, its reversible capacity, its cycling behavior and its rate capability.27
3.2 Nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires
The disadvantages of using nanoparticles as anodes in LIBs, such as loose contacts among nanoparticles and poor electronic or ionic transportation by random walk, limiting the electron collection efficiency in the current collector, can be addressed by using anisotropic nanostructures.17,20 One-dimensional nanostructures, such as nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes are considered to be superior to nanoparticles, due to directional electronic/ionic transportation, leading to high electron collection efficiency. Moreover, the 1D structures also provide mechanical stability during several cycles of lithium insertion and removal.47 Therefore, several methods have been employed to fabricate 1D nanostructures, template assisted synthesis, hydrothermal method, electrodeposition or chemical vapor deposition techniques for their applications as anodes in LIBs.
Significant improvements in battery performance are observed when anisotropic nanostructures are chosen over 0D nanostructures. Cui and co-workers developed an excellent anode electrode composed of Si nanowires.47 The self-supported Si nanowires were grown directly onto stainless steel current collectors by the vapour–liquid–solid growth method. The structural disintegration due to volume changes by 400% of the bulk Si during Li ion insertion–removal cycles was successfully managed by this approach. An exceptionally high observed capacity value for Si NWs during the first cycle, 4277 mA h g−1 decreased to 3541 mA h g−1 at the 2nd cycle and remained constant up to 10 cycles at a rate of C/20. Although the initial irreversible loss in this case remained unexplainable, the capacity stability after the 2nd cycle was attributed to the accommodating strain and good contact between Si and the current collector in such a self-supporting nanostructure. The effect of anisotropic Si nanostructure was more noticeable from the comparative plot of capacity vs. cycle number of Si nanocrystals and Si NWs (Fig. 6a). The similar VLS mechanism was used to fabricate SnO2 nanowires (dia: 40–50 nm, length: 1 μm) grown directly on the current collector.48 The yielded nanowire arrays exhibited excellent stability compared to SnO2 and Sn nanopowders over 50 cycles. A much easier and more cost-effective technique to fabricate self-supported metal oxides onto the current collector is the ammonia-evaporation-induced method.49,50 Mesoporous Co3O4 NW arrays were directly grown on a Ti foil by this technique and tested as the anode for LIBs.50 As expected, such a self-supported arrangement showed excellent stability in reversible capacity after the first charge–discharge process in the range of 700 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 1 C up to 20 cycles. A comparative study with commercial Co3O4 powders and non-self-supported (broken) NWs mixed with carbon black and polymer binder under the same electrochemical conditions exhibits reversible capacities of 80 and 350 mA h g−1, respectively, up to 20 cycles, along with a sharp decay in capacity retention percentage (Fig. 6e).
 Fig. 6  0D vs. 1D Nanostructures. (a) Capacity versus cycle number for the Si nanowires and Si nanocrystals at a rate of C/20. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanotubes by template-engaged precipitation followed by annealing and (c) their cycling performance in comparison to α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles at 0.5 C (ref. 56). (d) SEM images of Co3O4 NW arrays growing on Ti foil by ammonia-evaporation-induced method; (e) comparative study of specific capacity of the Co3O4 NW arrays on Ti foil, non-self-supported NWs, and commercial powders as a function of the cycle number at a current rate of 1 C (inset: corresponding capacity retention percentages as a function of the current rate). Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (f) Comparison of lithium ion storage capacity of TiO2-(B) nanowires and nanoparticles with the same diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. 
The good cyclability and high rate capability of NW arrays is also considered to be due to the porous nature of the arrays, allowing enhanced electrolyte/Co3O4 contact area, the short Li+ ion diffusion length in the NWs, and accommodation of strain induced by the volume change during the electrochemical reaction. The beneficial effect of the 1D nanostructure is also observed for non-self-supported materials. A considerable improvement in the electrode performance for TiO2-(B) was observed for nanowires over nanoparticles, exhibiting a specific discharge capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1, double that of TiO2-(B) nanoparticulate layers.17,51 MnO2 with different crystalline phases in the 1D nanostructure, as well as dendrite-like hierarchical forms, were synthesized by a hydrothermal method and found to be a potential candidate as an electrode in LIBs.52,53 When α- and γ-MnO2 nanowires or nanorods exhibited good electroactivity to lithium ions, delivering capacities of more than 200 mA h g−1, β-MnO2 nanostructures showed low capacity and poor cyclic stability.12,52 Mn-oxide nanorods were also combined with graphene sheets, showing a four times higher capacitance for the nanocomposites compared to free Mn3O4, with 100% capacitance retention.54 Xiao et al.55 synthesized single crystalline iron oxide nanorods by simple calcination of the α-FeOOH precursor, and observed a very high reversible capacity of ∼850 mA h g−1, with more than 90% capacitance retention up to 50 cycles. The nanotubular structure exhibits even better lithium storage capacity, with great reversibility due to the thin tube wall, providing a high Li+ ion access area and inner hollow space, facilitating strain accommodation during the charge–discharge process. Polycrystalline α-Fe2O3 nanotubes (dia: 50–200 nm, shell thickness: 10–20 nm) were successfully synthesized by template-engaged precipitation of Fe(OH)x and followed by thermal annealing in air.56 Such a nanostructure, when used as the anode material in LIBs, exhibited considerably high capacities of over 1000 mA h g−1 with superior capacity retention at 0.5 C, almost double that of Fe2O3 nanoparticles. Several reports are available comparing the bulk vs. 0D vs. 1D nanostructures based on vanadium pentoxide (V2O5).57–62 However, due to the higher working potential, it is mostly used as an efficient cathode in LIBs.
3.3 Core–shell nanostructures
The fabrication of hollow sphere and core–shell nanostructures of the same or different materials provided another good alternative for stable nanostructured anodes. In the case of hollow spheres, the inner void provides the necessary space for volume expansion during the charging–discharging process. On the contrary, the outer sphere in the core–shell nanostructure delivers extra mechanical stability against the expansion–contraction of the inner core material, allowing surface permeability.63–66 Mostly, template-assisted approaches are found to be useful for the fabrication of hollow as well as core–shell nanostructures with great control over their size and shape.66,67 Lou and his co-workers fabricated the SnO2 hollow nanosphere using mesoporous silica as the nanoreactor.68,69 Mesoporous silica was used here as the template and the Sn-precursor was introduced through the hollow cavity of silica followed by thermal annealing to prepare SnO2 inside the silica nanoreactor and finally etching out of the silica outer sphere using HF solution.
A comparative study showed that hollow spheres exhibit, as expected, a good capacitance stability of ∼750 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 160 mA g−1 up to 20 cycles, as compared to solid spheres or nanoparticles. The work was further extended, designing SnO2@carbon coaxial hollow spheres by the template-assisted method followed by the hydrothermal method for making the carbon outer sphere. This nanoportal showed enhanced Li-ion diffusion, enhancing the charge rate capabilities with a stable capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 625 mA g−1 for at least 200 cycles. Another remarkable work was reported on the fabrication of a SnO2 hollow nanobox by template-engaged coordinating etching of pregrown Cu2O nanocubes.66 The controlled hydrolysis of Sn4+ in an optimum ethanol:H2O ratio decides the volume of the nanoboxes. The structure was found to be suitable to use as an anode electrode in LIBs. While the thin wall allows easy Li-ion diffusion, the inner hollow space is able to accommodate volume variations during the Li-ion insertion–extraction process. Though the initial discharge and charge capacities were very high (2242 and 1041 mA h g−1), it decreased to 570 mA h g−1 and remained stable up to 40 cycles. Moreover, a template-free approach was reported by the same research group for the fabrication of SnO2 hollow spheres by a hydrothermal method and an almost 75% greater charge capacity of 1140 mA h g−1 was observed in comparison to the nanoparticles.43 Lou et al.70 synthesized α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres by a hydrothermal method via a glycerol/water quasiemulsion-templating mechanism and achieved greatly enhanced Li storage properties with a very high reversible capacity of 710 mA h g−1, even after 100 cycles. α-Fe2O3@SnO2 rattle-type hollow structures were also fabricated by the same research group by a hydrothermal method via inside-out Ostwald ripening mechanism.71 With the progress of the reaction, small crystallites in the interior dissolved out and were re-deposited on the outer shell, leading to an enlarged hollow interior space accompanied by construction of a compact shell. Such a nanostructure leads to much lower initial irreversible loss and higher reversible capacity compared to SnO2 hollow spheres. Co3O4/NiO core–shell nanowire arrays on conductive substrates were fabricated by the hydrothermal method followed by chemical bath deposition for the NiO coating, as reported by Xia et al.72 Both the structural feature and the combination of materials result in a high specific capacitance of 853 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 6000 cycles and an excellent cycling stability. Self-assembled porous NiO-coated ZnO nanorod electrodes were prepared on a stainless steel substrate by hydrolysis of aqueous nickel chloride in the presence of a hexagonal ZnO nanorod template, followed by heat treatment to convert Ni(OH)2 to NiO.73 The thin porous NiO shell acts as a buffer layer, which primarily reacts with the lithium ion and allows the ions to reach the ZnO core. This coating also helps to provide structural integrity as well as enhance the electron conductivity of the electrode. The effects were clearly observed by significant improvement of the reversible capacity value ∼1100 mA h g−1 for NiO-coated ZnO nanorod arrays, as compared to ZnO nanorod arrays with ∼700 mA h g−1 and 1 C current rate up to 15 cycles. Very recently, high-performance 3D electrodes for LIBs consist of TiO2–C/MnO2 core–double-shell nanowire arrays, as reported by Liao et al.74 The complex structure was fabricated on flexible Ti-foil by layer-by-layer deposition with soaking, followed by a glucose-assisted hydrothermal method and calcination for carbon coating and finally via redox reaction with KMnO4 solution to deposit MnO2 nanoparticles on the surface. The 3D electrode exhibits enhanced electrochemical performance with a higher discharge–charge capacity, superior rate capability, and longer cycling lifetime. Fig. 7 represents various examples of hollow spheres and core–shell nanostructures as the anode electrode in LIBs.
 Fig. 7  (a–f) TEM images of (a) SnO2 hollow sphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) SnO2/C hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. (d) α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nano-rattles (ref. 71). (e) TEM image of as-prepared SnO2 nanoboxes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (f) Co3O4/NiO core–shell nanowire. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of cycling performances of SnO2 hollow spheres, solid spheres and nanoparticles at a current rate of 160 mA g−1 with a voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Heterogeneous nanostructures
An extension of the core–shell nanostructure to hybrid branched nanostructures is of great interest. Such special structural features with tunable 3D morphology and homo or heterogeneous junctions provide structural integrity, high surface areas and direct electron transport pathways, thereby representing a unique system for applications in energy storage devices (Fig. 8).75,76 Usually, the branched hybrid nanostructures are fabricated with the help of a vapour phase or solution phase, or by the combination of both methods. Interconnected porous MnO nanoflakes were grown on nickel foam by a reduction of hydrothermal synthesized MnO2 precursor in hydrogen and the architecture proved to be a potential candidate for lithium ion batteries showing a very high specific capacity value of 700 mA h g−1 at the current density of 246 mA g−1.77 Fan and his co-workers75,78 fabricated α-Fe2O3 nanorod branches grown epitaxially on SnO2 nanowire stems by the combination of chemical vapour deposition (for the SnO2 stem) and a hydrothermal route (for the FeOOH branches), followed by annealing to convert FeOOH to α-Fe2O3. The α-Fe2O3/SnO2 hybrid structure showed enhanced performance as an anode in LIBs, with low initial irreversible loss and high reversible capacity in comparison to both single components, due to the synergetic effect exerted by SnO2 and α-Fe2O3. Another very promising hetero-nanostructure was reported by Wang et al.,79 composed of Si coated TiSi2 nanonets, where Si acts as an active component to store and release Li+ ions and TiSi2 serves as the inactive component to support Si and to facilitate charge transport. The TiSi2 nanonets were first grown on Ti-foil by the chemical vapour deposition method using TiCl4 and SiH4 as the precursors80,81 followed by flow of the SiH4 precursor for Si deposition on the TiSi2 nanonets in the same method. The heteronanostructure showed remarkable performance with specific capacities of >1000 mA h g−1 at a charge–discharge rate of 8400 mA g−1, along with long capacity life up to 100 cycles.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of α-Fe2O3/SnO2 branched nanostructures (inset: TEM image (top), schematic (below) of the branched structure). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (b) TEM image of Si nanoparticles deposited on the TiSi2 core (inset: schematic of the heterostructure). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
4. Types of anode materials
4.1 Carbonaceous material
Carbonaceous materials were the primary choice and were known to be commercially the most successful anode material in LIBs, having higher specific charges and more negative redox potentials than metal oxides, chalcogenides, and polymers.82 They could be categorized in different forms: graphite/graphitized material, non-graphitized soft carbon and hard carbon, each having different structures as well as electrochemical properties.
Graphite is considered to be a layered structure containing a carbon hexagon network in an orderly arrangement and sometime containing defects. The stacks are oriented in a specific A-B-A orientation, which on lithium intercalation changed to an A-A-A orientation.10 A defect-free ideal graphitic structure is very rare so an artificially manufactured, close to graphite structure, polycrystalline carbon material, called highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), is commonly used. HOPG is synthesized by the vapor transport method, a slow and expensive process.83 Lithium intercalation entirely depends on the crystallinity, microstructure and morphology of the materials and thereby determines the lithiation–delithiation potential. The intercalation process occurs with the formation of Li–carbon alloys, LixCn in a reversible reaction:10 (3)
Highly crystalline graphitic carbon materials can take in one Li atom per six C-atoms in a completely reversible process with a theoretical capacity value of 372 mA g h−1. Lithium insertion and distribution into the layers of graphite occurs in several stages. At stage 1 lithium is distributed between all of the graphene layers; at stage 2, the structure has an empty gallery between each occupied gallery, and a stage 4 structure has four graphene layers between each gallery containing lithium.10,82 However, several factors, such as SEI formation and solvated lithium insertion in the graphene layers, affect the reversibility of the intercalation reaction, increase cell resistance and thereby decrease the power density with the number of cycles.82
Soft carbon is amorphous in nature and can be prepared by pyrolysis of organic polymers or petroleum pitch at ∼1500 °C, and is available in the form of coke or carbon black. Such carbon materials are also known as ‘low specific charge non-graphitic carbon’ having x ∼ 0.5–0.8 in LixC6 but x = 1 for graphite. On heating at high temperature, graphitizing carbons developed with weak crosslinking between the layers. At 2500–3000 °C, enough crosslinking in between the layers develops and thereby the material becomes mechanically harder than normal graphite, known as hard carbon. Such materials are also known as ‘high specific charge carbonaceous material’ having x ∼ 1.2–5 in LixC6 with a high Li-storage capacity value of 200–600 mA h g−1 and good power capability.82 However, poor electrical conductivity and large irreversible capacity limits their extensive use as an anode material in LIBs.64 Moreover, lithium diffusion entirely depends upon the crystal structure of carbonaceous material and it is believed that the process is facilitated by the presence of defects.84
This fact drives the use of bulk carbonaceous material to nano-carbon materials in different dimensions, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and , carbon nanofibers (CNFs) for 1D; graphene nanosheets for 2D; and porous carbon with pore sizes in the nanometer range (Fig. 9).

1D carbon nanostructure. 
CNTs are considered to be a potentially useful material, having characteristic sp2 hybridization, high surface area, conductivity and fast 1D ion transportation. CNTs are prepared by rolling up the graphene layers by various methods: acid oxidation,85,86 ball milling,87,88 chemical vapour deposition89–91etc. in the form of single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) or multiple-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) based on the morphological requirement. On decreasing the diameter of the CNTs, strain is generated, which causes delocalization of electrons making it more electronegative than the bulk graphite.92 As a consequence, the degree of lithium intercalation is increased, which is also reflected by its high reversible capacity value up to 1116 mA g h−1. Although in the case of MWCNTs the inter-wall distance can accommodate lithium ions during the intercalation process, an increase of irreversible capacities and decrease in coulombic efficiency are observed due to the barrier for the extraction of lithium ions during the discharging process.91,93 In order to overcome such difficulties, several reports are available on making hybrid materials with other metal oxides,94,95 chalcogenides96,97 or other forms of carbonaceous materials.98 Carbon nanofibers (CNF) are also used in the place of CNTs as an anode material in LIBs, which can be synthesized by cost-effective and simple techniques, such as vapour deposition, arc discharge, laser ablation or electrospinning.99–102 Though the irreversible capacity loss cannot be avoided for CNFs, the high rate capability can be achieved due to the greater reduction of lithium diffusion length in the presence of surface and lattice defects in CNFs.102 However, an improvement in cyclability of reversible capacity of CNFs was attained by Deng et al.103 synthesizing carbon nanofibers with dome-shaped interiors by the noncatalytic thermal decomposition of acetylene under optimum conditions. Other than morphological modification, the making of nanocomposite materials is also a well known approach to enhance the electrochemical properties with high reversible capacity and adequate stability.104–108


2D carbon nanostructure. 
A considerable amount of research work was also carried out using graphene nanosheets as the 2D carbonaceous anode material in LIBs, solely or in hybrid form. The fact of being one of the most useful anode materials is mainly due to the one atomic layer thick aromatic carbon network with high conductivity, great chemical, physical and mechanical properties, very high lithium storage ability and high surface area, as it can accommodate lithium ions in both sides of the sheet as well as at the edges and disorder defect sites.92 Although the graphene nanosheet structure, unlike CNTs and CNFs, is in no way associated with any lithium ion extraction barrier, due to its structural design, it exhibits an unavoidable irreversible capacity and low Coulombic efficiency. It is noted that the charge capacity value in the first cycle corresponds to 1233 mA h g−1. However, the discharge capacity decreased to 672 mA h g−1 with Coulombic efficiency loss of 55%, while maintaining a reversible capacity value in the range of 500 mA g h−1 up to 30 cycles.92 Such electrochemical properties can be explained by the undesirable chemical reactions of lithium ions with oxygen containing functional groups and formation of SEI on the defect sites. Moreover, insertion of electrolytes along with the lithium ions in between the layers is also responsible for such electrochemical behavior.82,92,109 Moreover, the storage capacity changes with the interlayer spacing of graphene layers as well as functional groups present on the surface of the nanosheets, depending on the synthetic procedure.110 Generally, graphene nanosheets are prepared by mechanical exfoliation to obtain a nearly perfect graphitic nanostructure to be used in different electronic devices.111,112 In a solution method, chemical oxidation of natural graphite to graphene oxide (GO) followed by its reduction remains one of the most commonly used methods to synthesize graphene nanosheets. The insertion of oxygen containing a functional group during the process is found to have a detrimental effect on lithium ion storage capacity, decreasing the reversible capacity value sometimes even less than that of natural graphite.110,113 This can be confirmed from GO nanosheets with a low reversible capacity of 335 mA h g−1, which under reduction shows a significant improvement up to ∼1000 mA h g−1 with good capacity retention, as shown in Fig. 9e. A high reversible capacity was achieved for graphene nanosheets with a large interlayer distance of ∼4 Å, due to the increase in available sites for lithium ion accommodation, as reported by Yoo et al.114 In another report, improvement of reversible capacity up to 780 mA h g−1 by combining CNTs and C60 has been noted. Recently, high and stable reversible capacity has been achieved by fabricating nanocomposites of graphene with metals and metal oxides. Accordingly, active metals, such as Si115 and Sn116-based graphene nanocomposites are found to be promising materials. In addition, metal oxides, e.g. Co3O4,117–119 TiO2,37,120,121 Fe3O4,122–128 Mn3O4,129,130 CuO,131 NiO132 and SnO2 (ref. 133) nanoparticles, anchored on the surface of graphene nanosheets, also successfully diminish the irreversible capacity loss during the charging–discharging process. Such improvement in the electrochemical properties of materials is attributed to the synergistic effect of graphene and metal or metal oxide nanoparticles. When graphene nanosheets provide high surface area as well as high conductivity, anchoring of electroactive metal or metal oxide nanoparticles on the nanosheet surface prevents the coagulation of stacks, facilitating lithium storage to a greater extent.
 Fig. 9  (a) Variation of Crev for short and long CNTs with number of cycles at a current density of 25 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2007 John Wiley and Sons. (b) SEM image of SWNT-forest. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. (c) TEM images of graphene nanosheets (inset: oxidized graphene). Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (d) Cyclic performance of natural graphite (i), pristine GO(II), hydrazine-reduced GO(III), 300 °C pyrolytic GO(IV), 600 °C pyrolytic GO(V), and electron-beam-reduced GO(VI) at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of ordered mesoporous carbon and (f) its discharge and charge cycle performance at a constant current of 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2003 John Wiley and Sons. 


3D porous carbon nanostructure. 
Porous carbon nanostructures with different ranges of pore sizes are known to be another alternative anode material for LIBs. Generally, depending upon the pore size, they can be categorized as microporous (<2 nm), mesoporous (2–50 nm) and macroporous (>50 nm) carbonaceous materials. They show excellent electrochemical properties due to very high surface areas and interconnected carbon networks, allowing superconductivity as well as accommodating strain generated during the charging–discharging process.92 Usually the template-assisted synthetic methods or chemical treatment followed by pyrolysis of bulk materials are used to fabricate porous carbon nanostructures with different pore sizes.134–137 Unlike 1D or 2D carbon nanostructures, the difficulty of irreversible capacity loss can be avoided significantly by utilizing the porous carbon nanostructure. Zhou et al.135 synthesized mesoporous carbon with a uniform pore size of 3.9 nm by utilizing ordered silica SBA-15 as a template followed by carbonization of sucrose inside the pores. The material showed an excellent specific reversible capacity of ∼1000 mA g h−1 at a current rate of 100 mA g−1 with good retention up to 20 cycles. However, in some cases a very high surface area of the material results in considerable irreversible capacity loss, as reported by Takeuchi et al.137 They used zeolite and clay as templates to prepare the carbonaceous materials with very high surface area, which causes electrolyte decomposition and SEI formation on the carbon surface, resulting in an irreversible capacity loss from ∼3500 mA h g−1 to ∼500 mA h g−1 in the first cycle. However, after the 1st cycle, the materials show stable reversible capacity with >80% capacity retention values, making them promising for the anode material in LIBs.
Very recently, Pint and his co-workers reported very high reversible capacities of 2640 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.186 A g−1 by designing an anode material with freestanding, flexible graphene and carbon nanotube hybrid foams.138 Such a hybrid material showed a high performance due to the decoupling of the lithium storage reaction energetics dictated by the SWNTs from the total storage capacity of the hybrid material, as well as developing mechanically robust carbon electrodes.

4.2 Spinel structured Li4Ti5O12
Graphite, being a primary choice for the anode electrode in LIBs, shows a lithiation potential of ∼0.2 V vs. Li/Li+, which is close to the lithium stripping voltage and, especially at high rate, this may cause a safety issue.10 Moreover, such a low lithiation potential range leads to the formation of electronically insulating solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the surface of graphite, which is likely to occur below 1.0 V vs. Li/Li+. The disadvantages of using graphite can be avoided by using spinel structured Li4Ti5O12, as reported by Thackeray's group in 1994.139 Unlike graphite, Li4Ti5O12 works at a potential of 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ and thereby the SEI layer formation can be avoided. Moreover, it shows high specific capacity (∼170 mA h g−1) and good cyclic stability, due to zero strain or volume change during the charging and discharging processes.12,140 However, poor electronic conductivity (10−13 S cm−1) of Li4Ti5O12 and a moderate Li+ diffusion coefficient (10−9 to 10−13 cm2 s−1) limits the performance, which up to a certain extent can be overcome by reducing the size and conductive coating.9,141–144 Several reports are available on the size dependence performance of Li4Ti5O12.144–146 Jaiswal et al.146 fabricated Li4Ti5O12 with two different size distributions of 50 nm and 200 nm by pyrolysis and exhibited charge capability values of 148 and 138 mA h g−1 at C/25 and 5 C, respectively. Other than nanoparticles, Li4Ti5O12 in the form of hollow microspheres147 and nanowire148 structures also showed high performance, achieving structural stability with more than 90% capacity retention.12 Besides fabrication of nanostructured Li4Ti5O12, conductive coating with carbon or surface nitridation was also found to be fruitful for further improvement in their performances.39,40,149 Ionic liquids, containing C, H and N elements, are commonly used precursors for N-doped carbon coating onto the surface of Li4Ti5O12, as they can penetrate porous material easily due to their fluidic properties.39,150 Such coated porous Li4Ti5O12 materials show an initial capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at 2 C and decrease to 124 mA h g−1 after 2200 cycles at 2 C, with very good capacity retention of 83%. Fig. 10 shows an example of C-coated Li4Ti5O12 and comparison of cycling performance of coated and uncoated Li4Ti5O12 samples.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of 5 wt% pitch-coated Li4Ti5O12. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (b) Comparison of cycling performance of N-doped carbon coated and pristine (inset) Li4Ti5O12. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.3 Metal alloys
The concept of binary metal alloys as an effective electrode material for energy storage devices was first proposed by Huggin and Besenhard.151,152 Later on, extensive investigations were carried out in designing different metal as well as metal oxide alloys and their performances in LIBs were evaluated. The preliminary choice of metal alloys were Li-based alloys, LixM, where M was an electrochemically active or inactive secondary metal.153 The role of M was to provide the matrix of the alloy electrode to support the strain generated during the lithium intercalation–deintercalation process, as well as to improve the electrical conductivity.154 However, disadvantages, such as decrease in reversible capacity due to incorporation of electrochemically inactive material in alloys, and volume expansion during the charging–discharging process, resulting in cracks on the surface of alloys, are noticed. In order to avoid such problems and to improve reversible capacity values with good cyclability, use of electrochemically active–active binary metal alloys in the nanodimensional structure have drawn much attention. In this context, electroactive metals, such as Si,155–158 Sn,159,160 Al,161–163 Ga,164 Ge,165,166 Pb,167 Sb168,169 are extensively studied as matrix metals with the reversible formation of Li-M different phases including phase transitions in several steps during the lithiation–delithiation process (Fig. 11).10,82 The choice of metal matrices is based on their individual reversible capacity values as well as their phase diagrams and equilibrium thermodynamic properties.10 Among these electroactive metals, Si is the most studied anode material, involving alloy formation with lithium as Li12Si7, Li7Si3, Li13Si4, and Li22Si5 in several steps.170 The formation of alloys with different phases is also accompanied by the crystalline-to-amorphous mechanism in a two step process during the charging–discharging process as follows:171,172
During discharge: Si (crystalline) + xLi+ + xe− → LixSi (amorphous) + (3.75 − x)Li+ + (3.75 − x)e−(4) → Li15Si4 (crystalline)(5)
During charge: Li15Si4 (crystalline) → Si (amorphous) + yLi+ + ye− + Li15Si4 (residual)(6)
 Fig. 11  (a and b) An in situ TEM observation of pristine Al2O3 coated Al NW morphology before (a) and after (b) lithiation–delithiation, showing the pulverization and volume expansion of the Al NW. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM top view of crystalline (100) Si nanopillars showing anisotropic lateral expansion after full lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Cycle performances of Si NT array electrode at a rate of 0.05 and 0.2 C (square symbol: 0.05 C, circle symbol: 0.2 C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) charge capacity vs. cycle number of Si70Sn30 nanoalloys annealed at 900 and 1000 °C in coin-type half cells between 1.2 and 0 V at a rate of 0.2 C (=1000 mA g−1) (ref. 200). 
Although Si-based electrodes show an extremely high reversible capacity, the unavoidable volume expansion of almost 400% due to lithiation remains a major challenge. Several reports are available on this issue, showing that morphological changes occur during the lithiation–delithiation process.156,173 The use of different nanosized Si and its lithiation process is discussed in detail in the next section. Like Si, Sn metal undergoes reaction with Li and results in formation of different Li–Sn phases as Li2Sn5, LiSn, Li7Sn3, Li5Sn2, Li13Sn5, Li7Sn2, and Li22Sn5. The most lithium rich Sn–Li alloy, Li22Sn5, can accommodate 4.5 atoms of Li per Sn atom, delivering a capacity value of 959.5 mA h g−1 at a working potential of 0.5 V vs. Li/Li+.153 Although the reversible capacity value of the Sn–Li alloy based anode is low in comparison to the Si–Li alloy system, the low melting point of Sn facilitates the alloy formation with Li, as well as easy crystallization; also the mobility of Sn in the alloy becomes easier than with other metals.174 However, poor capacity retention due to inhomogeneous volume change with the formation of different intermetallic Li–Sn phases is observed during the charging–discharging process.153,175 The capacity retention of the Sn-based anode can be improved to a large extent by using the oxide form of Sn. Sn-oxides undergo reaction with Li, forming Li2O, and are themselves reduced to Sn, according to the electrochemical reaction shown in reactions (14) and (15). Although in the first cycle an irreversible capacity loss is observed due to the formation of electrochemically inactive Li2O; afterwards good stability during several cycles is noticed. Such stability could be attributed to the reversible Li–Sn alloy formation reaction with metallic Sn and Li+ ions, as well as due to the role of Li2O as a matrix, preventing the aggregation of formed Sn nanoparticles. Lithium alloy formation is also well known for Al metal, forming different phases of LixAl alloys (0.1 < x < 1). Up to 50 at% of lithium content is reported in the Li-rich alloy, accompanied by a large volume expansion.161 Moreover, the high ionic character of the LixAl alloys leads to the brittle nature of the material, reducing mechanical stability.82 A very good piece of work was reported by Huang and his group showing an in situ transmission electron microscopy observation of pulverization of aluminum nanowires during lithiation–delithiation cycles.162 According to this, the lithiation process started through the Al2O3 coating, forming a stable Li–Al–O glass tube, towards the Al nanowire core converting single crystal Al into polycrystalline Li–Al alloy. Such alloy formation resulted in 100% volume expansion accompanied by the appearance of voids causing irreversible capacity loss from 800 to less than 200 mA h g−1. The Li–Ge alloy system has also been found to be an interesting anode material, showing a theoretical capacity of 1568 mA h g−1 (Li17Ge4). Although the theoretical capacity value is much less than that for the Li–Si system, Ge is favoured due to much faster lithium diffusivity than Si.176 Other group V elements are also known to be promising materials forming Li-rich alloy systems, such as Li3P, Li3As, Li3Sb, and Li3Bi, which have high capacity values due to their low atomic packing factor in their crystal structure, leading to large accommodation of Li-ions in the voids.153 However, undesirable factors, such as large volume expansion and mechanical integration, resulting in significant irreversible capacity loss during the lithiation–delithiation process, cannot be avoided.
Another possible strategy for the alloy based anode material is the fabrication of the intermetallic M1–M2 system, where M1 and M2 are either electrochemically active–active or active–inactive in nature.153 It is believed that in the case of electrochemically active–active intermetallic compounds, multiphases are generated during the lithiation process, in which two different phases mutually buffer each other, preventing volume expansion to some extent and achieving stability of the electrode. Moreover, the system involves the formation of a ternary alloy, Li–M1–M2 system during the lithiation process, with a favourable voltage profile as well as reversible capacity values. For the electrochemically active–inactive combination, the inactive metal acts as the metal matrix, as in case of binary LixM alloys. In both these categories, intermetallic compounds of Si and Sn with various metals are mostly studied. Mg or Ag–silicides are known Si-based intermetallic alloy compounds with Mg and Ag as electroactive elements. The complicated lithiation process involves the formation of both binary and ternary metal alloys Li–Si, Li–Mg and LixMg2Si, respectively, as in the following proposed by Kim et al.:177 Mg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LixMg2Si(7) LixMg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LicriticalMg2Si(8) → LisaturatedMg2Si + Mg + Li–Si alloy(9) Mg + xLi+ + xe− → Li–Mg alloy(10)
The insertion of the Li+ ion occurs in the octahedral sites of Mg2Si, forming the ternary alloy compound LixMg2Si, which can further accommodate the Li+ ion until it forms the unstable LicriticalMg2Si intermetallic alloy, which undergoes an electrochemical reaction, resulting in LisaturatedMg2Si, Li–Si and Li–Mg alloys. The lithium insertion mechanism in the Si–Ag alloy is also reported elsewhere, showing a stable capacity of ∼280 mA h g−1.178 Mostly, such intermetallic alloy compounds are synthesized by the mechanical ball milling process. Si–M (M = Ni, Fe, Co, Mn, Cr etc.) are the other examples of intermetallic alloys of Si, where M is an electrochemically inactive transition metal serving as a buffering matrix against volume expansion during lithiation.179–183 In such cases, the electrochemical reactions can be described as follows:153 xLi+ + xe− + NiSi → LixSi + Ni ↔ Ni + Si + xLi+ + xe−(11) xLi+ + xe− + FeSi → LixSi + Fe ↔ Fe + Si + xLi+ + xe−(12)
The capacity values (∼60–1000 mA h g−1) with good capacity retention, depending upon the alloy compositions, have been noted. Similar to silicon (Si), intermetallic Sn-inactive M (M = Fe, Cu, Co, Cr, Mn, Ni etc.) alloys have also been applied in LIBs.184–191 Wang et al.184 prepared FeSn2, Cu6Sn5, CoSn3, and Ni3Sn4 single-crystalline nanospheres of particle size ∼40 nm by a modified polyol process and their electrochemical properties were compared. The capacity values follow the order: FeSn2 > Cu6Sn5 ≈ CoSn3 > Ni3Sn4, with the highest capacity for FeSn2 (500 mA h g−1). Such electrochemical behavior is attributed to the structurally open channels in the FeSn2 crystal lattice, as well as SEI formation after the first cycle, leading to superior cycling performance. Electrochemically active M–Sn intermetallic compounds, such as SbSn,192–194 Ag3Sn,195 and Mg2Sn196 are also reported. These involve ternary Li–Sn–M alloy formation similar to Si-based intermetallic compounds. Very recently, Seo and Park fabricated nanostructured SnSb/MOx (M = Al or Mg)/C hybrid materials by mechanical milling technique via mechanochemical reduction of SnO and Sb2O3 with Al or Mg, respectively, in the presence of carbon.194 In this nanohybrid material, it is believed that SnSb acted as the active material, and Al2O3 or MgO as the inactive material, with amorphous carbon as a buffering matrix. This fact can be confirmed from their electrochemical analyses, as SnSb particles showed very poor performance due to a large volume change, which can be improved to a reversible capacity value ∼500 mA h g−1 with great stability up to 150 cycles for SnSb/Al2O3/C and SnSb/MgO/C nanocomposite electrodes.
Other than Si or Sn based intermetallic compounds, intermetallic alloys, like Cu2Sb,197 CoSb3198 and Zn–Sb199 are also promising materials for LIB applications. Saadat and his group synthesized different Zn–Sb nanostructures in the form of nanoflakes, nanowires, or nanoparticles with tunable Zn–Sb molar ratios by electrochemical deposition techniques, and compared their performance as an anode electrode in LIBs.199 The study revealed that the Zn–Sb nanoflakes were found to be superior to nanowire or nanoparticle structures of the same compositions and phases, with high Li-ion storage capacities of 500 mA h g−1 and stable cyclabilities up to 70 cycles, with a Coulombic efficiency of 98%. Another approach involved an improvement in irreversible capacity loss of intermetallic alloys and cyclic stability, with good capacity retention by the formation of a composite of intermetallic nanoalloys with carbon.200–203 Cho and co-workers fabricated carbon-coated Si70Sn30 nanoalloys by vacuum annealing butyl-capped analogues at 900 °C, and showed an outstandingly high reversible capacity of 2032 mA h g−1, with capacity retention of 97% after 60 cycles.201
4.4 Silicon based materials
Silicon is another promising anode material, with low discharge potential of ∼370 mV vs. Li/Li+.204 It can accommodate 4.4 lithium atoms per single Si atom, forming the alloy Li4.4Si, which provides a very high theoretical specific capacity value (4212 mA h g−1); this is ten times higher than the conventional graphite and stable voltage during cycling.47,205 However, the use of silicon still remains challenging due to the large volume expansion (>400%) during the lithiation–delithiation process and formation of the SEI layer at low potential. It may be noted that the volume expansion of bare Si causes poor reversibility and rapidly declining capacity. It can be managed by alloying with other material to minimize the stress inside the material or by fabricating a 1D nanostructure of Si to accommodate the strain generated during several cycles.47,206–208 Although the SEI layer formation provides mechanical stability against electrode expansion, it is responsible for irreversible capacity loss, influencing the kinetics of lithium ion transfer between the electrolyte and the electrode. Si nanoparticles are mostly synthesized by ball milling, the pyrolysis method or via the template-assisted method.209–211 Usually either Si/C composite materials or carbon additive binders are mixed with Si nanostructures to improve the electrical conductivity to the current collector.207,212,213 Li et al.209 synthesized Si nanoparticles (dia: 78 nm) and combined them with carbon binders, giving a high reversible capacity of 1700 mA h g−1 at a cycling voltage between 0.0–0.8 V. Mazouzi et al.210 also observed reversible capacity of 960 mA h g−1 with excellent stability over 700 cycles, using Si particles and carboxymethyl cellulose binder composite material. Kim et al.211 synthesized well-dispersed n-Si nanoparticles (size range: 5–20 nm) in the presence of a surfactant, followed by carbon coating by flowing acetylene gas through the products at high temperature and studied their performance as an anode in LIBs. It was inferred that 10 nm sized nanoparticles showed a significantly high charge capacity of ∼3400 mA h g−1, with capacity retention of 81%, which could be further improved to 96% after carbon coating up to 40 cycles (Fig. 12a and b). Si nanowires/nanotubes grown on a conductive substrate by the vapour deposition method were found to be very efficient for this purpose.47,214 They can accommodate a large strain without pulverization, and provide good electronic contact and conduction.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of 10 nm sized n-Si nanoparticles, (b) comparison of charge capacity of different sized n-Si nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (c) TEM image of double walled Si nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) SEM images of pristine Si NWs before (d) and after (e) electrochemical cycling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
Cui and his group carried out extensive studies on 1D nanostructured Si and its composite materials with superior electrode design.47,215–217 The Si nanowires grown on stainless steel showed very high specific capacities of ∼3500 mA h g−1 with capacity retention of 75%, where double walled Si nanotubes showed a specific capacity charge of ∼1500 mA h g−1 at a rate of C/5, with an outstanding stability of 6000 cycles and a cycling time of more than one year.47,216 Song et al.173 fabricated sealed Si nanotube arrays that are capable of accommodating the large volume changes associated with the lithiation process. The geometry exhibited very high and stable charge capacity values of over 3000 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.1 C. The surface structure becomes rough during electrochemical cycling (Fig. 12d and e), with increased electrical resistivity due to the crystalline-to-amorphous transition.215 Therefore, the desired electrical conductivity as well as the structural integrity could be maintained by applying the hybrid nanostructure. Cao et al.218 fabricated Cu–Si–Al2O3 nanocables directly grown on the current collector. While the Cu core provides inner mechanical stability and maintains electrical conductivity, the outer sheath of Al2O3 provides a stable Si/electrolyte interface and triggers stable SEI formation. Such nanocables deliver a specific capacity of ∼1560 mA h g−1 under a current density of 1.4 A g−1 up to 100 cycles. Wang and his group synthesized a unique heteronanostructure consisting of two-dimensional TiSi2 nanonets as the mechanical supporter and particulate Si coating as the electroactive material.79,219 The heteronanostructures showed specific capacities >1000 mA h g−1 at a charge–discharge rate of 8400 mA g−1, with an average of only 0.1% capacity fade per cycle up to 100 cycles. Fan and his co-workers fabricated vertically ordered Ni3Si2/Si nanorod arrays directly grown on the current collector. In this geometry, Si acts as the electroactive material and Ni3Si2 as the inner mechanical supporter.220 The structure showed a high and steady discharge capacity of over 2184 mA h g−1 up to 50 cycles. Synthesis of nanostructured layered silicon–germanium systems (Si1−xGex) was also attempted by the glancing angle deposition (GLAD) method.221 The material offered a very high reversible capacity of >2000 mA h g−1 at a very high rate (20 C) as lithium ion battery anodes.
4.5 Transition metal oxides and their composites
Transition metal oxides (TMO) are found to be potential substitutions for graphite as the anode material in LIBs due to the very high specific capacity values of 3d metal oxides. In addition, the lithium ion reacts reversibly with metal oxides, avoiding metal–lithium alloy formation as follows:9,222 MO + xLi+ + xe− ↔ Li2O + M (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu)(13)
The forward reaction is thermodynamically favorable and involves multiple electron transfer per unit metal atom, leading to high theoretical lithium storage capacity. However, the reaction in the backward direction, i.e. formation of the Li+ ion from Li2O is a thermodynamically unfavorable process and is believed to be facilitated by metal nanoparticles (M) formed during the reaction.63 This indicates that the reversibility of the reaction is well maintained in the nanoscale system. Other limitations, such as poor conductivity, low diffusion coefficient and formation of a thick SEI layer could be overcome by using different combinations of materials or by fabricating different hierarchical nanostructures.
Among different TMOs, tin oxide (SnO2) was the preliminary choice for use as an anode material, due to its high theoretical capacity value of 790 mA h g−1.223,224 The major drawback of using SnO2 as the anode material in LIBs is the irreversible nature of the reaction with the lithium ion leading to large capacity loss initially. However, the metallic Sn formed in the next step undergoes reversible alloy formation, accommodating 4.4 Li atoms per single Sn atom, which is further affected by the large volume change during the lithiation process.63,225,226 SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O(14) Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ 4LixSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4)(15)
It is worth noting that hollow spheres, core–shell or mesoporous structures of SnO2 can accommodate the volume change,43,226 whereas SnO2 in the form of nanowires and nanorod structures provides the mechanical support to last through several cycles of the intercalation–deintercalation process.48 Titirici et al.226 employed the hydrothermal carbonization process to synthesize mesoporous SnO2 microspheres via nanoparticle assembly. It is noted that the porosity not only helps the faster lithium intercalation–deintercalation process, but also provides a good network system, making the surfaces available for electrolytes. The mesoporous structure showed the specific capacity of 370 mA h g−1 at the current density 1 A g−1.
Lou and his group carried out an extensive study on fabricating different hollow SnO2 nanostructures and investigated their lithium storage capacity in LIBs.43,66–69,71,227 Hollow SnO2 nanoboxes, prepared by template-engaged coordinating etching of pre-grown Cu2O nanocubes were found to be a promising material.66 They showed the capacity value of about 570 mA h g−1 over 40 cycles at a current rate of 0.2 C. In order to attain both high and stable capacity values, fabrication of 1D nanostructures grown directly onto the current collector were also attempted by Kim et al.48 They synthesized 1 μm long SnO2 nanowires with a diameter range of 40–50 nm by a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism. When it was directly used as an anode material in LIBs, >700 mA h g−1 discharge capacity at a current density of 782 mA g−1, stable up to 50 cycles, was observed. On the contrary, SnO2 nanopowders undergo a steady deterioration of discharge capacity values with cycle numbers. Hybrid SnO2 nanowires encapsulated by Sn nanoclusters have also been explored as an excellent anode electrode in LIBs by Sunkara and co-workers.228 The electrode exhibited an exceptional capacity of >800 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles with a low capacity fading of less than 1% per cycle. However, post lithiation analyses after 100 cycles showed little morphological degradation of the hybrid nanowires. Liu et al.229 synthesized SnO2 nanorods of 60 nm in diameter and 670 nm in length directly grown on the metal or metal alloy substrates via alkaline hydrothermal methods. This array electrode showed a specific capacity of 580 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1 C, with coulombic efficiency of nearly 100%.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is another promising anode material in LIBs, due to its non-toxic, ecofriendly nature and abundant availability. Also TiO2, due to its photocatalytic activity, is extensively used in numerous applications, e.g. dye-sensitized solar cells, water splitting, photocatalysis, gas sensing etc.230–232 A considerable amount of work has also been done in LIBs with a theoretical specific capacity value of 335 mA h g−1. The lithium intercalation–deintercalation occurs in the interstitial positions of TiO2 crystals with the lower cut off potential of 1.0 V vs. Li+/Li and can be presented as the following reversible reaction:95 xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)(16)
A phase transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic TiO2 is observed due to lithium intercalation. TiO2 exists in different polymorphs, such as anatase, rutile, brookite, TiO2-(B) (bronze), TiO2-(H) (Hollandite) etc. and the electrochemical activity depends upon their intrinsic properties based on their crystal structures. Among different polymorphs, anatase TiO2 is known to be most electroactive material.63,233 In all cases the Li+ ion diffusion is highly anisotropic and occurs along the c-axis. Although the mechanism leads to fast Li+ ion diffusion in anatase TiO2, in rutile the diffusion is inhibited due to its crystal orientation.9 The performance of rutile TiO2 can be improved by preparing nanosized rutile TiO2 showing a specific capacity of 132 mA h g−1 at 1 C with good retention, as reported by Hu et al.19 Moreover, anatase TiO2 with higher percentages of (001) exposed facets is more reactive than (101) facets and undergoes fast reversible lithium intercalation–deintercalation.234–236 However, poor electrical conductivity limits extensive use of pristine TiO2 in LIBs. The conductivity can be improved by N-doping of TiO2.237 The 1D mesoporous TiO2Nx exhibited a specific capacity of 185 mA h g−1 with high capacity retention over 40 cycles. A number of research studies were carried out on fabricating the anode material with combinations of TiO2 with other metal oxides, among which TiO2–SnO2 composite materials are commonly studied.238–241 Another effective way to improvise the electrical conductivity of TiO2 is by making TiO2–C nanocomposites. Several research studies are available on preparing TiO2–C nanocomposites in different forms of nanostructures.37,120,121,242,243 Wang et al.242 fabricated porous TiO2–C nanocomposite hollow shells by the sol–gel method with high capacity of 288.2 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.1 C, excellent cycling stability over 300 cycles, and high rate performance. Grafting of nanosized TiO2 onto graphene nanosheets is a straightforward way to increase electrical conductivity. Xin et al.121 fabricated a TiO2–graphene nanocomposite by assembling a hydroxyl titanium oxalate precursor in a flower-like structure with the help of a surfactant, followed by calcination. These nanocomposites delivered exceptionally high rate capability, with a capacity of 230 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and excellent cycling stability. Lou and co-workers fabricated the nanocomposite by growing ultrathin anatase TiO2 nanosheets with exposed high-energy (001) facets onto graphene support for fast lithium storage, showing a specific capacity value of ∼200 mA g h−1 at a current rate of 0.1 C.37 Wang et al.120 developed both anatase and rutile TiO2–graphene hybrid nanostructures by self-assembly of metal oxides and graphene, via anionic surfactant mediated growth. The nanocomposites showed a significant enhancement in performance compared to the pristine materials. Symbiotic coaxial nanocables made of carbon nanotubes as the core and a TiO2 nanoporous sheath, reported by Maier and his group, showed high performance as the anode electrode in LIBs, with a reversible capacity of 406 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 50 mA g−1.243 Although TiO2 shows a greater cyclic stability, its extensive use is inhibited due to not so high specific capacity values. Considering this fact, Liao et al.74 assembled core–shell nanowires with a combination of MnO2, TiO2 and C to design an effective anode for LIBs, utilizing the high specific capacity value of MnO2 and the cyclic stability of TiO2 and C-coating for electrical conductivity. The electrode was fabricated by the hydrothermal method, forming freestanding TiO2–C core–shell nanowires on flexible Ti-foil followed by layer-by-layer deposition of MnO2 nanoparticles. As expected, the electrode showed highly improved electrochemical performance between 0.01 and 3 V (vs. Li/Li+) with specific capacity value ∼350 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 1 C over 100 cycles.
Theoretical capacity values of manganese oxides (MnOx) are high enough and vary depending on their different forms and phases of oxides, e.g. MnO2 (1230 mA h g−1), MnO (755 mA h g−1) and Mn3O4 (936 mA h g−1). However, extremely poor electrical conductivity and rapid capacity fading of MnOx due to volume expansion and aggregation in the discharge–charge process suppress the use of pristine MnOx. The reports are mostly focused on the synthesis of MnOx–C nanocomposites for their applications as anodes in LIBs.129,244 Cui and his group successfully synthesized Mn3O4 nanoparticles anchored on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) by a two-step solution-phase reaction.130 By this approach the insulating nature of Mn3O4 nanoparticles was overcome by incorporating the oxide nanoparticles into the RGO. This was also confirmed by the more than 4-fold enhancement of the reversible capacity of the Mn3O4–RGO nanocomposite over free Mn3O4 nanoparticles with great cycling stability. The cell showed a stable specific capacity of ∼900 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 40 mA g−1 with Coulombic efficiency of 98%. An excellent cycling stability was observed for Mn3O4 nanorods dispersed on a graphene nanosheet, with a reversible capacity of 100 Fg−1 at the current rate 5 Ag−1 over 10000 cycles with 100% retention.54 In another approach, a hierarchical structure of graphene-wrapped MnO2–graphene nanoribbons was fabricated by Li et al.129 Such a complex structure was fabricated in two steps by a hydrothermal method to synthesize MnO2@graphene nanoribbons, followed by chemical treatment and introduction into a graphene solution, leading to wrapping with graphene nanosheets. The electrode exhibited enhanced specific capacity of ∼800 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.4 Ag−1 and improved cycling stability up to 250 cycles as an anode material compared to MnO2–graphene and pure MnO2, because of the synergic effect between the graphene, graphene nanoribbons, and MnO2. The electrode, composed of MnO2 nanoflakes coated on carbon nanohorns (CNHs), was also synthesized via a facile solution method where CNHs act as a buffer carrier, resulting in an excellent capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1 measured at a high current density of 100 mA g−1 even after 60 cycles.244 The free MnO2 showed a significant capacity fading after 20 cycles, clearly indicating the role of CNHs. In addition, different metal-based supports have also been used to improve the electronic transportation. For example, interconnected porous MnO nanoflakes grown on Ni foam showed a high reversible capacity up to 648.3 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, at a current density of 246 mA g−1.77
Different forms of iron oxides, such as hematite (α-Fe2O3), magnetite (Fe3O4) and ferrous oxide (FeO), have been extensively used in applications from biological to industrial, due to their availability and environmental benignity. Among them, α-Fe2O3 is the most thermodynamically stable oxide and is used as a promising anode in LIBs due to its high theoretical capacity (1007 mA h g−1). Tarascon and his co-workers studied for the first time lithium intercalation in different nanosized α-Fe2O3 particles.245,246 As per their observation, large particles (∼0.5 μm) took up only a small amount of lithium (LixFe2O3, x < 0.1), whereas nanosized α-Fe2O3 (20 nm) inserted up to one Li per formula unit (LixFe2O3, x = 1) without any phase transformation. Fe2O3 nanostructures grown directly onto conductive substrates (Cu or Ti foil) are preferred due to their direct attachment to the current collector, avoiding the use of additives and thereby facilitating the electron collection efficiency.247–249 Chowdari and his group247 synthesized α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes grown on Cu-foil by radio frequency (rf) magnetron sputtering. The electrode showed the stable capacity of ∼700 mA h g−1, with no noticeable capacity fading up to 80 cycles, in the range 0.005–3.0 V at a current rate of 65 mA g−1 (0.1 C rate). The nanoflake structure of α-Fe2O3 is found to be superior to the nanoparticle or nanotubular forms, as they showed noticeable capacity fading up to 50% after 15 cycles. Large arrays of α-Fe2O3 nanotube layers, with enhanced electrochemical properties in LIBs, were fabricated using anodic alumina as a hard template or ZnO nanowires as a sacrificial template.249,250 Chen et al.251 synthesized single crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanodiscs by a top-down method and particles with tunable porosity by controlled etching. In this, phosphate ions acted as a capping agent to control the etching so that it occurred along the (001) direction. The pore size as well as the surface area of α-Fe2O3 microparticles was controlled by the etching time. The material exhibited a significantly improved capacity retention compared to the pristine one. Lou et al.70 fabricated α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres by hydrothermal conditions via an interesting glycerol/water quasiemulsion-templating mechanism. This material, when used as the anode material, accommodated the strain during the lithium intercalation–deintercalation process and showed good performance with specific capacity near 900 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 200 mA g−1 between 0.05 and 3 V. Koo and co-workers252 synthesized Fe/Fe3O4 core–shell nanoparticles by vacancy coalescence technique during oxidation. The technique involves an annealing process oxidizing Fe3O4 into γ-Fe2O3 hollow nanospheres, creating cation vacancies. Such iron vacancies in the hollow spheres result in a considerable increment in the specific capacity value above 1200 mA g h−1 in the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V. Liu et al.253 fabricated fiber-like 1D macroporous Fe2O3 by in situ synthesis of Fe2O3 nanoparticles in the regenerated cellulose fibers during the wet spinning process, followed by the removal of the cellulose matrix by calcination. The material showed an excellent capacity ∼1200 mA h g−1, with good capacity retention up to 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. In order to improve the electrical conductivity, synthesis of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)/Fe2O3 nanocomposites was also reported in a two-step process of homogeneous precipitation of Fe2O3 nanoparticles onto GO followed by reduction of GO with hydrazine under microwave irradiation.122 RGO, in their approach, provided a C-frame to improve the conductivity of the electrode and perform electrochemical analysis in the voltage range between 3.0 and 0.005 V vs. Li+/Li indicated 10.1 mol of Li uptake per unit mole of Fe2O3. The cycling performance of the RGO/Fe2O3 nanocomposite showed a specific capacity value of ∼1100 mA h g−1 at current density 100 mA g−1 up to 50 cycles. This was found to be considerably stable compared to the physically mixed Fe2O3 nanoparticles and RGO in the same ratio. Fe2O3 nanorice or nanoparticles anchored on graphene nanosheets were prepared by a microwave-assisted hydrothermal technique and showed a high reversible capacity of 1184 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 40 cycles.127 The other most studied nanocomposites involved the combination of other metal oxides, e.g. Co3O4, SnO2 or TiO2 with Fe2O3 as hetero-nanostructures in the form of core–shell, branched structures etc.71,78,254–257 Such a hetero-nanostructured electrode was found to be an excellent candidate in LIBs due to the synergistic effect between α-Fe2O3 and other metal oxides. The reduction in initial irreversible loss and high specific capacity is observed in the range of ∼1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1.
Magnetite (Fe3O4), consisting of both Fe2+ and Fe3+, is also a very promising candidate as an anode material in LIBs, with a theoretical capacity value of ∼900 mA g h−1. In 2006, Tarascon et al.258 reported the use of Fe3O4 as an anode in LIBs for the first time. Later on, the material was extensively studied by various research groups in the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li with good C-rate capability up to 8 C.9 Zhang et al.126 fabricated Fe3O4 nanoparticles decorated on graphene nanosheets by in situ deposition of Fe3+ and at the same time reducing graphene oxides with a microwave heater followed by a thermal process. In this, the graphene nanosheet acted as a buffer layer in between Fe3O4 nanoparticles, accommodating the strain generated during Li-insertion and the removal process. The effect was clearly observed from their significantly enhanced cycling performances (about 650 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles) and high rate capabilities (350 mA h g−1 at 5 C). Li and his co-workers fabricated a 3D nanocomposite anode electrode for LIBs, anchoring Fe3O4 nanoparticles wrapped within carbon shells onto reduced graphene sheets, and the electrode exhibited superior electrochemical properties with a specific capacity of 842.7 mA h g−1 and superior recycling stability after 100 cycles.123 Several other reports are available on Fe3O4–C nanocomposites and proved to be an outstanding anode electrode in the LIB, showing a specific capacity in the range 900–1100 mA h g−1 with good cyclability.124,125,259–261 Synthesis of carbon coated 1D-Fe3O4 nanostructures (nanorods, nanowires and microbelts) was also attempted by several researchers as a promising anode material in LIBs. They exhibited improved electrochemical properties due to their 1-D structures.262–265 Moreover, hybrid Fe3O4@SnO2 core–shell nanorod film directly grown on the current collector is found to exert considerable areal capacitance (mF cm−2 level), with long cycling stability up to 2000 cycles, and thereby acts as a supercapacitor as reported elsewhere.266
Cobalt-based oxides, CoO and Co3O4, are other suitable candidates as anodes in LIBs, since the first report by Tarascon et al.267 in 2000. Co3O4 is a mixed valence oxide with a spinel structure, containing both Co2+ as well as Co3+. It can take up 8 moles of Li per mole of Co3O4 in a reversible reaction, showing theoretical capacity 890 mA h g−1 in the voltage range 0.005–3.0 V vs. Li. Various nanodimensional forms of Co3O4 can be prepared by the co-precipitation method, hydrothermal synthesis or by using anodic alumina (AAO) as a hard template.268–270 Core–shell nanostructured Co3O4 was found to be successful in accommodating strain during the Li-insertion–removal process as expected. Son et al.271 fabricated yolk–shell Co3O4 powder with a solid core and multiple shells by the spray pyrolysis technique in different temperatures, and were found to be very stable even at a high discharge rate of 10000 mA g−1. A significant enhancement in the specific capacity value was observed for multishelled Co3O4 hollow spheres fabricated by template-assisted growth.272 The material showed an exceptionally high specific capacity above 1500 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 50 mA g−1 up to 30 cycles. Huang et al.273 synthesized Co3O4 microcubes composed of nanoparticles by a surfactant-assisted hydrothermal method from a single crystal CoCO3 microcube precursor and studied their performance as an anode material in LIBs. Such a material with high surface area exhibits high initial discharge capacities (1298 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and 1041 mA h g−1 at 1 C), with excellent capacity retention values over 90%. 1D-nanostructures of Co3O4 are also found to be very promising to attain high specific capacity in the range 700–900 mA g h−1 with good retention capability.50,274,275 Free-standing CoO nanowires on a flexible conductive substrate are found to be even more promising for LIBs, due to their robust adhesion to the current collector and thereby good mechanical stability after several cycles.50,275 Synthesis of different nanocomposites of Co3O4 with carbonaceous materials and other different metal oxides are also reported by several research groups.72,117,118,255,269,276,277 Anchoring of Co3O4 or CoO nanoparticles on graphene nanosheet layers was found to be a fruitful approach for improving the electrical conductivity of the material and accommodating strain during the intercalation–deintercalation process.117,118 While Co3O4/graphene nanocomposites with Co3O4 particle size of 10–30 nm showed a reversible capacity value of ∼1000 mA h g−1, smaller sized (∼5 nm) CoO quantum dot/graphene nanocomposites exhibited an outstanding reversible capacity value of 1600 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1, stable up to 50 cycles. Qi et al.269 fabricated Co3O4@SnO2@C core–shell nanorods via a facile hydrothermal and subsequent carbonization process. The material was found to be superior electrode due to an elegant synergistic effect of Co3O4 and SnO2,278 showing the stable reversible capacity value of ∼1000 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 200 mA g−1, stable up to 50 cycles. The synergistic effect of bi-component nanocomposites, such as CoO/CoFe2O4 and directly grown Co3O4/NiO nanorods on conductive substrate were also found to be promising as anode electrodes in LIBs.72,277
NiO, having a theoretical capacity of 718 mA h g−1, can be used as an anode electrode in LIB, as reported by Tarascon in 2000. It showed the initial reversible capacity of ∼600 mA h g−1, which slowly degraded to ∼200 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles in the voltage range 0.01–3.0 V.267 NiO, in different nanodimensional forms (nanoflakes, nanoparticles), synthesized by the hydrothermal method or by a controlled chemical synthesis process, and showed a reversible capacity of 500–600 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 50 mA g−1.279–281 Sasidharan et al.282 synthesized NiO hollow spheres of size 30 nm by a soft-template self-assembly process using poly(styrene-b-acrylic acid-b-ethylene oxide) as the template. The hollow spheres, when used as the anode, delivered a capacity of 393 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles of charge–discharge at a rate of 0.3 C and maintained their structural integrity with excellent cycling stability, even after being subjected to a high rate of 10 C. It is believed that the addition of metals with high density, such as Au, Ag and Ni, contributes to the excellent electrochemical properties, in terms of electrical conductivity and cycling stability.283–286 In addition, the formation of nanocomposites with carbon or other metal oxides is also another well-known approach in order to improve electrochemical properties.73,132,287,288 Such nanocomposites exhibited considerably high and stable specific capacities of ∼1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1.
Although ZnO nanostructures are mostly used as a hard and sacrificial template, they can also be used for anodes in LIBs as sole materials or in the form of composites with metals as well as other metal oxides.289–291 However, they have not been explored much, due to their experimentally obtained low specific capacity values and lack of cycling stability. A comparative study of cycling performance of different TMOs and their nanocomposites is represented in Table 1 and Fig. 13.
Table 1 Synthetic strategies and electrochemical properties of transition metal oxide based anode materials in lithium ion rechargeable batteries




#
Sample
Methods
Size
Sp. capacity (mA h g−1)
Current density
# Cycles
% Retention
References




1
SnO2 hollow nanostructures
Hydrothermal
100–250 nm
1140
0.2 C
40
—

227



2
SnO2 hollow nanoboxes
Template-engaged etching
200 nm–1 μm
570
0.2 C
40
—

66



3
Mesoporous SnO2 microspheres
Hydrothermal
3–15 nm
370
1 A g−1
100
—

226



4
SnO2 nanorods
Hydrothermal
Dia: 60 nm
580
0.1 C
100
—

229




L: 670 nm


5
SnO2 nanowires
Vapour–liquid–solid method
Dia: 40–50 nm
>700
782 mA g−1
50
—

48




L: 1 μm


6
SnO2@carbon hollow nanospheres
Hard template (SiO2) and hydrothermal
250 nm
>460
0.8 C (1 C = 625 mA g−1
100
—

43



7
Co metal coated SnO2 nanoparticles
Wet-chemical route
100–150 nm
810
0.1 C (1 C = 782 mA h g−1)
50
—

35



8
SnO2 nanowire covered with Sn nanoparticle
Microwave chemical vapour deposition
Dia: 30–100 nm
>800
100 mA g−1
100
99%

228




L: few μm


9
Nanosized rutile TiO2
Chemical reflux process
Dia: 10 nm
132
1 C
90
—

19




L: 30–40 nm


10
Anatase TiO2 nanosheets
Solvothermal
∼1 μm (sphere)
190
1 C
100
—

234



11
Porous TiO2/C nanocomposite shells
Sol–gel process
200–300 nm
288.2
0.1 C
300
>98%

242



12
TiO2/graphene nanocomposite
Surfactant-assisted and calcination
1–1.5 μm
230
0.1 C or 17 mA g−1
350
>98%

121



13
Anatase and rutile TiO2/graphene nanocomposite
Surfactant mediated growth
5–6 nm
Anatase: 160
1 C
100
98%

120



Rutile: 170


14
1D mesoporous TiO2Nx
Electrospinning process
Dia: 100–200 nm
185
0.1 C
40
—

237




L: few μm


15
TiO2@CNT nanocables
Hydrolysis of Ti(OBu)4
Dia: 150 nm
406
50 mA g−1
100
—

243




L: few μm


16
Graphene-supported anatase TiO2 nanosheets
Solvothermal
3–10 nm (mesopores)
161
1 C
120
90%

37



17
TiO2 nanotube @SnO2 nanoflakes
ALD and hydrothermal
Dia: ∼50 nm
580
1.6 A g−1
50
—

238




L: ∼1 μm


18
Mesoporous TiO2:RuO2 nanocomposite
Wet-chemical route
300 nm
214
C/5 (30 C = 10.08 A g−1)
20
—

36



19
NiO@TiO2 nanopowders
Flame spray pyrolysis
34 nm
∼1000
300 mA g−1
80
108%

288



20
TiO2–C/MnO2 core–double-shell nanowire arrays
Hydrothermal and layer-by-layer deposition method
Dia: 80 nm
471
0.1 C (1 C = 335 mA g−1)
100
93%

74




L: 12 μm


21
MnO nanoflakes on Ni foam
Hydrothermal
Thickness: 300 nm
700
246 mA g−1
200
—

77



22
Mn3O4 nanorods on graphene sheet
Hydrothermal
Dia: 5–30 nm
100 Fg−1
5 A g−1
10000
100%

54




L: 100–1000 nm


23
Mn3O4–graphene hybrid
Two-step solution-phase reactions
10–20 nm (Mn3O4 NP)
900
40 mA g−1
10
—

130



24
MnO2 nanoflakes@carbon nanohorns
Facile solution method
Caterpillar morphology
∼600
100 mA g−1
60
—

244



25
Graphene-wrapped MnO2–graphene nanoribbons
Hydrothermal
Dia: 200 nm
612
0.4 A g−1
250
100%

129



26
α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres
Quasiemulsion-template
1 μm
750
200 mA g−1
100
90%

70



27
α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes
Radio frequency (rf) magnetron sputtering
Thickness: 700 nm
∼700
65 mA g−1
80
>98%

247



28
Fiber like Fe2O3 macro-porous nanostructure
Cellulose as template and calcination
Dia: 7.5 μm
1200
100
20
—

253




L: several 100 μm


29
Mesoporous α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanorods
Hydrothermal
Dia: 20–80 nm
1000
0.1 C (1 C = 905 mA g−1)
50
92%

55




L: 400–700 nm


30
α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanotube arrays
ZnO nanorods as sacrificial template-accelerated hydrolysis
Dia: 200 nm
659 (C-coated), 384 (without coating)
C/5, (1 C = 671 mA g−1)
150
—

249



31
Fe3O4 nanoparticle anchored on graphene
Microwave irradiation
Dia: 20–70 nm
650
0.1 C
50
—

126



32
Fe3O4–carbon–rGO nanocomposite
Hydrothermal
Dia: 10–20 nm
843
0.2 C
100
>95%

123



33
Fe3O4–graphene nanocomposites
Ultrasonic assisted co-precipitation
Dia: 10 nm
1200
2 C
1000
96%

124



34
Fe3O4–carbon nanocomposites
Hydrothermal
Dia: 10 nm
1249
0.1 C
100
100%

259



35
Carbon-encapsulated Fe3O4 nanoparticles
Facile and scalable in situ synthesis method
Dia: 5–25 nm
858
5 C (1 C = 1 A g−1)
350
96%

260



36
Fe2O3–graphene rice-on-sheet nanocomposite
Microwave-assisted hydrothermal technique
Particle: 50–80 nm
1184
100
40
—

127



Rice: 150–200 nm


37
Reduced graphene oxide/Fe2O3 nanocomposite
Precipitation reaction and microwave irradiation
Dia: 60 nm
∼1100
100
50
—

122



38
FeOx-coated SnO2 nanoparticle
Simple solution method
10 nm
480
400 mA g−1
150
—

257



39
α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles
Hydrothermal
450 nm
419
200 mA g−1
30
—

71



40
Fe3O4@carbon nanorods
Glucose-mediated hydrothermal method
Dia: 20–50 nm
800
924
100
—

262




L: 50–200 nm


41
Carbon-decorated single-crystalline Fe3O4 nanowire
Microwave-hydrothermal approach
Dia: 20–50 nm
830
0.1 C
50
100%

263




L: several μm


42
Branched Co3O4/Fe2O3 nanowires
Hydrothermal
Dia: 70 nm (Co3O4)
1000
100
60
—

255



Dia: 40 nm (Fe2O3)


Thickness: 5 μm


43
Branched α-Fe2O3/SnO2 nano heterostructures
Vapour transport deposition and hydrothermal
Dia: 50 nm
1167
1000 mA g−1
30
50%

78




L: 500 nm


(Sub-nanorods)


44
Co3O4 yolk–shell powder
Spray pyrolysis
1 μm
750
1400
100
—

271



45
Multishelled Co3O4 hollow microspheres
Template-assisted growth
1 μm
1600
50
30
100%

272



46
Co3O4 microcubes consisting of nanoparticles
Surfactant-assisted hydrothermal
2–3 μm
1298
0.1 C
60
99.3%

273



1041
1 C
89.9%


47
Mesoporous Co3O4 nanowire arrays
Ammonia-evaporation-induced method
Dia: 500 nm
700
1 C
50
50%

50




L: 15 μm


48
CoO porous nanowire arrays
Hydrothermal and pyrolysis
Dia: 100 nm
670
1 C
20
—

275




L: 2 μm


49
Co3O4 nanotubes
Topotactic transformation
Dia: 150–400 nm
900
50
30
100%

274




L: 10 μm


50
Co3O4 nanoparticles anchored on graphene
Chemical exfoliation and calcination
10–30 nm
1000
50
30
100%

117



51
CoO quantum dot/graphene nanocomposites
Ultrasonic method
∼5 nm
1600
50
50
100%

118



52
SnO2@silica double shell hollow sphere Co3O4@SnO2@C
Thermal treatment
400 nm
800
160 mA g−1
50
—

68



53
Co3O4@SnO2@C core–shell nanorods
Hydrothermal and carbonization
Dia: 30 nm
1000
200
50
100%

269



54
NiO nanoplates
Hydrothermal
90–120 nm
500
50
20
—

279



55
NiO nanoflakes
Controlled chemical synthesis
50–100 nm
410
50
40
98%

280



56
NiO hollow spheres
Soft-template self-assembly process
Dia: 30 nm
∼400
0.3 C
50
—

282



57
3D macroporous NiO/Ni powder
Metal complex chemical route
Flakes: 1–2 μm
∼700
1 C
50
100%

281



Thickness: 10 nm


58
NiO-coated ZnO nanorod arrays
Hard template (ZnO) assisted growth
Dia: 60–120 nm
∼1100
1 C
15
97%

73



59
Co3O4/NiO and ZnO/NiO core–shell nanowire array
Hydrothermal
Dia: 70 nm
853 Fg−1
1 A g−1
6000
95%

72




L: 10 μm


60
2D mesoporous NixCo3−xO4 nanosheets
Thermal decomposition
Dia: 2 μm
1330
100 mA g−1
50
96.6%

294



Thickness: 2 nm
844
500 mA g−1
200
—


61
Hollow and porous nanostructure of ZnxCo3−xO4
Template-assisted Co-precipitation method
∼1 μm
∼1000
1 C
50
—

297



62
Hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays on carbon cloth
Solvothermal
Dia: 80–100 nm (NW)
>1200
100 mA g−1
160
99%

298




L: 5 μm (NW)


Dia: 20 μm (C fiber)


63
ZnMn2O4 nanocrystals anchored on 3D porous carbon aerogel
Solution immersion chemical route
40 nm
833
100 mA g−1
60
50.3% (>96% after 5 cycles)

296



64
CoO/CoFe2O4 nanocomposites
Calcination
100 nm
1000
100
100
98%

277





 Fig. 13  Cycling performance comparison of different nanodimensional transition metal oxides and their nanocomposites in LIBs: (b) Sn-nanocluster-covered SnO2 nanowires (SEM image in (a)), SnO2 nanowires with dispersed Sn metal, and pure SnO2 nanowires measured between 0 to 2.2 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; (c) anatase TiO2 with dominant (001) (blue) and (101) (red) facets at a current rate of 10 C (ref. 235); (e) bare TiO2 and TiO2–C, TiO2–C/MnO2 (SEM image in (d)) nanocomposites at a rate of 1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (f) carbon nanohorns (CNHs), MnO2 and MnO2/CNH electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; (g) Fe3O4 nanowires before and after carbon decoration at 0.1 C rate (inset: HRTEM image of crystalline Fe3O4 nanowires surrounded by amorphous carbon) (ref. 260); (h) Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 branched NW, Co3O4 NW, and α-Fe2O3 NW anodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (inset: TEM image of Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 branched NW). Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2013 Springer; (i) CoO quantum dot/graphene nanocomposites at a current density of 50 m g−1 (inset: SEM image of nanocomposite). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Mixed metal oxides or their hybrid materials with carbonaceous material are also considered to be effective anode materials in LIBs. CoSnO3/graphene nanohybrid materials were synthesized by a solvothermal method followed by dispersion on the graphene nanosheets reduced from GO.292 When the material was used as an anode material, it exhibited stable reversible capacity values even at a very high current density (e.g. at 3200 mA g−1 it has a charge capacity of 248 mA h g−1). Recently, much attention has also been paid to the development of spinel structured ternary metal oxides of AB2O4, where A and B are two transition metals with oxidation states +2 and +3, respectively.293–298 Such compounds are able to store the Li+ ion through a series of possible conversion reactions (17)–(19), as well as alloy formation reactions (20) and (21): AB2O4 + xLi+ + xe− → A + B + Li2O(17) A + Li2O ↔ AO + 2Li+ + 2e−(18) B + Li2O ↔ BO + 2Li+ + 2e−(19) A + Li+ + e− → LiA(20) B + Li+ + e− → LiB(21)
Spinel NiCo2O4 with different nanoarchitectures and their nanocomposites with C-based materials are extensively studied as anode electrodes in LIBs or in supercapacitors.293–295 Zheng et al.294 fabricated 2D mesoporous NixCo3−xO4 nano-sheets after the heat treatment of the Ni–Co-hydroxide precursor. The porous and 2D textural structure provide a huge surface area, enhancing the electrolyte contact area, which is responsible for exhibiting outstanding performance as the anode electrode in LIBs. A reversible capacity of 1330 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles was obtained with 96.6% capacity retention, which further reached a stable reversible capacity of 844 mA h g−1 at a relatively high current density of 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles. Shakir et al.293 fabricated NiCo2O4 anchored on the MWCNT and used them as an electrode in the energy storage device. The composite electrode showed excellent performance with high specific capacitance of 2032 Fg−1 as compared to 1235 Fg−1 for pristine NiCo2O4 nanoflakes, both at a high current density of 1 A g−1 up to 5000 cycles. Very recently, Huang et al.299 developed NiFe2O4/Fe2O3 nanotubes from metal organic frameworks under solvothermal treatment followed by annealing. The material showed considerably high specific capacity of 936.9 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 up to 100 cycles. Spinel ZnMn2O4 nanocrystals anchored onto a three dimensional (3D) porous carbon aerogel were prepared through a facile solution immersion chemical route.296 This kind of interconnected porous C-matrix provides abundant porosity and high electron transport properties, which is reflected in the high reversible capacity of 833 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, even higher than the theoretical capacity of 784 mA h g−1 for pure spinel ZnMn2O4 materials, with a Coulombic efficiency of 99.9%. The anisotropic, hollow and porous nanostructure of ZnxCo3−xO4 is also found to give an effective anode material in LIBs, with a reversible capacity value in the range of ∼1000 mA h g−1 (rate of 1 C) up to 50 cycles, as reported by Ajayan and co-workers.297 Liu et al.298 designed a flexible anode electrode for LIBs composed of hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays on carbon cloth. The electrode exhibited outstanding performances in terms of capacity, rate capability, and cycle life. The full battery set up composed of this 3D hybrid anode and LiCoO2 cathode showed a reversible capacity of >1200 mA h g−1 at a current density 200 mA g−1, stable up to 160 cycles, with great capacity retention.
4.6 Layered metal dichalcogenides and their composites
Layered metal dichalcogenides (MX2) exhibit excellent lithium ion storage capacity due to their special layered arrangement in crystal structures. In MX2, the metal atoms are sandwiched in between two hexagonally arranged chalcogenide layers in the form of X–M–X, which are attached with another unit through weak van der Waal's forces. Such a layered stacking arrangement provides enough space for lithium intercalation in the tetrahedral or octahedral interstitial sites, where the latter is more energetically favoured.82,300 Moreover, the lithium intercalation in MX2 involves a complete charge transfer, reducing M4+ to M3+, along with Li+ ion diffusion in the van der Waal's gap, resulting in volume expansion.82 Depending upon the lithiation potential values, metal sulfides MS2 of M = Fe, Ti, Co, Ni, and Cu are considered as cathode material, whereas M = Mo, W, Ga, Nb, and Ta are known to be used as anode materials in LIBs (Table 2 and Fig. 14).92
Table 2 Synthetic strategies and electrochemical properties of transition metal dichalcogenide based anode materials in lithium ion rechargeable batteries




#
Sample
Methods
Size
Sp. capacity (mA h g−1)
Current density
# Cycles
% Retention
References




1
Hierarchical hollow MoS2 nanoparticles
Solvothermal
300–800 nm
902
100 mA g−1
80
—

305



2
Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet-graphene nanocomposites
Hydrothermal
Interlayer spacing 0.62 nm
∼900
0.2 C (1 C = 832 mA g−1)
50
—

303



3
2D MoS2 nanowall and cellulose binder
Two-step chemical synthesis
Wall thickness: 22 nm
880
100 mA g−1
50
84%

302



4
MoS2–MWCNT hybrid materials
Grinding technique
—
>1100
100 mA g−1
30
85%

97



5
WS2 nanotubes
Sintering method
Inner hollow core: 4.6 nm
600


20
—

307



6
Ordered mesoporous WS2
Vacuum assisted impregnation
Pore size: 3–4 nm
805
0.1 A g−1
100
98%

308



7
Graphene-like WS2
Solid-state reaction
Thickness: 5.43 nm
600
0.05 C (1 C = 432 mA g−1)
100
—

309



8
WS2–SWCNT lamellar porous nanocomposite
Vacuum filtration
—
821
100 mA g−1
50
—

310



9
WS2 supported on reduced graphene oxide
Hydrothermal
—
400–450
100 mA g−1
50
—

311



10
WS2–MWCNT hybrid material
Grinding method
—
∼400
100 mA g−1
20
80%

312



11
Ultrathin ZrS2 nanodiscs
Surfactant-assisted chemical synthesis
Dia: 20, 35, 60 nm
600
69 mA g−1
50
86%

314



Thickness: 1.6 nm


12
TiS2–MWCNT hybrid materials
Grinding method
—
340
100 mA g−1
20
80%

315





 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of 2D MoS2 nanowall and (b) their cyclic performance in the presence of cellulose as a binder at different current rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Cyclic performance of MoS2–MWCNT hybrid materials in different ratios (ref. 96). (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of WS2–SWCNT (3:2) hybrid film and (e) Cycling performance of WS2–SWCNT hybrid films in different ratios at current rate of 0.1 A g−1 (ref. 302). (f) Nanosize effect of ultrathin ZrS2 on the discharge capacity as compared to bulk ZrS2 at a current rate of 69 mA g−1 (inset: TEM images of ultrathin-ZrS2 nanodiscs with different lateral sizes). Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Molybdenum disulfides undergo lithiation at a relatively high potential value of ∼2 V and were used as the anode, paired with a high voltage lithiated cathode (say ∼4 V). The theoretical capacity value for MoS2 is >670 mA h g−1, accommodating 4 mole of Li+ ions per unit, according to the following electrochemical reaction:305 MoS2 + 4Li+ + 4e− ↔ Mo + 2Li2S(22)
However, Li2S, formed during the reaction, is very reactive with electrolyte forming the SEI on the surface of the electrode material affecting the cyclic stability and rate capability. Recent studies show that nanocomposites of MoS2 with carbonaceous material are considered to be another promising material with reversible capacity values in the range of 900–1000 mA h g−1 and good cycling stability.97,301–304 Yang et al.305 reported a stable reversible capacity of 902 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 up to 80 cycles, fabricating hierarchical hollow nanoparticles of MoS2 nanosheets with an increased interlayer distance by a simple solvothermal method. Archer and his group prepared a composite material of MoS2 with amorphous carbon via a hydrothermal method.301 This MoS2–C nanocomposite electrode with 22% carbon content showed the best performance, with a stable reversible capacity value of ∼900 mA h g−1, as the thick carbon coating onto MoS2 inhibited direct contact of Li2S with the electrolyte, increasing the electrode stability. An excellent stability in discharge capacity can be attained by making a composite of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets with graphene as reported by Zhang et al.303 MoS2 with 2D nanowall also provides a better electrochemical performance and stability when combined with a cellulose binder.302 Sen and Mitra synthesized such an electrode material by a two-step chemical synthesis method and it showed a stable capacity of 880 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 100 mA g−1. Srivastava and co-workers prepared the MoS2–MWCNT hybrid materials by a simple grinding technique.97 The electrochemical performance of this electrode showed an exceptionally high and stable capacity value in the range 1100–1200 mA h g−1 up to 30 cycles. Such electrochemical behavior is attributed to the synergistic effect of MWCNT and MoS2, as well as surface defects generated during the grinding process, enhancing the lithium intercalation capacity (Table 2).
Tungsten disulfide (WS2) is another interesting layered type material from the transition meta dichalcogenide family. When used as an anode material, it shows a theoretical capacity value of 433 mA h g−1 allowing 4 mole of Li+ ions per mole of WS2 forming a LixWS2 intercalated compound.92,306 Moreover, the morphology of the material also plays a very important role in deciding the Li+ ion insertion capacity, based on the available sites for intercalation, showing higher reversible capacity values. Wang et al.307 synthesized WS2 nanotubes by sintering amorphous WS3 at high temperature under flowing hydrogen and the nanotubular structure showed excellent electrochemical properties, allowing easy Li+ ion intercalation through the open ends into the 4.6 nm diameter inner core as well as into intertubular sites. The WS2 nanotube layers exhibited an initial high capacity value of ∼900 mA h g−1, which decreased to a static value of 600 mA h g−1 after the 1st cycle. Such electrochemical behavior is attributed to the trapping of a fraction of the Li+ ions inside the intertubular sites or caused by the decomposition of electrolytes on the WS2 surface. Liu et al.308 fabricated ordered mesoporous WS2 with a very high surface area and narrow pore size distribution by a vacuum assisted impregnation route. They noted that the material showed a high lithium storage capacity of 805 mA h g−1 at a current of 0.1 A g−1, with high rate capability in compared to its bulk. Fang et al.309 reported graphene-like WS2 prepared by the solid-state reaction of tungsten and sulfur powder and exhibited a reversible capacity value of 600 mA h g−1 up to 100 cycles. Like MoS2, composites of WS2 with carbonaceous materials are revealed to be a promising material, achieving high as well as stable capacity values due to the synergistic effect of WS2 and C.310–312 Rao and his co-workers synthesized a WS2 nanosheet supported on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) through a hydrothermal synthesis route.311 The WS2–RGO composite system delivered a reversible capacity value in the range 400–450 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles with good cyclability. Very recently, WS2–SWCNT lamellar porous hybrid electrodes were fabricated by vacuum filtration, as reported by Liu et al.308 A very high capacity value of 1337.7 mA h g−1 was observed, which decreased to 821.5 mA h g−1 after the 1st cycle due to SEI layer formation at the interface.
Among other transition metal chalcogenides, SnSe2, ZrS2, TiS2 and their hybrid materials with carbonaceous materials are also found to be very promising in the field of anode materials used in LIBs.313–315 Ultrathin ZrS2 nanodiscs were prepared by surfactant-assisted chemical synthesis and proved to be a highly functional host material for the lithium intercalation process, as reported by Jang et al.314 Different sized ZrS2 nanodiscs of diameter 20, 35 and 60 nm with thickness of 1.6 nm acquire a very high surface area and showed excellent nanoscale size effects, enhancing the discharge capacity by 230% and stability for 20 nm nanodiscs in comparison with bulk ZrS2. TiS2, having a layered structure like MoS2, can also serve as a good host material for lithium intercalation forming LixTiS2 (x = 0.12, 0.52, and 1.0) as intercalated compound.316–318 Due to its relatively high discharge capacity value of 2.1 V, TiS2 is used mostly as a cathode material rather than an anode material in LIBs. However, few reports are available where it is used as effective anode material in the form of a hybrid material with carbonaceous material.315
5. Summary and future perspective
Lithium ion batteries with high energy and power density have become important for consumer electronic devices, portable power tools, and vehicle electrification. Miniaturization of electrodes in LIBs is the smart approach to store as much energy as possible in a small volume to address this huge energy demand. To date, an enormous amount of research studies have been reported toward achieving high performance LIBs involving several approaches. Nanostructured anode materials are more effective for fast Li intercalation–de-intercalation reactions, short Li+ diffusion path length and fast electron transportation to the current collector. Therefore, the present article aims to provide an extended review on recent developments in LIBs based on 0D, 1D and 2D nanostructured anode materials. Although earlier investigations were mostly focused on using single materials, nowadays combinations of two or three materials as hybrids are investigated to address issues such as specific capacity values, volume contraction or mechanical stability and capacity fading over cycles etc. In this regard, not only the choice of materials, but proper design of nanostructured hybrid materials is also very important to achieve the desired properties of materials. The shape of the nanostructure plays a very important role in the charge transportation kinetics affecting LIB performances. It is noted that 1D nanostructures are invariably superior to the 0D nanostructures, allowing the directional electron transportation through the nanostructure to the current collector. Moreover, it is believed that the 1D nanostructures are able to accommodate the strain generated during the repeated Li+ intercalation–de-intercalation process. The issues, such volume expansion and structural dis-integrity during the cycles can also be managed by a core–shell or hollow nanostructured anode, providing enough space for expansion–contraction during the lithiation–delithiation process. Another advanced approach is the fabrication of 3D branched heteronanostructures composed of more than one component. However, the complexity in designing such nanoarchitectures, composition uniformity, presence of defects and electronic transportation mechanism, means that we are still far from a desirable strategy.
Until now, a number of materials have been attempted as promising anode materials in LIBs. Carbon-based materials, with their versatility of structure, surface area and electrical conductivity, were the primary choice as anodes in LIBs. However, significant capacity fading with cycles due to rigorous chemical reactions with electrolytes and SEI formation limits their use. Moderate results were obtained using spinel structured Li4Ti5O12 in different forms of nanostructures. Further improvement in their capacity retention values was achieved by effective carbon coating on the Li4Ti5O12 nanostructures. The concept of binary metal alloys turned out to be another interesting approach in designing anodes for LIBs. The combination of metals in such binary alloys could be electrochemically either active–active or active–inactive in nature. While the first case involves the formation of various intermetallic or ternary alloy phases, the electrochemically inactive material in the second case acts like a buffer against volume expansion during the lithiation process. Though reasonable results were attained by this approach, the complicated Li+ intercalation–de-intercalation mechanism and irreversible nature of the reaction steps during the cycles discourages their further use. Silicon, as an electrochemically active material, is the latest material of interest for the anode, having a reasonably high theoretical capacity value. However, large volume changes during the lithiation–delithiation process, resulting in capacity fading, are found to be big challenge for researchers. Recently, the concept of conductive polymer coating onto nanostructured Si has been proposed, and is likely to be a good method to resist large volume change and structure damage during the lithiation process.319–321 A considerable amount of research was also focused on the transition metal oxides involving thermodynamically favourable reversible reaction with Li+ ion, leading to good cyclability. However, poor electrical conductivity and low diffusion coefficient still exist as limiting factors. Some excellent results were also obtained with transition metal dichalcogenides as the anode, with their special layered-type of structures facilitating the intercalation–deintercalation process. Addition of carbon nanotubes and graphene into layered transitional metal dichalcogenides or metal oxides enhances the lithium uptake capacity further, as revealed by the superior specific capacity of the hybrids compared to their individual components. This approach not only provide the much needed mechanical stability, but also improves the electrical conductivity of the system.
Overall, it can be concluded that although significant progress has been made up to now using different types of materials as the anode in LIBs, performance-wise they are still far from the requirement. In order to overcome the limitations, such as low specific capacity (experimental) as compared to theoretical values, unusual volume expansion, irreversible reaction of the Li+ insertion–removal process, SEI layer formation, poor electrical conductivity etc., proper designing of nanostructures as well as the combination of suitable materials are a great challenge nowadays. While the size, shape and design of novel nanoarchitectures are important, rigorous side reactions due to very large surface area need to be avoided. Consequently, the electrode–electrolyte interface reaction mechanism should be properly examined. Furthermore, safety issues, and non-toxic and low-cost materials should also be considered for commercial applications. In order to address this, electrodes composed of eco-friendly organic compounds or organic/inorganic hybrid materials are believed to be promising.322,323 Another interesting approach to fabricate thin, flexible, bendable and stretchable energy storage devices based on textiles, plastics or papers loaded with CNTs or different metal oxides by the ‘dipping and drying’ process or by printing have also been proposed.324–329 Such simple and cheap devices are assumed to be useful to meet the high energy demand in our modern society. However, all these techniques are now under development and further studies are required to understand the mechanism; accordingly modifications need to be planned to improve their performance.
It is anticipated that the present review paper delivers an overview of recent scientific research and developments on nanostructured anode materials and could provide insight into the future development of high-performing anode materials in LIBs.
Notes and references
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, in Progress in Batteries and Solar Cells, JEC Press Inc., Brunswick, OH,  1990, vol. 9, 209 Search PubMed .
B. Scrosati, Nature, 1995, 373, 557 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Nelson, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 2 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nano Today, 2006, 1, 28 CrossRef .
J. Tellefson, Nature, 2008, 456, 436 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. A. Huggins, Advanced Batteries, Springer Science & Business Media, New York, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1053–1061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and G. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1218–1237 CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marcicki, A. T. Conlisk and G. Rizzoni, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 157–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. B. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Purushothaman and U. Landau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A533–A542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, H. Q. Li, P. He, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1294–1305 RSC .
Y. S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y. G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Armstrong, C. O'Dwyer, W. J. Macklin and J. D. Holmes, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. P. Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Cheng, Y.-S. Ye, T.-M. Chiu, C.-J. Pan and B.-J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 253, 27–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. Li, F. Wang, G. Xia, R. Liu, D. Li, N. Li, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1243 CAS .
H. Q. Li and H. S. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1201–1217 RSC .
L. J. Fu, H. Liu, C. Li, Y. P. Wu, E. Rahm, R. Holze and H. Q. Wu, Solid State Sci., 2006, 8, 113–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, J. A. Ritter, R. E. White and B. N. Popov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, J. A. Ritter, R. E. White and B. N. Popov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Q. Wang, H. Li, Z. Wang, X. Huang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 60 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, M. Mancini and R. Marassi, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 264–268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Momose, H. Honbo, S. Takeuchi, K. Nishimura, T. Horiba, Y. Muranaka and Y. Kozono, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 208 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nishimura, H. Honbo, S. Takeuchi, T. Horiba, M. Oda, M. Koseki, Y. Muranaka, Y. Kozono and H. Miyadaera, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 436 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim, Y. Kadoma, H. Ikuta, Y. Uchimoto and M. Wakihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A109–A112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mei, C. C. Li, B. H. Qu, M. Zhang, C. Xu, D. N. Lei, Y. J. Chen, Z. Xu, L. B. Chen, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5731–5737 RSC .
Y. G. Guo, Y. S. Hu, W. Sigle and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2087–2091 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Y. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780–5782 RSC .
N. Zhu, W. Liu, M. Q. Xue, Z. A. Xie, D. Zhao, M. N. Zhang, J. T. Chen and T. B. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5813–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, Z. X. Wang and L. Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1385–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Jung, J. Kim, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7763–7766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Jung, S. T. Myung, C. S. Yoon, S. B. Son, K. H. Oh, K. Amine, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1345–1351 CAS .
K. T. Lee, Y. S. Jung and S. M. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5652–5653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, C. M. Li and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2536–2539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuwabata, N. Tsumura, S. Goda, C. R. Martin and H. Yoneyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Veeraraghavan, J. Paul, B. Haran and B. Popov, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaberscek, M. Bele, J. Drofenik, R. Dominko and S. Pejovnik, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97/98, 67 CrossRef .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Ko, J. G. Kang, J. G. Park, S. Lee and D. W. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455701 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Tan and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Tan and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2597 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Z. Zhao, W. Song, C. S. Li, H. Ma, J. Chen and P. Shen, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. T. Sayle, R. R. Maphanga, P. E. Ngoepe and D. C. Sayle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, A. S. Hall, J.-D. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1158–1164 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Xia, Z. Ren, Z. Liu, G. Xu, C. Chao, X. Li, G. Shena and G. Han, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20566 RSC .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, C. M. Li and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8061–8063 RSC .
C. J. Patrissi and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3176–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takahashi, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Takahashi, H. M. Shang, K. H. Lee and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Takahashi, K. Lee and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053102 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Takahashi, S. J. Limmer, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 662 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526 RSC .
J. Liu and D. Xue, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1525–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3967 RSC .
Z. Wang, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. D. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, G. Qi, X. Duan, Z. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 21–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Small, 2007, 3, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. S. Chen, H. B. Wu, Z. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17146–17148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, W. W. Zhou, Q. Y. Yan, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 280–285 RSC .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X.-b. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Wu and H.-W. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2590–2599 CAS .
J.-Y. Liao, D. Higgins, G. Lui, V. Chabot, X. Xiao and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5467–5473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chenga and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 327–343 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu, X. T. Huang, C. Z. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Li, D. Li, L. Qiao, X. H. Wang, X. L. Sun, P. Wang and D. Y. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9189–9194 RSC .
W. Zhou, C. Cheng, J. Liu, Y. Y. Tay, J. Jiang, X. Jia, J. Zhang, H. Gong, H. H. Hng, T. Yu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2439–2445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, X. Liu and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 860–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, X. H. Liu, Y. J. Lin and D. W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7681–7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Lin and D. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1023–1027 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Su, J. H. Zeng, X. Y. Bao, Y. S. Yu, J. Y. Lee and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3960–3967 CrossRef CAS .
K. Persson, V. A. Sethuraman, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Hinuma, Y. S. Meng, A. van der Ven, V. Srinivasan, R. Kostecki and G. Ceder, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1176–1180 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Q. Wu and B. Simard, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Eom, H. S. Kwon, J. Liu and O. Zhou, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Eom, D. Y. Kim and H. S. Kwon, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, C. Bower, J. D. Lorentzen, L. Fleming, A. Kleinhammes, X. P. Tang, L. E. McNeil, Y. Wu and O. Zhou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
K. Evanoff, J. Khan, A. A. Balandin, A. Magasinski, W. J. Ready, T. F. Fuller and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Wang, J. N. Wang, H. Chang and Y. F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3613–3618 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi and X. W. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2682–2699 CAS .
E. Frackowiak, S. Gautier, H. Gaucher, S. Bonnamy and F. Beguin, Carbon, 1999, 37, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, M. O. Lai and L. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6896–6902 RSC .
Z. H. Wen, S. Q. Ci, S. Mao, S. M. Cui, Z. He and J. H. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 499 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Shi, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, A. Y. S. Tan, C. L. Hsu, L. J. Li, Y. C. Lu and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2169 Search PubMed .
K. Bindumadhavan, S. K. Srivastava and S. Mahanty, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1823–1825 RSC .
Y. Nomura, I. V. Anoshkin, C. Okuda, M. Iijima, Y. Ukyo, H. Kamiya, A. G. Nasibulin and E. I. Kauppinen, J. Nanopart., 2014, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Wu, M. V. Reddy, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12175–12184 CAS .
L. W. Ji and X. W. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 155705 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luo, J. Schardt, C. Bommier, B. Wang, J. Razink, J. Simonsen and X. L. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10662–10666 CAS .
V. Subramanian, H. W. Zhu and B. Q. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7178–7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4198–4204 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wu, X. P. Li, W. S. Li, B. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. T. Wang, M. Q. Xu and L. D. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 85–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. L. Wang, A. Dhanabalan, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6485–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Lu, C. H. Luo, Y. Li, Y. Y. Feng, W. Feng, Y. H. Zhao and X. Y. Yuan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1736 CrossRef .
Z. X. Yang, G. D. Du, Q. Meng, Z. P. Guo, X. B. Yu, Z. X. Chen, T. L. Guo and R. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5848–5854 RSC .
L. Ji, O. Toprakci, M. Alcoutlabi, Y. Yao, Y. Li, S. Zhang, B. Guo, Z. Lin and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2672–2679 CAS .
P. Guo, H. H. Song and X. H. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3136–3142 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H. K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Wang, B. Wang, X. L. Wang, J. Park, S. X. Dou, H. Ahn and K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8378–8384 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, W. C. Ren, L. Wen, L. B. Gao, J. P. Zhao, Z. P. Chen, G. M. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Peng, B. D. Chen, Y. Qin, S. H. Yang, C. Z. Li, Y. H. Zuo, S. Y. Liu and J. H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1074–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Yue, Z. Z. Lin, S. H. Jiang and X. J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16318–16323 RSC .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xin, X. F. Zhou, J. H. Wu, X. Y. Yao and Z. P. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stollers and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10374–10376 RSC .
S. K. Behera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10371–10373 RSC .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, H. Xiang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, D. N. Lei, X. M. Yin, L. B. Chen, Q. H. Li, Y. G. Wang and T. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5538–5543 RSC .
Y. Q. Zou, J. Kan and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20747–20753 CAS .
L. Chen, Z. Y. Wang, C. N. He, N. Q. Zhao, C. S. Shi, E. Z. Liu and J. J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9537–9545 CAS .
L. Li, A.-R. O. Raji and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6298–6302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. A. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. L. Wu, C. Y. Shu, Y. G. Guo and C. R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10661–10664 RSC .
G. M. Zhou, D. W. Wang, L. C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214–3223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Zhang, L. Y. Jiang, H. J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W. G. Song, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462–5467 RSC .
F. Cheng, Z. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 667–681 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Zhou, S. M. Zhu, M. Hibino, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2107–2111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, X. Y. Liu, D. Y. Zhao and Z. Y. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 389, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Meyers, S. D. Shah, S. C. Patel, R. M. Sneeringer, C. A. Bessel, N. R. Dollahon, R. A. Leising and E. S. Takeuchi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2143–2152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Oakes, A. P. Cohn, R. Carter, S. Chatterjee, A. S. Westover, K. Share and C. L. Pint, Nanoscale, 2014, 4669–4675 Search PubMed .
E. Ferg, R. J. Gummow, A. Dekock and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yin, L. Song, X. Y. Wang, M. F. Zhang, K. L. Zhang and Y. X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Peramunage and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, Y. R. Wang, E. J. Hosono, K. X. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, H. M. Liu, K. X. Wang, H. Eiji, Y. R. Wang and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6789 RSC .
W. J. H. Borghols, M. Wagemaker, U. Lafont, E. M. Kelder and F. M. Mulder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Allen, T. R. Jow and J. Wolfenstine, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaiswal, C. R. Horne, O. Chang, W. Zhang, W. Kong, E. Wang, T. Cherm and M. M. Doeff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, L. Yang, S. Fang and Z. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6244–6249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim and J. P. Cho, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Park, A. Benayad, D.-J. Kang and S.-G. Doo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14930–14931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Shen, J. Wang, B. Ding, P. Nie, G. Xu, X. Wang and X. Zhang, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 90, 281 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Huggins and B. A. Boukamp, US Patent 4,436,796,  1984 .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1497–1514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pharr, K. J. Zhao, X. W. Wang, Z. G. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5039–5047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, M. T. McDowell, J. W. Choi and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3034–3039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, J. W. Wang, S. Huang, F. F. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Liu, S. Krylyuk, J. Yoo, S. A. Dayeh, A. V. Davydov, S. X. Mao, S. T. Picraux, S. L. Zhang, J. Li, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 749–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, I. Ryu, S. W. Lee, C. M. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6034–6041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Xu, C. Kim, A. K. Shukla, A. G. Dong, T. M. Mattox, D. J. Milliron and J. Cabana, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1800–1805 CAS .
B. Wang, B. Luo, X. L. Li and L. J. Zhi, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 544–552 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wen, B. A. Boukamp, R. A. Huggins and W. Weppner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. S. Hudak, D. L. Huber, S. J. Limmer, J. P. Sullivan and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4188–4194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Benson, S. Boukhalfa, A. Magasinski, A. Kvit and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 118–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Saint, M. Morcrette, D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A42–A45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Baggetto and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A169–A175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Martos, J. Morales and L. Sanchez, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 615–621 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dailly, J. Ghanbaja, P. Willmann and D. Billaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 977 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, I. D. Raistrick and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 37, 271 CrossRef CAS .
P. Limthongkul, Y.-I. Jang, N. J. Dudney and Y.-M. Chiang, Acta Mater., 1103, 51 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, M. Gu, Y. Zhou, X. Zu, J. G. Connell, J. Xiao, D. Perea, L. J. Lauhon, J. Bang, S. Zhang, C. Wang and F. Gao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Song, J. L. Xia, J. H. Lee, D. H. Lee, M. S. Kwon, J. M. Choi, J. Wu, S. K. Doo, H. Chang, W. Il Park, D. S. Zang, H. Kim, Y. G. Huang, K. C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and U. Paik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1710–1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nitta and G. Yushin, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 31, 317–336 CrossRef .
A. N. Dey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Fuller and J. C. Severiens, Phys. Rev., 1954, 96, 21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Choi, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Hwang, H.-Y. Lee, S.-W. Jang, S.-M. Lee, S.-J. Lee, H.-K. Baik and J.-Y. Lee, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kasavajjula, C. S. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Fleischauer, J. M. Topple and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Kim, H.-Y. Lee, S.-W. Jang, S.-H. Lim, S.-J. Lee, H.-K. Baik, Y.-S. Yoon and S.-M. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2593 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Kim, H.-Y. Lee, K.-S. Lee, S.-H. Lim and S.-M. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 544 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Park, J. S. Kim, K. S. Kim, K. Zhang, J. Park, J. H. Park, J. K. Lee and P. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1702–1708 CAS .
X.-L. Wang, W.-Q. Han, J. Chen and J. Graetz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1548–1551 CAS .
H. C. Shin and M. L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 582–586 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alcantara, U. Nwokeke, I. Rodriguez and J. L. Tirado, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A209–A213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, P. Simon, P. L. Taberna and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1632–1635 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Zhang, J. P. Tu, X. H. Huang, Y. F. Yuan, S. F. Wang and F. Mao, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 457, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Beaulieu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3237–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Xue and Z. W. Fu, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1501–1507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. D. Ehinon, S. Naille, R. Dedryvere, P. E. Lippens, J. C. Jumas and D. Gonbeau, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5388–5398 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. H. Shi, W. Lu, X. J. Huang and L. Q. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A915–A922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7039–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-U. Seo and C.-M. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15316 CAS .
X. Y. Wang, Z. Y. Wen, B. Lin, J. Lin, X. W. Wu and X. G. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 508–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher, A. S. Prakash, J. Saint, M. Morcrette and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5502–5511 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Mosby and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10656–10661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Zhu, T. Sun, J. S. Chen, W. H. Shi, X. J. Zhang, X. W. Lou, S. Mhaisalkar, H. H. Hng, F. Boey, J. Ma and Q. Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5333–5339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saadat, Y. Y. Tay, J. X. Zhu, P. F. Teh, S. Maleksaeedi, M. M. Shahjamali, M. Shakerzadeh, M. Srinivasan, B. Y. Tay, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and Q. Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1032–1038 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2638–2641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kwon and J. Cho, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1109–1111 RSC .
O. Mao, R. L. Turner, I. A. Courtney, B. D. Fredericksen, M. I. Buckett, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 3–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jung, M. Park, Y.-G. Yoon, G.-B. Kim and S.-K. Joo, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 346–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard, J. Yang and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 87 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Szczech and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 56 CAS .
H. Kim, E.-J. Lee and Y.-K. Sun, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 285–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 Search PubMed .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, Z. Wu and Y. Liang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 547–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mazouzi, B. Lestriez, L. Roue and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A215–A218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, M. Seo, M.-H. Park and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Terranova, S. Orlanducci, E. Tamburri, V. Guglielmotti and M. Rossi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 167–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shao, D. Tang, Y. Mai and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15068 CAS .
P. P. Prosini, C. Cento, F. Alessandrini, P. Gislon, A. Mancini, A. Rufoloni, F. Rondino and A. Santoni, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 260, 49–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Cui, R. Ruffo, C. K. Chan, H. Peng and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Koski and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3739–3743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-F. Cao, J.-W. Deng, S. Xin, H.-X. Ji, O. G. Schmidt, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou and D. W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7014–7020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, H. Zhang, N. Du, P. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Li and D. Yang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5343–5347 RSC .
P. R. Abel, A. M. Chockla, Y.-M. Lin, V. C. Holmberg, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2249–2257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Jiang, Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu and X. T. Huang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 45–58 RSC .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Small, 2013, 9, 1877–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher, S. Beattie, M. Morcrette, K. Edstrom, J.-C. Jumas and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3759 RSC .
R. Demir-Cakan, Y. S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M. M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227–1229 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
P. Meduri, C. Pendyala, V. Kumar, G. U. Sumanasekera and M. K. Sunkara, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 612–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Li, X. T. Huang, R. M. Ding, Y. Y. Hu, J. Jiang and L. Liao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1859–1864 RSC .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, D. Kim, K. Lee, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 45–59 RSC .
P. Roy, C. Das, K. Lee, R. Hahn, T. Ruff, M. Moll and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5629–5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Yang, D. Choi, S. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, D. H. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Graff and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Sun, X. H. Yang, J. S. Chen, Z. Li, X. W. Lou, C. Li, S. C. Smith, G. Q. M. Luc and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6129–6131 RSC .
J.-G. Kim, D. Shi, K.-J. Kong, Y.-U. Heo, J. H. Kim, M. R. Jo, Y. C. Lee, Y.-M. Kang and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 691–696 CAS .
C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, D. Chao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 105–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Jeun, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Kim, W.-S. Kim, H.-C. Kim, B.-S. Lee, H. Kim, W.-R. Yu, K. Kang and S.-H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8480 RSC .
G. Ji, B. Ding, Y. Ma and J. Y. Lee, Environ. Technol., 2013, 1, 567 CAS .
X. Wu, S. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Du, H. Fang, Y. Ling and Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11151 RSC .
W. Wang, Q. Sa, J. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Jung and Y. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6478 CAS .
F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, R. R. Bi, L. J. Wan and J. Maier, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1908–1914 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lai, J. Li, Z. Chen and Z. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2325 CAS .
D. Larcher, C. Masquelier, D. Bonnin, Y. Chabre, V. Masson, J.-B. Leriche and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A133–A139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher, D. Bonnin, R. Cortes, I. Rivals, L. Personnaz and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1643–A1650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, T. Yu, C.-H. Sow, Z. X. Shen, C. T. Lim, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2792–2799 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Song, S. S. Qin, Y. W. Zhang, W. Q. Gao and J. P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21158–21164 CAS .
J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Li, H. J. Fan, Z. H. Zhu, J. Jiang, R. M. Ding, Y. Y. Hu and X. T. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Xu, W. Li and X. Gou, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 582 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, X. H. Yang, H. G. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13162–13164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Koo, H. Xiong, M. D. Slater, V. B. Prakapenka, M. Balasubramanian, P. Podsiadlo, C. S. Johnson, T. Rajh and E. V. Shevchenko, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2429–2435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Xiang, J. Sun and J. Guan, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3623–3628 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Zhou, Y. Y. Tay, X. T. Jia, D. Y. Y. Wai, J. Jiang, H. H. Hng and T. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4459–4463 RSC .
H. Wu, M. Xu, Y. C. Wang and G. F. Zheng, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 167–173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Morales, L. Sánchez, F. Martín, F. Berry and X. Ren, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. El-Shinawi, A. S. Schulze, M. Neumeier, T. Leichtweiß and J. r. Janek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8818–8823 CAS .
L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 567 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shen, H. Song, H. Cui, X. Wen, X. Wei and C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9849–9854 RSC .
C. He, S. Wu, N. Zhao, C. Shi, E. Liu and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4459–4469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Zeng, H. L. Zhao, J. Wang, P. P. Lv, T. H. Zhang and Q. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 15–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, J. S. Chen and X. W. D. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9814–9820 CAS .
T. Muraliganth, A. V. Murugan and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7360 RSC .
L. M. Lang and Z. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1698–1703 CAS .
J. Wang, L. Li, C. L. Wong, L. Sun, Z. Shen and S. Madhavi, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15316 RSC .
R. Li, X. Ren, F. Zhang, C. Du and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5010–5012 RSC .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Binotto, D. Larcher, A. S. Prakash, R. H. Urbina, M. S. Hegde and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3032–3040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, H. Zhang, N. Du, C. X. Zhai and D. R. Yang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9511–9516 RSC .
W. Y. Li, L. N. Xu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 851–857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Son, Y. J. Hong and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5678–5680 RSC .
J. Wang, N. Yang, H. Tang, Z. Dong, Q. Jin, M. Yang, D. Kisailus, H. Zhao, Z. Tang and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6417–6420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, S. Xu, S. Lu, L. Li and H. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7236 CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee, J. Feng and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, J. P. Liu, R. M. Ding, X. X. Ji, Y. Y. Hu, X. Li, A. Z. Hu, F. Wu, Z. H. Zhu and X. T. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 929–932 CAS .
M. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. Hu, Q. Zhang, T. Wang, G. Cao and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12342–12349 RSC .
M. X. Li, Y. X. Yin, C. J. Li, F. Z. Zhang, L. J. Wan, S. L. Xu and D. G. Evans, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 410–412 RSC .
L. L. Xing, Y. Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y. X. Nie, P. Deng, Q. Wang and X. Y. Xue, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 586, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ma, J. Q. Yang, L. F. Jiao, Y. H. Mao, T. H. Wang, X. C. Duan, J. B. Lian and W. J. Zheng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 453–459 RSC .
S. Ci, J. Zou, G. Zeng, Q. Peng, S. Luo and Z. Wen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5185–5192 RSC .
C. M. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Zeng, X. H. Rui, J. X. Zhu, W. Y. Zhang, C. Xu, T. M. Lim, H. H. Hng and Q. Y. Yan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3718–3724 RSC .
M. Sasidharan, N. Gunawardhana, C. Senthil and M. Yoshio, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7337 CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Zhu, S. Tsukimoto, P. A. v. Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wen, J. M. Wu and M. H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3881–3885 CAS .
B. Varghese, M. V. Reddy, Z. Yanwu, C. S. Lit, T. C. Hoong, G. V. S. Rao, B. V. R. Chowdari, A. T. S. Wee, C. T. Lim and C. H. Sow, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3360–3367 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, I. Honma and H. S. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 284–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Liu, L.-B. Kong, C. Lu, X.-M. Li, Y.-C. Luo and L. Kang, ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4631–4636 CAS .
S. H. Choi, J. H. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12645–12650 RSC .
J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Li, R. M. Ding, J. Jiang, Y. Y. Hu, X. X. Ji, Q. B. Chi, Z. H. Zhu and X. T. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5336–5339 CAS .
Y. J. Feng, R. Q. Zou, D. G. Xia, L. L. Liu and X. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9654–9658 CAS .
M. Ahmad, Y. Y. Shi, A. Nisar, H. Y. Sun, W. C. Shen, M. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
Y. Cao, L. Zhang, D. Tao, D. Huo and K. Su, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 483–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Shakir, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 490–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, D. Zhu and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9256–9264 CAS .
L. L. Li, S. J. Peng, Y. L. Cheah, P. F. Teh, J. Wang, G. Wee, Y. W. Ko, C. L. Wong and M. Srinivasan, Chem. - Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5892–5898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, F. Hao, Q. Li, C. Wang, R. Fan and Y. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4176–4185 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, X. Qian, K. Zhou, J. Wei, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6297–6303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, F. F. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. C. Du, J. W. Wang and L. M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8048–8053 CAS .
B. G. Silbernagel, Solid State Commun., 1975, 17, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, R. Mallavajula, N. Jayaprakash and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12988–12992 RSC .
U. K. Sen and S. Mitra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1240–1247 CAS .
K. Zhang, H. J. Kim, X. J. Shi, J. T. Lee, J. M. Choi, M. S. Song and J. H. Park, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9807–9812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. W. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, G. D. Li, H. Y. Xu, Y. T. Qian and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1003–1008 CAS .
C. Q. Feng, L. F. Huang, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 119–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Wang, S. Bewlay, J. Yao, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A321–A323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, D. W. Su, G. X. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17437–17440 RSC .
X. P. Fang, C. X. Hua, C. R. Wu, X. F. Wang, L. Y. Shen, Q. Y. Kong, J. Z. Wang, Y. S. Hu, Z. X. Wang and L. Q. Chen, Chem. - Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5694–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, H. Huang, L. Gu, Y. Wang and X. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4485–4488 RSC .
K. Shiva, H. S. S. R. Matte, H. B. Rajendra, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 787–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kartick, S. K. Srivastava and S. Mahanty, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 3758–3764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. Jin, I. G. Jung, J. M. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5241–5243 RSC .
J. T. Jang, S. Jeong, J. W. Seo, M. C. Kim, E. Sim, Y. Oh, S. Nam, B. Park and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7636–7639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kartick, S. K. Srivastava and S. Mahanty, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1950 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Z. L. Tho and S. L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2147–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Tao, L. N. Xu, X. L. Gou, J. Chen and H. T. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2080–2081 RSC .
M. S. Whittingham, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1978, 12, 41 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Song, M. J. Zhou, R. Yi, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, D. H. Tang, Z. X. Yu, M. Regula and D. H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5904–5910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, X. C. Xiao, G. Liu, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu, N. D. Browning and C. M. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3684 Search PubMed .
C. Erk, T. Brezesinski, H. Sommer, R. Schneider and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7299–7307 CAS .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribiere, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, S. Nagarajan, P. Chumyim, S. R. Gowda, P. Pradhan, S. R. Jadhav, M. Dubey, G. John and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 960 Search PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. M. Zhou, H. P. Wu and Z. X. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373–16378 RSC .
G. Y. Zheng, L. B. Hu, H. Wu, X. Xie and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3368–3373 CAS .
J. F. Zang, C. Y. Cao, Y. Y. Feng, J. Liu and X. H. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6492 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Hu, H. Wu, F. La Mantia, Y. A. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, M. Pasta, F. La Mantia, L. F. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Poulomi Roy	Poulomi Roy received her M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, India in 2002 and obtained her PhD in Inorganic Nanomaterials from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India in 2007. She spent 2008–2011 at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany as a postdoctoral research fellow, where she worked on the development of self-organized TiO2-based nanostructures and their various applications. Currently, she is working as an Assistant Professor at Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, India. Her current research interests include the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage devices.
Suneel Kumar Srivastava	Suneel Kumar Srivastava was born in 1954 in Ismilepur (Sitapur), Uttar Pradesh. He received his M.Sc. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Lucknow University, Lucknow. Subsequently, he completed his post graduate diploma in ‘High pressure technology and technical gas reactions’ and Ph.D in the field of ‘Solid state chemistry’ from Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur in 1979 and 1986, respectively. He also carried out his post-doctoral work as a DAAD Fellow in Technical University, Karlsruhe (1988–89, 2003, 2006), University of Siegen (1994, 1999), Technical University, Munchen (2009) and Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research, Dresden (2013) Germany, and University of Nantes, France (2003, 2007). He is currently Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. His research interests are in the fields of zero, one and two dimensional semiconducting and magnetic nanomaterials for their applications in energy and the environment, polymers and polymer blends and their structure–property relationships. He has guided 13 Ph.D. students and published about 120 research papers in referred journals.

 	Fig. 1  HEV market evaluation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  A comparative study of battery discharge curves showing the variation of operating voltage vs. fraction of available capacity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2009 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 3  A plot of publication numbers by year, obtained by searching with keywords ‘lithium ion battery’ (data source: http://www.scopus.com).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Relative energy diagram of electrode potentials and electrolyte energy gap in LIBs; (b) schematic diagram of the lithium intercalation–de-intercalation reaction mechanism in a rechargeable lithium-ion battery containing solid electrodes and a liquid electrolyte.	 
Cathode: LiCoO2 ↔ LixCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−	(1)
Anode: 6C + xLi+ +xe− ↔ LixC6	(2)
τ = Lion2/DLi

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of electronic transportation through 0D, 1D nanostructures: (a–c) electron random walk through grain boundaries of bare nanoparticles (a), through carbon binders blended with nanoparticles (b), and through carbon coating on to the nanoparticles (c); (d and e) 1D electron transportation through randomly distributed nanorods (d) and directly grown nanorods (e) on to the current collector.	 

 	Fig. 6  0D vs. 1D Nanostructures. (a) Capacity versus cycle number for the Si nanowires and Si nanocrystals at a rate of C/20. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanotubes by template-engaged precipitation followed by annealing and (c) their cycling performance in comparison to α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles at 0.5 C (ref. 56). (d) SEM images of Co3O4 NW arrays growing on Ti foil by ammonia-evaporation-induced method; (e) comparative study of specific capacity of the Co3O4 NW arrays on Ti foil, non-self-supported NWs, and commercial powders as a function of the cycle number at a current rate of 1 C (inset: corresponding capacity retention percentages as a function of the current rate). Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (f) Comparison of lithium ion storage capacity of TiO2-(B) nanowires and nanoparticles with the same diameter. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–f) TEM images of (a) SnO2 hollow sphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) SnO2/C hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. (d) α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nano-rattles (ref. 71). (e) TEM image of as-prepared SnO2 nanoboxes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (f) Co3O4/NiO core–shell nanowire. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of cycling performances of SnO2 hollow spheres, solid spheres and nanoparticles at a current rate of 160 mA g−1 with a voltage window of 0.01–2.0 V Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of α-Fe2O3/SnO2 branched nanostructures (inset: TEM image (top), schematic (below) of the branched structure). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (b) TEM image of Si nanoparticles deposited on the TiSi2 core (inset: schematic of the heterostructure). Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Variation of Crev for short and long CNTs with number of cycles at a current density of 25 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2007 John Wiley and Sons. (b) SEM image of SWNT-forest. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. (c) TEM images of graphene nanosheets (inset: oxidized graphene). Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (d) Cyclic performance of natural graphite (i), pristine GO(II), hydrazine-reduced GO(III), 300 °C pyrolytic GO(IV), 600 °C pyrolytic GO(V), and electron-beam-reduced GO(VI) at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of ordered mesoporous carbon and (f) its discharge and charge cycle performance at a constant current of 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2003 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of 5 wt% pitch-coated Li4Ti5O12. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (b) Comparison of cycling performance of N-doped carbon coated and pristine (inset) Li4Ti5O12. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 
Si (crystalline) + xLi+ + xe− → LixSi (amorphous) + (3.75 − x)Li+ + (3.75 − x)e−	(4)
→ Li15Si4 (crystalline)	(5)
Li15Si4 (crystalline) → Si (amorphous) + yLi+ + ye− + Li15Si4 (residual)	(6)

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) An in situ TEM observation of pristine Al2O3 coated Al NW morphology before (a) and after (b) lithiation–delithiation, showing the pulverization and volume expansion of the Al NW. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) SEM top view of crystalline (100) Si nanopillars showing anisotropic lateral expansion after full lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Cycle performances of Si NT array electrode at a rate of 0.05 and 0.2 C (square symbol: 0.05 C, circle symbol: 0.2 C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) charge capacity vs. cycle number of Si70Sn30 nanoalloys annealed at 900 and 1000 °C in coin-type half cells between 1.2 and 0 V at a rate of 0.2 C (=1000 mA g−1) (ref. 200).	 
Mg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LixMg2Si	(7)
LixMg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LicriticalMg2Si	(8)
→ LisaturatedMg2Si + Mg + Li–Si alloy	(9)
Mg + xLi+ + xe− → Li–Mg alloy	(10)
xLi+ + xe− + NiSi → LixSi + Ni ↔ Ni + Si + xLi+ + xe−	(11)
xLi+ + xe− + FeSi → LixSi + Fe ↔ Fe + Si + xLi+ + xe−	(12)

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of 10 nm sized n-Si nanoparticles, (b) comparison of charge capacity of different sized n-Si nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (c) TEM image of double walled Si nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) SEM images of pristine Si NWs before (d) and after (e) electrochemical cycling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 
MO + xLi+ + xe− ↔ Li2O + M (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu)	(13)
SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O	(14)
Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ 4LixSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4)	(15)
xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)	(16)

1	SnO2 hollow nanostructures	Hydrothermal	100–250 nm	1140	0.2 C	40	—	
227

2	SnO2 hollow nanoboxes	Template-engaged etching	200 nm–1 μm	570	0.2 C	40	—	
66

3	Mesoporous SnO2 microspheres	Hydrothermal	3–15 nm	370	1 A g−1	100	—	
226

4	SnO2 nanorods	Hydrothermal	Dia: 60 nm	580	0.1 C	100	—	
229


L: 670 nm
5	SnO2 nanowires	Vapour–liquid–solid method	Dia: 40–50 nm	>700	782 mA g−1	50	—	
48


L: 1 μm
6	SnO2@carbon hollow nanospheres	Hard template (SiO2) and hydrothermal	250 nm	>460	0.8 C (1 C = 625 mA g−1	100	—	
43

7	Co metal coated SnO2 nanoparticles	Wet-chemical route	100–150 nm	810	0.1 C (1 C = 782 mA h g−1)	50	—	
35

8	SnO2 nanowire covered with Sn nanoparticle	Microwave chemical vapour deposition	Dia: 30–100 nm	>800	100 mA g−1	100	99%	
228


L: few μm
9	Nanosized rutile TiO2	Chemical reflux process	Dia: 10 nm	132	1 C	90	—	
19


L: 30–40 nm
10	Anatase TiO2 nanosheets	Solvothermal	∼1 μm (sphere)	190	1 C	100	—	
234

11	Porous TiO2/C nanocomposite shells	Sol–gel process	200–300 nm	288.2	0.1 C	300	>98%	
242

12	TiO2/graphene nanocomposite	Surfactant-assisted and calcination	1–1.5 μm	230	0.1 C or 17 mA g−1	350	>98%	
121

13	Anatase and rutile TiO2/graphene nanocomposite	Surfactant mediated growth	5–6 nm	Anatase: 160	1 C	100	98%	
120

Rutile: 170
14	1D mesoporous TiO2Nx	Electrospinning process	Dia: 100–200 nm	185	0.1 C	40	—	
237


L: few μm
15	TiO2@CNT nanocables	Hydrolysis of Ti(OBu)4	Dia: 150 nm	406	50 mA g−1	100	—	
243


L: few μm
16	Graphene-supported anatase TiO2 nanosheets	Solvothermal	3–10 nm (mesopores)	161	1 C	120	90%	
37

17	TiO2 nanotube @SnO2 nanoflakes	ALD and hydrothermal	Dia: ∼50 nm	580	1.6 A g−1	50	—	
238


L: ∼1 μm
18	Mesoporous TiO2:RuO2 nanocomposite	Wet-chemical route	300 nm	214	C/5 (30 C = 10.08 A g−1)	20	—	
36

19	NiO@TiO2 nanopowders	Flame spray pyrolysis	34 nm	∼1000	300 mA g−1	80	108%	
288

20	TiO2–C/MnO2 core–double-shell nanowire arrays	Hydrothermal and layer-by-layer deposition method	Dia: 80 nm	471	0.1 C (1 C = 335 mA g−1)	100	93%	
74


L: 12 μm
21	MnO nanoflakes on Ni foam	Hydrothermal	Thickness: 300 nm	700	246 mA g−1	200	—	
77

22	Mn3O4 nanorods on graphene sheet	Hydrothermal	Dia: 5–30 nm	100 Fg−1	5 A g−1	10000	100%	
54


L: 100–1000 nm
23	Mn3O4–graphene hybrid	Two-step solution-phase reactions	10–20 nm (Mn3O4 NP)	900	40 mA g−1	10	—	
130

24	MnO2 nanoflakes@carbon nanohorns	Facile solution method	Caterpillar morphology	∼600	100 mA g−1	60	—	
244

25	Graphene-wrapped MnO2–graphene nanoribbons	Hydrothermal	Dia: 200 nm	612	0.4 A g−1	250	100%	
129

26	α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres	Quasiemulsion-template	1 μm	750	200 mA g−1	100	90%	
70

27	α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes	Radio frequency (rf) magnetron sputtering	Thickness: 700 nm	∼700	65 mA g−1	80	>98%	
247

28	Fiber like Fe2O3 macro-porous nanostructure	Cellulose as template and calcination	Dia: 7.5 μm	1200	100	20	—	
253


L: several 100 μm
29	Mesoporous α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanorods	Hydrothermal	Dia: 20–80 nm	1000	0.1 C (1 C = 905 mA g−1)	50	92%	
55


L: 400–700 nm
30	α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 nanotube arrays	ZnO nanorods as sacrificial template-accelerated hydrolysis	Dia: 200 nm	659 (C-coated), 384 (without coating)	C/5, (1 C = 671 mA g−1)	150	—	
249

31	Fe3O4 nanoparticle anchored on graphene	Microwave irradiation	Dia: 20–70 nm	650	0.1 C	50	—	
126

32	Fe3O4–carbon–rGO nanocomposite	Hydrothermal	Dia: 10–20 nm	843	0.2 C	100	>95%	
123

33	Fe3O4–graphene nanocomposites	Ultrasonic assisted co-precipitation	Dia: 10 nm	1200	2 C	1000	96%	
124

34	Fe3O4–carbon nanocomposites	Hydrothermal	Dia: 10 nm	1249	0.1 C	100	100%	
259

35	Carbon-encapsulated Fe3O4 nanoparticles	Facile and scalable in situ synthesis method	Dia: 5–25 nm	858	5 C (1 C = 1 A g−1)	350	96%	
260

36	Fe2O3–graphene rice-on-sheet nanocomposite	Microwave-assisted hydrothermal technique	Particle: 50–80 nm	1184	100	40	—	
127

Rice: 150–200 nm
37	Reduced graphene oxide/Fe2O3 nanocomposite	Precipitation reaction and microwave irradiation	Dia: 60 nm	∼1100	100	50	—	
122

38	FeOx-coated SnO2 nanoparticle	Simple solution method	10 nm	480	400 mA g−1	150	—	
257

39	α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles	Hydrothermal	450 nm	419	200 mA g−1	30	—	
71

40	Fe3O4@carbon nanorods	Glucose-mediated hydrothermal method	Dia: 20–50 nm	800	924	100	—	
262


L: 50–200 nm
41	Carbon-decorated single-crystalline Fe3O4 nanowire	Microwave-hydrothermal approach	Dia: 20–50 nm	830	0.1 C	50	100%	
263


L: several μm
42	Branched Co3O4/Fe2O3 nanowires	Hydrothermal	Dia: 70 nm (Co3O4)	1000	100	60	—	
255

Dia: 40 nm (Fe2O3)
Thickness: 5 μm
43	Branched α-Fe2O3/SnO2 nano heterostructures	Vapour transport deposition and hydrothermal	Dia: 50 nm	1167	1000 mA g−1	30	50%	
78


L: 500 nm
(Sub-nanorods)
44	Co3O4 yolk–shell powder	Spray pyrolysis	1 μm	750	1400	100	—	
271

45	Multishelled Co3O4 hollow microspheres	Template-assisted growth	1 μm	1600	50	30	100%	
272

46	Co3O4 microcubes consisting of nanoparticles	Surfactant-assisted hydrothermal	2–3 μm	1298	0.1 C	60	99.3%	
273

1041	1 C	89.9%
47	Mesoporous Co3O4 nanowire arrays	Ammonia-evaporation-induced method	Dia: 500 nm	700	1 C	50	50%	
50


L: 15 μm
48	CoO porous nanowire arrays	Hydrothermal and pyrolysis	Dia: 100 nm	670	1 C	20	—	
275


L: 2 μm
49	Co3O4 nanotubes	Topotactic transformation	Dia: 150–400 nm	900	50	30	100%	
274


L: 10 μm
50	Co3O4 nanoparticles anchored on graphene	Chemical exfoliation and calcination	10–30 nm	1000	50	30	100%	
117

51	CoO quantum dot/graphene nanocomposites	Ultrasonic method	∼5 nm	1600	50	50	100%	
118

52	SnO2@silica double shell hollow sphere Co3O4@SnO2@C	Thermal treatment	400 nm	800	160 mA g−1	50	—	
68

53	Co3O4@SnO2@C core–shell nanorods	Hydrothermal and carbonization	Dia: 30 nm	1000	200	50	100%	
269

54	NiO nanoplates	Hydrothermal	90–120 nm	500	50	20	—	
279

55	NiO nanoflakes	Controlled chemical synthesis	50–100 nm	410	50	40	98%	
280

56	NiO hollow spheres	Soft-template self-assembly process	Dia: 30 nm	∼400	0.3 C	50	—	
282

57	3D macroporous NiO/Ni powder	Metal complex chemical route	Flakes: 1–2 μm	∼700	1 C	50	100%	
281

Thickness: 10 nm
58	NiO-coated ZnO nanorod arrays	Hard template (ZnO) assisted growth	Dia: 60–120 nm	∼1100	1 C	15	97%	
73

59	Co3O4/NiO and ZnO/NiO core–shell nanowire array	Hydrothermal	Dia: 70 nm	853 Fg−1	1 A g−1	6000	95%	
72


L: 10 μm
60	2D mesoporous NixCo3−xO4 nanosheets	Thermal decomposition	Dia: 2 μm	1330	100 mA g−1	50	96.6%	
294

Thickness: 2 nm	844	500 mA g−1	200	—
61	Hollow and porous nanostructure of ZnxCo3−xO4	Template-assisted Co-precipitation method	∼1 μm	∼1000	1 C	50	—	
297

62	Hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire arrays on carbon cloth	Solvothermal	Dia: 80–100 nm (NW)	>1200	100 mA g−1	160	99%	
298


L: 5 μm (NW)
Dia: 20 μm (C fiber)
63	ZnMn2O4 nanocrystals anchored on 3D porous carbon aerogel	Solution immersion chemical route	40 nm	833	100 mA g−1	60	50.3% (>96% after 5 cycles)	
296

64	CoO/CoFe2O4 nanocomposites	Calcination	100 nm	1000	100	100	98%	
277


 	Fig. 13  Cycling performance comparison of different nanodimensional transition metal oxides and their nanocomposites in LIBs: (b) Sn-nanocluster-covered SnO2 nanowires (SEM image in (a)), SnO2 nanowires with dispersed Sn metal, and pure SnO2 nanowires measured between 0 to 2.2 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; (c) anatase TiO2 with dominant (001) (blue) and (101) (red) facets at a current rate of 10 C (ref. 235); (e) bare TiO2 and TiO2–C, TiO2–C/MnO2 (SEM image in (d)) nanocomposites at a rate of 1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (f) carbon nanohorns (CNHs), MnO2 and MnO2/CNH electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; (g) Fe3O4 nanowires before and after carbon decoration at 0.1 C rate (inset: HRTEM image of crystalline Fe3O4 nanowires surrounded by amorphous carbon) (ref. 260); (h) Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 branched NW, Co3O4 NW, and α-Fe2O3 NW anodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (inset: TEM image of Co3O4/α-Fe2O3 branched NW). Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2013 Springer; (i) CoO quantum dot/graphene nanocomposites at a current density of 50 m g−1 (inset: SEM image of nanocomposite). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 
AB2O4 + xLi+ + xe− → A + B + Li2O	(17)
A + Li2O ↔ AO + 2Li+ + 2e−	(18)
B + Li2O ↔ BO + 2Li+ + 2e−	(19)
A + Li+ + e− → LiA	(20)
B + Li+ + e− → LiB	(21)

1	Hierarchical hollow MoS2 nanoparticles	Solvothermal	300–800 nm	902	100 mA g−1	80	—	
305

2	Ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet-graphene nanocomposites	Hydrothermal	Interlayer spacing 0.62 nm	∼900	0.2 C (1 C = 832 mA g−1)	50	—	
303

3	2D MoS2 nanowall and cellulose binder	Two-step chemical synthesis	Wall thickness: 22 nm	880	100 mA g−1	50	84%	
302

4	MoS2–MWCNT hybrid materials	Grinding technique	—	>1100	100 mA g−1	30	85%	
97

5	WS2 nanotubes	Sintering method	Inner hollow core: 4.6 nm	600	
	20	—	
307

6	Ordered mesoporous WS2	Vacuum assisted impregnation	Pore size: 3–4 nm	805	0.1 A g−1	100	98%	
308

7	Graphene-like WS2	Solid-state reaction	Thickness: 5.43 nm	600	0.05 C (1 C = 432 mA g−1)	100	—	
309

8	WS2–SWCNT lamellar porous nanocomposite	Vacuum filtration	—	821	100 mA g−1	50	—	
310

9	WS2 supported on reduced graphene oxide	Hydrothermal	—	400–450	100 mA g−1	50	—	
311

10	WS2–MWCNT hybrid material	Grinding method	—	∼400	100 mA g−1	20	80%	
312

11	Ultrathin ZrS2 nanodiscs	Surfactant-assisted chemical synthesis	Dia: 20, 35, 60 nm	600	69 mA g−1	50	86%	
314

Thickness: 1.6 nm
12	TiS2–MWCNT hybrid materials	Grinding method	—	340	100 mA g−1	20	80%	
315


 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of 2D MoS2 nanowall and (b) their cyclic performance in the presence of cellulose as a binder at different current rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Cyclic performance of MoS2–MWCNT hybrid materials in different ratios (ref. 96). (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of WS2–SWCNT (3:2) hybrid film and (e) Cycling performance of WS2–SWCNT hybrid films in different ratios at current rate of 0.1 A g−1 (ref. 302). (f) Nanosize effect of ultrathin ZrS2 on the discharge capacity as compared to bulk ZrS2 at a current rate of 69 mA g−1 (inset: TEM images of ultrathin-ZrS2 nanodiscs with different lateral sizes). Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
MoS2 + 4Li+ + 4e− ↔ Mo + 2Li2S	(22)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
