The multifaceted dimensions of potent nanostructures: a comprehensive review  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00950D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00950D
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2967-2995The multifaceted dimensions of potent nanostructures: a comprehensive review

        
          
            Deepika 
            Jamwal
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Aashima 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rohini 
            Kanwar
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Surinder Kumar 
            Mehta
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Centre of Advanced Studies in Chemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh 160 014, India. E-mail: surinder.sk1961@gmail.com
Received 
      16th November 2020
    , Accepted 5th February 2021First published on 5th March 2021AbstractNanotechnology has been accepted as a successful general-purpose technology and engine for growth in the 21st century. Research in the last two decades has highlighted the numerous potential applications of nanomanufacturing and commercialization. Nanotechnology has revolutionized various aspects of different areas, like cosmetics, medicines, medical devices, pharmaceuticals, cement, agriculture, electronics, etc. Effective commercialization is of prodigious importance to inventive firms, and the latest literature has progressively recognized that industry has involvement not only in research and development but also in commercialization. Research into nanotechnology is extremely broad and involves different products, such as in the fields of cosmetics, medicines, medical devices, electronics, cement, etc.; many examples have already been commercialized and others are in development. The present review article explores recent developments relating to industrial nanotechnology and nanotechnology commercialization, which involves the development of products and techniques with a view toward their commercialization.
Deepika Jamwal
Dr Deepika Jamwal received her PhD degree from Shoolini University, India, in 2016. She has completed a National Post-Doctoral Fellowship at the Department of Chemistry and Centre of Advanced Studies in Chemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India, and worked on the project “metal chalcogenide nanostructures for third generation device applications” with Prof. S. K. Mehta. She is an awardee of the Shastri-Indo Canadian Post-Doctoral Fellowship to continue her research at the University of Ottawa, Canada. Her main area of interest is the synthesis of semiconductor nanostructures with controlled size and shape, specifically metal chalcogenides, and the improvement of their features for applications in the contemporary semiconductor industry.
Aashima Sharma
Aashima Sharma is a senior research scholar at Panjab University with extensive experience in the field of nano-chemistry. She has sound knowledge of various spectroscopic techniques. She was awarded a Commonwealth Split-site Fellowship for 2019–2020. During her time at the University of York, UK, she worked on various renewable methods to convert biomass into nanostructures. Her focused area of interest is lanthanide-based composites with other metal oxides and solid supports for wastewater remediation. She has 8 publications and 2 book chapters to her credit.
Rohini Kanwar
Dr Rohini Kanwar is working as an Assistant Professor at MCM DAV College, Chandigarh (India). After graduating in 2011 and completing her post-graduation work in 2013, she obtained a PhD in 2019 from Panjab University, Chandigarh. She was the recipient of CSIR-JRF in 2012 and a DAAD scholarship in 2016, and has carried out research work at Technical University, Berlin, Germany. She is an active researcher and has expertise in nanoassemblies, like nanostructured lipid carriers, niosomes, nanoemulsions, etc., for the site-specific and controlled delivery of drugs and pesticides, and for catalysis. She is a co-author of 13 publications in reputed journals.
Surinder Kumar Mehta
Dr S. K. Mehta, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Ex-Chairman (Chemistry), and Ex-Director (SAIF), at Panjab University, Chandigarh. He is highly active in significant areas of research, like metallosurfactant chemistry, nano-electrochemical sensors, the synthesis and applications of semiconducting nanoparticles, colloidal chemistry, and nano-drug-delivery systems. He has 348 publications (h-index: 48), is the author of 12 books/chapters, has guided 12 post-doctoral, 47 PhD, and 50 Masters students, and has handled 20 research projects. He is the recipient of renowned DAAD and JSPS fellowships, a CRSI bronze medal, an RSC authors award, a Haryana Vigyan Ratna award, and an STE Green Excellence Award.
1. Introduction
Nanotechnology has been proclaimed as a next step in industrial development, with the prospective means to influence numerous areas of the economy, including energy, the environment, agriculture, food, medicine, defense, etc.1 To date, nanoscience and nanotechnology are anticipated to impact many facets relating to the environment, human life, and science and technology industries. As regards industry and governmental and non-government bodies, nanotechnology presents the capability to attract strong attention. The economic needs of society have directed scientists to assist and substantially contribute to human development globally. To achieve progress in all areas, billions of dollars have been spent on research. Among nations, the levels of investments vary. At present, the United States of America is considered as the foremost investor, even though the competition for global leadership is intensifying as different industries and countries around the world increase their investments. The levels of investment also differ between various commercial divisions, presently being led by the defense and energy sectors.2
Nanotechnology is often designated as the understanding and control of materials of around 1 to 100 nanometers in length. It covers nanoscale science, engineering, and technology, and comprises the quantification, modeling, imaging and operating of matter in the nanometer-size region. Furthermore, due to the construction of novel products and processes with unique characteristics because of nanoscale properties, it is broadly expected to be one of the foremost drivers of technology-centered economic and business growth all over the world.3 The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) circulated guidelines in June 2014 that extended the present definition to cover materials within the standard nanoscale range, i.e., 1–100 nm, as well as any bigger products of up to 1000 nm that are manufactured to involve features that are caused by their dimensions. Using the term “engineered”, they mention products that have certain dimensions or show certain features as a result of thoughtful and determined manipulation. According to an overview of the FDA guidelines,4 as an emergent technology, nanotechnology can be used in an extensive group of FDA-regulated products, comprising foods, cosmetics, and medical products. In comparison to their larger-scale counterparts, materials in the nanoscale range can exhibit improved physical and chemical features, or biological effects. For instance, to obtain functional properties, such as better drug product potency, improved bioavailability, reduced dosages, better detection of pathogens, reduced toxicity of drug products, the upgraded transfer of functional ingredients or supplements from food, more protective food packaging materials, dimensionally reliant features or phenomena may be used. These superior properties may arise from improved biological, chemical, and magnetic features, enhanced optical or electrical properties, improved physical integrity, or other special characteristics of the synthesized compounds in the nanoscale range that would not usually be perceived or predictable in higher-scale materials with similar chemical compositions. The end products or materials may also show identical phenomena or properties attributable to a dimension outside the nanoscale region of nearly 1 to 100 nm.5–7
In this brief review, detailed information relating to the ongoing use of nanotechnology in cosmetics, medicines, medical devices, electronics, cement, and agriculture during the last five years is presented.
2. Nanotechnology in cosmetics
Cosmetics have been extensively used from Egyptian times, where, for example, substances obtained from flora and minerals were used as eye make-up. Consulting documentary evidence, some of the substances were very harmful in terms of toxicity, even though they were used to treat the skin as well as eye illnesses. The first cold cream, invented in the second century by Galen, a Greek physician, was an emulsion of vegetable oil, water, and beeswax. Today, the conception of cosmetics is assuredly different from ancient times, even though some of the additives are still the same.8 For addressing situations like hyperpigmentation, photoaging, hair damage, and wrinkles, cosmeceuticals are a rapidly developing section of the cosmetic industry, and a large number of contemporary cosmeceutical products have come into widespread use. Nanotechnology has played a substantial role in the cosmeceutical field; nevertheless, the actual number of nanomaterials being used depends on exactly how these materials are defined.9 It is challenging to decide the number of nanomaterials used in cosmetic products because the definition of what counts as a nanomaterial is presently expanding. The use of the preface “nano” in the description and labeling of cosmetics may not correspond with how the word is used by regulatory authorities.
With the manipulation of materials using new approaches at an atomic or molecular level, materials have become a source of diverse inventions, including the establishment of innovative ideas for the development of the cosmetic industry. Cosmeceuticals based on nanotechnology present the assets of product diversity, the improved bioavailability of effective constituents, and the enhanced appeal of cosmeceutical products with long-lasting special effects.
Researchers currently concentrating on cosmeceutical products have emphasized the active growth of the area; according to researchers, intensifying with a fast yearly growth of 7.7%, the value of the worldwide cosmeceutical marketplace had reached $31.84 billion by 2016.10 The worldwide cosmeceutical marketplace has enormous capacity in Asian countries like India, Japan, and China, which are set to take a leading role in the future. In the global cosmetics market, to date, Japan already has a significant position, and its position in the cosmeceutical sector is developing efficiently.11
2.1 The types of nanomaterials employed in the cosmetics industry

2.1.1 Liposomes. 
Liposomes are well-known drug carriers classified for use in dermal therapy, which, at the same time, can substantially enhance the proficiency of drugs and reduce their side effects. They are polymolecular aggregates with a double-layer shell configuration and are spherical in shape. Depending on the synthesis technique used, liposomes can be unilamellar (containing one bilayer shell) or multilamellar (containing many bilayer shells).12,13 Usually, liposomes differ in size, ranging from 20 nm to a few hundred micrometers. The central part of the liposome is aqueous, and its chemical constituents are analogous to the aqueous solution in which the vesicles are synthesized. The benefits of the use of liposomes in cosmetics or dermatology are along these lines: (i) being complementary to biological membranes, they can accumulate lipophilic and water-soluble constituents in their altered phases; (ii) based on studies performed, liposomes are non-toxic and biodegradable, which is important for averting side effects; (iii) their structures and compositions are similar to the epidermis, which facilitates them entering the epidermal barrier, with better scope in comparison to alternative dosage formulas; (iv) they are suggested to perform both as “drug transporters” and “drug localizers”, therefore preventing systematic absorption and sequentially unpleasant effects; (v) liposomes may work as a local depot in the skin for the constant and continued release of dermally active compounds, comprising corticosteroids, antibiotics, or retinoic acid; and (vi) they can reduce skin roughness, as liposomes are reported, as a result of their contact with intercellular lipids and corneocytes, to assist in skin smoothening and softening.14Fig. 1 shows liposomes as a cosmetic platform for the delivery of transdermal folic acid into systemic circulation through different layers of the skin.15
 Fig. 1  A schematic representation of the delivery of folic acid into systemic circulation through the different layers of the skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright: 2018, Nature. 
Guo and co-workers16 modified proanthocyanidin liposomes with polyethylene glycol. Various parameters, such as the added amounts of surfactant and polyethylene glycol and the mass ratio of cholesterol to lecithin, were examined to enhance the encapsulation efficiency of proanthocyanidin liposomes. The enhanced encapsulation efficiency of the liposomes was found to 77.28%. The proanthocyanidin in the liposomes underwent improved sustained release in comparison to free proanthocyanidin, so it was concluded that liposomes could be used to lengthen the life of proanthocyanidin and to deliver better performance and more convenience during its use in cosmetics. In another case, to enhance the stability of clove oil and its major component (eugenol), Sebaaly and his team developed appropriate formulations of soybean phospholipid vesicles. In combination with cholesterol, saturated and unsaturated soybean phospholipids were used to synthesize liposomes at different concentrations of clove essential oil and eugenol. Subsequently, the synthesized liposomes were examined in terms of their stability after storing at 4 °C for 2 months; during this time, various parameters were monitored, such as alterations in size, encapsulation efficiency, and polydispersity index. The study confirmed that saturated and unsaturated soybean phospholipid vesicles are appropriate formulations for eugenol and for clove essential oil.17


2.1.2 Nanoemulsions. 
Nanoemulsions belong to a category of emulsions that have transparent properties and a size range of 50–200 nm. They are kinetically stable and thermodynamically unstable.18 Because of their low levels of surfactants, lack of toxicity, good stability against coalescence, low viscosity, favorable texture, and flexibility for use in formulations such as creams, foams, liquids, and sprays, nanoemulsions are enticing structures for use in cosmetics. Fig. 2 represents the mechanism of the absorption of emulsions and nanoemulsions via penetration through skin cells.19 Due to the droplets having a large surface area, the use of nanoemulsions in cosmetic formulations leads to the fast penetration of active constituents into the skin. It is also noticed that nanoemulsions can penetrate rough skin without difficulty. This trait of nanoemulsions reduces the need for additional penetration enhancers, which can be accountable for inconsistencies in formulations.20
 Fig. 2  A graphical representation of the mechanism for the absorption of standard emulsions and nanoemulsions through skin cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
Nanoemulsions are advantageous systems for use in cosmetics as the smaller droplet sizes lead to closer interactions with the stratum corneum, leading to an increase in the quantity of active compound reaching the expected site of action. Also, these systems can carry active compounds into the skin, enhancing the skin layer penetration and therefore improving the efficiency for various applications. The beauty of nanoemulsions is that they do not cream, making them appropriate for use in the manufacture of sprayable liquid formulations. Several patents exist relating to the usage of nanoemulsions in cosmetic formulations.21,22
Barreto et al.23 developed a cosmetic nanoemulsion with Agave sisalana (sisal), known to be a source of hard fibers that is extensively used in the manufacturing of wires, ropes, and handicrafts. They successfully developed a cosmetic nanoemulsion and assessed its clinical moisturizing efficiency. The prepared nanoemulsion, comprising a polysaccharide-supplemented fraction, revealed moisturizing properties, leading to an increase in the water content of the stratum corneum and improving the skin barrier function 5 h after a single application. Another plant, Opuntia ficus-indica, which is found in arid areas, was used to synthesize an oil-in-water nanoemulsion. The results indicate that the prepared oil-in-water nanoemulsion comprising 1% Opuntia ficus-indica was stable for at least 60 days, had moisturizing efficiency, and provided good output with potential for use in the cosmetics area.24


2.1.3 Dendrimers. 
Dendrimers are also known as fractal polymers, and they are monodisperse, highly branched, and regular three-dimensional structured macromolecules (Fig. 3). Their dimensions are in the range of 2 to 10 nm. Dendrimers contain a series of chemical shells situated around the small central molecule involving four prime constituents: a central component; arms of similar size; branches or linker points; and end functional groups. The different constituents are developed based on a fundamental plan and linked using various permutations to fix the structure. The terminal entities may be chemically dissimilar from the center part. The central core can be removed to produce a cavity.25 Tomalias's “PAMAM dendrimers”26 and Newkome's “arbrol” system27 were the first dendritic structures that were inspected systematically, and they have earned extensive attention. Both dendrimers were fabricated separately, and the synthesis processes started with a multifunctional core molecule and moved out to the periphery. To treat a variety of skin conditions, the area of nanotechnology-based cosmeceutical dendrimers holds great importance. L’Oreal, Unilever, and other companies have numerous patents for dendrimer applications in skin-care, nail-care, and hair-care products.28–30
 Fig. 3  The structure of a dendrimer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright: 2005, Nature Publishing Group. 


2.1.4 Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs). 
As drug carriers, solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) were introduced in the year 1991 for the first time by Gasco and co-workers. These can be synthesized with submicron sizes ranging between 50 to 500 nm, utilizing high melting-point lipids stabilized by surfactants that are non-toxic, biocompatible, and biodegradable in nature.31 SLNs have been broadly analyzed for use as carriers for the delivery of antidepressant, antioxidant, and anticancer agents. Fig. 4 shows the action of lipid nanoparticles (NPs) on the skin.32 On an industrial scale, they can be prepared via high-pressure homogenization. The solid matrix of SLNs shields the active constituent that is amalgamated into it and protects it from chemical degradation, which eventually enhances the drug-release profile.33 Targeting different administration routes, such as oral, ocular, pulmonary, dermal, parenteral, and rectal, various formulations have been established. SLNs are particularly beneficial for use in ocular drug delivery as they can increase the corneal absorption of drugs and assist the ocular bioavailability of both lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs.34 The first patent involving SLN methods was granted in 1993 and, subsequently, there have been many more, some of which are shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 4  A representation of the effects of SLNs/NLCs on the skin (NLC: nanostructured lipid carrier). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
Table 1 A list of patents for the use of nanotechnology in cosmetics




Patent title
International publication/patent no.
Patent date
Proposed use
Assignee/inventor




Cosmetic composition containing rubus coreanus extract for diminishing skin wrinkles
US9198945B2
Dec. 1, 2015
Reducing skin wrinkles without causing adverse effects
Amorepacific Corporation, Seoul (KR)


Hair conditioning composition for permanent and semi-permanent hair coloration applications
US20150056154A1
Feb. 26, 2015
A hair conditioning composition for permanent and semi-permanent hair coloring applications
OTC GMBH, Oberhausen (DE)


Cosmetic composition containing retinol stabilized by porous polymer beads and nanoemulsion
US8980293B2
Mar. 17, 2015
An anti-inflammatory and skin-wrinkle-reducing cosmetic composition
Act Co., Ltd, Chungcheongbuk-do (KR)


Cosmetic base comprising collagen-modified liposome and skin cosmetic containing the same
US9289367 B2
Mar. 22, 2016
Collagen modified liposomes with the improved ability to retain the moisture of the skin
Faith, Inc., Osaka (JP)


Use of essential oil-Origanum majorana, as an agent for treating and/or preventing greasy skin and/or the associated aesthetic skin defects
US20160106660A1
Apr. 21, 2016
The formulation is a cleansing treatment for greasy skin and also includes essential oil as a dermatological agent
L’Oreal, Paris (FR)


Nanoparticle-based cosmetic composition
US9375388B2
Jun. 28, 2016
Used in cosmetics like Mehendi powder, water, carbon lip gloss, etc.
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra (IN)


Hair removal with coated metal nanoparticles
US9421259B2
Aug. 23, 2016
Allows hair removal with coated metal NPs
Sienna Biopharmaceuticals, Inc., Carlsbad, CA (US)


Solid lipid nanoparticles
US9616001B2
Apr. 11, 2017
The production of solid lipid NPs and their use in different cosmetics.
DSM IPASSETS B.V., Heerlen (NL)


Nanostructured conditioning cosmetic composition, the use thereof in cosmetic preparations, and a conditioning shampoo
US9918913B2
Mar. 20, 2018
Conditioning shampoo
NATURA COSMÉTICOS S.A. São Paulo-SP (BR)


Composition comprising an alkoxysilane and a modified starch, and cosmetic use thereof
US20180154189A1
Jun. 7, 2018
Composition for the care or shaping of keratin materials
L’Oreal, Paris (FR)




For the delivery of active ingredients into the skin, SLNs are very appropriate vehicles. Suter and his team developed a cost-effective formulation of SLNs for improving peptide delivery into the skin. In comparison to a placebo drug, skin treated with this formulation showed a statistically noteworthy 20% reduction in DNA damage.35 In another work, different antioxidants, such as vitamin E, resveratrol, and epigallocatechin gallate, which are well recognized to protect the skin, were formulated into SLNs. Out of all these antioxidants, resveratrol showed a constant release of over 70% after 24 h, and it was observed that for the delivery of resveratrol and vitamin E, SLNs are promising viable carriers to deliver long-lasting antioxidant benefits to the skin.36 To prevent skin damage due to exposure to UVA, a dermatological formulation was created through a microemulsion technique by Trombino and co-workers. For this, stearyl-ferulate-based SLNs were formulated as vehicles for α-tocopherol and β-carotene to improve the stabilities of these compounds.37 Kamel and Mostafa38 also concentrated on improving the synthesis of photoprotective nanoparticulate dermal preparations of the antioxidant flavonoid rutin. Conventional physical sunscreen (TiO2) was used to study the favorable photoprotective and antioxidant effects, and the study resulted in an appropriate cosmeceutical lipid colloidal system of rutin being used as an efficacious photoprotective preparation.


2.1.5 Niosomes. 
Niosomes can be described as non-ionic surfactant vesicles that are created upon the hydration of fabricated nonionic surfactants, with or without the inclusion of cholesterol or additional lipids. These are vesicular-system analogs of liposomes, and they can be utilized as carriers for lipophilic and amphiphilic drugs. Compared to liposomes, these vesicles exhibit greater entrapment efficacy, improved penetration, enhanced chemical stability, and lower production costs.39 As regards the structural arrangement, a niosome is a nanostructure with a size range of 100 nm to 2 μm, and the cavity in a niosome is aqueous in nature and enclosed by layers of non-ionic surfactant in a lamellar phase (Fig. 5).40 These have been assessed as vesicular carriers for various cosmetics, as well as for drugs.41 In the late 1970s, niosomes were improved and patented by the L’Oreal cosmetic company; the first commercialized niosome product was an antiaging cream that was well-known in the market in the 1980s. The benefits of employing these systems in cosmetic products include their capability to stabilize encapsulated ingredients, an improvement in the skin absorption of such agents, and the enhancement of bioavailability.42
 Fig. 5  The structure of a niosome. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright: 2014, Elsevier. 
Gupta et al.43 generated a blend of benzoyl peroxide (a potent antibacterial) and tretinoin (a keratolytic agent) employing niosomes as favorable carriers for the adequate treatment of acne via acting on the pathogenic site. In vivo investigations of a niosome-based gel and anti-acne cream composed of tretinoin and benzoyl peroxide revealed that the niosome gel was much more efficient than the anti-acne cream. The potential of niosomes was studied for scar treatment; Manosroi et al.44 compared the permeation behaviors of a niosome-based gel with papain and nanospheres loaded with papain. In vivo studies on rat skin involving a transdermal route indicated that the prepared niosomes have the potential for the improvement of the delivery of papain and the reduction of scarring in a rabbit-ear model. To treat photo-induced aging, Yadav et al.45 optimized coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)-loaded pro-niosomal formulations. The skins of different animals were treated with UV radiation and after that treated with the pro-niosomal gel formulation. The submicron vesicle size and skin retention of up to 22% of CoQ10 make the formulation appropriate for relevant applications. In comparison to a conventional gel, a histopathology study of animal skin treated with the pro-niosomal gel formulation revealed improved regeneration and healing processes.


2.1.6 Employing other types of nanoparticles. 
The particle size of a material plays an important role, as it can change the physicochemical features and can generate favorable circumstances for better contact and uptake within biological tissue. For example, the performances of cosmetic products like sunscreens and mineral-based materials rely on the particle size of the material. There are some nanomaterials that not only provide superior impression and spreading capabilities in cosmetic formulations but they also provide superior sun protection; some particular examples of these nanomaterials are ZnO, TiO2, Au, etc.46 ZnO has shown excellent properties as an active physical ingredient in sunscreens and it has been extensively used in cosmetic products, where it is used as a skin-protective UV absorber and bulking agent. In sunscreens, ZnO is used at concentrations of up to 25%.47–49 In the same way, TiO2 NPs are also applied in consumer and industrial products owing to their higher catalytic activity in comparison to their counterparts.50 This distinctive catalysis property has been attributed to their greater surface area per unit mass, or their small size. Nano-sized TiO2 in different forms is used extensively in regular life in a variety of products, such as cosmetics, sunscreens, household products, antifouling paints, medications, pharmaceutical additives, plastic goods, and food colorants, and a number of novel applications are being developed.51,52 Similarly, various other NPs, such as silver,53 gold,54 fullerenes,55 silica,56etc. are used frequently in the cosmetics industry.

2.2 An overview of some recent patents in the field of cosmetics
Dumas et al.57 patented a composition incorporating tocopheryl phosphate in liposomes, which was found to be useful for slowing down the effects of skin aging and particularly for delaying the formation of wrinkles on the face. A collagen-based supporting matrix is embedded with a liposomally formulated photosensitizer. The invented composition carried cytokines and improved growth factors, which were responsible for promoting fibroblast cell migration and proliferation in the affected skin area. This invention could be used for the treatment of chronic and acute wounds, reducing scars, sulci, wrinkles, and skin regularities.58 Takakura et al.59 invented an oil-in-water emulsion with a composition that included octyl methoxycinamate, t-butyl methoxybenzoyl methane, polyoxyethylene–polyoxyalkylene alkyl ether block polymers, and a non-polar oil, which showed improved ultraviolet blocking capabilities, excellent emulsion stability, and good usability.
A specific carbosiloxane dendrimer structure was patented by Hori and group with a composition involving a cosmetic raw material and a cosmetic containing a copolymer. The composition showed excellent properties and compatibility with cosmetic raw materials, e.g., the composition is capable of improving the compound stability of cosmetics and good ultraviolet absorbers.60 For fragrances and aromas in cosmetics, foods, pharmaceuticals, and detergents, Dahms et al.61 created a composition in the form of a solid lipid nanoparticle dispersion. In this lipid-based composition, NPs were present and they were stabilized by a monolayer emulsifier and some other auxiliaries. Petersen created cosmetic preparations via using various nanosuspensions comprising nanocrystals of cosmetic actives, which are important for enhancing the bioactivity of molecules within the skin and improving techniques for making cosmetic preparations. The prepared nanosuspensions proved suitable for use in many cosmetic formulations, such as creams, lotions, and liposomal dispersions.62
Shiny oily skin is a common problem particularly encountered by adolescents. Greasy or shiny skin is mostly a result of hyperseborrhea, described as the exaggerated secretion and excretion of sebum, commonly leading to a high level of sebum (greater than 200 μg cm−2) on the forehead. To treat this type of oily skin cosmetically, Dalko et al.63 made formulations using niosomes, liposomes, and jasmonic acid compounds as the main agent for making greasy skin matt. A given formulation was taken on by L’Oreal, Paris, in 2015.
3. Nanotechnology in medicine and medical devices
Nanotechnology is undoubtedly influencing a part of almost every area of the healthcare industry. As a form of applied science and technology, the field of nanotechnology targets the development of dosages and device forms on the scale of 1 to 100 nm. The utilization of nanotechnology for the diagnosis of problems, monitoring, the control of biological systems, and treatment is currently referred to as nanomedicine.64 In the past two decades, there has been a continuous increase in the value of commercially existing nanomaterial-based therapeutic products. A global survey carried out in 2006 by the European Science and Technology Observatory showed that over 150 companies were establishing nanoscale therapeutics.65 Nowadays, diseases like Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease, along with distinct types of severe infectious or inflammatory diseases, like HIV, constitute the types of complex and severe illnesses that pose great threats to humankind.66,67 Sooner or later, medicine based on nanotechnology will utilize the advantages of molecular nanotechnology. The medical zone of nanoscience applications has many projected benefits and is a potential boon for all of humanity.
3.1 Nanotechnology in medicine

3.1.1 Drug delivery. 
Drug development is one of the numerous areas of healthcare that has greatly benefitted from nanotechnology. Drug delivery, in vitro diagnosis, in vivo imaging, tissue-engineering biomaterials, and therapy techniques are ongoing and promising applications of nanomedicine. The commercialization of nanotechnology in medical and pharmaceutical science has undergone great evolution. In 1960, liposomes were proposed for the first time and projected as carriers of drugs and proteins for the therapy of diseases.68 To develop effective therapeutic moduli, a variety of inorganic/organic nanomaterials and various devices have been used as delivery vehicles. To date, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has permitted over two dozen nano-based therapeutic products for clinical usage, and many are in clinical trials. If we consider the example of only the USA, a minimum of fifteen novel pharmaceuticals permitted since 1990 have employed nanotechnology in their design and drug-delivery systems. At the site of disease, nanoparticles can be incorporated in targeted drug delivery to enhance the uptake of drugs with low solubility, the targeting of drugs to particular sites, and drug bioavailability.69 A graphic representation showing the contrast between targeted and untargeted drug delivery systems is shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  A comparison between (A) targeted drug delivery and (B) untargeted drug delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright: 2007, Springer Nature. 


3.1.2 Cancer. 
Cancer is one of the foremost devastating diseases, and it comprises numerous cellular abnormalities and genomic alterations. This heterogeneity and complexity can allow the aggressive growth of cancer cells, leading to significant morbidity and mortality in patients. With an assessed 7.6 million humans dying every year, accounting for 13% of all deaths, cancer is one of the prominent causes of death worldwide. Cancer-related mortality is estimated to increase to 13.1 million by 2030.70,71 However, even with present treatment resources, there may be the chance to vastly diminish the burden of cancer if the disease can be identified in its early stages. In 2004, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) committed $144 million to the progress of novel nanotechnologies for improving cancer mortality, describing aims in six areas: (1) disease diagnosis and imaging; (2) the exposure of molecular alterations that are responsible for disease pathogenesis; (3) multifunctional systems for joined-up diagnostic and therapeutic applications; (4) drug delivery and therapy; (5) vehicles to improve the in vivo efficiencies of therapeutic agents; and (6) nanoscale development expertise, which will speed up scientific discovery and elementary research.72
As we already know, for diagnostic and therapeutic proceedings relating to polyps, bleeding, and cancerous growth, the gastrointestinal tract is a very tricky area in which to operate. To diagnose and treat intestinal diseases like colon cancers, Lee and co-workers demonstrated a multifunctional surgical endoscope system. This smart endoscope system comprises transplant bioelectronics, which provide pH-based sensing and impedance, grouped with radiofrequency ablation therapy abilities to aid the categorization and elimination of colon cancers.73 Nucant multivalent pseudopeptide, doxorubicin, and both in tandem were used to functionalize superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs electrostatically. Their cytotoxic potential was measured using the breast adenocarcinoma cell line MDA-MB-231. The therapeutic efficiency was studied using subcutaneous MDA-MB-231-tumor-bearing female athymic nude mice. These superparamagnetic NP studies by Kossatz et al.74 observed particular suitability in the initial phases of breast cancer involving solitary tumors, and negative lymph node status could be handled. In another case, for non-small-cell lung cancer treatment, Zhu et al.75 developed long-circulating siRNA nanoparticles. According to the study, these developed hybrid RNA interference NPs were particularly applicable for validating potential cancer targets and establishing novel cancer treatments. Further, Chen et al.76 proposed the photothermal ablation of tumors through multifunctional nanoparticles via combining immune-adjuvant TLR and NIR heaters. When photothermal tumour ablation was carried out using the prepared nanoparticles, after 40 days a strong immune-memory effect was noticed. The fabricated nanoparticles proved capable enough to remove primary tumors, to attack and kill growing metastatic tumours, and, lastly, to attempt immune-memory conservation to inhibit tumour recurrence.


3.1.3 Neurodegenerative disorders. 
Neurodegenerative disorders (NDs) involve the continuous loss of the function or structure of neurons; this is frequently related to the end of the lives of neurons. Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and prion diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are a few examples of neurodegenerative disorders. Nanotechnology makes use of devices or engineered materials that collaborate with biological systems at a molecular level, and this could allow the curing of NDs via responding to and stimulating defective components, with the nanotechnology and biological system acting together at target sites to obtain physiological responses while reducing side effects.77


3.1.4 Nanotechnology for Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Alzheimer's disease is characterized by cognitive and memory dysfunction; at this time more than 24 million people are affected by this disease. The neuropathological signs of Alzheimer's disease are neurofibrillary tangles comprising extracellular plaques and intra-neuronal double-helical strands of hyperphosphorylated tau protein consisting of 39–43 amino-acid parts of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid β (Aβ) peptide. At present, aggregates of Aβ (ADDLs, amyloid-β-derived diffusible ligands) are studied as the core reason for memory loss and synaptic loss during AD. At present, for the curing of AD, approaches utilizing nanoparticles have primarily concentrated on intervening in Aβ aggregation or sequestering peptides in disaggregated form, or even in the blood, using the concept of decreasing the levels in the brain (sink effect). Many groups have established nanoliposomes functionalized with cardiolipin or phosphatidic acid that could be successfully employed to achieve the sink effect.78
Recently, Amin and coworkers described the development of a novel, inventive nanotechnology-based drug-delivery approach for the potential treatment of Alzheimer's diseases for the first time. They showed the delivery of fluorescent carboxyl magnetic Nile-red particles, via utilizing a functionalized magnetic field comprising positive and negative pulsed magnetic fields produced by electromagnetic coils, to the brains of normal mice. In a few minutes, the prepared FMNPs effectively reached the brain, presenting proof of blood-brain-barrier passage. Based on the results, this approach for the delivery of this magnetic drug could be extended to preclinical and clinical use and could enhance the probability of progress in the treatment of neurological disorders.79 In another study, curcumin and selenium nanoparticle loaded poly-lactide-co-glycolide (PGLA) nanospheres were analyzed. The synthesized drug delivery system could decrease amyloid-β levels in brain samples from AD mice and significantly healed memory inadequacies shown by model mice; this was described as an attractive way of treating Alzheimer's disease.80


3.1.5 Nanotechnology for Parkinson's disease (PD). 
PD is a neurological disorder involving damage to dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra, leading to problems in the control of actions and affecting 1–2% of the population mostly over the age of 65. The pathological signature in the brain of a PD sufferer is cytoplasmic inclusions, named Lewy bodies, comprising 50–700 nm-long strands of the protein α-synuclein. Several cellular mechanisms are considered to be implicated in neuronal decay during PD, for example, endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial and proteasomal dysfunction. For the in vitro diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, An and co-workers developed a gold-doped titanium dioxide nanotube array to manufacture a photoelectrochemical immune sensor with high sensitivity for the detection of α-synuclein. Similarly, some other researchers have also established in vitro quantifiable analysis techniques for neurotransmitters associated with PD. Presently, there are no existing records related to the use of nanomaterials for the in vivo diagnosis of PD.66,81
Yoo et al.82 fabricated electromagnetic-field (EMF) magnetized Au nanoparticle systems, which greatly accelerated the modification rate of somatic cells, and the resultant induced dopaminergic neurons displayed many functional features of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. The prepared electromagnetic field system presents a non-intrusive way to potentiate the in vivo direct reprogramming of neurons and, therefore, it may be highly appropriate for clinical applications. The outcome of this work proposed that the reprogramming of somatic cells inside neurons through electromagnetized Au nanoparticles may present a novel remedial treatment for Parkinson's, as well as for other neurodegenerative conditions. Further, the performance of cerium oxide nanoparticles was also checked toward induced Parkinson's disease in rats. Hegazy and his team designed a system to assess whether cerium oxide nanoparticles could alleviate neurochemical and neurobehavioral deficits arising from 6-hydroxydopamine-induced neurotoxicity in rats and recommended their antiapoptotic and antioxidant effects as a probable mechanism explaining the elevated striatal levels and enhanced motor performance.83 Raj et al.84 developed chitosan-based pramipexole nanoparticles specifically for nose-to-brain drug delivery. Based on an in vivo study, the authors suggested that the prepared pramipexole-loaded chitosan nanoparticles could be utilized for productive brain targeting through a non-intrusive nasal route for the treatment of PD.

3.2 Nanotechnology in medical devices
In medical treatment and diagnostics, nanoscale devices have created new horizons, as technological developments relating to materials and biosensors in these devices have turned out to be forerunners for evolving medical applications. For example, nanomaterials have had an active influence in the magnetic resonance imaging and X-ray contrast agent marketplaces, which are appraised to be worth near to $400 million and $3 billion per year, respectively.
On the basis of standard sandwich ELISA, Song et al.85 introduced a platinum nanoparticle volumetric bar-chart chip (V-chip), and this was utilized for the exposure of lung cancer biomarkers like CYFRA 21-1 in buffer and serum. To prove the broad nature of the probable applications, tests were executed via cell-based ELISA and on-chip cell cultures to detect human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and phosphorylated HER2 (pHER2) on the surfaces of breast-cancer cells. We know that bacterial infections related to medical devices remain a question in present-day medicine, as many patients are being implanted with medical devices that offer environments and surfaces that are suitable for bacterial colonization. Specifically, devices that are made up of hydrophobic ingredients are considered more prone to bacterial infections because of the usually noticeable desirable attachment of bacteria to these surfaces. Tran and his team86 developed a simple and novel process to include antimicrobial silver NPs in a hydrophobic polymer and accomplish the extended release of active Ag to deal with this concern. A new methodology was selected to include Ag nanoparticles into a polycaprolactone polymer (an FDA-approved polymer) matrix to enhance the release of Ag ions from the matrix for use in antimicrobial medical device applications. A device for early cancer detection was designed by Garai et al.,87 which delivered multiplex molecular data through a panel of surface-enhanced Raman scattering nanoparticles. This device allowed for the quick circumferential scanning of hollow organs, such as the colon and oesophagus. Also, black phosphorus nanoparticles were used for the first time by Yew et al.88 for DNA detection. An extensive linear detection range with acceptable linearity (r = 0.91) ranging from 4 to 4000 pM was attained with the prepared nanosensor. The results obtained extended the applications of synthesized black phosphorus to nucleic acid detection and other targets, such as proteins, enzymes, and inorganic ions.
Nanostructured materials also play an exceptional role in the fields of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Nowadays, to restore, develop, and uphold the functionality of defective or lost tissue, tissue engineering shows great potential for the manufacturing of functional substitutes. The key application areas of tissue engineering include cancer, skin, dental, neurology, urology, and cardiology uses. Recently, Ashtari et al.89 compiled an impressive article on conductive nanomaterials for cardiac-tissue engineering. It elaborates the great potential of electroactive nanomaterials for use in cardiac regeneration. The development and utilization of different materials, such as carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, conductive polymers, gold nanostructures, and graphene, were explained in detail (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Various categories of nanostructures utilized for the production of electrically conductive cardiac-tissue-engineering scaffolds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright: 2019, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, Que et al.90 reported the size-dependent anti-invasive properties of silver nanostructures toward lung-cancer cells. The effects of Ag NPs in different size ranges (13, 45, and 92 nm) were studied against A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. In vitro studies revealed that 13 nm Ag NPs repressed the growth and invasion of lung-cancer cells. This may be due to apoptosis via the NF-kB signaling pathway, complimented by the upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins and the downregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins. In another case, a biohybrid conductive PMCNT hydrogel functionalized with multiwall carbon nanotubes was developed by Roshanbinfar et al.91 The synthesized gel promoted human mesenchymal stromal cell (hMSC) proliferation. It also enhanced the probability that these cells would correspondingly proliferate upon transplantation, expanding the number of hMSCs over time. Consequently, this improves the paracrine signaling, which influences the stimulation of endogenous cardiac repair.
Recently, Li et al.92 reported core–shell BSA-coated CaF2 nanostructures. The synthesized CaF2-matrix nanodepots showed excellent performance during in vivo biomineralization. These nanodepots signify an effective approach for monitoring and promoting various metabolic activities related to biomineralization. Another system, bioinspired matrix vesicles (MVs) embedded with black phosphorus, which were functionalized with cell-specific aptamers, was reported by Wang et al.93 The prepared aptamer-guided MVs exhibited the exceptional capacity to facilitate in vivo biomineralization and further promote new bone generation. This strategy can be used to exploit bioinspired materials and to promote the future applications of bioinspired materials in biological and medical engineering.
The introduction of nanotechnology to the forensic sciences has opened up the door to simple data collection and analysis. This technology can act as a catalyst to speed up evidence analysis in real-time, applying various aspects of nanotechnology relating to genetics, medicine, analytical chemistry, etc.94 Wang et al.95 reported upconversion NPs functionalized with a lysosome-binding aptamer for latent-fingerprint imaging. These NPs have the ability to suppress background fluorescence and they make fingerprint imaging possible on problematic surfaces. This strategy can serve as a robust approach for applications relating to forensic investigations and medical diagnostics. In another report, Zn2GeO4. Ga, Mn NPs with persistent luminescence were developed and employed for the time-gated imaging of latent fingerprints.96 The results proved their ability to eliminate background fluorescence to afford highly sensitive latent-fingerprint imaging. Different metal oxide NPs (ZnO, TiO2, Fe2O3) exist for the optical imaging and mass spectrometric determination of small drug molecules in latent fingerprints.97 Mass spectroscopic determination was performed using NPs as substrates for surface-assisted laser desorption ionization/mass spectrometry (SALDI-MS), which enabled the detection of small drug molecules. Among the mentioned NPs, the utilization of Fe2O3 NPs led to the best SALDI performance and the highest detection limits for the analytes of interest. Yu et al.98 synthesized non-toxic Au-nanoclusters@montmorillonite using a microwave-assisted synthesis method and used it as an alternative florescent developing reagent for enhancing latent fingerprints deposited on various surfaces, like glass, stainless steel, etc., for individual identification. The system showed good sensitivity, non-toxicity, and strong resistance to background interference. These kinds of hetero-nanosystems are evolving as superior sensors and can replace the conventional red phosphors in latent-fingerprinting technology.
3.3 An overview of some of the latest patents relating to medicine and medical devices

3.3.1 Medicine. 
Functionalized magnetic nanoparticles were introduced by Akhtari et al.99 to provide a method for grading and detecting cancer cells. The main core materials, suitable for inclusion in functionalized magnetic nanoparticles, included ferrites with the general composition of MeOxFe2O3, where Me is a bivalent metal like Co, Mn, or Fe. This method involved the use of functionalized magnetic nanoparticles, which contained a moiety that was responsible for selective association with and/or metabolic uptake into cancer cells. Based on estrogen and progesterone receptors and involving the administration of Taxane, Desai et al.100 invented a method and kit for treating breast cancer in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents or radiation. For imaging and anti-cancer therapy, different synthesis methods using metal–bisphosphonate nanoparticles were disclosed by Lin and his group101 for the treatment of cancer or disorders linked to bones, such as osteoporosis, bone metastases, and Paget's diseases, as well as the creation of imaging agents. Gonda and his team102 patented liposomal ciprofloxacin formulations showing activity against non-tuberculous mycobacteria. This clinical model was found to be beneficial for the treatment of patients with M. avium and M. abscessus lung infections with combination therapy given orally or intravenously. Masour et al.103 developed a composition made up of liposomes, an antigen capable of generating a humoral immune response, a carrier containing a repeated phase of a hydrophobic substance, and an adjuvant that initiates or increases the activity of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2).
For the treatment of Alzheimer's and other diseases related to age, curcumin formulations with improved bioavailability were prepared by Frautschy and Cole.104 This composition comprises a curcuminoid, an antioxidant, a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, a water solubilizer, and a glucuronidation inhibitor. In the first embodiment, the curcuminoid was dissolved in edible oil and further emulsified, and in the second embodiment, solubilization was attained via forming curcuminoid-lipid micelles, and the composition delivered solid lipid nanoparticles or a microemulsion. The resultant composition could be provided as a liquid, gel, or capsule, or in other pharmaceutically suitable forms. In another case, an effective amount of bryostatin in a biopolymer was used. The biopolymer contained a number of microspheres with diameters between 1 and 1000 nm. This invention was directed at oral administration for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.105
Harmon et al.106 invented a composition related to gene therapy and involving delivery to the central nervous system for treating Parkinson's disease using nucleic acid nanoparticles. Through this method, an intranasal administration of compact nucleic acid NPs was fabricated for brain-based therapeutic purposes. For the treatment of cerebral nerve diseases, recently, Kim and Yoo107 provided a method for direct transdifferentiation reprogramming into neurons via incorporating metal nanoparticles that could be magnetized by an electromagnetic field and a cell therapeutic agent for the treatment of cerebral nerve diseases.


3.3.2 Medical devices. 
Nanomaterials are having a considerable impact in the area of medical devices for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases. Many medical devices containing nanomaterials are currently under development, and some have already been launched in the market.
An oil-in-water nanoemulsion-based composition was patented by Port et al.108 for use as a contrast agent, especially in magnetic resonance imaging. Also, nanoparticle implantation techniques provided by Larsen et al.109 were used to create strongly adherent surface coatings on the surfaces of substrates. NPs were embedded into medical devices via accelerating them to a speed ranging between 100 to 1000 m s−1 and embedding the particles into the polymer surface of a medical device or a device precursor. There are many medical devices, and it is essential to sustain their aseptic properties over time. The solution to this problem is to produce these devices in such a way that they contain antimicrobial agents for extended periods. There are some heavy metals, like Ag, Au, Zn, and Cu, along with their compounds that exert an antimicrobial effect on different microorganisms, including different bacteria and fungi. This effect is known as the ‘oligodynamic effect’. Keeping all this in mind, Li and Sheu110 used Ag nanoparticles; the advantage of this invention was that it used considerably less antimicrobial material in devices like ureteral stents, urological catheters, urological scopes, guidewires, tissue-engineering scaffolds, etc.Table 2 compiles a list of patents related to nanomaterials that have been used in medicine and medical devices.
Table 2 A list of patents for the use of nanotechnology in medicine and medical devices




Patent title
International publication/patent no.
Patent date
Proposed use
Assignee or inventor




Cholesterol level lowering liposomes
US8703744B2
Apr. 22, 2014
Cholesterol-level-lowering liposomes
The Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford


Particles for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases
US20140161896A1
Jun. 12, 2014
The treatment of neurodegenerative diseases with the activity of the lysosomal enzymes in the lysosomes of brain cells
Ramot at Tel-Aviv University Ltd, Tel-Aviv (IL)


Methods of treating cancers with therapeutic nanoparticles
US20150017245A1
Jan. 15, 2015
The treatment of cholangiocarcinoma or tonsillar cancer
BIND Therapeutics, Inc., Cambridge, MA (US)


Method for the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease
US20150086616A1
Mar. 26, 2015
An invention related to the treatment and prevention of Alzheimer's disease
Steven Lehrer, New York, NY (US)


MRNA for use in treatment of human genetic diseases
US9061021B2
Jun. 23, 2015
For the treatment of human genetic diseases
Shire Human Genetic Therapies, Inc., Lexington, MA (US)


Neurotherapeutic nanoparticle compositions and devices
US20150231266A1
Aug. 20, 2015
The invention provides a composition for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases
Susan Marie Metcalfe, Cambridge (GB); Yale University, New Haven, CT (US)


Polymeric/ceramic composite materials for use in medical devices
US9125968B2
Sep. 8, 2015
Improved materials for the construction of medical devices
Boston Scientific Scimed, Inc., Maple Grove, MN (US)


Controlled disintegrating implantable medical devices
US9248034B2
Feb. 2, 2016
An implantable device for the treatment of body disorders
Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Inc., Santa Clara, CA (US)


Nanoparticle and polymer formulations for thyroid hormone analogs, antagonists, and formulations and uses thereof
US9289395B2
Mar. 22, 2016
The use of nanoparticles to promote angiogenesis
Nano-pharmaceuticals, LLC, Rensselaer, NY (US)


Nanoparticle active ingredient conjugates
US9345768B2
May 24, 2016
Involves the injection of solutions containing nanoparticles for the treatment of cancer
Magforce AG, Berlin (DE)


Intravenous curcumin and derivatives for treatment of neurodegenerative and stress disorders
US9393198B2
Jul. 19, 2016
The formulation was effective in the treatment of different neurological disorders
Signpath Pharma INC., Quakertown, PA (US)














Foam prepared from nanoemulsions and uses
US9539208B2
Jan. 10, 2017
Composition to treat or prevent disorders of the skin, body cavity, or mucosal surfaces.
Foamix Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Rehovot (IL)


Perfluorocarbon nanoemulsions with endocytosis enhancing surface for gene-transfer
US9616131B2
Apr. 11, 2017
Stable perflurocarbon nanoemulsions for gene transfer
Soluventis UG (DE)


Cerium oxide nanoparticles for the treatment and prevention of stroke and cardiovascular disease
US9649337B2
May 16, 2017
To treat or prevent neurological injury using cerium oxide nanoparticles
Edward Via Virginia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Blacksburg, VA (US)


Process for preparing solid lipid sustained-release nanoparticles for delivery of vitamins
US9907758B2
Mar. 6, 2018
The invention has utility in the treatment of diseases like tuberculosis and its use may be extended to others, such as cancer, acne, and osteoporosis
Panjab University Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Punjab (IN)


Liposome compositions comprising an adjuvant that activates or increases the activity of TLR2 and uses thereof
US10105435B2
Oct. 23, 2018
Increases the activity of toll-like receptor 2 via controlling the composition of liposomes
Immuno Vaccine Technologies INC. Dartmouth, Nova Scotia (CA)


Prodrug compositions, prodrug nanoparticles, and methods of use thereof
US10201500B2
Feb. 12, 2019
Composition for the in vivo delivery of the compound to the target cell
Washington University, St. Louis, MO (US)


Oral anaerobic glutathione supplement in the liposome suspension
US10272130B1
Apr. 30, 2019
For the treatment of cellular oxidative stress in a user
Stephen N. Pitcher, Alpine, UT (US); Danny Clinton Purser, Provo, UT (US)





4. Nanotechnology in electronics
Research into semiconductor nanomaterials, opening with introductory efforts involving nanocrystals in the 1980s, has presented an area of ongoing significant thrust in nanoscience and nanotechnology. Attention originated due to various striking features relating to light emission, charge transport, thermal diffusion, and mechanics that occur at nanometer-scale dimensions, especially owing to size-scaling properties.111 The assimilation of different classes of semiconductor nanomaterials (1D, 2D, and 3D layouts) into single systems is of great advantage for use in existing and emerging electronic devices, such as infrared imaging cameras, addressable sensor arrays, hybrid silicon complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor circuits, multifunctional radio-frequency communication devices, and nanowire devices.112 To date, nanomaterials have been used in many areas of electronics, and production is estimated to grow in the coming years as research leads to an increasing number of usages, including in batteries, chips, fuel cells, photovoltaic cells, lighting, displays, etc.
4.1 The use of nanomaterials in different devices

4.1.1 Nanomaterials in batteries. 
In recent years, the commercialization of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries and the benefits of this technology have led to gains in the battery marketplace; this has inspired the scientific and technological communities to devote even more energy to establishing novel materials and solutions for obtaining novel examples of Li-ion batteries.
The design of Li-ion batteries (Fig. 8) is very simple, enclosing a separator sandwiched between a cathode and anode impregnated with an electrolyte; the entire assembly is encircled by closed casing that shields the materials from tough conditions, specifically water vapor and oxygen from the environment.113
 Fig. 8  A basic diagram of a lithium-ion battery: (1) cathode collector; (2) anode collector; (3) cathode material; (4) anode material; and (5) separator with electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright: 2015, IOP Science. 
Numerous nanostructures have been fabricated to address substantial material- and electrode-based challenges that exist in current battery set-ups at the present time.114,115 For example, Si nanotubes were synthesized by Park and co-workers116via a simple reductive decomposition method. The prepared nanotubes showed remarkable results, having a large reversible charge capacity of 3247 mA h g−1 with coulombic efficiency of 89%. Additionally, the capacity of a Li-ion full cell comprising a Si nanotube anode (Fig. 9) and LiCoO2 cathode was 10 times higher compared to commercially obtained graphite, even after 200 cycles. For the first time, MgH2 nanoparticles were tested as a negative electrode material for the electrochemical conversion reaction with lithium. The cycling life stability was greatly enhanced, with good electrochemical capacity of 500 mA h g−1. This new method and treatment described by the authors enhanced the electronic contact between the carbon host and MgH2. The results obtained when using this material are very promising, and this material could be used as an electrode with impressive electrochemical properties in lithium-ion batteries.117 Numerous nanostructured active materials, such as MnO2,118 Ag4V2O6F2,119 CuV2O6,120 Co3O4,121 TiS2,122 Ni(OH)2,123 LiFePO4,124etc., have been fabricated and will be explored by researchers to discover good battery applications.
 Fig. 9  A representation of a lithium-ion pathway in silicon nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2 The use of nanomaterials in chips. 
On a small scale, the capability to execute laboratory operations using chip devices is very tempting. Owing to the good surface properties of nanomaterials, chip devices can greatly benefit overcoming the most pressing challenges relating to analytical processes, thus enhancing the selectivity, sensitivity, and reproducibility.125 Chip devices function with a much smaller amount of solution, generally picolitre/nanolitre volumes, with small amounts of sample, ranging from a single molecule to a few million molecules. Several groups have shown working on-chip devices using nanomaterial-modified detectors.126,127 For example, Fig. 10 shows the assimilation of four different nanomaterials via a sequential spatially controlled dielectrophoresis method. In this method, in the array, an AC signal is applied to the preferred electrode, and the chip is deeply immersed in a dispersion of the given nanomaterial.
 Fig. 10  The dielectrophoresis method involving the transmission of the assembly signal to several electrodes in parallel; several electrodes can be populated all together. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright: 2014, PLOS ONE. 
To accumulate various nanomaterials on the same plane, this procedure can be repeated consecutively with diverse dispersions. The manufacturing of the underlying chip with electrode patterns is the main portion that is completed in a cleanroom situation by means of a top-down photolithography method, whereas the rest of the dielectrophoresis assembly route is executed in a modest cleanroom research laboratory environment at room temperature.117 In another case, Grigoras and coworkers128 used an atomic layer deposition method and developed a stable and efficient supercapacitor electrode via combining porous silicon and TiN for integrated energy storage. For these devices, various carbon-based materials have also been explored for chip integration, such as graphene reduced from graphite oxide,129 carbon nanotube devices, silicon-carbide-derived carbon films,130etc.


4.1.3 The use of nanomaterials in fuel cells. 
Fuel cells are electrochemical energy scavengers that, by way of a chemical reaction with an oxidizing agent like oxygen or air, transform the chemical energy of a fuel (for example hydrogen or methanol) into electricity.131 Fuel cells can be classified as alkaline, direct-methanol, molten-carbonate, phosphoric-acid, proton-exchange-membrane, or solid-oxide fuel cells. Fuel cell systems are commercial products in numerous areas, such as stationary power generation;132 the powering of portable and compact devices, like laptop computers, mobile phones, radios, pagers, etc.;133 the propulsion of vehicles;134etc.


4.1.4 The use of nanomaterials in lighting and displays. 
Nanomaterials have been developed as dynamic materials for use in light-emitting diodes, showing tunable optical bandgaps, great color purity, and high photoluminescence quantum yields. They seem to be favorable resources for use in next-generation ultrahigh-definition displays, as well as in electroluminescent devices and for backlighting liquid-crystal displays.135 Quantum dots are some of the most visually fascinating models showing how materials can perform differently on the nanoscale. Via solution chemistry, one can develop crystals of a semiconductor in a reaction flask. In the initial growth phase, when the crystals are less than 10 nm in diameter, the bandgaps of these semiconductor nanocrystals depend upon their size, allowing for the simple tuning of their absorption and emission spectra.136 CdSe nanocrystals were the first commercialized materials used in light-emitting devices, reported in 1994.137 Although these nanocrystals have severe problems relating to the toxicity of Cd, they are still seen as the best-performing example, and they are highly reliable lighting nanocrystals for industrial development. From collected data, it is perceived that various research groups have introduced variants of these materials with different chemicals and compositions, such as CdSe/CdS,138 CdSe/ZnS,139 CdTe,140 CuInS2, CuInSe2,141 AgInS2,142 CuGaS2,143etc.Table 3 provides a list of patents related to nanomaterials used in electronics.
Table 3 A list of patents involving the use of nanotechnology in electronics




Patent title
International publication/patent no.
Patent date
Proposed use
Assignee or inventor




Method for manufacturing semiconductor device and method for growing graphene
US8642410B2
Feb. 4, 2014
The manufacturing of a semiconductor device
Fujitsu Limited, Kawasaki (JP)


Palladium-catalyzed reactions executed on solid-phase peptide synthesis supports for the production of self-assembling peptides embedded with complex organic electronic subunits
US20140114052A1
Apr. 24, 2014
Biosensing
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD (US)


Controlled buckling structures in semiconductor interconnects and nanomembranes for stretchable electronics
US8729524B2
May 20, 2014
Flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices
The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL (US)


Semiconductor device and method of manufacturing the same
US8823077B2
Sep. 2, 2014
Memory device or a diode
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)


Radiofrequency devices based on carbon nanomaterials
US8860137B2
Oct.14, 2014
Radiofrequency devices
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA (US)


Stretchable and foldable electronic devices
US8905772B2
Dec. 9, 2014
Multilayer devices
The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL (US)


Semiconductor device, method of manufacturing the same, and an electronic device including the semiconductor device
US8946789B2
Feb. 3, 2015
Transistors and diodes
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)


Carbonaceous nanomaterial-based thin-film transistors
US8987710B2
Mar. 24, 2015
Transistor devices
Polyera Corporation, Skokie, IL (US)


Nano-composite structures, methods of making, and use thereof
US9076570B2
Jul. 7, 2015
Related to lithium-ion batteries, capacitors, supercapacitors, or fuel cells
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY (US)


Interconnected hollow nanostructures containing high capacity active materials for use in rechargeable batteries
US9231243B2
Jan. 5, 2016
Electrode layer for use in rechargeable batteries
Amprius, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA (US)


Branched nanostructures for battery electrodes
US9325014B2
Apr. 26, 2016
Efficient battery electrodes
The research foundation of State University of New York, New York, NY (US)


Optical member, display device having the same and method of fabricating the same
US9335459B2
May 10, 2016
Display devices
LG INNOTEK CO., LTD, Seoul (KR)


Electronic paper display device
US9442343B2
Sep. 13, 2016
An electronic paper display device
Beijing Boe Optoelectronics Technology GO., LTD, Beijing (CN)


Extended two-dimensional metal nanotubes and nanowires useful as fuel cell catalysts and fuel cells containing the same
US9680160B2
Jun. 13, 2017
Efficient fuel cell catalysts
The Regents of The University of California, Oakland, CA (US)


Tube-in-a-tube electronic sensors
US9739741B2
Aug. 22, 2017
Electronic sensors
University of Maryland, College Park, MD (US)


Luminescent particle, materials, and products including same, and methods
US20170066963A1
Mar. 9, 2017
Useful in remote and proximity lighting and displays
Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd (US)


3d printed active electronic materials and devices
US9887356B2
Feb. 6, 2018
Components such as plastic parts, metal lines, passive conductors, and biological materials
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ (US)


Graphene electronic device and manufacturing method thereof
US10157989B2
Dec. 18, 2018
Electronic devices
Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)


Illumination system for reflective displays
US10190743B2
Jan. 29, 2019
Display devices
E INK Corporation, Billerica, MA (US)





4.2 An overview of some of the latest patents relating to electronics
An electrode and an electric device comprising a composite graphene nanomaterial was developed by Ryu and coworkers.144 This composite was proficient in increasing the electrode capacity per volume via the stacking of graphene sheets. A battery electrode was patented by Cui et al.145 in the form of nanowires using single growth conditions to promote the growth of crystalline nanowires. In another case, Courtel and Abu-Lebdeh146 used xanthan gum (polysaccharide) as a better binder material for the binding of an electrode, specifically an anode for lithium–sulphur or lithium-ion batteries, which provided stable capacities in batteries. The use of xanthan gum provided a higher and more stable discharge capacity.
Waki and coworkers147 investigated the redox properties of modified carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and proved that the modified CNTs themselves are suitable for use in the electrode of a fuel cell. They produced a fuel cell electrode via depositing metal oxide (cobalt oxide, iron oxide, vanadium oxide, tin oxide, or nickel oxide) or metal nitride (cobalt nitrate, iron nitrate, vanadium nitrate, tin nitrate, or nickel nitrate) in the form of microparticles on the surfaces of CNTs and claimed a better production process and suitable fuel cell electrode. Similarly, in another case, a platinum-based electrode catalyst or alloy catalyst for a fuel cell with excellent oxygen reduction capabilities was prepared by Jin et al.148 This platinum-based alloy catalyst contained at least one metal chosen from the group comprising iridium, cobalt, vanadium, chromium, manganese, copper, titanium, niobium, indium, tin, tungsten, and cerium metals.
Transparent conductive films prepared using a combination of silver nanowires and water-soluble polymers, i.e. polyvinyl alcohol or gelatin, were investigated and used by Zou and Eckert.149 The prepared films had very good transparency and conductivity, and great stability. In another patent,150 displays and light-emitting devices with enhanced performance were developed using semiconductor nanocrystals with a “core” of semiconductor materials, which was surrounded by a “shell” made of another semiconductor material. The core and shell materials can be semiconductor materials, and examples were CdO, CdS, CdSe, CdTe, HgS, HgSe, HgTe, InN, InP, InSb, MgS, MgSe, PbO, PbS, PbSe, PbTe, ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, Si, and Ge. The core and shell were selected based on the basic features and compatibilities of the above-mentioned compounds, e.g., a ZnS, ZnSe or CdS overcoating could be grown on CdSe or CdTe semiconductor nanocrystals. Hence light-emitting devices and displays with improved performance were successfully revealed.
5. Nanotechnology in the cement industry
Cement is one of the most extensively applied raw material in the construction industry. It is a kind of binder material that can be used to produce a heterogeneous mortar or concrete matrix. The resilience of concrete material and its good binding properties and strength are some of the properties that are of prime importance to practicing engineers and researchers.151,152 With this in mind, several attempts have been made to improve the durability of concrete. The durability of concrete strongly depends upon the binder; this is why modifications of the binder have been carried out.153,154 The rise in demand for high quality and better performance materials has led to the speedy growth of new grades of raw materials.155
Nanotechnology has great potential to overcome the prevailing problems in the construction industry. Significant enhancement in the quality and durability of cementitious items can be perceived upon amalgamation with nanomaterials such as ZnO, nano-SiO2, carbon nanotubes, Al2O3, TiO2, nano-clays, nanofibers of carbon, and other nanomaterials.156 The nano-modification of concrete can be carried out in one or all of the phases present (the solid phase, liquid phase, and liquid–solid interface), and this is achievable due to its porous liquid–solid composition.157 Nano-engineering is a smart step to achieve cement-based materials with outstanding performance. The main advantages accompanying these nanomodifications include: (i) improved cement hydration; (ii) high stretching power; (iii) increased ductility; (iv) the better ability to regulate cracking and shrinking phenomena. A plausible mechanism for the improved properties of mortar and concrete is summarized in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  A schematic flow chart of the improvements that nanotechnology provide in cement-based materials. 
The hurdles faced by ongoing research in this field involve the high complexity related to manipulation at the nanoscale level. But, as a hopeful evolving technology, nanotechnology has been exploited in the manufacture of concrete. It is known that extending the service life of concrete requires either enhancing the mechanical properties (e.g., compressive strength, ductility, bearing resistance) or reducing shrinkage and porousness.156 Not only have the mechanical properties been improved but the possibility of tackling some major challenges, such as the release of carbon dioxide, poor cracking resistance, long remedial periods, low tensile strength, water absorption capabilities, low ductility, and other mechanical performances, has increased. The fusion of nanostructures into concrete has enhanced the properties of concrete. There is a vast array of materials with nanosized dimensions, such as nanoclays, hematite (Fe2O3), silica (SiO2), TiO2 NPs, and carbon nanotubes, that has been employed to lessen the porousness or improve the strengthen of concrete, and these materials are discussed in detail below.
5.1 Types of nanomaterials used in the cement industry

5.1.1 Nanosilica (SiO2). 
Silica-based materials are commonly employed in various areas, including cementitious materials, bone-tissue engineering, and drug delivery. Concrete is one of the most extensively used synthetic solids on the planet. Its huge consumption has called for noteworthy state-of-the-art policies in order to develop concrete with upgraded properties. Rupasinghe and co-workers158 reported the addition of nanoscale SiO2 (NS) to cement at low levels to monitor the impact on the strength characteristics of the nano-modified concrete. Different levels of replacement, i.e., 4, 8, and 12%, were carried out with NS in cement, and it was validated that a replacement level of 8% could considerably reduce the quantity of capillary pores and intensify the hydrated phase content. Rai et al.159 illustrated the performance of NS in cement paste. The presence of NS increased the durability and the strength of the cement paste, along with growth in calcium silicate hydrate (C–S–H) compounds. Indeed, enhancements in the performance induced by the growth of NS resulted in the reduction of CO2 discharge without affecting the mechanical performance or durability of advanced cementitious items. In another report,160 a material with size-controlled spherical calcium silicate particles was synthesized. It exhibited improved physicochemical properties and durability. The influence of the reaction conditions, such as the concentration of catalyst, the calcium/silica ratio, and different surfactants, on the final product was tested. Lavergne et al.161 reported the impact of NS on the various properties, e.g., hydration, rheology, and strength, of cement phases. NS induced improvements in the hydration properties of the cement; this was analyzed via isothermal calorimetry. This effect was ascribed to the specific surface of NS. In addition, it was visualized that cement paste incorporating 5% NS enclosed a reduced but significant amount of portlandite for 90 days. This revealed that NS is more effective than silica fumes as a pozzolanic reactant. Therefore, cement paste modified with NS may be considered as a potential applicant for repairing or building steel-reinforced concrete structures (Fig. 12). Ultra-lightweight cement (ULWC) is cement-based slurry with a minimum of 20% (per volume) foam embedded in plastic mortar. When colloidal NS was added into ULWC at low levels, the strength was found to be increased to 27 MPa because of the increased packing density of the solid particles and modification at the interface level of the microstructures. A 2% content of colloidal NS showed the greatest improvement, resulting in improved microstructures, mechanical properties, and durability performance.162 NS was also utilized as a surface treatment system for cement-based materials. The characteristics of the pozzolanic reactivity of NS and its influence on the properties of cement at both early and later stages revealed that products produced via pozzolanic reactions are more compact than those produced using silica fumes. Also, NS-modified hardened cement mortar resulted in a less water-absorbing entity.163
 Fig. 12  The importance of nano-silica in the cement industry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright: 2017, Elsevier. 
NS acts not only as a filler to enhance the mortar cement microstructure, but it also acts as a promoter of pozzolanic reactions. The wide range of enhancements in properties as a result of the use of NS have widened its scope for future use in the construction industry.


5.1.2 Nano-titanium oxide (TiO2). 
Titanium is one of the most widely available minerals, mainly in rutile and ilmenite forms, and it is broadly distributed in the earth's crust and lithosphere. In this modern era, TiO2 has attracted the interest of physical chemists, material scientists, and engineers due to its characteristic semiconducting and catalytic properties.
Taking into account its practical applicability on the commercial scale, TiO2 has become an important candidate due to its inertness to different chemical environments and its long-term photostability. In recent years, many researchers have incorporated TiO2 NPs into cement-based concrete or asphalt concrete to enhance the durability or to endow these products with certain types of desirable functionality.164–166 The early-stage performance of cement-based materials altered with TiO2 NPs has been examined by various researchers.165,166 When TiO2 NPs are mixed with cement-based materials, not only is the hydration enthalpy increased but the hydration rate is also accelerated via heterogeneous nucleation.167 Feng et al.168 evaluated the de-pollution activity of cement paste modified with different concentrations of TiO2 NPs. An increase in the amount of NPs added to the cement paste increased the amount of NOx degradation. Experiments disclosed that for cement paste with a water/cement ratio of 0.4, the 28 day three-point bending strengths were increased by 4.52, 8.00, 8.26, and 6.71% when TiO2 NPs (0.1, 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5% by mass of cement, respectively) were incorporated, and tested demonstrated improved depolluting activity. These kinds of upgrades in mechanical properties can be ascribed to improvements in the microstructures of pastes.169 Hydrophobic TiO2 anisotropic nanocrystal rods with two different surface-functionalities based on chloroform and n-heptane were formulated. The designed materials were investigated for use in high-quality coatings and assessed for their solar irradiation response. These coatings provided long-term stability and photocatalytic efficacy towards specific persistent pollutants. The results indicated that spray-coating with these modified materials has substantial potential for real applications on buildings and monuments.170


5.1.3 Nano-alumina (Al2O3). 
Nano-alumina (NA) is a material with high thermal stability, and it exists in different crystalline forms that can bring different characteristic properties to the materials in which they are incorporated. NA was blended into cement matrices and its effects on the properties of the cement were studied. To understand the effects of NA, 5% NA (γ-phase) was chosen, and the early-stage hydration of Portland cement was investigated. The dissolution of NA led to a high initial ettringite content, leading to the high release of heat. The continuous dissolution of NA initiates the additional formation of ettringite, which promotes the depletion of gypsum, thus accelerating the reaction of aluminate.171 The other properties were also affected by modification with NA, i.e., the elastic modulus and compressive strength. Therefore, to investigate the effects, Li et al.172 constructed cylindrical specimens with distinct volume fractions of NA, and these were molded and tested after different lengths of curing time. It was revealed that incorporating NA into the cement matrix enhances the compressive strength and elastic modulus of mortar. This is achieved via an increase in the compactness of the interfacial transition zone and a decrease in the porosity. The mechanical strength is an important factor to consider and, aiming at this property, NA ranging from 0.5 to 1.5% mass was added into calcium aluminate cement (with a water to cement ratio (w/c) of 0.36). The mixture showed the creation of tiny hydrate crystals along with the amorphous aluminium gel. The microstructure in the case of 1% NA additive, which was found to be much denser, was highest in mechanical strength at an elevated temperature during the hardening process.173 When the long-term strength of Portland cement with 5% NA in the cement matrix was investigated, the formation of some extra phases (mainly monosulphate) reduced the sulfur species concentration, consumed portlandite, increased the bound water content, and limited the aluminum concentration in the pore solution, simultaneously. The development of additional phases also increased the solid volume, reduced the porosity, and refined the pore structure in the cement paste, consequently leading to increased strength at later stages.174


5.1.4 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs). 
Cementitious composites modified with carbon nanofibres, carbon nanotubes, and graphene oxide displayed significantly improved compressive strength and open porosity from unmodified examples.175 Graphene oxide and polyvinyl alcohol fibers were added to cement-based materials and their effects on the mechanical performance, durability, and microstructure of cement were investigated. It was found that the compressive and flexural strengths were increased by 30.2 and 39.3%, respectively, at the end of day 28. Adding graphene oxide coupled with polyvinyl alcohol fibers into cement-based materials possibly stimulated the hydration of cement, refined the microstructure, and significantly improved the mechanical strength and durability.176 Carbon nanotubes were also found to result in a remarkable increase in the flexural strength, fracture toughness, and other properties of cement-based materials due to reinforcement provided by carbon nanotubes.177 These studies revealed the great potential of surface-treated CNTs for reinforcing cement.

5.2 An overview of some of the latest patents in the cement industry
The modification of cement and concrete has been an outstanding scientific achievement that has enabled the construction of industrial housing, engineering facilities, and transport highways all over the planet. Improvements in the construction and technical properties of Portland cement are being made to upgrade the quality of cement. A nanocement production method has been developed that is initiated via the mechanochemical activation of dispersed grains of Portland cement in the presence of a polymeric modifier with sodium naphthalene sulfonate, SiO2, and gypsum, followed by grinding the material to a specific surface area of 300–900 m2 kg−1, which is carried out in a ball mill. This method could be used to create cement of grades 72.5–82.5 with improved construction and technical properties that cost less with reduced hazardous gas emission.178
Nanozeolite incorporation into cement provided enhanced compressive and tensile strength, improved rheology, and changes in the cement microstructure. These effects may improve the health of cement during drilling operations and under high-pressure and high-temperature conditions.179 A cement slurry composition containing hydraulic cement, water, and between 1 and 4% organically modified nanoclay also showed improved strength. A method was demonstrated for cementing a high-pressure, high-temperature well via pumping this cement composition between casing and a formed wellbore, to fill the gap between the casing and the wellbore, and allowing the cement to harden.180 There have been many reports from the cement industry (Table 4) that reveal the benefits of nanotechnology in enhancing the properties of cement.
Table 4 A list of patents for the use of nanotechnology in the cement industry




Patent title
International publication/patent no.
Patent date
Proposed use
Assignee or inventor




A cement-based nano-composite material and its preparation method
CN104446264B
Oct. 28, 2015
Improvements in the mechanical properties of cement
Hunan Ming Xiang Technology Development Co., Ltd


High early-strength high-performance concrete mixed with nano silicon dioxide powder and preparation method thereof
CN103979886A
Jan. 3, 2016
High-early-strength high-performance concrete
Hohai University


Method for producing nano-cement, and nano-cement
EP3006415A1
Apr. 13, 2016
Portland cement
Bickbau Marsel Yanovich Bikbau Ulyana Marselievna Sakrytoe Aktsyonernoe Obschestvo “imetstroi


Cement compositions and methods utilizing nano-hydraulic cement
US9512346B2
Dec. 2, 2016
Portland cement
Halliburton Energy Services Inc.


Nanotechnology protection method for existing bridge structures
CN105696475A
Jun. 27, 2017
Strengthening cement
Hefei Caleston Building Materials Co., Ltd


Carbon Nanotube-Fiber Reinforced Cement and Concrete
US20080134942A1
Jun. 12, 2018
Portland cement
University of Plano, TX, USA


A kind of dispersion mill preparing nano-material modified cement
CN108514928A
Sep. 11, 2018
Nanocement
China University of Mining and Technology


Nano zeolite cement additive and methods of use
US10150904B1
Sep. 28, 2019
Enhancements in the various properties of cement
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals


Nanoclay as an additive for high pressure and high temperature well cementing
US9650296B2
Sep. 29, 2019
High strength cement
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals




6. Nanotechnology in the agricultural industry
Agriculture, the skill and art of nourishing vegetation and livestock, is an important sector that produces and provides raw materials for the livelihoods of people. Natural resources are limited for fulfilling the increasing demands of the world's population; due to this, there is a need for the development of sustainable and economical agricultural practices. The agriculture sector is dealing with many global challenges, e.g., the effective use of resources; climate change; urbanization; increased populations; and environmental issues, like run-off and the accumulation of hazardous chemicals into the soil. The sustainability of agriculture is necessary for the development of soil fertility, food quality, and food quantity, which can help to deal with poverty problems prevailing in developing countries.181 There is no doubt that sustainable growth in agriculture depends upon new and innovative techniques such as nanotechnology. Nanotechnology has great potential to assist the agriculture sector in various areas, like rapid disease detection, enhancing the capacity of plants to absorb nutrients, and the molecular management of disease (Fig. 13). In this section, the potential applications of nanoscale science and engineering and nanotechnology toward agriculture, food production, and related issues are discussed.
 Fig. 13  The utilization of nanotechnology in agriculture. 
6.1 Nanostructures for soil improvement and disease management
Nanostructures can be designed and deployed for the real-time monitoring of crop growth, soil moisture, soil fertility, temperature, nutrients, diseases, etc. There is a variety of nanostructures that has been investigated for improving soil quality and disease management. This section provides a glimpse of potential nanosystems that can be useful in agricultural activities in the near future.

6.1.1 Inorganic-based nanostructures. 
In commercial agriculture practices, speedy and uniform seed germination and seedling emergence are vital determinants of successful stand establishment.182 In recent years, several types of metal-based NPs have been explored for the growth and quality improvement of seeds and soil.183 Silver (Ag) NPs exhibited diverse applications and have shown antimicrobial efficacy in cosmetics, household products, etc.184 Ag NPs were checked for seed priming effects in salt-stressed soil in the case of wheat plants. It was observed that seed priming with Ag NPs (2 to 5 mM) decreased the negative effects of salt stress on wheat-plant growth. The NPs increased the activities of antioxidant enzymes and decreased the hydrogen peroxide and malondialdehyde content levels in wheat leaves compared to salt-stressed plants.185 Ag NPs showed potential for use in the cultivation of crops in saline areas. Zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs were investigated for plant growth (lupines) in saline areas. The plants were subjected to sodium chloride with and without priming with different concentrations of ZnO for 20 days. The salinized plants showed a reduction in plant growth and levels of photosynthetic pigments against the controlled plant. It could be said that plants primed with ZnO exhibited better growth rates in terms of root lengths, shoot lengths, fresh weights, and dry weights.186 Iron oxide NPs were exploited to investigate the progress and growth of peanut plants (Arachis hypogaea), which are sensitive to iron deficiency, and the performance was compared to a chelated-iron compost (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid-iron; EDTA-iron) fertilizer. The studies revealed that iron oxide NPs increased the plant-growth parameters of peanut plants, like the root length, plant stature, biomass, and soil plant analysis development value. The NPs promoted the growth of peanut plants via amending the phytohormone number and antioxidant enzyme action.187 A report was published on the positive effects of zinc oxide and iron NPs on the growth of wheat (Triticum aestivum). Upon exposure to the NPs, the plant heights, spike lengths, and dehydrated masses of shoots, roots, spikes, and grains were found to be increased due to NPs affecting the photosynthesis process in wheat plants. The presence of NPs of these metal oxides increased the levels of Zn and Fe in the roots, grains, and shoots, which indicated that these materials can be employed in the bio-fortification of cereals.188 Greenly synthesized ZnO NPs were explored at various concentrations for the seedling development and germination of wheat. The greenly synthesized ZnO NPs were found to result in better outcomes than the control (Fig. 14). The results indicated that wheat seed samples treated with a moderate amount (62 mg L−1) of green ZnO NPs showed maximum enhancements (P < 0.005) in their root and shoot dimensions relative to other concentration levels or chemically synthesized counterparts (50 and 105% enhancements, respectively).189
 Fig. 14  The root and shoot profiles of wheat seeds with varied concentrations of ZnO NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright: 2019, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, nanotechnology displays a range of unique properties that can be utilized to manage plant health via improved solubility, delivery, and long-term residual activity.190 Powdery mildew is a type of common and destructive disease affecting cucurbits. Plants before and after disease were exposed to Ag NPs at different concentrations to determine their antifungal effects. The lower concentration of nano-sized Ag was enough to infiltrate the microbial cells. NP concentrations of 50 ppm and 100 ppm resulted in significant inhibition effects against powdery mildew in field tests.191 Copper-based NPs also proved to be a logical choice in plant disease management.192 Strayer-Scherer et al.193 fabricated Cu nanocomposites, with core–shell Cu, multivalent Cu, and fixed Cu via quaternary ammonium, for the management of bacterial diseases in plants. The nano-Cu products were more effective in reducing bacterial spot disease in greenhouse experiments and in the field when compared to Cu fungicides. Goswami et al.194 reported that nano-formulations fabricated using Ag, ZnO, Al2O3, and TiO2 NPs were very much effective at controlling rice weevil and Grasserie disease in silkworms.


6.1.2 Carbon-based nanostructures. 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) involve a 2-dimensional graphene sheet being rolled into tubular form and are a new form of carbon. Khodakovskya et al.195 showed enhancements in tomato seed growth when the soil was enriched with CNTs. The increase in seed development was found to be due to an increase in the water uptake through penetration via the CNT pores. Zn–chitosan NPs were synthesized and their effects on maize-plant growth were assessed; an amount of synthesized NPs of 1.0–1.6 × 10−2% was revealed to have in vitro antifungal effects, and sprout growth was promoted. Further, substantial bug control was revealed via enhancing the natural immune system of plants through improving the functioning of defense enzymes, balancing reactive oxygen species (ROS), and boosting lignin accumulation.196 In another report, alginate/chitosan (ALG/CS) and chitosan/tripolyphosphate based nanovehicles were fabricated for the plant growth regulator gibberellic acid (GA3). Bioactivity assays employing Phaseolus vulgaris illustrated that the ALG/CS–GA3 NPs were found to be potent in speeding up the growth of leaf areas and increasing the chlorophyll and carotenoid levels in the tested plants.197

6.2 Nanostructures: the nano-delivery of agrochemicals
Due to rises in food-trade demand, the use of nitrogen-based fertilizers, e.g., urea, has increased (29%). The requirement for food due to rises in population has indirectly increased the content of N2O (a greenhouse gas) in the atmosphere. The increase in its level has enhanced the atmospheric temperature, thus contributing to global warming.198 Nano-vehicles/nano-fertilizers can be effectively applied to deliver different ingredients, like pesticides, fertilizers, plant-growth regulators, etc., to specific sites. The mechanisms involve the balanced release of fertilizer, which results in less nutrient loss and the reduction of undesirable nutrient interactions with microorganisms, water, and air.199
Silicon-based fertilizers are employed for improving the growth rates of seeds and roots to boost plant resistance towards harmful environments.200 Food production can be increased via the use of additives in fertilizers, like non-toxic TiO2 or titanium NPs, which enhance water retention capacities.190 Liu and Lal201 developed hydroxyapatite NPs and utilized them to observe the growth rates of Glycine max (soybean) during greenhouse testing. The synthesized system was compared to a traditional phosphorus fertilizer and it was noticed to lead to an increase of about 20–30% in seed production and development. Iron NPs were shown to increase the content of chlorophyll in the leaves significantly when applied to soybean. This suggested that iron NPs could be employed as supplements for deficiencies in soybeans, which may be a more effective way to avoid chlorotic symptoms in leaves.202 Taran et al.203 stated that the use of molybdenum (Mo) NPs with nitrogen-fixing bacteria resulted in the enhancement of the growth of chickpea seeds compared with incubation with only Mo NPs via increasing bacterial resistance.
6.3 Nanostructures as nano-biosensors
Nano-biosensors are portable and sensitive detectors that can be constructively employed to identify fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, moisture, and soil pH at agriculture sites. The effective utilization of biosensors can lead to sustainable agricultural practices, upgrading the quantity and quality of the crops produced. The sensors may result in the cost-effective usage of natural assets, e.g., water, agrochemicals, etc., due to precision farming.204 These developed nanosensors can be employed to detect plant viruses, pathogens, and the amounts of soil nutrients.205 The herbicide metsulfuron-methyl (an acetolactate synthase inhibitor) was detected using an atomic force microscopy tip modified with an acetolactate synthase enzyme based nanobiosensor.206 The time-efficient detection of bacteria and viruses with precision can be achieved using nanobiosensors, which can lead to an increase in the safe delivery of food to customers.207 An extremely sensitive glassy-carbon-modified biosensor for organophosphorus pesticides was fabricated using carbon nanotubes functionalized and tailored with amino groups. Functionalization was done to allow the successful immobilization of acetylcholinesterase and the system was utilized to analyze the quality of vegetable samples.208 Another acetylcholinesterase biosensor based on multiwalled carbon nanotubes on a liposome bioreactor was prepared and used for the sensing of organophosphate pesticides.209 The detection of organophosphorus pesticides, e.g., chlorpyrifos and carbofuran, was achieved using a highly sensitive acetylcholinesterase biosensor tailored with hollow gold nanospheres, and detection limits of 0.06 and 0.08 μg dm−3 were observed for chlorpyrifos and carbofuran, respectively.210 Acetylcholinesterase immobilized over Zn–Se quantum dots with a biosensor based on a graphene–chitosan-nanocomposite-modified electrode was used to detect the organophosphate pesticide methyl parathion, and a detection limit of 0.2 nmol dm−3 was found.211
6.4 An overview of some of the latest patents in the agriculture industry
A nano-vanadium–selenium fertilizer with sustained and controlled release was prepared and utilized in the technical field of agricultural fertilizers. The preparation method requires precursors like ammonium chloride, monoammonium phosphate, potassium sulfate, humic acid, vanadium peroxide, sodium selenite, a natural macromolecular component, and coating agents. The prepared fertilizer was found to have a high utilization rate, resulting in substantially improved yields and improved crop qualities, and reducing the usage of chemical fertilizers to decrease soil pollution.212 The incorporation of nanotechnology into the field of agriculture also affects the growth of plants. Another invention utilizes the light-activated chemistry of TiO2via a composition involving an organosilane and the photocatalyst TiO2 for treating plant bacterial diseases via a psyllid vector. The metal-based system allowed photocatalytic oxidation and ROS generation, which reduces the pathogen levels.213 Another report suggested that nano-SiO2-based carriers are proficient in the controlled release of pesticides. In this report, the nano-SiO2 pore volume, pore size, surface area, and pore volume can be adjusted depending upon the required release of pesticides. The release of pesticides can be adjusted accurately and, therefore, the utilization of pesticides is increased, leading to a reduction in environmental pressure.214 Examples where nanosystems have improved agricultural practices in various ways are depicted in Table 5.
Table 5 A list of some of the latest patents in the agriculture industry




Patent title
International publication/patent no.
Patent date
Proposed use
Assignee or inventor




Nano vanadium-selenium sustained and controlled release fertilizer and preparation method thereof
CN104892084A
Sep. 9, 2015
Fertilizer delivery via nanoparticles
Huang Shengbo


Organic functional polymer organophosphorus insecticide sustained release agent of a kind of nano-silica grafting and preparation method thereof
CN105831113B
Nov. 1, 2016
A nano-delivery system for the sustained release of insecticide
Huazhong Agricultural University


Nano silica carrier capable of controlling the release of pesticide
CN105815312A
Aug. 8, 2016
Pesticide nano-delivery
Haining Chengying Nano Technology Co., Ltd


The method for cultivation of plants using metal nanoparticles and the nutrient medium for its implementation
WO2017101691A1
Dec. 2, 2016
Plant growth mediators
Shenzhou Space Biotechnology Group


Composition containing an organosilane and a photocatalyst, and methods of treating flowering plants infected with a bacterial disease using the composition
US10117435B2
Nov. 6, 2018
Plant disease management
Nano Photo Sciences, LLC, Tequesta, FL (US)


Rod-shaped plant viral nanoparticles or virus-like particles for agricultural applications
WO2017210682A1
Dec. 7, 2017
Nanodelivery
Case Western Reserve University


Preparation method for nano zinc thiazole
CN107417640A
Mar. 23, 2019
Treatment for bacterial infections
Zhao Jinhao, Jingli Cheng, Cheng Xiao, Dou Xin Li, Zhongshan Zhu, Guo Nian


Synthesis of nanocomposites and their use in enhancing plant nutrition
US20190202750A1
Oct. 28, 2019
A nanocomposite for increasing nutrition
Washington University in St. Louis


Electrochemical sensors and methods for using electrochemical sensors to detect plant pathogen infection
US20180142277A1
Oct. 28, 2019
A nanosensor for pathogen detection
National Science Foundation and University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.




7. Conclusions
Nanotechnology has great potential in every field of industry due to the ease of synthesis and the unique properties offered. The use of nanotechnology in different fields, especially medicine, offers some exciting prospects. The incorporation of nanotechnology in the field of medicine will modernize treatment and detection methods and will help in the monitoring of diseases and changes in the human body in the future. The exposure of the cosmetics industry to the nanoworld is exciting; many cosmetics companies are coming up with products modified with nano-ingredients and there is still a lot of scope for discovery on this research road. The cement and agriculture industries have also been influenced by the mesmerizing world of nanotechnology. Construction materials modified with nanostructures are found to be more effective at dealing with environmental conditions than traditional ones. Nano-based sensors have been proven to be successful at dealing with problems relating to monitoring nutrition levels and diseases. Growth in the plant- and site-specific delivery of fertilizers and other essential ingredients can be successfully achieved via the formulation of nanowagons. Nano-based formulations can also improve herbicide applications via offering better penetration along with the slow and sustained release of active ingredients. Hence, amalgamation with nanotechnology can provide green and ecofriendly routes for sustainable agriculture. The employment of nanotechnology provides not just another step towards miniaturization but a new route towards the more sustainable growth of new ways of thinking.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
Deepika Jamwal acknowledges financial support from a National Post-Doctoral Fellowship (PDF/2017/001869), from the DST, SERB, India, and Panjab University, Chandigarh and Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute for Shastri Post-Doctoral Fellowship (SRSF-2019). Aashima Sharma is thankful to CSIR for an open SRF fellowship. Surinder Kumar Mehta is grateful to CSIR for project support.
References
R. Ciriminna, N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, F. Meneguzzo, Y.-J. Xu and M. Pagliaro, Commercialization of Graphene-Based Technologies: A Critical Insight, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7090–7095 RSC .
M. C. Roco and W. S. Bainbridge, Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Maximizing Human Benefit, J. Nanopart. Res., 2005, 7, 1–13 CrossRef .
L. Mazzola, Commercializing Nanotechnology, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-A. D. Jones, G. Mi and T. J. Webster, A Status Report on FDA Approval of Medical Devices Containing Nanostructured Materials, Trends Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 117–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hamburg, FDA's Approach to Regulation of Products of Nanotechnology, Science, 2012, 336, 299–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Kostoff, R. G. Koytcheff and C. G. Y. Lau, Technical Structure of the Global Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Literature, J. Nanopart. Res., 2007, 9, 701–724 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Roco, Towards a US National Nanotechnology Initiative, J. Nanopartices Res., 1999, 1, 435–438 CrossRef .
A. Rinaldi, Healing Beauty? More Biotechnology Cosmetic Products That Claim Drug-like Properties Reach the Market, Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ., 2008, 9, 1073–1078 CAS .
S. Foss Hansen, L. R. Heggelund, P. Revilla Besora, A. Mackevica, A. Boldrin and A. Baun, Nanoproducts-What Is Actually Available to European Consumers?, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 169–180 RSC .
A. Lohani, A. Verma, H. Joshi, N. Yadav and N. Karki, Nanotechnology-Based Cosmeceuticals, ISRN Dermatology, 2014, 2014, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kapoor and S. Si, Strategic Analysis of Cosmeceuticals with Special Reference to Antiaging Creams, Int. J. Business Management Invention, 2014, 3, 44–52 Search PubMed .
J. de Leeuw, H. de Vijlder, P. Bjerring and H. Neumann, Liposomes in Dermatology Today, J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol., 2009, 23, 505–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fakhravar, P. Ebrahimnejad, H. Daraee and A. Akbarzadeh, Nanoliposomes: Synthesis Methods and Applications in Cosmetics, J. Cosmetic Laser Therapy, 2016, 18, 174–181 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Rahimpour and H. Hamishehkar, Liposomes in Cosmeceutics, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2012, 9, 443–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kapoor, A. D’Souza, N. Aibani, S. S. Nair, P. Sandbhor, D. Kumari and R. Banerjee, Stable Liposome in Cosmetic Platforms for Transdermal Folic Acid Delivery for Fortification and Treatment of Micronutrient Deficiencies, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 16122 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Guo, M. Lin, Y. Gu, X. Zhao and G. Hu, Preparation of PEG-Modified Proanthocyanidin Liposome and Its Application in Cosmetics, Eur. Food Res. Technol., 2015, 240, 1013–1021 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sebaaly, A. Jraij, H. Fessi, C. Charcosset and H. Greige-Gerges, Preparation and Characterization of Clove Essential Oil-Loaded Liposomes, Food Chem., 2015, 178, 52–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Izquierdo, J. Esquena, Th. F. Tadros, C. Dederen, M. J. Garcia, N. Azemar and C. Solans, Formation and Stability of Nano-Emulsions Prepared Using the Phase Inversion Temperature Method, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Rai, N. Mishra, K. S. Yadav and N. P. Yadav, Nanoemulsion as Pharmaceutical Carrier for Dermal and Transdermal Drug Delivery: Formulation Development, Stability Issues, Basic Considerations and Applications, J. Controlled Release, 2018, 270, 203–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, H. B. Eral, T. A. Hatton and P. S. Doyle, Nanoemulsions: Formation, Properties and Applications, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 2826–2841 RSC .

          L. Quintero, D. E. Clark and A. McKellar, J. Nanoemulsions, US Pat., 8357639B2,  2013 Search PubMed .

          D. Huglin, J. F. Roding, A. Werner and H. Georg, Use of Nanodispersions in Cosmetics End Formulations, US Pat., 2005/0191330,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. M. A. G. Barreto, M. S. Maia, A. M. Benicá, H. R. B. S. de Assis, V. R. Leite-Silva, P. A. da Rocha-Filho, M. M. F. de Negreiros, H. A. de Oliveira Rocha, E. A. Ostrosky and P. S. Lopes, 
            et al., Evaluation of in Vitro and in Vivo Safety of the By-Product of Agave Sisalana as a New Cosmetic Raw Material: Development and Clinical Evaluation of a Nanoemulsion to Improve Skin Moisturizing, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 108, 470–479 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ribeiro, S. Barreto, E. Ostrosky, P. Rocha-Filho, L. Veríssimo and M. Ferrari, Production and Characterization of Cosmetic Nanoemulsions Containing Opuntia Ficus-Indica (L.) Mill Extract as Moisturizing Agent, Molecules, 2015, 20, 2492–2509 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Lee, J. A. MacKay, J. M. J. Fréchet and F. C. Szoka, Designing Dendrimers for Biological Applications, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 1517–1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Tomalia, H. Baker, J. Dewald, M. Hall, G. Kallos, S. Martin, J. Roeck, J. Ryder and P. Smith, Dendritic Macromolecules: Synthesis of Starburst Dendrimers, Macromolecules, 1986, 19, 2466–2468 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Newkome, Z. Yao, G. R. Baker and V. K. Gupta, Micelles. Part 1. Cascade Molecules: A New Approach to Micelles. A [27]-Arborol. The, J. Org. Chem., 1985, 50, 2003–2004 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Franzke, K. Steinbrecht, T. Clausen, S. Baecker and J. Titze, Cosmetic Compositions For Hair Treatment Containing Dendrimers Or Dendrimers Conjugates, US Pat., 6068835,  2000 Search PubMed .

          D. Allard and S. Forestler, Self-Tanning Cosmatic Composition, US Pat., 6399048,  2002 Search PubMed .

          B. A. Wolf and F. Snyder, Cosmetic Compositions Having Keratolytic And Anti-Acne Activity, US Pat., 5449519,  1995 Search PubMed .
N. P. Aditya and S. Ko, Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLNs): Delivery Vehicles for Food Bioactives, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30902–30911 RSC .
A. Garcês, M. H. Amaral, J. M. Sousa Lobo and A. C. Silva, Formulations Based on Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLN) and Nanostructured Lipid Carriers (NLC) for Cutaneous Use: A Review, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2018, 112, 159–167 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Zheng, L. Wu, X. Zhu, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Novel Solid Lipid Nanoparticle with Endosomal Escape Function for Oral Delivery of Insulin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9315–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Katariya and J. Prajapati, The Review of Patents on Solid Lipid Nanoparticles, Invent Journals, 2013, 2013, 1–3 Search PubMed .
F. Suter, D. Schmid, F. Wandrey and F. Zülli, Heptapeptide-Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles for Cosmetic Anti-Aging Applications, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2016, 108, 304–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, N. Wei, M. Lopez-Garcia, D. Ambrose, J. Lee, C. Annelin and T. Peterson, Development and Evaluation of Resveratrol, Vitamin E, and Epigallocatechin Gallate Loaded Lipid Nanoparticles for Skin Care Applications, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2017, 117, 286–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Trombino, R. Cassano, R. Muzzalupo, A. Pingitore, E. Cione and N. Picci, Stearyl Ferulate-Based Solid Lipid Nanoparticles for the Encapsulation and Stabilization of β-Carotene and α-Tocopherol, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 72, 181–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kamel and D. M. Mostafa, Rutin Nanostructured Lipid Cosmeceutical Preparation with Sun Protective Potential, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2015, 153, 59–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aramaki, J. Yamada, Y. Tsukijima, T. Maehara, D. Aburano, Y. Sakanishi and K. Kitao, Formation of Bilayer Membrane and Niosomes by Double-Tailed Polyglyceryl-Type Nonionic Surfactant, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10664–10671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moghassemi and A. Hadjizadeh, Nano-Niosomes as Nanoscale Drug Delivery Systems: An Illustrated Review, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 185, 22–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nasir, H. Sl and K. Amanpreet, Niosomes: An Excellent Tool for Drug Delivery, Int. J. Res. Pharmacy Chem., 2012, 9, 479–487 Search PubMed .
C. T. Lo, A. Jahn, L. E. Locascio and W. N. Vreeland, Controlled Self-Assembly of Monodisperse Niosomes by Microfluidic Hydrodynamic Focusing, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8559–8566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Webster, S. Singh, A. Gupta and N. Kotla, Formulation and Evaluation of a Topical Niosomal Gel Containing a Combination of Benzoyl Peroxide and Tretinoin for Anti acne Activity, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 171–182 Search PubMed .
A. Manosroi, C. Chankhampan, W. Manosroi and J. Manosroi, Transdermal Absorption Enhancement of Papain Loaded in Elastic Niosomes Incorporated in Gel for Scar Treatment, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2013, 48, 474–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Yadav, S. Nanda, G. Sharma and O. P. Katare, Systematically Optimized Coenzyme Q10-Loaded Novel Proniosomal Formulation for Treatment of Photo-Induced Aging in Mice: Characterization, Biocompatibility Studies, Biochemical Estimations and Anti-Aging Evaluation, J. Drug Targeting, 2016, 24, 257–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaul, N. Gulati, D. Verma, S. Mukherjee and U. Nagaich, Role of Nanotechnology in Cosmeceuticals: A Review of Recent Advances, J. Pharmaceutics, 2018, 2018, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jančíková, R. Janiš, J. Krejčí and I. Hauerlandová, Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in Cosmetic Products. Advance in Environment, Biotechnology Medicine; Czech Republic, 2012, 278–282 Search PubMed .
P.-J. Lu, S.-C. Huang, Y.-P. Chen, L.-C. Chiueh and D. Y.-C. Shih, Analysis of Titanium Dioxide and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in Cosmetics, J. Food Drug Anal., 2015, 23, 587–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Osmond and M. J. Mccall, Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in Modern Sunscreens: An Analysis of Potential Exposure and Hazard, Nanotoxicology, 2010, 4, 15–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ottofuelling, F. Von Der Kammer and T. Hofmann, Commercial Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles in Both Natural and Synthetic Water: Comprehensive Multidimensional Testing and Prediction of Aggregation Behavior, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10045–10052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, R. Magaye, V. Castranova and J. Zhao, Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles: A Review of Current Toxicological Data, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2013, 10, 1–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Weir, P. Westerhoff, L. Fabricius, K. Hristovski and N. von Goetz, Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles in Food and Personal Care Products, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 2242–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gajbhiye and S. Sakharwade, Silver Nanoparticles in Cosmetics, J. Cosmet., Dermatol. Sci. Appl., 2016, 6, 48–53 CAS .
M. Sierra-Rodero, J. M. Fernández-Romero and A. Gómez-Hens, Photometric Determination of Thioglycolic Acid in Cosmetics by Using a Stopped-Flow Reverse Flow-Injection System and the Formation of Gold Nanoparticles, Microchem. J., 2011, 97, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Mousavi, S. Nafisi and H. I. Maibach, Fullerene Nanoparticle in Dermatological and Cosmetic Applications, Nanomedicine, 2017, 13, 1071–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, W. Zhao, M. Zhai, F. Wei, Z. Cai, N. Sheng and Q. Hu, Molecularly Imprinted Layer-Coated Silica Nanoparticles for Selective Solid-Phase Extraction of Bisphenol A from Chemical Cleansing and Cosmetics Samples, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 658, 209–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Dumas, E. Nonless, V. Alard, D. Quiles and E. Perrier, Method For Preventing Or Slowing Down The Appearance Of The Effects Of Skin Aging Using A Tocopheryl Phosphate In Liposomes, US Pat., 2014/0072617A1,  2014 Search PubMed .

          W. Neuberger, F. T. Labuan, V. Albrecht and D. Castro, Photodynamic Cosmetic Procedure and Healing Method, US Pat., 8999933B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          T. Takakura, Oil-In-Water Type Emulsion Sunscreen Cosmetic Composition, US Pat., 8697038B2.  2014 Search PubMed .

          S. Hori and T. Limura, Copolymer Having Carbosiloxane Dendrimer Structure and Composition and Cosmetic Containing the same, US Pat., 10172779B2.  2019 Search PubMed .

          G. Dahms, A. Jung and H. Seidel, Compositions for the Targetted Release of Fragrances and Aromas, US Pat., 8716214B2.  2014 Search PubMed .

          R. Petersen, Nanocrystals for Use in Topical Cosmetic Formulations and Method of Production Thereof, US Pat.,9114077B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          M. Dalko, Use of a Jasmine Acid Compound For Treating Greasy Skin, US Pat., 9138389B2.  2015 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Gu, J. Chan, A. Wang, R. Langer and O. Farokhzad, Nanoparticles in Medicine: Therapeutic Applications and Developments, Clin. Pharmacol. Ther., 2008, 83, 761–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Nikalje, Nanotechnology and Its Applications in Medicine, Med. Chem., 2015, 5, 81–89 Search PubMed .
F. Re, M. Gregori and M. Masserini, Nanotechnology for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Nanomedicine, 2012, 8, S51–S58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sosnik, Nanotechnology Contributions to the Pharmacotherapy of Pediatric HIV: A Dual Scientific and Ethical Challenge and a Still Pending Agenda, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 833–837 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, A. R. Votruba, O. C. Farokhzad and R. Langer, Nanotechnology in Drug Delivery and Tissue Engineering: From Discovery to Applications, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3223–3230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suri, H. Fenniri and B. Singh, Nanotechnology-Based Drug Delivery Systems, J. Occup. Med. Toxicol., 2007, 2, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Gmeiner and S. Ghosh, Nanotechnology for Cancer Treatment, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2014, 3, 111–122 CAS .
R. J. Barnard, Prevention of Cancer through Lifestyle Changes, J. Evidence-Based Complementary Altern. Med., 2004, 1, 233–239 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Alexis, J.-W. Rhee, J. P. Richie, A. F. Radovic-Moreno, R. Langer and O. C. Farokhzad, New Frontiers in Nanotechnology for Cancer Treatment, Urol. Oncol.: Semin. Orig. Invest., 2008, 26, 74–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, Y. Lee, C. Song, H. R. Cho, R. Ghaffari, T. K. Choi, K. H. Kim, Y. B. Lee, D. Ling and H. Lee, 
            et al., An Endoscope with Integrated Transparent Bioelectronics and Theranostic Nanoparticles for Colon Cancer Treatment, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kossatz, J. Grandke, P. Couleaud, A. Latorre, A. Aires, K. Crosbie-Staunton, R. Ludwig, H. Dähring, V. Ettelt and A. Lazaro-Carrillo, 
            et al., Efficient Treatment of Breast Cancer Xenografts with Multifunctionalized Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Combining Magnetic Hyperthermia and Anti-Cancer Drug Delivery, Breast Cancer Res., 2015, 17, 66 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Xu, L. M. Solis, W. Tao, L. Wang, C. Behrens, X. Xu, L. Zhao, D. Liu and J. Wu, 
            et al., Long-Circulating SiRNA Nanoparticles for Validating Prohibitin1-Targeted Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7779–7784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Xu, C. Liang, C. Wang, R. Peng and Z. Liu, Photothermal Therapy with Immune-Adjuvant Nanoparticles Together with Checkpoint Blockade for Effective Cancer Immunotherapy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Modi, V. Pillay and Y. E. Choonara, Advances in the Treatment of Neurodegenerative Disorders Employing Nanotechnology: Nanotechnology and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 2010, 1184, 154–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srikanth and J. A. Kessler, Nanotechnology-Novel Therapeutics for CNS Disorders, Nat. Rev. Neurol., 2012, 8, 307–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. U. Amin, A. K. Hoshiar, T. D. Do, Y. Noh, S. A. Shah, M. S. Khan, J. Yoon and M. O. Kim, Osmotin-Loaded Magnetic Nanoparticles with Electromagnetic Guidance for the Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10619–10632 RSC .
X. Huo, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, Y. Li and L. Zhang, A Novel Synthesis of Selenium Nanoparticles Encapsulated PLGA Nanospheres with Curcumin Molecules for the Inhibition of Amyloid β Aggregation in Alzheimer's Disease, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2019, 190, 98–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Tisch, I. Schlesinger, R. Ionescu, M. Nassar, N. Axelrod, D. Robertman, Y. Tessler, F. Azar, A. Marmur and J. Aharon-Peretz, 
            et al., Detection of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease from Exhaled Breath Using Nanomaterial-Based Sensors, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 43–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoo, E. Lee, H. Y. Kim, D. Youn, J. Jung, H. Kim, Y. Chang, W. Lee, J. Shin and S. Baek, 
            et al., Electromagnetized Gold Nanoparticles Mediate Direct Lineage Reprogramming into Induced Dopamine Neurons in Vivo for Parkinson's Disease Therapy, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1006–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Hegazy, H. M. Maklad, D. M. Samy, D. A. Abdelmonsif, B. M. El Sabaa and F. Y. Elnozahy, Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles Could Ameliorate Behavioral and Neurochemical Impairments in 6-Hydroxydopamine Induced Parkinson's Disease in Rats, Neurochem. Int., 2017, 108, 361–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raj, S. Wairkar, V. Sridhar and R. Gaud, Pramipexole Dihydrochloride Loaded Chitosan Nanoparticles for Nose to Brain Delivery: Development, Characterization and in Vivo Anti-Parkinson Activity, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 109, 27–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, X. Xia, X. Wu, P. Wang and L. Qin, Integration of Platinum Nanoparticles with a Volumetric Bar-Chart Chip for Biomarker Assays, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12451–12455 CAS .
P. A. Tran, D. M. Hocking and A. J. O’Connor, 
            In Situ Formation of Antimicrobial Silver Nanoparticles and the Impregnation of Hydrophobic Polycaprolactone Matrix for Antimicrobial Medical Device Applications, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 47, 63–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garai, S. Sensarn, C. L. Zavaleta, N. O. Loewke, S. Rogalla, M. J. Mandella, S. A. Felt, S. Friedland, J. T. C. Liu and S. S. Gambhir, 
            et al., A Real-Time Clinical Endoscopic System for Intraluminal, Multiplexed Imaging of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanoparticles, PLoS One, 2015, 10, e0123185 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Yew, Z. Sofer, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez and M. Pumera, Black Phosphorus Nanoparticles as a Novel Fluorescent Sensing Platform for Nucleic Acid Detection, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1130–1136 RSC .
K. Ashtari, H. Nazari, H. Ko, P. Tebon, M. Akhshik, M. Akbari, S. N. Alhosseini, M. Mozafari, B. Mehravi, M. Soleimani, R. Ardehali, M. E. Warkiani, S. Ahadian and A. Khademhosseini, Electrically Conductive Nanomaterials for Cardiac Tissue Engineering, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2019, 144, 162–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Que, X. Q. Fan, X. J. Lin, X. L. Jiang, P. P. Hu, X. Y. Tong and Q. Y. Tan, Size Dependent Anti-invasiveness of Silver Nanoparticles in Lung Cancer Cells, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 21134–21138 RSC .
K. Roshanbinfar, Z. Mohammadi, A. S. Mesgar, M. M. Dehghan, O. P. Oommen, J. Hilborn and F. B. Engel, Carbon Nanotube Doped Pericardial Matrix Derived Electroconductive Biohybrid Hydrogel for Cardiac Tissue Engineering, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 3906–3917 RSC .
Z. Li, H. Liu, R. Wang, C. Ji, Y. Wei, M. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Du, Y. Zhang, Q. Yuan and C. Yan, Bioactive Core–Shell CaF2 Upconversion Nanostructure for Promotion and Visualization of Engineered Bone Reconstruction, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16085–16095 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Hu, L. Zhang, C. Zhu, J. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang and Q. Yuan, Bioinspired Extracellular Vesicles Embedded with Black Phosphorus for Molecular Recognition-Guided Biomineralization, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2829 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Sodhi and J. Kaur, Powder Method for Detecting Latent Fingerprints: A Review, Forensic Sci. Int., 2001, 120, 172–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Wei, X. Li, B. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Huang and Q. Yuan, Near-Infrared-Light-Mediated Imaging of Latent Fingerprints Based on Molecular Recognition, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1616–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Ma, H. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Shen, X. Hu, C. Ma, Q. Yuan and W. Tan, Time-Gated Imaging of Latent Fingerprints and Specific Visualization of Protein Secretions via Molecular Recognition, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 12764–12770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O. Amin, M. Madkour and E. Al-Hetlani, Metal Oxide Nanoparticles for Latent Fingerprint Visualization and Analysis of Small Drug Molecules Using Surface-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometry, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 4815–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Yan and Z. Xia, Non-toxic Luminescent Au Nanoclusters@Montmorillonite Nanocomposites Powers for Latent Fingerprint Development, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 50106–50112 RSC .

          M. Akhtari and J. Engel, Use of Functionalized Magnetic Nanoparticles in Cancer Detection, US Pat., 9011913B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          N. P. Desai and P. Soon-Shiong, Breast Cancer Therapy Based on Hormone Receptor Status with Nanoparticles Comprising Taxane, US Pat., 9675578B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          W. Lin, D. Liu, J. D. Rocca, S. A. Kramer and C. Y. Poon, Metal Bisphosphonate Nanoparticles for Anti-Cancer Therapy and Imaging and for Treating Bone Disorders, US Pat., 9693957B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          I. Gonda, J. Blanchard, D. C. Cipolla and L. E. M. Bermudez, Liposomal Ciprofloxacin Formulations with Activity Against Non-Tuberculous Mycobacteria, US Pat., 9532986B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          M. Mansour, M. Karkada and M. G. Weir, Use of Liposomes in a Carrier Comprising a Continuous Hydrophobic Phase for Delivery of Polynucleotides In Vivo, US Pat., 9498493B2.  2016 Search PubMed .

          S. A. Frautschy and G. M. Cole, Bioavailable Curcuminoid Formulations for Treating Alzheimer's Disease and Other Age-Related Disorders, US Pat., 9192644B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          T. P. Castor, J. S. Alexander, G. Purdum, J. D. Rios, L. M. Schrott, T. A. Tyler and M. I. Vizcaino, Drug Delivery System and Method for the Treatment of Neuro-Degenerative Disease, US Pat., 9034347B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          B. Harmon, B. L. Waszezak and M. Cooper, Methods for Delivery to the Central Nervous System of Nucleic Acid Nanoparticles to Treat Central Nervous System Disorders, US Pat., 9486540B2.  2016 Search PubMed .

          J. Kim and J. Yoo, Method for Direct Transdifferentiation Reprogramming into Neurons Using Electromagnetic-Induced Metal Nanoparticles, US Pat., 20190062702A1.  2019 Search PubMed .

          M. Port, C. Robic, F. L. Calderon and S. Chadel, Chelate Nanoemulsion for MRI, US Pat., 9770520B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          R. S. Larsen, E. Peterson and S. R. Schewe, Nanoparticles Implantation in Medical Devices, US Pat., 9408951B2.  2016 Search PubMed .

          J. Li and M.-S. Sheu, Antimicrobial Medical Devices, US Pat., 9333063B2.  2016 Search PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Inorganic Semiconductor Nanomaterials for Flexible and Stretchable Bio-Integrated Electronics, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e15 CrossRef .
J.-H. Ahn, H.-S. Kim, K. J. Lee, S. Jeon, S. J. Kang, Y. Sun, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Heterogeneous Three-Dimensional Electronics by Use of Printed Semiconductor Nanomaterials, Science, 2006, 314, 1754–1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Yaroslavtsev, T. L. Kulova and A. M. Skundin, Electrode Nanomaterials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2015, 84, 826–852 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A Review on New Solutions, New Measurements Procedures and New Materials for Rechargeable Li Batteries, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Promises and Challenges of Nanomaterials for Lithium-Based Rechargeable Batteries, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–12 CrossRef .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Silicon Nanotube Battery Anodes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oumellal, C. Zlotea, S. Bastide, C. Cachet-Vivier, E. Léonel, E. Leroy, L. Aymard, J.-P. Bonnet and M. Latroche, Bottom-up Preparation of MgH2 Nanoparticles with Enhanced Cycle Life Stability during Electrochemical Conversion in Li-Ion Batteries, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14459–14466 RSC .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Mesoporous Crystalline β-MnO2-a Reversible Positive Electrode for Rechargeable Lithium Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sorensen, H. K. Izumi, J. T. Vaughey, C. L. Stern and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Ag4V2O6F2: An Electrochemically Active and High Silver Density Phase, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6347–6352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, S. Zhang, W. Ji, Z. Tao and J. Chen, α-CuV2O6 Nanowires: Hydrothermal Synthesis and Primary Lithium Battery Application, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5361–5367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Li, L. N. Xu and J. Chen, Co3O4 Nanomaterials in Lithium-Ion Batteries and Gas Sensors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 851–857 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Tao, L.-N. Xu, X.-L. Gou, J. Chen and H.-T. Yuan, TiS2 Nanotubes as the Cathode Materials of Mg-Ion Batteries, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2080–2081 RSC .
F.-S. Cai, G.-Y. Zhang, J. Chen, X.-L. Gou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Ni(OH)2 Tubes with Mesoscale Dimensions as Positive-Electrode Materials of Alkaline Rechargeable Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43(32), 4212–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, S. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Ji and J. Chen, Porous LiFePO4/NiP Composite Nanospheres as the Cathode Materials in Rechargeable Lithium-Ion Batteries, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maria-Hormigos, B. Jurado-Sánchez and A. Escarpa, Labs-on-a-Chip Meet Self-Propelled Micromotors, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2397–2407 RSC .
K. Balasubramanian, Challenges in the Use of 1D Nanostructures for On-Chip Biosensing and Diagnostics: A Review, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 1195–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. MacNaughton, S. Ammu, S. K. Manohar and S. Sonkusale, High-Throughput Heterogeneous Integration
of Diverse Nanomaterials on a Single Chip for Sensing Applications, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e111377 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Grigoras, J. Keskinen, L. Grönberg, E. Yli-Rantala, S. Laakso, H. Välimäki, P. Kauranen, J. Ahopelto and M. Prunnila, Conformal Titanium Nitride in a Porous Silicon Matrix: A Nanomaterial for in-Chip Supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 340–345 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hantel, T. Kaspar, R. Nesper, A. Wokaun and R. Kötz, Partially Reduced Graphite Oxide as an Electrode Material for Electrochemical Double-Layer Capacitors, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 9125–9136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, A. Gutes, I. Laboriante, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, Graphitization of N-Type Polycrystalline Silicon Carbide for on-Chip Supercapacitor Application, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 112104 CrossRef .
L. Carrette, K. A. Friedrich and U. Stimming, Fuel Cells – Fundamentals and Applications, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 35 CrossRef .
A. Kirubakaran, S. Jain and R. K. Nema, A Review on Fuel Cell Technologies and Power Electronic Interface, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2430–2440 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Fuel Dyer, Cells for Portable Applications, J. Power Sources, 2002, 106, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chan, A. Bouscayrol and K. Chen, Electric, Hybrid, and Fuel-Cell Vehicles: Architectures and Modeling, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2010, 59, 589–598 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Song, B. Han, T. Fang, J. Li and H. Zeng, High-Efficiency Pure-Color Inorganic Halide Perovskite Emitters for Ultrahigh-Definition Displays: Progress for Backlighting Displays and Electrically Driven Devices, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700382 CrossRef .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Quantum Dot Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Inorganic Perovskite Cesium Lead Halides (CsPbX3), Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Light-Emitting Diodes Made from Cadmium Selenide Nanocrystals and a Semiconducting Polymer, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. A. Bardecker, A. M. Munro, M. S. Liu, Y. Niu, I.-K. Ding, J. Luo, B. Chen, A. K.-Y. Jen and D. S. Ginger, Efficient CdSe/CdS Quantum Dot Light-Emitting Diodes Using a Thermally Polymerized Hole Transport Layer, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 463–467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Son, H. H. Kim, D. K. Hwang, S. Kwon and W. K. Choi, Inverted CdSe–ZnS Quantum Dots Light-Emitting Diode Using Low-Work Function Organic Material Polyethylenimine Ethoxylated, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 510–514 RSC .
J. Du, S. Xu, C. Wang, J. Pan, J. Chen, L. Zhu, C. Lv and Y. Cui, Design and Assembly of an Aqueous Red CdTe QD-LED: Major Factors to Fabricate Aqueous QD-LEDs, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77963–77967 RSC .
S. Wepfer, J. Frohleiks, A.-R. Hong, H. S. Jang, G. Bacher and E. Nannen, Solution-Processed CuInS2-Based White QD-LEDs with Mixed Active Layer Architecture, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11224–11230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki and T. Kuzuya, Photoluminescence Properties and Its Origin of AgInS2 Quantum Dots with Chalcopyrite Structure, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1786–1792 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zuo, K. Chang, J. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Tang, B. Li and Z. Chang, Bubble-Template-Assisted Synthesis of Hollow Fullerene-like MoS2 Nanocages as a Lithium Ion Battery Anode Material, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 51–58 RSC .

          C. J. Ryu, N. Y. Jung, S. G. Kwon and J. Y. Choi, Graphene-Nanomaterial Composite, Electrode and Electric Device Including the Same, and Method of Manufacturing the Graphene-Nanomaterial Composite, US Pat., 9721734B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          L.-F. Cui, C. K. Chan, S. Antonio, R. Ruffo, H. Peng and Y. Cui, Crystalline-Amorphous Nanowires for Battery Electrodes, US Pat. 9061902B2.  2005 Search PubMed .

          F. Courtel and Y. Abu-Lebdeh, Use Of xanthan Gum as an Anode, US Pat., 9601774B2.  2017 Search PubMed .

          K. Waki, M. Takano and K. Lee, Fuel Cell Electrode and Production Process Thereof, US Pat., 9123964B2,  2015 Search PubMed .

          S.-A. Jin, C.-H. Pak, K.-J. Kwon, K.-H. Lee, D.-J. Yoo and J.-W. Lee, Electrode Catalyst for Fuel Cell, Method of Manufacturing the Same, and Fuel Cell Using the Electrode Catalyst, US Pat., 8940453B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          C. Zou and K. Eckert, Transparent Conductive Film Comprising Water Soluble Binders, US Pat., 8962131B2.  2015 Search PubMed .

          S. J. Lee, Optimal Member, Display Device Including the Same, Method for Manufacturing the Same, US Pat., 20160025918A1.  2016 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, L. Fay, M. M. Peterson and Z. Yang, Freeze−Thaw Damage and Chemical Change of a Portland Cement Concrete in the Presence of Diluted Deicers, Mater. Struct., 2010, 43, 933–946 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rozière, A. R. Loukili, E. Hachem and F. Grondin, Durability of Concrete Exposed to Leaching and External Sulphate Attacks, Cem. Concr. Res., 2009, 39, 1188–1198 CrossRef .
X. Shi, N. Xie, K. Fortune and J. Gong, Durability of Steel Reinforced Concrete in Chloride Environments: An Overview, Constr. Build. Mater., 2012, 30, 125–138 CrossRef .
A. R. Bagheri, H. Zanganeh and M. M. Moalemi, Mechanical and Durability Properties of Ternary Concretes Containing Silica Fume and Low Reactivity Blast Furnace Slag, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2012, 34, 663–670 CrossRef CAS .

          A. K. Mukhopadhyay, Next-generation nano-based concrete construction products: a review, Nanotechnology in civil infrastructure, Springer,  2011, pp. 207–223 Search PubMed .
F. Sanchez and K. Sobolev, Nanotechnology in Concrete-A Review, Constr. Build. Mater., 2010, 24, 2060–2071 CrossRef .
E. Garboczi, Concrete nanoscience and nanotechnology: definitions and applications, Nanotechnol. Cem.-Based Constr., 2009, 3, 81–88 Search PubMed .
M. Rupasinghe, P. Mendis, T. Ngo, T. N. Nguyen and M. Sofi, Compressive strength prediction of nano-silica incorporated cement systems based on a multiscale approach, Mater. Des., 2017, 115, 379–392 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rai and S. Tiwari, Nano Silica in Cement Hydration, Mater. Today: Proc., 2018, 5, 9196–9202 CAS .
R. Shahsavari and S. H. Hwang, Size- and Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Calcium Silicate Particles Enables Self-Assembly and Enhanced Mechanical and Durability Properties, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 12154–12166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lavergne, R. Belhadi, J. Carriat and A. B. Fraj, Effect of nano-silica particles on the hydration, the rheology and the strength development of a blended cement paste, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2019, 95, 42–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, Properties of ultra-lightweight cement composites with nano-silica, Constr. Build. Mater., 2019, 199, 696–704 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hou, J. Qian, X. Cheng and S. P. Shah, Effects of the pozzolanic reactivity of nano SiO2 on cement-based Materials, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2015, 55, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dylla, M. M. Hassan, L. N. Mohammad, T. Rupnow and E. Wright, Evaluation of Environmental Effectiveness of Titanium Dioxide Photocatalyst Coating for Concrete Pavement, Transp. Res. Rec., 2010, 2164, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hassan, H. Dylla, L. N. Mohammad and T. Rupnow, Evaluation of the Durability of Titanium Dioxide Photocatalyst
Coating for Concrete Pavement, Constr. Build. Mater., 2010, 24, 1456–1461 CrossRef .
S. Shen, M. Burton, B. Jobson and L. Haselbach, Pervious Concrete with Titanium Dioxide as a Photocatalyst Compound for a Greener Urban Road Environment, Constr. Build. Mater., 2012, 35, 874–883 CrossRef .
A. R. Jayapalan, B. Y. Lee and K. E. Kurtis, Effect of nano-sized titanium dioxide on early age hydration of Portland cement, Nanotechnol. Cem.-Based Constr., 2009, 3, 267–273 Search PubMed .
D. Feng, N. Xie, C. Gong, Z. Leng, H. Xiao, H. Li and X. Shi, Portland Cement Paste Modified by TiO2 Nanoparticles: A Microstructure Perspective, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 11575–11582 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, P. Hou, L. Zhang, P. Yang and X. Cheng, Photocatalytic and hydrophobic activity of cement-based materials from benzyl-terminated-TiO2 spheres with core-shell structures, Constr. Build. Mater., 2017, 148, 176–183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Petronella, A. Pagliarulo, A. Truppi, M. Lettieri, M. Masieri, A. Calia, M. L. Curri and R. Comparelli, TiO2 Nanocrystal Based Coatings for the Protection of Architectural Stone: The Effect of Solvents in the Spray-Coating Application for a Self-Cleaning Surfaces, Coatings, 2018, 8, 356–379 CrossRef .
J. Zhou and F. He, Chemical effect of nano-alumina on early-age hydration of Portland cement, Cem. Concr. Res., 2019, 116, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and M. Wang, Investigations on the preparation and mechanical properties of the nano-alumina reinforced cement composite, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 356–359 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and X. Hou, The effect of nano-γAl2O3 additive on early hydration of calcium aluminate cement, Constr. Build. Mater., 2018, 158, 755–760 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shao and X. Zeng, Enhancement of nano-alumina on long-term strength of Portland cement and the relation to its influences on compositional and microstructural aspects, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2019, 98, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tzilerogloua, M. Stefanidoua, S. Kassavetisb and S. Logothetidis, Nanocarbon materials for nanocomposite cement mortars, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 6938–6947 Search PubMed .
W. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Lv, M. Zhou, Z. Liu, Z. Ren and Z. Yu, Cement-Based Materials Containing Graphene Oxide and Polyvinyl Alcohol Fiber: Mechanical Properties, Durability, and Microstructure, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 638–654 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Singh, M. Kalra and S. K. Saxena, Nanoscience of cement and concrete, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 5478–5487 Search PubMed .

          M. Y. Bickbau, Method for producing nano-cement, and nano-cement. EP3006415A,  2020 Search PubMed .

          M. K. Rahman, M. T. Baig and A. A. Majed, Nano zeolite cement additive and methods of use. US10150904B1,  2018 Search PubMed .

          M. K. Rahman, M. Murtaza, A. A. A. Majed and M. A. Zahrani, Nanoclay as an additive for high pressure and high temperature well cementing. US9650296B2,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. Thornhill, E. Vargyas, T. Fitzgerald and N. Chisholm, Household food security and biofuel feedstock production in rural Mozambique and Tanzania, Food Security, 2016, 8, 953–971 CrossRef .
W. Mahakham, A. K. Sarmah, S. Maensiri and P. Theerakulpisut, Nanopriming technology for enhancing germination and starch metabolism of aged rice seeds using phytosynthesized silver nanoparticles, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 8263–8284 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu and R. Lal, Potentials of engineered NPs as fertilizers for increasing agronomic productions, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 514, 131–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Anjum, S. S. Gill, A. C. Duarte, E. Pereira and I. Ahmad, Silver NPs in soil–plant systems, J. Nano Res., 2013, 15, 1–26 Search PubMed .
A. K. S. H. Mohamed, M. F. Qayym, A. M. A. Hadi, R. A. Rehman, S. Ali and M. Rizwan, Interactive effect of salinity and silver Nanoparticles on photosynthetic and biochemical parameters of wheat, Arch. Agron. Soil Sci., 2017, 63, 1736–1747 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. H. A. Latef, M. F. A. Alhmad and K. E. Abdelfattah, The Possible Roles of Priming with ZnO Nanoparticles in Mitigation of Salinity Stress in Lupine (Lupinus termis) Plants, J. Plant Growth Regul., 2017, 36, 60–70 CrossRef .
R. Mengmeng, M. Chuanxin, H. Yi, G. Jing, R. Yukui, T. Xinlian, Z. Qi, F. Xing, Z. Zetian, H. Tianqi and Z. Siyuan, Iron Oxide nanoparticles as a Potential Iron Fertilizer for Peanut (Arachis hypogaea), Front. Plant Sci., 2016, 7, 815–825 Search PubMed .
M. Rizwan, S. Ali, B. Ali, M. Adrees, M. Arshad, A. Hussain, M. Z. U. Rehman and A. A. Waris, Zinc and iron oxide nanoparticles improved the plant growth and reduced the oxidative stress and cadmium concentration in wheat, Chemosphere, 2019, 214, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Singh, S. Kumar, A. Alok, S. K. Upadhyay, M. Rawat, D. C. W. Tsang, N. Bolan and K. H. Kim, The growth of green synthesized Zinc oxide nanoparticles as nutrient source for plant growth, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 214, 1061–1070 CrossRef CAS .
W. Emlerr, C. Ma and J. White, Nanoparticles for plant disease management, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health, 2018, 6, 60–70 CrossRef .
K. Lamsal, S. W. Kim, J. H. Jung, Y. S. Kim, K. S. Kim and Y. S. Lee, Inhibition Effects of Silver Nanoparticles against Powdery Mildews on Cucumber and Pumpkin, Mycobiology, 2011, 39, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kanhed, S. Birla, S. Gaikwad, A. Gade, A. B. Seabra, O. Rubilar, N. Duran and M. Rai, 
            In vitro antifungal efficacy of copper nanoparticles against selected crop pathogenic fungi, Mater. Lett., 2014, 15, 13–17 CrossRef .
S. A. Strayer, Y. Y. Liao, M. Young, L. Ritchie, G. E. Valla, S. Santra, J. H. Freeman, D. Clark, J. B. Jones and M. L. Paret, Advanced copper composites against copper-tolerant Xanthomonas performance and tomato bacterial spot, Phytopathology, 2018, 108, 196–205 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Goswami, I. Roy, S. Sengupta and N. Debnath, Novel applications of solid and liquid formulations of nanoparticles against insect pests and pathogens, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khodakovskya, E. P. Dervishi, M. Mahmood, Y. Xu, Z. Li, F. Watanabe and A. S. Biris, Carbon nanotubes are able to penetrate plant seed coat and dramatically affect seed germination and plant growth, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3221–3227 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Choudhary and V. Saharan, Zinc encapsulated chitosan nanoparticle to promote maize crop yield, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 127, 126–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. S. Pereira, P. M. Silva, J. L. Oliveira, H. C. Oliveira and L. F. Fraceto, Chitosan nanoparticles as carrier systems for the plant growth hormone gibberellic acid, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 150, 141–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, P. Croteau, K. A. Boering, D. M. Etheridge, D. Ferretti, P. J. Fraser, K.-R. Kim, P. B. Krumme, R. L. Langenfelds, T. D. V. Ommen, L. P. Steele and C. M. Trudinger, Trends and seasonal cycles in the isotopic composition of nitrous oxide since 1940, Nat. Geosci., 2012, 5261–5265 Search PubMed .

          S. E. Emadian, Physiological Responses of Loblolly Pine (Finustaeda L.) to Silicon and Water Stress, Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX,  2017, pp. 27–37 Search PubMed .
M. Othman, H. Saada and Y. Matsuda, Antifungal activity of some plant extracts and essential oils against fungi-infested organic archaeological artefacts, Archaeometry, 2019, 62, 187–199 CrossRef .
R. Liu and R. Lal, Synthetic apatite nanoparticles as a phosphorus fertilizer for soybean (Glycine max), Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. H. Ghafariyan, M. J. Malakouti, M. R. Dadpour, P. Stroeve and M. Mahmoudi, Effects of magnetite nanoparticles on soybean chlorophyll, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 10645–10652 CAS .
N. Y. Taran, O. M. Gonchar, K. G. Lopatko, L. M. Batsmanova, M. V. Patyka and M. V. Volkogon, The effect of colloidal solution of molybdenum nanoparticles on the microbial composition in rhizosphere of Cicer arietinum L, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 289–296 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Rai, S. Acharya and N. Dey, Implications of nanobiosensors in agriculture, J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol., 2012, 3, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Brock, T. E. Douglas, D. C. Queller and J. E. Strassmann, Primitive agriculture in a social amoeba, Nature, 2011, 469, 393–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. N. Da Silva, D. K. Deda, A. L. da Róz, R. A. Prado, C. C. Carvalho, V. Viviani and F. L. Leite, Nanobiosensors based on chemically modified AFM probes: a useful tool for metsulfuron-methyl detection, Sensors, 2013, 13, 1477–1489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Otles and B. Yalcin, Nano-biosensors as new tool for detection of food quality and safety, Log Forum, 2010, 6, 67–70 Search PubMed .
G. X. Yu, W. X. Wu, Q. Zhao, X. Y. Wei and Q. Lu, Efficient immobilization of acetylcholinesterase onto amino functionalized carbon nanotubes for the fabrication of high sensitive organophosphorus pesticides biosensors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 288–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Yan, H. N. Guan, J. Yu and D. F. Chi, Acetylcholinesterase biosensor based on assembly of multiwall carbon nanotubes onto liposome bioreactors for detection of organophosphates pesticides, Pestic. Biochem. Physiol., 2013, 105, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, C. Zhai and X. Y. Wang, A novel and highly sensitive acetyl-cholinesterase biosensor modified with hollow gold nanospheres, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2013, 36, 273–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, H. Zhao, F. Qiao, P. Liu, X. D. Wang and S. Y. Ai, Quantum dot immobilized acetylcholinesterase for the determination of organophosphate pesticides using graphene–chitosan nanocomposite modified electrode, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 2866–2872 RSC .

          W. Yirong and H. Shengbo, Nano vanadium-selenium sustained and controlled release fertilizer and preparation method thereof. CN104892084A,  2015 Search PubMed .

          C. C. Willette and T. D. Anspachus, A composition containing an organosilane and a photocatalyst, and methods of treating flowering plants infected with a bacterial disease using the composition. WO2016138446A1,  2016 Search PubMed .

          H. Chengying, Nano Tech. Nano silica carrier capable of controlling release of pesticide. CN105815312A,  2016 Search PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Deepika Jamwal
	Dr Deepika Jamwal received her PhD degree from Shoolini University, India, in 2016. She has completed a National Post-Doctoral Fellowship at the Department of Chemistry and Centre of Advanced Studies in Chemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India, and worked on the project “metal chalcogenide nanostructures for third generation device applications” with Prof. S. K. Mehta. She is an awardee of the Shastri-Indo Canadian Post-Doctoral Fellowship to continue her research at the University of Ottawa, Canada. Her main area of interest is the synthesis of semiconductor nanostructures with controlled size and shape, specifically metal chalcogenides, and the improvement of their features for applications in the contemporary semiconductor industry.

Aashima Sharma
	Aashima Sharma is a senior research scholar at Panjab University with extensive experience in the field of nano-chemistry. She has sound knowledge of various spectroscopic techniques. She was awarded a Commonwealth Split-site Fellowship for 2019–2020. During her time at the University of York, UK, she worked on various renewable methods to convert biomass into nanostructures. Her focused area of interest is lanthanide-based composites with other metal oxides and solid supports for wastewater remediation. She has 8 publications and 2 book chapters to her credit.

Rohini Kanwar
	Dr Rohini Kanwar is working as an Assistant Professor at MCM DAV College, Chandigarh (India). After graduating in 2011 and completing her post-graduation work in 2013, she obtained a PhD in 2019 from Panjab University, Chandigarh. She was the recipient of CSIR-JRF in 2012 and a DAAD scholarship in 2016, and has carried out research work at Technical University, Berlin, Germany. She is an active researcher and has expertise in nanoassemblies, like nanostructured lipid carriers, niosomes, nanoemulsions, etc., for the site-specific and controlled delivery of drugs and pesticides, and for catalysis. She is a co-author of 13 publications in reputed journals.

Surinder Kumar Mehta
	Dr S. K. Mehta, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Ex-Chairman (Chemistry), and Ex-Director (SAIF), at Panjab University, Chandigarh. He is highly active in significant areas of research, like metallosurfactant chemistry, nano-electrochemical sensors, the synthesis and applications of semiconducting nanoparticles, colloidal chemistry, and nano-drug-delivery systems. He has 348 publications (h-index: 48), is the author of 12 books/chapters, has guided 12 post-doctoral, 47 PhD, and 50 Masters students, and has handled 20 research projects. He is the recipient of renowned DAAD and JSPS fellowships, a CRSI bronze medal, an RSC authors award, a Haryana Vigyan Ratna award, and an STE Green Excellence Award.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic representation of the delivery of folic acid into systemic circulation through the different layers of the skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright: 2018, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  A graphical representation of the mechanism for the absorption of standard emulsions and nanoemulsions through skin cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  The structure of a dendrimer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright: 2005, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  A representation of the effects of SLNs/NLCs on the skin (NLC: nanostructured lipid carrier). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 

Cosmetic composition containing rubus coreanus extract for diminishing skin wrinkles	US9198945B2	Dec. 1, 2015	Reducing skin wrinkles without causing adverse effects	Amorepacific Corporation, Seoul (KR)
Hair conditioning composition for permanent and semi-permanent hair coloration applications	US20150056154A1	Feb. 26, 2015	A hair conditioning composition for permanent and semi-permanent hair coloring applications	OTC GMBH, Oberhausen (DE)
Cosmetic composition containing retinol stabilized by porous polymer beads and nanoemulsion	US8980293B2	Mar. 17, 2015	An anti-inflammatory and skin-wrinkle-reducing cosmetic composition	Act Co., Ltd, Chungcheongbuk-do (KR)
Cosmetic base comprising collagen-modified liposome and skin cosmetic containing the same	US9289367 B2	Mar. 22, 2016	Collagen modified liposomes with the improved ability to retain the moisture of the skin	Faith, Inc., Osaka (JP)
Use of essential oil-Origanum majorana, as an agent for treating and/or preventing greasy skin and/or the associated aesthetic skin defects	US20160106660A1	Apr. 21, 2016	The formulation is a cleansing treatment for greasy skin and also includes essential oil as a dermatological agent	L’Oreal, Paris (FR)
Nanoparticle-based cosmetic composition	US9375388B2	Jun. 28, 2016	Used in cosmetics like Mehendi powder, water, carbon lip gloss, etc.	Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra (IN)
Hair removal with coated metal nanoparticles	US9421259B2	Aug. 23, 2016	Allows hair removal with coated metal NPs	Sienna Biopharmaceuticals, Inc., Carlsbad, CA (US)
Solid lipid nanoparticles	US9616001B2	Apr. 11, 2017	The production of solid lipid NPs and their use in different cosmetics.	DSM IPASSETS B.V., Heerlen (NL)
Nanostructured conditioning cosmetic composition, the use thereof in cosmetic preparations, and a conditioning shampoo	US9918913B2	Mar. 20, 2018	Conditioning shampoo	NATURA COSMÉTICOS S.A. São Paulo-SP (BR)
Composition comprising an alkoxysilane and a modified starch, and cosmetic use thereof	US20180154189A1	Jun. 7, 2018	Composition for the care or shaping of keratin materials	L’Oreal, Paris (FR)

 	Fig. 5  The structure of a niosome. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright: 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  A comparison between (A) targeted drug delivery and (B) untargeted drug delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright: 2007, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Various categories of nanostructures utilized for the production of electrically conductive cardiac-tissue-engineering scaffolds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright: 2019, Elsevier.	 

Cholesterol level lowering liposomes	US8703744B2	Apr. 22, 2014	Cholesterol-level-lowering liposomes	The Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford
Particles for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases	US20140161896A1	Jun. 12, 2014	The treatment of neurodegenerative diseases with the activity of the lysosomal enzymes in the lysosomes of brain cells	Ramot at Tel-Aviv University Ltd, Tel-Aviv (IL)
Methods of treating cancers with therapeutic nanoparticles	US20150017245A1	Jan. 15, 2015	The treatment of cholangiocarcinoma or tonsillar cancer	BIND Therapeutics, Inc., Cambridge, MA (US)
Method for the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease	US20150086616A1	Mar. 26, 2015	An invention related to the treatment and prevention of Alzheimer's disease	Steven Lehrer, New York, NY (US)
MRNA for use in treatment of human genetic diseases	US9061021B2	Jun. 23, 2015	For the treatment of human genetic diseases	Shire Human Genetic Therapies, Inc., Lexington, MA (US)
Neurotherapeutic nanoparticle compositions and devices	US20150231266A1	Aug. 20, 2015	The invention provides a composition for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases	Susan Marie Metcalfe, Cambridge (GB); Yale University, New Haven, CT (US)
Polymeric/ceramic composite materials for use in medical devices	US9125968B2	Sep. 8, 2015	Improved materials for the construction of medical devices	Boston Scientific Scimed, Inc., Maple Grove, MN (US)
Controlled disintegrating implantable medical devices	US9248034B2	Feb. 2, 2016	An implantable device for the treatment of body disorders	Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Inc., Santa Clara, CA (US)
Nanoparticle and polymer formulations for thyroid hormone analogs, antagonists, and formulations and uses thereof	US9289395B2	Mar. 22, 2016	The use of nanoparticles to promote angiogenesis	Nano-pharmaceuticals, LLC, Rensselaer, NY (US)
Nanoparticle active ingredient conjugates	US9345768B2	May 24, 2016	Involves the injection of solutions containing nanoparticles for the treatment of cancer	Magforce AG, Berlin (DE)
Intravenous curcumin and derivatives for treatment of neurodegenerative and stress disorders	US9393198B2	Jul. 19, 2016	The formulation was effective in the treatment of different neurological disorders	Signpath Pharma INC., Quakertown, PA (US)

	
	
	
	

Foam prepared from nanoemulsions and uses	US9539208B2	Jan. 10, 2017	Composition to treat or prevent disorders of the skin, body cavity, or mucosal surfaces.	Foamix Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Rehovot (IL)
Perfluorocarbon nanoemulsions with endocytosis enhancing surface for gene-transfer	US9616131B2	Apr. 11, 2017	Stable perflurocarbon nanoemulsions for gene transfer	Soluventis UG (DE)
Cerium oxide nanoparticles for the treatment and prevention of stroke and cardiovascular disease	US9649337B2	May 16, 2017	To treat or prevent neurological injury using cerium oxide nanoparticles	Edward Via Virginia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Blacksburg, VA (US)
Process for preparing solid lipid sustained-release nanoparticles for delivery of vitamins	US9907758B2	Mar. 6, 2018	The invention has utility in the treatment of diseases like tuberculosis and its use may be extended to others, such as cancer, acne, and osteoporosis	Panjab University Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Punjab (IN)
Liposome compositions comprising an adjuvant that activates or increases the activity of TLR2 and uses thereof	US10105435B2	Oct. 23, 2018	Increases the activity of toll-like receptor 2 via controlling the composition of liposomes	Immuno Vaccine Technologies INC. Dartmouth, Nova Scotia (CA)
Prodrug compositions, prodrug nanoparticles, and methods of use thereof	US10201500B2	Feb. 12, 2019	Composition for the in vivo delivery of the compound to the target cell	Washington University, St. Louis, MO (US)
Oral anaerobic glutathione supplement in the liposome suspension	US10272130B1	Apr. 30, 2019	For the treatment of cellular oxidative stress in a user	Stephen N. Pitcher, Alpine, UT (US); Danny Clinton Purser, Provo, UT (US)

 	Fig. 8  A basic diagram of a lithium-ion battery: (1) cathode collector; (2) anode collector; (3) cathode material; (4) anode material; and (5) separator with electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright: 2015, IOP Science.	 

 	Fig. 9  A representation of a lithium-ion pathway in silicon nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The dielectrophoresis method involving the transmission of the assembly signal to several electrodes in parallel; several electrodes can be populated all together. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright: 2014, PLOS ONE.	 

Method for manufacturing semiconductor device and method for growing graphene	US8642410B2	Feb. 4, 2014	The manufacturing of a semiconductor device	Fujitsu Limited, Kawasaki (JP)
Palladium-catalyzed reactions executed on solid-phase peptide synthesis supports for the production of self-assembling peptides embedded with complex organic electronic subunits	US20140114052A1	Apr. 24, 2014	Biosensing	The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD (US)
Controlled buckling structures in semiconductor interconnects and nanomembranes for stretchable electronics	US8729524B2	May 20, 2014	Flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices	The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL (US)
Semiconductor device and method of manufacturing the same	US8823077B2	Sep. 2, 2014	Memory device or a diode	Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)
Radiofrequency devices based on carbon nanomaterials	US8860137B2	Oct.14, 2014	Radiofrequency devices	University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA (US)
Stretchable and foldable electronic devices	US8905772B2	Dec. 9, 2014	Multilayer devices	The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL (US)
Semiconductor device, method of manufacturing the same, and an electronic device including the semiconductor device	US8946789B2	Feb. 3, 2015	Transistors and diodes	Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)
Carbonaceous nanomaterial-based thin-film transistors	US8987710B2	Mar. 24, 2015	Transistor devices	Polyera Corporation, Skokie, IL (US)
Nano-composite structures, methods of making, and use thereof	US9076570B2	Jul. 7, 2015	Related to lithium-ion batteries, capacitors, supercapacitors, or fuel cells	Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY (US)
Interconnected hollow nanostructures containing high capacity active materials for use in rechargeable batteries	US9231243B2	Jan. 5, 2016	Electrode layer for use in rechargeable batteries	Amprius, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA (US)
Branched nanostructures for battery electrodes	US9325014B2	Apr. 26, 2016	Efficient battery electrodes	The research foundation of State University of New York, New York, NY (US)
Optical member, display device having the same and method of fabricating the same	US9335459B2	May 10, 2016	Display devices	LG INNOTEK CO., LTD, Seoul (KR)
Electronic paper display device	US9442343B2	Sep. 13, 2016	An electronic paper display device	Beijing Boe Optoelectronics Technology GO., LTD, Beijing (CN)
Extended two-dimensional metal nanotubes and nanowires useful as fuel cell catalysts and fuel cells containing the same	US9680160B2	Jun. 13, 2017	Efficient fuel cell catalysts	The Regents of The University of California, Oakland, CA (US)
Tube-in-a-tube electronic sensors	US9739741B2	Aug. 22, 2017	Electronic sensors	University of Maryland, College Park, MD (US)
Luminescent particle, materials, and products including same, and methods	US20170066963A1	Mar. 9, 2017	Useful in remote and proximity lighting and displays	Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd (US)
3d printed active electronic materials and devices	US9887356B2	Feb. 6, 2018	Components such as plastic parts, metal lines, passive conductors, and biological materials	Princeton University, Princeton, NJ (US)
Graphene electronic device and manufacturing method thereof	US10157989B2	Dec. 18, 2018	Electronic devices	Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd, Gyeonggi-Do (KR)
Illumination system for reflective displays	US10190743B2	Jan. 29, 2019	Display devices	E INK Corporation, Billerica, MA (US)

 	Fig. 11  A schematic flow chart of the improvements that nanotechnology provide in cement-based materials.	 

 	Fig. 12  The importance of nano-silica in the cement industry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright: 2017, Elsevier.	 

A cement-based nano-composite material and its preparation method	CN104446264B	Oct. 28, 2015	Improvements in the mechanical properties of cement	Hunan Ming Xiang Technology Development Co., Ltd
High early-strength high-performance concrete mixed with nano silicon dioxide powder and preparation method thereof	CN103979886A	Jan. 3, 2016	High-early-strength high-performance concrete	Hohai University
Method for producing nano-cement, and nano-cement	EP3006415A1	Apr. 13, 2016	Portland cement	Bickbau Marsel Yanovich Bikbau Ulyana Marselievna Sakrytoe Aktsyonernoe Obschestvo “imetstroi
Cement compositions and methods utilizing nano-hydraulic cement	US9512346B2	Dec. 2, 2016	Portland cement	Halliburton Energy Services Inc.
Nanotechnology protection method for existing bridge structures	CN105696475A	Jun. 27, 2017	Strengthening cement	Hefei Caleston Building Materials Co., Ltd
Carbon Nanotube-Fiber Reinforced Cement and Concrete	US20080134942A1	Jun. 12, 2018	Portland cement	University of Plano, TX, USA
A kind of dispersion mill preparing nano-material modified cement	CN108514928A	Sep. 11, 2018	Nanocement	China University of Mining and Technology
Nano zeolite cement additive and methods of use	US10150904B1	Sep. 28, 2019	Enhancements in the various properties of cement	King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals
Nanoclay as an additive for high pressure and high temperature well cementing	US9650296B2	Sep. 29, 2019	High strength cement	King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals

 	Fig. 13  The utilization of nanotechnology in agriculture.	 

 	Fig. 14  The root and shoot profiles of wheat seeds with varied concentrations of ZnO NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright: 2019, Elsevier.	 

Nano vanadium-selenium sustained and controlled release fertilizer and preparation method thereof	CN104892084A	Sep. 9, 2015	Fertilizer delivery via nanoparticles	Huang Shengbo
Organic functional polymer organophosphorus insecticide sustained release agent of a kind of nano-silica grafting and preparation method thereof	CN105831113B	Nov. 1, 2016	A nano-delivery system for the sustained release of insecticide	Huazhong Agricultural University
Nano silica carrier capable of controlling the release of pesticide	CN105815312A	Aug. 8, 2016	Pesticide nano-delivery	Haining Chengying Nano Technology Co., Ltd
The method for cultivation of plants using metal nanoparticles and the nutrient medium for its implementation	WO2017101691A1	Dec. 2, 2016	Plant growth mediators	Shenzhou Space Biotechnology Group
Composition containing an organosilane and a photocatalyst, and methods of treating flowering plants infected with a bacterial disease using the composition	US10117435B2	Nov. 6, 2018	Plant disease management	Nano Photo Sciences, LLC, Tequesta, FL (US)
Rod-shaped plant viral nanoparticles or virus-like particles for agricultural applications	WO2017210682A1	Dec. 7, 2017	Nanodelivery	Case Western Reserve University
Preparation method for nano zinc thiazole	CN107417640A	Mar. 23, 2019	Treatment for bacterial infections	Zhao Jinhao, Jingli Cheng, Cheng Xiao, Dou Xin Li, Zhongshan Zhu, Guo Nian
Synthesis of nanocomposites and their use in enhancing plant nutrition	US20190202750A1	Oct. 28, 2019	A nanocomposite for increasing nutrition	Washington University in St. Louis
Electrochemical sensors and methods for using electrochemical sensors to detect plant pathogen infection	US20180142277A1	Oct. 28, 2019	A nanosensor for pathogen detection	National Science Foundation and University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
