Exploiting optothermal conversion for nanofabrication: site-selective generation of Au/TiO 2 inverse opals   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B913478F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B913478F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7990-7994Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsExploiting optothermal conversion for nanofabrication: site-selective generation of Au/TiO2 inverse opals†

        
          
            Ivano 
            Alessandri
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Matteo 
            Ferroni
          
        
      b
aINSTM and Chemistry for Technologies Laboratory, University of Brescia, via Branze 38, 25123, Brescia, Italy. E-mail: ivano.alessandri@ing.unibs.it
bCNR-INFM and Department of Chemistry and Physics for Engineering and Materials, University of Brescia, via Valotti 9, 25123, Brescia, Italy
Received 
      7th July 2009
    , Accepted 22nd August 2009First published on 16th September 2009AbstractOptothermal conversion mediated by gold nanoparticles was exploited to generate localized Au/TiO2 inverse opal structures in direct opal substrates. The local enhancement of the electromagnetic field made these nanostructures active sites for SERS and contributed to boosting the efficiency of some reactions, such as the photodegradation of methylene blue, under both UV and Vis irradiation.
1. Introduction
Metal nanoparticles (NPs) are attracting ever-increasing interest in nano- and bio-technology due to the synergic combination of their versatile surface chemistry and optical properties, which may be controlled directly by synthesis.1,2 In addition, metal NPs can be exploited as very efficient photon-thermal converters to generate localized heat at the micro- and nanoscale (optothermal conversion).3 In particular, the heating effect is strongly enhanced when the frequency of the incident light matches the plasmon resonance of the metal NPs, so that it is commonly referred to as “plasmonic heating”.4 This key property is currently being investigated for a number of important applications in various research fields, including drug delivery,5 cancer diagnostics and therapy.6,7 Further important sectors that can benefit from plasmonic heating are micro- and nanofabrication4 and plasmon-assisted chemical vapour deposition.8,9 Recently, we used Au NPs as light harvesting centers to bring extremely localized heating into colloidal particles and colloidal assemblies, obtaining a selective modification of their morphology.10 Moreover, we demonstrated how plasmonic heating can be harnessed and conveniently employed to yield “hot” sites for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) which were based on in-situ generated metal oxides.11,12 Optothermal conversion becomes actually useful for nanofabrication when one can fully take advantage of some of its key features, such as precise spatial localization of heating effects and selective activation of specific areas which have been properly functionalized.
In the present work optothermal conversion is exploited to generate localized inverse opal structures into direct opal substrates. Opals and inverse opal structures have been intensively investigated in view of achieving photonic crystals with 2- and 3D photonic bandgaps that can be tuned depending on the colloid size.13 Mallouk and co-workers14 and, more recently, Corma and co-workers15 studied the photonic crystal topology for applications in photoelectrochemical solar cells. Ozin's group proposed to exploit stop-band reflections to achieve optically amplified photochemistry.16 This goal can be reached since, at the frequency edges of these stop bands, photons propagate with strongly reduced group velocity, so that the effective optical path length of the system can be significantly enhanced. Chen et al. demonstrated that the photoactivity of anatase TiO2 inverse opals is remarkably enhanced by using slow photons with energies close to the electronic bandgap of the semiconductor.16 In particular, they showed that TiO2 inverse opals, generated as inverse replicas of colloidal crystals made of polystyrene nanospheres 150 nm in diameter, exhibited a significant enhancement in photodegrading methylene blue (MB) under white light irradiation in comparison to conventional nanocrystalline TiO2. In a following paper,17 the same authors demonstrated that a certain degree of microstructural disorder, which is inherently associated with these materials, can be tolerated without preventing their use for some important applications, such as purification of water from environmental pollutants. Another way to increase the efficiency of oxide-based photocatalysts is by exploiting the enhancement of electromagnetic field that takes place in the presence of metal NPs, as proposed by Awazu et al.18 The synergic combination of amplified photocatalytic properties of metal oxide inverse opals with localized surface plasmons of metal NPs might strongly enhance the efficiency of many reactions occurring under UV-Vis-NIR irradiation. In addition, the integration of photoactive metal oxide inverse opals into micro-reactors or smart devices represents an important goal for nanotechnology. However, the selective generation of metal-doped inverse opals and extended defects into functional oxide matrices (e.g. TiO2, ZnO, etc.) still remains a challenging task.
Here we demonstrate that Au NPs can be used as nanoheaters in order to open up macroporous windows at selected areas of PS/TiO2 core/shell colloidal crystals. The resulting Au/TiO2 inverse opals were active sites for SERS and exhibited enhanced photocatalytic properties when illuminated under both UV and Vis conditions.
2. Experimental
The colloidal crystals formed by PS-Au/TiO2 nanospheres were prepared as follows. Monodisperse PS nanospheres (diameter: 150 ± 6 nm) suspended in milliQ water (10% wt) were assembled as multilayered colloidal crystals on both Si (100) and microscope glass slides by either sedimentation or crystallization under capillary forces. The substrates were previously UV-cleaned for 5 minutes to remove organic contaminants from the surface and improve hydrophilicity. The colloidal crystals were coated by sputtering with a thin layer of gold (about 12 nm thick), consisting of nanoislands agglomerated in the form of gold nanoparticles. Details on Au deposition can be found in reference 10. These Au nanoshells act as active substrates (nanoheaters) for triggering the formation of the inverse opals. The 50 nm thick amorphous titania layer was deposited in a Savannah 100 ALD flow reactor (Cambridge Nanotech Inc., MA), using TDMAT (tetrakis-dimethylamido titanium, Aldrich, Germany) as the titanium source and water as the oxygen source. The deposition temperature and pressure were respectively 90 °C and 0.5 Torr. TDMAT (99.999%) and H2O were evaporated from stainless steel reservoirs held respectively at 80 °C and at room temperature, and led into the reactor through solenoid valves. Nitrogen was used as a precursor carrier and purge gas. The processing cycle consisted of a TDMAT pulse of 0.1 s, a 5 s purge pulse of N2, a 0.1 s pulse of water vapour and a 5 s pulse of N2. The deposition rate was 0.0667 nm per cycle. To generate Au/anatase inverse opals, the colloidal substrates were set upon the motorized x-y stage (resolution: 0.1 µm, scanning range: 100 × 100 mm) of a high resolution Raman microscope (Horiba/Jobin-Yvon). The Au/TiO2 inverse opals were obtained by focussing a He–Ne (λ = 632.8 nm) laser through 50× long working distance (numerical aperture, NA: 0.5) and 100× (NA: 0.9) objectives with different dwell times.10,12 The inverse opal nanostructures reported in Fig. 3 (see later) were obtained by irradiating for 10 s with a 100× objective. The power of the laser at the surface of the sample was about 4.5 mW. MicroRaman spectra of the Au/TiO2 were acquired using optical filters that allowed the power of the laser to attenuate to 0.05 mW. The UV photocatalytic degradation experiment was performed by dropping 1 µL of a 10−6 M aqueous solution of methylene blue (MB, C16H18N3SCl) onto the area of Au/TiO2 inverse opals upon direct observation by means of an optical microscope. The adsorption of the MB on the anatase surface was checked by Raman spectroscopy (see the text for details). The photodegradation was carried out by irradiating the sample with a Philips UV lamp, that emits from 340–410 nm, with a peak maximum at 365 nm. The distance between the lamp and the sample was 1 cm. The sample was directly UV irradiated without moving the Raman stage, to ensure that all the Raman spectra were acquired on the same zone. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were recorded using a LEO 1521 high resolution instrument equipped with a field emission gun and an in-lens secondary electron detector. The SEM was operated in the 1–2 keV beam energy range to prevent the specimen from electrostatic charging and from excessive beam induced damage and shrinking.
3. Results and discussion
The experimental procedure for generating Au/TiO2 inverse opals (i.o.) localized at specific sites is displayed in Fig. 1. Colloidal crystals (opals) made of polystyrene (PS) nanospheres (diameter: 150 nm) were first coated with a 12 nm thick layer of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) and then with a 50 nm thick layer of amorphous titania (a-TiO2) obtained by atomic layer deposition. Selected regions of these opals were irradiated by a continuous wave (C.W.) He–Ne laser (λmax: 632.8 nm) focused through the objectives of a Raman microscope. The power of the laser was 4.5 mW. Details on preparation are reported in the experimental section. As a general result, the irradiation yielded Au/TiO2 inverse opals whose size could be tuned by changing different parameters such as time of exposure and laser penetration depth. Moving the laser using a motorized x-y stage allows inverse opal structures to be localized and patterned at selected areas with a lateral resolution of about 2 micrometers.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of Au/TiO2 inverse opal generation by optothermal conversion. Colloidal crystals made of PS-Au/TiO2nanoshells are irradiated by a low power C.W. He–Ne laser focused onto a specific region through the objective of a microscope. Upon irradiation, inverse opal nanostructures are created by efficient photon-thermal conversion mediated by Au nanoparticles. The lateral resolution that can be achieved is less than 2 µm. 

Fig. 2a shows a lateral view of PS-Au/TiO2 opals before laser irradiation. The colloidal crystals were formed by about 20 close packed layers of PS nanospheres. This thickness was the same as has been employed in other experiments aiming to exploit slow photons for photocatalysis.16Fig. 2b shows that the optical extinction of these opals is characterized by two main bands ranging from 300 to 400 and from 500 to 900 nm and centered at about 340 and 640 nm, respectively. The first band is mainly due to the absorption of a-TiO2, as shown by comparison with the absorbance spectrum of a 50 nm thick a-TiO2 taken as a reference. According to Chen et al., the stop band of the resulting inverse opal nanostructures that will be generated by laser irradiation should be located in this range of frequencies.16 The second broad band, which is extended from the visible to the near infrared range, is due to the plasmon resonance characteristic of Au nanoshell-like structures formed by the PS–Au composite nanospheres. In the present case the maximum of this peak matches the wavelength of the exciting He–Ne laser, so that the photon-thermal conversion process occurs under optimal conditions. The most interesting aspect of using Au nanoshells as substrates for optothermal processes is that the plasmonic band can be shifted and broadened simply by changing the PS/Au core/shell ratio, as reported by Halas and co-workers.19 This allows the effects of plasmonic heating to be tailored depending on the distance between the wavelength of the exciting laser and the spectral position of the plasmonic resonance.
 Fig. 2  a) SEM section of a PS-Au/a-TiO2 colloidal crystal before laser irradiation. Scale bar: 200 nm. b) Optical extinction of PS-Au/a-TiO2 colloidal crystals in the UV-Vis range. Dotted line represents the extinction of a 50 nm thick a-TiO2 reference sample. The wavelength of the incident laser is marked. 

Fig. 3a shows an example of the local inverse opals obtained by irradiating the PS-Au/a-TiO2 colloidal crystals for 10 s with a 100× (N.A.: 0.9) objective lens. The effects of laser irradiation encompassed a circular area of about 2 µm in diameter, which corresponds to the size of the focused laser. The central part shows a three dimensionally ordered macroporous structure extended in depth to a few layers of the close packed colloidal crystal. The mechanism of inverse opal formation is analogous to that we reported in the case of formation of Au/TiO2 SERS-active spots.11,12 The laser beam penetrates the amorphous TiO2 and is strongly absorbed by the gold interlayer. Au NPs act as very efficient photon-thermal converters, so that a large amount of heat is generated and propagated through the surrounding medium. PS is a poor thermal conductor, thus heat cannot be dissipated in an effective way, leading the local temperature to increase up to the thermal decomposition of the polymeric spheres. As this process is exothermic, additional heating is supplied to the system, allowing the amorphous TiO2 to be converted into the anatase phase (vide infra). Moreover, the presence of Au may further contribute to the anatase crystallization at low temperatures.20
 Fig. 3  a) SEM image showing Au/TiO2 inverse opals generated after laser irradiation. Inset highlights the macroporous structure. Scale bar: 100 nm. An enlarged view of this nanostructure is reported in ESI.† b) MicroRaman spectrum of the Au/TiO2 inverse opals. 
The heat generated by the tail of the laser beam, which is assumed to be Gaussian, is enough only to lead to the sintering of the nanospheres located at the peripheral region. On the other hand, at the centre of the beam, the remarkable enhancement of the local temperature gives rise to explosions of the polymer cores, which cause the ejection of the composite material. Part of the ejected Au re-crystallizes on the surface in the form of spherical droplets which appeared as bright areas in the SEM image. The explosive release of gases upon pressure buildup provoked the partial destruction of the walls interconnecting the topmost layers of the inverse opals. On the other hand, the deepest layers exhibit integral, well-interconnected macropores of about 120 nm in diameter.
In general, greater penetration depth can be obtained by using lower numerical apertures, as we demonstrated in previous works carried out on similar systems.10,11
The resonant excitation of surface plasmons allowed strong heating to be achieved by means of low-power C.W. lasers. Unlike conventional approaches, which utilize high energy pulsed lasers to produce direct heating of the substrate, this low-power, Au-mediated procedure offers higher lateral and depth resolution which ultimately comes from the localized nature of the optothermal conversion. In addition, this method allows operation in a “direct-writing” mode, without needing to use either lithographic masks or etching procedures.
MicroRaman analysis revealed that laser irradiation caused the formation of nanocrystalline anatase. Fig. 3b shows the presence of signals at about 149, 394, 512 and 636 cm−1, which correspond, respectively, to the Eg(1), B1g(1), A1g + B1g and Eg(3) modes characteristic of TiO2 in the anatase phase. The spectrum was acquired using an optical filter in order to attenuate the laser power below 0.05 mW and avoid any possible heating-induced modification during the measurement. The broadening of the Raman modes, as well as their slight shift compared to bulk powder samples, suggested that the anatase was present in the form of nanocrystals and might indicate diffusion of gold into the anatase layer.
As we already observed for analogous systems,11 it is important to note that, under typical conditions, the Raman detection of such a thin (50 nm or less) anatase layer is prevented. In contrast, in the present case, the gold aggregates gave rise to suitable conditions for a strong enhancement of the Raman signal, so allowing the detection of anatase. This confirmed that the electromagnetic field was locally increased by laser excitation of gold surface plasmons, and that a certain amount of Au NPs remained tethered into the crystallizing anatase. Further in-depth microstructural characterization is currently under way to analyze the Au–TiO2 interdiffusion.
The SERS activity of the Au/TiO2 inverse opals can be exploited for monitoring photo-induced reactions occurring at these sites. We tested the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) under two different sets of operating conditions. On one hand, a UV-induced photodegradation experiment was carried out using a lamp emitting in the 340–410 nm range as an excitation source. To avoid possible direct photobleaching of MB during Raman acquisition the power of the He–Ne laser was attenuated to 0.005 mW. In the present case, as the main absorption band of MB falls within the frequency range of excitation, the surface enhanced Raman experiment is carried out under resonant conditions (SERRS). This enables one to gain extra sensitivity compared to the surface-enhanced effect taken by itself, so allowing the adsorbed dye to be detected at low concentration (10−6 M, see experimental section).

Photodegradation was monitored by observing the Raman modes located in the 450–504 cm−1 range which have been attributed to C–N–C skeletal bending of dimer (450 and 504 cm−1) and monomer (490 cm−1) MB species.
The intensity of MB bands diminished progressively upon UV irradiation, indicating that the photo-degradation process occurred successfully at the Au/TiO2 i.o. sites (Fig. 4a). Moreover, photodegradation is faster than that observed for a reference sample made of a 50 nm thick film of anatase deposited by ALD on a planar substrate (see ESI†).21 This improved kinetics may depend on many factors, such as the presence of Au NPs and the sample morphology, including both increased surface area and possible enhancement of optical path length due to slow photons. The latter factor has been demonstrated by Chen et al. for analogous TiO2 i.o. systems,16 as we reported in the introduction. On the other hand, the role of metal NPs towards improving charge separation and promoting interfacial charge transfer kinetics in semiconductor assisted photocatalysis has been intensively investigated in the literature.22 For example, Kamat and co-workers demonstrated that, in the case of TiO2/Au NPs, the Fermi level is shifted to more negative potentials in comparison to the values of pure TiO2. This accounts for increased charge storage and improved charge separation exhibited by these composite systems.23 Although the TiO2–Au interface may offer many complex scenarios, photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic measurements indicate that the presence of Au NPs promotes charge stabilization in nanostructured TiO2 and interfacial redox processes. In the present case, the combination of Au/TiO2 i.o. structural and optical properties may contribute to enhance photocatalytic efficiency. Further experiments aiming to elucidate the roles of these different factors are currently under way.
 Fig. 4  
Photodegradation of MB monitored by microRaman spectroscopy (see the text for details) under a) UV and b) laser irradiation (0.5 mW). 
Another interesting aspect of generating Au/TiO2 i.o. at selected, micron-sized areas, is related to their possible integration into microreactors and microdevices. From this standpoint, these nanostructures might be suitably employed as plasmonic photocatalysts, enabling important reactions to occur with high efficiency and minimal light exposure. Thus, in a second experimental layout, the MB photodegradation was tested under monochromatic irradiation at 632.8 nm. The power of the exciting laser was set at 0.5 or 0.05 mW. Under these conditions, reference MB solutions deposited onto glass substrates resulted stable after prolonged irradiation. In contrast, Fig. 4b shows that the spectra of MB adsorbed onto the Au/TiO2 sites changed continuously as photodegradation proceeded. In particular, during the first stages of this process, MB species converted from dimers to monomers (MB2 = 2MB), as indicated by the appearance of the peak at 490 cm−1, which becomes stronger, and the corresponding weakening of dimer signals.24 Then, the photoreaction proceeded until the MB was completely removed, and no signals could be detected. Although the power of the laser was set at very low values, the removal of MB through this process is faster than that occurring under UV irradiation. Moreover, MB removal was also observed even when the power of the laser was further reduced to 0.05 mW, as shown in ESI.† Again, Au plays a key role in enhancing the efficiency of this process. During the first stages the heating generated by light absorption under resonance conditions promotes the dimer-to-monomer conversion, which is an endothermic reaction. Thereafter, the monomeric species are completely removed in a few minutes. As MB photobleaching usually occurs at higher laser power, in the present case the efficient photon-thermal conversion of Au is a decisive factor for driving the degradation of the dye. This is an important outcome, as it may allow the production of microreactors using low power-solid state lasers as excitation sources.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we demonstrated that optothermal conversion can be exploited to generate nanostructured Au/TiO2 inverse opals in opal substrates with high spatial resolution. This process was accomplished by means of a C.W. laser at low power, with a very simple experimental setup. The localized nature of plasmonic heating provides a mean for generating inverse opals without heating the remainder of the substrate, thus enabling the integration of inverse opals into microreactors and nanodevices. Gold acted as a very efficient photon-thermal converter, allowing the a-TiO2 to be transformed into anatase. The overall thermal effect was enhanced by the exothermic decomposition of the underlying polymer. The enhancement of the electromagnetic field due to the presence of Au NPs allowed the in-situ microRaman characterization of the inverse opal nanostructures. The same effect was exploited both for monitoring and at the same time assisting reactions occurring at these sites under optimal conditions of efficiency and light exposure. This approach may be extended to other composite systems, including Au (Ag)/ZnO or Au (Ag)/CeO2, thus opening attracting scenarios for fabricating nanostructures and in situ characterization of physical and chemical processes occurring at these interfaces.25
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Fondazione Cariplo. Marcello Zucca is gratefully acknowledged for assistance in deposition of TiO2. Prof. Laura E. Depero is acknowledged for valuable discussions.
References
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Richardson, Z. N. Hickman, A. O. Govorov, A. C. Thomas, W. Zhang and M. E. Kordesch, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 783 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Cortie, N. Harris and M. Ford, Physica B, 2007, 394, 188 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Skirtach, A. Muñoz Javier, O. Kreft, K. Köhler, A. P. Alberola, H. Möhwald, W. J. Parak and G. B. Sukhorukov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4612 CrossRef CAS .
C. Loo, A. Lowery, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 709 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Boyd, L. Greengard, M. Brongersma, M. Y. El-Naggar and D. G. Goodwin, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2592 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Hung, I.-K. Hsu, A. Bushmaker, R. Kumar, J. Theiss and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3278 CrossRef CAS .
I. Alessandri and L. E. Depero, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 305301 CrossRef .
I. Alessandri, M. Ferroni and L. E. Depero, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1017 CrossRef CAS .
I. Alessandri and L. E. Depero, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2359 RSC .

  (a) 
            G. Ozin, A. Arsenault and L. Cademartiri, Nanochemistry, RSC Publishing: Cambridge,  2008 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Stein, F. Li and N. R. Denny, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 649 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, K. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rodriguez, P. Atienzar, F. Ramiro-Manzano, F. Meseguer, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Photonics Nanostruct.: Fundam. Appl., 2005, 3, 148 Search PubMed .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murukami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Oldenburg, R. D. Averitt, S. L. Westcott and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Fu, G. M. Chow, P. C. Hsu and Y. K. Hwu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 758 CrossRef CAS .
I. Alessandri, M. Zucca, M. Ferroni, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Small, 2009, 5, 336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353 CrossRef .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolff and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS .

          S. H. A. Nicolai and J. C. Rubim, Langmuir, 19, p. 4291 Search PubMed.
A. V. Whitney, J. W. Elam, P. C. Stair and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16827 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM image (enlarged view) of the resulting structures, microRaman monitoring of UV-induced photodegradation of MB onto a 50 nm thick anatase film deposited onto a planar support, and microRaman monitoring of MB photodegradation upon laser irradiation at the power of 0.05 mW. See DOI: 10.1039/b913478fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of Au/TiO2 inverse opal generation by optothermal conversion. Colloidal crystals made of PS-Au/TiO2nanoshells are irradiated by a low power C.W. He–Ne laser focused onto a specific region through the objective of a microscope. Upon irradiation, inverse opal nanostructures are created by efficient photon-thermal conversion mediated by Au nanoparticles. The lateral resolution that can be achieved is less than 2 µm.	 

 	Fig. 2  a) SEM section of a PS-Au/a-TiO2 colloidal crystal before laser irradiation. Scale bar: 200 nm. b) Optical extinction of PS-Au/a-TiO2 colloidal crystals in the UV-Vis range. Dotted line represents the extinction of a 50 nm thick a-TiO2 reference sample. The wavelength of the incident laser is marked.	 

 	Fig. 3  a) SEM image showing Au/TiO2 inverse opals generated after laser irradiation. Inset highlights the macroporous structure. Scale bar: 100 nm. An enlarged view of this nanostructure is reported in ESI.† b) MicroRaman spectrum of the Au/TiO2 inverse opals.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Photodegradation of MB monitored by microRaman spectroscopy (see the text for details) under a) UV and b) laser irradiation (0.5 mW).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM image (enlarged view) of the resulting structures, microRaman monitoring of UV-induced photodegradation of MB onto a 50 nm thick anatase film deposited onto a planar support, and microRaman monitoring of MB photodegradation upon laser irradiation at the power of 0.05 mW. See DOI: 10.1039/b913478f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
