Cathodic catalysts in bioelectrochemical systems for energy recovery from wastewater  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60130G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60130G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7718-7745Cathodic catalysts in bioelectrochemical systems for energy recovery from wastewater

        
          
            Xian-Wei 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wen-Wei 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Han-Qing 
            Yu
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: wwli@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 551 63601592
Received 
      8th April 2013
    First published on 20th August 2013AbstractBioelectrochemical systems (BESs), in which microorganisms are utilized as a self-regenerable catalyst at the anode of an electrochemical cell to directly extract electrical energy from organic matter, have been widely recognized as a promising technology for energy-efficient wastewater treatment or even for net energy generation. However, currently BES performance is constrained by poor cathode reaction kinetics. Thus, there is a strong impetus to improve the cathodic catalysis performance through proper selection and design of catalysts. This review introduces the fundamentals and current development status of various cathodic catalysts (including electrocatalysts, photoelectrocatalysts and bioelectrocatalysts) in BES, identifies their limitations and influential factors, compares their catalytic performances in terms of catalytic efficiency, stability, selectivity, etc., and discusses the possible optimization strategies and future research directions. Special focus is given on the analysis of how the catalytic performance of different catalysts can be improved by fine tuning their physicochemical or physiological properties.
Xian-Wei Liu
Xian-Wei Liu received his PhD from the University of Science & Technology of China (USTC) under the direction of Professor Han-Qing Yu in 2011. His research has focused on chemical and biological catalysis in bioelectrochemical systems. Dr Liu is now a postdoctoral fellow at Arizona State University, USA. He is involved in National Institutes of Health projects aimed at the development and application of plasmon-based electrochemical microscopy. He has published over 30 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.
Wen-Wei Li
Wen-Wei Li is an associate professor from the Department of Chemistry, the University of Science & Technology of China (USTC). He received his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. After postdoctoral training at USTC, he joined the faculty at this university in 2010. His research expertise is in renewable energy, bioelectrochemistry and environmental biotechnology. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed international papers and 5 invited book chapters.
Han-Qing Yu
Han-Qing Yu is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. He received his PhD from Tongji University, China in 1994. After that, he worked as a Marie Curie postdoctoral fellow at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, a research fellow at the Nanyang Technological University, and a research assistant professor at the Hong Kong University. He is now an Associate Editor of Water Research and an editorial board member of eight international journals. His research interests include contaminant biodegradation and nanomaterials for environmental application. He has published more than 300 international peer-reviewed papers and 4 invited book chapters.
1. Introduction
Extracting energy from inexhaustible waste streams in our planet has been a subject of intense study for decades, which might hold a solution to solve the energy and environmental problems simultaneously. Endeavors in this respect include the development of anaerobic fermentation technologies and their combination with various extraction–purification techniques or electrochemical fuel cells for improved energy utilization. Recently, bioelectrochemical systems (BES), as a new generation of renewable energy technology that perfectly couples microbial metabolism with electrochemical reactions,1–4 has attracted growing interest and brought new opportunities for the energy and biosynthesis industries.5,6
Several features distinguish BES from conventional energy conversion technologies and make it highly desirable to meet a sustainable future energy paradigm. In comparison with electrochemical fuel cells that are based on the use of an abiotic anode for chemical fuel reduction, the beauty of BES mainly lies in the use of a microbial-catalyzed anode and directly exploiting the organics in waste as an energy source. Thus, not only can extra fuel investment be avoided, but also the process can proceed in a mild, sustainable and environmentally-benign way. Compared with an anaerobic fermentation process, the electrochemical setup of BES with separated substrate metabolism and energy production processes allows a more flexible and well-controlled utilization of the liberated electrons from microbial metabolism. Thus, theoretically higher energy yield and product purity can be achieved in BES, despite the reality that many technological and economic challenges are yet to be addressed to make it competitive with anaerobic processes at the present stage.
Currently, apart from the economic factor, the practical application of BES is mainly restricted by low energy efficiency due to considerable energy losses associated with the use of waste as substrate and the characteristics of BES itself. Especially, while we are increasingly capable of offering a better knowledge and manipulation on the anode today, the cathode side of BES is relatively less recognized, and the slow cathodic reaction kinetics has gradually become a bottleneck for its development.7–9 Thus, a substantial improvement in the cathodic catalysis is required to accelerate electron transport from electrode to some targeted reactants and to promote the electrode reactions, which necessitates an in-depth understanding of the catalytic reactions and involved catalysts.
Several reviews have summarized the fundamentals and application aspects of cathode processes in BES.6,9 In particular, Harnisch and Schröder discussed the new opportunities of BES brought about by the rapid development of the cathode, and presented the first primary comparative analysis of two classes of cathodic catalysts with a focus on two typical cathodic reactions, i.e., the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).6 Rabaey and Rozendal overviewed the BES-based production processes from a microbial electrosynthesis perspective, which focused on the use of microbial catalysts at the cathode.10 Huang et al. also introduced various cathode reactions in BES, but with special emphasis on the elimination of recalcitrant contaminants.11 More recently, Pant et al. summarized the new opportunities of BES for niches of application beyond electricity generation.12 All these reviews offer some valuable information on this emerging new area from specific aspects. However, while the potentials and challenges of various cathode processes have been well discussed, the characteristics, detailed roles and limitations of catalysts in such processes remain largely unclear. Especially, an extensive and systematic insight into the cathodic electron transfer chains and electrochemical reactions as well as the catalysts involved in BES is still lacking.
This review aims to provide a panoramic picture of various cathodic catalysts applied in BES, which present a special category of catalysts substantially differing from those in conventional biological or electrochemical systems, and to give an insight into their catalytic characteristics, mechanisms and limitations. In particular, unlike previous BES studies that emphasize mainly the use of electrocatalysts or biocatalysts, in this work the photoelectrocatalysts are incorporated into the overall concept of cathodic catalysts to allow a more comprehensive comparison. Here, we firstly introduce the unique characteristics of cathodic catalysis in BES as well as the relevant catalysis processes and catalyst categories. Briefly, the cathodic catalysts in BES are divided into three major categories, i.e., electrocatalysts, photoelectrocatalysts and bioelectrocatalysts, according to the catalytic mechanisms and properties. Secondly, we identify the key restrictions and influential factors for each category of catalysts, and discuss how the catalytic performance can be improved by tuning the composition, morphology and structure of catalysts. Thirdly, a brief comparison of the performance of different catalyst categories in terms of catalytic efficiency, stability, selectivity and other relevant issues is presented. Lastly, we propose several future research and development directions for catalysts in BES that may lead to improved cathodic performance and promote a practical implementation of this technology. In all, this review identifies the characteristics, current limitations and future opportunities of cathodic catalysts in BES, and may offer useful information for guiding the selection and design of BES catalysts towards improved energy recovery from wastewater.
2. Fundamentals of cathodic catalysis in BES and implications for catalyst design
2.1 Characteristics of cathodic catalysis in BES
With a general definition, BES is an electrochemical system that utilizes biocatalysts (either microbial cells or enzymes) to catalyze electrochemical reactions at one or both of the electrodes.10,13 In such systems, accompanied with substrate oxidation at the anode and reduction reactions (e.g., ORR and HER) at the cathode, electrons flow from anode to cathode via an external circuit. From this process, energy can be harvested either in the form of electricity or chemical fuels. Notably, depending on the practical electrode potential of the anode and cathode, the electron flow can occur spontaneously, i.e., without extra power supply, which makes it a microbial fuel cell (MFC), or have to be driven by an external power source, i.e., electric power is invested, which makes it a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC).10 While electrical energy can be directly harvested in an MFC, in an MEC a wide range of high energy-density products (e.g., H2, CH4 or ethanol) can be obtained at the cost of only a small amount of power consumption.14 Hence, in either operating mode of BES, net energy recovery could be possible, although this is only limited to a fraction of redox reaction processes and relies heavily on the real running conditions (detailed below). So far, the most important BES cathodic reactions that may contribute to a net energy production mainly include ORR, HER and several hydrocarbons synthesis processes (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of catalytic processes at the cathode in BES and catalysts involved. Electric energy can be harvested at the external circuit or a small amount of energy should be invested to drive the production of hydrogen or carbohydrate fuels. 
Notably, most of these cathodic reactions also occur in conventional electrochemical systems. Therefore, it is not surprising that many cathodic electrocatalysts used in chemical fuel cells or electrolysis cells can be directly used in BES. However, they usually suffer from poorer catalytic performance in terms of activity, selectivity and stability than conventional electrochemical systems, mainly due to a suboptimal operating environment in BES. Thus, these existing catalysts need to be modified or new catalysts should be designed to meet the BES operation requirements.

2.1.1 Mild operation environment. 
One prominent feature of BES relative to normal electrochemical systems is the use of a biocatalyst, in most cases microorganisms. Thus, unlike normal electrochemical systems that are usually operated under specifically-defined or even extreme environmental/solution conditions to allow optimal catalysis, the operating conditions of BES are typically confined in order to sustain the bioactivity. Especially, neutral pH, a relatively low ionic strength of electrolyte, and ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure are required to sustain the metabolic activities of microorganisms. Unfortunately, for most metal catalysts such mild conditions are usually unfavorable due to constrained reaction kinetics.15


2.1.2 Complex wastewater electrolyte. 
Wastewater is a predominant electrolyte for most BESs. Unlike the conventional synthesized electrolytes that typically have well-defined composition and solution properties, real wastewater is characterized by high complexity and uncertainty in composition, and usually lacks sufficient conductivity and buffering capability to support ion transport.16 Moreover, the presence of organic substrate is usually needed to support microbial growth in the case of a microbial anode, which increases the risks of cathodic catalyst fouling due to substrate crossover.17 These characteristics all bring challenges to an efficient and stable operation of BES.
One major concern associated with the complexity of wastewater is that multiple competitive reactions would occur at the cathode due to the presence of various organics, nutrients and metal ions. For instance, some reductive substances such as organic substrate, ammonia and sulfide would directly react with oxygen, thus substantially decreasing the amount of oxygen available for the cathode and slowing down the kinetics of electron uptake at an MFC cathode.17 Additionally, for MECs, such side reactions would not only decrease the production rate of desired products (e.g., the HER kinetics might be decreased in the presence of other electroactive species such as nitrate and hypochlorite that compete for electrons), but also lower the product purity due to the formation of side products.14
Another relevant challenge is that some aqueous contaminants (e.g., dissolved organic matter18–20 and some metal ions21) or reaction intermediates (e.g., chloride,22 and sulfide18,23) may lead to catalyst deactivation during long-term operation, as a result of dissolution, oxidation, poisoning or fouling.24–27 Especially, an accumulation of OH− at the vicinity of the ORR cathode usually leads to a considerable drop in the thermodynamic and kinetic performance.28 These challenges thus give rise to difficulties in selecting and designing cathodic catalysts for BES, because not only the catalytic activity is important, but also a high selectivity and durability of catalysts should be ensured.


2.1.3 Microbially catalyzed electrosynthesis – a sustainable option. 
Overall, the mild operating conditions and complex wastewater composition make the cathodic catalysis processes in BES usually less efficient and more difficult to sustain than in conventional electrochemical systems, especially when abiotic catalysts are used. However, these special conditions also result in a new opportunity for BES – the use of microbial catalysts is allowed and greatly favored.5,6 This is different from conventional electrochemical systems where only pure chemical or enzymatic catalysts are used. Microbial cells are capable of self-repairing and regeneration. Hence, as cathodic catalysts, they have several distinct advantages over chemical materials or enzymes, such as high process robustness, better sustainability and low cost. Especially, microbial catalysts based on mixed cultures are highly adaptable to treatment of complex wastewater due to the coexistence of diverse metabolic pathways, and a dynamic change of the microbial community structure can well adapt to the environmental or operational variations.2,4,8

2.2 Cathode overpotential and catalysis in BES
One main task of BES cathodic catalysis is to reduce the cathode energy losses (also called overpotential) and thus increase the energy efficiency. A BES can be operated in an MFC or MEC mode, depending on the thermodynamics of electrode reactions and energy losses. In theory, electric energy can be harvested if the equilibrium potential of the involved redox couple at the anode is lower than that at the cathode, otherwise extra energy should be invested, and the recoverable or input energy should be dependent on the potential difference of the electrode reactions.9,29 In reality, however, less energy is typically harvested or more power needs to be invested, due to a considerable overpotential in electrode reactions. Especially, the cathode overpotential could be substantial in a BES, which lowers the potential attained over the BES and hence decreases the energy efficiency.9 For instance, while the thermodynamic potential for O2 reduction to water at neutral pH 7 is around +0.81 V (vs. SHE, hereafter the same), the onset potential of reduction current on non-catalyzed carbon is often below −0.1 V. Such a cathodic overpotential can be approximately categorized into kinetic losses (i.e., charge and mass transfer resistance) and thermodynamic losses.

2.2.1 Kinetic losses. 
The electrode kinetic losses have three fractions, namely, charge transfer overpotential, Ohmic overpotential and concentration overpotential, which are reflected in the different current density regions of the polarization curve (Fig. 2).30
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of cathode overpotential dependence on the current density for a single redox couple. 
Charge transfer overpotential. 
The cathodic charge transfer overpotential refers to the resistance of electron transfer from the electrode towards the terminal electron acceptors (e.g., oxygen in ORR). This part of overpotential is dominant in the low current region (e.g., below 1 mA cm−2) when the reactants are abundant and the Ohmic resistance is negligible. Considering the generally low current density of MFCs, the abatement of charge transfer overpotential is hence of great importance.29
The cathodic charge transfer overpotential can be decreased by applying an efficient catalyst to lower the activation energy for a specific reaction. Or, the current density (relative to the projected geometric surface area of the electrode) can be lifted by increasing the specific surface area of the catalyst layer as long as the reaction rate is not limited by mass transfer. This means, for a certain current density measured, the true current density relative to catalyst electroactive area becomes lower, which also leads to a decreased charge transfer overpotential.31 In this respect an electrode with porous structure and rough surface to allow more catalyst surface area and efficient reactant/products diffusion is thus highly favored. Apart from selecting efficient catalysts, the structural properties of catalyst carriers, which greatly affect the specific surface area and loading of the catalyst, should be optimized. Moreover, considering that many contaminants in wastewater can deactivate the catalysts or foul the electrode and hence lead to a decreased catalytically active surface area in long-term operation, the stability of the catalyst is also an important factor to be considered in catalyst design.
For biocatalysts, the electron transfer kinetics is not solely associated with the rate of interfacial electron transfer between electrode and catalyst, but also is usually limited by the rate of electron transfer within the biofunctional moiety, which is usually associated with the activity of biocatalysts. Thus, for biocatalysts especially in niche of toxic/recalcitrant wastewater treatment, improving the bioactivities is also an important aspect to lower the charge transfer overpotential.
Ohmic and concentration overpotentials. 
The cathode Ohmic losses, which are caused by electrical resistance of the electrode and ionic resistance in the catholyte, become predominant at a medium current level. Furthermore, concentration overpotential would become significant under higher current conditions where electron supply is sufficient and the mass transfer (i.e., transport of reactants or reaction products) in the electrode vicinity is relatively limited. For instance, for an ORR microbial cathode the oxygen diffusion across the biofilm might be constrained, or the dissolved oxygen concentration can be decreased by some reductive substrates that consume oxygen. In addition, due to a low ionic strength and poor buffering capability of wastewater and insufficient mixing, the build-up of a pH gradient within biofilm cannot be neglected. These would all lead to decreased reaction kinetics (i.e., Monod kinetics for microorganisms). Such phenomena are more frequently encountered in MECs where an external power supply is afforded and usually a higher current density is created. The concentration limitations can be eased to some extent by designing a porous 3D electrode to facilitate mass diffusion. Especially for biofilm-based catalyst, it would be crucial to optimize the biofilm inner structure.


2.2.2 Thermodynamic losses. 
For a BES, the thermodynamic difference of the actual anode and cathode reactions ultimately governs its maximum achievable energy output. The cathode thermodynamic overpotential describes a deviation from the formal potential of the involved redox couple. A higher thermodynamic overpotential implies a lower cathode potential and thus a lower voltage output for an MFCs or a higher applied voltage for an MEC.
For biocatalysts, the thermodynamic overpotential mainly results from the occurrence of redox cascades. The substrate conversion reactions of biocatalysts are spatially separated from the electrode reaction, thus the electrons from the cathode have to be transferred to the catalytic active site via a redox cascade (i.e., mediators, protein matrix for enzymes, or cytochromes for microorganisms). This process incurs extra energy loss. Taking enzymatically-catalyzed ORR as an example, the catalytic active center of laccase has a lower redox potential than the standard reduction potential of oxygen at neutral pH, and the electron relay between the active center and the electrode leads to a further potential drop. As a result, the actual cathode potential at which the ORR effectively occurs is considerably lower than the redox potential of ORR. Such a potential drop could be more significant in microbial cells, which typically utilize intracellular enzymes to catalyze the substrate conversion and extract a certain fraction of the yielded energy for their survival and proliferation.
The formation of mixed potential due to oxidation of reductive substances at the cathode may also contribute to the thermodynamic overpotential for a BES. For example, in an MFC with ORR cathode, some reductive substrates from the anode chamber may enter into the cathode chamber and be oxidized at the cathode, which leads to an internal current at the cathode (i.e., direct electron flow from substrate oxidation to ORR at the same electrode)17 and gives rise to a mixed cathode potential between the redox potential of the substrate (e.g., −0.28 V vs. SHE for acetate) and O2/H2O.10
Therefore, to reduce the thermodynamic overpotential and ensure a high cathode potential, efficient catalyst design should be adopted to decrease the redox cascades in biocatalysts and meanwhile to improve the cathode reaction specificity. Especially, for an enzymatic catalyst, it is desirable that the redox potential of the catalytic center should be kept close to that of the catalyzed reactions.

2.3 Photo-aided cathodic catalysis in BES
In addition to reducing the cathode overpotential, improved electricity generation or fuel production can also be achieved by incorporating an external power source, ideally a renewable energy source such as solar energy, to provide an extra driving force for electron transfer. This has led to the development of photocathode and photoelectrocatalysts, which greatly aid the cathodic electrocatalytic reactions in BES.30,32
In a photocathode BES, there are strong synergies between the cathodic photoelectrocatalysis and anodic metabolism, as well as between the photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes in the photocathode (Fig. 3). In the operation, electron–hole pairs are generated at a semiconductor upon photo irradiation, then the photogenerated charges (either electrons or holes) are transferred to a catalytically active site for electrocatalytic reactions, meanwhile electrons are delivered from the anode to combine with holes or directly participate in cathodic reactions. Thus, to enable such synergies, the photoelectrocatalyst should possess the following three properties. (1) The material should be conductive and active for the electrocatalytic reactions. (2) It should be able to absorb light (ideally visible light) and transport the photo-excited electrons. These two properties don't have to be provided by the same material. That means, a photoelectrocatalyst may consist either of an absorber that is catalytically active by itself or of a structure where light absorption and electrocatalytic activity are separated (i.e., a photocatalyst is used in combination with a normal electrochemical co-catalyst).33 (3) The band structure is of critical importance. In order to receive microbial electrons from the anode, the photoelectrocatalyst should have a valence band edge more positive than the anode potential. Meanwhile, to transfer the photo-excited electrons to a terminal electron acceptor, it should have a conduction band edge more negative than the redox potential of the target cathode reactions. Therefore, photoelectrocatalysts in BES should be rationally designed to enable efficient interactions among the photoelectrocatalysts, the anodic electricigens and the catholyte.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of photoelectrocatalysis at BES cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Main categories of cathodic catalysts in BES
As aforementioned, the BES cathode offers a flexible platform for versatile redox reactions and catalysts application. Not only normal electrocatalysts can be employed, but also biocatalysts and photocatalysts can be introduced to accelerate the cathodic reactions. However, the unique features of cathodic catalysis in BES, particularly the need to adapt to wastewater treatment and the coupling of microbial and photochemical catalysis with electrode reactions, raise special demands on catalysts. Table 1 lists some typical cathodic catalysts that have been applied in BES. According to the catalytic reaction mechanism and catalyst nature, they can be divided into three main categories: electrocatalysts, photoelectrocatalysts and bioelectrocatalysts. To avoid crossover among different categories, the electrocatalysts and photoelectrocatalysts herein exclusively refer to abiotic materials. Different categories of catalysts vary considerably in their catalytic mechanisms, performance and physicochemical–biological properties.
Table 1 Several typical cathode catalysts in BESa




Category
Catalyst
Catalyzed reaction
Ref.





a Composite abiotic catalysts comprising multiple catalysts are not included.





Electro-catalyst
Noble metal
Pt
ORR, HER

14, 17 and 43



Pd
HER

65



Non-noble metal
Ni
HER

51, 239 and 240



Stainless steel
HER

35 and 241



MnO2
ORR

36



Carbon-based material
Activated carbon
ORR

242



Carbon nanotube, nanofiber
ORR

39 and 40



Graphene
ORR

55



Graphite
Dye reduction

243



Photoelectrocatalyst
n-type semiconductor
TiO2
Dissolved organic matter reduction

94 and 96



p-type semiconductor
Cu2O
HER

32



Biocatalyst
Enzyme
Laccase
ORR, Dye reduction

121–124



Microorganisms

Shewanella putrefaciens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
ORR

136 and 138–140




Geobacter sulfurreducens

HER

244



Mixed culture
ORR, HER

133, 134 and 142



Mixed culture
Methane/acetate, etc. production

91, 144, 153, 245 and 246





At a BES cathode, the kinetics of the catalytic reaction is highly dependent on the rate of mass and electron transfer at the electrode–catalyst–solution interfaces. Therefore, the structure, surface properties and conductivity of catalysts are all important issues to be considered. In the subsequent sections, we respectively summarize the general catalytic performance of each category of catalysts, and discuss how the cathodic catalysis in BES can be enhanced by appropriately tuning their properties.
3. Electrocatalysts for BES implementation
3.1 Characteristics of electrocatalysts
Electrocatalysts, including various metal- and carbon-based materials, are the earliest and by far still the most widely used type of catalysts at BES cathode. Noble metals, such as Pt and Pd, are commonly used as ORR or HER catalysts in BES due to their excellent catalytic activity and high resistance to corrosion. However, the high cost, scarcity and usually a low reaction specificity of such materials greatly limit their practical implementation. Moreover, many noble metals are prone to bind with oxygen or contaminants in wastewater, leading to severe deactivation. These limitations have motivated the search for cost-effective and more resistant alternatives based on the use of abundant elements, such as non-noble metals and even metal-free catalysts (mainly carbon-based materials).
The commonly used non-noble metal catalysts in BES include nickel (Ni),34 stainless steel,35 MnO2,36etc. and their various composite materials. These materials generally exhibit better catalytic selectivity and improved stability, and some of them (e.g., Co- and Fe-centered composite catalysts) even showed ORR catalytic activities approaching Pt,37,38 but the problem of long-term performance decline still remained.
In addition, many carbon-based materials, such as activated carbon and graphite (especially their nanoscale counterparts), have been frequently used at BES cathodes. These materials also possess certain catalytic activities arising from the quinone groups on the surface, and their large specific surface area, low cost, high chemical stability and good biocompatibility make them attractive cathodic materials for BES.39,40 However, most carbon-based materials alone tend to favor a slow 2e− ORR pathway over a 4e− pathway in MFC.30 Such a 2e− pathway is unfavorable from an energy production point of view due to the higher overpotential and smaller Faradaic efficiency. In addition, for MEC application such as HER, a plain carbon electrode as the cathode also incurs a large overpotential.14 Thus, carbon materials are usually used in combination with other catalysts to perform the electrocatalysis, in which case they play a role of catalyst carrier and current collector37,41 or as a carbon shell of a metal catalyst.42
In all, the performance of electrocatalysts is still greatly limited in terms of catalytic activity, selectivity and stability for BES implementation. Although an improvement in the catalysis performance can be achieved by creating a better catalytic environment through adjusting wastewater properties or by simply enlarging the cathode geometric area, these would be difficult to realize and costly when it comes to practical engineering application. In this context, an essential and more pursuable way would be to rationally modify the physicochemical properties of catalysts in order to adapt them for BES operation.
3.2 Tailoring the properties of electrocatalysts

3.2.1 Composition. 
The reaction activity, selectivity and stability of a catalyst are closely associated with its chemical composition. Although electrocatalysts of a single component are effective in catalyzing cathode reactions in BES, their performance is somewhat limited in either stability (for most noble metals) or activity (for non-noble metals).14,43Fig. 4A illustrates the process of ORR catalyzed by Pt, which involves three major consecutive steps: (1) oxygen adsorption, dissociation and binding to Pt surface; (2) binding of a proton to the adsorbed oxygen molecule to form OH; (3) binding of another proton to form H2O and subsequent desorption from Pt surface. However, step 3 is usually very slow. As a consequence, Pt tends to bond with O2 molecule to form stable Pt–O and Pt–OH species, which decreases the available reactive sites for ORR catalysis.44,45 To resolve this problem, one common strategy is to combine Pt with another metal (e.g., Pd) to form a bimetallic catalyst, in which the electronic structure of Pt can be altered.46 As illustrated in Fig. 4B, doping of Pd can significantly improve the ORR catalytic efficiency of Pt, arising from less Pt–OH coverage caused by the lateral repulsion from the OH or O adsorbed on the neighboring Pd atom. In addition, such an alloying changes the electronic structure of Pt by creating a more favorable Pt–Pt interatomic distance for O2 dissociative adsorption and can lead to a higher catalytic efficiency. In another study, doping of biogenic Pd with Au was found to greatly alleviate the catalyst poisoning caused by sulfide and enable efficient dechlorination under environmental conditions.47
 Fig. 4  Schematic of (A) Pt-catalyzed ORR, and (B) alleviated Pt oxidation by Pd in a Pt–Pd catalyst. ORR catalysis steps: (1) O2(ads) ↔ O(ads) + O(ads); (2) O(ads) + H+ + e− ↔ OH(ads); and (3) OH(ads) + H+ + e− ↔ OH2. 
For economic considerations, noble metals can be alloyed with non-noble elements48 or even noble metal-free composite catalysts49 can be created. For example, a Ti/nano-TiO2/Pd catalyst exhibited a comparable ORR catalytic activity with Pt and led to steady current generation when assembled in an MFC, with a maximum power density of 200 mW m−2 achieved.50 In addition, Ni-based composite catalysts, such as Ni–Mo and other multi-components alloy, have a lower cost than Pt, but possess a comparable catalytic activity and usually a higher selectivity towards HER.51–53 It was recently reported that an appropriately designed MoS2 composite catalyst also showed a higher HER catalytic activity than Pt-based catalyst in a BES, yet the cost was 4.5 times less.54
Analogous to metal catalysts, the electronic and catalytic properties of carbon-based catalysts such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene can also be enhanced through element doping or combination with other catalysts.41,55 CNTs, which are composed of graphitic carbons with one or several concentric tubules,56,57 usually lead to a 2e− oxygen reduction and have a lower ORR catalytic efficiency than Pt.45 However, the vertically aligned nitrogen-containing CNTs were found to alter the ORR to 4e− pathway and greatly improve its catalytic activity and tolerance to substrate crossover.58 This is mainly because the integration of electron-accepting nitrogen atoms in the conjugated CNT plane imparts a relatively high positive charge density on adjacent carbon atoms, which promotes parallel diatomic adsorption of O2 and increases the ORR kinetics.58 In another study, combining Mn–polypyrrole with CNT as a cathodic catalyst also led to greatly improved MFC performance. The system sustained a comparably high power density as Pt-based MFC, with the maximum power density decreased by less than 10% after 4 months of operation.59
As we can see, most composite catalysts exhibit not merely a combination of the properties associated with individual components, but usually lead to new properties arising from possible synergies between the distinct elements. Thus, catalyst doping and combination may offer an effective strategy to create novel electrocatalysts with enhanced catalytic performance and better adaptability to BES operation.


3.2.2 Morphology. 
It has been well demonstrated that fine morphological and structural manipulation with nanoscale precision can give rise to a new-generation of catalysts with superior performance. First of all, size effects are enormous for electrocatalysts. In this respect, nano-materials have many advantages over their bulk counterparts. Firstly, since the electrocatalytic activity of catalysts depends heavily on the area of catalytic active sites, the specific surface area of cathode and accordingly the available active area of catalyst can be increased at smaller particle sizes, thus electrocatalytic activity can be improved; secondly, the catalyst loading can be minimized by creating an extra-thin film,60 in which the catalyst atoms can be more efficiently utilized because only the outmost few layers of atoms are actually utilized in electrocatalysis.61,62 In addition, for some electrocatalysts, even their resistance to poisoning can be improved at smaller particle size, likely due to a substantial change in the mass transport rate and double-layer electronic structure of catalyst.63 For example, Pt nanoparticles immobilized on high-silica zeolites, with size smaller than 2 nm, were found to be more sulfur-tolerant than larger particles.64 For these reasons, today nanoscale materials have been increasingly used as electrocatalysts in various electrochemical systems including BES,65,66 and particle size control has become an important strategy to improve electrocatalyst performance.
However, although a positive correlation between particle size and catalytic activity has been documented in most studies, there are also contradictory results.67 A recent study revealed that decreasing the particle size also resulted in a change in the particle shape and the exposure of active surface facets, which seems to prevail over other nanoscale effects in governing the catalyst performance.68 The shape of a nanoparticle is a parameter of paramount importance, because it governs the surface atomic arrangement and coordination, i.e., it determines which crystal facets are exposed at the surface of a nanocrystal, and thus strongly controls the catalytic reactivity and selectivity.69 In general, noble metal nanoparticles such as Pt nanocrystals are exclusively composed of the low-index crystal planes, i.e., (100), (110) and (111) facets, but the exposed facets vary with particle shape. For instance, a cubic Pt nanoparticle contains six (100) facets, whereas in a Pt octahedron all the exposed facets are (111), and in a Pt cuboctahedron the exposed facets are a mixture of (111) and (100) domains. Since these facets have different catalytic activities and selectivity, manipulation of the particle shape can thus give rise to electrocatalysts with well-defined properties.70 This has inspired considerable effort in the synthesis of shape-controlled catalyst nanoparticles with a maximum expression of active facets. For example, Liu et al.15 fabricated nanostructured MnOx catalysts with nanorod morphology, which showed a significantly better electrocatalytic activity towards ORR at an MFC cathode compared with the nanowire (NW)-shaped materials.


3.2.3 Catalyst structure. 
In electrocatalysis without mediators, the electrode reaction occurs only when the reactants are adsorbed onto the catalyst surface. Hence, it is important to increase accessible active sites on the catalyst. One effective way is to disperse and encapsulate catalyst nanoparticles in a 3D porous carrier (or called support), thus forming a 3D-structured catalyst layer (Fig. 5).41,59 To serve such a purpose, carbon-based materials are typically an option of first choice due to their good electrical and mechanical properties, versatility in pore size and structure, adaptability to chemical modification, and low cost.39,42 Compared with catalysts of planar configuration, a 3D porous structured catalyst based on the use of carbon nano-material carriers typically possesses larger specific surface area for reactant adsorption and subsequent reactions, and thus favors higher reaction kinetics.57,71,72 However, it is possible that the transport of reactants/products might become limited in such a circumstance, since the mass transport is strongly dependent on the electrode porosity and distribution of inner channels.73 Hence, the internal porous structure of the catalyst layer should also be carefully designed. Other 3D structured materials such as nano Pd–Cu foams74 and activated carbon–Ni foams75 also showed superior ORR catalytic activity and have been employed in MFCs. Some appropriately designed porous structures can even effectively protect the catalyst from poisoning or fouling in complex wastewater environment.76 A porous zeolite structure was found to greatly alleviate fouling of internally located Pd sites by excluding sulfite, attributed to the molecular size and hydrophobicity effects. With such a Pd/zeolite catalyst efficient reduction of chlorinated hydrocarbons at a groundwater site was sustained for over 2 years.77
 Fig. 5  SEM images of: (A) Mn–polypyrrole–CNT catalyst; (B) Fe- and nitrogen-functionalized graphene; (C) γ-MnO2 mixed with CNTs and (D) coral-like Cu–Pd bimetallic porous structure developed on 3D copper foam carrier. Adapted with permission from ref. 41, 55, 59 and 74. Copyright, Elsevier and American Chemical Society. 
In terms of the micro-structure of catalysts, especially for composite catalysts, the catalyst atoms can be rationally deployed to allow a better interaction. While most multicomponent catalysts reported so far are based on a simple and unordered mixing of different elements, recently the core–shell structures, which consist of a uniformly deposited catalyst as the shell on the surface of another catalyst as the core, have attracted great interest.78–80 The core–shell structure can be arranged in several ways (Fig. 6). Generally, all these structures enable a better play of the synergy between individual catalyst components than conventional composite catalysts, and thus mostly lead to an improved catalyst activity, durability and structural stability in complex environments.81 It was reported that Pd–FePt nanoparticles consisting of a 5 nm Pd core and a FePt shell efficiently catalyzed ORR and enabled 12-times more current generation than with commercially available Pt catalysts of the same total weight, and exhibited a significantly higher durability (Fig. 6D).82 A nitrogen-doped core–shell structured catalyst with iron-based composite (Fe–Fe3C) nanorods as the core and graphite carbon as the shell also showed higher ORR activity than Pt/C catalysts in neutral phosphate buffer solution, and yielded a 3-fold higher power density than the latter in an MFC (Fig. 6E).83 More importantly, a shell material with well-designed pore structure and composition could selectively reject or combine with some contaminants and thus effectively shield the inner core from poisoning or fouling.84 Expectedly, such a property of the shell may also be utilized to allow selective passage of reactant species, thus a higher reaction selectivity could be achieved.
 Fig. 6  Core–shell structured electrocatalysts: (A and D) nanoparticles (B and E) core nanoparticles dispersed and encapsulated in the nanotube shell and (C and F) core particles wrapped by a shell layer to form a nanorod. (D)–(F) are TEM images of a Pd@FePt NPs, CeO2 nanorods in the titanate NTs, and N–Fe/Fe3C@graphite nanorods, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82–84. Copyright, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH. 
In light of the poor stability of many electrocatalysts in complex wastewater environment, a protective coating naturally comes as a rational protection strategy to keep the catalysts from directly contacting the outside solution while allowing transport of protons and reactants. Thus, like in a core–shell structure, a similar protection and screening effect may also be afforded by employing a non-catalytic protective polymer coating outside the catalyst or by encapsulating catalyst particles in a matrix of protection material.19,85 Although such a catalyst coating layer has only been employed in conventional electrochemical systems to date, they definitely hold great promise for BES implementation.


3.2.4 Surface properties of catalyst layer. 
While a 3D porous-structured catalyst layer has become a common practice to increase catalytic sites and promote proton transfer, the hydrophobic gas diffusion within an air-breathing cathode should be given more attention. Today, air-breathing cathode is gaining growing popularity in MFC design because of its many advantages, such as energy saving and enabling higher oxygen concentration than aqueous dissolved oxygen supply via aeration. Thus, the design of an efficient gas diffusion cathode is essential for ORR catalysts in BES, and this raises great challenges for controlling the surface properties of the catalyst layer.57 To ensure efficient ORR, an air-cathode needs to simultaneously provide sufficient passage paths for oxygen, proton and electron. However, a highly hydrophilic catalyst layer would hinder oxygen diffusion, while a highly hydrophobic layer would greatly limit proton diffusion.86 Therefore, it is essential to ensure sufficient porosity and meanwhile maintain appropriate hydrophobicity to allow a balanced transfer of proton and oxygen.87 To this end, one useful strategy is to fabricate a uniform-microporous catalyst layer with a large amount of three-phase interfaces by using a certain amount of hydrophobic binders such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).88 A further improvement can be made by avoiding the sintering procedure that has been usually adopted to create a thin-film of PTFE but could adversely decrease the porosity of the catalyst layer.89 With an as-prepared activated carbon air-cathode, a substantial increase in power density (1086 mW m−2 (ref. 89) vs. 802 mW m−2 with a sintered electrode88 and 766 mW m−2 with a Pt-loaded air-cathode90) was achieved in the MFC.

4. Photoelectrocatalysts for BES implementation
4.1 Characteristics of photoelectrocatalysts
The key processes in photocatalysis include: (i) light absorption by the light-harvesting agent; and (ii) charge separation and electron transport to the catalyst/solution interface. However, to enable photoelectrocatalysis at the BES cathode, besides meeting the above criteria, the catalyst should also be able to retrieve electrons from the anode and to efficiently utilize the generated redox potential to drive the desired cathodic reactions.33 These requirements thus set more strict restrictions on the selection of photoelectrocatalysts (mainly semiconductor materials).
So far, only a few semiconductors have been used for cathodic catalysis in BES. Among these, the n-type semiconductor TiO2 has been widely used as an efficient photoelectrocatalyst to drive ORR, attributed to its appropriate electronic band structure, good photostability, chemical inertness and low cost.91–94 However, this material can absorb only a small portion of the visible light due to a relative wide band gap (3.0–3.2 eV) and suffers from considerable recombination of photo-induced electrons and holes, which greatly lowers the quantum efficiency and photocatalytic performance. Such electron–hole recombination can be alleviated to some extent in a BES due to a continuous supply of electrons from the anode to trap the holes32,91,95 or a deliberate supply of oxygen at the cathode to rob the photo-excited electrons,96 but cannot be circumvented because of a very short time duration of the electron–hole separation relative to a slow supply and transport of provided extra charges. A p-type semiconductor, cuprous oxide (Cu2O), has also been recently reported for BES implementation.32 This material is regarded as a promising photoelectrocatalyst towards HER for three reasons: (1) it has a band gap of 2.0–2.2 eV, which allows efficient visible light absorption; (2) its conduction band lies 0.7 eV negative to the hydrogen evolution potential at neutral pH, which makes it thermodynamically suitable for hydrogen production;97 and (3) the natural abundance and low cost make its large-scale fabrication potentially competitive. However, the narrow band structure of Cu2O on the other hand also limits the available driving force for cathode electron transfer. Moreover, it suffers from poor stability due to photocorrosion, i.e., self-photoreduction of Cu2O to Cu0 when the generated electrons are not transported away or consumed quickly.98
Being different from a normal electrocatalysis process, photoelectrocatalysis involves extra steps of photo absorption and excitation. Thus, in addition to the conventional electrochemical considerations such as catalyst/electrolyte interfacial electron transfer and catalytic selectivity and stability, there is also a strong need to enhance the photo-to-electricity conversion efficiency and meanwhile to better tune the synergy between the photocathode and bioanode in BES.
4.2 Tuning photoelectrocatalyst properties
Analogous to electrocatalysts, the photoelectrocatalysts properties can also be fine-tuned to improve BES cathode performance. In light of the high similarity between photoelectrocatalysts and electrocatalysts in respect of electrochemical properties and relevant manipulation strategies, the focus here is mainly on the aspects associated with light adsorption and charge separation.

4.2.1 Composition. 
The existing natural semiconductors are mostly constrained in their band structure and electron conductivity. To better adapt them for electrocatalysis implementation, one common strategy is to modify the catalyst composition by either doping with non-metal elements (e.g., C, N, S, F, B, I and H)99,100 or combining with another catalyst.101 Especially, the synthesis of semiconductor–metal composite and bi-semiconductor composite photoelectrocatalysts, which are commonly seen in conventional photoelectrochemical systems, might greatly aid the optimization of photoelectrocatalysis at BES cathode.
Although many semiconductors can play a dual role of photo absorber and electrocatalyst, they generally have relatively poor electrocatalytic capability due to limited charge conductivity and catalytic specificity. Thus, in many cases semiconductors are coupled with metal materials as co-catalyst to perform the photoelectrocatalysis.102 Such a combination confers two major advantages: on the one hand charge separation of semiconductor can be accelerated arising from a high conductivity of metal, on the other hand new redox pathways with low overpotential requirement might be created due to a synergy between the two components. For example, TiO2 alone as a photocatalyst cannot catalyze HER at neutral pH because its conduction band is quite close to the thermodynamic potential of the H+/H2 couple, but this reaction becomes possible when a co-catalyst with a relatively low overvoltage requirement (e.g., Pt or Au) is present. Especially, Au nanoparticles can act as a reservoir of electrons to conduct away the electrons from the electron–hole pairs, and at the same time the Au nanoparticles become negatively charged and activated for HER.103
Another strategy to achieve synergetic photoelectrocatalysis is to appropriately combining two or more semiconductors of different electronic energy levels. Especially, a coupling of n-type and p-type semiconductors is greatly favored. For example, in a Bi2WO6–TiO2 system, the electron and holes generated in Bi2WO6 under visible light can respectively migrate to the conduction band and valence band of TiO2, leading to activation of TiO2 (Fig. 7).104 This means, the activation of wide-gap semiconductors such as TiO2 under visible light irradiation becomes possible, and meanwhile the photo-corrosion of p-type semiconductors such as Bi2WO6 and Cu2O can be alleviated, because the excited electrons can be efficiently transported away and these semiconductors can be well isolated from the electrolyte solution.97 Nevertheless, in such a double-layer design the reductive potential of the photo-generated electrons would decrease during the migration. Thus, to facilitate efficient catalysis, a metal catalyst can also been applied to form a semiconductor–semiconductor–metal sandwiched structure.97
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the synergetic catalytic effects in TiO2/Bi2WO6 catalysts: e−–h+ pairs are generated in Bi2WO6 under visible light irradiation due to its relatively small band gap of 2.8 eV; the h+ at the valence band (VB) then migrate to the VB of TiO2, leading to accelerated charge separation in Bi2WO6. Alternatively, the photo-excited electrons at the conduction band (CB) of Bi2WO6 can be activated to that of TiO2via a two-photon adsorption mechanism, leading to activation of TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Notably, although so far only TiO2 and Cu2O have been reported for BES photoelectrocatalysis, many more semiconductors can be expected for such a purpose according to the basic principles of photoelectrocatalysis. Fig. 8 shows some photocatalysts that have been used to drive water oxidation, hydrogen production or overall water splitting reactions in photochemical cells. Despite their different band gaps, all these semiconductors have more positive VB edges than the redox potential of the bacterial outer membrane c-type cytochrome (e.g., the MtrC of Shewanella strain is around −0.1 V vs. SHE), and a more negative CB position than the standard potentials of HER (−0.42 V vs. SHE) and ORR (0.81 V vs. SHE) at neutral pH (Fig. 8). Thus, if disregarding the overpotential, all these catalysts should be able to catalyze HER or ORR at a BES cathode. However, in reality the overpotential and the fouling problems would become severe, and the limited solar spectrum adsorption by the wide-band semiconductors would present another big challenge. In addition, many semiconductors such as CdS, GaP, GaAs and ZnO suffer from a low chemical and photochemical stability and potential toxicity. All these factors would make the photoelectrocatalysis process difficult or prohibitive for BES implementation. Thus, creation of more efficient and robust photoelectrocatalysts is needed to better meet a BES operation.
 Fig. 8  Band positions of several semiconductors in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 7.0. The positions of the lower edge of the conduction band (red color) and upper edge of the valence band (blue color) are presented relative to the redox potential of the HER and anode cell cytochrome protein. The visible light spectrum corresponds to energies from 1.56 to 3.12 eV. 


4.2.2 Morphology. 
Like electrocatalysts, nanoscale photoelectrocatalysts with well-controlled morphology and structure offer many advantages over their bulk counterparts, such as superior band structure for light adsorption, large surface area and short charge diffusion length to favor interfacial charge-carrier transfer. For instance, there is a mismatch between the intrinsic carrier diffusion of bulk Cu2O materials (usually 20–100 nm) and the light absorption depth (approximately 10 μm).105 This mismatch slows down the charge separation and leads to a low photoelectrocatalytic efficiency and severe photocorrosion.106 Such a limitation can be greatly eased by specifically modulating the carrier diffusion length of Cu2O through fabricating various nano-structure materials such as nanowire, nanorod and nanotube.32,107 In addition to the catalyst size, a precise control of the catalyst morphology is also helpful, because the distribution of crystal facets not only greatly affects charge separation but also influences the stability of semiconductor crystals.108,109 Thus, to enable an efficient and stable photoelectrocatalysis process at the BES cathode, semiconductor nano-crystals with highly reactive exposed facets and a low percentage of defect sites should be synthesized.


4.2.3 Catalyst structure. 
Similar to electrocatalysts, photoelectrocatalysis materials can also be fabricated into 3D porous nano-structures and/or core–shell structures to promote reaction kinetics, selectivity and stability. For example, a sandwich core–shell nanostructure consisting of a SiO2 core and a TiO2 shell with Au nanoparticles embedded inside was found to greatly enhance the synergies between different components and increase the structural and functional stability due to a shell-protection effect.110 Moreover, because the photogenerated electrons need only to travel a short distance before being collected at the junction by the core, the charge separation can be greatly accelerated. However, being slightly different from electrocatalysts, in such a configuration the light adsorption of photoelectrocatalysts might be affected, because the shell or cover layers are prone to shield the inner core photocatalyst from light irradiation and thus lower the overall photoelectrocatalytic efficiency. Thus, for the design of photoelectrocatalysts, a structure with good light-transmission properties should also be considered.
In this respect, 3D macroporous or nanotube/NW-array structures again appear to be a favorable option. For instance, a sieve-like macroporous composite SnO2/TiO2 photoelectrocatalyst was developed by assembling an Sb-doped SnO2 film on vertically aligned TiO2 nanotubes,111 which exhibited an excellent catalytic efficiency and stability for the treatment of nitrophenol wastewater. In such a structure, the macropores increased the specific surface area, provided more active sites, and allowed easy transmission of light and thus a direct irradiation of the TiO2 catalyst. Efficient photoelectrochemical generation of H2 was also reported by using a composite Si–Pt photoelectrocatalyst,112 which was fabricated by impregnation of Pt nanoparticles on a Si NW array (Fig. 9A and B). This configuration confers several benefits: (1) the 3D nanostructured photoelectrodes ensured large semiconductor/electrolyte interface areas; (2) the vertically aligned NW array allowed an efficient light transmission; (3) by modulating its dimensions to match the wavelength of visible light, the NW array could function as an antireflective or light-trapping layer to minimize reflection of incident photons, thereby enhancing the photo absorption. For BES application, a self-biased BES, which was co-driven by microbially-derived electricity and solar power, was constructed based on the use of a Cu2O NW-arrayed photocathode (Fig. 9C).32 This system yielded a stable current density of ∼75 μA cm−2 under light illumination and of ∼25 μA cm−2 in the dark (the latter was mainly attributed to the negative bias imposed by the bioanode) (Fig. 9D). Moreover, there was no obvious decline in the current density after several light–dark cycles within a time span of about 2000 s.32 Although the catalytic efficiency and stability of is still to be elevated, all these studies evidenced that 3D nano-structured semiconductor materials offer a feasible option for photoelectrocatalysis at a BES cathode.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic of synergetic catalysis in a Si NW–Pt NPs composite catalyst with 3D structure, photo-generated electrons at the conducting band of Si NW immediately drift to Pt. (B) SEM image of Si NWs array. Inset: photograph of a Si NW array sample with low reflection. (C) SEM image of Cu2O NW-arrayed 3D structured photocathode; (D) current density curves recorded from a zero-biased BES with a bioanode and a Cu2O NWs-arrayed photocathode with light on–off cycles (light intensity = 20 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 and 112. Copyright, American Chemical Society. 
To increase the catalyst life-time and improve the long-term stability of system, a protective layer could also be applied. However, for this strategy to be successful in photoelectrocatalysis application, the protective layer must meet the following criteria: (1) it must be dense enough to block the aqueous electrolyte solution from accessing the semiconductor surface; (2) it must be thin enough to avoid interfering with the light absorption of the semiconductor; (3) it must be conductive so that it can efficiently transmit minority carriers from the semiconductor into the electrolyte solution; (4) it must be mechanically and chemically stable itself. Some attempts have been initiated in this respect, although their feasibility for practical BES implementation is yet to be demonstrated. For example, Lin et al.113 obtained a 3-fold increase in the photostability of Cu2O by coating with a protective layer of metal oxide co-catalyst. Zhang et al. used glucose as a carbon precursor to form a thin protective carbon coating on a photocathode of Cu2O NW arrays (Fig. 10), which led to a 6-fold increase in photostability and considerably enhanced photocurrent generation.98
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic diagram of a carbon-layer protected Cu2O NW array photocathode; photocurrent density decay with (B) unprotected cathode and (C) carbon-protected cathode at 0 V vs. SHE in chopped light illumination (light on–off cycle: 10 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 

5. Bioelectrocatalysts for BES implementation
5.1 Characteristics of bioelectrocatalysts
Nowadays, the concept of cathodic bioelectrocatalysis, attributed to its compatibility with a bioanode design, has gained increasing popularity for BES applications. In bioelectrocatalysis, the reaction kinetics is not only associated with the catalyst–electrode interfacial electron transfer rate, but also governed by the transport of electrons and substrate within the catalysts (either enzymes or microbial cells). It should be noted that, although microbial cells mostly rely on the in situ synthesized redox enzymes for catalysis, they substantially differ from enzymes in both characteristics and catalytic behaviors.

5.1.1 Enzymes. 
Many enzymes have been recognized as excellent redox catalysts because of their high efficiency and reaction specificity and operate under mild conditions. Today, enzymes have found wide applications in many synthesis industries and in various sensing and reaction processes.114 Several biocathodes have been established for ORR catalysis, mainly relying on the high catalytic capabilities of some multi-copper oxidases (MCO, e.g., laccase, bilirubin oxidase (BOD),115 and copper efflux oxidase,116 tyrosinase117) or some redox enzymes from the cell respiration chain such as cytochrome oxidase.118 These enzymes often exhibit a better ORR catalytic activity and selectivity than Pt, hence allowing simpler reactor design. In particular, the laccase from Trametes versicolor is one of the most impressive and most widely used enzymes for cathodic ORR. The redox potential of the active site of laccase (∼0.78 V vs. SHE at neutral pH) is very close to that of the O2/H2O redox couple,119 hence in principle a low overpotential is allowed if it is used as the cathode catalyst.120 The use of a laccase cathode for an MFC was firstly reported by Schaetzle et al.121 This system generated one order of magnitude higher power density than a Pt cathode control. In theory, such a hybrid system can provide a high electromotive force of ∼1.1 V, but the use of redox mediators at the cathode significantly increased the overpotential. This concept of a laccase cathode MFC was further advanced by enhancing the communication between enzyme and electrode.122–125 Higgins et al. achieved a steady full cell potential of 0.97 V by linking a Shewanella-inoculated bioanode with a mediator-free air-breathing laccase cathode.123 The pressed, Teflon-ized carbon black electrode in their system not only favored a high enzyme loading and a direct electron transfer from cathode to laccase, but also permitted efficient supply of oxygen at higher concentrations. As a consequence, a high cathodic open-circuit potential of 0.75 V (vs. SHE), which was close to the theoretical redox potential of laccase, was achieved.125 Aside from laccase, the combination of a microbial anode and a BOD ORR cathode was also recently reported.126 The BOD was fixed to a carbon nanotube cathode using a heterobifunctional cross linker and then stabilized with a silica sol–gel coating. It showed a sustained electrocatalytic activity for over 24 h during the tests.
To serve as an electrocatalyst in BES, the electron conductivity and operation robustness are also very important properties. Unfortunately, many enzymes are inherently limited in these respects. Especially, the relatively short lifetime of enzymes, which is usually on the order of 10 days,127 presents a big limitation. It is well known that the protein shell of enzymes (Fig. 11) on the one hand renders them unique selective, but on the other hand also makes them very fragile, because any vibration of the flexible protein regions or chemical modifications of single amino acids may change interactions within the protein chain and lead to their denaturation.128 Another key issue limiting the application of most copper-containing oxidases as BES cathodic catalysts is their low activity at neutral pH (due to the formation of copper hydroxo complexes129 and inhibition by halide ions130). Other shortcomings of many enzymatic catalysts for BES application include: (1) low active site loading (geometric area basis) due to the large size of the enzyme; (2) usually insufficient electrical communication between enzyme redox center and electrode due to electrical insulation effects of the surrounding protein matrix; (3) typically high costs for their production and purification.114,131 Thus, BES implementation of enzymatic catalysis so far has been limited largely to relatively simple niches such as ORR. It is worth mentioning that different MCOs vary substantially in their properties. Although BODs generally have a lower redox potential and hence a lower catalytic activity than laccase under optimal conditions, they operate better at neutral pH and are less affected by halide ions.126 It has been reported that a Streptomyces coelicolor small laccase with redox polymer mediator132 showed a higher ORR catalytic efficiency at pH 7 than Trametes versicolor laccase despite its lower T1 site potentials. Hence, in addition to further improving the activity and stability of existing MCOs under physiological conditions, an exploration of more endurable enzymes is also highly desirable for BES application.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of laccase for ORR catalysis. 


5.1.2 Microorganisms. 
Recently, there has been growing enthusiasm in exploring the potential of living microorganisms for catalyzing cathodic reactions in BES.10,133,134 In comparison with enzymatic catalysis, microbial catalysis processes could be more robust, stable and cost-effective for several reasons: (1) enzymes are contained within cells, and their catalytic activity could be less affected by outside adverse environmental conditions; (2) the continuous in situ regeneration of enzymes ensures a long-term activity of the catalysis process;135 and (3) no isolation or purification of enzymes is needed.13,136 More importantly, since in a practical environment the microbial growth on a BES cathode is actually hard to avoid, the idea of a microbial catalyst undoubtedly presents a great opportunity for sustainable operation of BES.
As a bioelectrocatalyst, microorganisms need to retrieve electrons from an electrode or to utilize photo energy, which distinguish them from normal biocatalysts that use organic carbon sources or hydrogen as the electron donor.29,137 It has been found that a wide variety of microorganisms, including Shewanella putrefaciens,136Pseudomonas aeruginosa,138Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans,139 and even some green algae,140 are able to utilize the cathode electrode as the electron donor to perform ORR. This has led to the development of MFCs with passive air-breathing or aerated biocathodes.141 The growth of a biofilm on the carbon cathode of an MFC was found to substantially decrease the overpotential of ORR by ∼0.3 V and lead to a comparable current onset potential with Pt and MCOs catalysts.116,142
In addition, microbially catalyzed electrosynthesis in an anoxic cathodic environment has also been reported. An increasing number of electrochemically active microorganisms have been found to efficiently combine electrode respiration with their substrate metabolism. Especially in production processes of biofuel (including H2, methane, and various liquid organic fuels), several groups of microorganisms are usually involved.143 First of all, many microorganisms have been identified to possess the ability to uptake electrons from an electrode and use them for production of H2, formate or even multi-carbon products such as acetate.144,145 The known electrotrophs to serve such a purpose include most Gram-negative bacteria like the famous Shewanella and Geobacter species, and some Gram-positive bacteria.5,146–149 Although it is possible that some methanogens might also directly accept electrons from the electrode, this is yet to be confirmed because the involvement of H2 production cannot be completely excluded so far.150 Subsequently, another group of microorganisms (e.g., methanogens and some acetogenic microorganisms) can further utilize the produced H2 or formate (which can also be derived from abiotic production processes, as illustrated in Fig. 12) as electron donors for anaerobic reduction of carbon dioxide to produce methane or to form higher tier organic fuels such as 2,3-butanediol, lactate, butyrate, and butanol.56,128 More recently, it was even found that medium chain fatty acids such as caproate and caprylate could be produced from acetate at a biocathode with mixed cultures.151 Therefore, although many microorganisms can couple direct electron consumption to their metabolism for fuel production, it is increasingly realized that an efficient and robust cathodic catalysis may ultimately rely on a balanced growth and collaboration of multiple microbial species that each play a part of the roles.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of pathways for microbially catalyzed electrosynthesis of fuels at BES cathode. 
In parallel, photocathode BES based on the use of phototrophs as catalysts to drive various ORR or synthesis reactions have also been extensively investigated.91,152,153 Liu et al. reported a green algae, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which can directly mediate oxygen reduction by receiving electrons from the cathode.140 Compared with heterotrophs that rely on organics as carbon source, such photo-autotrophic microorganisms could be less affected by substrate crossover and be more adaptive to the environment with limited organic carbon content. Moreover, the solar light can offer an inexhaustible source of energy, in addition to the anode bioenergy in BES, to drive a sustainable energy production process. All the above findings clearly indicate a potentially widespread capability of diverse microorganisms in nature to accept electrons from the electrode,154 and thus a high potential of biocathode BES to recover energy from various wastewaters efficiently.141
However, one major challenge of microbially catalyzed electrode reactions is the poor interfacial electron transfer. For most biocathodes, the passage of electrons from solid electrode surface to microbial cells (e.g., extracellular electron transfer, EET) presents a rate-limiting step in the overall cathodic reactions.155 Another problem is associated with complicated microbial population structure. Despite the use of a pure culture as cathodic biocatalyst in many BES-oriented works, a mixed culture can allow a more robust operation with a coexistence of multiple parallel metabolic pathways and might be ultimately unavoidable for practical wastewater treatment due to the unsterilized nature of wastewater. However, this also leads to competition reactions and may cause mixed potential. Thus, the coexistence of multiple microbial species significantly increases the cathodic process complexity and causes difficulty in catalyst engineering. Lastly, the cathode-respiration microorganisms usually grow slowly,142,156 and their catalytic activities could be severely inhibited by some toxic substances in wastewater. Nevertheless, a recent study showed that a long-term stable performance of a microbial cathode could be maintained by appropriately selecting the inocula and manipulating the operating conditions.157 With the use of long-term enriched microbial inocula, a poised cathode potential of ∼590 mV (vs. SHE) and the introduction of CO2 gas during the 150 day test, the system performance in terms of acetate and hydrogen generation was found to improve over time, accompanied with an increased biofilm coverage and dominance of active autotrophic acetogens.

5.2 Mechanisms of electron transfer between biocatalysts and cathode
For a biocathode to function as an efficient electron donor, in the first step an efficient electron transport route between electrode and biocatalyst (sometimes also between multiple layers of microbial cells or enzymes) should be established. This necessitates an in-depth understanding and manipulation of the electron transfer chains (ETC).

5.2.1 Electron transfer at enzymatic biocathode. 
In microbial cells, oxidoreductase enzymes usually interact with some biological cofactors, such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2), to transfer electrons between enzymatic active site and a substrate. However, although such cofactors are effective in physiological environment, they typically have poor electrochemical properties on electrodes and are expensive. Hence, for electrode catalysis application, natural cofactors are usually circumvented or replaced, which may lead to a decreased enzymatic activity. For enzymatic catalysis at a cathode, electrons must be transported from the electrode to the active site within the enzyme. For example, laccase contains a coordinated copper redox center, which consists of a T1 copper site and a T2/T3 trinuclear copper cluster. When it is used as a cathodic catalyst, the T1 copper site (which is close to the enzyme surface) firstly accept electrons from the cathode, then further passes them to the T2/T3 copper cluster through an electron coupling matrix, where O2 is efficiently reduced to water (Fig. 11).158 The electron transfer from T1 to T2/T3 sites is mainly through the Marcus-type collisional transfer pathway,159 wherein individual redox centers move within finite distances only to allow for outer-sphere self-exchange reactions and thus electron transfer can proceed rapidly. In comparison, the diffusion of electrons from electrode to the T1 site usually presents a rate-limiting step, because the active site of enzymes is usually enveloped by insulated proteins that hamper the electron communication between the active sites and electrode surfaces.114
The electron transfer between electrode and the T1 site of laccase can occur in a direct way or via redox mediators. Direct electron transfer requires the electrode to be sufficiently close to the T1 site, and hence in practical systems usually occurs at a low rate. Thus, redox mediators are frequently used to accelerate the transfer. In this respect, although addition of solution-phase mediators has been proven useful to accelerate the electron transfer, it needs the use of separating membranes between anode and cathode to prevent short-circuiting by mediator reduction at the anode, and a frequent addition of mediator also brings economic burden and environmental pollution. In contrast, co-immobilization of redox mediators with enzymes is generally more favored. The cross-linking of redox polymers with enzymes on the electrode yield a redox hydrogel, which allows efficient electron transfer between enzymes and electrode through electron hopping.159


5.2.2 Extracellular electron transfer (EET) of microorganisms. 
The electron transfer of microbial catalysts involves more ETC steps than that of enzymes at a BES cathode. The EET mechanism of cathode microorganisms has been extensively studied and discussed recently, but many of the processes remain unclear and controversial.136,160 In all, several electrode-to-microbe EET pathways have been revealed so far, including: (1) direct electron transfer (DET) via cell-membrane associated proteins such as cytochromes; (2) transfer through conductive microbial nano wires (NWs); and (3) mediated electron transfer (MET) through use of some redox reactive molecules known as soluble mediators (either artificial or natural compounds).161 Recently, it was found that, with a combination of multiple EET strategies, even long-range transfer can be achieved via a biofilm matrix with “nanowire grid” and matrix-associated cytochromes, and the cell–cell EET can occur not only in the same electrochemically active strains, but also between different species.7,162,163

Fig. 13 depicts the three pathways of electron transfer from cathode to the periplasm space of a microbial cell by taking Shewanella oneidensis as an example. Firstly, c-type cytochromes (a protein surrounding single or multiple heme groups, mainly the Mtr proteins for Shewanella1) play a pivotal role in direct EET from cathode to the microbial cells.164 Notably, other parallel pathways also exist in the outer membrane (OM) of Shewanella, but their specific routes still need to be identified. The involvement of c-type cytochromes in direct cathodic EET has been also found in other microbial species such as Geobacter sulfurreducens and Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. Especially, genome studies of G. sulfurreducens revealed the presence of over one hundred c-type cytochromes, but their respective roles in electron transfer are not clearly understood yet.165 Secondly, the role of microbial nanowires in EET is unnegligible. Several studies have demonstrated that bacterial NWs from S. oneidensis MR-1 possess electrical conductivities comparable to those of moderately doped inorganic semiconductors, and enable longitudinal electron transport over up to tens of micrometers.166 The NWs of S. oneidensis MR-1 contain both structural (pilin) and electron transport (multiheme cytochrome) proteins,167 and these two groups of proteins seem to work collaboratively to allow efficient passage of electrons.166 However, it was recently suggested that the NWs of Geobacter have different compositions and might work differently.168 The NWs produced by G. sulfurreducens were found to contain no cytochromes, thus its electron transfer is ascribed to solely the intrinsic electron structure of the peptide subunits. This was convincingly shown in a recently study in which the polymerized pilin proteins (with delocalized electronic domains) were mainly responsible for the metallic-like conductivity.169 Lastly, just as in natural microbial transformation processes, various soluble mediators also represent very important vehicles in EET of biocathodes. The frequently involved mediators in such processes include artificial redox species (e.g., methyl viologen, anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate, neutral red, etc.), some compounds secreted by microorganisms, e.g., phenazines from Pseudomonas spp.170 and flavins from S. oneidensis,161 and even some naturally-existing compounds (e.g., quinone-like humic substances).137 Such mediators can freely move to multiple sites within the cytoplasmic membrane (CM) or into the periplasm, enabling efficient electron transfer from electrode to even some non-EAMs.171 Interestingly, some mediators such as pyrroloquinoline quinone not only shuttle electrons for biological oxygen reduction but also undergo autooxidation with oxygen.136 Therefore, mediated EET is a complex process, and also plays an important role in cathode catalysis of BES. In all, with the continuous transfer of electrons through the outer membrane cytochromes to the perisplasm space, many reduction reactions (e.g., nitrate reduction and HER) can occur under catalysis of some periplasmic redox enzymes.
 Fig. 13  Cathodic EET mechanisms of Shewanella. OM: outer membrane; CM: cytoplasmic membrane. The red arrows represent the possible flow paths of electrons. 
However, for some oxidoreductases located at the periplasm membrane and within the periplasm (e.g., some dehydrogenases as shown in Fig. 13), electrons have to be further passed to the terminal electron acceptors at these sites to accomplish the reaction (e.g., ORR and reduction of chlorinated organics or CO2). In this transfer process, some cytochromes, mediators and even hydrogenases within the periplasm might be involved to create an EET network. Especially, considering the fact that a majority of the biocathode catalyzed processes involve microorganisms capable of metabolizing H2,160 quite likely hydrogenases may provide an efficient electrical wiring in the periplasmic ETC for most of the cathode EAMs. For instance, Shewanella on a cathode has been found to produce H2 in the absence of any external electron acceptor, which is considered as a strategy of microbial cells to dispose the excess reducing equivalents.172 Direct bioelectrochemical hydrogen production by a dechlorinating bacterium as cathodic catalyst was also recently reported.173 While Shewanella is capable of directly transferring reducing equivalents from hydrogenase to CymA at the CM and further to the quinone pool, other species like Desulfovibrio seem to need the participation of some c-type cytochromes.174 In addition to c-type cytochromes and hydrogenases, some other OM redox proteins (e.g., laccase158 and other multi-copper containing enzymes175) can also be engaged in the cathodic EET for many microbial species. Notably, when photosynthetic microorganisms are involved as cathodic catalysts, the EET route could be more complicated.91,92 In a light-dependent EET process, electrons are usually firstly transferred via c-type cytochromes to some supporting components in photosynthesis complexes, which are then oxidized by the photo-excited reaction center.176 Therefore, the overall routes of electron transfer from extracellular space to various intracellular enzymes within microbial catalysts remain unclear at this point.
For living microorganisms, one important issue highly relevant to the EET process is energy uptake, which is essential for microbial metabolism and proliferation. The energy is usually extracted during electron transfer and stored in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) or reduced coenzymes such as NADH and FADH2. In microbial cells, electrons are generally transferred from electrode to enzymes via ETC, as discussed above. Those intermediate redox reactions in the cell membrane's ETC leads to the synthesis of ATP through oxidative phosphorylation177 (Fig. 14). However, for autotrophic microorganisms there is usually a separation of electron flow after electrons entering the ETC. While a fraction of electrons are transferred to soluble electron acceptors (e.g. O2, nitrate or other oxidants), another fraction of the electron flow is diverted to the reduction of NADH or FADH2, and ultimately leads to the synthesis of organic compounds from CO2.178 However, the EET process does not necessarily lead to energy conservation by microorganisms. For instance, it was recently found that ORR can be directly catalyzed by c-type cytochromes on the cell surface of Shewanella putrefaciens without the active involvement of microbial enzymes and thus without energy conservation.136 In addition, the ETC of the photosynthetic biocathode seems to be more complicated. Although the photosynthetic reactions can provide added energy to generate ATP, in most cases it alone seems insufficient to drive the formation of NADH2, which is essential for growth of autotrophic microorganisms. Hence, NADH2 is considered to be mainly generated through the uptake of electrons from the cathode via c-type cytochromes rather than directly from photocatalytic water splitting.160 In all, the energy flow within microbial cells and its correlation with the EET process remains fuzzy. A better understanding of how the various microorganisms transfer electrons from electrode to targeted electron donors and how they gain energy from this process would surely help researchers to establish more efficient ways to extract energy from BES.
 Fig. 14  Energy metabolism of microbial catalyst at BES cathode. 

5.3 Engineering enzymatic catalysts
Immobilization of enzymes on electrode surfaces has become a common practice to create efficient enzymatic biocathodes, which not only enables better enzyme–electrode interaction but also improves long-term stability. However, to meet a BES implementation, further improvements in electrical contact, enzymatic activity and operating stability are needed.179 This may require an adoption of more appropriate mediators, better connection between enzymes and electrode, and more rational electrode design.

5.3.1 Redox polymer for MET. 
Immobilized polymer-bound mediators can greatly assist the transfer of electrons from electrode to enzymes and between multi-layers of enzymes without giving rise to environmental and economic problems, and meanwhile allows simple reactor design. Especially, redox polymers with a redox center connected to the polymer backbone by long tethers, such as a redox complex based on quinones, organometallic compounds or conjugated polymers, are considered to be superior. Among these, osmium-based redox polymers are commonly used, which enable efficient electron transfer and can be completely immobilized, thus the toxicity and economic problem associated with most soluble mediators can be avoided.180 It has been reported that an osmium-mediated laccase cathodes can catalyze ORR more efficiently (with a lower overpotential) than Pt180 and can reduce the inhibition of Cl− on laccase due to a tight binding between the osmium complexes and the hydrophobic T1 copper active center.181 For such MET processes of MCOs, it is essential that the redox potential of the mediators should be rationally tailored to better match the T1 site potential, so that the best balance between electron transfer rate and cathode potential can be established and the output power densities of a BES can be maximized. For instance, a recent study showed that, when osmium redox polymers were used as the mediator for a laccase biocathode, a redox potential of 0.66 V (vs. SHE) appeared to be optimal, because a too high redox potential would lead to slow electron-transfer kinetics due to the lack of a thermodynamic driving force, while a too low potential would lower the power density due to a decreased cathode potential.182 All these studies highlight the importance of engineering redox polymer complex for enhancing MET.


5.3.2 Electrode modification with conducting binding materials for enhancing immobilization and DET. 
Although immobilized mediators enable efficient electrochemical communication between electrode and enzymes, they can lead to a lower cathode potential than a DET enzyme cathode. In many cases, a DET between the active site of MCOs and the electrode allows a cathode potential approaching the thermodynamic value for 4e− oxygen reduction to water, and thus is highly desirable. Of course, the DET strongly relies upon intimate contact between enzyme and electrode as well as an orientated immobilization of enzymes, which pose high demand on enzyme–electrode connection.
In DET-type enzymatic biocathodes, carbon materials, especially carbon nano-materials, have been increasingly adopted due to their excellent biocompatibility, good conductivity and large surface area.117,183 However, immobilization of enzymes onto electrodes purely by adsorption is unstable and weak in the connection. Moreover, even if the enzyme outer surface is near enough to the electrode surface, this doesn't guarantee a good electric connection because the active sites may orient in random directions and thereby eliminate most of the enzymes from DET. Hence, to create an efficient DET, intimate connection between the active sites of enzymes and the electrode surface should be afforded, which can be achieved by chemically modifying electrode surfaces with some conducting and selective binding materials to enhance enzyme binding and orientation.
One effective strategy in this context is preferential docking of enzyme active site in close proximity to the electrode surface with covalent linkers.184 Blanford et al. have reported that a laccase cathode fabricated with an anthracene-modified graphite electrode showed excellent DET properties, attributed to good orientation and immobilization of active sites of laccase toward the anthracene-modified electrode surface caused by hydrophobic pockets surrounding the T1 sites.185 Moreover, effective DET based on tethering between enzymes and electrode was found to greatly relieve Cl− inhibition and hence increase the longevity of enzyme catalyst.186 A consistent electrocatalytic oxygen reduction by laccase tethered on carbon nanotube was observed in a fluctuating environmental for over 20 days.187 Instead of fabricating a modified electrode to preferentially orient active sites near the electrode surface, one alternative is to immobilize enzymes inside a highly conductive matrix on the electrode surface, in which DET can occur in any direction. In this sense, conducting polymer films could be an attractive option because their surface properties can be tailored by selecting appropriate monomers and polymerization conditions. It was recently reported that the use of a poly(3-methylthiophene) coating greatly improved the O2 reduction at a DET-type laccase biocathode.188 This method can be further advanced by dispersing some nano-structured materials such as CNTs into a conducting polymer hydrogel layer, so as to create a shorter and more efficient route for electron transfer from enzymes or mediators that are far away from the electrode surface in the immobilization matrix.189


5.3.3 3D conductive enzyme matrix. 
To create an efficient and stable enzymatic electrode for sufficient current generation, the architecture of the electrode should be engineered not only to allow a high EET rate between the active site of the enzyme and electrode, but also to provide enough electronic access to more than one monolayer of enzyme and to allow efficient diffusion of reactants and products. These requirements necessitate the adoption of a conductive electrode with porous 3D structure. The immobilization of MCOs onto carbon nanotube-modified electrode was found to create a highly conductive matrix with a sufficient enzyme loading and increase current generation.190,191 Parimi et al.192 fabricated a laccase composite electrode by immobilizing laccase on a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) modified inert disk electrode by using 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (PBSE) as a tethering agent (Fig. 15), which exhibited an excellent ORR electrocatalytic activity.192 Considering that the availability of oxygen, due to its low solubility and small diffusion coefficient, also frequently limits the cathode reaction kinetics especially for 3D structured electrodes, the electrode material and configuration should be carefully designed to facilitate both hydrophobic gas diffusion and hydrophilic OH− transport across the multi-layer enzyme matrix. Gupta et al. have reported several gas-diffusion DET-type cathodes whereby MCOs were immobilized on porous, 3D, conductive air-breathing cathodes to achieve a highly efficient oxygen supply and reduction.193 The systems with such gas-diffusion enzymatic cathodes sustained a relatively high current density for 30 days.194
 Fig. 15  Schematic of a laccase–MWCNT composite for catalyzing ORR via DET. PBSE is used as a tethering agent to link the laccase and MWNT, through a coupled covalent-binding of the protein and a noncovalent side wall functionalization of MWCNT with a π–π interaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, efficient enzymatic catalysts for BES implementation can be created by appropriately engineering the surface properties and structure of the electrode. However, one non-negligible fact is that, even in a well-crafted electrode design, the activity of enzymes inevitably fades over time and the lifetime of enzymatic cathode is generally shorter than those with microbial or some metal catalysts.123,195 Addressing this limitation may rely on a further optimization of electrode design, the development of more robust enzymes as well as an employment of a protective layer if possible.196

5.4 Improving performance of microbial catalysts
For microorganisms to be used as cathodic catalysts in BES, they should possess metabolic activity towards desired cathodic reactions and good capability to exchange electrons with the electrode. In most BES, a microbial consortia naturally aggregate and adhere to the cathode in the form of a biofilm to allow direct contact with the electrode and meanwhile to gain a better operating stability. Thus, the overall catalytic performance of microbial catalysts is closely associated with the biofilm properties, community composition as well as the metabolism and EET capability of individual cells.

5.4.1 Biofilm properties. 
As cathodic catalysts for BES, biofilms have several advantages over suspended-growth cells: (1) the microorganisms enclosed in a biofilm have better resistance to toxic substances and environmental fluctuations due to a relatively stable environment; (2) it favors improved biomass retaining, especially for the slow-growing species, thus a more balanced microbial community can be established; and (3) it may facilitate direct contact between microbial cells and the electrode, thus direct EET can be achieved. These attributes of a biofilm greatly increase the potential of applying microbial catalysts for catalyzing electrode reactions in complicated environments. However, to create a truly robust and efficient biofilm catalyst with a high adaptability to BES implementation, several hurdles should be overcome through engineering the biofilm properties.
One major concern of biofilms is the limited mass transfer, due to a relatively compact structure, especially when it gets dense and thick. In particular, the extracellular polymer substances (EPS), which consist of carbohydrates, proteins, DNA and lipids and play an important role in maintaining the biofilm structure and offering cell protection (Fig. 16), may also considerably decrease the biofilm porosity and thus affect mass diffusion.197 Moreover, due to a relatively low electron conductivity of EPS, it may also hamper the electron transfer and lead to an increased cathode overpotential. Therefore, to facilitate a better BES cathodic catalysis, a conductive and permeable biofilm should be created. In this context, strategies should be developed to create porous biofilm architectures with hierarchical channels and meanwhile to appropriately control the biofilm thickness. For instance, an enhanced microbe–electrode electron transfer can be achieved by modifying the electrode with appropriate conductive materials, preferably nano-structured 3D carriers, to create a conductive biofilm-nanomaterial matrix and meanwhile allow effective reactant/product diffusion. A microbially catalyzed reduction of CO2 to acetate was achieved at cathodes modified with different metal nanomaterials or CNTs and an over 3-fold increase in the electrosynthesis of acetate for all these modified electrodes was obtained in comparison with the unmodified carbon cloth control.145 Liu et al.198 reported that not only electron transfer in a biocathode MFC was greatly improved by using an electrodeposited CNT–chitosan (CHI) nanocomposite as the cathodic catalyst carrier (Fig. 17), but also the biomass loading was increased attributed to higher surface area and enhanced biofilm attachment. More importantly, considering the complex and unique roles of EPS in biofilm structure and function, it is essential to offer a better insight and manipulation of the microbe–EPS–electrode interactions and the factors influencing EPS properties.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of microbial catalysts for HER at a biofilm-colonized cathode. 
 Fig. 17  (A) SEM image of the biofilms attached to the CNT–CHI nanocomposite-modified carbon paper, (B) power output of the MFCs with microbial-CNT–CHI composite cathode and a non-CNT control. Adapted with permission from ref. 198. 
In addition to the microbe–electrode interactions, the electrochemical communication between microbial cells within the biofilm structure also deserves special attention. In this context, establishment of a “nanopower grid” with filament networks to mediate long-range electron transfer could be a promising means to create a conductive biofilm.7 Another important but relatively unexplored area for manipulation of biofilm structure and cell–cell communication is quorum sensing (QS).199 Although it has been demonstrated that the biofilm properties such as microbial community structure, biomass density and thickness can be controlled through manipulating extracellular QS signals, its influences on biofilm structure and functions at BES cathode are still to be elucidated.


5.4.2 Microbial consortia. 
As discussed above, for the sake of efficient and robust microbial catalysis, it is important to maintain microbial consortia with appropriate community structure. For instance, Erable et al.200 reported an over 14-fold increase in current density in an MFC with a mixed-culture biocathode compared with that of a pure culture of Winogradskyella poriferorum as the ORR catalyst, suggesting a synergy between different microbial species at the BES cathode. However, one unfavorable consequence of a mixed-cultured biocathode is usually a low reaction specificity, and the electrode reaction kinetics and product yield can be unfavorably affected by other competitive or product-consuming microbial species.201 Particularly, it is difficult to eliminate the effects of these undesirable microorganisms in a biofilm where various microbial species can be well retained. In addition, because electrotrophs mostly grow slower than normal heterotrophs, especially in the presence of an organic substrate, how to maintain a dominance of the electrotrophs in long-term operation presents another challenge.8 In this regard, creation of an artificial biofilm by encapsulating specific microorganisms in a permeable and conductive polymer layer125 or modification of electrode surface for selective colonization of specific microorganisms might provide a solution,202 but their viability for BES biocathode application still needs to be validated. Moreover, a better balanced microbial community might also be maintained by controlling the operating environments or using QS effects,199 which shall warrant more in-depth knowledge and control strategies for such processes.


5.4.3 EET and metabolism engineering. 
While certain success has been made in enhancing microbial metabolism for substrate utilization and enhance tolerance against a harsh environment through genetic or metabolic engineering approaches, efforts in manipulating the microbial EET and directional synthesis are just at the very beginning.
A good starting point for offering insight into such processes would be the utilization of a pure culture. In this context, while relatively good knowledge has been gradually established for several EAM species such as Shewanella and Geobacter,203,204 fundamental studies about the EET pathways of other strains are still needed. This may rely on more comparative analysis of various mutants, application of properly selected artificial redox mediators with known redox and chemical properties, and the use of more powerful analytical and characterization techniques.
With improved knowledge of the cathode EET, it would then be possible for us to engineer microbial EET pathways. Especially, metabolic engineering may offer a highly efficient way.205 To strengthen power generation, the genes or proteins that are crucial for electron transfer can be overexpressed, while other genes with a negative effect on electron transfer can be inhibited or even deleted. So far, some successful attempts have been made in this direction. For instance, the metabolic regulation of electrochemically active microorganisms have been reported to increase the microbial respiratory rate and to thicken the layer of the outer membrane cytochromes for longer-distance electron transfer.206 In another study, the overexpression of rhl QS system in Pseudomonas aeruginosa steered bacterial metabolisms to synthesize more efficient shuttles, leading to 1.6 times higher power generation.207 To make it a further step forward, the overall microbial EET network, which usually consists of several parallel pathways, could be optimized. Microbially-secreted mediators are known to accelerate the electron transfer process and cause no environmental issues, but they also cause some negative impacts. For example, the H2-mediated pathway typically allows H2-consuming microorganisms to flourish and decrease the supply of reducing equivalent;149 their involvement also elongates the overall redox-cascade and thus may lead to an increased overpotential. Furthermore, some mediators may directly react with the terminal electron donors without the active involvement of microbial catalysis. It was reported that many microbially-secreted quinones and heme-containing groups are able to directly reduce O2 to H2O2 at the cathode surface, causing a mixed potential.136 In comparison, a direct EET pathway theoretically allows more energy gain and hence is more desirable. Thus, engineering approaches for strengthening or completely shifting to direct EET or other more efficient, directional pathways are encouraged.208,209 Especially, the engineering of highly-conductive microbial nanowires appears to be a promising direction.169,210,211 It was recently demonstrated that efficient electronic communication can be created through engineering a synthetic electron conduit within Escherichia coli.209 After being added with a portion of the EET chain from S. oneidensis MR-1, the engineered E. coli gained significantly improved EET capability, and exhibited 4-fold higher rate in solid metal oxides reduction compared to its parental strain. Thus, with synthetic biology approaches, it is possible to substantially improve the EET capability of existing EAMs or even to create new electron transfer paths for those inherently incapable of cathode respiration. Interestingly, apart from tuning the inherent ETC of microbial cells, some abiotic DET pathways can also be created by introducing some special-structured synthetic molecules. For instance, amphiphilic conjugated oligoelectrolytes like distyrylstilbene oligoelectrolyte (DSSN+) are capable of intercalating into the lipid bilayer membrane of a microbial cell, with its long axis spanning the membrane to create a highly efficient transmembrane EET pathway like some microbial nanowires.212,213 Hence, artificially wiring the ETC with specially-designed molecules might offer another attractive option to enhance electronic communication at the microbe–electrode interface.
For microbial cells, aside from efficient electron uptake from the electrode, how to utilize the obtained electrons in an efficient and more meaningful way is also a matter of great significance. While the catalysis of abiotic materials or enzymes is almost exclusively directed towards ORR or HER at the cathode, a microbial catalyst also allows the synthesis of hydrocarbon fuels. From an energy extraction and storage point of view, the synthesis of energy-intensive liquid fuels at the cathode in BES is highly pursuable. Thus, divert ion of the intracellular electron flow towards more efficient energy conversion processes or for a production of higher-tier energy products presents another promising development direction for microbial catalysts in BES. This necessitates a manipulation or even rewiring of the synthesis pathways. For instance, a genetic mutant of Clostridium sp. MAceT113, obtained through eliminating genes for acetate and ethanol production and introducing acetone synthesis genes, was found to acquire an acetone-producing ability.214 Efforts have also been devoted to engineer the intermediate pathway for more efficient electron utilization. For example, both H2 and formate can drive CO2 fixation by lithoautotrophic microorganisms to form liquid fuels. However, formate could be a more efficient precursor for further synthesis than H2 because of its high solubility and being more readily convertible to NADH. Thus, it is desirable to redirect the synthesis pathways of microorganisms from H2 to formate pathway. Li et al.215 created an engineered strain from Ralstonia eutropha H16 by introducing a set of genes for isobutanol and 3-methyl-1-butanol production. This strain can effectively utilize formate for production of the mixed fuels with a final tier of over 1.4 g l−1. All these findings provide valuable implications for engineering of microorganisms at BES biocathode.

6. Comparison among the catalytic performances of different cathodic catalysts in BES
In light of the great diversity of catalysts and their remarkable differences in catalytic performance, a question thus arises: how to judge the superiority and suitability of a catalyst for specific BES cathodic applications? Answering this question necessitates a comparative evaluation of different catalysts in their performances such as catalytic efficiency, stability, selectivity, and cost, etc. Additionally, a comparison of the catalytic performance “alone” is essential before evaluating the roles of cathodic catalyst in the whole BES (where other numerous parameters out of the cathode may affect the global performance). However, this seems to be a challenging task. As shown above, the catalytic mechanism and performance differ considerably among different catalysts and even for the same catalyst with different morphological or structural properties. Challenges also come from the great diversity of reactor configuration and operating conditions, which usually cover up or disturb the true impacts of cathodic catalysts, and from the limited available statistic data about the BES-associated cathodic catalysis. Lastly, many of the evaluation criteria are unclear and somewhat subjective (e.g., selectivity). All these matters hinder a straightforward comparison among different cathodic catalysts in BES. Nevertheless, a preliminary and even only partially quantitative evaluation in this regard is worthwhile and presents a meaningful first step to guiding catalyst selection and design for BES.
6.1 Catalytic efficiency
Catalytic efficiency is undoubtedly a criterion of first priority for evaluating a catalyst, which governs how efficiently electrons from cathode and reactants can be utilized for redox reactions. The electrode reactions involve not only interfacial charge and substrate transfer step, but also other processes such as adsorption, molecule structural reorganization and chemical reaction.216 The rate of the overall electrode reactions is hence governed by the most hindered step (or called the rate-limiting step, which could be either electron transfer or mass transport for a BES). Electrochemical parameters such as electrode open circuit potential (OCP) and maximum current density obtained from polarization curves can provide useful information to reveal the nature of catalysts. Generally, for a certain electrode reaction under the same conditions, a higher OCP means a lower thermodynamic overpotential, while a higher achievable current density means a faster reaction kinetics, both implying good catalytic performance. Thus, the OCP and maximum power density together can provide a foundation for quantitatively evaluating catalysis efficiency.
Here, we take the most-common ORR reaction as an example. To avoid the inference of operating conditions as far as possible and facilitate a direct comparison, we compare the performance of different catalysts under identical cathodic operating conditions: pH = 7, ambient temperature and atmosphere, and no active mixing except for aeration. Notably, under such conditions, the difference in catalyst load, active surface area and cathode configurations may still affect the evaluation results, which explains the diverse performance even for the same type of catalyst. Nevertheless, the performances of different catalyst categories can be approximately distinguished by such a comparison. As shown in Table 2, the catalyst performance in terms of OCP generally is in the following order: laccase > sludge > Pt catalyst. This is more clearly evidenced in the polarization curves of difference catalysts, which were loaded on identical plain carbon cloth electrodes of MFCs (Fig. 18). Apparently, the laccase-immobilized DET cathode can produce a potential much closer to the thermodynamic equilibrium potential of 4e− ORR compared to microbial cathode and Pt. The low OCP of Pt catalyst here might be attributed to a relatively lower loading of bulk Pt associated and a formation of PtO on the surface.217 However, the maximum current density shows a different trend: Pt > laccase > sludge. Fig. 18 more clearly shows that the current density of the Pt cathode kept increasing with decreasing voltage, whereas that of the microbial cathodes reached a plateau at ∼1.0 A m−2. In the meantime, the current density of the laccase cathode declined sharply at a potential below 0.6 V and peaked at ∼0.9 A m−2 (Table 2).123 This higher maximum current density of Pt over the biological entities should be mainly attributed to its lower charge transfer resistance and more access to oxygen. Unlike the Pt catalyst that has good conductivity and enables a high loading to sustain a high current, for the biocatalyst the electron transfer from electrode to catalytic center could become limiting.218 Moreover, especially for microorganisms, the oxygen diffusion through the biofilm may also become severely limited at higher current densities in such static air-breathing cathodes.219,220 The limited biocatalytic kinetics of the biocatalyst probably further lowers the ORR rate. In addition to the above mentioned catalysts, Table 2 also reveals that the OCPs of non-noble metals differ markedly with their compositions and sizes, but the maximum power densities are generally in the same level as the Pt catalyst.
Table 2 Cathode performance of several typical ORR catalysts in MFCsa




Catalyst
Air supply type
Cathode OCP (V vs. SHE)
Maximum current densityb (A m−2)
Ref.





a The polarization curve tests were conducted by using a three-electrode system with the cathode as the working electrode. The operation conditions were: pH = 7, ambient temperature and atmosphere, and no active mixing except for aeration.
b The highest current density (normalized to the cathode area) achieved under tested conditions or the short-circuit current density.





Pt
Passive diffusion
0.42
40.0

247



Pt
Passive diffusion
0.45
3.0

218



FePc
Passive diffusion
0.35
30.0

247



MnO2/CNTs
Passive diffusion
0.73
1.5

248



Tree laccase
Passive diffusion
0.59
5.0

193



Fungal laccase
Passive diffusion
0.78
0.9

123



Aerobic cultures
Passive diffusion
0.62
0.8

218



Aerobic cultures
Aeration
0.30
0.4

156



Aerobic cultures
Aeration
0.58
0.3

220





 Fig. 18  Polarization curve of ORR cathodes in air-breathing cathode MFCs with different cathodic catalysts. The potential scanning rate was 1 mV s−1. The enzymatic cathode was fabricated by pressing a carbon black (Vulcan XC 72)-polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) composite onto a nickel mesh, then 8 mg mL−1 laccase (from Tr. versicolor) were adsorbed on the solution side of that electrode. All the other electrode were prepared by coating Pt (5 mg cm−2, 10% Pt) or enriching aerobic sludge (50 mL) onto a 30% wet-proofed carbon cloth (Vulcan XC-72), which was painted with four PTFE diffusion layers on the air-facing side. The solution pH was maintained at 7.0 using buffer. Oxygen was supplied by passive air diffusion, and no solution stirring was performed. Adapted with permission from ref. 123 and 218. Copyright, American Chemical Society. 
It should be pointed out that only a few typical examples are given in Table 2, and the polarization curves in Fig. 18 have been recorded for specific systems (catalyst loadings, electrode surface pre-treatment, microorganism strain, etc.) and conditions (convection, pH, etc.). They are therefore not really representative of the very broad range of Pt, microorganism or enzyme catalyzed ORRs. In addition, the performance of catalysts in a BES is reaction-specific. For instance, at an HER cathode a microbial catalyst usually shows a higher overpotential than Pt, because in this case no PtO would be formed, while the H+ diffusion across the biofilm and the energy gain/growth of microorganisms could be highly limited.134,221 Hence, for more in-depth understanding of the catalysts, more systematic and comparative assessment of catalysts under similar conditions based on statistics analysis should be needed.
6.2 Stability
One of the biggest drawbacks of most abiotic catalysts (including electrocatalysts and photoelectrocatalysts) and enzymes for BES application is their poor long-term stability due to a gradual deactivation. This might be caused by catalyst poisoning, biofouling, clogging and corrosion in complex wastewater environment.24,25 For example, the catalytic activity of Pt can be significantly reduced in the presence of sulfide or chloride, which occupies the reactive sites.22 For enzymes, irreversible destruction of protein structure or deactivation of the active center may occur at inappropriate pH value or in the presence of poisonous substances, leading to a substantial declined activity over time and thus a relatively short lifetime of the order of 10 days.127,185 In contrast, microbial catalysts have been proven to be more sustainable, attributed to their ability of self-regeneration and self-adaption to environmental disturbance.2,8,141 Wang et al. recently reported stable electricity generation in an air-breathing microbial cathode MFC for over two months.222 In an MEC with microbial cathode, even a steadily increasing performance in acetate and hydrogen production was observed during the 150 day operation, accompanied by improved biofilm growth.157 Notably, the electrocatalytic stability of microorganisms is highly dependent on the environmental conditions and catholyte properties. Sometimes severe deterioration may occur at alkaline pH or in the presence of organic substances due to the suppressed growth and activity of EAMs.223
6.3 Selectivity
Catalyst selectivity refers to the ability of a catalyst to selectively catalyze a targeted reaction over other reactions. A high selectivity is desirable to lower the cathode overpotential (due to the lower possibility for formation of a mixed potential) and to improve the energy output and product purity (for MECs). The selectivity of chemical catalysts can vary remarkably among different subcategories. For example, Pt, activated carbon and graphite have been found to catalyze a wide range of reactions and thus have a low reaction specificity,17,224,225 while some specifically-designed materials such as alloy and biomimetic catalysts typically possess a higher selectivity.49 Of course, it is generally agreed that the highest reaction selectivity can be attained by enzymatic catalysts. For example, some MCOs such as laccase and BOD show high specificity for 4e− ORR and thus favors a good thermodynamic performance.123 In comparison, the microbial consortia colonized on the cathode typically possess poor selectivity due to the existence of diverse microbial species that may catalyze different reactions.8 For example, it is hard to avoid concurrent methanogenesis and HER at a microbial cathode due to the presence of methanogens.201
6.4 Other issues for catalyst evaluation
For the cathodic catalysis processes in BES to be implemented in practical wastewater systems, many other issues, such as the material cost, regeneration performance and environmental impact of the catalysts, should also be taken into consideration. Taking ORR as an example, while a wide range of electrocatalysts and photoelectrocatalysts is capable of catalyzing this reaction, the use of noble metals like Pt are apparently economically-prohibitive. In addition, while many metal-based electrocatalysts suffer from performance decline in long-term operation,24,25 others (e.g., Ag) may face extra problems such as the gradual release of metal nanoparticle or ions into the environment and threaten the aquatic ecosystem and human health.226 Lastly, from a life-cycle perspective, the regeneration of electrocatalysts/photoelectrocatalysts by chemical agents may incur additional costs and cause environmental pollution, and the final disposal of some heavy-metal containing catalysts would also cause environmental concerns. Comparatively, enzymatic catalysts can offer better environmental benefits, but they still need high costs for their production, purification and regeneration and suffer from even poorer longevity. Microbial catalysts seem to be the best option in terms of sustainability and economics, although in general their catalytic efficiency still needs to be greatly improved to make them competitive in energy recovery performance. Especially, microbial catalysts are free of charge, abundantly available, continuously renewable and operationally robust.227 Most of all, they are environmentally benign and can uptake nutrients from wastewater and even sequestrate CO2, hence leading to extra environmental benefits.153 It should be mentioned that it might be unfair to compare the economics of catalysts solely based on the manufacturing and maintenance costs, because microbial catalysts usually require more reactor space and electrode surface than abiotic ones to achieve a similar catalytic efficiency, which may compensate the catalyst cost.6 Thus, to guide a better development of the BES catalysts towards practical application, a comprehensive evaluation of various catalysts in multiple criteria will be needed in future studies.
7. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, BES cathodes offer an attractive platform for versatile potential applications, but the unique features of cathodic catalysis processes in BES (i.e., mild operating environment, complex wastewater electrolyte, and compatibility with a bioanode) raise special requirements and meanwhile offer new opportunities for the selection and design of catalysts. Generally, limited catalytic reactivity, durability and selectivity are the main challenges faced by most catalysts involved in the cathodic reactions in BES. To better adapt them for BES implementation, it is essential to tailor the physicochemical–physiological properties of each type of catalysts. Today, on the one hand the advances in the basic sciences of electrochemistry, photochemistry and biochemistry has led to new insights into the underlying mechanisms of cathodic catalysis in BES, on the other hand the rapid advances and intensifying cooperation among multiple disciplines such as nanotechnology, bioengineering and synthesis techniques are increasingly capable of providing new catalyst materials with fine-tuned properties.
Nevertheless, our knowledge about the cathodic catalysis in BES is still limited and studies in engineering the catalysts are at the very beginning. To create more efficient, robust and sustainable cathodic catalysts and to better adapt them to BES implementation, in our opinion, efforts in the following directions should be pursued.
(1) For the abiotic electrocatalysts and photoelectrocatalysts, the development of new nano-materials with precisely-controlled morphology and structure shall continue to be an important direction. The future advances in nano-science and engineering, especially their combination with molecular biotechnology, may allow more precise control over material morphology, composition, structure and surface properties. Meanwhile, to further advance our understanding on the complex mass and charge transport processes at the BES cathode (especially at electrode–nanomaterial–solution interfaces) and to aid in the catalyst design, advanced analytic tools such as spectroscopic techniques and atomistic simulations could be used. Notably, in the design of efficient catalysts with refined simplicity, the principle of bionics (i.e., learning from the nature) could offer a useful strategy. For example, several small molecular metal complex catalysts that mimic the catalytic center of enzymes have been reported and successfully used for a wide range of electrode reactions.228,229 Such catalysts mostly exhibit a comparable catalytic efficiency and selectivity with enzymes,230 and meanwhile have smaller sizes and can be easily tuned or modified. In addition, they generally possess good biocompatibility because of their similar compositions with enzymes. So far, there have already been several successful examples of applying such bio-inspired materials, including iron(II) phthalocyanine231 and MoS2,54 for ORR or HER catalysis at the BES cathode. In the future, with our better insight into the structure and functions of various enzymes and improved synthesis techniques, more bio-inspired catalysts with lower costs and better adaptability to BES operation can be expected. Another promising direction is to fabricate the catalyst and electrode by using biomaterials. For instance, the bacterial nanowires from Shewanella were found to exhibit p-type, comparable electronic behavior to the commonly used synthetic organic semiconductors.210 Such biomaterials are usually more cost-effective than conventional metal and semiconductor materials and cause no negative environmental impact after use, thus showing a greater sustainability for practical application.
(2) For enzymatic catalysts, new advances in nano-materials and the use of novel redox polymers may enable a better electrochemical communication between enzymes and electrode. Moreover, to promote a real-world application of enzymatic catalysts at a BES cathode, concurrent advances in several other aspects could be helpful. For example, novel immobilization polymers could be developed to increase the lifetime of enzymes by creating a favorable microenvironment, and meanwhile to allow for a facile diffusion of water, substrates and ions and transfer of electrons from electrode surfaces.232 In addition, in light of the complex environment and to meet a further need for synthesizing energy products at the BES cathode, more enzymes, rather than the currently predominating laccase and BOD, should be explored, and rationally-designed multi-enzyme cascades by mimicking the microbial metabolisms might present an attractive way.
(3) For microbial catalysts, continuing efforts are required to gain a better understanding of the complex interactions among microorganisms, electrode and solution, and to appropriately engineer the catalysts at three levels, i.e., biofilm, microbial community and individual cells. Actually, microorganisms do not strictly meet the definition of catalyst because they take away a small fraction of energy for their growth and maintenance. However, it is this self-generation nature of microorganisms that ensures a continuous catalytic activity and may ultimately make a sustainable operation of BES. Thus, special care should be taken to ensure a balanced flow of the anode derived electrons towards energy production reactions and for microbial cell proliferation. In addition, instead of directly utilizing the intracellular enzymes in microbial cells for the catalysis, there are also several other possible ways in which microorganisms can be actively involved in cathodic catalysis. One approach is to use some extracellular enzymes in situ produced by microorganisms for catalysis.205 Such a strategy offers an ideal solution to the enzyme-stability issue and has been demonstrated successfully in an MFC with a white-rot fungus colonized biocathode for ORR, where laccase was continuously synthesized to ensure a long-term stable catalytic activity.233 In addition, a recent study showed that the freshly-prepared laccases in catholyte were capable of dynamically replacing the adsorbed inactive enzymes on the electrode, leading to regeneration of the enzymatic cathode and a 2.5 times longer cathode lifetime.234 This result further confirms that using enzyme-producing microorganisms to continuously resupply fresh enzymes is possible. Another strategy is to utilize biogenic electrocatalysts, which may also help to resolve the instability problem of electrocatalysts by continuous in situ generation. It has been reported that some metal (e.g., Pd) nanoparticles can be in situ synthesized by specific microorganisms and be used for efficient cathodic catalysis.66,235 All these confer microorganisms with great flexibility of application as a cathodic catalyst for BES. Lastly, studies should be strengthened on microbial catalysts that are adaptive to a passive air-cathode operation. In light of the lower soluble oxygen concentration in aqueous solution and the need for aeration that consumes energy in aerated biocathode, a passive air-breathing biocathode is apparently more attractive in terms of net energy production and should be a more promising direction of MFC development.236 The major challenges in this respect shall be how to maintain the activity of microorganisms and ensure sufficient oxygen availability, because the diffusion of oxygen, nutrients and OH− across the biofilm might become limited.28 While a breakthrough of this may heavily rely on a better design of more porous electrodes and permeable biofilms, the introduction of oxygenic phototrophs to produce oxygen in situ might offer another promising avenue.237,238
Future progress in the above aspects shall not only greatly improve the catalytic performance of existing cathodic processes in BES, but also may lead to the discovery of new BES applications. Moreover, in addition to improving the catalyst itself, it is also important to ensure an appropriate catalysis environment by controlling the wastewater properties and the electrode structure. All these aspects warrant future in-depth investigations.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the Natural Science Foundation of China (51008290 and 51278479), National Hi-Technology 863 Program of China (2009AA06Z305), and the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University of Ministry of Education of China for the partial support of this study.
References
D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Rabaey, L. Angenent, U. Schröder and J. Keller, IWA Publishing, London,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Rabaey, P. Girguis and L. K. Nielsen, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley and K. P. Nevin, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 441–448 CrossRef CAS .
F. Harnisch and U. Schröder, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4433–4448 RSC .
D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4896–4906 CAS .
A. P. Borole, G. Reguera, B. Ringeisen, Z. W. Wang, Y. J. Feng and B. H. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4813–4834 CAS .
H. Hamelers, A. Ter Heijne, T. Sleutels, A. Jeremiasse, D. Strik and C. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1673–1685 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rabaey and R. A. Rozendal, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 706–716 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, S. Cheng and G. Chen, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 86, 481–491 CrossRef .
D. Pant, A. Singh, G. Van Bogaert, S. Irving Olsen, P. Singh Nigam, L. Diels and K. Vanbroekhoven, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1248–1263 RSC .
S. Freguia, B. Virdis, F. Harnisch and J. Keller, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, D. Call, S. Cheng, H. V. M. Hamelers, T. H. J. A. Sleutels, A. W. Jeremiasse and R. A. Rozendal, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8630–8640 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Liu, X. F. Sun, Y. X. Huang, G. P. Sheng, K. Zhou, R. J. Zeng, F. Dong, S. G. Wang, A. W. Xu, Z. H. Tong and H. Q. Yu, Water Res., 2011, 44, 5298–5305 CrossRef .
D. Pant, G. Van Bogaert, L. Diels and K. Vanbroekhoven, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1533–1543 CrossRef CAS .
F. Harnisch, S. Wirth and U. Schröder, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2253–2256 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Chaplin, E. Roundy, K. A. Guy, J. R. Shapley and C. J. Werth, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 3075–3081 CrossRef CAS .
F.-D. Kopinke, D. Angeles-Wedler, D. Fritsch and K. Mackenzie, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Knitt, J. R. Shapley and T. J. Strathmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 577–583 CrossRef .
H. Hildebrand, K. Mackenzie and F.-D. Kopinke, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 389–396 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt, U. A. Paulus, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
N. Munakata and M. Reinhard, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 75, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Kiely, G. Rader, J. M. Regan and B. E. Logan, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martin, B. Tartakovsky and O. Savadogo, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Chaplin, M. Reinhard, W. F. Schneider, C. Schüth, J. R. Shapley, T. J. Strathmann and C. J. Werth, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 3655–3670 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Palomares, C. Franch and A. Corma, Catal. Today, 2010, 149, 348–351 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Popat, D. Ki, B. E. Rittmann and C. I. Torres, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1071–1079 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. A. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, R. C. T. Slade and J. R. Varcoe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1926–1939 RSC .
S. Freguia, K. Rabaey, Z. Yuan and J. Keller, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 598–603 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, G. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4686–4691 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lewerenz, C. Heine, K. Skorupska, N. Szabo, T. Hannappel, T. Vo-Dinh, S. A. Campbell, H. W. Klemm and A. G. Munoz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 748–760 CAS .
M. Ghasemi, W. R. W. Daud, M. Rahimnejad, M. Rezayi, A. Fatemi, Y. Jafari, M. R. Somalu and A. Manzour, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9533–9540 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Call, M. D. Merrill and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2179–2183 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Zhuang, W. Li, S. Zhou and J. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2825–2829 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, B. Zhao, Y. Jeon, S. Zhong, S. Zhou and S. Kim, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 5849–5854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahmed, Y. Yuan, L. Zhou and S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, S. Shahgaldi, M. Ismail, B. H. Kim, Z. Yaakob and W. R. Wan Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 13746–13752 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, M. Ismail, S. K. Kamarudin, K. Saeedfar, W. R. W. Daud, S. H. A. Hassan, L. Y. Heng, J. Alam and S.-E. Oh, Appl. Energy, 2013, 102, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, S. Kharkwal, H. Y. Ng and S. F. Y. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4728–4732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, Z. Wen, S. Ci, J. Chen and Z. He, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 751–756 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, H. Liu and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 40, 364–369 CrossRef .
M. A. Petersen, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Phys.
Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11962–11970 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kiuchi, H. Niwa, M. Kobayashi, Y. Harada, M. Oshima, M. Chokai, Y. Nabae, S. Kuroki, M.-a. Kakimoto, T. Ikeda, K. Terakura and S. Miyata, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8035–8049 RSC .
S. De Corte, T. Sabbe, T. Hennebel, L. Vanhaecke, B. De Gusseme, W. Verstraete and N. Boon, Water Res., 2012, 46, 2718–2726 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Ye, B. Lu, S. Zhu and S. Shen, Water Sci. Technol., 2011, 63, 440–448 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jeremiasse, J. Bergsma, J. M. Kleijn, M. Saakes, C. J. N. Buisman, M. Cohen Stuart and H. V. M. Hamelers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 10482–10489 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Hosseini and I. Ahadzadeh, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Manuel, V. Neburchilov, H. Wang, S. R. Guiot and B. Tartakovsky, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5514–5519 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Y. Fan and H. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 35, 3227–3233 CrossRef .
H. Hu, Y. Fan and H. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 8535–8542 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Tokash and B. E. Logan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 9439–9445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Hu, Q. Xu, J. Sun, B. Hou and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 265–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Wu, A. Plaseied, P. Jenkins, L. Simpson, C. Engtrakul and Z. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7465–7469 CrossRef CAS .
D. Higgins, Z. Chen and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1570–1575 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, L. Guo, S. Kharkwal, H. n. Wu, H. Y. Ng and S. F. Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Caillard, C. Charles, R. Boswell and P. Brault, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 185307 CrossRef .
W. P. Zhou, X. Yang, M. B. Vukmirovic, B. E. Koel, J. Jiao, G. Peng, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12755–12762 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli, K. Gong, M. B. Vukmirovic, W.-p. Zhou, E. Sutter, S. S. Wong and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9783–9795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 CAS .
T. Matsui, M. Harada, Y. Ichihashi, K. K. Bando, N. Matsubayashi, M. Toba and Y. Yoshimura, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 286, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Huang, X. W. Liu, X. F. Sun, G. P. Sheng, Y. Y. Zhang, G. M. Yan, S. G. Wang, A. W. Xu and H. Q. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2773–2776 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hennebel, B. De Gusseme, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Trends Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Mayrhofer, B. B. Blizanac, M. Arenz, V. R. Stamenkovic, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14433–14440 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Leontyev, S. V. Belenov, V. E. Guterman, P. Haghi-Ashtiani, A. P. Shaganov and B. Dkhil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5429–5434 CAS .
J. Solla-Gullon, F. J. Vidal-Iglesias and J. M. Feliu, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2011, 107, 263–297 RSC .
S. Mostafa, F. Behafarid, J. R. Croy, L. K. Ono, L. Li, J. C. Yang, A. I. Frenkel and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15714–15719 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
D. He, C. Zeng, C. Xu, N. Cheng, H. Li, S. Mu and M. Pan, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5582–5588 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Gross and A. P. Nowak, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11378–11383 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, Y. X. Huang, X. W. Liu, G. P. Sheng, W. W. Li and H. Q. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng and J. Wu, Bioelectrochemistry, 2013, 92, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, D. Pant and B. E. Logan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 30, 49–55 CAS .
C. Schüth, N. A. Kummer, C. Weidenthaler and H. Schad, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 52, 197–203 CrossRef .
K. A. Kuttiyiel, K. Sasaki, Y. Choi, D. Su, P. Liu and R. R. Adzic, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6266–6271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and N. Toshima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5301–5306 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9373–9382 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012 DOI:10.1021/ar300230s .
V. Mazumder, M. Chi, K. L. More and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7848–7849 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, S. Ci, F. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Cui, S. Mao, S. Luo, Z. He and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. Liu and X. Weng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17479–17484 CAS .
D. Angeles-Wedler, K. Mackenzie and F.-D. Kopinke, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5734–5739 CrossRef CAS .
U. Pasaogullari and C. Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A399–A406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, H. Yu and X. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 13009–13015 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, H. Yu, X. Wang, Q. Zhou and J. Feng, Water Res., 2012, 46, 5777–5787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, H. Yu, H. Yu, N. Gao and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, H. Liu and B. E. Logan, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, J. Kan, F. Mansfeld, L. T. Angenent and K. H. Nealson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1648–1654 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, Y. Li, A. Lu, S. Jin, C. Quan, C. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zeng and Y. Yan, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3500–3505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lu, Y. Li, S. Jin, H. Ding, C. Zeng, X. Wang and C. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2009, 24, 1184–1190 CrossRef .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 532–537 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yuan, G. P. Sheng, W. W. Li, Z. Q. Lin, R. J. Zeng, Z. H. Tong and H. Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 5575–5580 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, R. Dua, L. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1709–1717 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2139–2181 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wodka, E. b. Bielańska, R. P. Socha, M. Elżbieciak-Wodka, J. Gurgul, P. Nowak, P. Warszyński and I. Kumakiri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1945–1953 CAS .
A. B. Laursen, S. Kegnaes, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5577–5591 CAS .
M. Shang, W. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Sun, L. Wang and L. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14727–14731 CAS .
S. Hacialioglu, F. Meng and S. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1174–1176 RSC .
L. Chen, S. Shet, H. Tang, H. Wang, T. Deutsch, Y. Yan, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6962–6967 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. H. Bang, C. Tang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 387–395 CrossRef .
K. L. Sowers and A. Fillinger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, F80–F85 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. Chi and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 7226–7230 CrossRef .
S. Chai, G. Zhao, P. Li, Y. Lei, Y.-N. Zhang and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18261–18269 CAS .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 298–302 CrossRef .
C. Y. Lin, Y. H. Lai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3482–3487 RSC .
J. A. Cracknell, K. A. Vincent and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2439–2461 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Ivnitski, C. Khripin, H. R. Luckarift, G. R. Johnson and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7385–7393 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsujimura, Y. Miura and K. Kano, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5716–5720 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zebda, C. Gondran, A. Le Goff, M. Holzinger, P. Cinquin and S. Cosnier, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 370 CrossRef .
E. Katz, A. F. Bückmann and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10752–10753 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Solomon, A. J. Augustine and J. Yoon, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3921–3932 RSC .
S. Shleev, A. Jarosz-Wilkolazka, A. Khalunina, O. Morozova, A. Yaropolov, T. Ruzgas and L. Gorton, Bioelectrochemistry, 2005, 67, 115–124 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schaetzle, F. Barriere and U. Schroder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 96–99 CAS .
H. Luo, S. Jin, P. H. Fallgren, H. J. Park and P. A. Johnson, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165, 524–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Higgins, C. Lau, P. Atanassov, S. D. Minteer and M. J. Cooney, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 994–997 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. P. Savizi, H.-R. Kariminia and S. Bakhshian, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 6584–6593 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Roy, H. R. Luckarift, S. R. Sizemore, K. E. Farrington, C. Lau, G. R. Johnson and P. Atanassov, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2013, 53, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Strack, H. R. Luckarift, S. R. Sizemore, R. K. Nichols, K. E. Farrington, P. K. Wu, P. Atanassov, J. C. Biffinger and G. R. Johnson, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 128, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Jia and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2006, 24, 296–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rubenwolf, S. Kerzenmacher, R. Zengerle and F. von Stetten, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 89, 1315–1322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barrière, Y. Ferry, D. Rochefort and D. Leech, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 237–241 CrossRef .
D. J. Spira-Solomon, M. D. Allendorf and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 5318–5328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gallaway, I. Wheeldon, R. Rincon, P. Atanassov, S. Banta and S. C. Barton, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jeremiasse, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 78, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Rozendal, A. W. Jeremiasse, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lapinsonnière, M. Picot and F. Barrière, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 995–1005 CrossRef .
S. Freguia, S. Tsujimura and K. Kano, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 813–818 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 2009–2015 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cournet, M. Bergé, C. Roques, A. Bergel and M.-L. Délia, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4902–4908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carbajosa, M. Malki, R. Caillard, M. F. Lopez, F. J. Palomares, J. A. Martín-Gago, N. Rodríguez, R. Amils, V. M. Fernández and A. L. De Lacey, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Liu, X. F. Sun, Y. X. Huang, D. B. Li, R. J. Zeng, L. Xiong, G. P. Sheng, W. W. Li, Y. Y. Cheng, S. G. Wang and H. Q. Yu, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Liu, Y. P. Wang, Y. X. Huang, X. F. Sun, G. P. Sheng, R. J. Zeng, F. Li, F. Dong, S. G. Wang, Z. H. Tong and H. Q. Yu, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2011, 108, 1260–1267 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rabaey, S. T. Read, P. Clauwaert, S. Freguia, P. L. Bond, L. L. Blackall and J. Keller, ISME J., 2008, 2, 519–527 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Hawkins, P. M. McTernan, H. Lian, R. M. Kelly and M. W. W. Adams, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2013, 24, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2010, 1, e00103–e00110 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, H. Nie, T. S. Bain, H. Lu, M. Cui, O. L. Snoeyenbos-West, A. E. Franks, K. P. Nevin, T. P. Russell and D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 217–224 CAS .
L. Huang, J. M. Regan and X. Quan, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
M. Villano, F. Aulenta, C. Ciucci, T. Ferri, A. Giuliano and M. Majone, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Wrighton, B. Virdis, P. Clauwaert, S. T. Read, R. A. Daly, N. Boon, Y. Piceno, G. L. Andersen, J. D. Coates and K. Rabaey, ISME J., 2010, 4, 1443–1455 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Strycharz, S. M. Gannon, A. R. Boles, A. E. Franks, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol. Rep., 2010, 2, 289–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, D. Xing, D. F. Call and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 3953–3958 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. A. A. Van Eerten-Jansen, A. Ter Heijne, T. I. M. Grootscholten, K. J. J. Steinbusch, T. H. J. A. Sleutels, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 513–518 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, R. A. Timmers, M. Helder, K. J. J. Steinbusch, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Trends Biotechnol., 2010, 29, 41–49 CrossRef .
X. Cao, X. Huang, P. Liang, N. Boon, M. Fan, L. Zhang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 498–501 CAS .
A. Cournet, M. L. Delia, A. Bergel, C. Roques and M. Berge, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 505–508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konorty, V. Brumfeld, A. Vermeglio, N. Kahana, O. Medalia and A. Minsky, Biochemistry, 2009, 48, 4753–4761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Hu, S. Li and Q. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 16935–16942 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Marshall, D. E. Ross, E. B. Fichot, R. S. Norman and H. D. May, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 6023–6029 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shleev, J. Tkac, A. Christenson, T. Ruzgas, A. I. Yaropolov, J. W. Whittaker and L. Gorton, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 20, 2517–2554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 664–672 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Aulenta, M. Villano and L. T. Angenent, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 324–333 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. D. Shikhare, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morita, N. S. Malvankar, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers, L. Giloteaux, A. E. Rotaru, C. Rotaru and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2011, 2, e00159 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Summers, H. E. Fogarty, C. Leang, A. E. Franks, N. S. Malvankar and D. R. Lovley, Science, 2010, 330, 1413–1415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, J. Hu, L. A. Fitzgerald, J. C. Biffinger, P. Xie, B. R. Ringeisen and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16806–16810 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Pokkuluri, Y. Y. Londer, N. E. C. Duke, M. Pessanha, X. Yang, V. Orshonsky, L. Orshonsky, J. Erickson, Y. Zagyanskiy, C. A. Salgueiro and M. Schiffer, J. Struct. Biol., 2011, 174, 223–233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. El-Naggar, G. Wanger, K. M. Leung, T. D. Yuzvinsky, G. Southam, J. Yang, W. M. Lau, K. H. Nealson and Y. A. Gorby, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 18127–18131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Gorby, S. Yanina, J. S. McLean, K. M. Rosso, D. Moyles, A. Dohnalkova, T. J. Beveridge, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. E. Culley, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini, E. A. Hill, L. Shi, D. A. Elias, D. W. Kennedy, G. Pinchuk, K. Watanabe, S. i. Ishii, B. Logan, K. H. Nealson and J. K. Fredrickson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Malvankar, M. Vargas, K. P. Nevin, A. E. Franks, C. Leang, B.-C. Kim, K. Inoue, T. Mester, S. F. Covalla, J. P. Johnson, V. M. Rotello, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 573–579 CrossRef .
A. Venkataraman, M. Rosenbaum, J. B. A. Arends, R. Halitschke and L. T. Angenent, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 459–462 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Thrash, J. I. Van Trump, K. A. Weber, E. Miller, L. A. Achenbach and J. D. Coates, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 1740–1746 CrossRef CAS .
G. Meshulam-Simon, S. Behrens, A. D. Choo and A. M. Spormann, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 1153–1165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Villano, L. De Bonis, S. Rossetti, F. Aulenta and M. Majone, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 3193–3199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Barton, F. Goulhen, M. Bruschi, N. Woodards, R. Plunkett and F. M. Rietmeijer, Biometals, 2007, 20, 291–302 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, T. Mester, R. A. O'Neil, L. A. Perpetua, M. J. Larrahondo, R. Glaven, M. L. Sharma, J. E. Ward, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Microbiology, 2008, 154, 1422–1435 CrossRef CAS .

          M. T. Madigan and J. M. Martinko, Brock Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice Hall International, Inc., 11th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          J. M. Berg, J. L. Tymoczko and L. Stryer, Biochemistry, W.H. Freeman, New York, 5th edn,  2002 Search PubMed .

          D. White, The Physiology and Biochemistry of Prokaryotes, Oxford University Press, New York, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. J. Cooney, V. Svoboda, C. Lau, G. Martin and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 320–337 CAS .
V. Soukharev, N. Mano and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8368–8369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Beyl, D. A. Guschin, S. Shleev and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 474–476 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Gallaway and S. A. Calabrese Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8527–8536 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Pankratov, Y. S. Zeifman, O. V. Morozova, G. P. Shumakovich, I. S. Vasil'eva, S. Shleev, V. O. Popov and A. I. Yaropolov, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 1143–1149 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Meredith, M. Minson, D. Hickey, K. Artyushkova, D. T. Glatzhofer and S. D. Minteer, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1683–1690 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Blanford, R. S. Heath and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1710–1712 RSC .
C. Vaz-Dominguez, S. Campuzano, O. Rüdiger, M. Pita, M. Gorbacheva, S. Shleev, V. M. Fernandez and A. L. De Lacey, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Ramasamy, H. R. Luckarift, D. M. Ivnitski, P. B. Atanassov and G. R. Johnson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6045–6047 RSC .
T. Kuwahara, T. Asano, M. Kondo and M. Shimomura, Bioelectrochemistry, 2013, 91, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Little, S. F. Ralph, N. Mano, J. Chen and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8886–8888 RSC .
G. Feng, L. Viry, M. Maugey, P. Poulin and N. Mano, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 2–7 Search PubMed .
B. Reuillard, A. Le Goff, C. Agnès, A. Zebda, M. Holzinger and S. Cosnier, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 19–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Parimi, Y. Umasankar, P. Atanassov and R. P. Ramasamy, ACS Catal., 2011, 2, 38–44 CrossRef .
G. Gupta, C. Lau, B. Branch, V. Rajendran, D. Ivnitski and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10767–10771 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, C. Lau, V. Rajendran, F. Colon, B. Branch, D. Ivnitski and P. Atanassov, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 247–249 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murata, K. Kajiya, N. Nakamura and H. Ohno, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1280–1285 CAS .
Q. Qian, L. Su, P. Yu, H. Cheng, Y. Lin, X. Jin and L. Mao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 5185–5191 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Sheng, H. Q. Yu and X. Y. Li, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 882–894 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Liu, X. F. Sun, Y. X. Huang, G. P. Sheng, S. G. Wang and H. Q. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1422–1427 CAS .
T. K. Wood, S. H. Hong and Q. Ma, Trends Biotechnol., 2010, 29, 87–94 CrossRef .
B. Erable, I. Vandecandelaere, M. Faimali, M. L. Delia, L. Etcheverry, P. Vandamme and A. Bergel, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 78, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, D. Xing and N. Ren, Water Res., 2012, 46, 2425–2434 CrossRef CAS .
M. Picot, L. Lapinsonnière, M. Rothballer and F. Barrière, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 28, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Strycharz, R. H. Glaven, M. V. Coppi, S. M. Gannon, L. A. Perpetua, A. Liu, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Bioelectrochemistry, 2011, 80, 142–150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Y. Y. Cheng, H. Yin, X. N. Song, W. W. Li, X. X. Zhou, L. P. ZHao, L. J. Tian, J. C. Han and H. Q. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1945 Search PubMed .
L. Alfonta, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 822–831 CrossRef CAS .
M. Izallalen, R. Mahadevan, A. Burgard, B. Postier, R. Didonato Jr, J. Sun, C. H. Schilling and D. R. Lovley, Metab. Eng., 2008, 10, 267–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Yong, Y. Y. Yu, C. M. Li, J. J. Zhong and H. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 30, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
S. Larom, F. Salama, G. Schuster and N. Adir, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 9650–9655 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jensen, A. E. Albers, K. R. Malley, Y. Y. Londer, B. E. Cohen, B. A. Helms, P. Weigele, J. T. Groves and C. M. Ajo-Franklin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 19213–19218 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Leung, G. Wanger, M. El-Naggar, Y. Gorby, G. Southam, W. M. Lau and J. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2407–2411 CrossRef CAS .
T. Boesen and L. P. Nielsen, mBio, 2013, 4, e00270 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Thomas, L. E. Garner, K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, D. R. Lovley, J. J. Sumner, C. J. Sund and G. C. Bazan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1761–1765 CAS .
L. E. Garner, J. Park, S. M. Dyar, A. Chworos, J. J. Sumner and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10042–10052 CrossRef CAS .
V. Berzin, M. Kiriukhin and M. Tyurin, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 2012, 55, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, P. H. Opgenorth, D. G. Wernick, S. Rogers, T. Y. Wu, W. Higashide, P. Malati, Y. X. Huo, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Science, 2012, 335, 1596 CrossRef CAS .

          J. O. M. Bockris, A. K. N. Reddy and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Modern electrochemistry: Fundamentals of electrodics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, 2nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
C. Song, Y. Tang, J. L. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Shen, S. McDermid, J. Li and P. Kozak, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2552–2561 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, J. C. Tokash, F. Zhang, P. Liang, X. Huang and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 2085–2091 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, S. Zhou and J. Tang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 4911–4917 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ter Heijne, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 7151–7156 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Cheng and B. E. Logan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 18871–18873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Wang, G. P. Sheng, B. J. Shi, W. W. Li and H. Q. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1864 CAS .
F. Zhang, Z. Ge, J. Grimaud, J. Hurst and Z. He, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 136, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalathil, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, New Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Gregory, D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2004, 6, 596–604 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, T. Peng, X. Hu, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, J. Qu and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bergel, D. Féron and A. Mollica, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 900–904 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mano, V. Soukharev and A. Heller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11180–11187 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, F. Harnisch, U. Schröder, F. Scholz, P. Bogdanoff and I. Herrmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1405–1410 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hong, D. M. Ivnitski, G. R. Johnson, P. Atanassov and R. Pachter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4802–4809 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, X. W. Liu, W. W. Li, G. P. Sheng, G. L. Zang, Y. Y. Cheng, N. Shen, Y. P. Yang and H. Q. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2012, 98, 594–596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rubenwolf, S. Sane, L. Hussein, J. Kestel, F. von Stetten, G. Urban, M. Krueger, R. Zengerle and S. Kerzenmacher, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 96, 841–849 CrossRef CAS .
B. De Gusseme, T. Hennebel, L. Vanhaecke, M. Soetaert, J. Desloover, K. Wille, K. Verbeken, W. Verstraete and N. Boon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5737–5745 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 47, 332–333 CrossRef .
X. A. Walter, J. Greenman and I. A. Ieropoulos, Algal Res, 2013, 2, 183–187 CrossRef .
P. J. Cai, X. Xiao, Y. R. He, W. W. Li, G. L. Zang, G. P. Sheng, H. W. M. Lam, L. Yu and H. Q. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 39, 306–310 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Selembo, M. D. Merrill and B. E. Logan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 428–437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hrapovic, M. F. Manuel, J. H. T. Luong, S. R. Guiot and B. Tartakovsky, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 35, 7313–7320 CrossRef .
H. Luo, P. E. Jenkins and Z. Ren, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. You, J. Y. Wang, N. Q. Ren, X. H. Wang and J. N. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 334–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mu, K. Rabaey, R. A. Rozendal, Z. Yuan and J. Keller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 5137–5143 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Geelhoed and A. J. M. Stams, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 815–820 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, D. Xing, D. F. Call and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 3953–3958 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. J. Steinbusch, H. V. M. Hamelers, J. D. Schaap, C. Kampman and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 513–517 CrossRef .
L. Birry, P. Mehta, F. Jaouen, J. P. Dodelet, S. R. Guiot and B. Tartakovsky, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, S. Li, J. Sun and B. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9284–9289 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Xian-Wei Liu
	Xian-Wei Liu received his PhD from the University of Science & Technology of China (USTC) under the direction of Professor Han-Qing Yu in 2011. His research has focused on chemical and biological catalysis in bioelectrochemical systems. Dr Liu is now a postdoctoral fellow at Arizona State University, USA. He is involved in National Institutes of Health projects aimed at the development and application of plasmon-based electrochemical microscopy. He has published over 30 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.

Wen-Wei Li
	Wen-Wei Li is an associate professor from the Department of Chemistry, the University of Science & Technology of China (USTC). He received his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008. After postdoctoral training at USTC, he joined the faculty at this university in 2010. His research expertise is in renewable energy, bioelectrochemistry and environmental biotechnology. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed international papers and 5 invited book chapters.

Han-Qing Yu
	Han-Qing Yu is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. He received his PhD from Tongji University, China in 1994. After that, he worked as a Marie Curie postdoctoral fellow at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, a research fellow at the Nanyang Technological University, and a research assistant professor at the Hong Kong University. He is now an Associate Editor of Water Research and an editorial board member of eight international journals. His research interests include contaminant biodegradation and nanomaterials for environmental application. He has published more than 300 international peer-reviewed papers and 4 invited book chapters.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of catalytic processes at the cathode in BES and catalysts involved. Electric energy can be harvested at the external circuit or a small amount of energy should be invested to drive the production of hydrogen or carbohydrate fuels.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of cathode overpotential dependence on the current density for a single redox couple.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of photoelectrocatalysis at BES cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 


Electro-catalyst	Noble metal	Pt	ORR, HER	
14, 17 and 43

Pd	HER	
65

Non-noble metal	Ni	HER	
51, 239 and 240

Stainless steel	HER	
35 and 241

MnO2	ORR	
36

Carbon-based material	Activated carbon	ORR	
242

Carbon nanotube, nanofiber	ORR	
39 and 40

Graphene	ORR	
55

Graphite	Dye reduction	
243

Photoelectrocatalyst	n-type semiconductor	TiO2	Dissolved organic matter reduction	
94 and 96

p-type semiconductor	Cu2O	HER	
32

Biocatalyst	Enzyme	Laccase	ORR, Dye reduction	
121–124

Microorganisms	
Shewanella putrefaciens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii	ORR	
136 and 138–140


Geobacter sulfurreducens
	HER	
244

Mixed culture	ORR, HER	
133, 134 and 142

Mixed culture	Methane/acetate, etc. production	
91, 144, 153, 245 and 246


 	Fig. 4  Schematic of (A) Pt-catalyzed ORR, and (B) alleviated Pt oxidation by Pd in a Pt–Pd catalyst. ORR catalysis steps: (1) O2(ads) ↔ O(ads) + O(ads); (2) O(ads) + H+ + e− ↔ OH(ads); and (3) OH(ads) + H+ + e− ↔ OH2.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of: (A) Mn–polypyrrole–CNT catalyst; (B) Fe- and nitrogen-functionalized graphene; (C) γ-MnO2 mixed with CNTs and (D) coral-like Cu–Pd bimetallic porous structure developed on 3D copper foam carrier. Adapted with permission from ref. 41, 55, 59 and 74. Copyright, Elsevier and American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Core–shell structured electrocatalysts: (A and D) nanoparticles (B and E) core nanoparticles dispersed and encapsulated in the nanotube shell and (C and F) core particles wrapped by a shell layer to form a nanorod. (D)–(F) are TEM images of a Pd@FePt NPs, CeO2 nanorods in the titanate NTs, and N–Fe/Fe3C@graphite nanorods, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82–84. Copyright, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the synergetic catalytic effects in TiO2/Bi2WO6 catalysts: e−–h+ pairs are generated in Bi2WO6 under visible light irradiation due to its relatively small band gap of 2.8 eV; the h+ at the valence band (VB) then migrate to the VB of TiO2, leading to accelerated charge separation in Bi2WO6. Alternatively, the photo-excited electrons at the conduction band (CB) of Bi2WO6 can be activated to that of TiO2via a two-photon adsorption mechanism, leading to activation of TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Band positions of several semiconductors in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 7.0. The positions of the lower edge of the conduction band (red color) and upper edge of the valence band (blue color) are presented relative to the redox potential of the HER and anode cell cytochrome protein. The visible light spectrum corresponds to energies from 1.56 to 3.12 eV.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic of synergetic catalysis in a Si NW–Pt NPs composite catalyst with 3D structure, photo-generated electrons at the conducting band of Si NW immediately drift to Pt. (B) SEM image of Si NWs array. Inset: photograph of a Si NW array sample with low reflection. (C) SEM image of Cu2O NW-arrayed 3D structured photocathode; (D) current density curves recorded from a zero-biased BES with a bioanode and a Cu2O NWs-arrayed photocathode with light on–off cycles (light intensity = 20 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 and 112. Copyright, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic diagram of a carbon-layer protected Cu2O NW array photocathode; photocurrent density decay with (B) unprotected cathode and (C) carbon-protected cathode at 0 V vs. SHE in chopped light illumination (light on–off cycle: 10 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of laccase for ORR catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of pathways for microbially catalyzed electrosynthesis of fuels at BES cathode.	 

 	Fig. 13  Cathodic EET mechanisms of Shewanella. OM: outer membrane; CM: cytoplasmic membrane. The red arrows represent the possible flow paths of electrons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Energy metabolism of microbial catalyst at BES cathode.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of a laccase–MWCNT composite for catalyzing ORR via DET. PBSE is used as a tethering agent to link the laccase and MWNT, through a coupled covalent-binding of the protein and a noncovalent side wall functionalization of MWCNT with a π–π interaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of microbial catalysts for HER at a biofilm-colonized cathode.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) SEM image of the biofilms attached to the CNT–CHI nanocomposite-modified carbon paper, (B) power output of the MFCs with microbial-CNT–CHI composite cathode and a non-CNT control. Adapted with permission from ref. 198.	 


Pt	Passive diffusion	0.42	40.0	
247

Pt	Passive diffusion	0.45	3.0	
218

FePc	Passive diffusion	0.35	30.0	
247

MnO2/CNTs	Passive diffusion	0.73	1.5	
248

Tree laccase	Passive diffusion	0.59	5.0	
193

Fungal laccase	Passive diffusion	0.78	0.9	
123

Aerobic cultures	Passive diffusion	0.62	0.8	
218

Aerobic cultures	Aeration	0.30	0.4	
156

Aerobic cultures	Aeration	0.58	0.3	
220


 	Fig. 18  Polarization curve of ORR cathodes in air-breathing cathode MFCs with different cathodic catalysts. The potential scanning rate was 1 mV s−1. The enzymatic cathode was fabricated by pressing a carbon black (Vulcan XC 72)-polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) composite onto a nickel mesh, then 8 mg mL−1 laccase (from Tr. versicolor) were adsorbed on the solution side of that electrode. All the other electrode were prepared by coating Pt (5 mg cm−2, 10% Pt) or enriching aerobic sludge (50 mL) onto a 30% wet-proofed carbon cloth (Vulcan XC-72), which was painted with four PTFE diffusion layers on the air-facing side. The solution pH was maintained at 7.0 using buffer. Oxygen was supplied by passive air diffusion, and no solution stirring was performed. Adapted with permission from ref. 123 and 218. Copyright, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
