Multifunctional nanostructured electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage: current status and perspectives  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR01032C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR01032C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11241-11280Multifunctional nanostructured electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage: current status and perspectives

        
          
            Srabanti 
            Ghosh
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Rajendra N. 
            Basu
          
        
      *
      CSIR - Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Fuel Cell & Battery Division, 196, Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, INDIA. E-mail: ghosh.srabanti@gmail.com; rnbasu@cgcri.res.in
Received 
      5th February 2018
    , Accepted 4th June 2018First published on 4th June 2018AbstractElectrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) have attracted widespread attention because of their important role in the application of various energy storage and conversion devices, such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries and water splitting devices. However, the sluggish kinetics of the HER/OER/ORR and their dependency on expensive noble metal catalysts (e.g., Pt) obstruct their large-scale application. Hence, the development of efficient and robust bifunctional or trifunctional electrocatalysts in nanodimension for both oxygen reduction/evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions is highly desired and challenging for their commercialization in renewable energy technologies. This review describes some recent developments in the discovery of bifunctional or trifunctional nanostructured catalysts with improved performances for application in rechargeable metal–air batteries and fuel cells. The role of the electronic structure and surface redox chemistry of nanocatalysts in the improvement of their performance for the ORR/OER/HER under an alkaline medium is highlighted and the associated reaction mechanisms developed in the recent literature are also summarized.
1. Introduction
Increasing demand for sustainable energy has accelerated research on various renewable technologies such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and water splitting devices as alternative energy production and storage systems.1–3 Specifically, bi-functional or tri-functional catalysis can be considered as a novel concept in modern energy technologies, where nanomaterial-based catalysts may be used for water splitting via electrochemical reactions involving the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and as well as oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).4–7 There has been an extensive research focus on precious and non-precious metal- or metal oxide-based electrocatalytic nanomaterials as efficient ORR/OER/HER catalysts,8,9 while limited studies have been reported on bi-functional catalysts for both ORR and OER or HER and OER.10–13 Interestingly, high tri-functional activities for the ORR, HER, and OER using carbon-based electrocatalysts have rarely been reported.12 Furthermore, these reactions are considered to be complicated as they require multistep proton-coupled electron transfer and high overpotential and have low efficiency. For example, the ORR and OER play vital roles in the oxygen electrode through the discharge and charge processes of metal–air batteries which determine the overall performance of the device; however, the intrinsic slow kinetics of these two reactions limit their development and commercialization.14 Consequently, the search for low-cost bifunctional or trifunctional catalytic nanomaterials which are effective for both ORR and OER or HER processes is constantly an ongoing research focus.15–19 Noble metal (such as Pt and Ru)-based nanomaterials have been regarded as state-of-the-art catalysts, but unfortunately the high cost and poor stability seriously hamper their large-scale applications.20–22 In particular, transition metal oxides or perovskites have been regarded as cost-effective catalysts for metal–air batteries with reasonable catalytic activity and structural stability.23–25 Moreover, transition metal (such as Co, Ni and Fe) sulfides, selenides, nitrides, carbides, phosphides, hydro(oxy)oxides, etc. have shown promise as ORR, OER, or HER catalysts.26–31 Recently, carbonaceous nanomaterials incorporated with heteroatoms (N, O, P, S, etc.) have become promising alternative ORR/OER bifunctional catalysts with the advantages of Earth-abundance, nontoxicity, and cost effectiveness.32–34 The improved electrocatalytic activity of carbon-based catalysts can be attributed to the changes of the electronic structure by doping as confirmed with theoretical studies.35,36 Moreover, various synthetic strategies have been developed to obtain hybrid nanostructures for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction and water splitting. These hybrid catalytic nanostructures displayed superior performance in energy storage and conversion which are associated with superior electrical conductivity, high carrier mobility, and high electrochemical activity and stability.37–42 In particular, the fabrication of metal oxides/conductive carbon hybrids has been considered as an efficient approach to enhance catalytic activity, due to the synergistic combination of carbon materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, porous carbon, etc. having high electrical conductivity with a large surface area, capable of improving the utilization of dispersed metal catalysts. This review covers the recent progress achieved in the development of various catalytic nanostructures and hybrid strategies based on the functional associations of metallic and carbon nanomaterials. Controlling the dimension of each component permitted the engineering of the electronic energy state and surface within the nanoscale architecture, which makes them suitable for energy applications. This review highlights the current status of the representative applications of advanced electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage (such as fuel cells and batteries) with a strong emphasis on recent literature examples. Finally, this review ends with mechanistic details, summary and some perspectives on the challenges in this emerging area of research.
2. Why are multifunctional electrocatalysts special?
There is growing interest in oxygen electrochemistry as conversions between O2 and H2O play an important role in a variety of renewable energy technologies such as water splitting devices, fuel cells, metal–air batteries, electrolysis cells, solar synthetic reactors, etc. (Fig. 1).43–46 Specifically, for low-temperature fuel cells (LTFCs), both ORR (discharge, fuel cell mode) and OER (charge, electrolyzer mode) are important in parallel (Fig. 1a). Another energy storage device, unitized regenerative fuel cell (URFC), requires the use of a bifunctional catalyst for both OER and ORR. Overall, alkaline water splitting is considered as a promising approach for the commercialization toward mass hydrogen production; however, it is limited by the low activity of HER electrocatalysts under strongly alkaline conditions. In fact, the incompatible combination of HER and OER electrocatalysts in the same electrolyte severely affected the overall performance of water electrolysis (Fig. 1b). Indeed, the OER is a thermodynamically as well as kinetically demanding process involving four sequential proton-coupled electron transfer steps and oxygen–oxygen bond formation. Hence, it is more difficult to accomplish the OER compared to the HER. Moreover, the overpotential of the OER tends to be several-fold higher than that of the HER and most nonprecious OER catalysts do not work in acidic solutions.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of (a) an alkaline membrane regenerative fuel cell, (b) an electrolyzer and (c) a regenerative Li–air battery. The reactions shown are formulated for alkaline electrolytes. 
Hence, the overall acidic water splitting requires the use of scarce and expensive acid-insoluble OER electrocatalysts. In this regard, highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts that concurrently catalyze the HER and OER in alkaline media may overcome the instability issue of OER catalysts and definitely improve the overall water-splitting efficiency.47–49 The development of a multifunctional and durable catalytic material is one of the major approaches to reduce the production costs for the commercialization of alkaline water splitting and accelerate the kinetics of the HER and ORR. To date, various Pt-free bifunctional electrocatalysts that are simultaneously active for both electrochemical reactions such as the ORR and OER have been reported. However, there are very few catalysts which showed bifunctional catalytic activity for both HER and OER in the same electrolyte.
Li–air batteries represent a leading candidate for energy storage devices; however, the slow ORR during discharge and the slow OER kinetics for charging in Li+ ion-containing aprotic electrolytes limit the practical use of this technology.50–55 In an aqueous Li–air battery, oxygen is reduced to hydroxyl ions (or hydroperoxide ions) during discharge to combine with Li ions from the anode to form soluble LiOH (eqn (1), Fig. 1c). 2Li + 1/2 O2 + H2O ↔ 2LiOH (E° = 3.2 V)(1)
In a nonaqueous electrolyte, O2 enters the porous cathode, is reduced, and then combines with the Li+ ions in the electrolyte to form solid Li2O2 (or Li2O) upon discharging (eqn (2) and (3)). The process is reversed during charging in the rechargeable batteries. 2Li + O2 ↔ 2Li2O2 (E° = 2.96 V)(2) 2Li + 1/2 O2 ↔ Li2O (E° = 2.91 V)(3)
For a Zn–air battery, similar reactions occur at the air electrode, but zinc ions from the anode can combine with hydroxyl ions to form zincate ions [Zn(OH)42−], which may further decompose to produce ZnO (eqn (4)):56 Zn + 1/2 O2 ↔ ZnO (E° = 1.65 V)(4)
A highly active bifunctional air cathode catalyst for both ORR and OER is essential to improve energy storage as well as the conversion efficiency and durability of metal–air batteries (MABs). Intensive effort has been made to develop a multifunctional air/oxygen electrode which requires high performance electrocatalysts for the OER/ORR. In general, the cathode oxygen reactions are irreversible with slow kinetics, and to realize the cycling of an air electrode, the bifunctional catalytic activity of a catalyst plays a significant role in accelerating the ORR upon discharging and mediating the OER upon charging.57 Hence, the overall performance of sustainable technologies greatly depends on these electrochemical reactions, and the development of low-cost, highly active multi-functional electrocatalysts is one of the most vital challenges.58 Despite enormous efforts, the development of multi-functional catalysts is still limited, since they require significantly low overpotentials and high activities for both reactions, either the ORR and OER or the OER and HER. In fact, the overpotential difference between the ORR and the OER (ΔE) is considered as an evaluating factor for the bifunctional activity. The ORR current density is near the half-wave potential of the benchmark ORR catalyst (e.g., Pt/C), while the OER current density is equivalent to the expected current density for an ideal solar cell device with 10% efficiency. As the ORR/OER overpotentials are often reported for lower current densities, the comparison of various oxygen catalysts remains challenging and other parameters, the onset potential, the diffusion-limiting current (ORR), and the half-wave potential (ORR), are important. Moreover, various experimental conditions, such as catalyst loading, rotation speed, scan rate, O2-saturated or N2-saturated electrolyte and electrolyte concentration, are also essential factors for high catalytic activity. Nanostructured catalysts with preferred morphology and exceptional electrical, charge transport, optical and redox electrochemical properties make them suitable candidates for fuel cells, lithium batteries, etc. The important criteria for efficient bifunctional oxygen electrodes are as follows: (i) the catalysts must be well dispersed on a highly conductive and porous matrix to avoid aggregation; (ii) open gas diffusion pathways should be available; (iii) the catalysts must have efficient catalytic activity and use low-cost nanomaterials for mass production; and (iv) the catalysts must have a high surface area in contact with the electrolyte and O2. A new direction for fabricating robust lithium batteries or electrolyzers using high performance multifunctional nanoelectrocatalysts for the efficient ORR, OER and HER will be discussed in the next section.
3. Fundamental aspects of the electrocatalytic reactions
In the electrolyzer mode, the hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction occur for energy storage, while in the fuel cell mode, the oxygen reduction reaction takes place for energy conversion (Fig. 2).59 The HER is the cathodic reaction in electrochemical water splitting (eqn (5)). 2H+ + 2e− → H2(5)
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of redox reactions involved in water splitting. 
The electrocatalytic HER involves two different processes for the formation of H2 from the reduction of protons on catalytic sites.60 For both processes, a proton is first reduced into a hydride species on catalytic centers. For the formation of H–H, in one mechanism, two hydride species react to release one hydrogen molecule. In the other mechanism, one hydride reacts with one proton–electron couple to release one hydrogen molecule. The use of a catalyst to minimize the overpotential is necessary to drive the HER and platinum is the best-known catalyst for the HER that requires very small overpotentials even at high reaction rates in acidic solutions. The oxygen reduction reaction has been proposed to involve multistep electron-transfer processes.61 The ORR in alkaline environments under ambient temperature is more favourable than that in acidic environments because of better kinetics and lower overpotentials.62 Oxygen can be directly reduced to water with the concomitant consumption of four electrons per O2 molecule (eqn (6)). Alternatively, oxygen can be reduced indirectly, forming H2O2 as an intermediate, and only two electrons per O2 molecule are consumed (eqn (7)–(9)): O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → H2O + 4OH− (E° = 0.40 V)(6) O2 + H2O + 2e− → H2O2 + 2OH− (E° = −0.07 V)(7) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (E° = 0.87 V)(8) HO2− → 3OH− + O2(9)
In an acidic medium, oxygen reduction involved the following reactions (eqn (10)–(12)): O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → H2O(10) O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(11) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O(12)
Oxygen reduction may proceed via a four-electron (4e−) pathway or a two-electron (2e−) pathway on the surfaces of metals. The overall electron transfer numbers per oxygen molecule involved in the typical ORR process are calculated from the slopes of the Koutecky–Levich plots using the following equation (eqn (13)–(15)):63 (13) (14) jK = nFkC0(15)where j (mA cm−2) is the measured current density, jK and jL (mA cm−2) are the kinetic- and diffusion-limiting current densities, ω is the electrode rotating speed in rpm, n is the number of electrons transferred per oxygen molecule, F is the Faraday constant (F = 96485 C mol−1), C0 is the bulk concentration of O2 (1.2 × 10−6 mol cm−3), D0 is the diffusion coefficient of O2 (1.9 × 10−5 cm2 s−1), ν is the kinematic viscosity of the electrolyte (0.01 cm2 s−1) and k is the electron transfer rate constant.
The ORR pathways and mechanism may vary with the catalytic nanomaterials applied. Even for the same catalyst, the ORR behaves as a structure-sensitive reaction. The O2 adsorption configurations and the O2-surface interactions affect the ORR pathways. The standard Nernstian potential for the oxygen half-cell reaction is 1.23 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is defined by the hydrogen standard electrode potential for a given pH value. At pH = 0, this potential is referred to as the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) scale.64,65 The ORR is kinetically favored below the half-cell potential while the OER is thermodynamically favorable above the potential. However, because the ORR/OER kinetics are very poor, there is a large deviation from the half-cell potential – which is referred to as the “overpotential”.66 In general, the overall reaction of water splitting consists of both reduction (hydrogen evolution reaction) and oxidation (oxygen evolution reaction) half-reactions (eqn (16)–(18)). 2H2O/2H2 → O2 (E° = −1.23 V)(16) 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (E° = 0.00 V vs. RHE)(17) 2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e− (E° = 1.23 V vs. RHE)(18)
The thermodynamic voltage of water splitting is 1.23 V at 25 °C and 1 atm; however, higher voltages are needed to achieve electrochemical water splitting. The overpotential is mainly used to overcome the intrinsic activation barriers present on the anode and cathode, as well as solution resistance and contact resistance. Thus, the practical operational voltage for water splitting can be described as (eqn (19)):67 Eop = 1.23 V + ηa + Zc + Zother(19)
It is clearly seen from this equation that the reduction of the overpotentials by suitable methods is the central issue in order to make the water splitting reaction energy-efficient. Indeed, Zother can be reduced by optimizing the design of the electrolytic cell, whereas Za and Zc have to be minimized by highly active oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution catalysts, respectively. The electrode activity is generally estimated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) or linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). Furthermore, steady state currents at various applied voltages have been measured in order to determine the catalytic activity of a material. The kinetic current for the ORR/OER/HER can be normalized by mass, electrocatalytic surface area, or the number of active sites of oxide catalysts to obtain mass activity, specific activity, and turnover frequency (TOF), respectively. The TOF is typically defined as the number of reaction products generated per active site per unit time at a given overpotential. An “onset overpotential” at a suitable current density value (0.5–2 mA cm−2) or an overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is employed to determine the catalytic activity of certain nanomaterials. A Tafel plot can be used to follow the catalytic mechanism of the electrode reaction. For the Tafel plot, the overpotential (Z) is logarithmically related to the current density (j) and the linear portion of the plot is fitted to the Tafel equation (eqn (20)): Z = a + blogj(20)
From the Tafel equation, two important parameters, Tafel slope (b) and exchange current density (j0), have been determined. The exchange current density is obtained when Z is assumed to be zero, and defines the intrinsic catalytic activity of the electrode material under equilibrium conditions. A catalytic material having a high j0 and a small Tafel slope (b) is highly desirable. As the HER undergoes a multistep reaction process in acidic media, with three possible reaction steps, Tafel slope (b) is applied as a semi-quantitative indicator to determine the reaction mechanism.60 The first step is known as the Volmer reaction (eqn (21)): H+ + e− → Hads (b = ∼118 mV dec−1)(21)
An electron on the electrode surface captures a proton from the electrolyte to form an intermediate state of an adsorbed hydrogen atom (Hads). Then, the HER can proceed by the Tafel reaction (eqn (22)): 2Hads → H2, (b = ∼30 mV dec−1)(22)
Heyrovsky reaction (eqn (23)): Hads + H+ + e− → H2, (b = ∼40 mV dec−1)(23)
The Tafel slope b could be acquired from the polarization curve-derived Tafel plots. The electrocatalytic stability of the catalyst was determined by measuring the current variation with time (i.e., the I–t curve) at a high current density for a long period of time as well as the recycling experiment (≥5000 times) by performing CV or LSV.
In general, both the HER and OER as well as the ORR and OER are inherently efficiency-limited, requiring the active electrocatalysts to accelerate the reaction rate. Pt-based metals or alloys are considered as efficient catalysts for the ORR and precious metal oxide (such as iridium dioxide (IrO2) and ruthenium dioxide (RuO2)) nanomaterials are suitable for the HER or OER but their high cost and limited abundance necessitate the exploitation of nonprecious metal catalysts.68–70 Nevertheless, various technological hurdles such as the loss of the electrochemically active surface area due to the agglomeration of nanoparticles (NPs), Ostwald ripening, oxidation of noble metals and dissolution of the non-noble component of a Pt alloy catalyst, and corrosion of carbon supports still prevent the commercialization of fuel cell technologies. This requires the designing of durable, low-cost, and nonprecious metal catalysts as alternatives to the benchmarked Pt-based nanomaterials.71,72 Although oxygen reduction and oxidation (redox) operate under different conditions for aqueous, nonaqueous, and solid-state devices, here we focus on oxygen electrocatalysis in aqueous solutions. A variety of stable multifunctional catalysts including noble metals or alloys, transition metal oxides, carbon-based nanomaterials, and composites/hybrids have been summarized in the following section.
4. Metal and alloys
Noble metals, particularly platinum-group metals, can serve as superior electrocatalysts for the ORR due to their high stability and superior electrocatalytic activity.71,72 Substantial efforts have been made to develop Pt-based catalysts with minimal Pt loading or alternative transition elements via the alloying and de-alloying of Pt catalysts to form core–shell catalysts.73–75 Notably, the highly active ORR catalysts demonstrated poor OER performance, and vice versa. Consequently, combining one metal that is highly active for the ORR with another active metal for the OER would generate a synergistic combination to form a bifunctional catalyst. Li et al.76 reported platinum–gold bimetallic NPs as a highly active bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst which enhances the kinetics of the ORR and OER in rechargeable lithium–air batteries. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images showed that PtAu nanoalloys having an average particle size of 6.8 nm are well distributed on Vulcan carbon (XC-72) (Fig. 3a) and the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern further confirms the formation of the Pt0.5Au0.5 alloy. Fig. 3b demonstrates a typical CV curve which is useful to determine the electrochemical surface area (ECSA of PtAu alloys, 38 ± 4 m2 g−1 Pt). Fig. 3c displays a higher round-trip efficiency (73%) for the discharge and charge voltages of Li–O2 cells for PtAu/C air electrodes compared to a pure carbon electrode (57%). The discharge voltage of PtAu/C was higher than that of pure carbon by ∼150–360 mV for the ORR, and during the OER, the charge voltage of PtAu/C was on average ∼3.6 VLi which was considerably lower (by 900 mV) than that of pure carbon (with an average voltage of ∼4.5 VLi). Furthermore, the cell was charged under both Ar and O2 which confirms that PtAu/C catalyzes the oxidation of lithium (per)oxide discharge products at the lowest charging voltage of 3.4 VLi (Fig. 3d). Compared to current state-of-the-art Pt catalysts, Pt alloy based electrocatalysts have achieved about twice the ORR activity per gram of Pt-group metals, which contribute ∼35% to the costs of equivalent-power stacks and the long-term stability but still not enough for transportation applications.77
 Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM image (top right) and XRD data of PtAu/C. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of PtAu/C collected in Ar-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (at 50 mV s−1). Insets: Schematic representation of PtAu, with the arrows indicating the CV signatures for Pt (gray) and Au (yellow). (c) Li–O2 cell discharge/charge profiles of carbon (black, 85 mA gcarbon−1) and PtAu/C (red, 100 mA gcarbon−1) at a 0.04 mA cm−2 electrode. (d) Background measurement during charging at 100 mA g−1 carbon of Ar- and O2-filled cells (charging first) for PtAu/C.76 (e) Ni foam supported Mulliken atomic charge of the Ag12Cu(Cu-core) and Ag12Cu(Cu-shell) structure. (f) RDE polarization curves of Ag and AgCu nanoalloys at 1600 rpm. (g) Linear sweep voltammogram of a nickel foam, AgCu nanoalloys and pure Ag electrodes. (h) Discharge polarization and power density curves for the AgCu alloy catalyst layer for the primary Zinc–air battery. (i) Specific charge capacity and specific energy density of the Zinc–air battery at discharging current 20 mA cm−2.78 
Wu et al.78 also developed carbon-free and binder-free bimetallic Au–Cu nanoalloys deposited on nickel foams using pulsed laser deposition which possess both ORR and OER catalytic activity in rechargeable Zinc–air batteries. Fig. 3e shows the schematic presentation of the Ni foam supported Mulliken atomic charge of the Ag12Cu (Cu-core) and Ag12Cu (Cu-shell) structure on the basis of density functional theory calculations. It has been proposed that the Mulliken charge of silver atoms is changed by doping Cu atoms into the core or alloying them onto the surface of the Ag12Cu cluster. The first-principles calculations suggest that the adsorption energies for the Ag–Cu alloy were in between the adsorption energies of Ag and Cu (0.6 and 1.76 eV, respectively) and consequently the alloy possessed more efficient ORR activity than that of pure Ag catalysts.79,80Fig. 3f illustrates the RDE polarization curves for the different compositions of AgCu nanoalloys for the ORR. Among the nanoalloys, Ag90Cu10, Ag75Cu25, and Ag50Cu50 catalysts demonstrated a higher limiting current density and more positive onset potential than the Ag catalyst. A similar trend has been followed for OER catalysis as shown in Fig. 3f. The Ag–Cu alloy exhibited a higher OER current density than the pure Ag and Ni foam. The primary Zinc–air batteries have been fabricated with Ag90Cu10 and Ag50Cu50 air cathodes and the cells have maximum power densities of 86.3 and 82.1 mW cm−2 at voltages of 0.863 and 0.821 V, respectively (Fig. 3g). It is important to note that the energy density is 896.40 mW h g−1, which is 67.91% of the theoretical specific energy density (1350 mW h g−1) as shown in Fig. 3h.81 In another report, Yang et al.82 fabricated a nanoporous Ag-embedded SnO2 thin film by the anodic treatment of electrodeposited Ag–Sn alloy layers which showed excellent bifunctional oxygen electrochemical performance due to the improvement in the roughness factor of the catalyst, endowed with more electrocatalytically active sites for the ORR and OER and open pathways for the transport of gas molecules. Wang et al.83 reported a self-supporting nanoporous gold–palladium overlayer through the surface nanoengineering of dealloying-driven nanoporous gold (NPG) by epitaxial layer-by-layer growth. The as-prepared NPG-Pd overlayer nanocatalysts showed remarkably enhanced electrocatalytic activities toward both the ORR and OER in alkaline media due to the unique three-dimensional nanoarchitecture of NPG. This enhances the Pd utilization efficiency through a precise control of the Pd overlayers and change in the electronic structure, supported with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The carbon-free electrocatalytic nanoporous films are useful for the application in metal–air batteries which may overcome the poor cycling ability issue caused by the side reactions of carbon in the common carbon-containing oxygen electrodes. Pt deposited on IrO2 is typically considered as an excellent bifunctional catalyst in which Pt functions as an ORR catalyst while IrO2 is active as an OER catalyst.84 Recently, Kong et al.85 developed a highly dispersed Pt catalyst by depositing Pt on Irx(IrO2)10−x support using the Adams fusion method. The as-prepared Pt/Ir3(IrO2)7 catalyst possesses high activity for both ORR (21.71 mA mg−1 at 0.85 V) and OER (42.35 mA mg−1 at 1.55 V) and can be utilized for the regenerative fuel cell. Until now, Pt-based metals or alloys are regarded as efficient catalysts due to their bifunctionality but their high cost and limited abundance necessitate the utilization of non-precious or transition metal catalysts. Very recently, Shanmugam and co-workers86 fabricated a nanostructured nickel–cobalt–titanium alloy via electrodeposition on highly corrosion resistant titanium substrate and used it as an efficient electrocatalyst for water splitting under an alkaline medium. A nickel–cobalt–titanium alloy demonstrated promising HER and OER bifunctional catalytic performance with overpotentials of about 125 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and 331 mV at 100 mA cm−2, respectively, which can be used in an alkaline electrolyte membrane water electrolyzer. Recently, transition metal-based alloys, for example, Ni3FeN supported Fe3Pt intermetallic nanoalloy, were reported as high performance bifunctional catalysts for metal–air battery application.87 In another report, a bifunctional oxygen catalyst, Fe/Fe2O3 NPs anchored on Fe-N-doped carbon nanosheets, exhibited superior rechargeable performance and cycling stability for Zinc–air batteries.88 Despite this activity, the development of an active material via a naturally abundant element has remained an unresolved issue in energy conversion applications.
5. Metal oxides
Metal oxide electrocatalysts can display outstanding activity in oxygen catalysis and thus hold promise as materials for sustainable energy storage/conversion technologies. In this regard, ruthenium-based oxides (RuOx) have been actively explored due to their high electronic conductivity and outstanding catalytic activity, especially for the OER-based electrochemistry.89–92 Ru- and RuO2-based nanomaterials used as cathodes in Li–O2 batteries have shown good catalytic activity towards both the ORR and OER.93 Shi et al.94 conducted a detailed study on the catalytic activities of both rutile RuO2 and RuO2 monolayer for the ORR and OER in nonaqueous lithium–oxygen batteries using the density functional theory method. Computational results suggested that the RuO2 monolayer has higher catalytic activity than the rutile RuO2 due to a similar lattice structure between the RuO2 monolayer and the Li2O2 {0001} surface. This can induce the formation of crystallized Li2O2 with the conductive {0001} surface exposed during discharging, and during charging the RuO2 monolayer can attract the remaining Li2O2 to its surface spontaneously, maintaining the solid–solid reaction interface. However, RuO2 is thermodynamically unstable which causes its bifunctional catalytic activities to markedly reduce with time. Moreover, ruthenium has limited availability in the Earth's crust and it is not practical to use electrolyzers containing the rare metals on a large scale.
5.1 Transition metal-based catalysts
To improve the poor stabilities during the OER in alkaline solutions and costs, considerable efforts have been focused on transition metal oxides (TMOs) with multivalent Mn, Co, Ni, etc.95–98 TMOs showed potential as cost-effective substitutes for noble metals in commercially viable renewable energy storage and conversion devices. By virtue of having a diverse range of physicochemical properties, TMOs can be explored as bifunctional catalysts due to their promising catalytic activity.97,98 The best-known oxide catalysts include manganese oxides for the ORR and nickel–iron–cobalt oxides for the OER.99 Among the TMOs, manganese oxides are a highly promising class of water-oxidation catalysts.100,101
Stahl et al.100 conducted a systematic study on nine crystalline MnOx materials (as shown in Fig. 4) as water-oxidation catalysts and showed that the catalytic performance depends strongly on the oxidation method employed in order to achieve the “best” or “most active” catalysts. Jaramillo and co-workers101 reported excellent activity of the cubane-like CaMn4Ox thin film for both the ORR and OER comparable to the best known precious metal nanoparticle catalysts, such as platinum, ruthenium, and iridium, as shown in Fig. 5. In fact, the Mn oxide thin film was more active for the ORR than both Ru and Ir NPs and less active than Pt at the half-wave potential (0.73 V for Mn oxide and 0.86 V for Pt at I = −3 mA cm−2). On the other hand, the OER catalytic activity of the Mn oxide thin film was higher than that of Pt and comparable to those of Ir and Ru.
 Fig. 4  Structural representation of nine crystalline MnOx materials: α-MnO2, β-MnO2, R-MnO2, γ-MnO2, λ-MnO2, δ-MnO2, LiMn2O4, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4.100 
 Fig. 5  Comparative oxygen electrode activities of the nanostructured Mn oxide thin film with Pt, Ir, and Ru nanoparticles and the GC substrate.101 
Accordingly, non-precious manganese oxide-based TMOs have been considered as alternative ORR catalysts with high catalytic activity, low cost, and reasonable structural stability for primary alkaline-based fuel cells.102,103 Recently, Benhangi et al.104 carried out a comprehensive study based on the statistical design of experiments to optimize the surfactant-assisted structure (i.e., anionic, cationic, and non-ionic), surfactant concentration, Mn2+ concentration, deposition potential and temperature of anodically deposited bifunctional MnOx catalysts for both ORR and OER. A cationic surfactant (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB) produced MnOx with nanoneedle morphology, whereas nanospherical and nanopetal-like morphologies were obtained with SDS and Triton X-100, respectively. Notably, controlling the interfacial environment during the surfactant-assisted anodic electrosynthesis of MnOx was considered as an effective method for producing highly active MnOx bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts in alkaline media. The mass activities of the best performing catalysts for the OER and ORR up to 49 A g−1 (at 1556 mV RHE) and −1.36 A g−1 (at 656 mV RHE) have been achieved, respectively. Moreover, in terms of active sites, the high content of the Mn3+ valence (e.g., MnOOH) is beneficial for the ORR (catalyst prepared in the presence of Triton X-100). However, catalysts with an apparently amorphous structure produced by CTAB were less effective for the ORR. For example, Suib and co-workers105 conducted a comparative study on the structure–property relationship of a bifunctional nanostructured MnO2 catalyst having a dual nature (OER and ORR catalysis), a potential alternative for the high cost Pt and its alloys, and iridium and ruthenium oxide catalysts. By virtue of having diverse structures of manganese oxides, the four most distinct MnO2 structures, namely α-MnO2, β-MnO2, δ-MnO2 and amorphous manganese oxides (AMO), have been chosen to investigate the effects of the structure on their electrochemical OER and ORR activities. The morphology of α-MnO2-SF was well ordered and it was composed of 100 nm length nanofibers as shown in Fig. 6a. Amorphous manganese oxides were composed of aggregated nanoparticles (<50 nm) and β-MnO2 has a nanorod morphology with the average diameter and length of 50 nm and 2 μm, respectively (Fig. 6b and c). The SEM image of δ-MnO2 displayed nanoflowers which are composed of thin nanoplates with dimensions of 500 nm (width) × 20 nm (thickness) (Fig. 6d).
 Fig. 6  SEM images and structures of different manganese oxides: (a) α-MnO2 (2 × 2 tunnel), (b) amorphous manganese oxides (AMO), (c) β-MnO2 (1 × 1 tunnel, pyrolusite) and (d) δ-MnO2 (layered, birnessite). (e) Rotating disk electrode voltammogram curves represent the electrochemical water oxidation activities of manganese oxides. Sweep directions are shown by the arrows. (f) LSV curves of α-MnO2-SF, α-MnO2-HT, Ni/α-MnO2-SF, AMO, β-MnO2, and δ-MnO2 studied on RDE electrodes in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.105 
Remarkably, the electrocatalytic activities are strongly dependent on the crystallographic structures, and follow an order of α-MnO2 > AMO > β-MnO2 > δ-MnO2 both for OER and ORR in alkaline media.105Fig. 6e shows the rotating disk electrode voltammogram curves of all four manganese oxides which represent the electrochemical water oxidation activities (OER). The average overpotential value for α-MnO2 is 0.49 V, compared to AMO (η = 0.59 V), β-MnO2 (η = 0.60 V), and δ-MnO2 (η = 0.74 V). In fact, α-MnO2 displays an overpotential of 490 mV compared to 380 mV shown by an Ir/C catalyst upon reaching 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, the catalytic activity of manganese oxides further improved by adding Ni2+ as dopants. The superior OER activity was attributed to several factors, including abundant di-μ-oxo bridges existing in α-MnO2 as the protonation sites, analogous to the OEC in PS-II of the natural water oxidation system, and the lowest charge transfer resistances (91.8 Ω, η = 430 mV) as measured by in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. MnO2 having mixed valence states (Mn3+/Mn4+) was considered as a superior oxidation catalyst which may facilitate the charge transfer in the OER process by following a redox cycle between Mn3+ and Mn4+ to promote the OER process (eqn (24)–(26)):106,107 MnO2 + OH− − e− ↔ MnOOH⋯O(24) 2(MnOOH⋯O) ↔ 2MnOOH + O2(25) MnOOH + OH− − e− ↔ MnO2 + H2O(26)
α-MnO2 has relatively larger tunnel sizes and a lot of edge shared MnO6 (μ2-oxo-O(H) bridges), which support the access of water and the transportation of ions such as H+ and O−, and possesses superior deprotonating activities and charge transport ability that offer outstanding OER activity. In the ORR studies, α-MnO2 displays an overpotential of 760 mV which is close to 860 mV for the benchmark ORR catalyst (20% Pt/C) at a current density of 3 mA cm−2 as shown in Fig. 6f. The half-wave potential for α-MnO2, another important parameter for the ORR, falls into a region between −0.20 and −0.24 V, whereas the half-wave potentials of −0.32 and −0.30 V for AMO and β-MnO2, respectively, are comparable to that of δ-MnO2 (−0.34 V). The high ORR activity may be associated with the strong O2 adsorption capability of α-MnO2 as suggested by temperature-programmed desorption.108,109 Benbow et al.102 also showed that α-manganese oxide electrocatalysts displayed the highest activity in both aqueous (limiting current, iL = 3.66 ± 0.12 mA cm−2, exchange current, i0 = 1.0 ± 10−5 mA cm−2) and organic electrolytes (iL = 2.25 ± 0.15 mA cm−2). A very significant increase (2.7 ± 0.26 s−1 g−1) in the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide was observed, indicating that the doping of manganese oxide catalysts with Ni2+ ions enhances the bifunctionality and is useful for decreasing the charging potential for Li–air batteries. In contrast to other manganese oxides (Mn3O4 or MnO2), little attention has been paid to exploring the catalytic activity of Mn2O3 nanostructured materials. Recently, Jahan et al.110 developed a new method using the cation bridging effect for the synthesis of phase pure α-Mn2O3 prisms that exhibited strong bifunctional electrocatalytic activity for the OER and ORR which is 79% better than commercially-produced α-Mn2O3. Pickrahn et al.111 utilized the atomic layer deposition technique for the synthesis of Mn2O3 thin film catalysts with good catalytic activity for both the ORR and OER. Ghosh et al.112 reported a facile and effective microwave-assisted route for the synthesis of uniform and electrochemically active pure and transition metal-doped manganese oxide nanoballs (Mn2O3 NBs). Electrochemical investigations indicate that both pure and copper doped Mn2O3 NBs exhibited a bifunctional catalytic activity toward the ORR and OER in alkaline media (Fig. 7a). The FESEM image revealed that the Mn2O3 NBs have a spherical morphology with a mean diameter of 600–860 nm as shown in Fig. 7b. The average diameter of the Cu+2 doped Mn2O3 NBs (Cu-Mn2O3 NBs) was found to be 800 nm higher in comparison with pure Mn2O3 NBs (Fig. 7c). The energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping confirms the presence and distribution of Mn, O, and Cu elements in the Cu-Mn2O3 NBs as shown in Fig. 7d–f. LSV curves of Cu-Mn2O3 NBs with the increase in the rotation rate lead to the enhancement of the current density to ∼5.8 mA cm−2 as shown in Fig. 7g. For the OER, the anodic current with a maximum current density of 17 mA cm−2 at 1 V for Cu-Mn2O3 NBs has been achieved which is much higher than that of Mn2O3 NBs (1 mA cm−2 at 1 V) (Fig. 7h). Hence, copper doping in Mn2O3 NBs revealed a pronounced impact on the electrocatalytic activity with a high current density for both the ORR and OER.
 Fig. 7  (a) Catalytic activity of copper-doped Mn2O3 nanoballs for the oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Mn2O3 nanoballs with different magnifications using TOPO as the structure controlling agent. (c) SEM images and (d–f) elemental mapping of Cu-doped Mn2O3 nanoballs. (g) Rotating disk voltammograms of Cu-Mn2O3 in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at different rotation rates for the oxygen reduction. (h) The corresponding Koutecky–Levich plots (J−1vs. ω−0.5) at different potentials of Cu-Mn2O3 NBs. (i) Representative rotating disk voltammogram in N2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at 2000 rpm rotation rates for the oxygen evolution on the Cu-Mn2O3 NB electrodes.112 
Besides metal oxides, a novel manganese-5,10,15-tris(pentafluorophenyl)corrole complex (MnTpFPC) also acts as a bifunctional catalyst for both the electrocatalytic generation of dioxygen as well as the reduction of dioxygen in aqueous media.113 Similarly, Liu et al.114 reported a series of water-soluble copper complexes as catalyst precursors to generate the copper-based bifunctional catalyst composite for both hydrogen production and water oxidation reactions. Until now, various cobalt-based nanomaterials with different cobalt active species are useful for the overall water splitting to produce hydrogen and oxygen.115,116 Menezes et al.117 developed a facile and low temperature method for the synthesis of large-scale cobalt oxide nanochains as excellent multifunctional catalysts for the OER at both alkaline as well as neutral pH, the ORR in an alkaline medium and photochemical water oxidation. The as-prepared Co3O4 nanochains displayed high electrocatalytic OER activity at low overpotentials and the ORR activity of carbon-supported Co3O4 nanochains showed promising performance which is comparable to the Pt/C system in an alkaline medium. Recently, nanostructured materials doped with a transition metal, C-doped or N-doped, etc., have shown striking electrocatalytic performance for oxygen reduction.25,118,119 The enhanced electrochemical activity obtained due to the improved charge transfer between the foreign metal atoms and the host and their modified electronic structures lowered the kinetic energy barriers of the catalytic processes.120 Song et al.121 showed that cobalt oxide with 5% Ni doping demonstrates excellent catalytic activities for both ORR and OER, with an overpotential of 399 mV for the ORR (at −3 mA cm−2) and 381 mV (at 10 mA cm−2) for the OER, as well as displays better durability than precious metals with very low activity decay throughout the continuous operation for 24 h. Experimental results indicated that the enhanced catalytic activity and stability are related to the redox activity of Co3+ to Co4+ which is crucial for OER performance, while the population of surface oxygen vacancies and surface area determine the ORR activities. Hao et al.119 reported an alternative strategy for the synthesis of a N-doped porous carbon coated cobalt oxide nanoarray (CoOx@NC) on carbon fiber paper as a high performance bifunctional electrode. With the synergistic effect arising from the N-doped carbon and cobalt NPs, the high electrochemical surface area and the efficient charge transfer ability of the catalyst greatly enhance the bifunctional catalytic activity as well as stability toward both ORR and OER. In fact, the electrode consisting of CoOx@NC as an air cathode in rechargeable Zinc–air batteries exhibited durable performance over 100 cycles which is superior compared to Pt/C and IrO2/C. Recently, mixed metal oxides with a spinel structure such as cobalt–manganese mixed oxide,34,122 Co3O4,31,123 NiCo2O4,124,125 CoFe2O4,127,128 CuCo2O4,129etc. have been well investigated as promising bifunctional catalysts for the OER and ORR. Cobalt manganese oxides (Co3−xMnxO4±δ) are considered as a typical mixed transition metal spinel, having versatile applications in lithium storage and catalysis. Lambert and co-workers125 discovered that electrodeposited NixCo3−xO4 nanostructured films performed as effective electrocatalysts for both ORR/OER in an alkaline electrolyte. Jin et al.126 developed self-standing, well-ordered NiCo2O4 spinel nanowire arrays having a large electrochemically active surface area, and the superior mass transport property makes them useful as a bifunctional catalyst for the ORR and OER in an alkaline solution. Moreover, the crystallographic phases of another bifunctional electrocatalyst, Co3−xMnxO4, are considerably dependent on the Co/Mn ratio, with a high Mn content (1.9 ≤ x ≤ 3) tending to form the tetragonal phase while low proportions of Mn (0 ≤ x ≤ 1.3) resulting in the cubic spinel which influences the electrochemical activity.130 Li et al.131 developed a facile solution-based oxidation–precipitation technique for the synthesis of ultrasmall cobalt manganese spinels with tunable structural symmetry and composition. Notably, CoxMn3−xO4 demonstrated bifunctional catalytic activity for the ORR/OER which strongly depended on the phase and composition. Furthermore, strongly coupled spinel/carbon nanocomposites possess comparable activity but superior durability to Pt/C and serve as efficient catalysts to build rechargeable Zn–air and Li–air batteries. Also, other spinel MnCo2O4 and CoMn2O4 have been tested as air cathodes in rechargeable Zinc–air batteries by Jung et al.132 Moreover, Mn-doped CuCo2O4 demonstrated improved electrocatalytic activities as proposed by Wu and Scott.133 CuxMn0.9−xCo2.1O4 exhibited promising ORR and OER catalytic activities which are comparable to the activity of Pt/C. In fact, the onset potentials for the OER on CuxMn0.9−xCo2.1O4 catalysts are 100 mV more negative than that of Pt/C in an alkaline medium. Maiyalagan et al.134 described the excellent electrocatalytic activities of lithium cobalt oxide-based spinels as synergistic bifunctional catalysts for the OER and ORR. The high activities of delithiated compositions are attributed to the Co4O4 cubane subunits and a pinning of the Co3+/4+:3d energy with the top of the O2−:2p band. The enhanced structural stability and the occurrence of multiple active sites in which one type of active site was favourable for the ORR and the other sites were beneficial to the OER make them bifunctional catalysts for air electrodes in rechargeable metal–air batteries. Another spinel structure, namely, NiCo2O4, is widely used as a bifunctional catalyst for the ORR/OER due to its intrinsic high activity and corrosion resistance. NiCo2O4 possesses an inverse spinel structure, where Ni occupied the 16d octahedral sites and Co was distributed in both the 16d octahedral and 8a tetrahedral sites. As the oxygen vacancy could decrease the hindrance for the adsorption of H2O, the Co3+ site is more favourable for the adsorption of H2O at low-coordination sites. For example, Bao et al.135 established that NiCo2O4 ultrathin nanosheets rich in oxygen deficiencies were suitable for enhanced electrocatalytic water oxidation. Fig. 8 shows the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 ultrathin spinel-structured nanosheets with oxygen deficiencies.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustrations of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with oxygen vacancies.135 
The electrons neighbouring the oxygen vacancy that was previously occupied by the O 2p orbital become more delocalized, suggesting that a surface with oxygen vacancies is much more activated. Consequently, vacancy-defect nanosheets can produce more active sites and exhibited excellent performance for electrocatalytic water oxidation. Yuan et al.136 reported NixCo2−xO4 spinel oxides as a bifunctional air electrode for Zinc–air batteries. Cui et al.48 employed a unique approach using a lithium-induced conversion reaction to improve the catalytic activity of TMO (iron, cobalt and nickel oxides and their mixed oxides) where metal oxide NPs (20 nm) may be electrochemically transformed into ultra-small diameter (2–5 nm) NPs. For example, lithium-induced ultra-small NiFeOx nanoparticles were active bifunctional catalysts exhibiting high activity and stability for overall water splitting in a base. In fact, the NiFeOx electrode achieved a 10 mA cm−2 water-splitting current at 1.51 V for over 200 h without degradation in a two-electrode configuration and 1 M KOH, better than the combination of iridium and platinum as benchmark catalysts.48
5.2 Perovskite-type catalysts
Recently, perovskite-type oxides have gained noticeable popularity as cost effective bifunctional oxygen catalysts with promising catalytic activity and stability for the ORR and OER in an alkaline solution because of their excellent electrical properties and abundant active sites.137,138 Among various metal oxides, perovskites with a general formula of ABO3 have attracted consistent attention as potential bi-functional catalysts for metal–air batteries and fuel cell systems.139–143 A major advantage of perovskite oxides has been associated with tunable physical–chemical and catalytic properties of the ABO3 formulation, where “A” sites are rare earth or alkali metal ions and “B” sites are transition metal ions. It has been proposed that a near unity eg orbital occupancy in a transition metal cation, closer transition metal d-band and oxygen p-band center relative to the Fermi level, high covalency of the metal–oxygen bond and oxygen deficiency are favorable for the ORR/OER activity of the perovskites.144–147 The versatile structures of the A1−xA′xB1−xBxO3 perovskite with controlled electronic and geometric structures were also very suitable for the development of ORR/OER catalysts. Recently, highly efficient double perovskites and oxygen-deficient perovskites have shown high catalytic activity than the state-of-the-art IrO2 catalysts in alkaline media.148–150 Lee and co-workers151 epitaxially strained the conducting perovskite LaNiO3 to systematically determine its influence on both ORR and OER. Initially, epitaxial films (10 nm in thickness) were deposited by pulsed laser epitaxy on a range of lattice-mismatched substrates, which included (001) LaSrAlO4 (LSAO), (001) LaAlO3 (LAO), (001) (LaAlO3)0.3(SrAl0.5Ta0.5O3)0.7 (LSAT), (001) SrTiO3 (STO), and (001) pc DyScO3 (DSO). Notably, all films were coherently strained except for LNO on LSAO, which was relaxed and substantially strain free (ε = 0 to −0.3%) due to a small critical thickness for strain relaxation (Fig. 9a). The compressive strain could significantly enhance both OER and ORR, yielding a bifunctional catalyst. As shown in Fig. 9b and c, the improved bifunctional catalytic activity to the strain induced the splitting of the eg orbitals, which can modify the orbital asymmetry at the surface. The onset potentials clearly shift toward the overpotentials (η) for both reactions by at least 50 mV between strain states of 2.7 and −1.2%. When the current densities (J) for the ORR and OER at a typical operating η = 400 mV were compared, the bifunctional activity drastically increased with compressive strain, showing more than an order of magnitude enhancement (Fig. 9d). The total η required to reach 30 μA cm−2 (JORR at η = 400 mV on the ε = −1.2% LNO) for both ORR and OER is plotted in Fig. 9e. Due to decrease in η for both reactions, the highest compressively strained LNO (ε = −1.2%) has a bifunctionality exceeding that of Pt. Analogous to strain induced shifts in the d-band center of noble metals relative to the Fermi level, such splitting can dramatically affect the catalytic activity in this perovskite and other potentially more active oxides.
 Fig. 9  (a) Lattice parameters and associated biaxial strain for LNO on various substrates. Polarization curves for the (b) ORR and (c) OER on LNO films. Strain-relaxed (ε ∼0%) films grown on LSAO (10 nm in film thickness) and on LAO (100 nm in film thickness) as well as Pt films are used for comparison. (d) The current densities of both reactions at overpotentials of η = 400 mV (ORR = 0.823 V and OER = 1.623 V) increase with compressive strain. (e) Bifunctional overpotentials (η) to attain 30 μA cm−2 for both reactions show compressed LaNiO3 surpassing Pt and IrO2.151 
Suntivich et al.152,153 introduced Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ as an excellent OER catalyst among the perovskite oxides, and the catalytic performance was one order of magnitude higher than that of IrO2. The OER activity was predicted to be at an eg occupancy close to unity, with high covalency of transition metal–oxygen bonds, and the maximum ORR activity was also observed.154,155 Jung et al.156 prepared perovskite NPs with an optimized composition of Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ having superlative activity and stability for both the ORR and OER. The electrocatalysts preferentially reduced oxygen to water (<5% peroxide yield), exhibited more than 20 times higher gravimetric activity (A g−1) than IrO2 in the OER half-cell tests in an alkaline solution and exceeded the charge/discharge performance of Pt/C (20 wt%) in Zinc–air full cell tests (6 M KOH). Wang and co-workers157 fabricated hierarchical mesporous/macroporous perovskite La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−x nanotubes which exhibited outstanding intrinsic ORR and OER catalytic activity. Due to the amalgamation of the high catalytic activity and hierarchical mesoporous/macroporous nanotubular structure, they are suitable as air electrodes in Li–O2 batteries with a good rate capability and excellent cycling stability up to 50 cycles at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 with an upper-limit capacity of 500 mA h g−1. Gyenge and co-workers158 showed the alkali metal induced electrocatalytic activity and durability of mixed oxides, for example, MnO2-LaCoO3 and MnO2-Nd3IrO7, for the OER and ORR. It has been observed that the insertion of potassium ions in the oxide structure either by longer-term exposure to 6 M KOH or by an accelerated potential driven intercalation method lowers both the OER and ORR overpotentials further. The enhanced ORR/OER performance of the activated catalysts may be related to the uptake of K+ into the catalyst layer (mostly in the vacancies and defects of the MnO2 crystal structure) acting as a promoter for both ORR and OER. In general, composite electrode systems demonstrated higher bifunctional activity and durability compared with a single material. A phase-pure nanocrystal LaNiO3 perovskite catalyst was highly active for the OER and ORR.159 However, the OER mass activity of LaNiO3 supported on nitrogen-doped carbon was demonstrated to be nearly 3-fold that of 6 nm IrO2 and a strong OER/ORR bifunctionality was also associated with the low total overpotential (1.02 V) between the reactions, which was better than that of metal catalysts such as Pt (1.16 V) and Ir (0.92 V). Zhang and co-workers160 reported a facile multistep microemulsion method followed by a slow annealing method to fabricate hierarchical perovskite La0.5Sr0.5CoO2.91 (LSCO) mesoporous nanowires (Fig. 10a). The as prepared LSCO demonstrated high catalytic activity for the ORR and OER in both aqueous electrolytes and nonaqueous electrolytes. Furthermore, the CV and ORR/OER polarization curves of hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires along with activated carbon (AC) exhibited a more positive ORR peak potential (∼2.9 V) and higher peak current than those of AC and LSCO nanoparticles as shown in Fig. 10b and c. The high catalytic activity may be attributed to the high specific surface area, perovskite structure, and mesoporous structure of LSCO which promote oxygen diffusion, and the Co ions can also act as an active center for O2 chemisorption.
 Fig. 10  (a) The schematic diagram of the formation of hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires. (b) CV curves of AC, LSCO nanoparticles + AC, and hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires + AC. (c) ORR and OER polarization curves of AC, LSCO nanoparticles + AC, and hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires + AC on glassy carbon electrodes at 400 rpm rotation rates.160 
A composite electrode based on a core–corona structural bifunctional catalyst that consisted of LiNiO3 as the core supported on the nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube (NCNT) displayed high catalytic activity for the OER and ORR in Zinc–air batteries.161 The geometric confinement of the metallic oxide by an NCNT corona component could enhance the interfacial contact between the metal oxide and the conductive carbon, which suppressed the dissolution and agglomeration of oxide nanoparticles, ultimately enhancing the electrocatalytic activity and stability. Chen and co-workers162 prepared a novel LaCoO3/N-doped reduced graphene oxide (LaCoO3/N-rGO) nanohybrid with improved performances as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the ORR and OER. Improved durability and more rapid OER rate have been observed for LaCoO3/N-rGO compared to those of the benchmark OER electrocatalyst RuO2. The amended ORR and OER electrocatalytic performances for LaCoO3/N-rGO originated from the reduced size of LaCoO3 on rGO, reinforced synergistic effect between LaCoO3 and rGO, efficient N doping, and significantly low ohmic and kinetic impedances. Kim et al.163 designed a new composite catalyst with excellent bifunctional activities toward both ORR and OER consisting of a nanorod-type Nd0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ perovskite and IGnPs via a simple ultrasonication method which displayed remarkable cell performance, and exceptionally high stability for hybrid Li–air batteries. Hence, the fabrication of the hybrid perovskite catalysts with a uniform mixture at the nanoscale is essential for high catalytic performance. Although the perovskite structures have been progressively modified by various substitutions and defects to enhance the bifunctional activity, a more unified approach is required to further increase the activity and durability of these perovskites.
5.3. Layered double hydroxide (LDH)
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are promising 2D layered materials that have attracted increasing interest in the field of catalysis due to their unique layered structures, low cost, tunable composition, and high surface area which are favorable for the diffusion of water molecules and fast release of gaseous products.164–166 Several LDH-based binary catalyst systems (e.g., NiFe,167 CoFe,168 and CoMn169 ) have been studied for the efficient OER along with bifunctional catalysts for water splitting. For example, Yu et al.170 developed a safe and low-cost approach for the synthesis of highly efficient three-dimensional bifunctional catalysts based on core–shell nanostructures, in which few-layer NiFe LDH nanosheets (NSs) were grown on Cu nanowire cores supported on Cu foams, for the OER and HER. Fig. 11a illustrates that the Cu foam was used as the substrate and Cu(OH)2 nanowires (NWs) were initially synthesized to form CuO NWs, and then Cu NWs were obtained by the electroreduction of CuO. Finally, few-layer NiFe LDH NSs were electrodeposited on the Cu NWs, leading to the formation of the self-supported 3D core–shell Cu@NiFe LDH catalyst. EDS mapping analysis (Fig. 11b) identified the presence of core–shell structure, which clearly showed that copper was in the central part while both nickel and iron were homogeneously distributed throughout the whole composite.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the bifunctional catalytic activity on the self-standing 3D core–shell Cu@NiFe LDH electrocatalysts. (b) DF-STEM image of Cu@NiFe LDH with the corresponding elemental mapping. (c) HER polarization curves and overall water splitting performance of Cu@NiFe LDH conducted in 1 M KOH. (d) Comparison of the required voltage at a current density of 10 mA cm2 for the Cu@NiFe LDH catalyst with other state-of-the-art noble metal free bifunctional catalysts.170 

Fig. 11c shows the high HER activity of Cu@NiFe LDH catalysts and overpotentials of 116 and 192 mV to achieve current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, which were comparable to the highly efficient HER catalyst, Cu foam supported NiMo alloy catalyst in alkaline media.171 For overall water splitting, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 can be achieved at a voltage of 1.54 V, which was much better than the benchmark of IrO2(+)//Pt(−) electrodes at 10 mA cm−2 (1.63 V) as shown in Fig. 11d. Due to the 3D hierarchical nanoarchitecture with large surface areas, fast electron transport and open channels for effective gas release, the resulting 3D self-standing Cu@NiFe LDH catalysts displayed exceptional OER activity as well as excellent HER performance in an alkaline medium. Liu et al.172 prepared NiCo-LDH ultrathin nanosheets on a nickel foam (NiCo-LDH/NF) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst by a facile and scale-up fabrication strategy for overall water splitting. NiCo-LDH/NF demonstrated excellent water splitting performance, achieving a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.66 V. Thus, the synthesis of the hierarchical 3D porous structure composed of 2D ultrathin nanosheets in NiCo-LDH/NF opened an exciting novel approach to explore non-precious and environmentally friendly metal alloys for the large-scale production of hydrogen fuel. Wang et al.173 fabricated a novel hierarchical hybrid electrode based on NiFe-LDH ultrathin sheets on NiCo2O4 nanowires assembled from thin platelets with a Ni foam as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst toward overall water splitting. Due to the unique hierarchical architecture in which the catalytic metal sites were more accessible and the strong chemical coupling between NiCo2O4 and NiFe-LDH at the interface, the hybrid electrode showed superior catalytic activity for both OER and HER, achieving a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low cell voltage of 1.60 V which is comparable to Pt and RuO2. Wei and co-workers174 also fabricated monolithic-structured ternary NiCoFe LDH thin films onto 3D conductive Ni foams as freestanding bifunctional electrocatalysts for the OER and HER with a low cell voltage of 1.62 V to achieve a 10 mA cm−2 water-splitting current in 1.0 M KOH at a very low activation energy of 21.0 kJ mol−1. The mesoporous LDH arrays have fully exposed and highly active sites for electrochemical reactions, while the Ni foam substrate served as a current collector, as well as provided a smooth diffusion path for gaseous products. Moreover, the moderate Co dopant efficiently enhanced the electrical conductivity of the LDH phase which in turn increased its intrinsic activity. Although LDHs were considered as a promising bifunctional catalysts toward overall water splitting, the extremely low conductivity of LDHs seriously hinders the electron transfer and degrades the electrocatalytic performance. Subsequently, LDH-based hybrid catalysts were synthesized on carbon nanotubes or electrodeposited on glassy carbon, 3D carbon network, carbon nanoframe, etc.175–177 For example, Hou et al.178 reported the synthesis of NiFe LDH nanosheets on exfoliated graphene foil and used them as a 3D electrode for overall water splitting, which achieved a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at 1.71 V in an alkaline electrolyte. A non-precious, carbon supported NiFe-LDH bifunctional (ORR and OER) electrocatalyst was reported by Strasser and co-workers179 with high catalytic reactivity and stability, used in the oxygen electrodes of unitized reversible fuel cells/electrolyzers or rechargeable metal–air batteries. Rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) measurements of NiFe-LDH/C revealed a high faradaic selectivity for the four electron pathways, while subsequent continuous membrane assembled electrode tests in reversible electrolyzer cells confirmed the excellent catalyst reactivity rivaling the state-of-the-art combination of iridium (OER) and platinum (ORR). Huang and co-workers180 developed a cost effective strategy for fabricating Ni5Fe layered double hydroxide@NF (Ni5Fe LDH@NF) as a superior bifunctional water splitting electrode, exhibiting low overpotentials of 210 and 133 mV toward both OER and HER at 10 mA cm−2 under alkaline conditions. Moreover, Ni5Fe LDH@NF showed an appealing potential of 1.59 V at 10 mA cm−2 and also superior durability at a high current density of 50 mA cm−2 for overall water splitting. Recently, Jia et al.181 adopted an exfoliation method to fabricate single layered NiFe LDH on defective graphene for overall water splitting. Due to the numerous exposed edges of single layered nanosheets and synergetic effects of the composites, the NiFe LDH bifunctional catalyst can achieved a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at a voltage of 1.5 V, which has been the best for overall water splitting to date. However, the exfoliation method is complicated and expensive, which makes it incompatible for practical application. Despite this significant progress, the development of alternative bifunctional electrocatalysts with low overpotential and long-term stability is highly desirable.
6. Transition metal phosphides
Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) have received intense attention due to its abundance in the Earth's crust and comparable catalytic properties to noble metals.182,183 Until now, six different transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mo and W) are found to form TMPs which can be used for electrochemical hydrogen evolution.184–186 The catalytic activity of TMP catalysts was mainly ascribed to the proper surface of proton acceptor and hydride acceptor sites, resulting in moderate bonding between phosphorus in the structure and reaction intermediates in water splitting.187 Among these electrocatalysts, cobalt-based phosphides (including Co2P, CoP, CoP2, and CoP3) have been widely studied as HER and OER bifunctional electrocatalysts due to their excellent electrical conductivity and good durability both in acidic and basic media.47,188–190 For example, Li et al.191 reported hollow polyhedral CoP as a superior bifunctional electrocatalyst for the HER and OER and templated by co-centered metal–organic frameworks through simple oxidation and phosphorization calcinations (Fig. 12a). The Tafel slope for the CoP hollow polyhedron was 59 mV dec−1 lower than that for CoP particles of 77 mV dec−1, and the calculated exchange current density of the CoP hollow polyhedron was 0.037 mA cm−2, significantly higher than the CoP particles (0.005 mA cm−2) indicating a more efficient HER process on the CoP hollow polyhedron through the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism with a desorption process as the rate-determining step (Fig. 12b).192 The CoP hollow polyhedron has a large specific surface area and high porosity with rich catalytic active sites and showed excellent electrocatalytic performances for both HER and OER in acidic and alkaline media and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 159 and 400 mV, respectively. Fig. 12c shows the durability of CoP catalysts, even after 3000 potential sweeps. The polarization curve of the CoP hollow polyhedron exhibited negligible loss compared to the initial one and a 20 h static overpotential (η = 159 mV) electrolysis displayed a stable current density over the entire time for the CoP hollow polyhedron (Fig. 12c, inset). Schaak and co-workers193 further developed a general strategy for the synthesis of TMP electrodes based on the reaction of commercially available metal foil (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and NiFe) with various organophosphine reagents. Fig. 12d–f show the SEM images of as prepared NiFeP, Fe2P and Cu3P phosphide films. The Cu3P film was dense and composed of highly faceted and oriented crystals in contrast to the more porous surface of NiFeP, which was composed of fused bundles of microplatelets. The as-prepared phosphide electrodes were found to exhibit excellent electrocatalytic HER and OER performance under both acidic and alkaline conditions. The NiFeP, Co2P, and Fe2P electrodes required overpotentials of −143 mV, −174 mV, and −191 mV, respectively, to reach a cathodic current density of −10 mA cm−2 under acidic conditions as shown in Fig. 12g. Under alkaline conditions, the phosphide samples exhibited moderate activities and stabilities (Fig. 12h). Both the Co2P and Ni2P films required overpotentials of around −183 mV and −200 mV, respectively, to reach a current density of −10 mA cm−2, while less active catalyst, such as NiFeP and Fe2P required overpotentials of −255 mV and −300 mV, respectively, to reach a current density of −10 mA cm−2. The phosphide samples also demonstrated high electrocatalytic activity for the OER (Fig. 12i). NiFeP required an overpotential of 277 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 whereas the Ni2P, Co2P and Fe2P samples required overpotentials of only 339 mV, 367 mV, and 390 mV, respectively. This indicates that the combined presence of Ni and Fe atoms typically leads to significant improvements in electrocatalytic performance.194,195
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagrams to illustrate the HER and OER catalytic principles on CoP hollow polyhedra. (b) Tafel plots of CoP particles, CoP hollow polyhedron, and Pt/C. (c) Polarization curves of the CoP hollow polyhedron before and after potential sweeps (+0.1 to −0.6 V vs. RHE) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in a N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Inset: Time dependence of the current density for the CoP hollow polyhedron.191 (d–f) SEM images for NiFeP, Fe2P, and Cu3P films. Polarization data for the HER in (g) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (h) 1 M KOH for a series of metal phosphide films, along with the untreated metal foil and a Pt mesh electrode for comparison. (i) Polarization data for the OER in 1 M KOH for different metal phosphide films.193 
Sun et al.196 fabricated porous Co–P/NC nanopolyhedra composed of CoPx (a mixture of CoP and Co2P) NPs embedded in N-doped carbon matrices as electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. The superior activity (to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at low overpotentials of −154 mV for HER and 319 mV for OER) and stability of Co–P/NC originated from its 3D interconnected mesoporosity with high specific surface area, high conductivity and synergistic effect of CoPx encapsulated within N-doped carbon matrices. Remarkably, the Co–P/NC-based alkaline electrolyzer could reach 165 mA cm−2 at 2.0 V which was higher than that of the Pt/IrO2 couple. Zhong et al.197 also reported a unique nitrogen-rich sandwich-architectured catalyst with the coexistence of Co2P and CoxN crystal phases (CoNP@NC/NG) as a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst with superior positive onset potential, large kinetic current density, and exceptional stability toward both ORR and OER, compared with Pt/C and state-of-the-art nonprecious catalysts. A multifunctional carbon cloth supported cobalt phosphide (CoP@CC) electrocatalyst can be utilized for both efficient overall water splitting (HER and OER in an alkaline environment) and Zinc–air batteries.198 Wu et al.199 explored metal–organic framework (MOF) derived porous cobalt poly-phosphide (CoP3) concave polyhedra as superior bifunctional electrocatalysts for the HER and OER. CoP3 concave polyhedra displayed excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability towards the HER and OER in both acidic and alkaline media, with the Tafel slopes of 53 mV dec−1 and 76 mV dec−1 and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at the overpotentials of −78 and 343 mV for the HER and OER, respectively, comparable to those of the commercial precious metal catalysts. Ledendecker et al.200 employed nickel phosphide (Ni5P4) as an active catalyst for the HER and OER in a strongly acidic and alkaline environment superior to pristine nickel or platinum. Ni5P4 as a bifunctional catalyst was demonstrated with 10 mA cm−2 achieved below 1.7 V for the overall water splitting reaction, making it an ideal candidate for practical water splitting devices. You et al.10 developed a template-free electrodeposition of porous nickel microspheres on a nickel foam followed by phosphidation to fabricate three-dimensional hierarchically porous urchin-like Ni2P microsphere superstructures anchored on a nickel foam (Ni2P/Ni/NF) as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the HER and OER in an alkaline electrolyte. Ni2P/Ni/NF reached a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of only −98 mV for HER and showed excellent OER activity with small overpotentials of 200 and 268 mV to reach 10 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively. The high catalytic activity originated from hierarchically macroporous superstructures with a 3D configuration which can reduce ion transport resistance and facilitate the diffusion of gaseous products (H2 and O2). When Ni2P/Ni/NF was also used as the electrocatalyst for the cathode and anode, a water splitting electrolyzer was able to reach 10 and 100 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH at cell voltages of 1.49 and 1.68 V, respectively, with robust durability. Schäfer et al. discovered AISI Ni42 steel as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the HER and OER upon harsh anodization and γ-NiO(OH) and FeO(OH) have been proposed as the catalytically active OER species and NiO was the catalytically active HER species.201 Furthermore, the carbon fiber paper (CP) integrated Ni–P electrode also exhibited superior catalytic performance toward the HER in both acidic and alkaline solutions with small overpotentials of 162 and 250 mV, respectively, attaining a cathodic current density of 100 mA cm−2 and an exceptionally high OER current of 50.4 mA cm−2 was achieved at an overpotential of 0.3 V in 1.0 M KOH. Additionally, the electrode can be sustained at 10 mA cm−2 for 180 h with negligible degradation, showing outstanding durability. A full alkaline electrolyzer was constructed using two identical CP@Ni–P electrodes as the cathode and anode, which displayed overall water splitting with an efficiency as high as 91% at 10 mA cm−2 for 100 h.202 Recently, Wu et al.203 also fabricated self-supported porous cobalt poly-phosphide nanoneedle arrays on carbon fiber paper with a large specific surface area and high porosity, which exhibited superior bifunctional electrocatalytic activity and durability for both the HER and OER. It has been shown that Co doping in Ni2P and their hybridization with reduced graphene oxide effectively enhanced the catalytic activity for both HER and OER through faster charge transfer and high surface active sites.204 The Co-doped catalysts might deliver the moderate trapping of atomic hydrogen, and the facile desorption of the generated hydrogen due to the H-poisoned surface active sites of Ni2−xCoxP under the real catalytic process has been proposed by DFT calculations. A stabilized current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.59 V over 75 h and a faradaic efficiency of ≈100% for an overall water splitting have been achieved by the NiCoP/rGO couple in a two-electrode system in 1.0 M KOH. Ren and co-workers205 reported Ni2P nanosheet arrays on a three-dimensional Ni foam (NF) as a highly active electrocatalyst for both HER and OER in basic media. The as-prepared Ni2P-NF composite displayed remarkable OER catalytic performance which requires a cell voltage of 1.63 V to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and stability for longer duration. Chen et al.206 developed three-dimensional porous Ni/Ni8P3 and Ni/Ni9S8 as self-supported bifunctional electrodes for direct water splitting with excellent activity toward the OER and HER in alkaline media. Furthermore, an advanced water electrolyzer was fabricated through exploiting Ni/Ni8P3 as both anode and cathode, which required a cell voltage of 1.61 V to deliver a 10 mA cm−2 water splitting current density which was significantly better than that of the noble metal benchmark-integrated Ni/IrO2 and Ni/Pt–C electrodes. Duan et al.207 conducted a combined experimental and computational study on a rhodium phosphide (Rh2P/C) electrocatalyst with low metal loading in the form of nanocubes dispersed on high-surface-area carbon for the HER and OER. Moreover, the Rh2P/C electrocatalyst performed well in both acidic and alkaline media, showing higher activity compared with Rh/C and Pt/C. The combined studies suggested that surface phosphorus plays a crucial role in determining the robust catalyst properties. The atomic structure of the Rh2P NCs was directly observed by annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM), which revealed a phosphorus-rich outermost atomic layer as shown in Fig. 13a–d. Fig. 13a and c show the ADF-STEM images of two Rh2P NCs oriented along the [001] direction in which the P and Rh atoms were separated in two different columns. Fig. 13b and d display enlarged images of the surfaces, where the outermost atoms are located at the P lattice positions and appear lighter than those in the sublayer.
 Fig. 13  ADF-STEM imaging and calculated surface free energies of the Rh2P NCs. (a, c) ADF-STEM images of two individual Rh2P NCs. Colored frames feature near-surface regions. (b, d) Enlarged image of the frames. The arrows in the intensity profile on the right side of (d) point out the intensity of P columns. The insets in (b–d) display atom model projections along the [001] axis. Scale bars, 1 nm. (e) Calculated surface energies of Rh and P terminations of Rh2P NCs as a function of P chemical potential. The dashed vertical lines indicate the allowed range of the phosphorus chemical potential, using 1/4E (P4, white phosphorus) as zero reference. (f, g) Schematic diagrams of Rh-terminated and P-terminated surfaces, respectively. The cyan spheres indicate Rh atoms, and the magenta spheres indicate P atoms.207 
Statistical estimation based on eight Rh2P NCs showed that approximately 67% of the surface atoms are phosphorus, suggesting that the outmost atomic layer of Rh2P NCs was P-rich. Fig. 13e shows the calculated surface free energies of Rh and P terminations by using periodic density functional theory. The P-terminated surface (Fig. 13g) was more stable than the Rh-terminated surface (Fig. 13f) in the whole range of phosphorus (P) chemical potentials from P-rich to P-poor boundaries, indicating that P prefers the surface position. This result is well consistent with the ADF-STEM observations. The near surface structure and composition were critical determining factors in revealing the high performance of the Rh2P NC catalyst. Very recently, Zhang and co-workers208 fabricated a Ni/Ni2P inverse opal architecture by surface engineering with excellent bifunctional electrocatalytic performance for both the HER and OER. An alkaline electrolyzer using the two 3D structured electrodes could split water at 20 mA cm−2 with a low voltage of −1.52 V for 100 h which was even superior to that of the noble metal catalyst couple (IrO2–Pt/C).
7. Transition-metal-based sulfides
A significant effort has been made in the field of transition-metal-based sulfides (TMSs) to develop cost-effective catalysts. In particular, sulfide-based nanomaterials exhibited great potential as bifunctional electrocatalysts due to their unique structure and high concentration of defect sites.209,210 Cobalt sulfides with different phases such as Co9S8, Co3S4, and Co1−xS have been investigated as ORR and OER catalysts.211,212 Ni-based electrocatalysts have also been intensively studied as low-cost HER and OER catalysts. For instance, Wang and co-workers213 developed a NiS microsphere film on a Ni foam (NiS/Ni foam) via a sulfurization reaction as an efficient electrocatalyst, and reached 20 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 158 mV for the HER and 50 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 335 mV for the OER in 1.0 M KOH. Moreover, the bifunctional NiS/Ni foam electrode delivered a high-efficiency alkaline water electrolyzer with 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of only 1.64 V, which could be promising in water splitting devices for large-scale hydrogen production. In another example, Sun and co-workers found that a 3D electrode composed of NiSe nanorods/Ni foam could serve as a high-performance OER electrocatalyst, with an overpotential of 270 mV to achieve 20 mA cm−2, and which was also highly efficient for catalyzing the HER.214 Recently, Zhu et al.215 fabricated needle array and leaf pattern of 3D Ni3S2 superstructures on nickel foams through an in situ chemical etching method which can be used as effective binder-free electrodes for the HER and OER from electrocatalytic water splitting. As shown in the SEM images of Ni3S2 superstructures (Fig. 14a), nickel foams were fully covered with uniform needle arrays with an average length of 1.4 mm and an average thickness of 400 nm. Moreover, leaf-like ensembles of Ni3S2 superstructures were also observed from SEM images (Fig. 14b) with branched leaflets that can grow up to 5.2 mm in length. This anisotropic growth involves chemical dissolution, in situ nucleation and re-deposition processes, which endow the as-fabricated Ni3S2 with large surface areas and warrant firm adhesion to the nickel foams. Elemental mappings of the needle arrays showed an even dispersion of Ni and S elements and also confirmed the successful formation of nickel sulfide on nickel foams (Fig. 14b). Fig. 14c shows that a current density of 10 mA cm−2 can be retained for 12 h by both samples, demonstrating their good durability. The inset photo taken at an overpotential of 0.185 V indicates a stable evolution of gas bubbles on the electrode surface. Park et al.216 reported the synthesis of CoSe2 and NiSe2 nanocrystals as excellent bifunctional catalysts for the simultaneous generation of H2 and O2 in water-splitting reactions. High-resolution TEM images revealed the spherical morphology of CoSe2 and NiSe2 NCs with an average size of 20 nm used as both anode and cathode in a two-electrode configuration overall water splitting in 1 M KOH (Fig. 14d). The water-splitting cell exhibited high performance, requiring a cell voltage of 1.6 V to afford the 10 mA cm−2 water-splitting current with vigorous gas evolution at both electrodes. NiSe2 NCs exhibited superior electrocatalytic efficiency in the OER, with a Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH, and the HER, with 44 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. In comparison, CoSe2 NCs are less efficient for the OER (50 mV dec−1), but more efficient for the HER (40 mV dec−1). CoSe2 NCs contained more metallic metal ions than NiSe2, which could be a possible reason for the improved performance in the HER. Chronoamperometric tests showed that the current attenuation is 0% and 6%, respectively, for 6 h at 1.8 V (OER) and −0.18 V (HER) (Fig. 14f). The higher catalytic activity of NiSe2 was attributed to the highly active oxide layers compared to those of CoSe2. The remarkable catalytic activity, low cost, and scalability of NiSe2 make it a promising candidate for practical water-splitting solar cells.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image and (b) elemental mapping of Ni3S2@NF. (c) HER performance of Ni3S2 NF with a digital photo of gas evolution. (d) TEM image of CoSe2 and STEM NiSe2 NCs. (e) LSV curves of CoSe2, NiSe2, Pt/C, and IrO2 for water splitting in a two-electrode configuration in 1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (f) Chronoamperometric responses recorded on NiSe2 at a constant applied potential of 1.8 V (for OER) and −0.18 V (for HER). Catalyst loading was 1 mg cm−2 for all samples.215 
To facilitate charge transport, other co-catalysts have been combined with metal chalcogenides to form highly active heterointerfaces which improved the kinetics and catalytic activity for the HER, OER and overall water splitting. A series of typical co-catalysts can be used, such as CdS, MoS2, Mo(1−x)WxS2, etc. Qu et al.217 prepared CdS quantum dot decorated Ni3S2 nanosheet flowers deposited on the plasma-treated nickel foam which demonstrated superior catalytic performance in alkaline electrolyzers with a 121 mV overpotential (at a current density of 10 mA cm−2) for the HER and the onset potential can be as low as 1.25 V for the OER which is substantially lower than the commercial IrO2 catalyst (∼1.47 V). Yang and co-workers218 found MoS2–Ni3S2 heteronanorods supported on a Ni foam as efficient and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts with low overpotentials (η10) of 98 and 249 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH for the HER and OER, respectively. Such superior catalytic performance for overall water splitting could be attributed to the MoS2–Ni3S2 interfaces with the favored chemisorption of H- and O-containing intermediates, the effective exposure of active interfaces in hierarchical nanostructures and the facilitated electron transport along 1D Ni3S2 that was anchored on the Ni foam substrate. Zheng et al.219 showed an extremely low overpotential of 98 mV for the HER and 285 mV for the OER at 10 mA cm−2 in an alkaline electrolyte using few-layered Mo(1−x)WxS2 hollow nanosphere-modified Ni3S2 heterostructures. The doping of W element improves the conductivity and charge-transfer ability of MoS2@Ni3S2 and the presence of the few-layered hollow structure of Mo(1−x)WxS2 enhances the active surface area, leading to the strong electronic interactions between Mo(1−x)WxS2 and Ni3S2. Hence, Mo(1−x)WxS2@Ni3S2 heterostructures were found to be highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. Zhang and co-workers220 also employed hydrangea-like NiCo2S4 hollow microspheres as an advanced electrocatalyst for the ORR and OER. Asiri and co-workers221 also used a NiCo2O4 nanowire array on carbon cloth (NiCo2O4 NA/CC) as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for water splitting with good durability and superior activity in 1.0 M KOH. Novel transition metal hydroxysulfides are also proposed as efficient bifunctional OER/ORR catalysts with the integration of hydroxides and sulfides at an atomic level in Zn–air batteries.222 A 3D hydroxysulfide monolith with anion-regulated NiFe hydroxysulfide nanosheets having abundant active sites and a unique structure exhibited superior electrocatalytic performance in the OER, HER, and ORR in an alkaline electrolyte.223 However, the poor conductivities of the TMSs have limited their overall electrocatalytic performance. Notably, formation of hybrid nanomaterial with the combination of TMSs with multiple heteroatom-doped carbon materials may improve electrocatalytic activity and durability.224–227 It has been reported that graphene codoped with heteroatoms (e.g., N, S, and P) causes a synergistic effect for enhanced catalytic activity by introducing a larger asymmetrical spin and charge density, which makes these catalysts non-electron-neutral and consequently favors the adsorption of oxygen/OH− and its reduction/oxidation. For example, cobalt–iron sulfides supported on doped mesoporous graphitic carbon was reported to exhibit a good electrocatalytic activity toward the ORR in an alkaline medium, with a positive half-wave potential (0.808 V) and a high diffusion-limiting current density and OER catalytic enhancement compared to their monometallic counterparts.228 Moderate substitution and good dispersion of iron in bimetallic sulfide composites were believed to have a positive effect on the adsorption and activation of oxygen-containing species, thus leading to ORR and OER catalytic enhancement. Additionally, the covalent bridge between active sulfide particles and mesoporous carbon shells provided a facile pathway for electron and mass transport. Hence, the intimate interaction renders prolonged electrocatalytic performances to the composite. In another example, Wu and co-workers229 found that N-, O-, and S-tridoped carbon-encapsulated Co9S8 nanomaterials could serve as a high-performance OER and ORR bifunctional electrocatalyst with small overpotentials, high anodic current densities, low Tafel slopes as well as very high (nearly 100%) faradaic efficiencies. The synergistic effects between the Co9S8 NP cores and the heteroatom-doped carbon shells in the nanomaterials generate excellent electrocatalytic activity. Notably, Xie and co-workers230 reported that the 3D nitrogen anion decorated on Ni3S2 could serve as an excellent bifunctional electrocatalyst for the OER/HER with extremely low overpotentials of 330 and 110 mV to reach a current density of 100 and 10 mA cm−2 for the OER and HER in 1.0 M KOH, respectively. Notably, integrating this electrocatalyst into an alkaline electrolyzer showed a low potential requirement (a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a very low cell voltage of 1.48 V) and high stability, which was superior to most of the state-of-the-art Ni-based electrode materials. The introduction of N anions significantly modified the morphology and electronic structure of Ni3S2, generated high surface active site exposure, and enhanced the electrical conductivity as well as the charge transfer capacity optimal HER Gibbs free energy () and water adsorption energy change () which induced high electrocatalytic activity towards both OER and HER under alkaline conditions. Very recently, Qiao et al.231 developed a hierarchical meso–macroporous structure-based bifunctional catalyst by embedding cobalt sulfide hollow nanospheres in nitrogen and sulfur co-doped graphene nanoholes (Co1−xS/N–S–G) which showed high ORR catalytic activity, with a half-wave potential 30 mV more positive and a diffusion-limiting current density 15% higher than those of a commercial Pt/C catalyst, and the catalyst was also highly active for the OER with a small overpotential of 371 mV for 10 mA cm−2 current density. The enhanced catalytic activity was obtained due to a synergistic effect, induced by the presence of multiple types of active sites, including cobalt sulfide hollow nanospheres, nitrogen and sulfur dopants, and possible Co–N–C sites, more edge defects associated with the existence of nanoholes on the graphene basal plane and the high surface area and efficient mass transfer arising from the hierarchical porous structure. Zhao and coworkers232 found that Co/Co9S8@S,N-doped porous graphene sheets derived from S, N dual organic ligand assembled Co-MOFs could efficiently help the electrocatalysis of both HER and OER in an alkaline electrolyte with excellent stability. Song et al.233 showed that quaternary mixed nickel iron phosphosulfide (Ni1−xFexPS3) nanosheets as highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts with enhanced intrinsic activity and long-term stability and durability have great potential in overall water-splitting applications. They showed an overpotential of 72 mV vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) at a geometric catalytic current density of −10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 73 mV dec−1 which was among the best for HER catalysts under alkaline conditions and also showed an overpotential of 329 mV vs. RHE at a catalytic current density of 20 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1 for the OER. Besides, other metal chalcogenide films electrodeposited on a conductive Ti plate demonstrated high catalytic activity for both HER and OER. For instance, Liu et al.234 developed an amorphous CoSe film electrodeposited on a Ti mesh (a-CoSe/Ti) for a two-electrode alkaline water electrolyzer which affords a water-splitting current of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.65 V with strong long-term electrochemical stability. They also found an electrodeposited Co-doped NiSe2 nanoparticle film as a robust electrocatalyst which delivered 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 64 mV for the HER and 100 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 320 mV for the OER in 1.0 M KOH.235 In particular, both the HER and OER catalysts must work in either strongly acidic or alkaline solution to minimize the overpotentials, which is a huge challenge for most non-noble metal electrocatalysts due to their possible inactivity or instability under extremely acidic or alkaline environments. In this regard, Antonietti and co-workers236 developed a bifunctional electrocatalyst, nickel nitride (Ni3N) on a nickel foam with extremely low overpotential (∼50 mV), high current density and excellent stability for the HER in alkaline solution. In addition, the Ni3N/Ni foam demonstrated enhanced activity in the OER and ORR. The formation of the Ni3N/Ni(OH)2 catalyst results in lower overpotentials due to easier water dissociation on the nickel hydroxide layer, and the high catalytic activity and stability, along with the simple and facile fabrication process of this electrode, offered promising features as a cost-effective catalyst material toward water electrolysis applications. Furthermore, mesoporous nickel-iron nitride (Ni3FeN) was utilized as a cost effective and highly durable bifunctional electrocatalyst with a low overpotential (0.355 V) at 10 mA cm−2, a low Tafel slope (70 mV dec−1) for the OER, and a positive half-wave potential (0.78 V) for the ORR under alkaline solution.237 Jiang et al.238 reported a Fe2Ni2N material with a vertically aligned nanoplate array architecture as a bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting requiring 1.65 V for achieving 10 mA cm−2. The porous nanoarray architecture provided a large electrochemically active surface area for ion diffusion and facilitated fast electron transportation due to a direct contact with the substrate which in turn enhanced the catalytic activity of Fe2Ni2N with a small onset overpotential (ca. 200 mV for the OER and 110 mV for the HER), low Tafel slope (34 mV dec−1 for the OER and 101 mV dec−1 for the HER) and prominent electrochemical durability. Wang et al.239 prepared porous nickel–cobalt nitride nanosheets on a macroporous Ni foam which displayed good stability and superior catalytic performance toward both HER and OER with low overpotentials of 0.29 and 0.18 V, respectively, to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. This provides an efficient bifunctional catalyst with a 3D interconnected porous nickel–cobalt nitride network having exposed inner active sites for overall water splitting. Despite such promising reports, substantial efforts are still needed to improve the conductivity and activity of known non-noble metal-based or metal-free electrocatalysts as well as to find new nanomaterials with good catalytic performances for the ORR, OER and HER.
8. Carbon-based catalysts
Carbonaceous materials are considered as one of the most inexpensive catalyst alternatives to benchmark Pt catalysts. They can be utilized as catalyst supports or as metal-free catalysts with superior physicochemical properties such as wettability, large surface areas, high electrical conductivity and good stability under harsh environments which make them suitable in the electrocatalysis of oxygen.240,241 The catalytic activity can be significantly improved by doping the carbon-based nanomaterials with non-metal heteroatoms. After doping, the electronic structure of the carbon material can be modified while the defects, which often serve as the catalytic active sites, are also increased.242,243 Various carbon supports can be used for doping including mesoporous carbon, hollow sphere, graphene-like structures, carbon nanotubes, etc. The presence of nonmetal atoms, such as N, B, S, and P, into the sp2-hybridized carbon frameworks of graphenes or CNTs has been found to be effective in modifying their electrical properties and chemical activities.244–248 Dai and co-workers249 developed a facile and low cost method for the scalable fabrication of three-dimensional N and P co-doped mesoporous nanocarbon (NPMC) foams by the pyrolysis of polyaniline (PANi) aerogels synthesized in the presence of phytic acid (Fig. 15a). Initially, aniline monomers were polymerized in the presence of phytic acid to produce a PANi hydrogel which was further converted to aerogel, and subsequent pyrolysis of the PANi aerogel led to the one-step formation of an NPMC foam as shown in Fig. 15b (heated at 1000 °C, represented as NPMC-1000, surface area of 1548 m2 g−1) and the individual mesoporous ligaments were highly interconnected into a hierarchical porous network. The as-prepared NPMCs showed efficient catalytic activities for both ORR and OER as bifunctional air electrodes in primary and rechargeable Zn–air batteries (Fig. 15c). Fig. 15d displays the polarization and power density curves for Zn–air batteries based on the NPMC air cathodes. The NPMC-1000 catalyst showed a current density of ∼70 mA cm−2 and a peak power density of ∼55 mW cm−2, comparable to those of a Pt/C catalyst (∼60 mA cm−2 and 50 mW cm−2). The high catalytic activity of an NPMC-1000 foam derives from its porous structure, which facilitated an efficient diffusion of O2 gas and electrolyte to the active sites. Additionally, multiple Zn–air batteries can be integrated into series circuits to meet specific energy needs for various practical applications. In fact, two Zn–air button batteries were connected in series to generate a sufficiently high OCP of ∼2.8 V to power different light-emitting diodes (Fig. 15e). The DFT calculations revealed that the N, P co-doping and graphene edge effects were essential for the bifunctional electrocatalytic activity of NPMC-1000 materials.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the N and P co-doped porous carbon (NPMC) electrocatalysts. (b) SEM image of NPMC-1000. (c) Schematic of the basic configuration of a primary Zn–air battery, NPMC used as an air cathode and coupled with a Zn anode and a glassy fibre membrane soaked with an aqueous KOH electrolyte. The enlarged part illustrates the porous air electrode loaded with an electrocatalyst, which is permeable to air. (d) Polarization and power density curves of primary Zn–air batteries using Pt/C, NPMC-900, NPMC-1000, and NPMC-1100 (NPMC prepared by heating at three different temperatures) as the ORR catalyst (mass loading of 0.5 mg cm−2) and 6 M KOH electrolyte. (e) Optical images of an LED (∼2.2 V) before and after being driven by two Zn–air batteries in series.249 
In another report, Lai et al.250 designed O, N, and P co-doped porous graphite nanocarbon as a bifunctional free-standing 3D electrode (ONPPGC/OCC) toward overall water splitting. The assembled alkaline water electrolyzer exhibited excellent activity by using ONPPGC/OCC for both the HER and OER catalyst, which could produce a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.66 V with superior stability. The outstanding water splitting electrocatalytic performance of ONPPGC/OCC could be explained by the unique 3D porous structure, enhanced accessible active sites, improved transport properties as well as the good electrical conductivity. Minett and co-workers251 prepared nitrogen-doped graphene containing a high atomic percentage of pyridinic N and graphitic N (9.22 at% nitrogen) used as an electrocatalyst for the ORR producing a high current density of −4.3 mA cm−2 and with OER activity generating a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.74 V vs. RHE which may be useful for developing nanostructured graphene-based advanced energy storage and conversion devices. A three-dimensional phosphorus and sulfur codoped carbon nitride sponge sandwiched with carbon nanocrystals (P, S-CNS) exhibited high surface area and superior ORR and OER bifunctional catalytic activities compared to Pt/C and RuO2, respectively, in terms of both limiting current density and onset potential.252
The distinct P, S-CN sponges were obtained via a pyrolysis and subsequent polymerization method (Fig. 16a). The SEM images revealed that P, S-CNS have a 3D randomly entangled tubular hierarchical network structure and elemental mapping revealed a uniform distribution of C, N, P, and S elements in P, S-CNS (Fig. 16b). P, S-CNS displayed outstanding catalytic activity toward both ORR and OER with the smallest overpotential and Tafel slope compared to significantly active electrocatalysts comprising metal oxides and noble metals. The trielectrode configuration of Zn–air batteries (Fig. 16c) showed significantly enhanced performance of the P, S-CNS battery, by optimizing catalyst loading on both the air cathodes and balanced reversible transfer. Fig. 16d displays the long-term charge/discharge stability tests of the trielectrode rechargeable ZABs associated with P, S-CNS air cathodes on a steady current density of 25 mA cm−2. The P, S-CNS air cathode demonstrated outstanding cycling stability for 100 h without any noticeable voltage variation above 500 charge/discharge cycles. The unique approaches for developing metal-free bifunctional electrocatalysts from nonmetal polymeric and carbonaceous materials were useful for clean electrochemical energy storage as well as conversion technologies. Recently, organic frameworks (MOFs, including zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs)) composed of metal centers and organic ligands with tunable porous structures have been employed as an ideal template to fabricate carbon-based catalysts.253 Zhang and co-workers254 also used silicoaluminophosphate (SAPO-34) zeolite crystals as the catalytic templates for the synthesis of hierarchical porous graphene cages consisting of micron-sized hollow cubes with mesoporous/nanoporous facets, and ultrathin walls that exhibited considerable reactivity for both ORR and OER. Xia and co-workers255 prepared cobalt sulfide/N, S codoped porous carbon nanocomposites by heating ZIF-67 in argon at three different temperatures (600, 800 and 1000 °C). The as prepared nanocomposites exhibited an overpotential of 0.47 V at 10 mA cm−2 for the OER, a high onset potential around −0.04 V vs. −0.02 V for the benchmark Pt/C catalyst towards the ORR and good stability. Hadidi et al.256 found that nitrogen-doped hollow mesoporous carbon prepared from the polymerization and carbonization of dopamine on a sacrificial spherical SiO2 template showed excellent catalytic activity for the ORR and OER. A high ORR onset potential of −0.055 V (vs. Hg/HgO) and excellent stability of as-prepared catalysts were obtained which approached the performance of Pt. The bifunctional activity was further applied in a practical Zn–air battery, which displayed a small charge–discharge voltage polarization of 0.89 V and high stability over repeated cycling. Kim et al.257 fabricated mesoporous carbon on nitrogen and sulfur co-doped graphene nanosheets (NSGC), which displayed high bi-functional catalytic activity (ORR and OER) due to the synergistic effect of the co-doping of sulfur and nitrogen as well as the presence of a hierarchical porous structure. The lithium–oxygen cell assembled with the NSGC-based air cathode provided a high initial discharge capacity of 11431 mA h g−1 and exhibited good cycling stability which may enhance the round-trip efficiency and cycle life of lithium–oxygen batteries. The remarkable performance was attributed to the synergistic effect between the mesoporous carbon and N, S co-doped graphene nanosheets. Qiao and co-workers258 developed cobalt and nitrogen codoped graphene with inserted carbon nanospheres as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for the OER and ORR which showed an overall oxygen electrode activity parameter (ΔE) as low as 0.807 V, which was much lower than that of Pt/C. Ma et al.259 prepared (Ni,Co)/CNT nanoaerogels derived from sustainable seaweed biomass after an ion exchange process and found that it exhibited a much smaller onset potential (0.87 V) than the state-of-the-art non-noble bifunctional catalysts (Fig. 17a–f). The FESEM image showed that Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/N-CNT-As was supported on the highly porous 3D NCNT-As (Fig. 17g). Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/N-CNT-As was used as a cathode catalyst to evaluate its performance in Zinc–air batteries. Fig. 17h represents the interior assembling construction of the cell using 6 M KOH with 0.2 M zinc acetate as an electrolyte to ensure reversible Zn electrochemical reactions at the anode. A split test cell was used for the rechargeable Zn–air battery test as shown in Fig. 17i. The stability experiment was performed by charging and discharging (300 s in each cycle) of the Zn–air battery at two different current rates (Fig. 17j). At a low current rate of 5 A g−1, Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/NCNT-As maintained the energy efficiency at 58.5% after prolonged cycling. Then it increased the current rate up to 10 A g−1; the energy efficiency still remained at 57.9% after 70 cycles. Notably, the presence of the ternary Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4 catalytic center for charge transfer and 3D hierarchical mesoporous hybrid framework for efficient mass transport enhanced the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematics showing the synthesis of P, S-CNS nanocatalysts. (b) SEM image of the P, S CNS catalyst and the elemental maps of C, N, P, and S of P, S-CNS (scale, 300 nm). (c) Schematic illustrations of trielectrode Zn–air batteries. (d) Three-electrode rechargeable Zn–air batteries of galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles with P, S-CNS as the bifunctional catalyst.252 
 Fig. 17  (a–f) Schematic representation of the synthesis of electrocatalysts and (g) FESEM image of Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/NCNT-As electrocatalysts. Rechargeable Zn–air batteries with a bifunctional Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/NCNT-As catalyst as an air cathode. (h) Schematic of the interior assembling construction of the cell. (i) Photo of rechargeable Zn–air battery testing device. (j) Performance of the battery charge–discharge cycling at 5 and 10 A g−1.259 
A nitrogen-doped coaxial carbon nanocable (CNT@NCNT) with the pristine CNTs as the core and the N-doped carbon layers as the shell exhibited higher ORR/OER current, ∼51 mV positively shifted onset potential, low peroxide generation, as well as lower overpotential due to accessible active sites rendered by the surface enriched dopant atoms and which is effective to catalyze the oxygen involved electrochemical reactions.260 Tang et al.261 introduced defect engineering on graphene and fabricated Co/N/O tri-doped graphene catalysts with highly active sites and hierarchical porous scaffolds with superior ORR/OER bifunctional activities suitable for rechargeable Zn–air batteries. On the basis of theoretical studies, the improved electrocatalytic activity of these materials could be attributed to the changes of the electronic structure by doping N, B, P and S into carbon nanomaterials, providing more active sites and enhancing the interaction between carbon structures and oxygen molecules.262 These abundant carbon nanostructures and their doping or surface modification with functionalities would be suitable for tailor-made catalytic applications. However, the dopant concentration in carbon-based catalysts is low (4–6 at% of N, 0–2.24 at% of B, and 1–2 at% of S), which may limit the further improvement of the catalytic activity of carbon-based catalysts. Unfortunately, the carbon rapidly decayed under anodic oxidizing conditions, which provides the oxygen electrode poor stability during the charge/discharge cycling in a rechargeable metal air battery.263
9. Novel hybrid catalysts
Incorporating metal/metal oxides into carbon materials such as porous carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene nanosheets, etc. can complement the catalytic activity of the metal as well as allow the immobilization of the metal catalysts on the carbon support for renewable energy applications.37,38 A considerable effort has been devoted to create such hybrid nanomaterials that contain a carbon layer as well as an inorganic layer. Liang et al.264 prepared a Co3O4/N-doped graphene hybrid material and used it as a high-performance bi-functional catalyst for the ORR and OER. TEM images showed the formation of Co3O4 NPs of ∼4–8 nm size on graphene nanosheets as shown in Fig. 18a. The inset of Fig. 18a showed the high resolution TEM image of the crystalline spinel structure of Co3O4 nanocrystals. The N-doping of graphene could generate stronger coupling between Co and graphene in Co3O4/N-rmGO; consequently, the N-groups on reduced GO serve as nucleation and anchor sites for Co3O4 nanocrystals. Co3O4/N-rmGO demonstrated superior catalytic activity for both ORR and OER, as a non-precious metal-based bi-functional catalyst as shown in Fig. 18b. A relatively more positive ORR onset potential and higher cathodic currents of Co3O4/N-rmGO in comparison with the physical mixture of Co3O4 and N-rmGO suggested synergistic ORR catalytic activity of Co3O4 and rmGO in the hybrid. Moreover, Co3O4/N-rmGO conferred higher OER currents than either free Co3O4 nanocrystals or Pt/C. The OER performance has been evaluated with a Co3O/N-rmGO catalyst onto a Ni foam at 1 mg cm−2 (Fig. 18c). A current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of 0.31 V (Fig. 18c) has been obtained for hybrid catalysts which is comparable to the best reported Co3O4 NP-based OER catalyst.265 Furthermore, the N-doping of graphene did not affect the OER activity and the Co3O4/rmGO hybrid showed only slightly lower OER activity than Co3O4/N-rmGO (Fig. 18c) but an exceptional ORR activity of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid catalyst was observed with a much smaller Tafel slope of 42 mV per decade at low over-potentials than that measured with the Co3O4/rmGO hybrid (54 mV per decade) in 0.1 M KOH. In another interesting example, Co3O4 nanocrystals embedded in N-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon layer/multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) hybrids were prepared by a facile carbonization and subsequent oxidation process of MWCNT-based metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) by Li et al.266 The organic ligands, MOFs, served as a nitrogen-doped source and were converted into a N-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon layer during carbonization. Further metallic cobalt cores in situ embedded in the carbon layer were achieved during the carbonization process; subsequently, such cobalt cores were transformed into Co3O4 NPs via a simple oxidation (Fig. 18d). Co3O4@C-MWCNTs are considered as a powerful bi-functional catalyst for both OER and ORR. Co3O4@C-MWCNTs showed ultrahigh ORR activity with an onset potential of 0.89 V which is much higher than those of Co3O4@C and the MWCNTs (Fig. 18e). The electron transfer number has been calculated to be 3.9 at 0.35–0.75 V from the slopes of Koutecky–Levich plots and the overall activity was comparable to the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Fig. 18f indicates that the compositional transformation of MOF-MWCNTs to Co3O4@C-MWCNTs could significantly improve the catalytic activity with a high onset potential and OER current while both MWCNTs and the MOF exhibited insignificant catalytic activity and the MWCNT-based MOF also displayed a low OER response with a high onset potential. Remarkably, the Co3O4@C-MWCNTs demonstrated superior OER activity with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an over-potential of ∼320 mV, lower than that of Co@C-MWCNTs (∼390 mV). This high catalytic activity was associated with the presence of CoIV as the active center for the OER. The exceptional catalytic activity of Co3O4@C-MWCNTs with low resistance originated from the increased electrical conductivity and also from a complex synergistic effect between strongly interacting Co3O4@C and MWCNTs. Li et al.267 prepared an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst based on cobalt NPs embedded in porous N-rich carbon (PNC/Co) derived from a cobalt containing MOF, which can serve as both an active cathode and anode materials to drive the overall water splitting in alkaline media with small overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and yields a high faradaic efficiency towards both the HER and OER. In another example, Jahan et al.12 found that a composite via the assembly of graphene oxide (GO) and copper centered MOF demonstrated excellent performance as a tri-functional catalyst in the three important electrocatalysis reactions of HER, OER, and ORR. The unique porous scaffold structure of the GO-MOF composites generated improved charge transport and synergistic interactions between GO and MOF which in turn enhanced the electrocatalytic activity and stability. In continuation, Hou et al.268 synthesized a hybrid electrocatalyst consisting of a nitrogen-doped graphene/cobalt embedded porous carbon polyhedron (N/Co-doped PCP/NRGO) through the simple pyrolysis of graphene oxide-supported cobalt-based zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (Fig. 18g). The FESEM image showed that the hybrid possesses a regular rhombic dodecahedral morphology composed of twelve equivalent rhombus faces, twenty edges and sixteen vertices with an average edge length of 500 nm and is composed of N/Co-doped PCP and NRGO nanosheets as shown in Fig. 18h. The N/Co-doped PCP/NRGO demonstrated exceptional electrocatalytic activities and the kinetics for the ORR followed a four-electron pathway with superior durability and excellent methanol tolerance (Fig. 18i). Moreover, the hybrid exhibited superior performance for the HER with a low onset overpotential (58 mV) and a stable current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 229 mV as well as good catalytic performance for the OER (overpotential of 1.66 V for 10 mA cm−2 current density) as shown in Fig. 18i and j. This dual-active-site mechanism originated from the synergic effects between N/Co-doped PCP and NRGO which are responsible for the excellent catalytic performance of the hybrid.
 Fig. 18  (a) Transmission electron microscopy image of a Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid deposited at low magnification. Inset: High magnification TEM images of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid. (b) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts (catalyst loading 0.24 mg cm−2 for all samples). (c) Oxygen evolution currents of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4/rmGO hybrid and Co3O4 nanocrystal loaded onto a Ni foam (to reach a high catalyst loading of 1 mg cm−2) measured in 1 M KOH. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co3O4@C-MWCNTs (the tetrahedral coordination of benzimidazolate linkers to the cobalt ions (i), the largest cage in the MOF with tetrahedra in blue (ii) and the topological view of the MOF (iii); hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). (e) ORR LSV curves of the MWCNTs, Co3O4@C, Co3O4@C-MWCNTs and 20 wt% Pt/C (scan rate: 5 mV s−1; rotation rate: 1600 rpm). (f) OER LSV curves of MWCNTs, MOF, MOF-MWCNTs, Co@CMWCNTs and Co3O4@C-MWCNTs in an O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1).266 (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis process of N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO. (h) FESEM N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO. (i) LSV curves of NRGO (1), N/Co-doped PCP (2), physical mixture (3), N/Co-doped PCP-RGO (4), N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO (5), and Pt/C (6) at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (j) Polarization curves of the NRGO (I), N/Co-doped PCP (II), N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO (III), and Pt/C (IV) at 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution for HER. (k) LSV curves of I, II, III, and IV at 5 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH solution for OER.268 
Ghosh et al.45 prepared hierarchical and controllable structures of Mn2O3 and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) supported Mn2O3 composites which demonstrated bifunctional catalytic activity toward the ORR and OER in alkaline media. The 3D assembled hierarchical architecture of Mn2O3 composed of rose- and petal-like nano-particle arrays and the interconnection of the rGO network, as well as the synergetic effects of rGO as a support, reveal the pronounced impact on the electrocatalytic activity of the Mn2O3 composites with high current density and excellent durability as a cathode material which is comparable with other electrocatalysts. The synthetic approach provides a general platform for fabricating low cost graphene supported metal oxides for alkaline fuel cells. Liu et al.269 prepared another multifunctional electrocatalyst based on metal (Ni, Co)–metal oxides/graphene nanocomposites. Other hybrid catalysts, such as Ni-NiO/NrGO and Co-CoO/N-rGO, demonstrated multiple functions to catalyze the OER, HER, or ORR in alkaline media. Ni-NiO/N-rGO outperformed most of the reported precious-metal-free catalysts for the OER while Co-CoO/N-rGO exhibited higher ORR activity, relative to Ni-based catalysts, and the ORR activity was further studied as air cathodes in a primary Zinc–air battery, achieving comparable performance to that of the Pt/C cathode. Hence the development of such multifunctional electrocatalysts with optimal catalytic activity by varying transition metals (Ni or Co) is suitable for large-scale application in electrochemical energy technologies. Zhang and co-workers270 reported that Co/CoO NPs immobilized on Co–N-doped carbon demonstrated trifunctional catalytic activities toward the OER, ORR, and HER and high performance in rechargeable Zinc–air batteries. Very recently, Dai and co-workers271 developed two-dimensional N, S co-doped graphitic sheets (SHG) having a unique hierarchical structure consisting of stereoscopic holes over the graphitic surface as a tri-functional catalyst with long-term stability in alkaline electrolytes. The presence of stereoscopic holes in SHG ensures a high surface area with abundant interfacial active sites for electrochemical reactions. The SHG exhibited an ORR half-wave potential comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C and showed a comparable OER activity to RuO2 nanoparticles with a reasonably good HER activity. Hence, the development of such low-cost carbon-based metal-free catalysts would be suitable for a large variety of applications, ranging from fuel cells to metal–air batteries to water splitting devices and so on. Transition metals and their derivatives (carbide, oxide, sulfide, phosphide, hydroxide, mixed-metal alloys, etc.) have been extensively investigated as either HER or OER catalysts. The development of transition metal-based bifunctional electrocatalysts with high activities toward both the OER and HER is considered as a promising way to lower the cost of water-splitting devices. Liu et al.11 also reported a series of high-performance bifunctional electrocatalysts based on transition metal NPs encapsulated in nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (M/N-CNTs, M = Fe, Co, and Ni). The Co/N-CNT hybrid showed efficient bifunctional catalytic performance and excellent stability towards both the ORR and OER which exceed those of the Pt/C and RuO2 catalysts and most of the other non-precious metal-based bifunctional electrocatalysts reported in the previous literature. Jin et al.272 reported a one-pot synthesis of cobalt–cobalt oxide/N doped graphene material which could also simultaneously promote the HER with a small onset potential of 85 mV, low charge-transfer resistance (41 Ω) and considerable stability, as well as the OER with a 0.26 V overpotential for a current density of 10 mA cm−2. However, the active components (including Co, CoO, and Co3O4) are complex and are not well defined. Zhang et al.273 discovered metallic nickel–iron alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in nitrogen doped bamboo-like carbon nanotubes as advanced catalysts for both OER and HER under alkaline conditions at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with 1.58 V and showed negligible degradation after 24 h of operation. Fan et al.274 reported that transition metal carbide nanocrystalline M3C (M: Fe, Co, Ni) encapsulated in graphitic shells supported with vertically aligned graphene nanoribbons (VA-GNRs) are synthesized by a hot filament chemical vapor deposition method (Fig. 19a). The SEM image of M3C-GNRs showed an ordered hybrid structure and these hybrids were identified as an active and stable bifunctional electrocatalyst for the OER and HER (Fig. 19b). The hybrid exhibited enhanced the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR with a positive onset potential (∼0.8 V), high electron transfer number (∼4) and long-term stability (Fig. 19c). The half-wave potentials at 1600 rpm are 0.78, 0.77, and 0.77 V for Fe3C-GNRs, Co3C-GNRs, and Ni3C-GNRs, respectively (Fig. 19d), compared to that of Pt/C (0.85 V). The M3C-GNR catalyst demonstrated superior HER activity with a large cathodic current density of 166.6, 79.6, and 116.4 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 200 mV, and a low onset overpotential of 32, 41, and 35 mV, for Fe3C-GNRs, Co3C-GNRs, and Ni3C-GNRs, respectively, as shown in Fig. 19e. Moreover, the chronoamperometric tests of M3C-GNR and Pt/C (20%) electrodes showed that no obvious loss of current density occurred along with increasing time for M3C-GNRs, indicating that the catalytically active phase remained intact during the alkaline leaching process (Fig. 19f).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic representation of the formation mechanism of nanocrystalline M3C (M: Fe, Co, Ni) on VA-GNRs. (b) Typical SEM image of M3C-GNRs with a mechanism diagram of the catalytic reactions. (c) LSV curves of M3C-GNRs (M: Fe, Co, Ni) and Pt/C at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (d) The corresponding j@0.5 V vs. RHE, half-wave potentials and JK of M3C-GNRs (M: Fe, Co, Ni) and Pt/C, j@0.5 V measured at 1600 rpm. (e) Polarization curves of the M3C-GNR (M: Fe, Co, Ni) electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4, along with VA-GNRs, and Pt wire for comparison. (f) Time dependence of the current static overpotential of 235 mV. Inset: enlargement of the area denoted by the dashed circle.274 
Very recently, an integrated three-dimensional electrode of carbon paper/carbon tubes/cobalt sulfide sheets (denoted as CP/CTs/Co-S) has been designed and fabricated by Wang et al.275 which exhibited high catalytic activity and stability toward both HER and OER in an alkaline medium for efficient overall water splitting. Xu et al.276 reported mixed metal oxides such as MnCo2O4 NPs supported on nitrogen enriched carbon nanofibers (NCF) with enhanced catalytic activity for the ORR and OER compared to commercial Pt/C catalysts. The improved electrochemical performance correlated well with the abundance of ORR-active graphitic-N sites in NCFs and the effective integration of MnCo2O4 NPs and NCF to synergize charge transfer and post-charge transfer electron conduction. Zhao et al.277 developed a new type of transition-metal-doped carbon/nitrogen (M/C/N) hybrid nanomaterial with two types of active center, the transition metal and a nitrogen atom, for the oxygen bifunctional activity (ORR and OER). A new series of efficient noble-metal-free hybrid bifunctional electrocatalysts based on carbon nanomaterials has also been developed.278 Tian et al.279 reported the in situ formation of nitrogen-doped graphene/carbon nanotube hybrids having superior electrocatalytic activity for the ORR/OER, even comparable to that of the commercial 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst with better durability and resistance to crossover effect. Zhu et al.280 prepared one-dimensional cable-like multiwall carbon nanotube/S, N co-doped carbon nanodot (MWCNT@S–N–C) hybrids as high performance bifunctional electrocatalysts. The catalysts exhibited an outstanding ORR activity with high limiting current density, strong immunity towards methanol crossover and long-term stability. On the other hand, MWCNT@S–N–C catalysts also demonstrated a higher activity toward the OER compared to the state-of-the-art IrO2 catalyst, demonstrating excellent overall bi-catalytic performance. The superior electrocatalytic activity originated from the synergistic chemical coupling effects between S and N, excellent reactant transport provided by the mesoporous structures and a high charge transfer rate driven by 1D MWCNTs, thereby generating a high performance bi-functional electrocatalyst for both ORR and OER. Manganese-based oxides (MnOx including α-, β-, γ-, δ-MnO2, and Mn2O3) have been considered as the outstanding ORR catalysts but due to the poor electronic conductivity, the relatively low OER kinetics of MnOx should be improved by combining with other cocatalysts with higher OER activity. A considerable effort has been made to prepare metal–metal oxide composites for electrocatalytic activity.281 Yoon et al.16 exploited two types of double-walled RuO2 and Mn2O3 composite fibers, i.e., phase separated RuO2/Mn2O3 fiber-in-tube (RM-FIT) and multicomposite RuO2/Mn2O3 tube-in-tube (RM-TIT), by using single-nozzle electrospinning followed by heating speed controlled calcinations as shown in Fig. 20a. After calcination with a different ramping rate (R), i.e., a low R (1 °C min−1, hereafter 1R), the phase separation between the core fibers (∼80 nm) and the shell tubes (∼220 nm) distinctively occurred. For RM-FIT, the longer heating time allowed the pre-emptive clustering of [Ru–Ox] species at the core region induced by the PVP assisted Ostwald ripening behavior and the inner gel acted as a carrier matrix for the [Ru–Ox] diffusion before the condensation of the hollow structure. Thus, crystallized RuO2 fibers were predominantly formed at the inner region of the fibers, and the residual [Mn–Ox] species were crystallized into Mn2O3 at the outer layer. Furthermore, with a high R (5R), the formation of RuO2 and Mn2O3 appears to be overlapped in RM-TIT due to the shorter duration time for calcination, which inhibited the spatial separation of the [Ru–Ox] and [Mn–Ox] species. Hence, the formation of the hollow structure is predominantly governed by the correlation of gas diffusion and gel contraction features, resulting in the RuO2/Mn2O3 composited tube-in-tubes (RM-TIT).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of RM-FIT and RM-TIT. LSV curves measured in (b) the ORR region and (c) the OER region of KB, RM-FIT/KB, RM-TIT/KB, and 20 wt% Pt/C used air electrodes in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The rotating speed for the ORR was 1600 rpm. (d) Proposed reaction mechanism of RM-FIT used electrodes during the operation of Li–O2 cells, which are represented by four states as (i) on discharging, (ii) discharged state, (iii) on recharging, and (iv) recharged state. The ex situ TEM images of (e) discharged and (f) recharged states in RM-FIT used electrodes. The dashed circles in TEM images (f) indicate the discharge products, Li2O2.16 
In the LSV curves for the ORR region, RM-FIT/KB and RM-TIT/KB showed a similar onset potential of around −0.02 V and a half-wave potential (E1/2) of −0.12 and −0.08 V (vs. Hg/HgO), which were more positive values than those of KB and the half-wave potential value was comparable to that of Pt/C as shown in Fig. 20b and c. In contrast, the Pt/C electrode displayed poor OER activities with an onset potential of 0.78 V, but RM-FIT/KB and RM-TIT/KB have improved onset potentials of 0.64 and 0.61 V, respectively. For RM-FIT, the outer Mn2O3 components catalyzed Li+ and O2 to form Li2O2 with the aid of electrons during the discharge reaction. After discharging, Li2O2 were mainly accumulated on the surface of the outer tubes due to the outstanding ORR properties of Mn2O3 (Fig. 20d). When the cell was charged, the inner part of the RuO2 components takes part in the OER to decompose Li2O2, but some Li2O2 on the outer surface of the RuO2 shells were insufficiently decomposed due to the relatively low OER catalytic activity of Mn2O3 (Fig. 20e). The most plausible models for the catalytic reaction mechanism of the RM-FIT-based air electrodes are proposed in Fig. 20f. More importantly, hybrid nanomaterials showed excellent electrocatalytic activities and kinetics for the ORR, HER and OER, which compared favourably with the Pt/C and RuO2/C catalysts, together with superior durability and excellent methanol tolerance which provide an enormous opportunity for the rational design of bifunctional catalysts for efficient air cathodes in Li–O2 batteries, large-scale fuel cells and water splitting technologies.282,283 The presence of the porous carbon structure, functionalization of materials with heteroatoms as well as other transition metal atoms and good contact between multi-components result in a high catalytic efficiency. In another example, Park et al.284 developed perovskite NP (La0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3)-nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube composites with excellent bifunctionality for the ORR and OER which make them suitable for rechargeable metal–air battery application. Liu and co-workers285 found that hybrid MnO2/Co3O4 nanomaterials exhibited enhanced bifunctional catalytic reactivity toward the ORR and OER in rechargeable Zinc–air batteries compared to MnO2 nanotubes or Co3O4 nanoparticles alone. Very recently, Zhang and coworkers286 discovered a unique approach using a photogenerated-carrier-driven strategy to enhance the electrocatalytic HER and OER activities of a Ni/NiO heterostructured ultrathin nanosheet array supported on a Ni foam. The transition-metal/semiconductor bifunctional electrocatalysts displayed a 10- and 2.6-fold enhancement of mass activity for the HER and OER, respectively, after exposure to light irradiation, and the increase in water-splitting activities can be attributed to the transfer of photogenerated electrons from excited NiO to HER-active Ni and the accelerated formation of OER-active NiIII/IV, respectively. Wang and co-workers287 prepared a hybrid bifunctional catalyst based on cobalt–cobalt oxide/N-doped carbon (CoOx@CN) which exhibited a small onset potential of 85 mV and considerable stability for the HER and a 0.26 V overpotential needed for the OER to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Tour and co-workers288 synthesized Mo2C nanocrystals anchored on vertically aligned graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) as hybrid nanoelectrocatalysts (Mo2C–GNR) which displayed highly active and durable electrocatalytic performance for the HER with an onset potential of 39 mV and a Tafel slope of 65 mV dec−1 as well as for the ORR with a high peak current density of 2.01 mA cm−2 and an onset potential of 0.93 V which is more positive vs. RHE, and long-term stability. Wang and co-workers289 showed the benefits from the strong coupling between Co2B and CoSe2 nanosheets in the hybrid Co2B/CoSe2 as an efficient OER catalyst which demonstrated a very low overpotential of 320 mV @ 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 56.0 mV dec−1 in an alkaline medium, and an overpotential of 300 mV can also be observed under similar conditions. Recently, Tu and co-workers290 prepared a hierarchical NiCo2O4/Ni2P bifunctional catalyst that catalyzed the OER with a low overpotential of 250 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline media and showed excellent catalytic activity for the HER to achieve 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of 45 mV. The synergetic effect between the NiCo2O4 “core” and the Ni2P “shell” results in dramatically enhanced catalytic activity and longer durability in both OER and HER compared to bare NiCo2O4 or Ni2P. Xu and co-workers291 reported a novel self-assembled hierarchical structure of Co3O4/CoMoO4 as bifunctional electrocatalysts and exhibited excellent electrocatalytic performances for the HER and OER of 143 and 244 mV, respectively, at 10 mA cm−2 in an alkaline solution. The enhanced catalytic activity arises from the synergistic effect of the hierarchical nanostructures having more reaction active sites and facile electron transfer. The B/N-codoped mesoporous nanocarbon supported Co(II)1−xCo(0)x/3Mn(III)2x/3S NPs displayed a superior ORR/OER bifunctional catalytic performance and comparable Zn–air battery performance with a current density of 180 mA cm−2 at 1 V to that of the Pt-based battery.292 The advanced performance of the bifunctional catalysts was associated with the beneficial role of the simultaneous formation of Mn(III) and Co(0) as well as the dispersed hybridization with the codoped nanocarbon support. Sun and co-workers293 fabricated another hybrid bifunctional ORR/OER catalyst based on CoO NPs embedded in three-dimensional nitrogen/sulfur co-doped carbon nanofiber networks having a high specific surface area and graphitization degree, which favors both mass transport and charge transfer for electrochemical reaction. Pei and co-workers294 tested both primary and rechargeable Zn–air batteries using La2O3/Co3O4/MnO2–CNTs hybrid nanocomposites as air electrodes which exhibited highly bi-functional catalytic activity for both ORR and OER during the discharge and charge processes in a rechargeable Zn–air battery. The hybrid bifunctional catalyst demonstrated an unprecedented small charge–discharge voltage polarization, high reversibility and high stability, suggesting that this battery can be used as a power source for portable electronics, electrical vehicles and other practical applications such as smart electronics and wearable electronic devices. Moreover, NiFe LDH NPs supported on Co, N codoped carbon nanoframes295 or Ni–Fe nitride nanoplates on N doped graphene296-based nanohybrids displayed excellent ORR/OER bifunctional catalytic activity for rechargeable Zinc–air batteries. Recently, notable efforts have been made for the development of graphene-based hybrid bifunctional electrocatalysts such as cobalt and nickel selenide nanowalls anchored on graphene,27 MOF based CoP/reduced graphene oxide,30 nitrogen-doped graphene/cobalt-embedded porous carbon polyhedron,35 CoMn2O4/N-doped graphene nanosheets,41 Co3O4/graphene,46 ruthenium and hydrated ruthenium oxide/graphene oxide,93 LaCoO3/N-doped rGO,163 CoFe-LDH/graphene,169 Ni-Fe hydroxide/graphene,176 Ni2−xCoxP/graphene,204 NiCo2S4/graphene,210 cobalt sulfide hollow nanospheres in N and S co-doped graphene nanoholes,231 Co/Co9S8/S,N-doped porous graphene sheets,232 metal (Ni, Co)–metal oxides/graphene,269 Ni–Fe nitride/N-doped graphene,296 amorphous bimetallic oxide–graphene (such as Fe0.5Co0.5Ox, Ni0.4Fe0.6Ox and Ni0.33Co0.67Ox),297 cobalt sulfide NPs on N and S codoped graphene oxide,298 copper(0) and nitrogen ligands incorporated in graphene as bioinspired copper composite catalyst,299 spinel ternary oxide material and sulfide materials consisting of nickel, manganese, and cobalt supported on reduced graphene oxide (rGO/NMC), etc.300 Besides, very recently, Suib and co-workers301 tested hierarchical mesoporous NiO/MnO2@PANI core–shell microspheres as highly efficient and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER and displayed a potential gap, ΔE, of 0.75 V to achieve a current of 10 mA cm−2 for the OER and −3 mA cm−2 for the ORR. The exceptional electrochemical performance of the catalyst might be associated with good electrical conductivity, high surface area, as well as the synergistic effect of the specific core–shell structure. This study opens a new avenue for the rational design of the core–shell structure catalysts for energy conversion and storage applications. Table 1 presents a summary of advantages and disadvantages of the ORR, OER and HER catalytic activities of the recently reported multifunctional catalysts. Conceptually, a significant number of electrocatalysts have been developed which are primarily focused on reducing material costs through the reduction of precious metal loading and replacing precious metal-based catalysts with transition metals or metal-free carbon-based catalysts to obtain comparable catalytic activity of precious metal benchmark Pt- and Ir-based catalysts. Consecutively, significant research efforts have been devoted for the development of hybrid multi-functional catalysts, consisting of both transition metal and carbon materials having superior catalytic activity compared to those of individual components.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of different multifunctional electrocatalysts




Materials
Advantages
Disadvantages




Metal and alloy-based materials
These catalysts have acceptable high activity for commercial use.
(i) Metal catalysts are very expensive and as platinum and iridium are both precious metals, this makes them undesirable for commercial use.



e.g. Pt, PtAu/C, Ag–Cu alloy, Au–Pd, Pt/Ir3(IrO2)7, Ni–Co–Ti alloy
(ii) Stability is still a big challenge to overcome, to achieve proper durability and long life for practical purpose.


(iii) Another big challenge is high oxygen reduction overpotential and the slow kinetics causing unacceptable power loss.



Non-precious metal

Compared to the typical precious metal catalysts, transition metal oxides (TMOs) are cheaper and require a facile synthetic method, making them more realistic for commercial use.
TMO catalysts often suffer from poor conductivity, and subsequently display inferior onset potentials and limiting current densities than the current precious metal catalysts.



e.g. MnO2, Mn2O3, Mn3O4, Co3O4, CoFe2O4, NiCo2O4, CuCo2O4, NixCo3−xO4, MnCo2O4, LaNiO3, LaCoO3
Their structural diversity, as well as their ability to be mixed, doped, and combined with other materials, is useful for catalytic application.


Co9S8, Co3S4, Ni3S2, Co1−xS, NiS/Ni foam
Transition metal sulphides (TMSs) have promising ORR and OER catalytic activity; low cost.
TMSs suffer from stability and conductivity problems.


Ni3FeN, Ni3N/Ni foam, Fe2Ni2N, Ni3N/Ni(OH)2
Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) have superior electrochemical activity; transition metal based; low cost.
TMNs are less common for bifunctional applications, as some have displayed degradation and corrosion at high anodic or cathodic potentials, which is undesirable for long-term ORR/OER cycling.


Carbon-based materials
Low-cost, extremely high surface area, excellent mechanical and electrical properties, sufficient stability under harsh environments and high functionality.
(i) Irreversible capacity loss, big voltage crosstalk, low density, carbon oxidation/corrosion, etc.



e.g. Graphene, CNTs, porous nanocarbon
Heteroatom-doped carbon showed remarkably improved catalytic activity and stability in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes.
(ii) Thermodynamically unstable nature of carbon materials (above 0.2 V in the presence of water); fuel cell performance losses due to the deterioration of the cathode carbon catalysts, especially during start-up/shutdown under the stringent conditions of automotive operation.


N, B, P, S doped carbon nanomaterials


Hybrid structure
Hybrid catalysts; showed synergistically enhanced ORR and OER or HER activities. Typically, the carbon material either acts as an electrical conductive support to help the dispersion of metal oxide to facilitate the charge transport of metal oxides or as an active catalyst with a high surface area.
Difficult to synthesize and control, but through systematic research, new synthesis techniques will facilitate the production of more hybrid catalysts including solvothermal, electrospinning, and deposition techniques performed at low temperatures.



e.g. RuO2/Mn2O3, graphene/MnO2/CNT, Ni-NiO/NrGO, Co3O4/N-doped RGO, Co3O4@C-MWCNTs, La2O3/Co3O4/MnO2–CNTs, NiO/MnO2@PaniCoFeLDH/graphene, Co/Co9S8/S,N-doped graphene sheets, etc.




10. Mechanistic understanding
The inability to identify the active site of catalysts has blocked the progress of designing advanced electrocatalysts. Consequently, the combination of theoretical analysis and experimental methods would provide an excellent understanding of electrocatalysis at the atomic level as well as a fundamental insight that can potentially be used to design improved electrocatalysts for the ORR, OER and HER.302,303 Various advanced tools, for example, high-resolution X-ray crystal structure analysis, extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), have been utilized in order to correlate the electronic structure with the activity of the electrocatalysts. For example, an ex situ method has employed using X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at the Mn K-edge to probe unoccupied Mn-4p orbitals in order to correlate the Mn valence with the OER and ORR activity.304,305 Horn and co-workers306 reported the valence changes at the OER- and ORR-relevant voltages of a layered manganese oxide film by using the X-ray absorption spectra using inverse partial fluorescence yield (IPFY) at the Mn L3,2-edges and partial fluorescence yield (PFY) at the O K-edge. The oxidation to a mixed Mn3+/4+ valence preceded the oxygen evolution at 1.65 V vs. RHE, while manganese reduced below Mn3+ and contained tetrahedral Mn2+ during oxygen reduction at 0.5 V vs. RHE. The pre-edge in the O K-edge XAS analysis provided the Mn–O hybridization, which was the highest for Mn3+ (eg1). Hence, the combined in situ experiments at the metal L- and oxygen K-edges are crucial to identify both the active valence during catalysis and the hybridization with oxygen adsorbates, critical to the rational design of active catalysts for oxygen electrocatalysis. Schuhmann and co-workers307 utilized scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) to determine a range of the important electrocatalytic parameters of bifunctional catalysts based on oxides of cobalt (CoxOy) and nickel (NixOy) embedded in nitrogen-doped carbon including the selectivity of the ORR, the initial mechanistic steps during the OER, and the onset potential for both ORR and OER in a single experiment. It would be possible to observe directly that prior to oxygen evolution, local depletion of oxygen occurs at the SECM tip during redox transition associated with metal oxyhydroxide formation, thus allowing the direct in situ observation of the initial mechanistic steps of the OER. Liu and co-workers308 reported the first experimental evidence of the origin of bifunctional ORR/OER catalytic activity of three-dimensional graphene nanoribbon networks (N-GRW) doped with nitrogen. Depending on the N dopant configurations, N-doped graphene has been shown both theoretically and experimentally to be either p-type for pyridinic N or n-type for quaternary/pyrrolic N.309,310 Mott–Schottky experiments confirmed the presence of both n-type and p-type domains in N-GRW catalysts with bipolar characteristics as the quaternary and pyridinic N were the dominating N components. Theoretical calculations have indicated that quaternary N at the edge of graphene could act as the most active catalytic site for the ORR by reducing the OOH intermediate adsorption energy.311,312 Moreover, the work function (Φ) of N-GRW calculated from the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra in valence band emission region measurement suggested that a relatively low energetic barrier for donating electrons from the surface of the catalyst to the adsorbed molecular oxygen, that favour ORR catalytic activity.313,314 Furthermore, X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy measurements have been performed on carbon and nitrogen to identify the active sites for the OER and ORR on the N-GRW electrode. A new peak in the nitrogen K-edge XANES spectrum of the N-GRW at the lower energy side of graphitic quaternary N (∼401 eV) has been observed which can be ascribed to the distortion of heterocycles caused by the adsorbed O* and OOH* intermediates on carbon atoms near the graphitic N. The experimental results suggested that the electron-donating quaternary N sites were responsible for the ORR, whereas the electron-withdrawing pyridinic N moieties in N-GRW served as the active sites for the OER. Consequently, the as-prepared N-GRW holds great potential as a low-cost, highly efficient air cathode in rechargeable metal–air batteries. Suib and co-wokers315 developed a facile approach for controlling the active sites of sulfur-doped carbon nanotube–graphene nanolobes for highly efficient ORR and OER bifunctional catalysis through a bidoping strategy that introduces stable sulfur–carbon active sites. The fluorescence emission of the sulfur K-edge by using XANES and scanning transmission electron microscopy electron energy loss spectroscopy (STEM-EELS) mapping and spectra confirms that increasing the incorporation of heterocyclic sulfur into the carbon ring of CNTs not only enhances the OER activity with an overpotential of 350 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, but also retains 100% of the stability after 75 h. Xia and Zhao316 conducted a combined study on dual-element-doped carbon nanomaterials as efficient bifunctional catalysts for the ORR and OER which correlated the doping structures to their catalytic activities. The improved ORR/OER activity of codoped carbon-based catalysts could be attributed to the interactions of dual dopants within the carbon structures. During doping with two heteroatoms (e.g., N and P) in graphitic structures, p-electron clouds overlapped and interacted with each other, generating more active sites on neighboring carbon atoms as shown in Fig. 21a–d, compared to the single-element-doped graphene (Fig. 21e and f). Compared with single element doping, the dual-element doping leads to more active sites for the ORR and OER.
 Fig. 21  Differential charge density (between codoped and undoped graphene) and overpotential distribution of (a) N–P codoped, (b) P–N codoped, (c) N–N codoped, (d) P–P codoped, (e) single P-doped, and (f) single N-doped graphene nanoribbons with a zigzag edge. Brown and white balls refer to C and H atoms, respectively. Yellow and blue colors indicate the negative and positive values of electron quantities. The ORR (in red) and OER (in black) overpotentials of the active sites (U < 1.5 V) are also listed on them. (g) ORR and (h) OER minimum overpotentials of N–X codoped graphene (X = N, B, P, S, and Cl), normalized by the corresponding ORR/OER overpotentials for single X-doped graphene at the same active sites, versus the distance between dopants N and X.316 
When the electronegativity of the dopants (e.g., B, P, and S) is smaller than that of N, these dopants carry positive charges, and these codoping clusters may generate positive charges on neighboring carbon atoms that are potentially active sites for the ORR and OER. Moreover, the distance between the dopants also has a strong effect on the overall catalytic activity of the doped carbon. The ORR/OER overpotentials of the most active centers have been calculated as a function of the distance between the N and X dopants (Fig. 21g and h). The large variations in the ORR/OER within 4 Å can be attributed to the edge effects, and with increasing distance between the dopants, the ORR/OER overpotentials for (N–N) doping hold a small variation, but for (N–X) doping, the overpotentials are modified significantly.317 While the overpotentials for N–P and N–Cl doping decreased, those for N–S and N–B doping increased with increasing distance. Hence, to obtain a larger synergistic effect, the distance between N and Cl (ΦCl > ΦN) should be large, while N and B (ΦB < ΦN) should be located more closely. Thus, the synergistic effect of codoping within a certain distance between the codopants allows the rational design of new multifunctional catalysts.
Additionally, modern computational methods like DFT calculations are also used to offer sufficiently accurate estimations of key parameters necessary for the rational design of electrocatalysts, in particular, the energy of interaction between the reaction intermediates and catalyst surfaces.318–320 In general, the DFT calculations can be used to create surface Pourbaix diagrams, which define the surface oxidation and dissolution processes at a given pH and potential, and to identify thermodynamically stable surface phases under reaction conditions, the catalytic activity of those surfaces, and the associated mechanistic pathways for the reactions of interest. Jaramillo and co-workers303 described DFT calculations in combination with electrochemical characterization to elucidate the active surfaces and reaction mechanisms for the ORR and OER on a bi-functional Mn oxide catalyst. It has been identified that 1/2 ML HO* covered Mn2O3 and O* covered MnO2, as the active surfaces for the ORR and OER, respectively. The ORR occurred through an associative mechanism and its overpotential was highly dependent on the stabilization of the intermediates through hydrogen bonds with water molecules, while the OER occurred through a direct recombination mechanism and its major source of overpotential was the scaling relationship between the HOO* and HO* surface intermediates. The theoretical predictions of catalytic activities well matched the experimentally determined onset potentials for the ORR and OER, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Thus, the combination of the first-principles theoretical analysis and experimental methods provided an understanding of manganese oxide in oxygen electrocatalysis at the atomic level, achieving a fundamental insight that can be used to design and develop improved bifunctional electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER. Wang et al.84 also explained the origin of the remarkably enhanced electrocatalytic activities of three-dimensional dealloying-driven nanoporous gold toward both the ORR and OER due to the Pd utilization efficiency through a precise control of the Pd overlayers, and change in electronic structure, as revealed by DFT calculations.
11. Summary and future direction
Multifunctional catalytic activity is considered as a progressively important field in electrocatalysis research. For commercial applications of metal–air batteries and water electrolyzers, a great challenge remains in developing highly active, cost-effective, and durable bifunctional electrocatalysts toward both the oxygen reduction and water oxidation. The aim of this review is to provide a summary of the recent progress on advanced nanomaterials for the rational design of highly efficient ORR/OER or HER/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts, and ORR/OER/HER trifunctional electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage applications. Unfortunately, high cost and limited durability of metal-based catalysts have hampered the large-scale applications of multifunctional electrocatalysts in renewable energy technologies. This review provides a description about the replacement of precious metal-based catalysts with highly active and durable nonprecious catalysts for fuel cell and metal–air battery applications to harness energy in a cost-effective and scalable approach. Various non-precious transition metal-based catalysts have been identified including single metal oxides, spinel- and perovskite-type oxides, as well as other transition metal-based compounds. Due to the high electrical conductivity, carbon-based hybrid catalysts generally offer superior catalytic activities that are higher than those obtained individually. The primary focus has been driven by the development of low-cost and high-efficiency electrocatalysts such as perovskites, metal phosphides, metal sulphides, metal carbides or nitrides and carbon-based catalysts to avoid using the conventional expensive noble metals of low abundance, such as Pt, RuO2, and IrO2. The opportunity to tune the catalytic activity of perovskites and spinel oxides for oxygen evolution and peroxide decomposition by varying the mixture of metals and dopants represents new possibilities for the realization of efficient rechargeable metal–air batteries. Functional nanostructures have facilitated excellent mobility, solubility, morphology tunability and the possibility to tailor the surface properties in exceptional ways to achieve superior catalytic activity. Hybrid structures have shown real efficiency gains in terms of energy density and stability, and further improved fabrication techniques are required in order to contribute to the widespread implementation of future generation fuel cells and devices. In particular, for continuous overall water splitting, it is crucial to develop a bifunctional catalyst that has high activity toward both the HER and OER in the same electrolyte (either strongly acidic or strongly basic). Considering the sustainable overall water splitting, to drive both reactions for the simultaneous generation of hydrogen and oxygen gases, a single catalyst with dual functionality should work in the same electrolyte (strongly acidic or basic electrolyte) to minimize the overpotentials which is a big challenge for the Earth-abundant catalysts. The electrode performance in non-aqueous electrolytes could be improved by the use of specific catalysts to promote both ORR and OER, as the current density in lithium battery electrolytes is still too low for any practical application. In the future, considering the two parameters, both performance-to-cost ratio and durability of multi-functional catalysts through systematic research and development, may strongly contribute to the commercialization of rechargeable metal–air batteries which could generate a higher energy density than the current state-of-the-art lithium–ion batteries. Engineering the morphology of multi-functional catalysts into different nanostructures such as nanotubes, nanowires, etc., and tunable composition allow the modification of the electronic structure of active sites which is effective for the significant enhancement of the catalytic activity. Furthermore, the development of facile one-pot synthetic approaches for hybrid multifunctional catalysts may greatly reduce the cost for large-scale production and increase the potential for the commercialization of rechargeable metal–air batteries. Advanced synthetic routes and comprehensive characterization of the electrochemical interface are the major concerns for the successful application of electrocatalysts. Surface science in combination with electrochemical approaches has opened up an opportunity to control the surface structure and composition which are useful parameters in the field of electrocatalysis. Furthermore, as the surface structure and catalytic activity are known to vary proportionally, structure–activity relationships with improved theoretical concepts can accelerate the discovery of new materials. On the other hand, the stability of the catalyst is one of the essential factors for practical water-splitting or fuel cell devices which should ideally run for several years which in turn lowers the cost of hydrogen production. Hence, bifunctional or trifunctional electrocatalysts are expected to find real application for sustainable electrochemical energy conversion as well as storage.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
One of the authors (SG) is thankful to the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), India, for providing CSIR-Senior Research Associateship (Scientists’ Pool Scheme). The authors acknowledge the director, CSIR-CGCRI for his kind permission to publish the work.
Notes and references
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2009, 324, 48–49 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Hurst, Science, 2010, 328, 315–316 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Katsounaros, S. Cherevko, A. R. Zeradjanin and K. J. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 102–121 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ghosh and R. N. Basu, J. Indian Inst. Sci., 2016, 96, 293–314 Search PubMed .
J.-I. Jung, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee, M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4582–4586 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Cheng and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 967–984 CrossRef .
G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1878–1889 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kong, J. J. Cha, H. Wang, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3553–3558 Search PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, M. W. Bhushan and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 714–721 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1694–1701 Search PubMed .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef .
M. Kuang and G. Zheng, Small, 2016, 12, 5656–5675 CrossRef PubMed .
E. T. D. Kumar and V. Ganesh, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 590–600 CrossRef .
L. Morales and A. M. Fernandez, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 12692–12706 Search PubMed .
K. R. Yoon, G. Y. Lee, J.-W. Jung, N.-H. Kim, S. O. Kim and I.-D. Kim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2076–2083 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gupta, W. Kellogg, H. Xu, X. Liu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Chem – Asian J., 2016, 11, 10–21 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
Y. Zhu, C. Su, X. Xu, W. Zhou, R. Ran and Z. A. Shao, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 15533–15542 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184–2202 RSC .
E. A. Paoli, F. Masini, R. Frydendal, D. Deiana, C. Schlaup, M. Malizia, S. Hansen, T. W. Horch, E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 190–196 RSC .
J. Y. Cheon, K. Kim, Y. J. Sa, S. H. Sahgong, Y. Hong, J. Woo, S.-D. Yim, H. Y. Jeong, Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501794 CrossRef .
K. Elumeeva, J. Masa, F. Tietz, M. Muhler and W. A. Schuhmann, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 138–143 CrossRef .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Su, Y. Zhu, H. Jiang, J. Shen, X. Yang, W. Zou, J. Chen and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15080–15089 RSC .
X. Ma, J. Wang, D. Liu, R. Kong, S. Hao, G. Du, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 4754–4757 RSC .
X. Li, L. Zhang, M. Huang, S. Wang, X. Li and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14789–14795 Search PubMed .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
J.-E. Lee, Y. J. Jang, W. Xu, Z. Feng, H.-Y. Park, J. Y. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13692–13699 Search PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y.-X. Zhou and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan, C. Chen and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10121–10211 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Zhao, C. Li, M. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502039 CrossRef .
D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, H. W. Park, M. H. Seo, X. Wang and Z. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3129–3138 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, M. Park, M. G. Kim, S. Gupta, X. Wang, G. Wu and J. Cho, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 315–325 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 872–882 CrossRef .
J. E. Kim, J. Lim, G. Y. Lee, S. H. Choi, U. N. Maiti, W. J. Lee, H. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1571–1577 Search PubMed .
N.-I. Kim, R. A. Afzal, S. R. Choi, S. W. Lee, D. Ahn, S. Bhattacharjee, S.-C. Lee, J. H. Kim and J.-Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13019–13031 Search PubMed .
T. Ma, C. Li, X. Chen, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1628–1633 RSC .
J. Masa, W. Xia, I. Sinev, A. Zhao, Z. Sun, S. Grützke, P. Weide, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 32, 8524 CrossRef .
X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2072–2075 Search PubMed .
M. Prabu, P. Ramakrishnan and S. Shanmugam, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 59–63 CrossRef .
D. Wang, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5312–5315 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5713–5718 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Guo, Y. Hou, J. Wang, L. Fu, J. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14673–14681 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh, P. Kar, N. Bhandary, S. Basu, T. Maiyalagan, S. Sardar and S. K. Pal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 4111–4122 CrossRef .
W.-H. Ryu, T.-H. Yoon, S. H. Song, S. Jeon, Y.-J. Park and I.-D. Kim, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4190–4197 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P. A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, P. C. Hsu, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7261 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Davaria and D. G. Ivey, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 39–67 Search PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, F. Ding, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Park, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 987–1004 CrossRef .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 886–893 CrossRef .
J. S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef .
A. Débart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521–4524 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, F. Cheng, X. Han, T. Zhang and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 809–813 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Q. Lyu and F. Ciucci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35829–35836 Search PubMed .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3571–3594 CrossRef .

          W. Vielstich, A. Lamm and H. A. Gasteiger, Handbook of Fuel Cells–Fundamentals, Technology and Applications, Wiley, Chichester,  2003 Search PubMed .

          K. Kinoshita, Electrochemical Oxygen Technology, Wiley, New York,  1992 Search PubMed .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134–145 CrossRef .

          P. Vanysek, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 92nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

          A. D. Mcnaught and A. Wilkinson, IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology. Gold Book, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J.-C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Jung, D. Y. Chung, J. Ryu, S. J. Yoo and Y.-E. Sung, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 433–456 CrossRef .
K. A. Stoerzinger, L. Qiao, M. D. Biegalski and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1636–1641 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mamaca, E. Mayousse, S. Arrii-Clacens, T. W. Napporn, K. Servat, N. Guillet and K. B. Kokoh, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 376–380 CrossRef .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–45 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, S.-I. Choi, L. T. Roling, M. Luo, C. Ma, L. Zhang, M. Chi, J. Liu, Z. Xie, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7594 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeis, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Li, Z. C. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. H. Schifferli and Y. S. Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Debe, R. T. Atanasoski and A. J. Steinbach, ECS Trans., 2011, 41, 937–954 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, F. Chen, Y. Jin, N. Zhang and R. L. Johnston, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17782–17791 Search PubMed .
W. Ma, F. Chen, N. Zhang and X. Wu, J. Mol. Model., 2014, 20, 2454–2461 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shin, D. H. Kim, S. C. Yeo and H. M. Lee, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 94–98 CrossRef .
J. Goldstein, I. Brown and B. Koretz, J. Power Sources, 1999, 80, 171–179 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan, L. Li, G. Wang, N. D. Kim and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20607–20611 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Huang, C. Si, J. Zhang, X. Yan, C. Jin, Y. Ding and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3781–3794 CrossRef .
S. D. Yim, G. G. Park, Y. J. Sohn, W. Y. Lee, Y. G. Yoon, T. H. Yang, S. k. Um, S. P. Yu and C. S. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 1345–1350 CrossRef .
F. D. Kong, S. Zhang, G. P. Yin, N. Zhang, Z. B. Wang and C. Y. Du, J. Power Sources, 2012, 210, 321–326 CrossRef .
P. Ganesan, A. Sivanantham and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12416–12426 Search PubMed .
Z. Cui, G. Fu, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9901–9905 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, R. Liu, S. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang and H. Zhao, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2123–2137 CrossRef .
E. Yilmaz, C. Yogi, K. Yamanaka, T. Ohta and H. R. Byon, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4679–4684 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jian, P. Liu, F. Li, P. He, X. Guo, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 442–446 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Stoerzinger, L. Qiao, M. D. Biegalski and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1636–1641 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 Search PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3532–3539 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, A. Xu and T. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6356–6362 Search PubMed .
Y. Nie, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2168–2201 RSC .
J. O. Bockris and T. J. Otagawa, Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 2960–2971 CrossRef .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Akhade and J. R. Kitchin, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 084703 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Deng and H. Tüysüz, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3701–3714 CrossRef .
R. Pokhrel, Mc K. K. Goetz, S. E. Shaner, X. Wu and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8384–8387 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Benbow, S. P. Kelly, L. Zhao, J. W. Reutenauer and S. L. Suib, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22009–22017 Search PubMed .
Y. Gorlin, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, J. D. Benck, S. Gul, S. M. Webb, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8525–8534 CrossRef PubMed .
P. H. Benhangi, C. H. Kung, A. Alfantazi and E. L. Gyeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26771–26785 Search PubMed .
Y. Meng, W. Song, H. Huang, Z. Ren, S.-Y. Chen and S. L. Suib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11452–11464 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Suib, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1623–1631 RSC .
F. Cheng, Y. Su, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 898–905 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. Pan, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 79–84 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, B. Han and Y. S. Horn, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6021–6031 CrossRef .
M. Jahan, S. Tominaka and J. Henzie, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 18494–18501 RSC .
K. L. Pickrahn, S. W. Park, Y. Gorlin and H.-B.-R. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1269–1277 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, P. Kar, N. Bhandary, S. Basu, S. Sardar, D. Majumdar, S. K. Bhattacharya, A. Bhaumik, P. Lemmens and S. K. Pal, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1417–1429 Search PubMed .
W. Schçfberger, F. Faschinger, S. Chattopadhyay, S. Bhakta, B. Mondal, J. A. Elemans, S. Mîllegger, S. Tebi, R. Koch, F. Klappenberger, M. Paszkiewicz, J. V. Barth, E. Rauls, H. Aldahhak, W. G. Schmidt and A. Dey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2350–2355 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Zheng, Z. Sun, A. Han and P. Du, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1530–1538 CrossRef .
X. Deng and H. Tüysüz, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3701–3714 CrossRef .
V. Artero, M. C. Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, D. González-Flores, N. R. Sahraie, I. Zaharieva, M. Schwarze, P. Strasser, H. Dau and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2017–2027 CrossRef .
H. Yu, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan and S. Yang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 3457–3462 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hao, Y. Xu, N. Han, J. Liu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17804–17810 Search PubMed .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 2963–2967 CrossRef .
W. Song, Z. Ren, S.-Y. Chen, Y. Meng, S. Biswas, P. Nandi, H. A. Elsen, P.-X. Gao and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20802–20813 Search PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, N. R. Sahraie, A. Bergmann, P. Strasser and M. Driess, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 164–171 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, K. Kwon, J. Y. Cheon, F. Kleitz and S. H. Joo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9992–10001 Search PubMed .
M. Hamdani, R. N. Singh and P. Chartier, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2010, 5, 556–577 Search PubMed .
T. N. Lambert, J. A. Vigil, S. E. White, D. J. Davis, S. J. Limmer, P. D. Burton, E. N. Coker, T. E. Beechem and M. T. Brumbach, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9511–9514 RSC .
C. Jin, F. Lu, X. Cao, Z. Yang and R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12170–12177 Search PubMed .
P. Li, R. Ma, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, Z. Zhou, G. Liu, Q. Liu, G. Peng, Z. Liang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15598–15606 Search PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, N. R. Sahraie, A. Bergmann, C. Das, M. Tallarida, D. Schmeißer, P. Strasser and M. Driess, Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17530–17536 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Serov, N. I. Andersen, A. J. Roy, I. Matanovic, K. Artyushkova and P. Atanassov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F449–F454 CrossRef .
E. Rios, J. L. Gautier, G. Poillerat and P. Chartier, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 1491–1497 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Han, F. Cheng, Y. Hu, C. Chen and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7345 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Jung, S. M. Hwang, M. S. Park, K. J. Kim, J. G. Kim, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and J. W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7665 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 14–19 CrossRef .
T. Maiyalagan, K. A. Jarvis, S. Therese, P. J. Ferreira and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3949 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bao, X. Zhang, B. Fan, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, W. Yang, X. Hu, H. Wang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7399–7404 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Z. Yuan, W. Qu and J. Fahlman, ECS Trans., 2013, 45, 105–112 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, W. Kellogg, H. Xu, X. Liu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 10–21 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, P. Zhang and S. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6370–6385 CrossRef .
M. A. PeÇa and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4516–4521 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Elumeeva, J. Masa, J. Sierau, F. Tietz, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 208, 25–32 CrossRef .
P. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602674 CrossRef .
Y. Choi, M. C. Lin and M. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7214–7219 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bursell, M. Pirjamali and Y. Kiros, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 1651–1660 CrossRef .
C. K. Lee, K. A. Striebel, F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3801–3806 CrossRef .
S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, A. K. Manohar, A. Manivannan, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 967–972 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-F. Chen, G. King, R. M. Dickerson, P. A. Papin, S. Gupta, W. R. Kellogg and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 423–432 CrossRef .
A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y.-L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. Zhou and Y. S. Horn, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2439 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1691–1697 CrossRef .
J. R. Petrie, V. R. Cooper, J. W. Freeland, T. L. Meyer, Z. Zhang, D. A. Lutterman and H. N. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2488–2491 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. S. Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Maruyama, W. T. Hong, I. Takeuchi and Y. S. Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5229–5232 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. S. Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Matsumoto, H. Yoneyama and H. Tamura, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 83, 237–243 CrossRef .
J.-I. Jung, M. Risch, E. Park, M. G. Kim, G. Nam, H.-Y. Jeong, Y. S. Horn and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 176–183 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, H. Chen, L. Xia, S. Wang, L.-X. Ding, D. Li, K. Xiao, S. Dai and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22478–22486 Search PubMed .
P. H. Benhangi, M. A. G. Contreras, A. Alfantazi and E. L. Gyenge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1356–F1366 CrossRef .
W. G. Hardin, D. A. Slanac, X. Wang, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1254–1259 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, L. Mai, C. Han, Q. An, X. Xu, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19569–19574 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, A. Yu, D. Higgins, H. Li, H. Wang and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1946–1952 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, J. Li, Q. Wang, X. Wang, D. Qian, J. Jiang, J. Li and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 725, 260–269 CrossRef .
C. Kim, O. Gwon, I.-Y. Jeon, Y. Kim, J. Shin, Y.-W. Ju, J.-B. Baek and G. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2122–2127 Search PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950–5974 RSC .
L. Zhou, M. Shao, M. Wei and X. Duan, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1094–1106 CrossRef .
X. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6921–6928 Search PubMed .
X. Han, C. Yu, J. Yang, C. Zhao, H. Huang, Z. Liu, P. M. Ajayan and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500782 CrossRef .
F. Song and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16481–16484 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1820–1827 Search PubMed .
M. Gao, C. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Hua, C. Xu and P. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5797–5805 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Bao, M. Guan, Y. Zhao, J. Lian, J. Qiu, L. Xu, Y. Huang, J. Qian and H. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 8372–8376 RSC .
Z. Wang, S. Zeng, W. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Zhao and F. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1488–1495 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, B.-Q. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Li, C. Yang and F. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7245–7250 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Zhao, Y. Zhao, L. Song and Z. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 158–166 CrossRef .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700467 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 Search PubMed .
S. Dresp, F. Luo, R. Schmack, S. Kühl, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2020–2024 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Shao, Y. Pi, J. Guo and X. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700355 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan and G. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6017–6044 CrossRef .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
X. G. Wang, Y. V. Kolen'ko, X. Q. Bao, K. Kovnir and L. F. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8188–8192 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. M. Ge, R. J. Lim, J. Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 Search PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. Mckone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14871–14878 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. L. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6251–6254 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. L. Fei, G. D. Ruan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3175–3180 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2158–22165 Search PubMed .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3571–3594 CrossRef .
C. G. Read, J. F. Callejas, C. F. Holder and R. E. Schaak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12798–12803 Search PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, S. Gu, J. Yano and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7636–7642 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Wang, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J.-G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10575–10584 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, F. Liao, W. Shen, L. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Li and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18977–18982 RSC .
T. Wu, M. Pi, X. Wang, D. Zhang and S. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2104–2110 RSC .
M. Ledendecker, S. K. Calderón, C. Papp, H.-P. Steinrück, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 12538–12542 CrossRef .
H. Schäfer, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, J. Stangl, K. Müller-Buschbaum, J. D. Hardege, K. Kuepper, J. Wollschläger, U. Krupp, S. Dühnen, M. Steinhart, L. Walder, S. Sadaf and M. Schmidt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6402–6417 CrossRef .
X. Wang, W. Li, D. Xiong, D. Y. Petrovykh and L. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 26, 4067–4077 Search PubMed .
T. Wu, M. Pi, D. Zhang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14539–14544 Search PubMed .
J. Li, M. Yan, X. Zhou, Z.-Q. Huang, Z. Xia, C.-R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef .
J. Ren, Z. Hu, C. Chen, Y. Liu and Z. Yuan, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1196–1202 CrossRef .
G.-F. Chen, T. Y. Ma, Z.-Q. Liu, N. Li, Y.-Z. Su, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3314–3323 CrossRef .
H. Duan, D. Li, Y. Tang, Y. He, S. Ji, R. Wang, H. Lv, P. P. Lopes, A. P. Paulikas, H. Li, S. X. Mao, C. Wang, N. M. Markovic, J. Li, V. R. Stamenkovic and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5494–5502 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhou, J. Pu, X. Sun, C. Zhu, J. Li, J. Wang, S. Chang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14873–14880 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, R. Li, G. Ma, X. Gou, Y. Zhua and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20674–20684 RSC .
J. M. Falkowski and Y. Surendranath, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3411–3416 CrossRef .
Y. X. Zhou, H. B. Yao, Y. Wang, H. L. Liu, M. R. Gao, P. K. Shen and S. H. Yu, Chemistry, 2010, 16, 12000–12007 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, D. Susac, M. Teo, K. C. Wong, P. C. Wong, R. R. Parsons, D. Bizzotto, K. A. R. Mitchell and S. A. Campbell, J. Catal., 2008, 258, 235–242 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, X. Yue, W. Zhang, S. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1486–1489 RSC .
C. Tang, N. Cheng, Z. Pu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9351–9355 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhu, L. Zhu, J. Wang and G. Wei Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13916–13922 Search PubMed .
I. H. Kwak, H. S. Im, D. M. Jang, Y. W. Kim, K. Park, Y. R. Lim, E. H. Cha and J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5327–5334 Search PubMed .
S. Qu, J. Huang, J. Yu, G. Chen, W. Hu, M. Yin, R. Zhang, S. Chu and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29660–29668 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Zhang, H. Lin, X. Li, H. C. Chan, L. Yang and Q. Gao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2357–2366 CrossRef .
M. Zheng, J. Du, B. Hou and C.-L. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26066–26076 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Lai, J. Fang, F. Qin, Z. Zhang, J. Lia and K. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 434–437 Search PubMed .
D. N. Liu, Q. Lu, Y. L. Luo, X. P. Sun and A. M. Asiri, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15122–15126 RSC .
H.-F. Wang, C. Tang, B. Wang, B.-Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 35, 1702327 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, B.-Q. Li, X. Cui and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800055 CrossRef .
Z.-Q. Liu, H. Cheng, N. Li, T. Y. Ma and Y.-Z. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3777–3784 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Guo and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21353–21361 Search PubMed .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Da, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 Search PubMed .
X.-X. Ma, Y. Su and X.-Q. He, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1181–1192 Search PubMed .
M. Shen, C. Ruan, Y. Chen, C. Jiang, K. Ai and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1207–1218 Search PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Meng, S. He, A. Goswami, Q. Wu, J. Li, S. Tong, T. Asefa and M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606585 CrossRef .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, M. Zhang, Y. Tong, C. Zhong, N. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701584-1–1701584-6 Search PubMed .
X. Qiao, J. Jin, H. Fan, Y. Li and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12354–12360 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Zang, R. Liu, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 93–102 CrossRef .
B. Song, K. Li, Y. Yin, T. Wu, L. Dang, M. Cabán-Acevedo, J. Han, T. Gao, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. R. Schmidt, P. Xu and S. Jin, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8549–8557 CrossRef .
T. T. Liu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, Y. L. Luo and X. P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16683 RSC .
T. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3911–3915 RSC .
M. Shalom, D. Ressnig, X. F. Yang, G. Clavel, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8171–8177 Search PubMed .
G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Tang and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 77–85 CrossRef .
M. Jiang, Y. Li, Z. Lu, X. Sun and X. Duan, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 630–634 RSC .
Y. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Pan, H. Ma and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4170–4177 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, A. Santandreu, W. Kellogg, S. Gupta, O. Ogoke, H. Zhang, H.-L. Wang and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 83–110 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, J. Xiao, H. Wang and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7855–7865 CrossRef .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, X. Chen, B.-Q. Li, T.-Z. Hou, B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, M.-M. Titirici and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6845–6851 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. Bing Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 Search PubMed .
G.-L. Chai, K. Qiu, M. Qiao, M.-M. Titirici, C. de Shang and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1186–1195 Search PubMed .
R. Li, Z. Wei and X. Gou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4133–4142 CrossRef .
H. Wu, X. Jiang, Y. Ye, C. Yan, S. Xie, S. Miao, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1181–1186 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lai, S. Li, F. Wu, M. Saqib, R. Luque and G. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1210–1214 Search PubMed .
S. N. Faisal, E. Haque, N. Noorbehesht, W. Zhang, A. T. Harris, T. L. Church and A. I. Minett, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17950–17958 RSC .
S. S. Shinde, C.-H. Lee, A. Sami, D.-H. Kim, S.-U. Lee and J.-H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 347–357 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
L. Zhong, C. Tang, B. Wang, H.-F. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, New Carbon Mater., 2017, 32, 509–516 CrossRef .
B. Chen, R. Li, G. Ma, X. Gou, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20674–20684 RSC .
L. Hadidi, E. Davari, M. Iqbal, T. K. Purkait, D. G. Ivey and J. G. C. Veinot, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20547–20556 RSC .
J.-H. Kim, Ar. G. Kannan, H. S. Woo, D.-G. Jin, W. Kim, K. Ryu and D.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18456–18465 Search PubMed .
X. Qiao, S. Liao, R. Zheng, Y. Deng, H. Song and L. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 4131–4136 CrossRef .
N. Ma, Y. (Alec) Jia, X. Yang, X. She, L. Zhang, Z. Peng, X. Yao and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6376–6384 Search PubMed .
G.-L. Tian, Q. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y.-G. Jin, J.-Q. Huang, D. S. Su and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5956–5961 CrossRef .
C. Tang, B. Wang, H.-F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703185 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef .
F. Li, D. M. Tang, Y. Chen, D. Golberg, H. Kitaura, T. Zhang, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4702–4707 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Esswein, M. J. McMurdo, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15068–15072 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Fang, X. Lin, M. Tian, X. An, Y. Fu, R. Li, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17392–17402 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Niu, J. Jiang and L. Ai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3204–3209 Search PubMed .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, S. Ci, S. Mao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 872–882 CrossRef .
X. Liu, W. Liu, M. Ko, M. Park, M. G. Kim, P. Oh, S. Chae, S. Park, A. Casimir, G. Wu and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5799–5808 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, R. Liu, Y. Zang, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5946–5949 RSC .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604942-1–1604942-9 Search PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Li, Y. Li, T. Yang and Y. Liang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 580–588 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Z. Peng, R. Ye, H. Zhou and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7407–7418 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, H.-x. Zhong, Z.-li Wang, F.-lu Meng and X.-bo Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2342–2348 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, M. Lu, Y. Zhana and J. Y. Lee, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 25089–25092 RSC .
Y. Zhao, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2583–2588 Search PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17587–17603 Search PubMed .
G.-L. Tian, M.-Q. Zhao, D. Yu, X.-Y. Kong, J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhu, L. Lin, Y.-F. Jiang, X. Xie, C.-Z. Yuan and A.-W. Xu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6289–6296 RSC .
D. A. Slanac, A. Lie, J. A. Paulson, K. J. Stevenson and K. P. Johnston, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11032–11039 Search PubMed .
H. W. Park, D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, R. Ahmed, M. H. Seo, L. F. Nazar and Z. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1058–1065 CrossRef PubMed .
D. U. Lee, H. W. Park, M. G. Park, V. Ismayilov and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 902–910 Search PubMed .
H. W. Park, D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, R. Ahmed, M. H. Seo, L. F. Nazar and Z. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1058–1065 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Du, X. Liu, Y. Zong, T. S. Andy Hor, A. Yu and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4657–4661 RSC .
X. Han, Y. Yu, Y. Huang, D. Liu and B. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6464–6470 CrossRef .
H. Y. Jin, J. Wang, D. F. Su, Z. Z. Wei, Z. F. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, Z. Zhang, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, B. I. Yakobson, W. A. Goddard III, X. Guo, R. H. Hauge and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 384–394 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, Z. Yao, C. Shang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39312–39317 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Gu, X. Ge, J. Zhang, H. Zhu and J. Tu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700481 CrossRef .
Z. Pei, L. Xu and W. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 256–263 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, S. Xiao, Y. An, X. Long, X. Zheng, X. Lu, Y. Tong and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13348–13359 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, Y.-F. Guo, Y.-M. Yan, F. Wang, C. Deng, D. Rooney and K.-N. Sun, Carbon, 2016, 106, 84–92 CrossRef .
N. Xu, J. Qiao, X. Zhang, C. Ma, S. Jian, Y. Liu and P. Pei, Appl. Energy, 2016, 175, 495–504 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700467 CrossRef .
Y. Fan, S. Ida, A. Staykov, T. Akbay, H. Hagiwara, J. Matsuda, K. Kaneko and T. Ishihara, Small, 2017, 13, 1700099 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 170, 1410-1–1410-10 Search PubMed .
P. Ganesan, M. Prabu, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3625–3637 CrossRef .
J. Wang, K. Wang, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5285-1–5285-9 Search PubMed .
R. Miao, J. He, S. Sahoo, Z. Luo, W. Zhong, S.-Y. Chen, C. Guild, T. Jafari, B. Dutta, S. A. Cetegen, M. Wang, S. P. Alpay and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 819–832 CrossRef .
J. He, M. Wang, W. Wang, R. Miao, W. Zhong, S.-Y. Chen, S. Poges, T. Jafari, W. Song, J. Liu and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42676–42687 Search PubMed .
E. X. Sumboja, A. Wuu, D. An, T. Li, B. Goh, F. W. T. Hor, T. S. A. Zong and Y. Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4643–4667 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Su, Y. Gorlin, I. C. Man, F. C. Vallejo, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and J. Rossmeis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14010–14022 RSC .
C. Wei, Z. Feng, G. G. Scherer, J. Barber, Y. S. Horn and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606800 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Zaharieva, M. M. Najafpour, M. Wiechen, M. Haumann, P. Kurz and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2400–2408 Search PubMed .
M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, B. Han, T. Z. Regier, D. Peak, S. Y. Sayed, C. Wei, Z. Xu and Y. S. Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17682–17692 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, A. J. R. Botz, J. Masa and W. Schuhmann, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 1019–1027 CrossRef .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Turnbull, W. Lu, P. Boguslawski and J. Bernholc, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 014702-1–014702-6 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, K. Lee, S. I. Woo and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17505–17510 RSC .
J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Goddeti, J. Y. Park and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8875–8878 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Chung, C. H. Choi, S. Y. Lee and S. I. Woo, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 526–532 CrossRef .
A. M. El-Sawy, I. M. Mosa, D. Su, C. J. Guild, S. Khalid, R. Joesten, J. F. Rusling and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501966 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1553–1558 CrossRef .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeis and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, I. C. Man, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 283–290 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of (a) an alkaline membrane regenerative fuel cell, (b) an electrolyzer and (c) a regenerative Li–air battery. The reactions shown are formulated for alkaline electrolytes.	 
2Li + 1/2 O2 + H2O ↔ 2LiOH (E° = 3.2 V)	(1)
2Li + O2 ↔ 2Li2O2 (E° = 2.96 V)	(2)
2Li + 1/2 O2 ↔ Li2O (E° = 2.91 V)	(3)
Zn + 1/2 O2 ↔ ZnO (E° = 1.65 V)	(4)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of redox reactions involved in water splitting.	 
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → H2O + 4OH− (E° = 0.40 V)	(6)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → H2O2 + 2OH− (E° = −0.07 V)	(7)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (E° = 0.87 V)	(8)
HO2− → 3OH− + O2	(9)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → H2O	(10)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2	(11)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
jK = nFkC0	(15)
2H2O/2H2 → O2 (E° = −1.23 V)	(16)
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (E° = 0.00 V vs. RHE)	(17)
2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e− (E° = 1.23 V vs. RHE)	(18)
Eop = 1.23 V + ηa + Zc + Zother	(19)
Z = a + blogj	(20)
H+ + e− → Hads (b = ∼118 mV dec−1)	(21)
2Hads → H2, (b = ∼30 mV dec−1)	(22)
Hads + H+ + e− → H2, (b = ∼40 mV dec−1)	(23)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM image (top right) and XRD data of PtAu/C. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of PtAu/C collected in Ar-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (at 50 mV s−1). Insets: Schematic representation of PtAu, with the arrows indicating the CV signatures for Pt (gray) and Au (yellow). (c) Li–O2 cell discharge/charge profiles of carbon (black, 85 mA gcarbon−1) and PtAu/C (red, 100 mA gcarbon−1) at a 0.04 mA cm−2 electrode. (d) Background measurement during charging at 100 mA g−1 carbon of Ar- and O2-filled cells (charging first) for PtAu/C.76 (e) Ni foam supported Mulliken atomic charge of the Ag12Cu(Cu-core) and Ag12Cu(Cu-shell) structure. (f) RDE polarization curves of Ag and AgCu nanoalloys at 1600 rpm. (g) Linear sweep voltammogram of a nickel foam, AgCu nanoalloys and pure Ag electrodes. (h) Discharge polarization and power density curves for the AgCu alloy catalyst layer for the primary Zinc–air battery. (i) Specific charge capacity and specific energy density of the Zinc–air battery at discharging current 20 mA cm−2.78	 

 	Fig. 4  Structural representation of nine crystalline MnOx materials: α-MnO2, β-MnO2, R-MnO2, γ-MnO2, λ-MnO2, δ-MnO2, LiMn2O4, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4.100	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparative oxygen electrode activities of the nanostructured Mn oxide thin film with Pt, Ir, and Ru nanoparticles and the GC substrate.101	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images and structures of different manganese oxides: (a) α-MnO2 (2 × 2 tunnel), (b) amorphous manganese oxides (AMO), (c) β-MnO2 (1 × 1 tunnel, pyrolusite) and (d) δ-MnO2 (layered, birnessite). (e) Rotating disk electrode voltammogram curves represent the electrochemical water oxidation activities of manganese oxides. Sweep directions are shown by the arrows. (f) LSV curves of α-MnO2-SF, α-MnO2-HT, Ni/α-MnO2-SF, AMO, β-MnO2, and δ-MnO2 studied on RDE electrodes in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.105	 
MnO2 + OH− − e− ↔ MnOOH⋯O	(24)
2(MnOOH⋯O) ↔ 2MnOOH + O2	(25)
MnOOH + OH− − e− ↔ MnO2 + H2O	(26)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Catalytic activity of copper-doped Mn2O3 nanoballs for the oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Mn2O3 nanoballs with different magnifications using TOPO as the structure controlling agent. (c) SEM images and (d–f) elemental mapping of Cu-doped Mn2O3 nanoballs. (g) Rotating disk voltammograms of Cu-Mn2O3 in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at different rotation rates for the oxygen reduction. (h) The corresponding Koutecky–Levich plots (J−1vs. ω−0.5) at different potentials of Cu-Mn2O3 NBs. (i) Representative rotating disk voltammogram in N2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at 2000 rpm rotation rates for the oxygen evolution on the Cu-Mn2O3 NB electrodes.112	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustrations of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with oxygen vacancies.135	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Lattice parameters and associated biaxial strain for LNO on various substrates. Polarization curves for the (b) ORR and (c) OER on LNO films. Strain-relaxed (ε ∼0%) films grown on LSAO (10 nm in film thickness) and on LAO (100 nm in film thickness) as well as Pt films are used for comparison. (d) The current densities of both reactions at overpotentials of η = 400 mV (ORR = 0.823 V and OER = 1.623 V) increase with compressive strain. (e) Bifunctional overpotentials (η) to attain 30 μA cm−2 for both reactions show compressed LaNiO3 surpassing Pt and IrO2.151	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The schematic diagram of the formation of hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires. (b) CV curves of AC, LSCO nanoparticles + AC, and hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires + AC. (c) ORR and OER polarization curves of AC, LSCO nanoparticles + AC, and hierarchical mesoporous LSCO nanowires + AC on glassy carbon electrodes at 400 rpm rotation rates.160	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the bifunctional catalytic activity on the self-standing 3D core–shell Cu@NiFe LDH electrocatalysts. (b) DF-STEM image of Cu@NiFe LDH with the corresponding elemental mapping. (c) HER polarization curves and overall water splitting performance of Cu@NiFe LDH conducted in 1 M KOH. (d) Comparison of the required voltage at a current density of 10 mA cm2 for the Cu@NiFe LDH catalyst with other state-of-the-art noble metal free bifunctional catalysts.170	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagrams to illustrate the HER and OER catalytic principles on CoP hollow polyhedra. (b) Tafel plots of CoP particles, CoP hollow polyhedron, and Pt/C. (c) Polarization curves of the CoP hollow polyhedron before and after potential sweeps (+0.1 to −0.6 V vs. RHE) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in a N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Inset: Time dependence of the current density for the CoP hollow polyhedron.191 (d–f) SEM images for NiFeP, Fe2P, and Cu3P films. Polarization data for the HER in (g) 0.5 M H2SO4 and (h) 1 M KOH for a series of metal phosphide films, along with the untreated metal foil and a Pt mesh electrode for comparison. (i) Polarization data for the OER in 1 M KOH for different metal phosphide films.193	 

 	Fig. 13  ADF-STEM imaging and calculated surface free energies of the Rh2P NCs. (a, c) ADF-STEM images of two individual Rh2P NCs. Colored frames feature near-surface regions. (b, d) Enlarged image of the frames. The arrows in the intensity profile on the right side of (d) point out the intensity of P columns. The insets in (b–d) display atom model projections along the [001] axis. Scale bars, 1 nm. (e) Calculated surface energies of Rh and P terminations of Rh2P NCs as a function of P chemical potential. The dashed vertical lines indicate the allowed range of the phosphorus chemical potential, using 1/4E (P4, white phosphorus) as zero reference. (f, g) Schematic diagrams of Rh-terminated and P-terminated surfaces, respectively. The cyan spheres indicate Rh atoms, and the magenta spheres indicate P atoms.207	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image and (b) elemental mapping of Ni3S2@NF. (c) HER performance of Ni3S2 NF with a digital photo of gas evolution. (d) TEM image of CoSe2 and STEM NiSe2 NCs. (e) LSV curves of CoSe2, NiSe2, Pt/C, and IrO2 for water splitting in a two-electrode configuration in 1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (f) Chronoamperometric responses recorded on NiSe2 at a constant applied potential of 1.8 V (for OER) and −0.18 V (for HER). Catalyst loading was 1 mg cm−2 for all samples.215	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the N and P co-doped porous carbon (NPMC) electrocatalysts. (b) SEM image of NPMC-1000. (c) Schematic of the basic configuration of a primary Zn–air battery, NPMC used as an air cathode and coupled with a Zn anode and a glassy fibre membrane soaked with an aqueous KOH electrolyte. The enlarged part illustrates the porous air electrode loaded with an electrocatalyst, which is permeable to air. (d) Polarization and power density curves of primary Zn–air batteries using Pt/C, NPMC-900, NPMC-1000, and NPMC-1100 (NPMC prepared by heating at three different temperatures) as the ORR catalyst (mass loading of 0.5 mg cm−2) and 6 M KOH electrolyte. (e) Optical images of an LED (∼2.2 V) before and after being driven by two Zn–air batteries in series.249	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematics showing the synthesis of P, S-CNS nanocatalysts. (b) SEM image of the P, S CNS catalyst and the elemental maps of C, N, P, and S of P, S-CNS (scale, 300 nm). (c) Schematic illustrations of trielectrode Zn–air batteries. (d) Three-electrode rechargeable Zn–air batteries of galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles with P, S-CNS as the bifunctional catalyst.252	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–f) Schematic representation of the synthesis of electrocatalysts and (g) FESEM image of Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/NCNT-As electrocatalysts. Rechargeable Zn–air batteries with a bifunctional Ni/NiO/NiCo2O4/NCNT-As catalyst as an air cathode. (h) Schematic of the interior assembling construction of the cell. (i) Photo of rechargeable Zn–air battery testing device. (j) Performance of the battery charge–discharge cycling at 5 and 10 A g−1.259	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Transmission electron microscopy image of a Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid deposited at low magnification. Inset: High magnification TEM images of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid. (b) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts (catalyst loading 0.24 mg cm−2 for all samples). (c) Oxygen evolution currents of the Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4/rmGO hybrid and Co3O4 nanocrystal loaded onto a Ni foam (to reach a high catalyst loading of 1 mg cm−2) measured in 1 M KOH. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co3O4@C-MWCNTs (the tetrahedral coordination of benzimidazolate linkers to the cobalt ions (i), the largest cage in the MOF with tetrahedra in blue (ii) and the topological view of the MOF (iii); hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity). (e) ORR LSV curves of the MWCNTs, Co3O4@C, Co3O4@C-MWCNTs and 20 wt% Pt/C (scan rate: 5 mV s−1; rotation rate: 1600 rpm). (f) OER LSV curves of MWCNTs, MOF, MOF-MWCNTs, Co@CMWCNTs and Co3O4@C-MWCNTs in an O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1).266 (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis process of N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO. (h) FESEM N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO. (i) LSV curves of NRGO (1), N/Co-doped PCP (2), physical mixture (3), N/Co-doped PCP-RGO (4), N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO (5), and Pt/C (6) at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (j) Polarization curves of the NRGO (I), N/Co-doped PCP (II), N/Co-doped PCP//NRGO (III), and Pt/C (IV) at 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution for HER. (k) LSV curves of I, II, III, and IV at 5 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH solution for OER.268	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic representation of the formation mechanism of nanocrystalline M3C (M: Fe, Co, Ni) on VA-GNRs. (b) Typical SEM image of M3C-GNRs with a mechanism diagram of the catalytic reactions. (c) LSV curves of M3C-GNRs (M: Fe, Co, Ni) and Pt/C at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (d) The corresponding j@0.5 V vs. RHE, half-wave potentials and JK of M3C-GNRs (M: Fe, Co, Ni) and Pt/C, j@0.5 V measured at 1600 rpm. (e) Polarization curves of the M3C-GNR (M: Fe, Co, Ni) electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4, along with VA-GNRs, and Pt wire for comparison. (f) Time dependence of the current static overpotential of 235 mV. Inset: enlargement of the area denoted by the dashed circle.274	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of RM-FIT and RM-TIT. LSV curves measured in (b) the ORR region and (c) the OER region of KB, RM-FIT/KB, RM-TIT/KB, and 20 wt% Pt/C used air electrodes in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The rotating speed for the ORR was 1600 rpm. (d) Proposed reaction mechanism of RM-FIT used electrodes during the operation of Li–O2 cells, which are represented by four states as (i) on discharging, (ii) discharged state, (iii) on recharging, and (iv) recharged state. The ex situ TEM images of (e) discharged and (f) recharged states in RM-FIT used electrodes. The dashed circles in TEM images (f) indicate the discharge products, Li2O2.16	 

Metal and alloy-based materials	These catalysts have acceptable high activity for commercial use.	(i) Metal catalysts are very expensive and as platinum and iridium are both precious metals, this makes them undesirable for commercial use.

e.g. Pt, PtAu/C, Ag–Cu alloy, Au–Pd, Pt/Ir3(IrO2)7, Ni–Co–Ti alloy	(ii) Stability is still a big challenge to overcome, to achieve proper durability and long life for practical purpose.
(iii) Another big challenge is high oxygen reduction overpotential and the slow kinetics causing unacceptable power loss.

Non-precious metal
	Compared to the typical precious metal catalysts, transition metal oxides (TMOs) are cheaper and require a facile synthetic method, making them more realistic for commercial use.	TMO catalysts often suffer from poor conductivity, and subsequently display inferior onset potentials and limiting current densities than the current precious metal catalysts.

e.g. MnO2, Mn2O3, Mn3O4, Co3O4, CoFe2O4, NiCo2O4, CuCo2O4, NixCo3−xO4, MnCo2O4, LaNiO3, LaCoO3	Their structural diversity, as well as their ability to be mixed, doped, and combined with other materials, is useful for catalytic application.
Co9S8, Co3S4, Ni3S2, Co1−xS, NiS/Ni foam	Transition metal sulphides (TMSs) have promising ORR and OER catalytic activity; low cost.	TMSs suffer from stability and conductivity problems.
Ni3FeN, Ni3N/Ni foam, Fe2Ni2N, Ni3N/Ni(OH)2	Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) have superior electrochemical activity; transition metal based; low cost.	TMNs are less common for bifunctional applications, as some have displayed degradation and corrosion at high anodic or cathodic potentials, which is undesirable for long-term ORR/OER cycling.
Carbon-based materials	Low-cost, extremely high surface area, excellent mechanical and electrical properties, sufficient stability under harsh environments and high functionality.	(i) Irreversible capacity loss, big voltage crosstalk, low density, carbon oxidation/corrosion, etc.

e.g. Graphene, CNTs, porous nanocarbon	Heteroatom-doped carbon showed remarkably improved catalytic activity and stability in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes.	(ii) Thermodynamically unstable nature of carbon materials (above 0.2 V in the presence of water); fuel cell performance losses due to the deterioration of the cathode carbon catalysts, especially during start-up/shutdown under the stringent conditions of automotive operation.
N, B, P, S doped carbon nanomaterials
Hybrid structure	Hybrid catalysts; showed synergistically enhanced ORR and OER or HER activities. Typically, the carbon material either acts as an electrical conductive support to help the dispersion of metal oxide to facilitate the charge transport of metal oxides or as an active catalyst with a high surface area.	Difficult to synthesize and control, but through systematic research, new synthesis techniques will facilitate the production of more hybrid catalysts including solvothermal, electrospinning, and deposition techniques performed at low temperatures.

e.g. RuO2/Mn2O3, graphene/MnO2/CNT, Ni-NiO/NrGO, Co3O4/N-doped RGO, Co3O4@C-MWCNTs, La2O3/Co3O4/MnO2–CNTs, NiO/MnO2@PaniCoFeLDH/graphene, Co/Co9S8/S,N-doped graphene sheets, etc.

 	Fig. 21  Differential charge density (between codoped and undoped graphene) and overpotential distribution of (a) N–P codoped, (b) P–N codoped, (c) N–N codoped, (d) P–P codoped, (e) single P-doped, and (f) single N-doped graphene nanoribbons with a zigzag edge. Brown and white balls refer to C and H atoms, respectively. Yellow and blue colors indicate the negative and positive values of electron quantities. The ORR (in red) and OER (in black) overpotentials of the active sites (U < 1.5 V) are also listed on them. (g) ORR and (h) OER minimum overpotentials of N–X codoped graphene (X = N, B, P, S, and Cl), normalized by the corresponding ORR/OER overpotentials for single X-doped graphene at the same active sites, versus the distance between dopants N and X.316	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
