Phosphonate coupling molecules for the control of surface/interface properties and the synthesis of nanomaterials  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3DT51193F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3DT51193F
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12569-12585Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhosphonate coupling molecules for the control of surface/interface properties and the synthesis of nanomaterials

        
          
            Gilles 
            Guerrero
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Johan G. 
            Alauzun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michel 
            Granier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Danielle 
            Laurencin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            P. Hubert 
            Mutin
          
        
      *
      Institut Charles Gerhardt Montpellier, UMR5253 CNRS-UM2-ENSCM-UM1, Université Montpellier 2, Place Eugène Bataillon, CC1701, 34095 Montpellier cedex 5, France. E-mail: hubert.mutin@univ-montp2.fr
Received 
      7th May 2013
    , Accepted 28th June 2013First published on 28th June 2013AbstractPhosphonic acids are increasingly being used for controlling surface and interface properties in hybrid or composite materials, (opto)electronic devices and in the synthesis of nanomaterials. In this perspective article, a concise survey of phosphonate coupling molecules is first presented, including details on their coordination chemistry, their use in the surface modification of inorganic substrates with self-assembled monolayers, and the analytical techniques available to characterize their environment in nanomaterials. Then, some of their recent applications in the development of organic electronic devices, photovoltaic cells, biomaterials, biosensors, supported catalysts and sorbents, corrosion inhibitors, and nanostructured composite materials, are presented. In the last part of the article, a brief overview of recent progress in the use of phosphonate ligands for the preparation of molecular nanomaterials like metal organic frameworks and functionalized polyoxometalates is given.
1. Introduction
Phosphonic acids (PAs) are increasingly used in the synthesis of hybrid materials and nanomaterials, owing to the good stability of P–C bonds and the versatile coordination chemistry of the phosphonate ligand, which can bind to many different metal ions via P–O–M bonds.
Initially, phosphonate ligands were used in the preparation of metal–phosphonate compounds with a wide variety of compositions and structures.1–3 Later, Mallouk and co-workers proposed to use bisphosphonic acids for the formation of metal phosphonate multilayers on surfaces.4,5 Then, PAs found applications for the anchoring of organic monolayers and self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on a variety of high-surface area substrates6–10 and flat substrates.11–18 More recently, PAs have been used as precursors in the preparation of metal oxide-based hybrid materials by sol–gel processing.19–23
Surface modification with PA monolayers and SAMs is thus relatively recent. The absence of homocondensation between PAs, as well as the easy formation and good hydrolytic stability of M–O–P bonds, allow the straightforward and reproducible formation of robust PA monolayers on an extremely wide range of substrates. This explains the increasing interest in surface/interface modification by PAs,24–27 which appear to be a valuable alternative to the commonly used organosulfur compounds (thiols, disulfides),28 organosilicon compounds (e.g. trialkoxy- and trichlorosilanes)29 or carboxylic acids.30
In the present perspective article, we wish to first highlight the possibilities offered by PA monolayers for the control of surface and interface properties of materials, and to focus on some of their expanding applications. In the last part of the article, we also give an overview of recent progress in the use of phosphonate ligands for the preparation of molecular nanomaterials. Bulk metal phosphonates, pillared metal phosphates, multilayers of bisphosphonic acids, and applications such as release of bis-phosphonate drugs are not covered here.
2. Background
2.1. Coordination chemistry of phosphonates
Phosphonates are a highly versatile family of ligands.3,25,31 Two anions can form by deprotonation of phosphonic acids: RPO2(OH)− and RPO32−. In this manuscript, the term “phosphonate” will encompass both the mono-deprotonated (RPO2(OH)−) and fully deprotonated (RPO32−) forms, unless explicitly specified. The acidity constants corresponding to these deprotonations have been measured in a small number of cases.31 For example, for a simple molecule like methylphosphonic acid, pKa values of ∼2.2 and 7.5 have been reported.31
Phosphonates can bind to a wide variety of metal ions, ranging from monovalent cations like Na+ to tetravalent cations like Th4+.31,32 P–O–M bonds can also be established with metals of even higher oxidation state like MoVI and WVI, as will be illustrated below in the case of polyoxometalates. The water solubility of metal phosphonate generally decreases as the valence of the metal ion increases.3 A large number of metal phosphonate crystal structures have been reported from which different binding modes have been identified (Fig. 1).33–44 In the case of fully deprotonated RPO32− ions, a simplified terminology has been introduced by Bujoli and co-workers to discriminate coordination modes by counting the number of metal cations bound to each of the oxygen atoms of the phosphonate:36,37 for example, a (1 1 1) connectivity means that each of the oxygen atoms of RPO32− is bound to one metal cation. Some of the connectivity modes of RPO32− which have been identified experimentally are shown in Fig. 1a. It should be noted that this terminology is not fully unambiguous. Indeed, the term “(1 1 1) connectivity” can refer to a system involving 1 phosphonate and 3 metal ions, but also to a system involving 1 phosphonate and 2 metal ions. Concerning monoprotonated RPO2(OH)− species, to the best of our knowledge, no similar terminology has been introduced yet, despite the fact that several different coordination modes have also been identified (Fig. 1b). A terminology for differentiating the coordination modes of RPO2(OH)− anions is thus proposed in Fig. 1b.
 Fig. 1  Examples of coordination modes of phosphonates. (a) Examples of coordination modes of R-PO32−, (b) examples of coordination modes of R-PO2(OH)−, and (c) examples of grafting modes of phosphonates on POMs.45,46 
The mode of binding of phosphonate ligands depends not only on their degree of protonation, but also on the nature of the organic chain linked to the phosphorus.34,35,47 In particular, the presence of additional coordination sites along the organic chain (e.g. hydroxyl, carboxylate, sulfonate, imino, pyridine or even phosphonate functions) can affect the binding mode of the phosphonate unit. Although the study of crystalline metal–phosphonate structures helps to shed light on how these ligands can coordinate to metal cations, polyoxometalate-phosphonate architectures may serve as better models of the mode of binding of phosphonate ligands on metal oxide surfaces. Indeed, polyoxometalates (POMs) are discrete anionic metal–oxygen clusters, which can be considered as soluble metal oxide fragments. They are made of interconnected {MOx} polyhedra, where M is a d-block element in a high oxidation state (generally VIV,V, NbV, MoV,VI or WVI). The peripheral oxygen atoms of some POM frameworks can be functionalized by different organic molecules, including phosphonates.45,48 The analysis of the crystal structures of phosphonate derivatives of POMs shows that there are two main grafting modes on the oxometallic framework (Fig. 1c).45 Although these can be considered to be representative of the way in which phosphonate units will bind to metal oxide surfaces in most cases, it should be noted that other grafting modes, involving for instance residual P–OH groups, have also been proposed.25,49
2.2. Reaction of phosphonic acids and phosphonate derivatives with inorganic surfaces
Surface modification by phosphonate monolayers has been applied to a large variety of oxide substrates, notably titania,8,9,12,50,51 alumina,50,52,53 iron oxides,10,54–56 indium-tin oxide (ITO),11,27,57 and silica.18,58,59 PAs also react with the (native) oxide layer at the surface of metals and alloys15 such as titanium60,61 and titanium alloys (Ti-6Al-4V, Ti-45Nb, nitinol),62–65 aluminum,66,67 copper,68,69 silver,70 steel,71–73 magnesium alloys74–76 and cobalt–chromium alloys.77,78 PAs have also been used for grafting the interlayer surface of lamellar materials such as layered double hydroxides or perovskites.79,80
Phosphonate monolayers are not limited to oxide substrates; they have, for instance, been used for the modification of hydroxyapatite,81,82 calcium carbonate,83 cadmium or gallium sulfides,84–86 gallium arsenide87 or gallium nitride.88 The reaction of PAs with exfoliated zirconium phosphates leads to phosphate–phosphonate hybrid materials with tailored properties, as recently reviewed.89
Reaction of PAs with oxide surfaces involves the formation of ionocovalent P–O–M bonds by condensation of P–OH groups with surface M–OH groups and by coordination of the phosphoryl oxygen to Lewis acidic surface sites (if any). P–O–M bonds can also form via the opening of M–O–M oxo bridges by the PA.
These reactions can lead to a variety of phosphonate surface species linked to the surface by up to three P–O–M bonds (Fig. 2).49 In addition, hydrogen bonds between residual P–OH or PO groups and surface hydroxyl groups most likely participate in the anchoring of PAs to oxide surfaces.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the phosphonate surface species in monolayers formed by the reaction of a phosphonic acid with an oxide surface. 
It must be noted that, depending on the chemical stability of the substrate and the conditions of reaction (solvent, concentration, pH, and temperature), the formation of metal phosphonate bulk phases by a dissolution–precipitation process can also take place.24 This competition between surface modification and dissolution–precipitation has been evidenced for high surface area metal oxide substrates (nanoparticles), even for a highly stable oxide such as titania.50 However, dissolution–precipitation can be in most cases avoided by carefully choosing the reaction conditions, or by using alkylester derivatives (e.g. RPO(OEt)2) instead of the corresponding acids.50,90
There are relatively few studies on the reaction of PAs with non-oxide surfaces. In the case of ionic solids such as calcium phosphates or calcium carbonate, reaction with PAs or bis-PAs in aqueous media can lead to a partial dissolution of the substrate and precipitation of calcium phosphonates.91 Nevertheless, chemisorption and monolayer formation were reported when the reaction was carried out in organic solvent, such as THF or ethanol,81–83 or when calcium-deficient apatite was reacted with low concentrations of bis-PAs in aqueous media.91,92 In this case, the release of phosphate ions suggested an ion exchange mechanism,91 or a two-step process involving first the binding of bis-phosphonate groups to calcium ions leading to a proton release inducing the protonation of surface orthophosphate ions and their eventual solubilization.92
Several reports indicate that the chemical stability of phosphonate monolayers on oxide substrates can be improved by annealing the monolayers at 100–150 °C, suggesting that annealing increases the number of P–O–M bonds to the surface.18,72,77,93 This is particularly true in the case of silica substrates. Indeed, contrary to M–O–P bonds, Si–O–P bonds are easily cleaved by nucleophiles such as water or alcohols. As a result, PAs do not chemisorb onto silica surfaces in the presence of water, as shown by the selective functionalization of SiO2–TiO2 patterned substrates or mixed oxides.94 This led Hanson et al. to propose the so-called T-BAG method, which involves the deposition of PA SAMs on oxidized silicon by slow evaporation of THF solutions, followed by a 48 h annealing step at 140 °C to induce Si–O–P bond formation, and then washing of the excess PA.18 Once formed, the SAMs are quite stable to hydrolysis, probably due to the dense packing of organic groups hindering the diffusion of water to the interface. The in situ deposition of a nanolayer of metal oxide at the surface of the silica substrate prior to reaction with the PA offers an interesting alternative to the T-BAG method. Thus, silica nanoparticles have been modified with PAs in aqueous medium, using a fast (1 h) one-pot procedure based on the precipitation of a submonolayer of aluminum species followed by reaction with the PA.95 Similarly, an air plasma containing Al ions was used to deposit an AlOx nanolayer on a SiO2/Si substrate, allowing the fast deposition of PA SAMs by spin casting or microcontact printing.96
The degree of ordering of the monolayers depends on numerous parameters, notably on the interactions between the organic groups in the layer, on the preparation and characteristics of the substrate (cleanliness, roughness, crystallinity) and on the reaction conditions. Thus, as previously stated for other SAMs, the conformational order of alkyl PA monolayers on oxide or metal substrates increases with the chain length.70,97
The stability of monolayers is a crucial parameter in view of their application, and the stability under various conditions of PA monolayers on metal oxide substrates has been compared to that of other organic monolayers in several works.
Mani et al. have studied the stability in ambient air of 11-hydroxyundecyl PA SAMs on Ti. They found that this SAM was stable for up to 14 days, contrary to the corresponding thiolate SAMs on Au which were nearly completely oxidized after only 1 day.98
The stability in aqueous media of phosphonate monolayers depends on several parameters:
– The temperature and pH of the aqueous medium, as well as the ions present in the medium, notably phosphate ions (e.g. in physiological media) that can displace the surface-bound phosphonates.
– The ionic or covalent character of the M–O–P bonds, which varies with the degree of oxidation of the metal.
– The density and degree of ordering of the monolayer, which is governed by the steric hindrance of the organic groups (and also of the phosphonate anchor in the case of gem-bisphophonate), by the stabilizing interactions between organic groups, and by the reaction conditions used to deposit the monolayer, particularly the temperature and solvent.
The hydrolytic stability of phosphonate monolayers is significantly higher than that of carboxylate monolayers,99,100 likely reflecting the higher covalent character of interfacial M–O–P bonds compared to M–O–C bonds and the higher denticity of phosphonate groups. The hydrolytic stability of octadecyl PA monolayers on TiO2 or ZrO2 particles at pH values ranging from 1 to 10 was also found to be better (particularly at pH 1) than that of octadecylsilane monolayers, despite the numerous Si–O–Si bridges between the silane molecules which help increase the stability of these layers.101 Similarly, Silverman et al. compared the hydrolytic stability at pH 7.4 of fluorophore films anchored onto Ti-6Al-4V by post-modification of either an aminopropyl triethoxysilane monolayer or a 11-hydroxyundecylphosphonic acid monolayer deposited using the T-BAG method. They found that the phosphonate anchor was far more stable than the siloxane interface.62
The stability of phosphonate SAMs under physiological conditions is a controversial issue. As mentioned above, the conditions of reaction as well as the chain length can significantly influence the stability of PA monolayers. Thus, Mani et al. reported that dodecylphosphonic acid SAMs deposited from aqueous solutions and simply rinsed with water (without any thermal annealing) exhibited poor stability in Tris-buffered saline at 37 °C compared to dodecylthiol SAMs on Au or dodecyltrichlorosilane SAMs on Ti.98 Conversely, Kaufmann et al. investigated the long term stability in Tris-buffered saline at 37 °C of dodecylphosphonic acid and 11-phosphoundecanoic acid SAMs, which had been deposited on a Cr–Co alloy77 or stainless steel72 from THF solutions and then annealed at 120 °C for 18 h prior to rinsing. A fast desorption of the PA molecules occurred during the first few days, followed by a much slower desorption. In all cases, a significant amount of PA molecules remained bound to the surface after 28 days of immersion. In the presence of phosphate ions, a possible mechanism leading to monolayer desorption is the exchange of phosphonates by phosphate ions. Thus, Amalric et al. studied the stability of antibacterial PA SAMs on titanium and stainless steel, in simulated body fluid (SBF) and fresh human blood plasma. Evolution of the water contact angle and the P surface concentration as measured using XPS was consistent with a partial desorption of the monolayer, involving exchange with phosphate ions of the SBF.73 Conversely, Bhure et al. found that octadecylphosphonic acid SAMs deposited on Cr–Co alloy from THF solutions at 35 °C were strongly bound to the surface and were not significantly desorbed after 14 days in a phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution (pH 7.4) at 35 °C.102 Similarly, Jo et al.103 praised the robustness of long-chain (C11) carboxy-terminated PA SAMs on ITO in pure water, under ambient air conditions and in PBS solution.
Recent works suggest that the use of gem-bisphosphonate anchors can lead to particularly stable bonding to the surface,104–107 although the size of the bisphosphonate limits the density of grafting. Furthermore, both phosphonate groups are not necessarily linked to the surface,105,107 which may lead to the formation of multilayers.108 SAMs of long-chain 1,1-bisphosphonic acid on stainless steel were found to be stable for months in ultrapure water at 50 °C, and were not significantly degraded after 3 h in PBS solutions of pH 1–12.104 Rehor et al. found that the stability of films anchored by bis-phosphonate molecules could be ascribed to the formation of multilayers that resisted desorption even in the presence of phosphate ions.108 Similarly, hybrid materials prepared from a crystalline Ti0.75Zr0.25O2 support functionalized by a gem-bisphosphonate molecule displayed outstanding stability in acidic medium, as shown by the negligible leaching after 48 h in 4 M HNO3.107
2.3. Characterization of phosphonate environments and coordination modes in nanomaterials
As detailed above, the analysis of the structures of crystalline metal-phosphonates and of phosphonate-functionalized POMs provides clues to the type of local environments which can be found for phosphonates in nanomaterials. However, several analytical techniques are also available for characterizing directly phosphonate environments in nanoparticles or SAMs.
In the case of phosphonate-functionalized nanoparticles, IR spectroscopy can be useful in estimating the degree of protonation of phosphonates at the surface of nanoparticles. However, solid state NMR is one of the techniques which can provide most information on the mode of grafting of the phosphonate unit. Indeed, the degree of protonation of the phosphonate ion can be determined by measuring 31P chemical shift anisotropy parameters,109 by recording fast Magic Angle Spinning (fast MAS) 1H NMR spectra at high field,110 and/or by performing 31P → 1H cross-polarization (CP) MAS experiments.83 Furthermore, it has been shown that high-field 17O solid state NMR can directly prove the formation of P–O–Ti bonds between phosphonates and TiO2, and help to estimate the number of residual PO and P–OH bonds.49 However, given the poor sensitivity of oxygen-17,111,112 such experiments have only been carried out so far using expensive 17O-enriched samples. With the development of techniques like dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP), which has been recently applied successfully to 17O,113 one can expect that the use of natural-abundance 17O NMR for the characterization of phosphonate-functionalized nanoparticles may become more accessible in the future. It should be noted that in addition to structural information, solid state NMR can also be used to probe the dynamics of PA/phosphonate units at the surface of inorganic nanoparticles. Indeed, it was shown that the measurement of static 31P NMR spectra of phenylphosphonic/silica hybrids brings direct evidence of the “mobility” of phenylphosphonic acid at the surface of SBA-15 silica particles, and hence of the lack of strong interaction with the surface silanol groups.114
Concerning phosphonate-containing SAMs on flat substrates, solid state NMR techniques are not applicable, and other spectroscopies like IR, TOF-SIMs (Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy) and XPS (X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy) have been used instead to gain insight into the mode of grafting of the phosphonate unit. In the case of IR spectroscopy, measurements of spectra of phosphonate-SAMs have been performed using ATR or IRAS set-ups, and it is the analysis of the presence (or absence) of PO and P–OH vibration modes which has been looked into for discussing the mode of grafting of the phosphonate units.70,96,115 In particular, Yagyu et al. used IR spectroscopy to study the transition between mono- and multi-layer adsorption of phenylphosphonic acid on an alumina surface.115 In the case of TOF-SIMS, the analysis of both positive and negative ion spectra has been performed, showing that fragments containing P, O and M can be detected (M being the metal ion in the material onto which the phosphonate is grafted), which suggests that M–O–P bonds have formed. For example, in the TOF-SIMS study of n-octadecylphosphonate SAMs deposited on AlOx-activated Si, C18H39PO3Al+ and C18H39PO3AlO2− ions were detected in positive and negative modes, respectively.96 Concerning XPS, a detailed analysis of the P and O binding energies obtained after grafting of phenylphosphonates at the surface of indium zinc oxide has recently been carried out, suggesting that this technique can also be used to bring evidence of bi- or tri-dentate binding modes.116 Nevertheless, due to the strong overlap of different binding energies, notably in the O region, careful characterization of the bare metal-oxide surface and of model compounds of known structure was needed to help validate the interpretation of the data.
Another feature which can be accessed in the case of phosphonate SAMs, and which is of importance in relation to surface properties, is the tilting of the organic chains with respect to the surface, and hence the thickness of the SAM. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) can be used to determine the film thickness,70 and based on geometrical considerations of the grafted organic molecule (length of the carbon chain for example), the tilt angle of the chains can be estimated. Techniques like NEXAFS (near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure), PM-IRRAS (polarization modulation infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy), and SFG (sum frequency generation spectroscopy) can also be used to estimate the tilt of grafted molecules.70,96,116,117 It should be noted that in most cases, several of these techniques are combined to ensure that “accurate” tilt angles are determined. Furthermore, computational modeling is increasingly being used to help rationalize the mode of grafting of phosphonates (or bis-phosphonates) onto different surfaces. For example, the grafting of phenylphosphonate onto indium tin oxide was recently modeled using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and good agreement was found between the computationally determined tilt angles and the ones measured experimentally by PM-IRRAS.116
3. Recent examples of application
3.1. Organic electronic devices and photovoltaic cells
Optimization of organic–inorganic interfaces is of paramount importance in organic and hybrid electronic devices such as organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells or hybrid photovoltaic (HPV) cells. PA SAMs are among the most studied in these fields,26,27 as they bind strongly to a wide range of metals and dielectric or semiconducting oxides used in organic electronic devices. Furthermore, they are not sensitive to moisture and do not polymerize (contrary to trichloro or trialkoxysilanes), thereby offering simple, robust procedures for the deposition of dense SAMs.

3.1.1. Organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs). 
Organic thin-film transistors based on organic semiconductors (OSCs) have become the subject of intense research due to their potential applications in high-throughput, inexpensive and flexible electronic devices.26 PA SAMs are among the most studied in this field, as recently reviewed by Jen and co-workers.26 They have been used mainly to modify the oxide dielectric layer/OSC interface,96,120–123 but also the metal electrode/OSC interface.70 There are also a few examples of PA SAMs used as ultra-thin semiconductor layers in SAM field-effect transistors (SAM FETs),118,124 and as ultra-thin gate dielectric layers in nanowire transistors119 (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic views of field-effect transistors (FETs) involving PA SAMs. (a) Top-contact bottom-gate OTFT with a SAM-modified metal oxide gate dielectric (AlOx, HfOx, AlOx/SiOx); (b) bottom-contact bottom-gate OTFT using a single-component spin-cast SAM to simultaneous modify metal contact (Ag) and dielectric (AlOx) surfaces;70 (c) top-contact bottom-gate SAM-FET with a semiconducting SAM replacing the organic semiconductor layer;118 (d) top-gate nanowire FET with a SAM as a gate dielectric.119 
PA SAMs are usually deposited on the dielectric oxide surface by a solution process or by microcontact printing.125 Recently, Gupta et al.126 developed a dry method based on the thermal evaporation of ca. 10 layers of octylphosphonic acid at room temperature, followed by a treatment at 160 °C under vacuum (<10−6 mbar) to desorb the physisorbed layers and anneal the defect sites in the monolayer. This procedure opens up the possibility for a completely dry OTFT fabrication process, compatible with roll-to-roll processing.
In order to minimize power consumption in OTFTs, it is necessary to decrease their operating voltage, which can be done, for example, using ultra-thin dielectric oxide layers. However, a major drawback of this approach is the high leakage current of such ultra-thin layers. Modification of the oxide dielectric surface with a covalently bound SAM can drastically reduce the leakage current. PA SAMs are particularly attractive for the modification of metal oxide dielectric layers like aluminum oxide120,123,127,128 and hafnium oxide,122,129,130 and the resulting hybrid dielectric layers showed greatly improved dielectric properties compared to the bare dielectric layer or to the dielectric layer modified by organosilane SAMs120 or carboxylate SAMs.129
PA SAMs can also be used to modify SiO2 dielectric layers. However, SAM formation requires long annealing times (2 days at 140 °C) to force the formation of Si–O–P bonds,18 which moreover are very sensitive to hydrolysis (see above). To circumvent these barriers, Acton et al.96 have used an intermediate nanoscale plasma-deposited AlOx activation layer, allowing rapid processing of phosphonate SAMs by spin-casting under ambient conditions, followed by a thermal annealing step and then solvent cleaning. The annealing step is necessary to improve the SAM quality (i.e. its density and order).128
In pentacene OTFTs containing a metal oxide dielectric modified by an alkylphosphonic acid SAM, the chain length and more precisely the thickness of the SAM and its degree of ordering were found to strongly impact the performances of the device. Thus, the capacitance of MOx/SAM/Au devices decreased monotonically as the chain length increased.127,130,131 In hybrid AlOx/SAM gate dielectrics, the charge leakage decreased when the chain length increased; the long-chain PA SAMs (14 and 18 C atoms) could compensate for the somewhat lower quality of AlOx layers produced under mild plasma conditions.127 Conversely, using high quality sol–gel processed HfOx oxide layers, Acton et al. observed only a minimal influence of the chain length on the current leakage.130
Interestingly, the morphology of the pentacene layer was also related to the alkyl chain length. Larger pentacene grain sizes were observed for moderately ordered SAMs of intermediate chain length (8–14 C atoms), leading to higher carrier mobility in the pentacene OTFTs.127,130 For surfaces covered with well-ordered SAMs (16 and 18 C atoms), the morphology of the pentacene thin films suggested an island growth mode leading to small grain size. Hutchins et al. recently used PAs terminated by different groups (methyl, benzoate, phenoxy, triptycenylcarboxylate) to prepare AlOx/SAM dielectric layers on Si, and to evaluate the influence of the SAM structural order, surface homogeneity, and surface energy on the performance of top-contact pentacene OTFT devices fabricated with these hybrid dielectrics.132 In this case as well, the less ordered (liquid-like) SAMs with non-bulky methyl or phenoxy terminal groups and medium length alkyl chains (ca. 12 C atoms) favored the growth of large pentacene grains with high charge carrier mobilities, resulting in significantly higher performance of the OTFT devices. On the other hand, no direct relationship between SAM surface energy and charge carrier mobility in pentacene FET devices was found for the molecules used in this study.
In OTFTs based on alkyl-substituted benzothieno-benzothiophenes (BTBTs), Amin et al.123 found that the morphology of the BTBT film depended on the surface energy of the dielectric surface (they observed much smaller islands on hybrid PA SAMs/AlOx layers) but, in contrast to pentacene semiconductors, the grain size had only a small impact on the charge carrier mobility.
The threshold voltage of the transistors can be controlled by playing on the electron-withdrawing character of the monolayer. For instance, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorododecylphosphonic acid SAMs changed the threshold voltage of p-channel and n-channel organic transistors by about 1 V (almost half of the supply voltage) compared to dodecylphosphonic acid SAMs.121 Furthermore, mixed SAMs of fluorinated and non-fluorinated PAs allowed continuous and reproducible tuning of the threshold voltage of OTFTs, although the relationship between the mixing ratio in solution and the SAM composition is not linear.133
PA SAMs have recently been used to simultaneously modify the OSC/bottom-electrodes interface (in order to reduce the source/drain contact resistance) and the OSC/dielectric interface in OTFTs.70,134 SAMs of alkylphosphonic acids with different chain-lengths (C8, C12 and C18) were deposited by spin-casting on Ag electrodes and HfO2 dielectric layers. The best trade-off between low-contact resistance at the bottom-contact electrodes and good interface properties for compact OSC grain growth was obtained for octylphosphonic acid, allowing the fabrication of high-performance n-channel and p-channel devices.70
Semiconducting PA monolayers terminated by oligothiophenes118,124 or fullerenes118 have been used as the semiconductor layer (thus replacing the OSC layer) in p-type and n-type SAM field-effect transistors (SAM-FETs) (Fig. 3c). Moreover, Hutchins et al. demonstrated the possibility to deposit high density SAMs capable of charge transport over long channel lengths by a rapid spin-casting process.124


3.1.2. Organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). 
Recently, Kaelblein et al. have used an octadecylphosphonic acid SAM as the gate dielectric in field-effect transistors and integrated circuits based on individual single-crystalline ZnO nanowires with diameters of ∼50 nm119 (Fig. 3d). The transistors employed an aluminum source and drain contacts, a SAM gate dielectric with a thickness of 2 nm, and a gold top-gate electrode. Comparison of the transistor fabricated with and without the SAM gate dielectric showed that the SAM reduced the gate current by about 3 orders of magnitude, demonstrating the insulating properties of the octadecylphosphonic acid SAM on the ZnO nanowire.
ITO is a transparent conducting oxide widely used as an electrode in OLEDs or polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) and in OPV cells. PAs are choice molecules for the modification of ITO,11,135 leading to robust SAMs which are increasingly used to control the interface between ITO and organic conjugated materials (Fig. 4),93,136 as recently reviewed by Hotchkiss et al.27 ITO has a high surface energy, and most organic hole-transport materials or organic photoactive materials do not wet ITO properly. Modification of the ITO electrode aims first at improving the compatibility between these organic materials and ITO (“surface energy matching”), thus avoiding defects (pinholes) in the subsequent organic layers.137 Furthermore, modifying ITO with dipolar molecules provides a simple way to adjust the work function of the electrode over a range greater than 1 eV, in order to lower the hole injection barrier between the electrode and the organic material.93,136–139 For instance, fluorinated alkyl, aryl and benzyl PAs with different structures and fluorine contents have been used to tune the surface energy and work function of ITO in OLEDs and PLEDs.137,140–142 In addition, the luminance of OLEDs incorporating a fluorinated PA SAM can be significantly more stable over time compared to devices treated only by air-plasma.137 Wang et al. showed that in PLED devices, fluorinated PA SAMs on ITO could even replace poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT–PSS) as a hole injection layer.142
 Fig. 4  Schematic view of an OLED with a SAM-modified ITO transparent electrode, and examples of PAs used to tune the surface energy and work function of ITO in OLEDs: the 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluorooctyl phosphonic acid (FHOPA) and the pentafluorobenzyl phosphonic acid (PFBPA). 
Recently, Knesting et al.143 showed that microcontact printing could be used to pattern robust PA SAMs onto ITO, thus affording local control of the ITO work function. Comparisons of OLED device performance using microcontact-printed SAMs and solution-deposited SAMs indicated comparable SAM densities. The possibility to pattern PAs by microcontact printing may find applications in low-cost LED signage.


3.1.3. Organic and hybrid photovoltaic cells. 
In the organic photovoltaics field, recent studies describe the use of PA monolayers for the modification of the ITO/electron donor interface in conventional OPVs,144 or for the modification of the ZnO-based electron selective layer/heterojunction interface in inverted OPVs.145,146 In hybrid solar cells (HSCs), PA monolayers have been used to modify the P3HT/inorganic semiconductor (TiO2, CdSe) interface,147 whereas in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) PAs were used to bind sensitizers to the surface of the semiconductor (TiO2).
The reversible changes of the work function values of the ITO electrode under prolonged UV and air exposure can greatly impact the performance of OPVCs. Zhou et al.144 found that surface modification of ITO with pentafluorobenzylphosphonic acid (Fig. 5a) was an effective way to stabilize the performance of conventional OPVCs under UV illumination. MacDonald et al.148 used a conductive-probe atomic force microscopy technique, scanning current spectroscopy (SCS), to map with sub-100 nm lateral resolution the electrical properties of model heterojunctions, and to analyze the influence of alkylphosphonic acid modification of the ITO substrate. They reported a strong correlation between PA chain length and electrical properties of the heterojunctions. ITO electrodes modified by hexylphosphonic acid showed acceptable OPVC efficiencies, intermediate between those observed for ITO activated by detergent/solvent cleaning and for ITO activated by oxygen plasma cleaning. Recently, Lin et al.149 used a monolayer of zinc phthalocyanine tethered to ITO via a PA group as a model for the donor/transparent conducting oxide interface in OPVCs. Using spectroscopic, electrochemical, and spectroelectrochemical methods, they brought evidence for the relationship between molecular orientation and charge-transfer rates.
 Fig. 5  Schematic views of OPVCs involving PA SAMs. (a) Conventional OPVC with a SAM-modified ITO transparent electrode;144 (b) inverted OPVC with a SAM-modified ZnO electron selective layer.146 
In the case of inverted P3HT:PCBM bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Hau et al.145 described the functionalization of the ZnO electron-selective layer by C60-terminated monolayers, which were anchored using different anchoring groups (catechol, carboxylic acid, and phosphonic acid) (Fig. 5b). In all cases, the fullerene monolayers improved the power conversion efficiency of the inverted solar cells compared to the devices without monolayer, demonstrating the enhancement of charge transfer from the P3HT polymer to the ZnO. However, the gain in efficiency found for the PA-based monolayer (≈ 14%) was lower than that obtained with the other anchoring groups (up to 28%). This was ascribed to the degradation of the ZnO layer by the strongly acidic phosphonic acid anchoring group for immersion times longer than 10 min. More recently, Stubhan et al. used PA monolayers to modify the Al-doped ZnO electron-selective layer in similar inverted OPVCs.146 A hexylphosphonic acid SAM layer produced an insulating barrier, which deteriorated the device performance significantly. On the other hand, with C60-terminated monolayers, the charge transfer from the P3HT:PCBM layer to the Al-doped ZnO layer was improved. A 6-carbon spacer was found to be more efficient than an 18-carbon spacer, leading to a gain in solar cell efficiency of ≈15% compared to the same device without any monolayer.
Hsu et al. investigated the modification by PA bearing thiophene groups of the TiO2 layer in a simple layered hybrid solar cell.150 The ITO glass substrate was covered by a flat, 30 nm thick TiO2 layer deposited by spray pyrolysis and calcined at 450 °C. The PA SAM was then grafted by immersion in a THF solution. A P3HT layer was subsequently deposited by spin-coating, and Au electrodes were finally evaporated. The best efficiency was observed for the device modified with 2-terthiophene PA. Lower performances were observed when using PAs with a lower number of thiophene units or containing an alkyl spacer.
Interestingly, Bulusu et al. recently reported the deposition of PA monolayers by spray coating onto conductive metal oxide surfaces. Thus, pentafluorobenzylphosphonic acid (PFBPA) was deposited on ITO, indium–zinc oxide, nickel oxide, and zinc oxide substrates using a 60 s exposure time. The monolayers were similar in terms of coverage and changes in work function to monolayers formed by dip-coating with a 1 h exposure time. The performances of spray-coated and dip-coated ITO substrates in bulk heterojunction OPVCs were comparable, showing the potential of spray coating as a fast, scalable method to deposit PA monolayers onto metal oxides.151


3.1.4. Dye sensitized solar cells. 
As illustrated in Fig. 6, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are composed of a photo-sensitizer, linked to the surface of a semiconductor and embedded in a liquid or polymeric electrolyte. TiO2 is the most commonly used semiconductor, and it acts as an electron selective layer between the sensitizers and the electron-collecting electrode (which is generally made of indium tin oxide – ITO).9
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). 
Recently, several studies have been carried out, in which PAs were used as anchoring functions to bind organic or organometallic sensitizers to the surface of semiconductors such as those used in DSSCs.152 These investigations focused in particular on the comparison between PAs and other anchoring groups. The performance of dye-sensitized solar cells is indeed strongly dependent on (i) the electron transfer events at the semiconductor–sensitizer interface,153–155 and (ii) the long-term stability of the bonds at the interface.156
Detailed analyses of the influence of the surface-attachment functions of the dyes on these two factors have thus been carried out, notably by Mulhern et al. in 2012. Their experiments were conducted on chalcogenorhodamine dyes attached to the surface of nanocrystalline TiO2 through phosphonic or carboxylic acid functions. No significant changes in the photoelectrochemical performances of DSSC, H aggregation (i.e. plane-to-plane π-stacking, which broadens the absorbance and causes a blue shift) and electron transfer reactivity were observed when varying the nature of the anchoring group. However, PAs were found to improve the dye–TiO2 bond stability, particularly upon immersion of the material in acidified CH3CN.157 Indeed, while carboxylic acid-functionalized dyes desorbed completely from TiO2 within 30 min, only 10–20% of desorption occurred with PA-functionalized dyes after 2 days of immersion under the same conditions. Precise investigations of the relative desorption of –PO3H2versus –COOH substituted [RuII(bpy)3]2+ under different conditions (by varying the solvent, pH, electrolyte, semiconductor, and presence of oxygen) were also conducted by Hanson et al.156 Carboxylic acid dyes were found to desorb between 5 and 1000 times faster than PAs in all media tested (MeOH, MeCN, 0.1 M HClO4).
However, despite the fact that PAs can be seen as more stable alternatives than carboxylic acids, the charge-injection rates can be lower due to the tetrahedral phosphorus center and loss of conjugation.155–157 Thus, Brown et al. have recently tried to take advantage of both anchoring agents: (i) PAs to increase the surface binding stability, and (ii) carboxylic acids to increase the electron injection efficiency. A bis(tridentate) ruthenium complex containing phosphonic and carboxylic acids was thus elaborated (Fig. 7), which was found to combine interesting electron injection properties from the dye into the semiconductor, and a good stability in aqueous media.158
 Fig. 7  Ruthenium dye functionalized by both phosphonic and carboxylic acids.158 
To help develop more efficient phosphonate-based chromophores for DSSCs, computational investigations are also being undertaken. In this context, Ambrosio et al. performed qualitative and quantitative theoretical predictions of the electron transfer through phosphonate anchoring groups.159 Some of the results were in good agreement with available experimental data, showing that it would be worth extending such computational studies to compare different binding groups, semi-conductor surfaces, or dye-sensitizing functions, and thereby help to design new and more efficient DSSCs.
Finally, in the context of solar energy conversion, the work by Ardalan et al. is also worth mentioning here. In this case, PAs were used in quantum dot sensitized solar cells, which are an interesting class of materials because of their tunable band gap, expected long-term performance, and low cost.84 Several PAs with different end-groups (–CH3, –NH2, –COOH) were investigated. The nature of the end-group did not significantly affect the uptake of CdS quantum dots on TiO2 (except for octadecylphosphonic acid which led to lower uptake values) nor the final optical properties of the device. However, the power conversion efficiencies in devices made with phosphonic acids were up to ∼3 times higher compared to those without any anchoring agent, possibly due to the PA monolayers acting as recombination barriers or passivating defects at the TiO2 surface.

3.2. Bioapplications

3.2.1. Surface modification of implant biomaterials. 
PAs are well-adapted to the surface modification of major inorganic implant biomaterials (e.g. titanium and titanium alloys, stainless steel, alumina, calcium phosphates), and several recent studies have addressed the use of functional phosphonate monolayers to control the surface properties of implant materials.
Inhibiting non-specific adhesion of cells and proteins to biomaterials is an important issue. Raman et al.71 have shown that phosphonate monolayers could be used to control the non-specific adhesion of cells and proteins onto stainless steel (SS316L). Hydrophobic octadecylphosphonic SAMs reduced the non-specific fibroblast cell adhesion by 77% whereas hydrophilic PA SAMs terminated by –OH and –COOH groups were not significantly different from a SS316L control.
Phosphonic acid SAMs were also used to prevent the bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on implant materials. Amalric et al.73 described the formation on titanium and stainless steel of phosphonate monolayers functionalized by silver thiolate groups. These coatings significantly decreased bacterial adhesion (>99%) and biofilm formation (85%) and remained efficient after three days in fresh human blood plasma. Torres et al.82 studied the chemical modification of hydroxyapatite by silver carboxylate-terminated phosphonate SAMs with different chain lengths (11 or 16 carbon atoms). Both monolayers exhibited good antibacterial properties, but only the long chain SAM proved to be stable under ethylene oxide sterilization conditions.
Commercial drug-eluting stents may involve inflammatory reactions due to the polymer coatings used. In this context, PA SAMs on Co–Cr alloys or stainless steel appear to be more promising drug delivery platforms for stent applications. Thus, Paclitaxel (an antiproliferative drug) coatings were deposited on a Cr–Co alloy modified by a COOH-terminated phosphonate SAM.160,161In vitro drug release studies showed that the initial burst release observed in the first 7 days was followed by a slow release for up to 35 days.160
In the field of bone-substitution implants, Maho et al.162 designed a composite Ta2O5–carbon nanotube coating modified by a monolayer of amino-tris-methylene PA to improve osseointegration of titanium and to hinder its long term degradation. After a 7 day immersion in a simulated body fluid at 37 °C, they showed that hydroxyapatite nucleation was improved due to the presence of residual PA groups.


3.2.2. Surface modification of iron oxide nanoparticles for imaging and therapy. 
Surface-coated iron oxide nanoparticles have numerous applications, for example, as contrast agents in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), drug delivery or hyperthermia for cancer treatment.163,164 Several recent works describe the surface modification of iron oxide nanoparticles by phosphonate monolayers, in order to avoid aggregation of the nanoparticles,55,165 target tumors,165 prepare dual modality imaging agents,166 prepare recyclable antibacterial nanoparticles,167 or for other targeted drug delivery applications56 (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Examples of iron oxide nanoparticles functionalized by phosphonates for bio-applications. 
For instance, Basly et al.55,168 recently used a PA anchoring group to bind a biocompatible hydrophilic oligoethyleneglycol-based dendron to iron oxide nanoparticles. The surface modification improved the size distribution of the nanoparticles, and no influence of the phosphonate anchor on the magnetic properties was noticed, as previously observed by Daou et al. for iron oxide nanoparticles grafted by lipophilic stilbene molecules.54 The functionalized nanoparticles displayed high relaxivity values compared to commercial polymer-coated nanoparticles. Lartigue et al. proposed to modify iron oxide nanoparticles with carbohydrates derivatized by phosphonate groups.165 The resulting nanoparticles formed stable colloids in water. Carbohydrates, in particular rhamnose, a substrate of skin lectin, confer targeting properties on the nanoparticles. The magnetic, hyperthermal, and relaxometric properties of the modified nanoparticles made them promising for MRI imaging and hyperthermia. On another front, Torres Martin de Rosales et al.166 modified Endorem iron oxide nanoparticles, clinically approved for liver MRI, using a 99mTc-radiolabelled bisphosphonate, a single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) tracer giving rise to a new generation of SPECT-MR dual modality imaging agents. Recyclable antibacterial magnetic nanoparticles were also recently described,167 based on poly(quaternary ammonium) brushes grown by atom transfer radical polymerization using an initiator grafted via a phosphonate group to the surface of magnetite Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The resulting nanoparticles demonstrated a high biocidal activity against E. coli bacteria even after eight exposure tests, and were easy to remove from the bacterial culture tests using an external magnetic field. Magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles have also been used for targeted drug delivery applications.56 Cyclodextrin groups were linked to magnetite nanoparticles using a PA coupling molecule. The anchored cyclodextrin formed inclusion complexes with Diclofenac sodium salt, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. The resulting nanoparticles were stable in buffered aqueous media and released the drug for more than 12 h.


3.2.3. Biosensors. 
Several studies have been carried out in the past few years in which PAs were used as surface modifiers for biosensor applications.169,170 The investigations were mainly focused on the surface biofunctionalization of different semiconducting oxides, such as In2O3 nanowires,171,172 TiO2 mesoporous nanoparticles,173 as well as silicon micro-rings and nanowires.58,174–176
Zhang and co-workers have, for example, described a selective, electrochemically activated biofunctionalization which appears promising for the fabrication of high-density biosensor arrays. Monolayers of 4-(2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)butylphosphonic acid were grafted on In2O3 nanowires or ITO flat substrates. After applying a potential of 950 mV, the p-dimethoxyphenyl groups are converted to p-benzoquinone, which can then react with thiol-terminated DNA oligonucleotides. Once functionalized, these nanowires can be used as air stable and selective DNA sensors.172
Another example of biosensor based on In2O3 nanowires functionalized by PAs has been described by Chang et al. The nanowire surface was first grafted with 3-phosphonopropionic acid, and then the terminal carboxylic acid groups were activated by EDC/NHS, and were reacted with antibodies. After passivation with an amphipathic polymer (Tween 20) the resulting biosensors were found to be capable of performing rapid, label-free, electrical detection of cancer biomarkers (cancer antigen 125 and insulin-like growth factor II) from human blood collected by a finger prick.171

3.3. Corrosion inhibition
Corrosion inhibition using bulk metal–phosphonate coatings has been extensively studied.177,178 Surface modification by alkylphosphonic acid SAMs has also been described as an effective method to protect different metal surfaces against corrosion.65,68,75,179–183 For instance, Paszternak et al. studied the corrosion protection of iron by octylphosphonic acid (OPA) SAMs.182 The passive oxide layer on the metal surface was needed to bind the OPA monolayer, and played an important role in the stability of the monolayer. Electrochemical charge transfer measurements on phosphonate modified iron indicated a high value after treatment by a 0.1 mol L−1 NaClO4 solution (a typical supporting electrolyte to study corrosion in neutral aqueous solutions), confirming the good protection against corrosion of the dense phosphonate SAMs.
Perkins compared the protection of ZnO surfaces by 1-hexanethiol and 1-hexanephosphonic acid.184 Quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) data showed that the phosphonate SAM provided significant corrosion protection for ZnO against Brönsted acids. The low protection offered by the thiolate monolayer was ascribed to its low density.
PA SAMs also appear promising for hindering the corrosion of biomaterials. For instance, for implant applications of Ni–Ti alloys it is important to limit the release of cytotoxic Ni2+ cations. Octadecyl PA SAMs on Ni–Ti alloys were found to inhibit anodic and cathodic surface reactions.97 To provide further protection, Zorn et al. first used nitridation to form a bioinert TiN layer, and then anodic oxidation to build a titanium oxide layer on which a densely packed hexadecylphosphonic acid SAM was deposited.185 In another study, well-ordered octadecylphosphonic acid SAMs were deposited on the native oxide layer of Mg alloy, a promising material for biodegradable implants.75,76 Electrochemical measurements indicated that the octadecylphosphonate SAM efficiently screened the substrate from the corrosive environment.
3.4. Supported catalysis and sorption
Bifunctional ligands have been widely used for the immobilization of catalysts and complexing groups onto high-surface area supports.186,187 Whereas ligands functionalized by chloro- or alkoxysilane groups are ideally suited to silica supports, ligands functionalized by PAs appear particularly interesting for metal oxide supports, owing to the robustness of the phosphonate anchoring.25 Unfortunately, metal oxide supports usually present a much lower specific surface area than silica supports, and their synthesis can be challenging. However, metal oxides can also bring valuable properties, such as chemical stability, magnetic or semi-conducting properties.
Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are attractive supports because they allow the easy recovery of the catalyst by magnetic separation, and several recent works describe the use of PAs to bind catalytically active groups to such nanoparticles (Fig. 9). For example, chiral BINAP–Ruthenium–DPEN complexes were immobilized on magnetite particles using PAs, leading to efficient and reusable enantioselective catalysts for the asymmetric hydrogenation of aromatic ketones.188 The authors showed that the presence of two bulky phosphonic acid groups on the BINAP moiety in the 4,4′ positions imparted high activity and enantioselectivity by comparison with the BINAP modified with only one PA group. Tucker-Schwartz et al.189 prepared alcohol oxidation catalysts by immobilization of 2,2,4,4-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) using azidopropylphosphonic acid and click chemistry. The resulting heterogeneous catalysts showed good performances in the oxidation of alcohols to their carbonyl analogues and could be re-used up to 20 times under acidic oxidizing catalytic conditions.
 Fig. 9  Immobilization of catalysts and ligands on magnetic nanoparticles. (a) Immobilization of chiral BINAP–Ruthenium–DPEN complexes for the asymmetric hydrogenation of aromatic ketones;188 (b) immobilization of TEMPO for the oxidation of alcohols;189 (c) immobilization of proline ligands for the CuI catalyzed arylation of nitrogen nucleophiles.190 
Chouhan et al. also used the azidopropylphosphonic acid and click chemistry to immobilize proline ligands on Fe3O4 for the Cu(I) catalyzed arylation of nitrogen nucleophiles.190 These immobilized ligands were easily recyclable (up to 4 times) and were successfully tested in the Cu(I) (10 mol%) catalyzed N-arylation of N-heterocycles with aryl and heteroaryl bromides. Suzuki et al. described the preparation of a hybrid photocatalyst by anchoring via PA groups of a bipyridine–ruthenium complex on a N-doped Ta2O5 semiconductor.191 This catalyst showed excellent photocatalytic activity in the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH and CO under visible light irradiation. Anchoring via carboxylate groups led to much lower performances.
Finally, applications in metal sorption have also been looked into. Luca and co-workers have prepared highly efficient sorbents by surface modification of TiO2–ZrO2 mixed oxides with hierarchical porosity by bis- and tris-phosphonic acids.105,192 Functionalization of the porous mixed metal oxide framework with amino-tris-(methylenephosphonic acid) led to high affinity for [UO2(SO4)2]2 at pH values ranging from 0 to 2192 or Gd3+ ions in nitric acid solutions across a wide range of acid concentrations up to 3 M.105
3.5. Composite materials
PAs have recently proven to be useful coupling molecules for the tuning of organic–inorganic and inorganic–inorganic interfaces in (nano)composite materials, in order to improve, for instance, their mechanical properties,193–196 optical properties (transparency, refractive index),51,193,197,198 or thermal conductance.195,198 In addition, PA coupling molecules may also improve flame retardancy of nanocomposites with a polymer matrix.196,199
In several recent studies, phosphonate-grafted metal-oxide nanoparticles embedded in polymer matrices have been prepared for applications in electronics. Indeed, the introduction of inorganic nanoparticles (e.g. BaTiO3, TiO2, ZrO2) into polymer matrices to form dielectric polymer nanocomposites is one of the most promising ways to process easily dielectric materials with high permittivity.200–204 However, the direct dispersion of inorganic fillers in polymers is often difficult because of the high surface energy of the nanoparticles. Nanoparticles tend to agglomerate, which decreases the processability and increases the density of defects. Surface functionalization of the nanoparticles can be used to enhance their compatibility with the polymer matrix, leading to uniform composite films even at higher filler concentrations. In addition, the surface modified particles can be dispersed in organic solvents, allowing for solution processing of polymer nanocomposites.
Kim et al. have, for example, used {2-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]ethyl}phosphonic acid to modify barium titanate (BaTiO3) nanoparticles and facilitate their dispersion in a cross-linkable poly(4-vinylphenol) matrix. High-quality nanocomposite thin films with particle volume fractions up to 37 vol% were then obtained by spin casting.201 They extended this strategy to the dispersion of BaTiO3 modified by pentafluorobenzylphosphonic acid in a fluoropolymer matrix, poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene). The stability of the dispersion of the surface-modified BaTiO3 particles in the polymer matrix led to a significant improvement of the quality of the resulting spin-coated nanocomposite films.202
PAs have also been used to covalently bind the polymer chains to the metal oxide.51,194 Thus, Tchoul et al. applied this strategy205 to the preparation of a dielectric nanocomposite composed of TiO2 with a covalently grafted polystyrene corona using TiO2 nanoparticles grafted by an azide-terminated phosphonate monolayer, which were then covalently attached to the polystyrene chains by “click” chemistry.
3.6. Design of molecular nanostructures using phosphonate ligands
Phosphonate ligands have also found applications in the design of molecularly-defined nanostructures. Two examples of such applications will be described below, in which phosphonates (or bis-phosphonates) are used either as connectors for the preparation of coordination polymers like MOFs, or as “capping agents” at the periphery of discrete nanostructures like polyoxometalates.
The use of phosphonates in the preparation of MOFs has recently been reviewed.3,34 The main advantages of metal–phosphonate frameworks, in comparison with the more common metal–carboxylate ones, are their higher thermal stability and lower solubility.3 The lack of solubility of metal phosphonate structures is particularly pronounced when tri- or tetravalent metal cations are involved, and has direct consequences for the crystallinity of these materials. Indeed, because they quickly precipitate during the synthesis, such phosphonate structures are often poorly crystalline and/or composed of nanosized particles.3,206,207 Clearfield and co-workers recently introduced the term “unconventional MOFs” (UMOFs) to refer to porous metal organic structures of poor crystallinity,3 and gave an overview of some of the particularities of metal phosphonate UMOF phases, including details of their nanostructure.
Over the past year, several new phosphonate “UMOF”-type nanostructures have been described, with applications in fields like catalysis and gas separation.3 For example, magnesium aminoethyl phosphonate nanoparticles were prepared using a microemulsion approach, and showed high CO2:N2 sorption selectivity.208 Perry and co-workers recently reported on the preparation of ZrIV-phosphonate nanoparticles, using 2,2′-bipyridinediyl-5,5′-bisphosphonate as a cross linker and methylphosphonate as a spacer unit.206 They showed that the specific surface area and size of the nanoparticles can be tuned by varying the amount of methylphosphonate. The bipyridyl unit was then used to complex Pd2+ ions, which were subsequently reduced by hydrogen into Pd0 nanoparticles. These nanoparticles were found to be well dispersed within the porous structure, and did not aggregate upon heating at 450 °C. The catalytic properties of these materials are currently being studied.
Phosphonate ligands have also been often grafted at the periphery of nanomolecular structures like transition metal based molecular cages209 and polyoxometalates.45,48 In the latter case, a large variety of phosphonate derivatives of POMs have been reported.45,48,210 Although several other grafting agents have been developed to functionalize polyoxometalates, their respective impact on the electronic properties of POM is different. Indeed, as demonstrated by Odobel, Mayer and co-workers, the first reduction potential of the polyoxometallic core can vary by more than 0.4 V when switching from an organophosphonate to an analogous organosilane anchoring group.211 Furthermore, it has been underscored in the case of polyoxotungstates that phosphonate grafting agents are more attractive than silanes for applications in fields like catalysis,212 because P–O–W bonds are generally more robust in comparison with Si–O–W ones.213 To date, the main applications of phosphonate derivatives of polyoxometalates have been in catalysis, including electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. For example, Odobel and co-workers reported on the synthesis of a series of porphyrin derivatives of POMs, the porphyrin being covalently linked to oxometallic structure by a phosphonate function, and extensively investigated their electrochemistry and photophysical properties,214,215 in order to determine how they could be used in multi-electron transfer processes. Furthermore, Bonchio and co-workers described the functionalization of [γ-XW10O36]8− polyoxotungstates (X = Si, Ge) by an enantiopure PA, and tested the catalytic properties of these complexes in the oxidation of methyl p-tolyl sulfide into methyl p-tolyl sulfoxide in the presence of H2O2.216 However, no significant enantioselectivity was observed in the reaction, and it was hypothesized that this was because several different WVI centers of the POM surface were involved in the catalytic process, with different asymmetric induction. More recently, the covalent grafting of a phosphonate-functionalized polyoxotungstate onto mesoporous silica (SBA-15) has been described, and the potential interest of this material for catalytic applications was discussed in detail.212 Finally, it should be noted that a series of bisphosphonate derivatives of oxomolybdates and oxotungstates have also been synthesized, as recently reviewed by Dolbecq and co-workers.217 Among these, methylenediphosphonate polyoxomolybdates like the mixed-valence complex [(MoV)4(MoVI)2O14(O3PCH2PO3)2(HO3PCH2PO3)2]10− have been shown to be useful for the synthesis of Ag nanoparticles, as they serve as both reductants and stabilizing agents in the synthesis.218
4. Conclusions and perspectives
The recent publications reviewed here show the potential of PAs for controlling surface and interface properties in hybrid materials and in the synthesis of nanomaterials. PA monolayers appear promising for many different applications, including organic electronics, photovoltaics, bio-applications, catalysis, and sorption. PAs are also increasingly used in composite materials and in the synthesis of molecularly-defined nanostructures.
Several factors explain the success of PAs in this context:
– they bind strongly to a particularly wide range of cations and inorganic substrates;
– several well-established synthetic routes of PAs are available, allowing their synthesis with a variety of structures and end-groups;
– the range of end groups may be further widened through post-modification using well-known organic coupling reactions (e.g. amide bond formation or “click chemistry”);
– PAs are stable under ambient conditions, which facilitate their storage and application. Polymerization by P–O–P bond formation is not observed under mild conditions, and true monolayers can be obtained easily, without a strict control of humidity or even in aqueous media;
– the stability of PA monolayers is often cited as one of their main advantages. However, the stability of the monolayers strongly depends on their quality (density, ordering) and thus on the interactions between PA molecules, on the nature of the inorganic substrate and on the grafting conditions.
The use of PAs for controlling surface and interface properties in hybrid materials and in the synthesis of nanomaterials is a rapidly evolving field, which will hopefully lead to exciting developments in materials science.
Notes and references
G. Alberti, U. Costantino, S. Allulli and N. Tomassini, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1978, 40, 1113–1117 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Clearfield, in Metal Phosphonate Chemistry: From Synthesis to Applications, ed. A. Clearfield and K. Demadis, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2012, pp. 1–44 Search PubMed .
K. J. Gagnon, H. P. Perry and A. Clearfield, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1034–1054 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, L. J. Kepley, H. G. Hong and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 618–620 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Hong, D. D. Sackett and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 521–527 CrossRef CAS .

          L. F. Wieserman, J. W. Novak, C. M. Conroy and K. Wefers, PatentUS4,786,628,  1988 Search PubMed .

          L. F. Wieserman, D. H. De Young and G. M. Whitesides, PatentGB2221466,  1990 Search PubMed .
J. Randon, P. Blanc and R. Paterson, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 98, 119–129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pechy, F. P. Rotzinger, M. K. Nazeeruddin, O. Kohle, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphrybaker and M. Gratzel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 65–66 RSC .
C. Yee, G. Kataby, A. Ulman, T. Prozorov, H. White, A. King, M. Rafailovich, J. Sokolov and A. Gedanken, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7111–7115 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Gardner, C. D. Frisbie and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6927–6933 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. Dickinson, C. Grozinger, F. G. Morin and L. Reven, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 6429–6435 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Woodward, A. Ulman and D. K. Schwartz, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3626–3629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Berman, S. Steinberg, S. Campbell, A. Ulman and J. Israelachvili, Tribol. Lett., 1998, 4, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Van Alsten, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7605–7614 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Gawalt, M. J. Avaltroni, N. Koch and J. Schwartz, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5736–5738 CrossRef CAS .
R. Helmy and A. Y. Fadeev, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8924–8928 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Hanson, J. Schwartz, B. Nickel, N. Koch and M. F. Danisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16074–16080 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guerrero, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1268–1272 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maillet, P. Janvier, M.-J. Bertrand, T. Praveen and B. Bujoli, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2002, 1685–1689 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Vasylyev, E. J. Wachtel, R. Popovitz-Biro and R. Neumann, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3507–3514 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Zhang, T.-Y. Ma and Z.-Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2003–2010 RSC .
T.-Y. Ma and Z.-Y. Yuan, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1407–1419 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Mutin, G. Guerrero and A. Vioux, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3761–3768 RSC .
C. Queffelec, M. Petit, P. Janvier, D. A. Knight and B. Bujoli, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3777–3807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, O. Acton, D. O. Hutchins, N. Cernetic and A. K. Y. Jen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14110–14126 RSC .
P. J. Hotchkiss, S. C. Jones, S. A. Paniagua, A. Sharma, B. Kippelen, N. R. Armstrong and S. R. Marder, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 337–346 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Love, L. A. Estroff, J. K. Kriebel, R. G. Nuzzo and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1103–1170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onclin, B. J. Ravoo and D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6282–6304 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533–1554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Popov, H. Ronkkomaki and L. H. J. Lajunen, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1641–1677 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 73, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .

          K. D. Demadis and N. Stavgianoudaki, in Metal Phosphonate Chemistry: From Synthesis to Applications, ed. A. Clearfield and K. Demadis, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2012, pp. 438–492 Search PubMed .
G. K. H. Shimizu, R. Vaidhyanathan and J. M. Taylor, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1430–1449 RSC .
E. Matczak-Jon and V. Videnova-Adrabinska, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 2458–2488 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gillaizeau-Gauthier, F. Odobel, M. Alebbi, R. Argazzi, E. Costa, C. A. Bignozzi, P. Qu and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 6073–6079 CrossRef CAS .
D. Massiot, S. Drumel, P. Janvier, M. Bujoli-Doeuff and B. Bujoli, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 6–7 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guerrero, M. Mehring, P. H. Mutin, F. Dahan and A. Vioux, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1999, 1537–1538 RSC .
S. Drumel, P. Janvier, D. Deniaud and B. Bujoli, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 1051–1052 RSC .
K. D. Demadis, Z. Anagnostou and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 35–38 CAS .
F. Fredoueil, M. Evain, D. Massiot, M. Bujoli-Doeuff, P. Janvier, A. Clearfield and B. Bujoli, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 1508–1512 RSC .
G. Cao, V. M. Lynch, J. S. Swinnea and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 2112–2117 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Demadis, E. Barouda, N. Stavgianoudaki and H. Zhao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1250–1253 CAS .
N. Stavgianoudaki, K. E. Papathanasiou, R. M. P. Colodrero, D. Choquesillo-Lazarte, J. M. Garcia-Ruiz, A. Cabeza, M. A. G. Aranda and K. D. Demadis, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5385–5389 RSC .
A. Dolbecq, E. Dumas, C. R. Mayer and P. Mialane, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6009–6048 CrossRef CAS .
R. Villanneau, D. A. Ben, L.-M. Chamoreau, G. Gontard and A. Proust, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 10–11, 815–1820 Search PubMed .
F. Fredoueil, M. Evain, M. Bujoli-Doeuff and B. Bujoli, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1999, 1077–1079 CrossRef CAS .
A. Proust, R. Thouvenot and P. Gouzerh, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1837–1852 RSC .
F. Brodard-Severac, G. Guerrero, J. Maquet, P. Florian, C. Gervais and P. H. Mutin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5191–5196 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guerrero, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4367–4373 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Ruiterkamp, M. A. Hempenius, H. Wormeester and G. J. Vancso, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 2779–2790 CrossRef CAS .
J. Caro, M. Noack and P. Kolsch, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1998, 22, 321–332 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Brukman, G. O. Marco, T. D. Dunbar, L. D. Boardman and R. W. Carpick, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3988–3998 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Daou, J. M. Greneche, G. Pourroy, S. Buathong, A. Derory, C. Ulhaq-Bouillet, B. Donnio, D. Guillon and S. Begin-Colin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5869–5875 CrossRef CAS .
B. Basly, D. Felder-Flesch, P. Perriat, C. Billotey, J. Taleb, G. Pourroy and S. Begin-Colin, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 985–987 RSC .
C. Tudisco, V. Oliveri, M. Cantarella, G. Vecchio and G. G. Condorelli, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 5323–5331 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Brewer, D. A. Brown and S. Franzen, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6857–6865 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cattani-Scholz, D. Pedone, M. Dubey, S. Neppl, B. Nickel, P. Feulner, J. Schwartz, G. Abstreiter and M. Tornow, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1653–1660 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vega, P. Thissen and Y. J. Chabal, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8046–8051 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Gawalt, G. Lu, S. L. Bernasek and J. Schwartz, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 8929–8933 CrossRef CAS .
C. Viornery, Y. Chevolot, D. Leonard, B.-O. Aronsson, P. Pechy, H. J. Mathieu, P. Descouts and M. Graetzel, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 2582–2589 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Silverman, K. A. Wieghaus and J. Schwartz, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 225–228 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zorn, I. Gotman, E. Y. Gutmanas, R. Adadi, G. Salitra and C. N. Sukenik, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4218–4226 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quinones and E. S. Gawalt, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10123–10130 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Petrovic, J. Katic, M. Metikos-Hukovic, H. Dadafarin and S. Omanovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, F159–F165 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Lewington, M. R. Alexander, G. E. Thompson and E. McAlpine, Surf. Eng., 2002, 18, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hoque, J. A. DeRose, P. Hoffmann, B. Bhushan and H. J. Mathieu, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3956–3962 CAS .
J. F. Cabrita, A. S. Viana and L. M. Abrantes, Corros. Prot. Mater., 2010, 29, 114–119 CAS .
E. Hoque, R. J. A. De, B. Bhushan and K. W. Hipps, Ultramicroscopy, 2009, 109, 1015–1022 CrossRef CAS .
O. Acton, M. Dubey, T. Weidner, K. M. O'Malley, T.-W. Kim, G. G. Ting, D. Hutchins, J. E. Baio, T. C. Lovejoy, A. H. Gage, D. G. Castner, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1476–1488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raman and E. S. Gawalt, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2010, 30, 1157–1161 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kaufmann, G. Mani, D. Marton, D. M. Johnson and C. M. Agrawal, Biomed. Mater., 2010, 5, 0250081–02500810 CrossRef .
J. Amalric, P. H. Mutin, G. Guerrero, A. Ponche, A. Sotto and J.-P. Lavigne, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 141–149 RSC .
A. N. Khramov, V. N. Balbyshev, L. S. Kasten and R. A. Mantz, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 514, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishizaki, M. Okido, Y. Masuda, N. Saito and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6009–6017 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Grubac, M. Metikos-Hukovik, R. Babic, I. Skugor Roncevic, M. Petravic and R. Peter, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 2152–2158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kaufmann, G. Mani, D. Marton, D. Johnson and C. M. Agrawal, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2011, 98B, 280–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhure, T. M. Abdel-Fattah, C. Bonner, J. C. Hall and A. Mahapatro, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2010, 6, 117–128 CrossRef CAS .
V. Prévot, C. Forano and J. P. Besse, Appl. Clay Sci., 2001, 18, 3–15 CrossRef .
A. Shimada, Y. Yoneyama, S. Tahara, P. H. Mutin and Y. Sugahara, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4155–4162 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. D'Andrea and A. Y. Fadeev, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7904–7910 CrossRef CAS .
N. Torres, S. Oh, M. Appleford, D. D. Dean, J. H. Jorgensen, J. L. Ong, C. M. Agrawal and G. Mani, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 3242–3255 CrossRef CAS .
W. El Malti, D. Laurencin, G. Guerrero, M. E. Smith and P. H. Mutin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1212–1218 RSC .
P. Ardalan, T. P. Brennan, H.-B.-R. Lee, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1495–1504 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stalder, D. Xie, R. Zhou, J. Xue, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3143–3152 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Balitskii, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2013, 8, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keys and A. R. Barron, Main Group Chem., 2005, 4, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Simpkins, S. Hong, R. Stine, A. J. Mäkinen, N. D. Theodore, M. A. Mastro, J. C. R. Eddy and P. E. Pehrsson, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 015303 CrossRef .

          E. Brunet, in Metal Phosphonate Chemistry: From Synthesis to Applications, ed. A. Clearfield and K. Demadis, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2012, pp. 279–316 Search PubMed .
G. Guerrero, P. Mutin and A. Vioux, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 3161–3165 RSC .
S. Josse, C. Faucheux, A. Soueidan, G. Grimandi, D. Massiot, B. Alonso, P. Janvier, S. Laib, P. Pilet, O. Gauthier, G. Daculsi, J. Guicheux, B. Bujoli and J.-M. Bouler, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 2073–2080 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pascaud, P. Gras, Y. Coppel, C. Rey and S. Sarda, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 2224–2232 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Hanson, J. Guo, N. Koch, J. Schwartz and S. L. Bernasek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10058–10062 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lafond, C. Gervais, J. Maquet, D. Prochnow, F. Babonneau and P. H. Mutin, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4098–4103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lassiaz, D. Labarre, A. Galarneau, D. Brunel and P. H. Mutin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8199–8205 RSC .
O. Acton, D. Hutchins, L. Arnadottir, T. Weidner, N. Cernetic, G. G. Ting, T.-W. Kim, D. G. Castner, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1899–1902 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maxisch, C. Ebbert, B. Torun, N. Fink, T. de los Arcos, J. Lackmann, H. J. Maier and G. Grundmeier, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2011–2018 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mani, D. M. Johnson, D. Marton, V. L. Dougherty, M. D. Feldman, D. Patel, A. A. Ayon and C. M. Agrawal, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6774–6784 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Liakos, R. C. Newman, E. McAlpine and M. R. Alexander, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 995–999 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Liao, H. Anwar, I. G. Hill, G. K. Vertelov and J. Schwartz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6735–6746 CAS .
S. Marcinko and A. Y. Fadeev, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2270–2273 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhure, A. Mahapatro, C. Bonner and T. M. Abdel-Fattah, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2013, 33, 2050–2058 CrossRef CAS .
K.-M. Jo, H.-Z. Yu and H.-S. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4828–4833 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lecollinet, N. Delorme, M. Edely, A. Gibaud, J. F. Bardeau, F. Hindré, F. Boury and D. Portet, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7828–7835 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Griffith, M. D. L. Reyes, N. Scales, J. V. Hanna and V. Luca, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3436–3446 CAS .
P. Cao, L. Tong, Y. Hou, G. Zhao, G. Guerin, M. A. Winnik and M. Nitz, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12861–12870 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ide, G. L. Drisko, N. Scales, V. Luca, C. H. Schiesser and R. A. Caruso, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12985–12995 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rehor, V. Kubicek, J. Kotek, P. Hermann, J. Szakova and I. Lukes, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1981–1989 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ironside, M. J. Duer, D. G. Reid and S. Byard, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2010, 76, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pawsey, M. McCormick, P. S. De, R. Graf, Y. S. Lee, L. Reven and H. W. Spiess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4174–4184 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Wu, in NMR of Quadrupolar Nuclei in Solid Materials, R. E Wasylishen, S. E. Ashbrook, S. Wimperis, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,  2012, pp. 273–290 Search PubMed .

          S. E. Ashbrook and M. E. Smith, in NMR of Quadrupolar Nuclei in Solid Materials, R. E Wasylishen, S. E. Ashbrook, S. Wimperis, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,  2012, pp. 291–320 Search PubMed .
F. Blanc, L. Sperrin, D. A. Jefferson, S. Pawsey, M. Rosay and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2975–2978 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aiello, N. Folliet, G. Laurent, F. Testa, C. Gervais, F. Babonneau and T. Azais, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 166, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagyu, M. Yoshitake, N. Tsud and T. Chikyow, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 1140–1143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gliboff, L. Sang, K. M. Knesting, M. C. Schalnat, A. Mudalige, E. L. Ratcliff, H. Li, A. K. Sigdel, A. J. Giordano, J. J. Berry, D. Nordlund, G. T. Seidler, J.-L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, J. E. Pemberton and D. S. Ginger, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 2166–2174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dubey, T. Weidner, L. J. Gamble and D. G. Castner, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14747–14754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Novak, A. Ebel, T. Meyer-Friedrichsen, A. Jedaa, B. F. Vieweg, G. Yang, K. Voitchovsky, F. Stellacci, E. Spiecker, A. Hirsch and M. Halik, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 156–159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaelblein, R. T. Weitz, H. J. Boettcher, F. Ante, U. Zschieschang, K. Kern and H. Klauk, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5309–5315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang, J. Pflaum and M. Halik, Nature, 2007, 445, 745–748 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kraft, U. Zschieschang, F. Ante, D. Kaelblein, C. Kamella, K. Amsharov, M. Jansen, K. Kern, E. Weber and H. Klauk, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6416–6418 RSC .
O. Acton, I. Osaka, G. Ting, D. Hutchins, H. Ma, R. D. McCullough and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 113305/01–113305/03 CrossRef .
A. Y. Amin, K. Reuter, T. Meyer-Friedrichsen and M. Halik, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 15340–15344 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Hutchins, O. Acton, T. Weidner, N. Cernetic, J. E. Baio, G. Ting, D. G. Castner, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 464–468 CrossRef CAS .
U. Zschieschang, M. Halik and H. Klauk, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1665–1669 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta and H. Gleskova, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 354–361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jedaa, M. Burkhardt, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk, D. Habich, G. Schmid and M. Halik, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1442–1447 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Hutchins, O. Acton, T. Weidner, N. Cernetic, J. E. Baio, D. G. Castner, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 261, 908–915 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Ting, O. Acton, H. Ma, J. W. Ka and A. K. Y. Jen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2140–2147 CrossRef CAS .
O. Acton, G. G. Ting, P. J. Shamberger, F. S. Ohuchi, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 511–520 CAS .
K. Fukuda, T. Hamamoto, T. Yokota, T. Sekitani, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk and T. Someya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95 Search PubMed  , 203301-1/203301-3.
D. O. Hutchins, T. Weidner, J. Baio, B. Polishak, O. Acton, N. Cernetic, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 101–113 RSC .
U. Zschieschang, F. Ante, M. Schlörholz, M. Schmidt, K. Kern and H. Klauk, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4489–4493 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cernetic, O. Acton, T. Weidner, D. O. Hutchins, J. E. Baio, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 3226–3233 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Losego, J. T. Guske, A. Efremenko, J.-P. Maria and S. Franzen, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11883–11888 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. J. Appleyard, S. R. Day, R. D. Pickford and M. R. Willis, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 169–173 RSC .
A. Sharma, P. J. Hotchkiss, S. R. Marder and B. Kippelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 084507/1–084507/6 CAS .
J. Guo, N. Koch, S. L. Bernasek and J. Schwartz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 426, 370–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bardecker, H. Ma, T. Kim, F. Huang, M. S. Liu, Y.-J. Cheng, G. Ting and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3964–3971 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Paniagua, P. J. Hotchkiss, S. C. Jones, S. R. Marder, A. Mudalige, F. S. Marrikar, J. E. Pemberton and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7809–7817 CAS .
B. A. MacLeod, N. E. Horwitz, E. L. Ratcliff, J. L. Jenkins, N. R. Armstrong, A. J. Giordano, P. J. Hotchkiss, S. R. Marder, C. T. Campbell and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1202–1207 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and I. G. Hill, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 498–505 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Knesting, P. J. Hotchkiss, B. A. MacLeod, S. R. Marder and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 642–646 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, J. W. Shim, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, A. Sharma, K. A. Knauer, A. J. Giordano, S. R. Marder and B. Kippelen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12014–12021 RSC .
S. K. Hau, Y.-J. Cheng, H.-L. Yip, Y. Zhang, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1892–1902 CAS .
T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, A. Ebel, F. C. Krebs, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 532–535 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, A. P. Alivisatos, C. Pitois, C. Edder and J. M. J. Frechet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. MacDonald, P. A. Veneman, D. Placencia and N. R. Armstrong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9623–9636 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Lin, N. W. Polaske, L. E. Oquendo, M. Gliboff, K. M. Knesting, D. Nordlund, D. S. Ginger, E. L. Ratcliff, B. M. Beam, N. R. Armstrong, D. V. McGrath and S. S. Saavedra, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1154–1158 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Hsu, L. Wang and W.-F. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 329, 182–187 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bulusu, S. A. Paniagua, B. A. MacLeod, A. K. Sigdel, J. J. Berry, D. C. Olson, S. R. Marder and S. Graham, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3935–3942 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Cho, C.-C. Chu, W.-T. Chen, T.-C. Huang and Y.-T. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2915–2921 RSC .
E. Jakubikova, R. C. Snoeberger III, V. S. Batista, R. L. Martin and E. R. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 12532–12540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, S. Plogmaker, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Pechy, H. Rensmo, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hanson, M. K. Brennaman, A. Ito, H. Luo, W. Song, K. A. Parker, R. Ghosh, M. R. Norris, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14837–14847 CAS .
K. Hanson, M. K. Brennaman, H. Luo, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion, W. Song and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1462–1469 CAS .
K. R. Mulhern, A. Orchard, D. F. Watson and M. R. Detty, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7071–7082 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Brown, P. A. Schauer, J. Borau-Garcia, B. R. Fancy and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2013, 135, 1692–1695 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ambrosio, N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2622–2629 CAS .
G. Mani, N. Torres and S. Oh, Biointerphases, 2011, 6, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lancaster, S. Kakade and G. Mani, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11511–11526 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maho, S. Linden, C. Arnould, S. Detriche, J. Delhalle and Z. Mekhalif, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 371, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gupta and M. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3995–4021 CrossRef CAS .
E. Duguet, S. Vasseur, S. Mornet and J.-M. Devoiselle, Nanomedicine, 2006, 1, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lartigue, C. Innocenti, T. Kalaivani, A. Awwad, D. M. d. M. Sanchez, Y. Guari, J. Larionova, C. Guerin, J.-L. G. Montero, V. Barragan-Montero, P. Arosio, A. Lascialfari, D. Gatteschi and C. Sangregorio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10459–10472 CrossRef CAS .
R. Torres Martin de Rosales, R. Tavaré, A. Glaria, G. Varma, A. Protti and P. J. Blower, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 455–465 CrossRef .
H. Dong, J. Huang, R. R. Koepsel, P. Ye, A. J. Russell and K. Matyjaszewski, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1305–1311 CrossRef CAS .
B. Basly, D. Felder-Flesch, P. Perriat, G. Pourroy and S. Begin-Colin, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2011, 6, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
G. Collins and J. D. Holmes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11052–11069 RSC .
G. J. Zhang and Y. Ning, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 749, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Chang, F. N. Ishikawa, R. Zhang, R. Datar, R. J. Cote, M. E. Thompson and C. W. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9883–9891 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, M. Curreli and M. E. Thompson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4765–4769 CAS .
H. Li, T. Y. Ma, D. M. Kong and Z. Y. Yuan, Analyst, 2013, 138, 1084–1090 RSC .
A. Cattani-Scholz, D. Pedone, F. Blobner, G. Abstreiter, J. Schwartz, M. Tornow and L. Andruzzi, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 489–496 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hofmann, A. Cattani-Scholz, A. D. Mallorqui, I. D. Sharp, I. M. A. Fontcuberta and I. C. L. Moreno, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shang, F. Cheng, M. Dubey, J. M. Kaplan, M. Rawal, X. Jiang, D. S. Newburg, P. A. Sullivan, R. B. Andrade and D. M. Ratner, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3338–3344 CrossRef CAS .

          K. D. Demadis, M. Papadaki and D. Varouchas, in Green Corrosion Chemistry and Engineering, ed. S. K. Sharma, Wiley,  2011, pp. 243–296 Search PubMed .
M. Papadaki and K. D. Demadis, Comments Inorg. Chem., 2009, 30, 89–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rohwerder and M. Stratmann, MRS Bull., 1999, 24, 43–47 CAS .
J.-K. Shang, T. Du and A. J. G. Van, Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng., 1999, 81, 423–424 CAS .
J. Telegdi, T. Rigo, E. Pfeifer, T. Keszthelyi and E. Kalman, Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci., 2008, 135, 77–86 CAS .
A. Paszternak, I. Felhosi, Z. Paszti, E. Kuzmann, A. Vertes, E. Kalman and L. Nyikos, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 804–812 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maxisch, P. Thissen, M. Giza and G. Grundmeier, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6042–6048 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Perkins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18276–18286 CAS .
G. Zorn, R. Adadi, R. Brener, V. A. Yakovlev, I. Gotman, E. Y. Gutmanas and C. N. Sukenik, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5368–5374 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taguchi and F. Schüth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 77, 1–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Blümel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 2410–2423 CrossRef .
A. Hu, S. Liu and W. Lin, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2576–2580 RSC .
A. K. Tucker-Schwartz and R. L. Garrell, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 12718–12726 CrossRef CAS  , S12718/12711–S12718/12731.
G. Chouhan, D. Wang and H. Alper, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4809–4811 RSC .
T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka, T. Morikawa, M. Iwaki, S. Sato, S. Saeki, M. Inoue, T. Kajino and T. Motohiro, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8673–8675 RSC .
G. D. Sizgek, C. S. Griffith, E. Sizgek and V. Luca, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11874–11882 CrossRef CAS .
W. O. Yah, K. Yamamoto, N. Jiravanichanun, H. Otsuka and A. Takahara, Materials, 2010, 3, 1709–1745 CrossRef CAS .
J. Svehla, S. Pabisch, B. Feichtenschlager, D. Holzmann, H. Peterlik and G. Kickelbick, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. O'Brien, S. Shenogin, J. Liu, P. K. Chow, D. Laurencin, P. H. Mutin, M. Yamaguchi, P. Keblinski and G. Ramanath, Nat. Mater., 2012, 12, 118–122 CrossRef .
J. J. Ma, J. X. Yang, Y. W. Huang and K. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2007–2017 RSC .
Y. Imai, A. Terahara, Y. Hakuta, K. Matsui, H. Hayashi and N. Ueno, Polym. J., 2010, 42, 179–184 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Chow, Y. C. Quintero, P. O'Brien, P. H. Mutin, M. Lane, R. Ramprasad and G. Ramanath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 201605–201608 CrossRef .
G. Ilia and M. Drehe, Fire Mater., 2010, 34, 271–283 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and L. Zhu, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1421–1429 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, X.
H. Zhang, B. Domercq, S. C. Jones, P. J. Hotchkiss, S. R. Marder, B. Kippelen and J. W. Perry, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 013302/013301–013302/013303 Search PubMed .
P. Kim, N. M. Doss, J. P. Tillotson, P. J. Hotchkiss, M.-J. Pan, S. R. Marder, J. Li, J. P. Calame and J. W. Perry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2581–2592 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Beier, M. A. Cuevas and R. L. Brutchey, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5067–5071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chon, S. Ye, K. J. Cha, S. C. Lee, Y. S. Koo, J. H. Jung and Y. K. Kwon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5445–5452 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Tchoul, S. P. Fillery, H. Koerner, L. F. Drummy, F. T. Oyerokun, P. A. Mirau, M. F. Durstock and R. A. Vaia, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1749–1759 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Perry, J. Law, J. Zon and A. Clearfield, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 149, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Amghouz, J. R. Garcia, S. Garcia-Granda, A. Clearfield, F. J. Rodriguez, P. I. de and J. A. Blanco, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 536, S499–S503 CrossRef CAS .
P. Leidinger, S. Simonato and C. Feldmann, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7046–7048 RSC .
Y.-Z. Zheng, M. Evangelisti and R. E. P. Winpenny, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3692–3695 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barsukova-Stuckart, N. V. Izarova, R. A. Barrett, Z. Wang, T. J. van, H. W. Kroto, N. S. Dalal, P. Jimenez-Lozano, J. J. Carbo, J. M. Poblet, G. M. S. von, T. Drewello, O. P. de, B. Keita and U. Kortz, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 13214–13228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boujtita, J. Boixel, E. Blart, C. R. Mayer and F. Odobel, Polyhedron, 2008, 27, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .
R. Villanneau, A. Marzouk, Y. Wang, A. B. Djamaa, G. Laugel, A. Proust and F. Launay, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 2958–2965 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2691–2703 RSC .
A. Harriman, K. J. Elliott, M. A. H. Alamiry, P. L. Le, M. Severac, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, C. Fosse, C. Cannizzo, C. R. Mayer and F. Odobel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5834–5842 CAS .
K. J. Elliott, A. Harriman, P. L. Le, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, C. R. Mayer and F. Odobel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 8767–8773 RSC .
M. Carraro, G. Modugno, A. Sartorel, G. Scorrano and M. Bonchio, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 5164–5174 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dolbecq, P. Mialane, F. Secheresse, B. Keita and L. Nadjo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8299–8316 RSC .
G. Zhang, B. Keita, A. Dolbecq, P. Mialane, F. Secheresse, F. Miserque and L. Nadjo, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5821–5823 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Examples of coordination modes of phosphonates. (a) Examples of coordination modes of R-PO32−, (b) examples of coordination modes of R-PO2(OH)−, and (c) examples of grafting modes of phosphonates on POMs.45,46	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the phosphonate surface species in monolayers formed by the reaction of a phosphonic acid with an oxide surface.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic views of field-effect transistors (FETs) involving PA SAMs. (a) Top-contact bottom-gate OTFT with a SAM-modified metal oxide gate dielectric (AlOx, HfOx, AlOx/SiOx); (b) bottom-contact bottom-gate OTFT using a single-component spin-cast SAM to simultaneous modify metal contact (Ag) and dielectric (AlOx) surfaces;70 (c) top-contact bottom-gate SAM-FET with a semiconducting SAM replacing the organic semiconductor layer;118 (d) top-gate nanowire FET with a SAM as a gate dielectric.119	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic view of an OLED with a SAM-modified ITO transparent electrode, and examples of PAs used to tune the surface energy and work function of ITO in OLEDs: the 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluorooctyl phosphonic acid (FHOPA) and the pentafluorobenzyl phosphonic acid (PFBPA).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic views of OPVCs involving PA SAMs. (a) Conventional OPVC with a SAM-modified ITO transparent electrode;144 (b) inverted OPVC with a SAM-modified ZnO electron selective layer.146	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC).	 

 	Fig. 7  Ruthenium dye functionalized by both phosphonic and carboxylic acids.158	 

 	Fig. 8  Examples of iron oxide nanoparticles functionalized by phosphonates for bio-applications.	 

 	Fig. 9  Immobilization of catalysts and ligands on magnetic nanoparticles. (a) Immobilization of chiral BINAP–Ruthenium–DPEN complexes for the asymmetric hydrogenation of aromatic ketones;188 (b) immobilization of TEMPO for the oxidation of alcohols;189 (c) immobilization of proline ligands for the CuI catalyzed arylation of nitrogen nucleophiles.190	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
