A critical review on tin halide perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA00929A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00929A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518-11549A critical review on tin halide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Maria 
            Konstantakou
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Stergiopoulos
          
          
        
      *
      Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. E-mail: stergt@chem.auth.gr;   Tel: +30 2310997752
Received 
      28th January 2017
    , Accepted 20th March 2017First published on 23rd March 2017AbstractAPbI3−xBrx perovskite solar cells with the bandgap of ∼1.5–1.6 eV, where A represents caesium, methylammonium, formamidinium and mixtures thereof, currently present certified efficiencies very close to those of established thin film technologies (such as CIGS and CdTe) and are thus one of the most important optoelectronics. To restrict the use of lead, as well as to tune the band gap of the material close to the optimum according to the Shockley–Queisser limit (being 1.34 eV), substitution (total or partial) of Pb2+ by Sn2+ should take place. In this review, we present results on single junction solar cells, utilizing CsSnI3−xBrx, CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx or NH2CHNH2SnI3−xBrx perovskites as absorbers, as well as a mixture of Sn2+/Pb2+ being adopted as the metal binary cation, reducing the bandgap to 1.2–1.4 eV. We also highlight very recently recorded efficiencies of perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cells, produced by the combination of the above low band gap materials with typical highly performing semi-transparent APbI3−xBrx perovskites of a higher band gap (close to 1.6–1.8 eV). We discuss these fascinating results, focusing on some key points such as, among others, the role of the tin compensator/reducing agent (usually SnF2) during perovskite crystallization. In addition, we present the critical challenges that currently limit the efficiency/stability of these systems and propose prospects for future directions.Thomas StergiopoulosThomas Stergiopoulos is a Lecturer in the Department of Chemistry at Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (Greece), working on perovskite optoelectronics. He just finished a two year Marie Curie IEF fellowship, working at the Clarendon Laboratory at University of Oxford, with Prof. Henry J. Snaith on perovskite solar cells. Before that, he obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry, working at the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Greece), while being a visiting researcher for one year at the CNRS-Laboratoire Interfaces et Systemes Electrochimiques (LISE) in Paris (France). Besides doing science and raising two lovely young boys, Thomas is scouting players for his favourite basketball team.
1. Introduction
Perovskite, having the structure of mineral CaTiO3, has been an integral part of materials chemistry. Black halide perovskites were introduced for the first time in 1978 (ref. 1) and it took 28 years for these materials to be used in solar cells.2 A scientific “full moon” hit the field in 2012 when independent laboratories entered the field, altering the device structure and boosting the efficiencies (PCEs) from nearly 4% (ref. 3) up to 10–12% under standard 1 sun AM1.5G illumination, using the archetypal MAPbI3 perovskite with an optical bandgap of around 1.6 eV.4 After nearly 5 years, solar cells, adopting an absorber with the more complex molecular formula of [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15], exhibiting lower bandgap and enhanced electronic properties, have reached PCEs of around 21%; even more importantly, these PCEs are now certified from accredited laboratories.5 These PCEs are equivalent to others attained from emerging thin-film technologies such as CdTE and CIGS solar cells;6 this success story, along with outstanding proof-of-concept results in other applications such as photodetectors and LEDs,7 enabled this infant technology to soon join the major league of optoelectronics.8
As one can see, these highly-efficient materials contain pure lead, which is a highly toxic metal.9 Additionally, their optical bandgap (FAPbI3 has the lowest bandgap of 1.48 eV) is far from being the optimum, according to the Shockley–Queisser limit (1.34 eV).10 Fortunately, a solution to these issues could come from tin, which sits just above lead in group 14 of the periodic table. Tin is considered as an environmentally friendly alternative to lead, even though there are serious concerns regarding its suitability.11 A very consistent commentary on this topic has been recently published by Babayigit et al.;12 further discussion on this debate is completely out of the scope of this review. Then, ASnI3 perovskites (with A = Cs, MA and FA) have shown very suitable optical bandgaps of the order of 1.2–1.4 eV.13 Interestingly, similar, or even lower bandgaps could be attained through mixtures of lead with tin due to the anomalous bandgap effect,14 significantly enhancing the air stability of the compounds and the corresponding devices.15 Besides fabricating single junction solar cells based on pure tin or mixed lead–tin perovskites with efficiencies that could go up to approximately 33%,16 we notice that these bandgaps are ideal for a bottom cell in a tandem configuration. Tandems have a theoretical maximum of more than 40%;17 thus, a perovskite-on-perovskite tandem with a bottom cell of 1.2 eV could be envisaged, which would be otherwise impossible in the case of pure lead perovskites. Luckily, all these expectations seem to be met, most of them during the last six months; efficiencies of pure tin have gone up to 6%,18 those of with mixed lead–tin at 15%,19 while a four-terminal perovskite-on-perovskite tandem reached up to 20%.17 These latest results have been the motivation for us to write this review.
Therefore, we present here all the results reported on various types of solar cells, at the core of which the absorber consists of a perovskite which contains Sn2+ as the sole cation, or mixed with Pb2+. The review consists of 4 main parts. Before going straight into the solar cells, we provide a few very important features of the Sn2+-based perovskites (such as optical and charge transport/recombination properties) in direct comparison to typical Pb2+ perovskites; properties of single crystals (or pellets/ingots containing small single crystals) and polycrystalline films are provided. Then, in the second part of the review, single junction solar cells made of CsSnI3, MASnI3 (MA = CH3NH2) and FASnI3 (FA = NH2CHNH2) are reviewed. We proceed to the results presentation dividing them in subsections where critical points are commented on. For instance, a big part of the review on pure tin perovskites is devoted to the discussion of the importance (or not) of the use of tin compensators/reducing agents (tin salts, hypophosphorous acid, hydrazine, etc.) in order to prevent excessive hole doping. In terms of stability issues, we focus mainly on the humid air stability of the devices, which is crucial; stability results under nitrogen are simply reported, where appropriate. In the third part, solar cells, where mixtures of Sn2+ and Pb2+ are used at the B site (in various mixing ratios), are discussed, where a severe reduction of the band gap and an increase of the efficiency–reproducibility of the devices take place. Finally, we end this review by presenting very recent results obtained in perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cells, where one of the perovskites is based on the Sn2+ cation. At the very end of the review, we summarize the results thus far, providing a status of the current situation and giving an outlook of the future research in the field.
Reading this review, one will always meet the terms “normal” and “inverted” device. We would like to clarify here that when we write normal cells, the structure is conductive glass/TiO2/perovskite/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD)/metal. The term “normal/meso” is used when a mesoporous layer is incorporated between TiO2 and the perovskite. In turn, by the term “inverted” we mean ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/metal. Whenever other interlayers are added to the cell structure, their addition is highlighted in the tables that summarize the performance of the devices. Additionally, with the term “stabilized” efficiency, we refer to the determined value of the efficiency after holding the tested device at a constant voltage around the maximum power-point and track the power-output until it reaches a constant value.
Finally, we would like to note that we will not comment on recent results obtained with either liquid electrolytes,20 or with Sn4+ absorbers21 because they lie outside of the scope of this review.
2. The characteristics of the Sn2+-based 3D perovskites
2.1 Main intrinsic properties
Weber's seminal paper in 1978 (ref. 1) provided the springboard for the application-oriented work of Mitzi and coworkers who, in the mid 1990s, started a broader exploration of the hybrid halide systems with particular focus on the Sn-based systems. For instance, Kagan et al. were the first to demonstrate efficient field-effect transistors with layered tin perovskites, taking advantage of their high mobilities.23 It was then demonstrated that by controlling the thickness of the perovskite sheets (i.e. increasing the thickness of the layers), a metal-like perovskite with optimum conductivity could be formed, ultimately 3D MASnI3. The unusual electrical conductivity in each of these metal halide-based systems arises from the large dispersion of the Sn 5s band (hybridized with I 5p) along the 〈111〉 direction in the cubic Brillouin zone, leading to a marginal crossing of the Sn 5s and Sn 5p bands near the R point ([1/2, 1/2, 1/2]2π/a), with the Fermi energy falling roughly between the two bands.24 That said, conductivity depends on the Sn–I bond length as well as on the crystal symmetry; the higher the Sn–I bond length, the lower the conductivity. Again, the higher the distortion from perfect octahedral arrangement (tilting), the lower the conductivity.25 We will see that high mobility is a unique property, enabling these materials to sustain an affordable charge carrier diffusion length.
Additionally, tin halide perovskites are direct gap semiconductors, like their Pb-analogues; i.e. the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum lie at the same point in reciprocal space (k-space).27 Their bandgap is dependent on the A cation (A = Cs, MA, FA) and the crystal structure (see a characteristic example of tetragonal MASnI3 in Fig. 1); nonetheless, they exhibit lower optical bandgap than that of their Pb analogues, primarily as a result of different relativistic interactions. Because relativistic effects scale with atomic mass, spin–orbit coupling is enhanced roughly 3-fold in Pb perovskites, compared to their Sn analogues.28 As direct semiconductors, their absorption coefficients are high; however, the absorbance above the bandgap is weaker than that of the lead perovskites.29 Additionally, there are reports verifying that the absorption coefficients of MASnI3 films at the band gap are roughly one order of magnitude lower than those of the typical MAPbI3.22,30
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of tetragonal MASnI3. (b) Absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the MASnI3 and MAPbI3 perovskites. Note that the optical bandgap is severely reduced upon Sn2+ usage (from 1.61 to 1.23 eV); simultaneously, the PL peak of MASnI3 is broader than that of MAPbI3, implying more defects within the tin perovskite. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The majority of 3D Sn perovskites exhibit binding energies within a range similar to that of the lead perovskites (2–50 meV), indicating that exciton ionization is not a limiting factor in these materials.26 The small binding energies of the Sn-based perovskites could be attributed to the exceptionally low effective masses of both electrons and holes;27 small effective masses most probably arise from the large dispersion of the conduction and valence band (in comparison to the bands of the lead analogues).31
A summary of the intrinsic properties of the materials can be found in Table 1. More insights into the physics and chemistry of these fascinating materials can be found in ref. 13, 26, 31 and 32; our main focus here is to provide some fundamentals, which will assist the reader to better understand the discussion to follow on the photovoltaic performance of the devices.
Table 1 Main physical properties of tin based perovskites (pure or mixed with lead), in comparison to the model MAPbI3 compound. Most of the data originate from ref. 13 and 26




Perovskite
Direct bandgap (eV)
Absorption coefficient (cm−1)
Effective mass me/mh (in units of free electron mass)
Exciton binding energy (meV)
Bulk RT electrical conductivity (S cm−1)
Intrinsic carrier concentration (cm−3)
RT crystal system




MAPbI3
∼1.58
105
0.19–0.25
2–62
3 × 10−4
109
Tetragonal


MASnI3
∼1.25–1.3
104 to 105
0.28/0.13
29
5 × 10−2 to 2
1014
Tetragonal


FASnI3
∼1.40
105
—
31
8 × 10−2
1011 (cubic) to 1014
Orthorhombic/cubic


CsSnI3
1.30
105
—/0.07 (cubic)
18
20
1014 to 1019
Orthorhombic (B-γ/Y phase)/cubic


MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.17
104 (theoretical)
0.16/0.15
15.1
2 × 10−3
1014
Tetragonal




2.2 Charge transport/recombination
It is well known that the crucial properties affecting the solar cell performance are doping densities, carrier lifetimes, mobilities and diffusion lengths (LD). For pure lead perovskites, Wehrenfennig et al. highlighted that the ratio of the bimolecular recombination rate constant of MAPbI3 (∼10−10 cm3 s−1) to the charge-carrier mobility μ (∼10 cm2 V−1 s−1) was exceptionally low, a scenario that defied the Langevin limit by at least four orders of magnitude.33 It has been shown that if bimolecular rate constants adhered to the prediction of Langevin theory, LD ∼ 100 nm would be expected for MAPbI3 (as opposed to an actual value of 3 μm),34 making non-Langevin recombination a crucial prerequisite for solar cells. Interestingly, such low (non-Langevin) ratios of bimolecular recombination rate constants to motilities have also been determined for MASnI3.22 Low radiative bimolecular recombination by itself may not be an aim for optoelectronic materials because it could also lower absorption coefficients; that said, FASnI3 was found to be highly suited to lasing applications because it exhibits high charge-carrier mobility in combination with very low Auger and strong radiative bimolecular recombination rate constants, similar to GaAs.35
In turn, for lead perovskite solar cells under AM1.5 illumination, typical charge-carrier concentrations are relatively low (1015 to 1016 cm−3); hence, much more importance has been given to the monomolecular recombination, that is, recombination through traps (capture of one electron or hole in a specific trap state). For MASnI3 infused into a mesoporous metal oxide layer, a value of 8 × 109 s−1 has been reported, which is orders of magnitude above values typically found for MAPbI3.36 This effect has been attributed to the fast recombination of electrons with a high density of p-type charge carriers resulting from self-doping. With knowledge of the effective free carrier mobility (being as high as 1.6 cm2 V−1 s−1) and the estimated monomolecular recombination lifetime (around 0.2 ns), a charge-diffusion length of only 30 nm was derived under realistic device operating conditions. The authors suggested that LD would substantially increase as soon as the doping density decreased from 1018 to 1015 cm−3 (it would go up to over 1 μm).22
These predictions were somewhat verified very recently when CsSnI3 ingots, containing high quality single crystals, exhibited diffusion lengths approaching 1 μm, with a doping density of ∼5 × 1017 cm−3 and bulk carrier lifetimes of 6.6 ns. Wu et al. also compared these values with CsSnI3 polycrystalline films (which by default have grain boundaries), exhibiting a LD of 16 nm; as a conclusion, the authors suggested replacing these films with melt-synthesized ingots in order to provide a performance leap for CsSnI3-based solar cells (Fig. 2).37
 Fig. 2  (a) PL dynamics with different photoexcitation energies. Solid lines are fits using an appropriate diffusion model. Note the long PL lifetimes (6.6 ns), which are responsible for the estimated long diffusion length. Bottom: Fitting residuals. (b) Prediction of solar cell performance parameters as a function of grain size. SC stands for single crystals. Solid circles are experimental data obtained for solar cells based on CsSnI3 polycrystalline (PC) thin films (see corresponding reference for details). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Even though the above value looks impressive, we ought to note that MAPbI3 single crystals could produce charge diffusion lengths over 175 μm under 1 sun illumination.38 In any case, this result could have been limited by low quality polycrystalline films; moreover, it could very well be that their comparison is applicable only in the case of CsSnI3.
Indeed, very recently, Ma et al. estimated, through absorption and fluorescence lifetime measurements, the diffusion lengths of MASnI3 films, which present high electronic quality upon tin compensation (this issue will be explored in Section 3.1). First, they measured the charge diffusion coefficients, being as high as 1.3 cm2 s−1 and 0.6 cm2 s−1 for electrons and holes, respectively.30 These values are 30 times larger than those attained by pure lead perovskites.39 Combining these values with monomolecular recombination lifetimes of 5.8 ns, hole diffusion lengths of close to 550 nm could be attained; interestingly, SnF2 decreased the LD of electrons while more than doubling the LD of holes. Notably, if we use a record lifetime of 10 ns (found in the paper) and couple it with the average electron diffusion coefficient of 1 cm2 s−1, a diffusion length of electrons of 1 μm could even be estimated;30 recall that this is a diffusion length of a polycrystalline film. Good values of monomolecular recombination lifetimes (6.6 ns) were also attained by the FASnI3 perovskite.18
These results seemed to be reproduced very recently;40 this time, the measured monomolecular recombination lifetimes were very low, of the order of 0.9 ns (similar to what Noel et al. have reported).22 However, the authors were able to estimate a THz mobility of 100 to 200 cm2 V−1 s−1;40 thus, roughly we could estimate an anticipated diffusion length of 650 nm, a value very close to that reported by Ma and coworkers.30 Interestingly, high values of LD (300 nm) were estimated for mixed Pb/Sn perovskites (50–50 ratio) as well.17Table 2 summarizes transport/recombination characteristics of various types of perovskites containing tin, lead or mixtures of them.
Table 2 Summary of transport–recombination characteristics of main three-dimensional pure Sn2+ or mixed Sn2+–Pb2+ halide perovskites. The properties of MAPbI3 are also given for comparison. Data are missing from some of the materials; however, we compiled this table in order to highlight the fact that the values of these properties need to be measured (in the near future). With this, we will have a fairer comparison and understand the differences between the materials. The reader can also find important values concerning bimolecular recombination rate constants and Urbach energies by looking carefully at the main text




Material
Monomolecular recombination lifetime (ns)
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Diffusion length (μm)




MAPbI3 single crystal
500–1000
24–105
2–175


MAPbI3 polycrystalline film
10–1000
0.4–35
0.1–2.7


MASnI3 single crystal13


150–2000




MASnI3 polycrystalline film
0.2–10.3
1.6–170
0.03–0.55


CsSnI3 ingot37
6.6
536
0.93


CsSnI3 polycrystalline film
0.05–19.7
585
0.016


FASnI3 single crystal13


103




FASnI3 polycrystalline film43
0.2–6.8
22 (cubic)




FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 polycrystalline film
2
17
0.21


FA0.8Cs0.2Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 polycrystalline film
1
14
0.19


FA0.6MA0.4Pb0.4Sn0.6I3 polycrystalline film
6.7
—
—


MAPb0.4Sn0.6I3 polycrystalline film
0.87
190




MAPb0.2Sn0.8I3 polycrystalline film
0.95
120






In any case, the above features prove that Sn-perovskites have nearly comparable (optical and) electronic properties to Pb-perovskites. In the following, we will see whether these materials were able to reach their rivals in terms of photovoltaic performance.
3. Pure Sn2+-based perovskites: single junction solar cells with varying organic/inorganic cations at the A site
3.1 All inorganic (less toxic) CsSnI3−xBrx

3.1.1 The first work back in 2012. 
We start our review on pure tin perovskite solar cells with CsSnI3, as this was the first “eco-friendly” material used as absorber in a solar cell configuration; it was previously commented that although the toxicity of organic–inorganic hybrid MASnI3 perovskite is comparable to the Pb-based perovskites, the all-inorganic Sn-based perovskite, with a much lower solubility in fat, could be less toxic to the human body.12 Back in 2012, Chen et al.44 thought of using a semiconductor with a bandgap close to ideal (1.3 eV) as an absorber in a Schottky-type solar cell, possessing an exciton binding energy as low as 18 meV,45 implying that most of the photogenerated carriers are practically free and simply need a driving force to move in a separate direction towards the contacts. The perovskite was deposited on Ti/Au through sequential evaporation of SnCl2/CsI pairs. Sputtered ITO served as the transparent hole contact. The photovoltaic effect was mainly driven by the built-in-field at the CsSnI3/Au junction, producing a Voc of 0.42 V and an overall efficiency of 0.9%. We should note here that Chen's paper was submitted a couple of months after Mike Lee's paper submission in Science4a and it was still not cited.


3.1.2 Origin of hole doping. 
By that time, a seminal work was published by the group of Kanatzidis, demonstrating that black orthorhombic CsSnI3 is a direct p-type semiconductor with an intrinsic carrier concentration of ∼1017 cm−3 and an enormous hole mobility of 585 cm2 V−1 s−1. The origin of the semi-metallic properties of the material was rationalized through DFT calculations, indicating that the conductivity of CsSnI3 arises from Sn2+ vacancies, which happen to have a very low formation energy;42 even if some Sn is missing and thus the compound is off-stoichiometric, it is common in chemistry to still write it as CsSnI3. Later on, the results were further confirmed by Kumar et al.46 and Xu and coworkers.47 Quite notably, the latter authors, by calculating the formation energies of possible intrinsic defects, have given a clear vision of the problem. Sn-rich growth conditions should be used to control the concentration of hole carriers to a moderate level; but not too rich, since extra Sn could occupy I sites and SnI antisite defects also act as recombination centres. Otherwise stated, a Sn self-compensation should be realized, or else, even a very small concentration of Sn vacancies could severely dope the material with holes. The situation is very similar to what is happening to SnTe48 or SnS.49 Attention should be paid to the following: some Sn2+ could be easily lost during spin-coating or thermal evaporation due to vapor pressure; even an imperfect weighing of the tin halide source could lead to a similar situation; obviously, something else will be reduced to preserve charge neutrality in the crystal. One should realize that this is like typical doping, thus very few holes could change the electrical properties of the material.


3.1.3 The role of Sn4+. 
Sn2+ is not only lost through oxidation; yes, it could be oxidized to Sn4+, but essentially if you substitute Sn2+ with Sn4+, you dope the crystal with 2 extra electrons, meaning that you n-dope the material, not the opposite. For instance, n-doping takes place in Pb2+ perovskites by heterovalent substitution; even 0.5% of Bi3+ in the solution, containing the MAPbBr3 precursor, provided extra electrons to the lattice and increased the conductivity of the crystal by more than two orders of magnitude.50 Likewise, in the case of the n-type Cs2SnI6 iodosalt, doping with Sn2+ introduced extra holes into the material, transforming it into p-type, as expected.51 We are not excluding the presence of Sn4+ in the formed perovskite, even inside a glovebox where oxygen and water exist at a 1 ppm level; XPS results cannot justify its presence, since exposure of the films to air before examination is unavoidable. Sn is a very peculiar, multivalent cation; one has to understand that it is rare to meet thermodynamically stable compounds of Pb4+ or Ge2+, but since Sn is in the middle of these elements of group 14 of the periodic table, both 2+ and 4+ oxidation states are equally probable. For instance, in the case of copper zinc tin sulphide cells, Sn2+ co-exists with Sn4+ (acting as a recombination centre when substituting Zn in the crystal lattice), even though the main oxidation state of Sn in CuZnSnS4 is 4+.52
When the black CsSnI3 film (or device) is exposed to humid air, it converts into the yellow phase (Y-CsSnI3). Then more and more Sn2+ is oxidized to Sn4+, also creating oxides and hydroxides. It is well known that oxygen and water could easily diffuse within the film through the grain boundaries.53 When the oxidation is severe (over time), Y-CsSnI3 irreversibly transforms into (light) black Cs2SnI6 with a bandgap of 1.48 eV, after half of the tin atoms are lost (within several hours). One should bear in mind that typical carrier densities of more than 5 × 1018 cm−3 have been estimated for p-type CsSnI3 polycrystalline films in the presence of SnF2 (and more than 1019 cm−3 without tin fluoride);46 solar cells with SnF2-doped CsSnI3 have been previously shown to short-circuit or present a bad diode rectifying behaviour.54,55 If oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ had to do with hole doping, then we believe that the above material (Cs2SnI6) should have been a very heavily, p-type doped material, with anticipated carrier concentrations of more than 1020 to 1021 cm−3 and a very low resistivity. However, electrical measurements have shown that the resistance of Cs2SnI6, after its formation upon exposure to black orthorhombic CsSnI3 films in air, was comparable to that initially obtained for black CsSnI3.56 Additionally, a heavily p-type doped material would probably short-circuit a solar cell, and, most importantly, would not work as an effective absorber. However, a Voc of 0.51 V was very recently reported for a Cs2SnI6 absorber, which is much higher than the average Voc attained by the CsSnI3 absorber in a similar device configuration.21 On the contrary, CsSnI3 with Sn compensation (adding extra 20 mol% of SnF2 in relation to initial SnI2) in the presence of hydrazine, which acts as a very strong reducing agent, protecting the film from the presence of Sn4+, could only reach a Voc of 0.17 V.54 This result further confirms that restricting the presence of Sn4+ from the CsSnI3 film, does not assure reduction of defect recombination.


3.1.4 Sn compensation: SnI2. 
The obvious route to compensate missing Sn2+ was obviously to add more of it. Marshall et al. have added 10 mol% of extra SnI2 into the (8 wt% SnI2:CsI in 1:1 molar ratio) precursor solution, increasing the Voc of the as fabricated solar cells by 30%, topping at 0.55 V and reaching an efficiency of 2.8%. The device was an inverted solar cell, using CuI as the hole contact and an indene-C60 bis-adduct as the electron acceptor. This is a very high value if we take into account the low bandgap of the material (1.3 eV). Unfortunately, the stability of these devices was relatively poor, with a 30% loss in efficiency, when stored in the dark in ambient air for 1 h.57


3.1.5 Sn compensation: SnF2. 
Chung et al. were the first to dope CsSnI3 with SnF2 and they used it as a hole transport material (HTM) in dye solar cells.58 Kumar et al. then adopted the idea and added it into the CsSnI3 precursor solution in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO); 20 mol% was found to be the optimum concentration to form a good mixture with CsSnI3 and produce a film with complete coverage on mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2); note that SnF2 does not get integrated into the lattice to distort the local environment. XRD indicated that the addition of SnF2 eliminated the formation of the yellow non-perovskite polymorph of CsSnI3. Most importantly, the initial high carrier density of CsSnI3 (>1019 cm−3), with holes as the majority carriers, was severely reduced by the presence of SnF2. Solar cells of normal structure, with 4,4′,4′′-tris(N,N-phenyl-3-methylamino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) as the HTM, could produce currents of more than 22 mA cm−2, accompanied by very low values of Voc (0.24 V) and FF (0.37), see Fig. 3a.46 Extraction of even higher photocurrents by SnF2-doped CsSnI3 devices (of the order of 27–30 mA cm−2) was observed by others;54,59 however, all solar cells never presented a good diode rectifying behaviour (FF around 0.30–0.35). The above results imply that severe charge losses still occur, even in the presence of tin fluoride, most probably through monomolecular recombination with trapped charge due to the still high background carrier density (>1017 cm−3).46 We must note here that SnF2 is a strong reducing agent in chemical synthesis, thus it should not solely play the role of the tin compensator in the perovskite precursor solution.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of photovoltaic devices fabricated with different amounts of SnF2 addition, indicating how SnF2 is necessary for functional devices; reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Device stability tests under 1 sun constant illumination in ambient air for unencapsulated devices with the same architecture. Note that SnCl2 doped-CsSnI3 cells are more stable than lead perovskite devices; reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (c) Device performance with and without HPA additive, measured under simulated AM1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiance; reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Scheme of the reducing vapor atmosphere process of MASnI3 (top), CsSnI3 (middle) and CsSnBr3 film preparation, along with a typical “normal” device fabrication; reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.6 Sn compensation: SnCl2. 
In an effort to improve the devices stability when excess of SnI2 was present, Marshall et al. used SnCl2 instead. It is well known that SnCl2 is also a typical reducing agent in chemistry. This time, they deposited the CsSnI3 perovskite (+10 mol% SnCl2) onto UV-ozone treated ITO and the electron contact (PCBM) was deposited on top. Reducing the sampling depth of XRD, the authors were able to reveal that SnCl2 was concentrated at the surface of the CsSnI3 crystallites. The as-fabricated devices presented better efficiencies than those attained by the SnI2 excess-devices (approximately 1% more in absolute efficiency). However, the most notable feature of this study was that the efficiency improved after 5 months of storage under nitrogen, reaching record values of 3.6% (average at 3.4%), accompanied with a Voc of 0.50 V and a FF close to 0.7 (average at 0.68). The efficiency was limited only by the very low thickness of the perovskite film, being 50 nm, able to produce a Jsc of around 10 mA cm−2. The improved performance over time was attributed to continuous n-doping of the fullerene electron-transport layer by SnCl2.
In terms of stability, the SnCl2 excess-devices were tested under continuous simulated solar illumination in ambient air at 50 °C, in comparison with standard MAPbI3 solar cells with the same architecture. Quite notably, the stability of un-encapsulated CsSnI3 devices was improved by at least an order of magnitude as compared to the lead-based devices. This improved stability was rationalized based on the presence of SnCl2, forming a layer on the surface of the perovskite; this layer is considered to cover the pinholes of the perovskite, which could operate as channels for water and oxygen ingress. This layer functions as a desiccant that sacrificially oxidizes, slowing down the oxidation of the underlying CsSnI3 by H2O; SnCl2 is known to form a stable hydrate or SnO2 upon oxidation. This is the first result in literature showing that tin can be more stable than lead under specific conditions (Fig. 2b). We must note here that devices with an excess of SnF2in lieu of SnCl2 exhibited a very poor performance (efficiencies of lower than 0.4%).55


3.1.7 Reducing agents (in the presence of SnF2): hypophosphorous acid. 
Hypophosphorous acid (HPA) is a very powerful reducing agent, acting as a stabilizer of hydroiodic acid aqueous solution; thus, traces of it may be found in methylammonium iodide powder when prepared.60 Stoumpos et al. have used it, following seminal recipes of the past, in order to grow perovskite single crystals of high quality out of solution under I-rich conditions; more specifically, a large excess of HI/H2O was employed as the reaction solvent and HPA was added in a 4:1 ratio in relation to HI, especially in the case of ASnI3 perovskites. The purpose of the HPA addition was to prevent Sn4+ and I3− formation. However, it is quite possible that HPA had another role: it inhibited/reversed the self-doping process and allowed the isolation of the pure stoichiometric compounds in such a way that the as-grown single crystals had a very low carrier concentration (being nearly intrinsic). Note that stoichiometric ratios of AI (A = Cs, MA or FA) and SnI2 were used without any tin compensator during liquid synthesis of ASnI3 single crystals.13 In perovskite films, HPA was added in MAPbI3 precursor solution (in lead acetate/MAI 1:3 molar ratio) to restore I/Pb stoichiometry and inhibit the creation of energetic defects, such as iodide vacancies, in the crystal lattice.61
In the case of tin perovskite solar cells, Li et al. chose cubic CsSnI2Br, with a bandgap of 1.63 eV, as a model compound to study the effects of the addition of HPA.62 Saba et al. have previously used CsSnI2Br along with SnF2, attaining an efficiency of 1.6% with a Voc of 0.31 V. Most importantly, the estimated carrier density was as low as 6 × 1015 cm−3, demonstrating that the introduction of Br severely suppressed the Sn cation vacancies, mainly due to bandgap widening.59 Likewise, Zhang et al. adopted a FASnI2Br perovskite with a bandgap of 1.68 eV, producing efficiencies as high as 1.7%, a Voc of 0.47 V and a FF of 0.4 in a typical inverted device structure; FASnI2Br was prepared without any tin compensation and this is most probably why un-encapsulated devices “died” within minutes when tested in ambient air.63
Li et al. therefore added an excess of 60 mol% SnF2 in CsSnI2Br precursor solution (1 M of 1:1 CsI–SnBr2 in DMSO) and then varied the HPA ratio; 0.5 μl per ml of perovskite solution was found to lead to optimum results. By simple optical measurements in precursor solutions with or without HPA, the authors inferred that new compounds were generated. Upon addition of HPA, the bright yellow colour transforms into dark brown, suggesting a possible intermediate between SnI2 or SnF2 or CsSnI2Br with HPA; it is well known that HPA could strongly coordinate with Sn2+ through an O–P–O–Sn bond interaction. Careful detection of X-ray reflections coming from the CsSnI2Br underlayer, after peeling off the cathode/perovskite capping layer, demonstrated that SnF2 phase separation was avoided when the HPA additive was present. The authors have observed clear phase separation of SnF2 without HPA, in accordance with Kumar et al., who indicated that more than 20 mol% of SnF2 could not properly mix with CsSnI3.46 The situation here looks similar to what Joo Lee et al. have shown by adding pyrazine into the SnF2-doped FASnI3 precursor solution; pyrazine also restricted phase separation for tin fluoride through binding to Sn2+. In both cases, additives seem to simply help SnF2, imposing its uniform spreading in the perovskite, to do its job of reducing tin vacancies. In the work of Li et al., trap-limited PL lifetimes were augmented and charge carrier density decreased (from 1.6 × 1016 to 1.5 × 1015 cm−3) upon HPA addition. These features were clear indications that HPA reduces tin vacancies. However, since experiments reported by Li et al. compared SnF2-doped perovskite with or without HPA, it may well be that proper function of SnF2 is the critical process that compensates tin vacancies (and not HPA itself). Further studies are required to provide more insight into this.
Nevertheless, the HPA-CsSnI2Br devices of normal “monolithic” structure, employing mesoporous thick Al2O3/TiO2 as the anode and 10 μm of carbon as the counter electrode, presented very good efficiencies, of the order of 3.2%, and high reproducibility, accompanied with a Voc of 0.31 V (Fig. 3c). Quite notably, this efficiency was stabilized at 3.3% within 300 s. Most importantly, the stability of the devices was impressive; encapsulated cells were stable for 77 days in ambient environment (humidity ∼ 20%). Moreover, these devices have shown unprecedented thermal stability up to 473 K, retaining 98% of their initial efficiency after holding them under illumination at the maximum power point for 9 h. Likewise, the cells retained 90% of their initial performance at 358 K; contrarily, devices based on MAPbI3 perovskite, maintained only 10% of their starting efficiency under identical conditions. The enhanced stability was attributed to the presence of HPA, protecting Sn2+ from oxidation to Sn4+ (confirmed by XPS). Increased tolerance towards oxidation could also take place due to HPA decreasing the surrounding oxygen levels; H3PO2 reacts slowly with O2, thus it can act as an oxygen sink. We should note here that the authors are not stating that the Sn and Pb based devices were of exactly similar structure.


3.1.8 Reducing agents (in the presence of SnF2): hydrazine. 
As we have seen in the previous paragraph, it seems that SnF2 does the job, but in a quite irreproducible way, most probably due to uncontrollable uniform perovskite formation; this is why we frequently read reports in literature where SnF2-doped CsSnI3 devices do not present any proper electrical characteristics or just produce a current with a marginal shunt resistance with efficiencies as low as 0.2–0.4%.54,55
Motivated by this, Song et al. have incorporated hydrazine as reducing agent in 1.25 eV CsSnI3 films, doped with 20 mol% SnF2.54 Hydrazine is well recognized as a strong reagent for reducing metal salts and metal oxides to pure metals. For this, it has been previously utilized during fabrication of CIGS64 and CZTS solar cells.65 This time, hydrazine was not incorporated in the precursor solution as an additive, as in the case of HPA, in order to avoid over-reduction of Sn2+, causing metallic tin to appear. On the contrary, N2H4 vapours were introduced instead during the perovskite crystallization (Fig. 3d). One could consider here that HPA could also over-reduce Sn2+, and this is probably why Li et al. had to add a large excess of SnF2 to make it vastly interact with HPA.62 Song et al. managed to increase the efficiency of devices that adopt a normal structure using m-TiO2 as the perovskite crystallization substrate, from 0.2% in the presence of tin compensator up to 1.8%, by adding an optimum loading of hydrazine. Note that more than 30 mA cm−2 could be extracted from the cell under short-circuit conditions. Hydrazine solution (450 μl) was dropped onto a blank glass substrate, spinning for sufficient time to promote the vaporization of the hydrazine; then, deposition of the perovskite layer was performed. XPS indicated that Sn4+ species formation was suppressed when hydrazine vapor was used in combination with SnF2. Additionally, UV-Vis optical measurements have shown that the absorption edge becomes sharper, indicating less disorder and defects. This result was further justified by transient PL spectroscopy, which proved that trap-mediated recombination was severely reduced (the monomolecular recombination lifetime increased from 6.0 up to 19.7 ns upon N2H4 addition) when hydrazine and SnF2 combined together, even though the attainable Voc of the devices was as low as 0.17 V. Unfortunately, as in the case of HPA, results without any SnF2 were not presented, most probably because cells could not even operate.54 Thus, the authors concluded that hydrazine itself provided all these beneficial effects but, it is also probable that hydrazine vapours assisted SnF2 to uniformly spread within the perovskite during film formation. Hydrazine is a strong base that could react with Sn2+, which is a Lewis acid, exactly as pyrazine did before.66 Further studies are definitely needed to justify these assumptions. Nevertheless, one should take into account that N2H4 is a highly toxic and explosive reagent, thus promoting an alternative, lead-free, eco-friendly PV technology would be somewhat questionable here.


3.1.9 Without tin compensation nor reducing agent. 
A big question that arises is whether it is still possible to adopt a specific synthetic procedure to make purely stoichiometric CsSnI3 without tin compensation or any other strong reducing agent such as HPA and N2H4. It has been previously shown that efficient devices, based on the MASnI3 perovskite with high Voc, could be fabricated without any of those “tricks”.22,41 Further discussion on this type of perovskite will take place in the following section. In the same direction, Wang et al. thought of optimizing the film morphology by improving coverage, thus avoiding direct shorting of the cells if the two electrodes come into direct contact. Most importantly, they considered reducing the grain boundaries to prevent oxygen and water diffusing within the film and oxidizing Sn2+.67 In order to prepare a stoichiometric CsSnI3 perovskite without tin compensation, the authors followed an already published synthetic procedure, by pre-preparing the perovskite via melting CsI and SnI2 in a sealed tube.58 For this method, Stoumpos et al. observed a nearly intrinsic carrier concentration, implying limited creation of Sn2+ vacancies and suppression of SnI4 formation.13 Melting precursor perovskite salts in a closed tube has been already shown to be an effective experimental procedure in order to prepare MASnI3−xBrx for operational solar cells.41
After dissolution of the CsSnI3 perovskite in proper, highly polar, solvents, films with very good coverage on UV-ozone treated NiOx hole collecting substrates were formed via typical spin-coating. The authors then provided thermal energy to the system (annealing at 150 °C) to promote grain coarsening, enabling the formation of films with grain sizes (300–400 nm), which were significantly higher than the film thickness (120 nm).65 In this way, films with reduced grain boundary area and improved crystallinity were created, diminishing charge recombination68 on a level that an impressive Voc of 0.52 V, along with an efficiency of 3.3% for an inverted solar cell using PCBM as the electron contact, could be attained. We have to note here that Voc did not seem to vary much with grain size, being approximately 0.5 V for grain sizes ranging from 30 up to 750 nm. Recombination was most probably governed by surface coverage; the presence of pre-fabricated perovskite crystals in the solution should have played a vital role in nucleation and formation of the polycrystalline film.69 Again, as in the case of SnCl2-doped CsSnI3,55 the efficiency was limited by the low thickness of the film, producing a Jsc of only 10 mA cm−2. Note that a 1.3 eV semiconductor can produce a theoretical maximum current of more than 35 mA cm−2.16
Similar efforts, without any tin compensation, have been realized in the case of the MASnI3 perovskite as well. For instance, Yu et al. fine-tuned the stoichiometry of the films during thermal evaporation and were able to fabricate MASnI3 films with carrier densities of holes as low as 1017 to 1018 cm−3.70 Likewise, Zhao et al. adopted a hot-casting procedure; in this way, the authors formed films with an Urbach energy as low as 41 meV, implying that the films exhibit low energetic and structural disorder.40 Noel et al. formed MASnI3 films with a relatively low bimolecular recombination rate constant (of 1.4 × 10−9 cm3 s−1), from which a rough estimation of the hole doping density (5.8 × 1018 cm−3) could be realized.22 The origin of the good electronic quality of the films without tin compensation was not explained by the authors; it could well be related to the specific conditions used. The quality of SnI2 and home-made MAI or the fact that they did not anneal the films after spin-coating etc. could be the reason for stabilizing β-tetragonal phase (I4cm space group) instead of the typical α-phase of MASnI3.41 Note here that this phase is of lower symmetry and thus of lower conductivity.13 This would be in agreement with a recent study indicating that crystal structure (and phase transitions) and lifetime are intrinsically linked with hole concentration and disorder.71


3.1.10 “Self”-(tin) compensation. 
A very peculiar case without tin compensator was recently published by Yokoyama et al. The authors used a two-step deposition route including the fabrication of a SnI2 film first, and then its conversion into a perovskite by interaction with MAI vapours at 150 °C.72
This method was chosen most probably because it has been used before by the group of Yang Yang in order to fabricate PbI2-rich films of typical MAPbI3;73 excess of PbI2 in mixed cation perovskites is now commonly utilized in order to prepare devices with efficiencies of more than 20%.74
Yokoyama et al. did not detect any XRD peak attributed to excess of SnI2 in the final film. However, they observed that the evaporation of MAI powder during the film growth only supplied methylamine gas to react with the SnI2 films. As a result, the final films contained not only MASnI3, but also SnO and Sn(OH)2 (confirmed by XPS), making them Sn2+-rich in nature. Quite notably, by quantifying XPS spectra, the amount of Sn2+ secondary phases was found to be as high as 50%. Surprisingly this large excess not only did not deteriorate the films performance, as we have previously seen in the case of SnF2 > 20 mol%,46 but significantly increased their resistivity (by 3 orders of magnitude) when compared for instance with films out of typical, one step spin-coating. Increased resistivity implies low hole carrier concentration, which is responsible for preventing the devices from short-circuit behaviour. It was then suggested that not only SnF2, but also other divalent Sn sources, such as oxides and hydroxides, can be potentially used to regulate the Sn vacancies in the perovskite crystal structure.72
In any case, all the above results suggest that the Sn-based devices can be used as efficient alternatives for the Pb-based devices provided the “background” carrier density can be reduced to intrinsic levels. This expectation is derived from the fact that semiconductors with similar band gaps to MASnI3, such as InP (1.34 eV), are capable of intrinsic “background” carrier densities as low as 107 cm−3.


3.1.11 CsSnBr3 perovskite: a potential candidate for tandem solar cell applications. 
We will see, in the final section of this review, that highly efficient tandem solar cells demand semiconductors with an ideal bandgap of 1.7 to 1.9 eV. CsSnBr3 is a perovskite of 1.75 to 1.80 eV bandgap, which crystallizes at room temperature in the cubic crystal system, has relatively low intrinsic carrier concentration when doped with SnF2 (lower than 6 × 1015 cm−3) and an Urbach energy of only 32.6 meV.59
Motivated by these features, Moghe et al. deposited CsSnBr3 perovskite onto MoO3 p-type substrate through sequential evaporation; quite notably, 2.5 mol% of SnF2 could be incorporated as a separate layer during evaporation. Inverted devices gave average efficiencies of ∼0.6% with a Voc of 0.40 V. Most importantly, these devices were stable over 50 min under continuous 1 sun illumination; similar devices based on CsSnI3 perovskite degraded within a few min in air.75
Further efforts with this material were accomplished based on a normal device structure, using porous titania as the perovskite crystallization substrate and spiro-MeOTAD as the HTM. First, Sabba et al. deposited the perovskite precursor solution (containing 20 mol% SnF2), utilizing one step spin-coating in DMSO. The devices afforded efficiencies of 1.3%, accompanied by a Jsc of ∼6.6 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.41 V. In this work, the authors, through XRD, inferred that excess of SnF2 eliminates the formation of secondary phases such as CsSn2Br5.59
In a very similar work, Gupta et al. managed to increase Jsc up to 9 mA cm−2, reaching efficiencies of 2.1%, probably due to the optimization of the deposition procedure. The authors deposited a hot (75 °C) precursor solution on pre-heated (100 °C) substrates. This may have led to optimized surface coverage as well as a disappearance of the perovskite capping layer, which usually forms on top of the TiO2, though the presence of a thick capping layer looks critical in the case of Pb2+ perovskites. Gupta et al. confirmed the “un-doping” (or better called hole compensation) of the perovskite through the use of SnF2via measurements of the Fermi level of the semiconductor; ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) experiments have shown that the Fermi level moves away from the valence band upon addition of tin fluoride. Additionally, upon time-dependent XPS analysis, the authors revealed that pristine CsSnBr3 was susceptible to beam damage and metallic Sn formation was observed within ∼0.5 h of constant X-ray irradiation. On the contrary, upon addition of ∼20 mol% of SnF2, no Sn0 was observed, even after 2.5 h of constant X-ray irradiation.76 The presence of metallic tin should not be confused with the metallic-like electrical properties of the caesium tin perovskites; however, in the case of lead perovskites, it has been already shown that metallic lead impurities act as trap-mediated recombination centres.77 Quite unexpectedly, non-encapsulated devices without SnF2 under continuous illumination in ambient atmosphere (∼65% RH with 1 sun intensity) preserved their Jsc to a greater extent than those with SnF2. This result seems to agree with our previous comment that SnF2 addition is uncontrollable, even if it works well in terms of efficiency increase. We argue that more studies need to be carried out in order to understand its chemistry within the precursor solution.
In this direction, as we have mentioned in Section 3.1.8, Song et al. have incorporated 300 μl of hydrazine as reducing agent in CsSnBr3 films, doped with 20 mol% of SnF2. Hydrazine had a severe impact on the recombination dynamics of the perovskite; the monomolecular recombination lifetime increased from 1.0 to 3.0 ns, while the bimolecular recombination rate constant decreased from 6.4 × 10−7 to 3.9 × 10−7 cm3 s−1. Note here that the latter values are 2 orders of magnitude higher than those attained by CsSnI3, implying that even if we widen the bandgap in relation to CsSnI3, recombination between electrons and holes significantly increases, limiting the production of a high Voc. Record values for this type of devices were of only 0.37 V, which represents 20% of the optical bandgap. Quite notably, a Jsc close to 14 mA cm−2 could be extracted from the device, most probably due to the very sharp slope of the IPCE spectrum near the band edge, which is comparable to highly-efficient lead perovskite solar cells; a sharp IPCE slope could suggest high absorption at the band edge and/or appreciable diffusion length. We must note that in terms of efficiency improvement, hydrazine led to only a slight enhancement, in contradiction to the huge efficiency increase in the case of the pure iodide perovskites; the reason behind this needs to be clarified.
In terms of stability, un-encapsulated CsSnBr3 devices were almost 100% stable after 5 min exposure in ambient (40% humidity) air; they could also last for more than 5 hours without losing their diode characteristics. The result does not seem impressive; however, we must note here that identical MASnI3, CsSnI3 and MASnBr3 devices were very unstable in air and could not be measured without encapsulation. All in all, CsSnBr3 is an interesting ∼1.80 eV material that could stand out as a top sub-cell in a tandem configuration as soon as bimolecular recombination is sufficiently suppressed. Energy losses due to exciton dissociation could play an additional role here and should be suppressed as well.76

3.2 MASnI3−xBrx

3.2.1 Seminal works which boosted the field. 
Two papers came out in late April-beginning of May 2014, with a chronological difference of less than one week. In the “first” paper, Noel et al. developed MASnI3 films via one step spin-coating of stoichiometric mixtures of SnI2 and MAI on m-TiO2. Devices of normal structure (with spiro-MeOTAD on top) gave record efficiencies of 6.4% with a Voc of 0.88 V, which is close to the thermodynamic limit for a material with a bandgap of 1.23 eV. However, the reproducibility of the results was really poor; the average efficiency and Voc were close to 1.5% and 0.40 V, respectively. Additionally, even with encapsulation, the devices quickly degraded within minutes when tested under ambient conditions.22 In parallel with the work of Noel et al., Hao et al. developed a range of MASnI3−xBrx perovskites by varying the I:Br molar ratio. Deposition was again realized via one step-spin-coating, but this time the precursor solution contained already made perovskite crystals. Tetragonal α-phase MASnI3-based devices, of very similar structure to those fabricated by Noel et al., gave average efficiencies of 5.2% with a Voc of 0.68 V. Quite notably, devices based on a wide bandgap (1.75 eV) MASnIBr2 perovskite afforded even higher efficiencies of the order of 5.7%, accompanied by a Voc of 0.82 V. MASnI3 devices retained 80% of their initial performance after storage for the first 12 h inside a glovebox; the efficiency dropped down to 1.9% (absolute value) after additional 12 h.41
The above results seemed to be reproduced just recently; Ergen et al. deposited MASnI3 or MASnIBr2 films onto GaN and collected the holes by placing a mixed graphene aerogel/spiro-MeOTAD HTM on top. The devices gave efficiencies as high as 5.3–5.4%.78 The authors clearly state that they pursued the experimental protocols, described in the above seminal papers; unfortunately, no details are given in the Experimental section, thus it was not clear for us which of the two methods was followed.


3.2.2 Controlling film morphology through optimizing deposition techniques. 
One of the big issues, besides the main problem of high intrinsic carrier concentration, was quickly recognized to be the fabrication of pinhole free films of pure tin perovskites. Methods that are suitable for pure lead perovskite films were not completely compatible with the pure tin films because the latter has a faster crystallization speed.29 Additionally, SnI2 has much better solubility in solvents like isopropanol, which is a typical solvent for two-step deposition.79 The resulting uncontrollable crystallization in the solution process caused poor quality films, e.g., with micrometer scale pinholes, even when the crystallization substrate had high surface area (i.e. mesoporous TiO2). This issue is a serious bottleneck since the two electrodes can easily make contact through these pinholes and massively increase recombination or even short-circuit the device through pinholes due to the imperfect coating of the contacts.22
Yu et al. succeeded in preparing high-quality MASnI3 films (with a thickness of 200 nm) by thermal evaporation onto poly-TPD/PEDOT:PSS substrates (where poly-TPD stands for poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine]). The as-deposited films had very smooth surfaces, densely packed grains of around 110 nm, excellent surface coverage, and preferred crystallographic orientation along the 〈100〉 direction.70 Inverted devices, by placing C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag contact on top to collect electrons, presented an efficiency of 1.7% with a Voc of 0.38 V. Interestingly, the J–V curves were recorded in air without any device encapsulation; the evaporated films were stable over a two month period inside the glovebox.
Noel et al. have already shown that conventional one step spin-coating is not an effective liquid method for efficient surface coverage. A solution to this was presented by Zhao et al. who hot-casted (240 °C) the precursor solution, containing MACl, onto NiO/PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates; the as-prepared films possessed large micron-sized grains and had almost complete substrate coverage. Inverted devices (with PCBM/Al as electron contact) attained efficiencies as high as 3.2% with an impressive Voc of 0.60 V.40 In a similar work, Song et al. adopted a hot-casting (150 °C) deposition onto m-TiO2. This time, the precursor solution contained 20 mol% excess of SnF2, and hydrazine treatment was included during film formation (see Section 3.1.8). The as-fabricated devices with poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] polymer (PTAA), doped with 4-isopropyl-4′-methyldiphenyliodonium tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)borate (TBFB) as the HTM, gave efficiencies of 3.9% with a Voc of 0.38 V.
A typical “trick” to control crystallization, i.e. solvent quenching,80 was utilized by Kim et al. to grow MASnI3 films on typical m-TiO2. More specifically, the authors dissolved SnI2 and MAI in DMSO by adding 20 mol% excess of SnF2. During spin-coating, an anti-solvent (toluene) was dripped and then the resulting films were annealed at 65 °C for 5 min to drive and complete crystallization.81 Normal devices, with PTAA as the HTM, produced efficiencies of 2.3% with a Voc of 0.33 V and an unprecedented Jsc of 26 mA cm−2.
The approach was moved a step forward through the use of a solvent–solvent extraction method. More specifically, an anti-solvent is again used, but instead of dripping it during spinning, the film is immersed in an anti-solvent bath, directly after spin-coating.82 Fujihara et al. employed an appropriate combination of anti-solvents (toluene and hexane) with different miscibility of the good solvent and the precursor solution. By modifying the extraction speed, 120 nm thick MASnI3 films on PEDOT:PSS, with a high surface coverage, very low roughness (7.3 nm) and oriented along the 〈001〉 direction, could be obtained. Inverted type solar cells with C60/BCP/Ag as the electron collection electrode presented efficiencies of 2.1% with good reproducibility. Quite notably, the devices retained ∼55% of their initial performance after 200 h of continuous 1 sun illumination.83
In a different approach, Yokoyama et al. used a two-step deposition route, including the transformation of SnI2 into the MASnI3 perovskite via interaction with MAI vapours.29 The method was originally developed by the group of Yang Yang and was previously employed to fabricate ultrasmooth MAPbI3 films.84 The authors managed to control the temperature of the SnI2 film at 60 °C, while evaporation of MAI took place at 150 °C; this is why the experiment was called a low temperature vapor assisted solution process (LT-VASP). Through LT-VASP, films with good surface coverage, uniformity and orientation along the 〈001〉 direction, could be obtained. Normal devices, with doped PTAA on top, produced efficiencies of 1.9 and 1.1% for MASnI3 (ref. 29) and MASnI1.5Br1.5 perovskites, respectively.72


3.2.3 Adduct chemistry in tin halide perovskites. 
An effective methodology for the production of high quality lead halide perovskite layers is the Lewis acid–base adduct approach. In the solution process, to form the perovskite layer, the key chemicals of MAI and PbI2 are used by dissolving them in polar aprotic solvents (DMF, DMSO, NMP etc.). Since polar aprotic solvents bear oxygen, sulfur, or nitrogen, they can act as Lewis bases. In addition, the main group compound PbI2 is known to be a Lewis acid. Thus, PbI2 has a chance to form an adduct by reacting with the Lewis base. Crystal growth and morphology of the perovskite can be controlled through the weak chemical interaction in the adduct.85
This adduct approach has been adopted also in the case of the fabrication of MASnI3 films, by taking advantage of the fact that Sn2+ has greater Lewis acidity than Pb2+.86 Previous reports have shown that DMSO forms a PbI2·DMSO adduct.79 Hao et al. identified here that a SnI2·3DMSO adduct is formed. The solvent-induced intermediate phase plays an important role in controlling the crystallization process and final thin film quality.87 The stabilization of the intermediate SnI2 solvates, prior to the formation of the perovskite films, was found to promote homogeneous nucleation and enabled an adjustable perovskite film growth rate. High-quality, pinhole-free MASnI3 films were achieved using DMSO; NMP solvent forms a similar adduct and could be used as well. Normal devices, without any HTM, gave efficiencies of 3.2%, accompanied by a Voc of 0.32 V and an unprecedented current density of up to 21 mA cm−2. Charge extraction and transient photovoltage decay measurements revealed comparable recombination lifetimes in the MAPbI3 and MASnI3 devices.


3.2.4 MASnBr3: a wide-band gap (>2.1 eV) semiconductor. 
We will finish our review on pure methylammonium tin perovskite solar cells focusing on materials with a bandgap of more than 2 eV; wide bandgap semiconductors are highly desirable due to the fact that they permit the fabrication of devices that can operate at high voltages and temperatures. This relatively wide bandgap can be accomplished with MASnBr3 perovskite, which has a bandgap of 2.1 to 2.2 eV. Additionally, MASnBr3 crystallizes in the tetragonal41 or cubic crystal system at room temperature, while cubic single crystals have very high resistivity, in comparison to their pure iodide analogue (10 orders of magnitude higher than MASnI3);88 quite interestingly, cubic polycrystalline films have shown relatively low FET mobilities of 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.89
Surprisingly, the first result obtained by devices based on MASnBr3 was spectacular. Unfortunately, it was never reproduced by the same authors or others. As we have described in previous sections, melting precursor perovskite salts in a closed tube has been utilized in order to prepare MASnBr3 for operational solar cells of normal structure. With this experimental procedure, Hao et al. were able to measure efficiencies as high as 4.3%, accompanied by an impressive Voc of 0.88.41
The same group has employed a novel technique, again without the use of any external tin compensator or reducing agent, but with self-compensation (as we have seen in Section 3.1.10). More specifically, Yokoyama et al. treated SnBr2 films with MAI vapours, unexpectedly leading to pure MASnBr3; evaporation of MAI supplied only methylamine during film growth. As a result, additional Sn2+ sources were part of the final films, regulating the tin vacancy concentration in the perovskite crystal structure. The performance of the devices was not extraordinary; an efficiency of 0.5% was attained, combined with a Voc of 0.49 V and a very poor Jsc of 2.2 mA cm−2. Recall that the same group reported a Jsc of almost 14 mA cm−2 for the pure caesium tin bromide perovskite, see Section 3.1.11. Amazingly, the Sn2+ excess was beneficial for the device's air stability by suppressing oxidative reactions; devices retained 69% of their original performance upon exposure to air for 60 min.72
In a different work, Jung et al. adopted a sequential evaporation method to deposit MASnBr3 onto compact TiO2; no SnF2 or any other compensator/reducing agent was used here. First, 100 nm of SnBr2 were deposited onto TiO2 and then a thick layer (400 nm) of MABr was placed on top. In this way, the top MABr layer protected the film from oxidation, when exposed in air. Films with sequential evaporation were of high crystallinity. Devices of normal structure, completed with poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl), otherwise called P3HT, as the HTM, presented an efficiency of 1.1% along with a Voc of 0.5 V.90

3.3 FASnI3−xBrx

3.3.1 First promising results. 
Recognizing from the very beginning that high intrinsic concentrations due to tin vacancies were the main obstacle to fabricating operational devices based on pure tin perovskite solar cells, it was quite mysterious that researchers tried FASnI3 as a last option (in a chronological order). Room-temperature resistivity and Hall effect measurements have previously shown that orthorhombic FASnI3 had larger resistivity (0.5, 0.9 and 11.8 Ω cm for MASnI3, CsSnI3 and FASnI3, respectively) and lower mobility (2320, 585 and 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 for MASnI3, CsSnI3 and FASnI3, respectively) when compared to the MA- and Cs analogues.13 Likewise, cubic FASnI3 single crystals have been shown to present lower conductivities/carrier concentrations than those of MASnI3.25,93 These results point out that FASnI3 is less prone to having tin vacancies, in comparison to MASnI3 or CsSnI3.
The first work was published by Ming Koh et al., about one year after the first paper on MASnI3 perovskite solar cells appeared online. The authors deposited orthorhombic FASnI3 with a bandgap of around 1.4 eV, doped with 20% SnF2, on m-TiO2via one step spin-coating in dimethylformamide (DMF); spiro-MeOTAD with typical additives, acting as a hole contact, completed the device architecture. The measured efficiency was 2.1% with poor Voc (0.24 V) and FF (0.36).94
These values were significantly increased when complexing 10 mol% SnF2 with pyrazine; discussion on the role of pyrazine was presented in Section 3.1.7. By optimizing the deposition process, adopting a one step spin-coating in DMF/DMSO along with toluene dripping, devices of very similar structure to that of the work of Ming Koh et al. gave a record efficiency of 4.8%, accompanied by a Voc of 0.32 V and a FF of 0.63. This PCE was stabilized at 4.0% for 50 s.66
Slight improvement was realized by optimizing charge extraction/recombination dynamics during device operation. For this, Ke et al. coated a thin layer of n-type ZnS on top of the m-TiO2. ZnS has higher electron mobility than TiO2, so electron transfer towards the anode could be accelerated; its conduction band lies closer to that of 20 mol% SnF2-doped FASnI3, when compared to TiO2, so that electrons may move from FASnI3 to ZnS first, and then to TiO2. Finally, the presence of the thin ZnS layer may act as an energy barrier, inhibiting charge recombination between TiO2 and FASnI3 because the conduction band of ZnS is higher in energy than that of TiO2. Steady-state PL measurements proved that electron transfer was enhanced (better quenching) due to ZnS, while transient PL justified the reduced recombination, since monomolecular recombination lifetimes increased by 2.5 times with the addition of a ZnS cascade (from 0.9 to 2.5 ns). The devices, using PTAA doped with TBFB as the HTM, presented stabilized efficiencies very close to 5% (recorded at 5.3% under reverse scan) with a Voc of ∼0.38 and a FF of 0.60.95


3.3.2 Inverted devices and record efficiencies. 
In devices with normal structure employing mesoporous titania as an electron collection layer, HTMs, such as spiro-MeOTAD and PTAA, typically contain lithium (Li) and/or cobalt (Co) salts that damage the Sn-based perovskite films and lead to poor device performance.18 Additionally, air exposure of Sn perovskite creates SnO2 on the surface, which is a hole blocking layer; this would impede hole transfer from the perovskite to the HTM.22 To circumvent these issues, researchers deposited FASnI3−xBrx perovskites onto a hole contact in a so-called inverted structure.
More specifically, Liu et al. used a solvent quenching, one step, spin-coating experiment to deposit FASnI3 on PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates. The efficiency was really poor, as low as 0.1%. Encouragingly, this efficiency increased to 1.4% via allowing FA with 20% Cs.15
Liao et al. added 10 mol% SnF2 in FASnI3 and deposited the precursor solution on the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate via one step spin-coating in DMF/DMSO co-solvent with anti-solvent (diethyl ether) quenching. The as-prepared films presented a long monomolecular recombination lifetime of 6.8 ns, most probably due to the relatively low carrier concentration of around 1017 cm−3. The devices, fabricated by depositing C60/BCP/Ag on top as an electron collecting electrode, gave a stabilized record efficiency of 6.0% (Fig. 4), accompanied by a Voc of 0.46 V and a FF of 0.60. Most importantly, encapsulated cells exhibited a nearly constant performance for 45 min under 1 sun illumination in air.18
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G illumination under reverse and forward voltage scans. (b) EQE spectrum and integrated Jsc. (c) Steady-state Jsc and PCE at a constant bias of 0.34 V under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (d) PCE histogram of 30 devices with 10% SnF2 additive. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 

3.4 Keypoints of the fabrication protocols
The main reason for the observed reproducibility in the reported results is obviously the uncontrollable doping arising from the formation of tin vacancies. However, we believe that other key factors are the issues that often come up, related to the preparation of the perovskite films itself and the fabrication of the corresponding devices. Without suggesting a clear solution, in the following, we summarize these problems so that researchers can pay a closer attention to them.
For instance, concerning the purity of the SnI2 starting material, Hao et al. confirmed (by thermal gravimetry) that commercial SnI2 contained SnI4 impurities.41 In another work, Kumar et al. suggested that the purity of the starting SnI2 material was critical. The majority (99%) of SnI2 precursors did not result in functional photovoltaic devices, while 99.999% of SnI2 precursors had wettability problems, which resulted in efficiency fluctuations; notably, the 99.99% of SnI2, proved to be the optimum.46 Interestingly, similar conclusions were drawn by Ma et al. for the 99.999% product; perovskite films made from this reagent gave 30 times lower fluorescence lifetimes than those of home-made SnI2, limiting diffusion lengths.30 In any case, we suggest that from now on, the authors explicitly report the exact details of the SnI2 they are using.
Another issue is the annealing protocol; it is a common practice to anneal the perovskite films after deposition, at a temperature higher than 70 °C to achieve good crystallization. Stoumpos et al. were the first to suggest that the annealing of pellets from organic tin-containing perovskites at around 200 °C reduces SnI4 formation; in this way, defect concentrations decrease, achieving nearly intrinsic concentrations.13 Following the suggestion of Stoumpos and coworkers,13 Lee et al. increased the annealing temperature of FASnI3 films from 60 to 170 °C, enhancing the efficiency from nearly 0.1% to ∼1.6%; note that no SnF2 was incorporated in these perovskite films.66 Annealing at 150 °C has been found to give better results, compared to lower temperatures in the case of CsSnI3 as well, producing an appreciable Voc of 0.52 V.65 Additionally, in a very distinct work, Zhao et al. adopted a hot-casting deposition at 240 °C, which resulted in very high Voc of 0.60 V for MASnI3-based devices.40 However, there are reports where significant values for Voc were recorded without22,57 or with only mild annealing.18,55 Unfortunately, annealing not only drives off SnI4 gas, but additionally controls film morphology, crystallinity and grain size; therefore one cannot draw a clear and generalized conclusion about this effect.
Until now, we have reviewed results in normal/meso and inverted solar cells; no significant differences were observed between these two types of devices. Normal planar cells, with typical compact (i.e. no porous) metal oxides as electron collectors (e.g. TiO2) and MASnI3 as the absorber, have been reported in only one paper and their efficiencies were as low as 0.3%.30 If one wants to choose which device architecture is best, two issues should be taken into consideration. First, as Sn-perovskite films are inherently p-type doped, a “normal” structure should be used in order to generate most of the photocarriers close to the electron contact, since the diffusion length of the electrons should in principle be shorter. On the other hand, since tin perovskites easily oxidize in air, forming n-type SnO2 on their surface, it would be more favorable to deposit a n-type material (such as PCBM) on top in order to more efficiently collect the electrons; note that hole extraction would be blocked in the “normal” architecture.
Additionally, in the case of normal cells, there is an inherent difficulty of how to properly dope the HTM material without exposure to the air. Recall that spiro-MeOTAD gets efficiently oxidized upon contact with oxygen for around 12 h. A typical oxidant in spiro-MeOTAD solutions, such as bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (LiTFSI), unfortunately degrades Sn perovskite. Noel et al. suggested an alternative, hydrogen bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (H-TFSI), which directly dopes spiro-MeOTAD upon heating for some hours under N2 atmosphere.22tert-Butyl pyridine, which is a typical additive in perovskite solar cells, could also form adducts with Sn2+; for this, 2,6-lutidine has been used instead.41 A viable HTM alternative could be PTAA, which gets doped by a polymer (TPFB) without exposure in the air; TPFB is not harmful for Sn perovskite films.87 In any case, when people make normal cells, they need to properly explain how they oxidize their HTM, without any exposure to the air and are still able to get acceptable fill factors.
Regarding inverted cells, both PCBM and C60 are working properly, even though C60 seems to have a much better band alignment with the conduction band of the tin perovskites. Finding the correct energy bands is a very important issue in this technology. Surfaces get oxidized very readily and therefore, it is practically impossible to get the correct values through UPS and XPS. Band misalignment could be a real issue for perovskite solar cells; recently, Grånäs et al. used first principles modeling to estimate a 5% PCE (absolute number) decrease for every 0.2 eV of mismatch between MASnI3 and the electron contact.96 Surely, similar issues could also appear in the case of normal cells (see Section 3.3.1).95 We suggest the trial and error method to be much more effective in terms of varying the electron and/or hole transport material with a specific tin perovskite until an optimum performance is achieved (rather than trying to measure correctly the energy bands of these sensitive materials).
A final comment that we would like to make concerns the irreproducibility in the measured Jsc values: yes, they could easily arise from uncontrollable doping and/or surface oxidation, however, it is worth noting here that the solar simulator, necessary to record the J–V curves, should be properly calibrated; for a 1.2 eV material, a KG2 (or KG1) photodiode detector should be used (instead of KG-5, which is ideal for the pure lead perovskites). With this, current overestimations will be circumvented.
3.5 Assessment of the photovoltaic performance of pure tin perovskite solar cells
All the photovoltaic parameters produced by devices of various structures are summarized in Table 3 (for Cs-based tin perovskites), 4 (for MA-based tin perovskites) and 5 (for FA-based tin perovskites) to help the reader acquire a general view of the whole work realized thus far in the field of pure tin perovskite solar cells. Fig. 5 simply compares the three different types of perovskites (with different cations at the A site, being Cs, MA and FA) in terms of photovoltaic performance. We focused on the Voc, which is a direct measure of the recombination governing cell operation, and the overall efficiency; to construct the plots, we used the values of parameters contained in all tables, but omitted data on perovskites containing bromide (because the bandgap is significantly altered). In terms of the Voc, all types of devices produce an average Voc of around 0.4 V; even though FA-based devices are less studied than the others (only 5 reports thus far), we should note that their reproducibility seems significantly better, in comparison to the other two perovskites. Quite notably, MASnI3 has a huge range of Voc values from 0.15 to 0.88 V. In the case of efficiency values, FASnI3 perovskites present an average efficiency of 4.5% with very good reproducibility, while the other two perovskites lie close to 2–2.5%. In any case, we should highlight here the fact that solar cells, based on a highly p-doped CsSnI3 perovskite, have small deviations in values when compared to the MASnI3 devices, which are highly irreproducible (Table 4).
Table 3 Parameters for solar cells (measured at 1 sun-AM1.5G) based on CsSnI3−xBrx perovskites (interfaced with various n- and p-type contacts and under various cell structures)




Perovskite
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.




CsSnI3
Schottky
4.8
0.42
22
0.9

44



CsSnI3
Inverted (HTM: UV-ozone treated NiOx)
9.5
0.52
61
3.0 (average)

65



CsSnI3 + 10 mol% SnI2
Inverted (HTM: CuI)
12.3
0.43
40
2.1 (average)

57



CsSnI3 + 10 mol% SnCl2
Inverted (HTM: UV-ozone treated ITO)
9.9
0.50
68
3.4 (average)

55



CsSnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso (HTM: m-MTDATA)
22.7
0.24
37
2.0

46



CsSnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + 450 μl N2H4
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
30.8
0.17
35
1.8

54



CsSnI2Br + 60 mol% SnF2 + H3PO2
Normal/meso (monolithic)
16.7
0.33
53
3.2

62



CsSnBr3 + 2.5 mol% SnF2
Inverted HTM: MoO3
2.4
0.40
55
0.6

76



CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso
6.6
0.41
48
1.3

59



CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso
9.1
0.40
56
2.1

76



CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + 300 μl N2H4
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
14.0
0.37
59
3.0

54





 Fig. 5  (a) Voc values (some of them are average values, while others are simply record values) of devices (of various structures) based on different pure tin ASnI3 perovskites (where A = FA or Cs or MA). (b) Overall efficiencies of the same devices. A total number of 24 types of devices (the number is not absolute, as we have previously stated that some of the values are average), from a large number of references, were included in the statistical analysis. Note that for better comparison reasons, we chose not to include data from devices based on perovskites which contain bromide anions. 
Table 4 Parameters of solar cells (measured at 1 sun-AM1.5G) based on MASnI3−xBrx perovskites (interfaced with various n- and p-type contacts and under various cell structures)




Perovskite
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.




MA0.9Cs0.1SnI3
Inverted
4.5
0.20
36
0.3

15



MASnI3
Inverted
4.5
0.15
38
0.3

91



MASnI3
Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD)
12.1
0.38
37
1.7

70



MASnI3
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
17.4
0.27
39
1.9

29



MASnI3
Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)
17.8
0.60
30
3.2

40



MASnI3
Normal/meso
16.3
0.68
48
5.2 (average)

41



MASnI3
Normal
13.4
0.79
52
5.5

78



MASnI3
Normal/meso
16.8
0.88
42
6.4

22



MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal
3.3
0.23
41
0.3

30



MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Inverted
11.8
0.45
40
2.1

83



MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
26.2
0.23
39
2.3

81



MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso (no HTM)
21.4
0.32
46
3.2

87



MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + N2H4
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
19.9
0.38
52
3.9

54



MASnI2.6Br0.4
Inverted
1.0
0.15
51
0.1

92



MASnI2Br
Normal/meso
11.7
0.82
57
5.7

41



MASnI1.5Br1.5
Normal/meso
5.0
0.45
48
1.1

72



MASnIBr2
Normal/meso
15.9
0.69
49
5.4

78



MASnBr3
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
2.2
0.49
46
0.5

72



MASnBr3
Normal/compact TiO2 (HTM: P3HT)
4.3
0.50
49
1.1

90



MASnBr3
Normal/meso
7.9
0.88
59
4.3

14





4. Pb–Sn binary perovskite solar cells
4.1 Anomalous bandgap behaviour in mixed Sn/Pb halide perovskites
A seminal paper was published by the group of Kanatzidis, a few days after the first two reports on MASnI3 perovskite solar cells came out. Hao et al. prepared solid solutions of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and its tin analogue (MASnI3); no phase separation occurred for any of the alloys. In terms of their crystal structures, alloys with lower than 50% tin crystallized in the same space group of the pure lead perovskite (tetragonal, I4cm), while for a percentage equal to or higher than 50%, alloys adopted the crystal group of the pure tin perovskite (tetragonal, P4mm). This signifies that at 50% (and more), the lattice shrinks enormously (almost 4 fold) in order to afford a higher symmetry. Interestingly, the electrical conductivity of the alloys was at around 103 Ω cm for 25 to 75% ratio, while that of the 100% tin was boosted up to 106 Ω cm; this result underscores that most probably, even 25% of lead is able to assist the perovskite in preserving an intrinsic carrier concentration down to acceptable levels. However, the most interesting feature of the MAPb1−xSnxI3 compositions was that they followed an anomalous band gap change, rather than the expected Vegard's law trend. As a function of x, a band gap could be obtained that was lower than that of either of the two end members, and thus, the absorption range could be extended down to 1.1 eV. These results have been confirmed by optical measurements of the materials as well as data taken from EQE responses of the respective devices.14Fig. 6 dictates the band gap narrowing between the two composition endpoints. As one would suspect, this work was the push the field needed; lead-free perovskite solar cells could be a solution, but the background carrier density has to be lowered by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude in order to make them work. Here, lead-less perovskite solar cells were proposed as a viable alternative, with normal levels of intrinsic carrier concentration. Additionally, this was the only way to lower the bandgap to 1.1 eV, which is the ideal bandgap for a bottom cell in a tandem configuration (see Section 5).
 Fig. 6  Optical bandgap variation of the MASn1−xPbxI3 solid solution perovskites. The figure clearly demonstrates the anomalous bandgap effect first observed by the Kanatzidis group;14 surprisingly, 25 to 75% tin mixed perovskites (x = 0.25–0.75) possess a lower optical bandgap, when compared to the two end members (1.55 eV for MAPbI3 and 1.30 for pure MASnI3). 
4.2 Tin-poor systems (10–40% tin)

4.2.1 10–20% tin. 
Just 9 days after Hao's paper submission, Zuo et al. submitted very similar work in Advanced Materials. In this work, the authors also prepared the whole series of solid solutions for the MAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite. However, their approach was different; various molar ratios of PbCl2 and SnCl2 were mixed together with excess (1:3 molar ratio) of MAI in DMF to produce the desired precursor solutions. Films were deposited on PEDOT:PSS/ITO via conventional one step spin-coating. To achieve high crystallinity, the films were annealed at 90 °C for 2 h. Inverted devices were fabricated and the J–V characteristics were recorded. Two important results were obtained: first, the devices with a percentage of tin higher than 15% worked very poorly; for instance, a maximum PCE of 0.1% was attained by the 50–50 perovskite-based devices, which is in full contradiction to what was previously published by Hao and co-workers.14 We believe that this contradictory feature is associated with the long annealing protocol adopted by Zuo and co-workers. The 15% perovskite, i.e. MAPb0.85Sn0.15I3, gave an impressive mean PCE of 9.8%, accompanied by a Voc of 0.76 V. Most importantly, this efficiency was even higher than that of the pure lead perovskite. This was attributed to higher Jsc, due to broadened absorption and current generation (up to 900 nm), verified by both UV-visible absorption and EQE spectroscopies.
The success of partial Sn substitution in organolead perovskites to simultaneously reduce Pb content and increase performance was also rationalized in terms of improved solution-cast film morphology. Time-resolved SEM study of perovskite growth during annealing indicated the dynamic morphological modulation offered by Sn2+ incorporation. A high coverage (∼97%) film with excellent continuity could be grown because of Sn's effect on nucleation and growth. The markedly improved morphology with well-ordered and relatively large crystalline domains resulted in an increased fill factor (0.66, compared to 0.52 attained by the pure lead material) which also contributed to the enhanced PCE.97
In another work, Zhao et al. repeated Hao's experiments by preparing a whole series of the MAPb1−xSnxI3 perovskite films, varying the Sn ratio from 0 up to 100%. Very promising results were produced in the case of rich-tin perovskites and as such, they will be discussed in the appropriate section (see Section 4.4). Interestingly, the mixed Sn:Pb perovskites did not follow the exact identical trend that Hao et al. observed. The bandgap did narrow between the two end members but, for instance, the 20% and 40% tin-containing perovskites had an optical bandgap higher than that of the 100% tin perovskite; the 20% tin perovskite presented a bandgap of around 1.5 eV, while in Hao's work, the whole series had a bandgap of less than 1.3 eV. We argue that the host casting method, utilized here (details are given in Section 4.4.1), is most probably responsible for this peculiar result. Interestingly, PL for the 40% Sn and 20% Sn content samples could not be measured as the emission was weak, potentially due to the highly-disordered nature and dominant nonradiative losses. This was further justified by photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) measurements; Urbach energies between 40 and 50 meV have been estimated. In any case, the as-fabricated inverted devices based on perovskite films with 20 and 40% tin (details on the preparation conditions will be given in Section 4.4.1) provided decent efficiencies of 5.6% and 7.3%, respectively.40
A very interesting work has been reported by Zhu et al. who were the first to employ a two-step solution-process method in order to fabricate Pb–Sn mixed perovskites. Binary SnxPb1−xI2 polycrystalline films (with a molar ratio of 0.1:0.9 and 0.25:0.75) were initially deposited on PEDOT:PSS/ITO via spin-coating. XRD showed that the crystalline structure of PbI2 was retained for 10 and 25% Sn substitutions. However, the morphology, grain size, and grain orientation were significantly influenced by the amount of Sn substitutions. After spin casting the MAI layer, the films were dried in RT for 1 h following an annealing step. This step could be realized in two different ways, meaning typical thermal annealing at 100 °C for 2 h or thermal annealing at 100 °C for 1 h plus DMSO or DMF vapor-assisted thermal annealing at the same temperature for another 1 h. Only-thermally annealed films had very good coverage; however, the grain size was limited to around 150 nm, being lower than the film thickness. Both DMSO and DMF interacted with Pb–Sn perovskites and caused morphology changes. In the case of DMF annealing, the grain size increased to 220 nm. DMSO had a much more pronounced effect, yielding larger grains (500–600 nm in average) with the same orientation, and with flat surfaces. Both, as-prepared perovskites crystallized at the tetragonal system having the I4cm space group of the MAPbI3 perovskite, in line with Hao and coworkers.14 A bandgap of 1.24 and 1.31 eV was estimated through optical measurements for the 10% and 25% tin-containing perovskite films, respectively. While the absorption onsets stayed the same, the high EQE, appearing at different wavelengths, changed after the thermal plus DMSO vapor assisted thermal annealing. As a result, inverted solar cells, with PCBM:C60 on top, containing 10% Sn perovskite films, made via the thermal plus DMSO vapor-assisted thermal annealing, exhibited a significant Jsc of 19 mA cm−2 and an average PCE of 10.0%. Sufficient PCEs were also achieved by the 25% tin-containing perovskite being as high as 8.5%, accompanied by a Voc of 0.77 V; quite unexpectedly, only-thermal annealing proved to be enough for preserving this PCE value. Despite the close to ideal grain size, the thermal plus DMSO vapor-assisted thermal annealed MASn0.25Pb0.75I3 solar cells exhibited a great drop of EQE in the range of 400–650 nm, which eventually resulted in a decrease of Jsc from 20.3 to 17.7 mA cm−2. This particular behaviour was attributed by the authors to increased film surface roughness and extended production of Sn4+.98


4.2.2 25% tin: the road toward PCES over 15%. 
In the previously mentioned work, Hao et al. were the first to show that a bandgap of 1.24 eV could be attained by MASn1−xPbxI3 perovskites with x = 0.75; the PCE of normal type devices was as high as 7.4% with a Voc of 0.73 V. The experimental protocol was identical to that previously published by the same group (and was properly described in Section 3.2.1),41 thus no further comments are given here by us.14
In the previous paragraph, we have seen that a two-step approach could be effectively utilized in order to fabricate 8.5% efficient solar cells with 25% Sn-containing perovskite films. A similar work was very recently published by Liu and coworkers.99 This time, these authors took advantage of the fact that PbI2 and SnI2 both coordinate with DMSO; as we have mentioned in Section 3.2.3, DMSO forms PbI2·DMSO and SnI2·3DMSO adducts.79,87 In this context, they prepared separate precursor solutions of PbI2 and SnI2 in DMF/DMSO co-solvents. Then, they simply blended them together in the proper ratio in order to form the required mixed system. The PbI2/SnI2 can be intercalated by DMSO solvent mediation, which gives rise to the formation of PbI2/(SnI2)·(DMSO)x complexes; this complexation retards fast and uncontrollable crystallization and assists with the formation of amorphous mirror-like films. After MAI interdiffusion, the corresponding perovskites with various mixing ratios were produced upon MAI/DMSO exchange. The more tin one inserts in the film, the more the grain size and the Sn4+ content increase. The whole series presented two peculiar characteristics: first, as soon as the tin percentage was lower than 50% in the initial film, the dominant crystal group was P4mm (the one that pure MASnI3 adopts). This is in contradiction to the work of Hao and coworkers.87 Additionally, the authors did observe an anomaly of the Vegard's law; however, while the bandgap decreased between the two end members, for instance, for x = 0.25, the optical bandgap was estimated to be 1.31 eV, which was higher than that of the pure MASnI3 perovskite (approximately 1.23 eV). This behaviour was also observed by others and further studies are necessary to shed more light on this.40
Inverted devices were fabricated with the perovskite films and it turned out that the films with 25% tin presented an optimum photovoltaic performance; average forward scanned efficiencies up to 12.3% were attained, with a record value of 14.1%. However, this PCE was stabilized at maximum power point at only 8% after around 500 s. Additionally, the authors noticed, without providing any details, that their unencapsulated devices presented an inferior stability when compared to the corresponding solar cells with the pure lead perovskite films.99
The group of Alex Jen in Washington previously published a nearly 10% solar cell based on 15% tin-containing perovskite films.97 As we have seen in Section 4.2.1, the authors used a conventional one step approach with PbCl2/SnCl2 and excess MAI in DMF as the precursor solution. With this, solar cells with perovskite films, containing a percentage of tin other than 15%, could not even work properly. To tackle this issue, the same group adopted a typical one step spin-coating (with SnI2/PbI2 mixtures in gamma-butyrolactone (g-BL)/DMSO co-solvent system) accompanied by toluene dripping;91 which was the typical solvent engineering method, first reported by Jeon and coworkers.80 Interestingly, working devices with PEDOT:PSS/ITO as hole contacts could now work moderately, even with a tin content of 75% (a PCE of 2.4% could be measured). When comparing the films (for instance those containing 25% tin) fabricated using solvent quenching, with those made with the Cl-induced crystallization, a distinct difference was discovered; toluene dripping led to a very homogeneous morphology with almost complete surface coverage and unprecedented smoothness (roughness of only 2 nm). Besides morphology and structure, careful UPS analysis demonstrated that the 25% possessed ideal band energetics in relation to PEDOT:PSS and PCBM for hole and electron extraction, respectively. Favourably, these films, with an optical bandgap of 1.35 eV, gave the optimum results when incorporated into inverted devices by placing PCBM/Bis-C60 on top (Bis-C60 is a fulleropyrrolidium).100 Impressive average PCEs of 14.4% were attained, combined with large values of Voc (0.82 V) and FF (0.78). On the contrary, similar devices with 25% tin but with pure FA this time, i.e. FAPb0.75Sn0.25I3 (with a bandgap of 1.31 eV), produced PCEs not higher than 7.3%. This unusual result may be associated with the co-existence of the yellow non-perovskite δ-phase of FAPbI3. To deal with this issue, the authors simply mixed the above two perovskites at a 50–50 ratio, forming a MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.75Sn0.25I3 perovskite, which had a bandgap between the two former perovskites (i.e. 1.33 eV). Owing to this marginal bandgap alteration, the Jsc slightly improved (from 22.4 to 23.0 mA cm−2) while, simultaneously, Voc decreased (from 0.82 to 0.78 V). Most importantly, the mixed MA–FA devices could be stabilized at 14.0% for 600 s. Additionally, these devices could preserve around 75% of their initial PCE after 15 days of storage in ambient (30–40% RH) atmosphere; unfortunately, the efficiency dropped to nearly zero at day 20. A direct comparison with devices based on pure lead perovskites would be useful here to correctly evaluate the significance of the above result.
An interesting outcome of this work was that blending MA with FA did not change the photovoltaic performance much. The same group confirmed the above results in two other recent works; FA with 20% Cs (FA0.8Cs0.2Pb0.75Sn0.25I3) or MA with 10% Cs (MA0.9Cs0.1Pb0.75Sn0.25I3) produced PCEs as high as 14.5–14.6% (we will see in the following sections that additional Cs or FA play a vital role in the performance of MA-perovskite solar cells when the tin percentage is 50% or higher).15 Remarkably, PCEs over 14% could still be attained when incorporating 10 to 20% Br into the perovskite lattice, widening the optical bandgap from nearly 1.31 up to 1.48 eV; details will be given in the following Section 4.2.3.92
A very similar approach was recently reported by Zhu and co-workers who deposited MAPb0.75Sn0.25I3 films on PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates upon one step spin-coating in DMF:DMSO co-solvent and subsequent anti-solvent (toluene) quenching. We have already seen that the presence of DMSO assures the control of the crystallization process; here, the authors also indicated that the introduction of DMSO also prevented the formation of colloidal coagulation observed under prolonged storage.
By optimizing the DMF:DMSO volume ratio (at 1:1), the resulting films (after annealing at 100 °C for 10 min to complete crystallization) presented a smooth surface (roughness of 12 nm), high crystallinity with strong 〈110〉 orientation as well as uniform grains of around 200 nm in size. Additionally, no pinholes were observed in the SEM down to the 500 nm scale, implying a 100% surface coverage. Interestingly, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), coupled with TEM, have shown that DMSO ameliorated inhomogeneous Sn/Pb distributions (on the 100 nm scale) in the resultant perovskite films. Additionally, combined SEM, XRD and TEM analysis unveiled that each large perovskite grain is composed of smaller crystals and an amorphous part. The high optoelectronic quality of the films was further justified by PDS, estimating an Urbach energy as low as ∼17 meV.
Inverted devices, by placing a mixed PCBM:C60 (3:1 by weight) layer on top to collect the electrons (Fig. 7a), gave average efficiencies of 14.3% (and a record of 15.2%) and a Voc of 0.77 V (Fig. 7b).19
 Fig. 7  (a) Device structure of 25% containing tin mixed alloy solar cell. (b) J–V curves (forward and backward scan) of the above devices. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Stabilized efficiencies of 50–50 Pb–Sn perovskite solar cells with or without 10% Cs. (d) Ambient-stability tests (RH = 35 ± 5%) of the above devices. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, Li et al. used a combined solvent engineering plus solvent annealing approach in order to prepare MAPb0.75Sn0.25I3 films with large polycrystalline grains. For this, they deposited the typical precursor solution (in DMF:DMSO 10:1 v/v) onto PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates via spin-coating and dripped an anti-solvent (sec-butyl alcohol) while spinning. Afterwards, the films were transferred to a hot plate for annealing at 100 °C for 25 s and then were soaked in a sec-butyl alcohol bath. Subsequently, the films were dried and then thermally annealed at 100 °C for 35 min, plus another 35 min at the same temperature in the presence of DMF vapours. With this, high quality films with a very good coverage and uniform morphology were obtained. Most importantly, the films consisted of densely packed large crystalline domains across the film with average grain size as large as 870 nm, massively expanding the aspect ratio of the film.101 Additionally, the films were highly crystallized at the I4cm crystal group, in line with results from Hao and coworkers.14
Inverted devices, prepared by placing a PCBM layer on top, yielded average efficiencies of 11.2% (with a record device at 12.1%) and a promising Voc of 0.80 V; the devices presented excellent reproducibility with mean deviation as low as 0.3%. The average PCE was also stabilized at exactly the same value within 300 s. Most importantly, the devices could retain 73% of their initial performance after exposure to ambient air for 15 h. Quite notably, efficient devices (with PCEs of 7.4 to 10% in average) could be fabricated with 15% or 35% tin as well; 25% definitely gave the optimum results.101


4.2.3 Widening the bandgap by Br introduction. 
In Section 3.1.11, we underlined the importance of finding a good material with a bandgap of 1.7–1.8 eV to work efficiently as a top cell in a tandem configuration (analysis of the tandem cells will be given in Section 5.1). A good candidate was proposed in literature with moderate thermal and ambient stability, being the CsSnBr3 perovskite, which has an optical bandgap close to ideal (1.75–1.8 eV); however, a pure tin material has inherent issues with oxidation (as we have seen in Section 3) and additionally, the specific material (CsSnBr3) exhibits a large bimolecular recombination rate constant, impeding the corresponding devices from producing an acceptable Voc; note that a high Voc is a prerequisite for a top cell in a tandem stratification.
Surely, one can prepare a ∼1.75 eV material based on pure lead perovskites. Despite many reported high-efficiency devices, light-induced instability was commonly observed under the operating conditions (AM1.5 illumination) for wide bandgap perovskite solar cells employing MAPb(I1−yBry)3 and FAPb(I1−yBry)3 perovskite compositions with Br content beyond 20% (y > 0.2).102 Under illumination, the complex phase segregation into iodide- and bromide-rich perovskite phases causes a significant drop in photocurrent over time, which raises severe concerns for stable long-term operation of these solar cells.103 The driving force for such phase separation could simply be the internal stress due to the mismatch in size between iodide and bromide (Table 5).
Table 5 Parameters for solar cells (measured at 1 sun-AM1.5G) based on FASnI3−xBrx perovskites (interfaced with various n- and p-type contacts and under various cell structures)




Perovskite
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.




FASnI3
Inverted
11.7
0.04
23
0.1

15



FA0.8Cs0.2SnI3
Inverted
16.1
0.24
36
1.4

15



FASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso
24.5
0.24
36
2.1

94



FASnI3 + 10 mol% SnF2 (+pyrazine)
Normal/meso
23.7
0.42
63
4.8 (stabilized at 4%)

64



FASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2
Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)
23.1
0.38
60
5.3

95



FASnI3 + 10 mol% SnF2
Inverted
22.1
0.47
60
6.2

18



FASnI2Br
Inverted
6.8
0.47
54
1.7

63





To tackle this, McMeekin et al. demonstrated a promising approach of incorporating Cs in FAPb(I1−yBry)3 to forbid the formation of the non-perovskite yellow phase and achieve a stable single perovskite phase of FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I1−yBry)3, which did not exhibit instability under continuous illumination. The authors hypothesized that lattice contraction due to the incorporation of smaller Cs cations (ionic radius: 1.67 Å) compared to FA cations (ionic radius: 2.53 Å) was possibly the reason for phase stabilization.104 That said, the driving force for phase segregation arising from different sized anions is most immediately built into the metal halide framework itself. Therefore, direct alteration of the metal site (B-site cation) could be a more immediately effective route to alter the impact of photostriction upon illumination and potentially eliminate the issue of phase segregation. To this end, Yang et al. partially replaced Pb2+ ions with smaller Sn2+ ions and properly examined how this alteration affects phase segregation.92
The authors adopted a standard procedure to fabricate their films on PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates; we have discussed the approach in Section 4.2.2. MAPb0.75Sn0.25(I0.6Br0.4)3 was utilized as a model compound. These films have shown homogeneous morphology with excellent coverage, while SEM energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping confirmed a uniform distribution of Pb, Sn, I, and Br. Interestingly, increasing pinholes and inhomogeneity were apparent when the Sn content was further increased to 50%. The bandgap of the 25% tin perovskite was 1.59 eV, which was quite far from being optimum. Nonetheless, PL and transient absorption spectra (TAS) confirmed that these films are stable under illumination. First, the PL peak, centred at 1.56 eV, was stable over time under light illumination. Additionally, the TAS spectra of the films at 10 ps pump-probe delay, exhibiting characteristic photobleaching signals, originating from state-filling effects at the onset of steady state absorption,105 did not show any significant change, and no new bleaching features corresponding to pure I-rich or Br-rich phases were observed. Impressively, similar remarks were drawn in the case of the whole series of perovskites, when varying the Br content (from 10 up to 100%). This clearly demonstrated that Sn incorporation contributed to the stabilization of the I/Br mixed system under illumination.
The 1.59 eV material was used to fabricate inverted devices, producing efficiencies of 11.9% with a Voc of 0.91 V. Even though the attained Voc was astounding, as we stated before, the material is not ideal for a top cell in a tandem configuration. For this, MAPb0.75Sn0.25(I0.4Br0.6)3 films were tested, having a bandgap of 1.73 eV; surprisingly, this large bandgap material was able to give an average efficiency of 11.1% (topping at 12.6%) along with a Voc of 0.99 V (with a record of 1.04 V). On top of that, the devices were stable under continuous illumination at their maximum power point under N2 for 30 days. Surprisingly, the devices also presented good thermal stability at 85 °C under inert atmosphere, which makes the material a promising wide bandgap perovskite for application in tandem solar cells. Notably, MAPb0.75Sn0.25(I1−yBry)3 perovskites showed stable and linearly tunable bandgaps from 1.35 up to 2.03 eV under continuous illumination. Efficiencies from 1.5 to 14.5% could be achieved (from 100 down to 10% Br) with a record Voc of 1.01 V for the 70% Br-containing perovskite device.

4.3 50–50 tin–lead

4.3.1 Theoretical background and first results. 
Mosconi et al. previously demonstrated, by first principles computational techniques and varying the Sn/Pb content, that the 50:50 compound retains the best of each compound, showing a red-shifted and increased absorption spectra along with almost perfectly balanced electron and hole transport properties, as derived by the calculated effective masses. At the same time, while above this Sn/Pb ratio, the material oxidation could become significant, the 50:50 compound seems to be sufficiently stable to oxidation, as measured by a HOMO energy more positive than 5 eV vs. vacuum.106
Hao et al. were the first to show that MASn1−xPbxI3 perovskites with a Sn/Pb molar ratio of 50–50, a material with a bandgap of 1.17 eV, could be attained; more importantly, the resistivity did not decrease at all when compared to the analogue with the 25% tin. With these films, the PCE of normal devices was as high as 7.3%, with a Voc of 0.58 V.14
Then, it took 2 years for a second work to appear in literature, dealing with a 50–50 Sn–Pb ratio. More specifically, Lin et al. first optimized the film preparation protocol, adopting a one step (toluene) dripping technique in DMSO:gBL co-solvent. The films, grown on typical PEDOT:PSS/ITO, were as thick as 290 nm, with a roughness of 10.8 nm and perfect substrate coverage. Then, by placing relatively thin, ∼65 nm, fullerene layers with variable LUMO levels on top to collect the electrons, inverted devices were constructed. Note that the solvent annealing step was significant in order to fully cover the perovskite underlayer. Upon J–V measurements, it was found that the performance of these solar cells was rather sensitive to the variation of the LUMO level of the electron transporting layer (ETL) materials. This is a typical behaviour already met in organic photovoltaics, stemming from the excitonic nature of the organic semiconductors employed. The authors suggested that MASn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite was also an excitonic semiconductor with the Frenkel–Wannier–Mott exciton hybridization feature. The efficiencies attained were as high as 6.1% with conventional PCBM as ETL, being higher than 10% when a fullerene (BPB-M) with a LUMO closer to the conduction band of the perovskite was used. The Voc was still relatively low (0.69 V), probably due to the energy needed for exciton dissociation.107
In a similar approach, Lyu et al. optimized their procedure to deposit the 50–50 perovskite, of a bandgap of 1.23 eV, by chlorobenzene quenching. Inverted devices with typical stratification ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/C60/Ca/Al gave a PCE of 7% with a Voc of 0.64 V. Interestingly, peaks from Sn4+ have been detected through XPS.108
In another work, a Pb-assisted two step spin coating method was proposed to construct MASn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite films. First, 1:1 SnI2:PbI2 dissolved in DMF, was spun onto PEDOT:PSS. After natural drying at RT for 1 hour, MAI in isopropanol was spun on top; the as-spun films were annealed at 110 °C for 45 min to drive the interdiffusion and fully crystallize the material; notably, the films were thermally unstable at T > 130 °C. Smooth compact films (roughness of 15 nm), as thick as 300 nm, were produced with perfect coverage and a bandgap of 1.18 eV. By placing thermally evaporated C60/BCP/Ag on top, devices with an astonishing Jsc of 26.3 mA cm−2 were fabricated, accompanied by an appreciable Voc, as high as 0.75 V. These parameters, combined with a FF of 0.69, led to efficiencies of 13.6%. Quite strikingly, a stabilized PCE of 13.4% was also measured. Interestingly, identical devices with PCBM (in lieu of C60) could not even reach a PCE of 5%.109


4.3.2 FA-Cs: a key mixture for record stabilized PCEs. 
Very recently, a seminal work on perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cells was published (the results will be analysed in Section 5.1). To fabricate highly efficient tandems, Eperon et al. first prepared materials with a close to ideal bandgap for this application (being 1.2 eV). For this, they prepared films of FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 on PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates. Rather than the typical one step dripping, the authors developed a “combo” dripping/solvent–solvent extraction method. A typical solution was first spin-coated onto PEDOT:PSS; FASnI3 and FAPbI3 solutions were prepared at a concentration of 1 M in DMF:DMSO and mixed together with an excess of 0.2 M SnF2. Then, the films were spun at 3000 rpm (3000 rpm per s acceleration) for 20 s. After 17 s, a non-toxic anti-solvent, anisole, was dripped onto the substrate. Once the substrate had stopped spinning, the films were immersed in anisole for 5 s, dried with N2 gas flow, and left for 5 min at RT before annealing at 70 °C for 20 min. With this, smooth, highly crystalline, uniform films with very good coverage were obtained. We should note here that all the Pb–Sn mixtures formed solid solutions with a crystallinity close to that of FASnI3 (orthorhombic, Amm2 space group) rather than that of FAPbI3 (trigonal). Additionally, even though a relative low temperature (70 °C) annealing protocol was adopted (compared to 170 °C needed to form the black phase of FAPbI3),110 the black phase was always seen, except for the case of 12.5% tin. This implies that not only does 50% of Pb2+ stabilize the remaining 50% of Sn2+, but simultaneously, the FASnI3 itself prevents the formation of the yellow, δ-phase (non-perovskite) of the FA-lead perovskite.
These features led to excellent electronic quality for the as-fabricated films. Transient PL and THz spectroscopies revealed that the films had a monomolecular recombination lifetime of 2 ns, accompanied by a mobility of 17 cm2 V−1 s−1. Combining these two values, a diffusion length of 210 nm was estimated, which is slightly lower than the average film thickness used to absorb all the incident light (around 300–350 nm). Inverted devices with C60/BCM/Ag on top provided stabilized PCEs of 10.9% and a Voc of 0.70 V. Notably, the 50–50 perovskite-based devices gave significantly higher efficiencies than those based on 25% and 75% tin perovskite films.
The authors moved their approach a step forward, adopting a strategy previously followed in the case of pure lead perovskites; both McMeekin et al. and Lee et al. have shown that Cs incorporation into FAPbI3 can contract the lattice to enhance the stability of the black phase compared to the yellow phase.104,111 Here, by adding a small amount of Cs (25 mol%), a material with similar optical and electronic properties could be attained. However, XPS and UPS measurements have shown that the valence band of FA0.75Cs0.25Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 is shallower than that of the Cs-free perovskite, making the Cs-perovskite form a nearly ideal contact (in terms of energetics) with PEDOT:PSS. Simultaneously, the Fermi level was found to slightly shift towards the valence band, thus Cs-perovskite showed a mild p-doping which could also affect hole extraction at the cathode. These interesting features had very positive implications on the photovoltaic performance of the devices. More specifically, Cs-perovskite devices presented an enhanced Jsc of 26.7 mA cm−2, in comparison to 21.9 mA cm−2 of the Cs-free perovskite, and a large Voc of 0.74 V. These parameters, together with an impressive FF of 0.71, led to an efficiency of 14.1%. Notably, the devices provided a stabilized efficiency of 14.8%, which is the current record for single junction perovskite solar cells containing any amount of tin. We should mark here that the enhanced Jsc was justified by external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements, which have shown that the Cs-containing material displayed higher EQE throughout the entire spectral range, except for a bump at around 700 nm; however, more experiments are imperative here to understand the different shapes of the two EQE spectra; different EQE could result simply from different light absorption or from a peculiar diffusion length dependence on the incident light.17 The positive impact of the incorporation of Cs (20% this time) into 50–50 FA-based perovskite was further confirmed by Liu et al. who observed an unprecedented enhancement in efficiency from 8.4 up to 11.6%.15
An even more spectacular result of Eperon and coworkers' study was the stability of the tin-containing films and the corresponding devices. Devices based on the FA and FA-Cs mixed perovskites were held at the maximum power point by illuminating them with simulated solar light (1 sun) for 50 min in humid air (RH at around 50%); devices based on pure FAPbI3 and FASnI3 were also tested for comparison. Impressively, both mixed tin–lead perovskite solar cells maintained their performance over time, showing similar or even better stability than the neat Pb material; note that pure FASnI3 devices completely degrade within minutes.
The authors of this work proved that by forming solid solutions of FAPbI3 and FASnI3, the anomalous bandgap behaviour is still observed; thus, the phenomenon is not limited to the MAPbI3–MASnI3 system. To elucidate the mechanisms underpinning the trend, first-principles calculations of bandgaps were performed as a function of the Sn:Pb ratio. The authors provided here a quite interesting scenario; when Sn and Pb atoms occupy a specific position relative to each other within the lattice, an anomalous bandgap trend emerges. Notably, for compositions with more than 50% tin, a specific type of short-range order (sub-nm) in the Pb–Sn positions allows the bandgap to dip below the end points, as observed experimentally.17


4.3.3 Cs also stabilizes MA-tin perovskites. 
Cs addition (20–25%) in FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskites proved to be effective for PCE enhancement. Does this effect happen in MAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskites as well? This question was adequately addressed by Liu and coworkers. They first used the Cs-free perovskite to fabricate solar cells, which gave an efficiency of 6.4%. When adding 20% of Cs, the efficiency slightly increased up to 7.5%, while by adding 10% more Cs, the efficiency deteriorated to 2.9%. Quite unexpectedly, when incorporating solely 10% of Cs, the efficiency went up to 10.1% with a record cell producing a PCE of 12.7% (Fig. 7c).
Through SEM imaging, the authors revealed that by incorporating 10 to 20 mol% Cs into MAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite, a homogenous morphology with uniform crystal domains could be obtained. This was clearly a consequence of the reduced crystallization rate, induced by the addition of Cs. However, the film morphology became poor again when the Cs content reached 30 mol%, possibly due to phase separation resulting from immiscibility. No significant differences were observed in terms of crystallinity and optical bandgap. It was thus concluded that a certain amount of Cs is capable of optimizing the associated film morphology and improving photovoltaic performance of the corresponding solar cells.
Even more importantly, the representative MA0.9Cs0.1Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 devices could preserve ∼76% of their initial PCE after being stored in the dark in an ambient environment with a relative humidity of 35 ± 5% for 20 days, outperforming the pristine MAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 device (Fig. 7d); interestingly, after just 1 day, XPS unveiled a peak corresponding to MA2SnI6, only in the case of the Cs-free perovskite film. This illustrates that Cs incorporation can effectively slow down the Sn2+ oxidation in an ambient environment, potentially due to the contraction of the crystal lattice and the denser morphology of perovskite films.15 This was the first breakthrough result concerning the stability in ambient conditions for a tin-containing perovskite device. This accomplishment agrees well with theory.106

4.4 Tin-rich systems (60–80% tin)

4.4.1 Record stabilized efficiencies. 
Hao et al. have already shown that by having 75% tin in the MASn1−xPbxI3 perovskite (thus x = 0.25), the bandgap could be tuned down to 1.17 eV, which seems ideal for a bottom cell in a tandem configuration. However, simultaneously, the resistivity of the material became lower than 103 Ω cm, stemming from extensive hole doping, which could not be adequately compensated by the 25% Pb2+. This resulted in a Voc of only 0.38 V, most probably due to increased trap-mediated recombination.14 Recall that devices based on 25% tin produced a nearly 2-fold higher Voc. In any case, preparing a highly efficient, nearly lead-free perovskite was still a motivation for the researchers.
Two works appeared in literature within less than one month; even though the device structure was similar (inverted), the approach was entirely different. First, Liao et al. adopted the experimental procedure previously developed by the same group to fabricate 10 mol% SnF2-doped FASnI3 perovskite solar cells (see Section 3.4).18 What changed here was that they simply added MAPbI3 perovskite, varying the molar ratio between the two perovskites, in order to form solid solutions (Fig. 8a). Quite notably, the as-fabricated films had perfect coverage on PEDOT:PSS (SEM, Fig. 8b–d), while XRD showed that they were orthorhombic, regardless of the Pb–Sn ratio; recall that MAPbI3 is tetragonal at room temperature, while FASnI3 adopts the orthorhombic crystal system. Transient PL decay measurements revealed that films with 60% tin, having a bandgap of around 1.2 eV, presented a spectacular monomolecular recombination lifetime of 6.7 ns, far higher than that of the pure FASnI3, being solely 0.2 ns. Still, this value was significantly smaller than that of the pure lead perovskite (169 ns). Devices with C60/BCP/Ag on top, achieved top efficiencies of more than 15%. The mean PCE value was as high as 14.4%, with a very small deviation of 0.3%. With regard to Jsc and Voc, mean values of 26.3 mA cm−2 and 0.80 V were attained, respectively. The latter value constitutes the ∼67% of the optical bandgap; this percentage is higher than that of iconic semiconductors such as CdTe or CIGS and slightly lower than that of InP.112 If we could push Jsc closer to the theoretical maximum (40 mA cm−2), the mixed lead–tin perovskite devices could soon reach PCEs of close to or more than 20%.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the formation of (FASnI3)1−x(MAPbI3)x precursor. (b–d) SEM images of (FASnI3)1−x(MAPbI3)x perovskite thin films with x = 0.0, 1.0, and 0.4. (e) Steady state photocurrent and PCE at a constant bias of 0.65 V, for a solar cell using a high tin (60%) mixed perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) The device structure used to fabricate the CH3NH3PbxSn(1−x)I3 [0 ≤ x ≤ 1] perovskite thin-film-based solar cells. (g) The Voc loss compared to the bandgap (Eg − qVOC). The effective loss in VOC from the thermodynamic limit, taking into account the PLQE, is indicated by the star symbol. This shows that the VOC loss from the thermodynamic limit seen for even the very high Sn content (80%) perovskite PV device is only due to low PLQE. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Interestingly, the best-performing device produced a stabilized efficiency of 14.8% (Fig. 8e); this PCE is identical to what Eperon et al. obtained with their 50–50 FA-Cs perovskite. We should note here that in the work of Eperon et al., the efficiencies of devices with 62.5% tin-based perovskite were very close to that of the 50–50 perovskite device.17,43
As we previously mentioned in Section 4.2.4, a different approach was selected by Zhao et al. to fabricate a mixed perovskite containing 60% of tin, without any excess of SnF2.40 The hot-casting method was already adopted by the same authors to prepare MASnI3 films of high optoelectronic quality on NiO/PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrates; the procedure was described in Section 3.2.2. The as-prepared MASn0.6Pb0.4I3 films crystallized in the tetragonal crystal system (P4mm space group), presented an optical bandgap of 1.27 eV and an Urbach energy (deduced from photothermal deflection spectroscopy) of 33 meV (or 16 meV, estimated by photocurrent measurements). The PL lifetime was as low as 0.87 ns; however, this was accompanied by a spectacular THz mobility of electrons of 190 ± 20 cm2 V−1 s−1. If we arbitrarily use this mobility lifetime product in order to estimate a diffusion length (LD) for electrons,113 a value of 650 nm is roughly estimated. These high values of LD for electrons should help charge extraction, under open and short-circuit conditions, in mesoporous-free planar solar cells; note that holes should in principle have a longer LD in these materials, even though this assumption needs further confirmation. Indeed, inverted devices with PCBM/Al as electron contact (Fig. 8f), attained record efficiencies as high as 10.0% with a Jsc of 20.5 mA cm−2 and an impressive Voc of 0.77 V.40 Taking into account the bandgap of the material (1.27 eV) and typical photon entropy losses of the order of 275 meV,112 an estimated maximum thermodynamically achievable Voc of ∼0.97 V would be anticipated. Thus, an operational voltage loss of 0.2 V is seen. Now, by measuring the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQE) of the films, being as low as 0.07% at 1 sun (for comparison, MAPbI3 perovskites could reach values of 30% after passivation),114 the authors could estimate the Voc loss to be ≈0.2 V, which is exactly what they get here (Fig. 8g). If PLQE could be increased to a greater extent (by enhancing the electronic quality of the perovskite films for instance), then the attainable voltage could reach much higher values (for instance GaAs solar cells attain a Voc of 1 V due to a PLQE of 72%).115 To give an even clearer picture, the reader should bear in mind that a semiconductor with very similar bandgap (1.34 V), InP, affords an efficiency of more than 22% with an operational voltage loss, just 100 mV lower than that of the mixed lead–tin perovskite.112


4.4.2 80% tin perovskite solar cells: Voc approaching thermodynamic limits. 
In the same work, perovskite films with even higher percentage of tin (80%) were fabricated. The MASn0.8Pb0.2I3 films had a bandgap of 1.19 eV, an Urbach energy of 38 meV, a monomolecular recombination lifetime of 0.97 s and a THz mobility of 120 ± 12 cm2 V−1 s−1, proving their good electronic quality. These films were incorporated into inverted devices, providing maximum efficiencies of 7.6% with a Voc of 0.66 V. Analysing the data, as we previously did in the case of 60% tin, the operational voltage loss was 0.23 V. Again, by taking into account the PLQE of the films, being 0.9% (thus the Voc loss arising from the PLQE was 120 meV), an additional 110 mV loss was estimated; this loss could be due to bad band alignment (UPS needs to correctly measure the energy levels of the perovskite in order to find the right contacts) and/or due to additional surface recombination taking place at the contact/perovskite interfaces.40 In any case, the Voc value of the devices is the 55% of the optical bandgap, a value quite close to that of CdTe solar cells (59%), which attain PCEs as high as 21%.112 This result is really important if we consider that only 20% of lead is present in the perovskite.


4.4.3 FA-Cs rich-tin perovskite solar cells. 
Eperon et al. observed a significant efficiency increase when incorporating 25% Cs in their FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite (see Section 4.3.2). Similar results were drawn by Liu et al. in the case of the tin rich systems; incorporation of 20% Cs in the FASn0.75Pb0.25I3 increased the efficiency from 5.3 to 7.8%. Again, we postulate that this increase stems mainly from optimized film morphology.15


4.4.4 Substituting SnI2 by SnCl2 in the precursor solution: lattice contraction and effects. 
In the famous Mike Lee's paper, PbCl2 was used instead of PbI2 (along with an excess of MAI) in order to fabricate MAPbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells with better photovoltaic performance and effective diffusion lengths than their Cl-free analogue (i.e. MAPbI3).4a Unexpectedly, it was later discovered that the chloride remaining after annealing probably resides at the grain boundaries, acting as passivation agent,116 rather than existing within the MAPbI3 crystal lattice.117 On the other hand, concerning tin, it was already proven that continuous solid solutions of MASnI3−xClx could not be formed because of the large difference in the ionic radius between Cl− and I−.118 Additionally, as we have seen in Section 4.2.1, SnCl2–PbCl2 mixtures, with excess of MAI, have been previously used to prepare efficient Pb–Sn solar cells; through EDS, the authors have detected a significant loss of (the initially added) chloride, in line with what was observed in the case of the pure lead based perovskites.97
We argue that the above works motivated Tsai et al. to develop alloyed Sn–Pb mixed-halide perovskites, MASnyPb1−yI3−xClx, using precursor solutions containing MAI and metal halide mixtures in varied stoichiometric ratios; the Sn/Pb ratios in the perovskites were controlled upon mixing the SnCl2/PbI2 precursors in molar ratios of 0/100, 25/75, 50/50, 75/25, and 100/0. When SnI2 was solely used along with MAI (thus no was Cl− involved), the PCEs of monolithic normal cells could not surpass 0.3%. Note that the cells had the following structure: the perovskite crystallization substrate was (1 μm) m-TiO2/(1 μm) Al2O3 and holes were collected by (10 μm) a carbon cathode. In turn, when 50 to 75% SnCl2 was included in the precursor solution, the devices worked more efficiently; surprisingly, the 75% tin perovskite gave the best efficiency (2.2%).
The authors then conducted a thorough XRD analysis to understand the effect of SnCl2. To this end, they studied the whole series from pure MAPbI3 (tetragonal, I4cm space group) to pure MASnI3 (tetragonal, P4mm space group) by adding SnCl2 or not. When SnI2 was the sole Sn2+ source (so no SnCl2 was present), the material crystallized in the tetragonal crystal system, having the space group of the pure lead at 25% tin (I4cm) or the P4mm group of pure MASnI3 by adding more tin. In contrast, by simply adding 25% SnCl2, the crystal lattice slightly decreased its volume (1% size contraction), but still this marginal shrinkage was able to change the crystal system from tetragonal to orthorhombic (Iba2 space group); quite notably the lattice parameters look quite similar to what Zuo et al. estimated in their work for the 15% tin perovskite material.97 When more SnCl2 (50 to 75%) was incorporated, the symmetry of the space group was broken and changed to Pmm2, with a substantially (in comparison to 0 and 25% tin) smaller unit cell. Obviously, modified crystal structures should in principle have different optical and electronic properties as well.
Indeed, and by focusing on the 75% winning material, the MASn0.75Pb0.25I3−xClx exhibited a suitable bandgap of 1.25 eV, while the same material without Cl, i.e. MASn0.75Pb0.25I3, had a bandgap of 1.18 eV. Most importantly, its workfunction and binding energy (measured by UPS), made it the best candidate for potential matching for electron extraction into TiO2 and for hole extraction towards the carbon electrode.
By adding 30 mol% excess of SnF2 to compensate for tin vacancies and inserting a thick interlayer (750 nm of NiO) between the alumina and the cathode (for even better band alignment), efficiencies of monolithic cells went up to 5.0% (mean value), topping at 5.1% for the record device. Quite notably, the mean fluctuation of PCE was marginal (only 0.1%), suggesting excellent reproducibility for the performance of the devices. In terms of stability, no deterioration of the photovoltaic performance was observed for storage under nitrogen for 4000 h; however, the devices quickly degraded in humid air.119

4.5 Assessment of the photovoltaic performance of mixed Sn/Pb solar cells
All the photovoltaic parameters discussed in Section 4 are summarized in Table 6. Fig. 9 compares the photovoltaic performance of solar cells based on perovskites using different molar ratios of Sn to Pb (ASn1−xPbxI3, where A can be MA, FA, Cs and their mixtures). As we already did in the main text, we divided the devices into 3 separate groups: the low tin amount (10–40% tin), the 50–50 (Sn:Pb 1:1 molar ratio) and the rich tin amount (60–80%) regions. Again, for simplicity, we omitted data on bromide containing perovskites. Additionally, we plotted only Voc and efficiency as we did in Fig. 5. The average values of Voc follow a very normal order, exactly as already published in ref. 14; the more tin you add, the more recombination governs the cell operation. A peculiar case with high Voc in tin-rich perovskite solar cells certainly needs special attention.40 In terms of absolute efficiency, record values are very similar for all types of devices for a tin percentage up to 60% (close to 14–15%). Again, for average efficiencies, the trend is almost linear and similar to what was already observed in the case of Voc. The efficiency drops systematically as soon as you add tin in the perovskite; however, we should notice here that the (mean value) efficiency drop in the 50–50 perovskite is not significant (drops down to 9.0% from 10.8%). This is a very important result if one takes into account that half of the lead is replaced by tin and the bandgap is close to ideal (1.17–1.28 eV), especially for a bottom cell in a tandem configuration. No clear conclusion could be drawn concerning the effect of the addition of SnF2. SnF2 has been used in two reports,17,43 however, in these works, there were no results comparing the photovoltaic performance of the devices with or without SnF2.
Table 6 Parameters for solar cells (measured at 1 sun-AM1.5G) based on ASn1−xPbxI3−yBry perovskites (where A = Cs, MA, FA or mixtures of these). The optical bandgap is provided as well, when available. The table is divided into three main regions: low tin region (x = 0.6–0.9), 50–50 region (x = 0.5) and rich-tin region (x = 0.4–0.2)




Perovskite
Bandgap
Device structure

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.




MASn0.1Pb0.9I3
1.24
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/C60)
19.0
0.78
67
10.0 (average)

98



MASn0.15Pb0.85I3
∼1.38
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
19.1
0.76
66
9.8 (average)

97



MASn0.15Pb0.85I3


Inverted
18.4
0.67
53
6.5 (average)

101



MASn0.2Pb0.8I3


Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)
11.8
0.77
65
5.6 (average)

40



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.24
Normal/meso
15.8
0.73
64
7.4

14



FASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.31
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
18.1
0.75
54
7.3 (average)

91



FASn0.25Pb0.75I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
19.5
0.75
70
10.3

15



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.31
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/C60)
17.7
0.70
56
7.0 (average)

98



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.26
Inverted
21.0
0.80
67
11.2 (average/stabilized)

101



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.31
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/BCP)
22.8
0.76
71
12.3 (average)

99



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
∼1.31
Inverted (ETL: PCBM + C60)
26.8
0.77
70
14.3 (average, record 15.2%)

19



MA0.5FA0.5Sn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.33
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
23.0
0.78
79
14.2 (stabilized at 14%)

91



MA0.25FA0.75Sn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.33
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
16.6
0.70
65
7.5

91



MA0.75FA0.25Sn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.34
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
22.5
0.80
77
13.9

91



FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.34
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
22.7
0.84
76
14.5

15



MASn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.35
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
22.4
0.82
78
14.4 (average)

91



MA0.9Cs0.1Sn0.25Pb0.75I3
1.39
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
22.8
0.84
76
14.6

15



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.9Br0.1)3
1.43
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
21.9
0.85
78
14.5

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.8Br0.2)3
1.48
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
21.1
0.87
77
14.1

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.7Br0.3)3
1.53
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
19.6
0.90
76
13.4

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.6Br0.4)3
1.59
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
17.3
0.91
76
11.9

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.5Br0.5)3
1.65
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
16.3
0.94
75
11.5

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.4Br0.6)3
1.73
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
15.2
0.99
74
11.1

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.3Br0.7)3
1.80
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
9.3
1.01
67
6.3

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.2Br0.8)3
1.90
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
6.2
0.97
63
3.8

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.1Br0.9)3
1.99
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
4.5
0.91
62
2.5

92



MASn0.25Pb0.75Br3
2.03
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
3.2
0.76
61
1.5

92



MASn0.35Pb0.65I3
1.25
Inverted
21.0
0.75
60
9.4 (average)

101



MASn0.4Pb0.6I3


Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)
17.8
0.75
62
7.3 (average)

40



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
0.7
0.24
53
0.1

97



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.17
Normal/meso
20.6
0.58
60
7.3

14



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
∼1.18
Inverted (ETL: BPB-M)
22.8
0.65
69
10.2

107



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.18
Inverted (ETL: C60)
26.3
0.75
69
13.6 (stabilized at 13.4%)

109



FASn0.5Pb0.5I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
21.5
0.60
65
8.4

15



FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 + 20 mol% SnF2
1.20
Inverted (ETL: C60)
21.9
0.70
66
10.2 (stabilized at 10.9%)

17



FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 + 20 mol% SnF2
1.20
Inverted (ETL: C60)
26.7
0.74
71
14.1 (stabilized at 14.8%)

17



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.23
Inverted (ETL: C60)
17.9
0.64
61
7.0

108



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.26
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
11.1
0.52
64
3.7

91



MASn0.5Pb0.5I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
18.7
0.62
55
6.4

15



FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.28
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
24.3
0.70
68
11.6

15



MA0.9Cs0.1Sn0.5Pb0.5I3
1.28
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
23.3
0.70
62
10.1 (12.7 record)

15



MA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
20.6
0.60
61
7.5

15



MA0.7Cs0.3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
15.0
0.39
50
2.9

15



MASn0.5Pb0.5(I0.6Br0.4)3
1.48
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
6.0
0.57
68
2.3

92



FA0.6MA0.4Sn0.6Pb0.4I3 + 10 mol% SnF2
1.20
Inverted (ETL: C60)
26.3
0.80
68
14.4 average/15.1% best (stabilized at 14.8%)

43



MASn0.6Pb0.4I3
1.27
Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)
20.5
0.77
63
9.2 (average)

40



MASn0.75Pb0.25I3
1.17
Normal/meso
17.6
0.38
57
3.7

14



MASn0.75Pb0.25I3−xClx + 30 mol% SnF2
1.25
Normal/meso (monolithic)
18.9
0.46
57
5.0 (average)

119



MASn0.75Pb0.25I3
1.27
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
3.5
0.06
25
0.1

97



FASn0.75Pb0.25I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
20.4
0.46
56
5.3

15



FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.75Pb0.25I3


Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
24.4
0.56
57
7.8

15



MASn0.75Pb0.25(I0.6Br0.4)3
1.34
Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)
2.8
0.41
63
0.7

92



MASn0.8Pb0.2I3
1.19
Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)
20.2
0.66
57
6.5 (average)

40





 Fig. 9  (a) Voc of devices (of various structure) based on ASn1−xPbxI3 perovskites (A = MA, FA, Cs or their mixtures) with various Sn:Pb molar ratios. (b) Efficiency values of the same devices. Around 40 types of devices were included in the statistical analysis. We divided the results into three main regions (see main text for details): the low tin region (x = 0.6–0.9), 50–50 region (x = 0.5) and tin-rich region (x = 0.4–0.2). Two values were omitted from the statistical analysis (0.1% for both 50 and 75% tin-based perovskite solar cells) because they deviated massively from the average. 
5. Perovskite-on-perovskite tandem (or graded) solar cells
5.1 Tandems
Multijunction solar cells consist of two or more semiconductors that absorb complimentary parts of the solar spectrum, offering a convenient way to increase the efficiency and go beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit; for instance, a double junction solar cell can potentially reach 43%, compared to the 33% upper limit for a single-junction cell.91 The simplest structure of this kind is the so called tandem where two absorbers are stacked together. For the combination of a high and a low bandgap material, the illumination should first strike the absorber with the high bandgap (called the front or top cell), because there, light with high energy will be absorbed with a high output voltage. Furthermore, this material will be transparent for low energy light, which can be passed onto the second absorber with the lower bandgap (called the rear or back cell). The ideal bandgaps for a highly performing tandem device are 0.9 to 1.2 eV for the rear cell and 1.7 to 1.9 eV for the front cell. Basically two designs exist, the monolithically integrated tandem (or two terminal cell) and the mechanically stacked tandem (or four terminal cell).
To date, most reported perovskite-based tandem cells are composed of a perovskite top cell and a bottom inorganic solar cell like silicon, copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), or copper zinc tin sulfur–selenium (CZTSSe). Quite notably, the first certified (by NREL) efficiency, as high as 23.6%, was recently reported by the Arizona State University and Stanford University who fabricated a 1 cm2 monolithic perovskite-on-silicon tandem cell, combining an infrared-tuned silicon heterojunction bottom cell with a Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3 perovskite top cell.120 Likewise, an uncertified 27.6% for a 4-terminal MAPbI3/SiC-based rear contact silicon tandem device was recently presented.121 This combination of materials is very interesting from a commercial point of view, since silicon is currently dominating the photovoltaics market. As pointed out by Prof. Martin A. Green, provided that the tandem approach represents an extension of a company's established manufacturing process, modules incorporating tandem cells could be introduced initially as a premium product by an existing silicon (or thin-film) manufacturer. This would be a lower-risk strategy than if a new market entrant developed and offered next-generation modules as its sole product, competing directly against established manufacturers.122
Nevertheless, an all-perovskite tandem cell could deliver lower fabrication costs. Impressive results have already been reported for monolithic vacuum deposited tandem solar cells combining an ∼2 eV top cell, based on a Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.3Br0.7)3 perovskite, with a ∼1.55 eV (using the archetypal MAPbI3 perovskite) bottom cell, producing a steady-state efficiency of 14.5% with a record Voc of 2.3 V (for their best tandem).123 Even though this was a breakthrough, it is still far from being optimum, since the bandgap of the bottom cell cannot be considered as ideal. One can easily modify the bandgap of the pure Pb2+ perovskite (based on Cs+, MA+ or FA+ organic cations), mainly by altering the iodide–bromide ratio,4c but around 1.48 eV (the optical bandgap of FAPbI3) seems to be the lowest limit. Therefore, to realize an efficient all-perovskite-based tandem solar cell, it is really critical to fabricate high performance perovskite bottom cells. As we have seen in the previous sections, completely replacing Pb with Sn can shift the band gap down to ∼1.3 eV (for MASnI3), while, by adopting mixed tin–lead perovskite systems, the optical bandgap could be lowered further to 1.17 eV (for MAPb0.5Sn0.5I3), due to the anomalous bandgap effect.14 Both approaches were adopted in order to fabricate highly efficient tandem (or graded) solar cells.

5.1.1 Two terminal (2T) tandems. 
Specific requirements have to be fulfilled in order to deliver optimum performance in a 2T tandem. First, the subcells must be connected with an ideal charge recombination layer (CRL); the deposition of the CRL remains challenging, since it should present high transparency, high conductivity, and at the same time, the deposition process must be compatible with the underlying perovskite and other underlayers (thus orthogonal solvents should be employed).123 In a second step, the current of the bottom cell should be matched with that of the top cell.
G. Eperon et al. used a 1.2 eV FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite as the bottom cell (see Section 4.3.2). Then, by simple theoretical calculations, they estimated that an ∼1.75–1.85 eV bandgap is best to combine with a 1.2 eV bottom cell (to give a theoretical maximum PCE of 40%); for this purpose, they adopted a 1.8 eV FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.5Br0.5)3 perovskite as the top cell.104 Both of these perovskites were deposited in a p–i–n structure; first, the 1.8 eV perovskite was deposited on NiOx/ITO substrate, and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was placed on top to act as the electron contact. Then, the CRL was deposited, consisting of a layer of tin oxide coated with sputter coated indium tin oxide (ITO). After post-annealing (120 °C) and UV-ozone treatment, the 1.2 eV cell was structured on top and PEDOT:PSS was deposited. Actually, since PEDOT:PSS is processed via water–methanol solvent, it is very impressive that CRL completely protects the underlying perovskite solar cell from any solvent damage. Then, 330 nm of the 1.2 eV perovskite was deposited on top, followed by thermal evaporation of C60, BCP and silver. We must note here that before depositing NiOx and the 1.8 eV perovskite, a MgF2 strip was evaporated horizontally across the bottom ITO glass; MgF2 insulates the sputtered ITO from the bottom ITO (on substrate) in case of any dissolution of the solar cell layers between, allowing both cells to be contacted in series, without any risk of shorting through either.
The photovoltaic performance of the 2T tandem was remarkable; a stabilized (at its maximum power point) 17.0% for a small area cell was attained, in excess of either of the individual subcells, decreasing down to 13.8% for a larger area (1 cm2) cell. The PCE of the 2T tandem seemed to be constrained only by the Jsc, which was as low as 14.5 mA cm−2, with the wide gap subcell limiting the current.
The initial efficiency was preserved for more than 4 h when the 2T tandem solar cell was held at its maximum power point under illumination in ambient air; however, the PCE dropped down to 8% after an additional 4 hours.17


5.1.2 Four terminal (4T) tandems. 
The same authors have gone a step further by also fabricating a 4T tandem cell by a small variation of the materials used. A 4T tandem operates the two cells independently, meaning that the cells are not electrically connected and there is simply air between them. The sole requirement is that the front cell should be semi-transparent in the region where the bottom cell highly absorbs light (i.e., in the region of 750–1050 nm for a 1.2 eV bottom cell). The efficiency of a 4T device is artificial: it is calculated by combining the efficiencies of the front and filtered bottom subcells. Compared to the monolithic tandem device, the 4T configuration is much easier to fabricate since it does not require precise current matching and has a relatively higher tolerance for bandgap matching to achieve high efficiencies.
Thus G. Eperon et al. combined the same 1.2 eV bottom cell (based on the FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite) with a 1.6 eV FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite. The experimental procedure for the individual cells was identical to that previously described for a 2T tandem, except that a transparent ITO top contact is now used instead of reflective silver. The front 1.6 eV cell gave an efficiency of 15.8%, and when this was used to filter a 14.8% bottom cell, a substantial photocurrent could still be extracted from the low-bandgap device. Overall, an additional 4.5% from the 1.2 eV bottom cell could be obtained, yielding an overall stabilized tandem efficiency of 20.3% (15.8 + 4.5). The above results were attained in 0.2 cm2 devices. Larger area (1 cm2) versions of the 4T tandems exhibited a stabilized PCE of 16%.17
In a very similar approach, Z. Yang et al. demonstrated a 4T cell using a 1.33 eV bottom cell of 14.1% efficiency, based on a MA0.5FA0.5Sn0.25Pb0.75I3 perovskite, along with a semi-transparent ∼1.58 eV MAPbI3 front cell, which produces an individual efficiency of 13.5%. Again, both devices had a p–i–n structure (as in the case of G. Eperon et al.) with slight modifications. Cu-Doped NiOx was used as the hole contact, while PCBM/Bis-C60 was adopted to extract electrons from the front cell. A top ITO electrode (500 nm), deposited by a soft sputtering method and featuring high transmittance across 400 to 1200 nm, finished the device structure. The bottom cell had a similar structure, except that PEDOT:PSS was employed as a perovskite crystallization substrate instead of NiOx. When the bottom cell was measured under the light filtered by the front sub-cell, a PCE of 5.6% was obtained. Combining this with the 13.5% of the front cell, an overall efficiency of 19.1% was estimated, a value very close to that of G. Eperon and coworkers.

Fig. 10 depicts some characteristic features of the above tandem cell.
 Fig. 10  (a–c) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the structure of four-terminal perovskite–perovskite tandem solar cells. (d) J–V characteristics (measured under AM1.5 illumination) of the tandem solar cells based on the 1.33 eV MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.75Sn0.25I3 bottom subcell and around 1.58 eV MAPbI3 front subcell. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 

5.2 Graded perovskite solar cells
A peculiar version of a tandem solar cell (we can still call it “tandem” in the sense that two perovskites combine together to surpass the efficiency of the two when alone) was very recently reported by O. Ergen and coworkers.78 The presented solar cell is not a typical monolithic tandem, similar to what G. Eperon et al. presented,17 in that it does not contain a recombination layer between the two individual cells and thus, current matching is not required. Additionally, it is not a typical graded solar cell with compositional grading within one material as in the case of CIGS graded solar cells, where the bandgap of the material increases from the centre of the absorber to the absorber/buffer interface to reduce recombination at this critical region of the device.124 In our opinion, a “more graded” perovskite solar cell was very recently fabricated by K. T. Cho et al., who managed to deposit a wide band gap FAPbI3−xBrx perovskite on top of the active, low band gap (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite, exactly at the space charge region between the perovskite and hole contact, boosting Voc and reaching efficiencies up to 21.3%.125 In any case, Ergen et al. achieved a sandwich type solar cell where 150 nm of one perovskite (MASnI3) was deposited on one substrate (GaN) and the other perovskite (300 nm of MAPbI3−xBrx) was deposited on a separate substrate. The two were then glued together by gentle (60 °C) heating to form the “graded” solar cell, following a similar idea previously adopted by J. H. Heo and coworkers.126 The turning point of this extravagant device architecture seems to be the medium between the two cells; hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is used primarily as an adhesion promoter, but additionally acts as a diffusion barrier, impeding cation mixing between perovskite layers.127 A schematic view of the cell stratification is shown in Fig. 11a. The result was impressive by all means: their record cell could produce “flash” (within the first 2 minutes of operation under light) efficiencies close to 26%, stabilized over time at 21.7% (with a mean efficiency of 18.4%). Fig. 11b depicts the stabilization of the efficiency within the first 9 min of operation. Even though Voc is not remarkable (only 0.69 V, most probably limited by the low bandgap of MASnI3), the attainable short-circuit current tops at 42.1 mA cm−2 (with a theoretical maximum of around 50 mA cm−2, meaning that the cell extracts 84% of the possible current), attributed to an extraordinary external quantum efficiency (EQE), covering the whole visible region and near infrared, until almost 1450 nm. This EQE was only possible due to the co-presence of h-BN and graphene aerogel (GA) in the device architecture; GA is mixed with spiro-OMeTAD to act as a hydrophobic hole extraction layer, but simultaneously controls the crystallization of the MAPbI3−xBrx perovskite, resulting in large crystal grains with improved mobility. Even though studies need to justify the achievable EQE, the authors provisionally attribute it to bandgap shrinkage (down to 1 eV), due to strain effects on the MASnI3 perovskite, as well as additional defect-induced lattice absorption or free carrier accumulation, which result in further screening at the band edges (further lowering the effective bandgap to 0.9 eV); these latter phenomena take place only under illumination. Besides widening EQE, excessive production of photocurrent could also justify the high values of Jsc. This exaggerated charge extraction from the contacts could be accounted for by improved charge collection efficiency and/or carrier multiplication due to impact ionization/multi-exciton formation effects. Both of these effects were rationalized in terms of the huge built-in field, which is produced in the whole area of the device due to bandgap grading (and band alignments).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the graded perovskite solar cell (b) time dependence of power conversion efficiency (PCE) for a given graded bandgap perovskite cell; the vertical dashed line indicates the onset of steady-state behaviour. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78; copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
6. Conclusions and outlook
The developments in tin-containing perovskite single junction and tandem solar cells, as reviewed in this article, not only provide promising lead-free (or lead-less) materials with probably lower toxicity, but also add a new class of members to the family of viable metal halide perovskites with enhanced mobilities and optical bandgaps close to the optimum. The maximum efficiency of these devices, according to the thermodynamic limit (34% for a 1.34 eV material, e.g. FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.25Pb0.75I3), is higher than that of the pure lead perovskite solar cells (32% for FAPbI3, which has a bandgap of around 1.48 eV).
Pure tin perovskite solar cells with a bandgap of 1.2 to 1.4 eV were able to produce stabilized efficiencies under 1 sun illumination of more than 6%. The Voc, which directly dictates the ability of the material to “fight” recombination, could be very close to the thermodynamic limit; however, the values presented very high irreproducibility so that a clear conclusion could not be drawn. Fortunately, long monomolecular recombination lifetimes (over 10 ns) and small values of bimolecular recombination rate constants (10−10 cm3 s−1) have been recorded, implying that recombination dynamics are not so different from archetypal MAPbI3 as we initially thought. If one takes into account the high mobilities of the order of 100 to 500 cm2 V−1 s−1, charge diffusion lengths could go over 500 nm, surpassing typical film thickness. Despite good results reported, improved reproducibility is needed in order to confirm the viability of pure tin solar cells. Additionally, results should be reproduced in independent laboratories. The attained efficiencies are definitely far away from their theoretical maximum. To boost current PCEs, both Jsc and Voc should increase by passivating traps, forming nearly ohmic contacts to collect charge from the perovskite and optimizing film thickness without compromising film quality, grain size and surface coverage.
SnF2 was added to most of the tin-containing precursor solutions to reduce tin vacancies; however there are reports where its presence was not imperative, most probably due to self-tin compensation effects. Nonetheless, SnF2, which is a Lewis acid, coexists in a solution with SnI2 (which is a Lewis acid as well) and (in most cases) DMSO, which acts as a Lewis base. Thus, we have to understand the adduct chemistry that is happening between these components. Then, we will be able to fine tune the amount of tin fluoride and any other additives necessary (such as pyrazine), which assist SnF2 to do the job.
The presence of reducing agents (HPA or hydrazine) assists in preserving Sn2+ at this oxidation state by reducing any formed Sn4+; still, we need to understand the reason behind the efficiency drop when an excess of these agents is present. Thus, we have to investigate more carefully the role of the reducing agent as well as the effect of a marginal amount of Sn4+ remaining in the film.
In terms of stability, SnCl2-doped CsSnI3 devices proved to be more stable than similar lead-based devices. This was the first result in literature showing that tin can be more stable than lead; SnCl2 is playing the role of a desiccant for water. Luckily, all-inorganic Sn-based perovskites proved to be less toxic to the human body than lead analogues. Promising air stability was also presented by CsSnI2Br and FASnI3 devices.
When blending Pb with Sn, the bandgap could go down to even lower values and is controlled from 1.17 eV to around 1.39 eV. This anomaly of Vegard's law was first observed by the Kanatzidis group and was confirmed by others. However, we have seen that there are reports in literature where specific preparation conditions of the mixed perovskite are probably responsible for altering the exact behaviour that Prof. Kanatzidis observed. Concerning the mixed Pb–Sn perovskite solar cells, things were clearer. Stabilized efficiencies of close to 15% (with a Jsc topping at 26.5 mA cm−2) can now be attained, when the percentage of tin is lower than or equal to 60%; the results have been reproduced to a large extent in various laboratories. The typical average Voc of the devices is around 0.80 V, which is very close to the Shockley–Queisser limit. Energy losses of only 0.16 eV could be estimated, a value lower than that of the 22% InP solar cells. Efforts should now be focused on enhancing Jsc toward 40 mA cm−2 (the theoretical limit). As in the case of pure tin devices, better band alignment, decreased grain boundaries and graded doping at the contacts could be among the possible solutions. A very important result was that a mixed Sn/Pb perovskite, with a bandgap close to ideal for a tandem configuration (1.73 eV), i.e. MAPb0.75Sn0.25(I0.4Br0.6)3, gave a record efficiency of over 12%, along with a Voc higher than 1 V. We expect that this material will soon be utilized in order to make a tandem cell containing a top and bottom cell, both containing tin perovskites. We should note also that by varying the Br content, bandgap tuning from 1.17 eV to more than 2 eV (for pure bromide perovskites) could be easily achievable without significant phase segregation.
Concerning long-term stability, mixed MA-Cs or FA-Cs could retain most of their initial performance when exposed to humid air for more than 15 days. Surely, proper stress tests are necessary to elucidate the actual stability of these systems.
Among the reports we reviewed, there were lots of works where a specific tin percentage was the optimum (50 to 60%) and others where a significantly lower percentage (25%) was the “winning” ratio. This demonstrates that even though the reproducibility is really acceptable, we cannot draw a generalized conclusion about the “correct” tin percentage. To do so, we first have to understand how Pb2+ stabilizes Sn2+, and then, other cations might be able to do a similar work.
2T and 4T tandems have shown appreciable efficiencies of around 17 and 19–20%, respectively. These are the highest efficiencies attained for perovskite-on-perovskite tandems. Enhancement of these efficiencies could arise from better current matching between the two subcells in the case of the 2T tandem. A more viable processing technique should be used to make the tandem; now, the best tandems adopt various deposition techniques (solution-processing, thermal and sputter deposition), thus complicating the experimental procedure. In terms of stability, the 2T tandem has shown a moderate stability in ambient air under illumination for 4 h; this obviously needs to be improved significantly.
A very interesting approach was the “graded” solar cell. The efficiency was higher than 20%. Our opinion is that experimental details should be quickly revealed; otherwise, this concept will be quite painful for others to reproduce.
Even though the efficiencies are quite promising for Pb–Sn single junctions and tandems, none of them is certified by any accredited laboratory. A certificate would give more confidence to researchers and motivate more people to get involved.
The evolution of the tin-containing single junction solar cells and tandems has been spectacular during the last year. Further work needs to be done, first to confirm all these results and then move the field a step forward. If we step back and see what happened in the case of lead perovskite during the last few years, a bright future could be envisaged here. We argue that once these materials prove to be viable in solar cells, then other applications, from photodetectors, LEDs, X-ray detectors etc., will follow. An era of lead-free, or lead-less, optoelectronics has just begun.
Acknowledgements
T. S. thanks Prof. Henry J. Snaith, FRS (University of Oxford, Clarendon Laboratory) who introduced him, in early summer of 2012, to the spectacular field of perovskite solar cells. This personal interaction led to a Marie Curie Intra European Fellowship proposal within the 7th European Community Framework Programme, which was then granted (MESO-SUPERCELLS, PIEG-GA-2012-327015), just one month after the famous Mike Lee's Science paper was published online (November 2012). The current work was funded by the “RESEARCH PROJECTS FOR EXCELLENCE IKY/SIEMENS” Programme as well as by the Research Committee of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki under the Programme “Financial support of lecturers and assistant professors”.
References
D. Weber, Zeitschrift für Naturforschung B, 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .

          A. Kojima, K. Teshima, T. Miyasaka and Y. Shirai, 210th ECS Meeting, Cancun, Mexico,  October 29-November 3, 2006 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C. S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 487–492 CrossRef .
D. O. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png
        .
W. Zhang, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(1–8), 16048 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Science, 2016, 351, 1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Slavney, R. W. Smaha, I. C. Smith, A. Jaffe, D. Umeyama and H. I. Karunadasa, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babayigit, D. D. Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H.-G. Boyen and B. Conings, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17939–17945 CAS .
T. Stergiopoulos and P. Falaras, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 616–627 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016 DOI:10.1126/science.aaf9717 .
W. Liao, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. R. Grice, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, P. Schulz, W. Meng, K. Zhu, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhu, J. Xiao, J. Mao, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605489 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Hsua, L. Jia, M. Du, J. Zhao, E. T. Yub and A. J. Bard, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 205–210 CrossRef .
X. Qiu, B. Cao, S. Yuan, X. Chen, Z. Qiu, Y. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Wang, H. Zeng, J. Liu and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi and C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, Science, 1999, 286, 945–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, S. Wang, C. A. Feild, C. A. Chess and A. M. Guloy, Science, 1995, 267, 1473–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi and K. Liang, J. Solid State Chem., 1997, 134, 376–381 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 Search PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu and C. Katan, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokoyama, D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T.-B. Song, Y. Sato, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 776–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, B. T. Phelan, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14750–14755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5778–5793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sarapov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2269–2275 CAS .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, T. Green, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4178–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Herz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 65–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, Y. Zhou, G. Xing, Q. Xu, H. F. Garces, A. Solanki, T. W. Goh, N. P. Padture and T. C. Sum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604818 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Tabachnyk, H. Glass, V. S. Kamboj, W. A. Nie, J. Pearson, Y. Puttisong, K. C. Gödel, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, A. D. Mohite, S. E. Dutton, R. H. Friend and A. Sadhanala, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604744,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201604744 .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(2014), 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, J.-H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liao, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, K. Ghimire, C. R. Grice, C. Wang, Y. Xiao, A. J. Cimaroli, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12360–12363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. J. Wang, Y. Ren, C. Yu and K. Shum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 093901 CrossRef .

          Z. Chen, C. Yu, K. Shum, J. J. Wang, W. Pfenninger, N. Vockic, J. Midgley, and J. T. Kenney, J. Lumin.  2012, 132, 345.
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh, M. Asta, M. Graetzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, S. Chen, H.-J. Xiang, X.-G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6068–6072 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tan, L.-D. Zhao, F. Shi, J. W. Doak, S.-H. Lo, H. Sun, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, C. Uher and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7006–7017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Wang, W. Wang, W. K. Fong, Y. Yu and C. Surya, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 39704,  DOI:10.1038/srep39704 .
A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. Katsiev, E. Alarousu, R. Comin, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, E. H. Sargent, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 295–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lee, C. C. Stoumpos, N. Zhou, F. Hao, C. Malliakas, C.-Y. Yeh, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. P. H. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15379–15385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Feng, H. Cui, F. Liu, X. Hao, G. Conibeer, D. B. Mitzi and M. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 879–898 Search PubMed .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Song, T. Yokoyama, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Logsdon, D. H. Cao, M. R. Wasielewski, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 836–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Marshall, M. Walker, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16178 CrossRef .
A. G. Kontos, A. Kaltzoglou, E. Siranidi, D. Palles, G. K. Angeli, M. K. Arfanis, V. Psycharis, Y. S. Raptis, E. I. Kamitsos, P. N. Trikalitis, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and P. Falaras, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 84–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Marshall, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11631–11640 CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sabba, H. K. Mulmudi, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Krishnamoorthy, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1763–1767 CAS .
Z. Xiao, D. Wang, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, W. Wei, J. Dai, X. Zeng and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 867–872 CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. Li, J. Li, J. Fan, Y. Mai and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17104–17110 CAS .
M. Zhang, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, M. Noori, X. Zhou, N. A. Cooling, Q. Wang, H. Yu, P. C. Dastoor and L. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1570–1577 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bob, B. Lei, C.-H. Chung, W. Yang, W.-C. Hsu, H.-S. Duan, W. W.-J. Hou, S.-H. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 504–522 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lee, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Noh, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3974–3977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Zhou, M.-G. Ju, H. F. Garces, T. Ding, S. Pang, X. C. Zeng, N. P. Padture and X. W. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1601130 CrossRef .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2554–2560 RSC .
Y. Yu, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, W. Meng, C. Wang, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, H. Zhang, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90248–90254 RSC .
E. S. Parrott, R. L. Milot, T. Stergiopoulos, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokoyama, T.-B. Song, D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Moghe, L. Wang, C. J. Traverse, A. Redoute, M. Sponseller, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and R. R. Lunt, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sadoughi, D. E. Starr, E. Handick, S. D. Stranks, M. Gorgoi, R. G. Wilks, M. Bär and H. J. Snaith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13440–13444 CAS .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1038/nmat4795 .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Kim, Y. Miyamoto, H. Kubota, T. Yamanari and H. Ohkita, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 253–256 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 CAS .
T. Fujihara, S. Terakawa, T. Matsushima, C. Qin, M. Yahiroa and C. Adachi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1121–1127 RSC .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zhang, P. Audebert, Y. Wei, A. Al Choueiry, G. Lanty, A. Brehier, L. Galmiche, G. Clavier, C. Boissiere, J. S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, Materials, 2010, 3, 3385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, P. Guo, N. Zhou, T. J. Marks, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11445–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hasegawa and T. Inabe, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 7043–7047 RSC .
F. Chiarella, P. Ferro, F. Licci, M. Barra, M. Biasiucci, A. Cassinese and R. Vaglio, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 86, 89–93 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Jung, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 2819–2825 RSC .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C.-C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, S. B. Jo, C.-C. Chueh, S. Williams, C.-C. Huang, J. K. Katahara, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7739–7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, D. Ju, S. Xia, H. Xia and X. Tao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3447–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, T. Krishnamoorthy, N. Yantara, C. Shi, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, A. C. Grimsdale, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14996 CAS .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, J. L. Logsdon, M. R. Wasielewski, Y. Yan, G. Fang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14998–15003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Grånäs, D. Vinichenko and E. Kaxiras, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36108 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6454–6460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, B. Yuh, S. Schoen, X. Li, M. Aldighaithir, B. J. Richardson, A. Alamer and Q. Yu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7621–7630 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Fan, H. Li, C. Zhang and Y. Mai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, K. M. O'Malley, W.-C. Chend and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8574–8578 RSC .
L. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Hao, Q. Sun, Z. Li, W. Hua, Y. Cui and F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2360–2367 RSC .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
I. L. Braly and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 893–902 CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, P. Umaribc and F. De Angelis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9208–9215 CAS .
G. Lin, Y. Lin, H. Huang, R. Cui, X. Guo, B. Liu, J. Dong, X. Guo and B. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 638–646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lyu, M. Zhang, N. A. Cooling, Y. Jiao, Q. Wang, J.-H. Yun, B. Vaughan, G. Triani, P. Evans, X. Zhou, K. Feron, A. Du, P. Dastoor and L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2016, 61, 1558–1562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Sun, W. Yan, S. Ye, H. Rao, H. Peng, Z. Zhao, Z. Bian, Z. Liu, H. Zhou and C. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1601353 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. W. Lee, D. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, S. W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levine, S. Gupta, T. M. Brenner, D. Azulay, O. Millo, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and I. Balberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5219–5226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. Koch, S. Burke, R. K. Paranji, A. J. Shropshire, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Miller, E. Yablonovitch and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 303 CrossRef .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Starr, G. Sadoughi, E. Handick, R. G. Wilks, J. H. Alsmeier, L. Köhler, M. Gorgoi, H. J. Snaith and M. Bar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1609–1615 CAS .
K. Yamada, K. Nakada, Y. Takeuchi, K. Nawa and Y. Yamane, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2011, 84, 926932 CrossRef .
C.-M. Tsai, H.-P. Wu, S.-T. Chang, C.-F. Huang, C.-H. Wang, S. Narra, Y.-W. Yang, C.-L. Wang, C.-H. Hung and E. W.-G. Diau, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1086–1093 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 3–13 Search PubMed .

          R. Pandey, A. Jain and R. Chaujar, Novel 4-terminal perovskite/SiC-based rear contact silicon tandem solar cell with 27.6% PCE, IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Oregon, Portland,  June 2016, pp. 5–10 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Nat. Energy, 2016, 15015 CrossRef .
D. Forgács, L. Gil-Escrig, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, C. Momblona, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1602121 Search PubMed .
K.-J. Yang, D.-H. Son, S.-J. Sung, J.-H. Sim, Y.-I. Kim, S.-N. Park, D.-H. Jeon, J. S. Kim, D.-K. Hwang, C.-W. Jeon, D. Nam, H. Cheong, J.-K. Kang and D.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10151–10158 CAS .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 CAS .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, S. J. Turner and A. Zettl, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2016, 253, 2478–2480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, J. Xu, S. Byeok Jo and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018,  DOI:10.1038/nenergy.2017.18 .

Footnote† During the resubmission of our manuscript, we noticed that two important papers appeared online. One paper, published by the group of Alex Jen, utilizes a new tin compensator, being ascorbic acid, in lieu of tin fluoride, along with a 50–50 Pb–Sn perovskite (MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3).128 The second paper deals with a 60% tin perovskite, (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4, producing a record efficiency of 17.5%. Even more importantly, this cell was used as a bottom cell in a tandem configuration, providing a perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cell with a maximum efficiency of 21%.129This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Thomas Stergiopoulos	Thomas Stergiopoulos is a Lecturer in the Department of Chemistry at Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (Greece), working on perovskite optoelectronics. He just finished a two year Marie Curie IEF fellowship, working at the Clarendon Laboratory at University of Oxford, with Prof. Henry J. Snaith on perovskite solar cells. Before that, he obtained his PhD in Physical Chemistry, working at the National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos (Greece), while being a visiting researcher for one year at the CNRS-Laboratoire Interfaces et Systemes Electrochimiques (LISE) in Paris (France). Besides doing science and raising two lovely young boys, Thomas is scouting players for his favourite basketball team.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of tetragonal MASnI3. (b) Absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the MASnI3 and MAPbI3 perovskites. Note that the optical bandgap is severely reduced upon Sn2+ usage (from 1.61 to 1.23 eV); simultaneously, the PL peak of MASnI3 is broader than that of MAPbI3, implying more defects within the tin perovskite. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

MAPbI3	∼1.58	105	0.19–0.25	2–62	3 × 10−4	109	Tetragonal
MASnI3	∼1.25–1.3	104 to 105	0.28/0.13	29	5 × 10−2 to 2	1014	Tetragonal
FASnI3	∼1.40	105	—	31	8 × 10−2	1011 (cubic) to 1014	Orthorhombic/cubic
CsSnI3	1.30	105	—/0.07 (cubic)	18	20	1014 to 1019	Orthorhombic (B-γ/Y phase)/cubic
MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.17	104 (theoretical)	0.16/0.15	15.1	2 × 10−3	1014	Tetragonal

 	Fig. 2  (a) PL dynamics with different photoexcitation energies. Solid lines are fits using an appropriate diffusion model. Note the long PL lifetimes (6.6 ns), which are responsible for the estimated long diffusion length. Bottom: Fitting residuals. (b) Prediction of solar cell performance parameters as a function of grain size. SC stands for single crystals. Solid circles are experimental data obtained for solar cells based on CsSnI3 polycrystalline (PC) thin films (see corresponding reference for details). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

MAPbI3 single crystal	500–1000	24–105	2–175
MAPbI3 polycrystalline film	10–1000	0.4–35	0.1–2.7
MASnI3 single crystal13	
	150–2000	

MASnI3 polycrystalline film	0.2–10.3	1.6–170	0.03–0.55
CsSnI3 ingot37	6.6	536	0.93
CsSnI3 polycrystalline film	0.05–19.7	585	0.016
FASnI3 single crystal13	
	103	

FASnI3 polycrystalline film43	0.2–6.8	22 (cubic)	

FAPb0.5Sn0.5I3 polycrystalline film	2	17	0.21
FA0.8Cs0.2Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 polycrystalline film	1	14	0.19
FA0.6MA0.4Pb0.4Sn0.6I3 polycrystalline film	6.7	—	—
MAPb0.4Sn0.6I3 polycrystalline film	0.87	190	

MAPb0.2Sn0.8I3 polycrystalline film	0.95	120	


 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of photovoltaic devices fabricated with different amounts of SnF2 addition, indicating how SnF2 is necessary for functional devices; reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Device stability tests under 1 sun constant illumination in ambient air for unencapsulated devices with the same architecture. Note that SnCl2 doped-CsSnI3 cells are more stable than lead perovskite devices; reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (c) Device performance with and without HPA additive, measured under simulated AM1.5 sunlight of 100 mW cm−2 irradiance; reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Scheme of the reducing vapor atmosphere process of MASnI3 (top), CsSnI3 (middle) and CsSnBr3 film preparation, along with a typical “normal” device fabrication; reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G illumination under reverse and forward voltage scans. (b) EQE spectrum and integrated Jsc. (c) Steady-state Jsc and PCE at a constant bias of 0.34 V under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (d) PCE histogram of 30 devices with 10% SnF2 additive. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

CsSnI3	Schottky	4.8	0.42	22	0.9	
44

CsSnI3	Inverted (HTM: UV-ozone treated NiOx)	9.5	0.52	61	3.0 (average)	
65

CsSnI3 + 10 mol% SnI2	Inverted (HTM: CuI)	12.3	0.43	40	2.1 (average)	
57

CsSnI3 + 10 mol% SnCl2	Inverted (HTM: UV-ozone treated ITO)	9.9	0.50	68	3.4 (average)	
55

CsSnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso (HTM: m-MTDATA)	22.7	0.24	37	2.0	
46

CsSnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + 450 μl N2H4	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	30.8	0.17	35	1.8	
54

CsSnI2Br + 60 mol% SnF2 + H3PO2	Normal/meso (monolithic)	16.7	0.33	53	3.2	
62

CsSnBr3 + 2.5 mol% SnF2	Inverted HTM: MoO3	2.4	0.40	55	0.6	
76

CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso	6.6	0.41	48	1.3	
59

CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso	9.1	0.40	56	2.1	
76

CsSnBr3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + 300 μl N2H4	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	14.0	0.37	59	3.0	
54


 	Fig. 5  (a) Voc values (some of them are average values, while others are simply record values) of devices (of various structures) based on different pure tin ASnI3 perovskites (where A = FA or Cs or MA). (b) Overall efficiencies of the same devices. A total number of 24 types of devices (the number is not absolute, as we have previously stated that some of the values are average), from a large number of references, were included in the statistical analysis. Note that for better comparison reasons, we chose not to include data from devices based on perovskites which contain bromide anions.	 

MA0.9Cs0.1SnI3	Inverted	4.5	0.20	36	0.3	
15

MASnI3	Inverted	4.5	0.15	38	0.3	
91

MASnI3	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD)	12.1	0.38	37	1.7	
70

MASnI3	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	17.4	0.27	39	1.9	
29

MASnI3	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)	17.8	0.60	30	3.2	
40

MASnI3	Normal/meso	16.3	0.68	48	5.2 (average)	
41

MASnI3	Normal	13.4	0.79	52	5.5	
78

MASnI3	Normal/meso	16.8	0.88	42	6.4	
22

MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal	3.3	0.23	41	0.3	
30

MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Inverted	11.8	0.45	40	2.1	
83

MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	26.2	0.23	39	2.3	
81

MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso (no HTM)	21.4	0.32	46	3.2	
87

MASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2 + N2H4	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	19.9	0.38	52	3.9	
54

MASnI2.6Br0.4	Inverted	1.0	0.15	51	0.1	
92

MASnI2Br	Normal/meso	11.7	0.82	57	5.7	
41

MASnI1.5Br1.5	Normal/meso	5.0	0.45	48	1.1	
72

MASnIBr2	Normal/meso	15.9	0.69	49	5.4	
78

MASnBr3	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	2.2	0.49	46	0.5	
72

MASnBr3	Normal/compact TiO2 (HTM: P3HT)	4.3	0.50	49	1.1	
90

MASnBr3	Normal/meso	7.9	0.88	59	4.3	
14


 	Fig. 6  Optical bandgap variation of the MASn1−xPbxI3 solid solution perovskites. The figure clearly demonstrates the anomalous bandgap effect first observed by the Kanatzidis group;14 surprisingly, 25 to 75% tin mixed perovskites (x = 0.25–0.75) possess a lower optical bandgap, when compared to the two end members (1.55 eV for MAPbI3 and 1.30 for pure MASnI3).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Device structure of 25% containing tin mixed alloy solar cell. (b) J–V curves (forward and backward scan) of the above devices. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Stabilized efficiencies of 50–50 Pb–Sn perovskite solar cells with or without 10% Cs. (d) Ambient-stability tests (RH = 35 ± 5%) of the above devices. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

FASnI3	Inverted	11.7	0.04	23	0.1	
15

FA0.8Cs0.2SnI3	Inverted	16.1	0.24	36	1.4	
15

FASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso	24.5	0.24	36	2.1	
94

FASnI3 + 10 mol% SnF2 (+pyrazine)	Normal/meso	23.7	0.42	63	4.8 (stabilized at 4%)	
64

FASnI3 + 20 mol% SnF2	Normal/meso (HTM: PTAA)	23.1	0.38	60	5.3	
95

FASnI3 + 10 mol% SnF2	Inverted	22.1	0.47	60	6.2	
18

FASnI2Br	Inverted	6.8	0.47	54	1.7	
63


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the formation of (FASnI3)1−x(MAPbI3)x precursor. (b–d) SEM images of (FASnI3)1−x(MAPbI3)x perovskite thin films with x = 0.0, 1.0, and 0.4. (e) Steady state photocurrent and PCE at a constant bias of 0.65 V, for a solar cell using a high tin (60%) mixed perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) The device structure used to fabricate the CH3NH3PbxSn(1−x)I3 [0 ≤ x ≤ 1] perovskite thin-film-based solar cells. (g) The Voc loss compared to the bandgap (Eg − qVOC). The effective loss in VOC from the thermodynamic limit, taking into account the PLQE, is indicated by the star symbol. This shows that the VOC loss from the thermodynamic limit seen for even the very high Sn content (80%) perovskite PV device is only due to low PLQE. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

MASn0.1Pb0.9I3	1.24	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/C60)	19.0	0.78	67	10.0 (average)	
98

MASn0.15Pb0.85I3	∼1.38	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	19.1	0.76	66	9.8 (average)	
97

MASn0.15Pb0.85I3	
	Inverted	18.4	0.67	53	6.5 (average)	
101

MASn0.2Pb0.8I3	
	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)	11.8	0.77	65	5.6 (average)	
40

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.24	Normal/meso	15.8	0.73	64	7.4	
14

FASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.31	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	18.1	0.75	54	7.3 (average)	
91

FASn0.25Pb0.75I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	19.5	0.75	70	10.3	
15

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.31	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/C60)	17.7	0.70	56	7.0 (average)	
98

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.26	Inverted	21.0	0.80	67	11.2 (average/stabilized)	
101

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.31	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/BCP)	22.8	0.76	71	12.3 (average)	
99

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	∼1.31	Inverted (ETL: PCBM + C60)	26.8	0.77	70	14.3 (average, record 15.2%)	
19

MA0.5FA0.5Sn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.33	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	23.0	0.78	79	14.2 (stabilized at 14%)	
91

MA0.25FA0.75Sn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.33	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	16.6	0.70	65	7.5	
91

MA0.75FA0.25Sn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.34	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	22.5	0.80	77	13.9	
91

FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.34	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	22.7	0.84	76	14.5	
15

MASn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.35	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	22.4	0.82	78	14.4 (average)	
91

MA0.9Cs0.1Sn0.25Pb0.75I3	1.39	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	22.8	0.84	76	14.6	
15

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.9Br0.1)3	1.43	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	21.9	0.85	78	14.5	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.8Br0.2)3	1.48	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	21.1	0.87	77	14.1	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.7Br0.3)3	1.53	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	19.6	0.90	76	13.4	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.6Br0.4)3	1.59	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	17.3	0.91	76	11.9	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.5Br0.5)3	1.65	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	16.3	0.94	75	11.5	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.4Br0.6)3	1.73	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	15.2	0.99	74	11.1	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.3Br0.7)3	1.80	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	9.3	1.01	67	6.3	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.2Br0.8)3	1.90	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	6.2	0.97	63	3.8	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75(I0.1Br0.9)3	1.99	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	4.5	0.91	62	2.5	
92

MASn0.25Pb0.75Br3	2.03	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	3.2	0.76	61	1.5	
92

MASn0.35Pb0.65I3	1.25	Inverted	21.0	0.75	60	9.4 (average)	
101

MASn0.4Pb0.6I3	
	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)	17.8	0.75	62	7.3 (average)	
40

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	0.7	0.24	53	0.1	
97

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.17	Normal/meso	20.6	0.58	60	7.3	
14

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	∼1.18	Inverted (ETL: BPB-M)	22.8	0.65	69	10.2	
107

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.18	Inverted (ETL: C60)	26.3	0.75	69	13.6 (stabilized at 13.4%)	
109

FASn0.5Pb0.5I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	21.5	0.60	65	8.4	
15

FASn0.5Pb0.5I3 + 20 mol% SnF2	1.20	Inverted (ETL: C60)	21.9	0.70	66	10.2 (stabilized at 10.9%)	
17

FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 + 20 mol% SnF2	1.20	Inverted (ETL: C60)	26.7	0.74	71	14.1 (stabilized at 14.8%)	
17

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.23	Inverted (ETL: C60)	17.9	0.64	61	7.0	
108

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.26	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	11.1	0.52	64	3.7	
91

MASn0.5Pb0.5I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	18.7	0.62	55	6.4	
15

FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.28	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	24.3	0.70	68	11.6	
15

MA0.9Cs0.1Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	1.28	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	23.3	0.70	62	10.1 (12.7 record)	
15

MA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	20.6	0.60	61	7.5	
15

MA0.7Cs0.3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	15.0	0.39	50	2.9	
15

MASn0.5Pb0.5(I0.6Br0.4)3	1.48	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	6.0	0.57	68	2.3	
92

FA0.6MA0.4Sn0.6Pb0.4I3 + 10 mol% SnF2	1.20	Inverted (ETL: C60)	26.3	0.80	68	14.4 average/15.1% best (stabilized at 14.8%)	
43

MASn0.6Pb0.4I3	1.27	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)	20.5	0.77	63	9.2 (average)	
40

MASn0.75Pb0.25I3	1.17	Normal/meso	17.6	0.38	57	3.7	
14

MASn0.75Pb0.25I3−xClx + 30 mol% SnF2	1.25	Normal/meso (monolithic)	18.9	0.46	57	5.0 (average)	
119

MASn0.75Pb0.25I3	1.27	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	3.5	0.06	25	0.1	
97

FASn0.75Pb0.25I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	20.4	0.46	56	5.3	
15

FA0.8Cs0.2Sn0.75Pb0.25I3	
	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	24.4	0.56	57	7.8	
15

MASn0.75Pb0.25(I0.6Br0.4)3	1.34	Inverted (ETL: PCBM/Bis-C60)	2.8	0.41	63	0.7	
92

MASn0.8Pb0.2I3	1.19	Inverted (HTM: PEDOT:PSS/NiO)	20.2	0.66	57	6.5 (average)	
40


 	Fig. 9  (a) Voc of devices (of various structure) based on ASn1−xPbxI3 perovskites (A = MA, FA, Cs or their mixtures) with various Sn:Pb molar ratios. (b) Efficiency values of the same devices. Around 40 types of devices were included in the statistical analysis. We divided the results into three main regions (see main text for details): the low tin region (x = 0.6–0.9), 50–50 region (x = 0.5) and tin-rich region (x = 0.4–0.2). Two values were omitted from the statistical analysis (0.1% for both 50 and 75% tin-based perovskite solar cells) because they deviated massively from the average.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–c) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the structure of four-terminal perovskite–perovskite tandem solar cells. (d) J–V characteristics (measured under AM1.5 illumination) of the tandem solar cells based on the 1.33 eV MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.75Sn0.25I3 bottom subcell and around 1.58 eV MAPbI3 front subcell. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the graded perovskite solar cell (b) time dependence of power conversion efficiency (PCE) for a given graded bandgap perovskite cell; the vertical dashed line indicates the onset of steady-state behaviour. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78; copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnote
† During the resubmission of our manuscript, we noticed that two important papers appeared online. One paper, published by the group of Alex Jen, utilizes a new tin compensator, being ascorbic acid, in lieu of tin fluoride, along with a 50–50 Pb–Sn perovskite (MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3).128 The second paper deals with a 60% tin perovskite, (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4, producing a record efficiency of 17.5%. Even more importantly, this cell was used as a bottom cell in a tandem configuration, providing a perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cell with a maximum efficiency of 21%.129

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
