The organic–2D transition metal dichalcogenide heterointerface  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00159F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00159F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3241-3264The organic–2D transition metal dichalcogenide heterointerface

        
          
            Yu Li 
            Huang†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu Jie 
            Zheng†
b, 
      
        
          
            Zhibo 
            Song
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dongzhi 
            Chi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew T. S. 
            Wee
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Su Ying 
            Quek
          
          
        
      *bc
aInstitute of Materials Research & Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, Singapore 138634, Singapore. E-mail: huangyl@imre.a-star.edu.sg
bDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542, Singapore. E-mail: phyweets@nus.edu.sg; phyqsy@nus.edu.sg
cCentre for Advanced 2D Materials, National University of Singapore, Block S14, Level 6, 6 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117546, Singapore
Received 
      24th February 2018
    First published on 13th April 2018AbstractSince the first isolation of graphene, new classes of two-dimensional (2D) materials have offered fascinating platforms for fundamental science and technology explorations at the nanometer scale. In particular, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) such as MoS2 and WSe2 have been intensely investigated due to their unique electronic and optical properties, including tunable optical bandgaps, direct–indirect bandgap crossover, strong spin–orbit coupling, etc., for next-generation flexible nanoelectronics and nanophotonics applications. On the other hand, organics have always been excellent materials for flexible electronics. A plethora of organic molecules, including donors, acceptors, and photosensitive molecules, can be synthesized using low cost and scalable procedures. Marrying the fields of organics and 2D TMDs will bring benefits that are not present in either material alone, enabling even better, multifunctional flexible devices. Central to the realization of such devices is a fundamental understanding of the organic–2D TMD interface. Here, we review the organic–2D TMD interface from both chemical and physical perspectives. We discuss the current understanding of the interfacial interactions between the organic layers and the TMDs, as well as the energy level alignment at the interface, focusing in particular on surface charge transfer and electronic screening effects. Applications from the literature are discussed, especially in optoelectronics and p–n hetero- and homo-junctions. We conclude with an outlook on future scientific and device developments based on organic–2D TMD heterointerfaces.
Yu Li Huang
Dr Yu Li Huang is a research scientist in IMRE, A*STAR, Singapore. She graduated with a BA in Physics from Shandong University, China (2006), and obtained her PhD in Physics from National University of Singapore (2010). She was awarded the JSPS fellowship in Chiba University (Japan) during 2010–2013. After that, she joined Prof. Andrew Wee's group as a Research Fellow. She moved to IMRE in 2014. Her current research interest focuses on surface and interfacial properties of 2D materials and organic–inorganic heterostructures studied by scanning tunneling microscopy and photoemission spectroscopy.
Yu Jie Zheng
Dr Yu Jie Zheng received his BA degree in Physics from Sichuan University (SCU, China) in 2013 and completed his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Andrew Wee and Prof. Su Ying Quek at the Physics Department of National university of Singapore (NUS) in 2017. He is currently a research assistant in Prof. Quek's group. His current research interests focus on combining first principles calculations and scanning tunneling microscopy to study two-dimensional materials.
Andrew T. S. Wee
Professor Andrew Wee is a Professor of Physics, and Vice President (University and Global Relations) at the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests include scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and synchrotron radiation studies of the molecule–substrate interface, graphene and 2D materials, and related device studies. He is an Associate Editor of ACS Nano, and on the Editorial Boards of several other journals. He holds a BA (Hons) and MA from the University of Cambridge, and received his DPhil from the University of Oxford.
Su Ying Quek
‡
Dr Su Ying Quek is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics at the National University of Singapore (NUS). Her research group uses first principles approaches to make predictions on the electronic structure, vibrational properties and transport properties of emerging materials. Before joining NUS in 2013, she was an Independent Investigator at the Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore and a postdoc in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USA. She holds a BA Honors (1st class) in Mathematics from the University of Cambridge in 2000 and received her PhD in Applied Physics from Harvard University in 2006.
1 Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted tremendous interest over the last decade due to their novel and intriguing properties with a wide range of potential applications for next-generation electronics and photonics.1–4 Being atomically thin, they provide unprecedented access to the exploration of fundamental interface science at the nanoscale, which is essential for developments in device miniaturization. 2D materials are also of special interest in flexible electronics and optoelectronics applications. As the first member in the 2D family, graphene is chemically inert and exhibits fascinating electronic and optical properties.5,6 However, because of the absence of a natural bandgap, graphene has limited applications in electronic devices such as field-effect transistors (FETs) which require high on/off switching ratios. Although a small bandgap (few hundred meV) in graphene can be opened by chemical functionalization,7 stress,8 electric field9 and other methods,10 a better approach is to search for other 2D semiconductor materials with diverse electronic bandgaps. In contrast to graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are chemically versatile and offer a broad range of semiconducting bandgaps depending on crystal symmetry, composition and phase.4,11 The recent emergence of different 2D TMD materials has led to a rapid burgeoning of the field.
One major challenge in the field of 2D TMDs is the reliable and scalable synthesis of defect free 2D TMD materials. This is in stark contrast to the well-established field of organics – traditionally a key player in the field of flexible electronics. Molecules with targeted electronic and optical properties can be controllably synthesized, and several of these molecules can even exhibit photo-, electron-, electric-, chemical- and/or temperature-induced conformational changes12 (e.g., azobenzene and derivatives13). These molecules are used to make single-molecule tunnel junctions,14 switches,15 and diodes,16 as well as scalable organic thin film devices17,18 that are low-cost, durable and flexible. The greatest success story of organic devices is that of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which are already used in cell-phone displays and other applications. Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) are also widely studied, but generally suffer from poor mobility.19,20
Since both 2D TMDs and organics are important for next generation flexible devices, it is natural to ask what would happen when we marry the two fields. Ideally, this would lead to a superior generation of flexible devices that would benefit from advantageous properties of both materials. At the very least, the sheer number of organics currently available would provide an interesting playground to investigate the properties of organic–2D TMD heterostructures and greatly expand the possibilities of these flexible nanostructures. Fig. 1a lists the relative advantages and disadvantages of organics and 2D TMDs. A number of researchers have already successfully harnessed the advantages of combining organics with 2D TMDs. For example, a high performance photodetector was constructed by combining organic dye molecules with MoS2, taking advantage of the high optical absorption efficiency of organic dyes and the relatively high charge mobility in MoS2.21 In another study on the zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc)–MoS2 interface,22 relatively fast (within 100 ps) singlet–triplet transitions were observed. This is a potentially useful result for improving solar cell performances using the singlet fission process,23 and was made possible by the large single–triplet splitting in organic materials together with the strong spin–orbit coupling in TMDs. Organic–TMD p–n junctions also support ultrafast exciton dissociation across the organic–TMD interface, resulting in long-lived charge transfer states.24 In general, organic–2D TMD heterostructures have promising applications as photovoltaics,25–29 p–n junctions,26,30–36 chemical sensors37,38 and catalysts37,39 (Fig. 1b). Stimulus-induced conformational changes in organic molecules and phase transformations in 2D TMDs suggest intriguing possibilities on the levels of device control that one might achieve with organic–2D TMD heterostructures.
 Fig. 1  Benefits of combining organics with 2D TMD materials. (a) Relative advantages and disadvantages of organics and 2D TMD materials. (b) Organics and 2D TMDs can both form integral components of functional flexible devices. (c) Organics can be used to enhance and tune the properties of 2D TMDs, the latter being the primary functional component. 
The field of organic–2D TMD heterostructures is arguably a nascent one. While multifunctional organic–2D TMD devices are an enticing prospect, an important first realization is that organic functionalization can dramatically improve the properties of 2D TMDs (Fig. 1c). Integration of 2D TMDs with organics is a promising and controllable approach to modify the properties of the TMDs and yet avoid structural damage, thereby retaining the desired properties of the 2D materials. Organics have been used to passivate defects in 2D TMDs,40–43 tune the carrier type44,45 and concentration in the TMDs,46,47 and change electronic screening properties.48 In this way, the 2D TMDs exhibit significantly enhanced charge mobility41 and near unity photoluminescence yields.49–52
Although some work has been done to investigate the electronic and optical properties of the organically functionalized TMDs and their performance in devices,53–56 there is a need for a unified and comprehensive understanding of organic–2D TMD heterointerfaces at the atomic scale. The energy level alignment and carrier relaxation paths and decay times at the interface are critical for any device applications. Yet, the underlying physical mechanisms that determine these quantities are largely unexplored. Compared to conventional bulk–bulk interfaces, the organic–2D interfacial properties are further complicated by low dimensional physical phenomena such as many-body interactions, and effects of electronic screening in 0D and 2D.53,56 In this article, we will review the current understanding of the organic/2D-TMD interface. We begin in Section 2 with a brief introduction of the basic geometrical structures and electronic properties of 2D-TMDs, and highlight some of their limitations. In Section 3, we discuss the atomic structure of the organic/2D-TMD interface, focusing on non-covalent and covalent interactions. In Section 4, we present what is known about the fundamental electronic properties of the organic/2D-TMD interface, focusing on energy level alignment (ELA) – a critical property for any device application. We discuss interfacial charge transfer as well as the effects of electronic screening on the ELA. In Section 5, we highlight a few examples where organic functionalization has resulted in significant enhancement of 2D TMD properties (in particular the mobility and photoluminescence yields), and in Section 6, we discuss devices based on organic/2D-TMD heterojunctions, particularly p–n junctions. We conclude with a forward looking perspective on future scientific challenges and device developments in the field.
2 Structural and physical properties of pristine TMDs
TMDs in general have the chemical formula MX2, where M is a group IV, V or VI transition metal (typically Mo, W), and X is a chalcogen (S, Se or Te). They are layered materials with graphite-like lamellar structures enabling exfoliation into 2D layers with thickness of a single unit cell and high chemical stability. For the layered TMDs, there are two most common symmetries, hexagonal (1H/2H) and tetragonal (1T), where the sandwiched M atoms have trigonal and octahedral prismatic coordination with the basal X layers respectively (Fig. 2a and b). Here 1 or 2 indicates the number of layers per repeat unit along the direction vertical to the (0001) plane (z direction or c axis). The electronic properties of TMDs can be determined by the crystal symmetry, for instance, MoS2 is semiconducting in the 1H/2H phase, and becomes metallic in the 1T phase.11
 Fig. 2  Atomic structures and electronic properties of 2D TMDs. (a and b) Top and side view sketch of monolayer MX2 with hexagonal (1H) and tetragonal (1T) symmetries. (c) Band structures of bulk, bilayer and monolayer MoS2 calculated at the DFT/PBE level exhibit an indirect-to-direct bandgap crossover and a bandgap increase with the decreasing layer numbers. The arrows indicate the fundamental bandgap for a given system. (d) A large-scale STM image reveals a MoS2 flake containing single-layer (SL), bilayer (BL) and trilayer (TL) regions. (e) Typical honeycomb structure (blue rhombus) is observed in SL-MoS2 with visible moiré superstructure (black rhombus). (f) dI/dV spectra taken at the SL-, BL- and TL-MoS2 in panel (d), respectively, reveal the bandgap varying with the layer thickness. (c) Is adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (d–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Moreover, because of their reduced dimensionality, 2D TMDs exhibit exotic layer-dependent phenomena due to quantum confinement, such as bandgap increase and indirect-to-direct bandgap crossover with decreasing layer numbers (Fig. 2c–f),57,58 extremely large exciton binding energies,59 valley polarization60 and so on, which are absent in their bulk counterparts. These diverse properties of 2D TMDs enable a wide range of applications in flexible nanodevices, including field-effect transistors, photovoltaics, photodetectors, sensors, complementary metal-oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) logic and so on.3,61,62
The properties of TMDs have been reviewed in detail elsewhere.2,11,63–67 Here, we wish to highlight that despite its many excellent properties, 2D TMDs suffer from significant drawbacks. In particular, it is difficult to obtain defect-free samples of 2D TMDs. From first principles calculations and transmission electron microscopy images, it has been established that the predominant defects in most 2D TMDs are chalcogen vacancies,68–72 edges,73 and grain boundaries,58,74 which introduce localized states in the band gap.68–70,74,75 These defects are important for some catalytic processes,76 but are detrimental to the performance of TMDs in electronic and photonic applications. In particular, the vacancies limit the charge mobility in TMDs – an important quantity for any electronic, thermoelectric, or optoelectronic device. For example, the mobility of 2D MoS2 devices is typically ∼40 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, more than an order of magnitude lower than the intrinsic phonon-limited mobility.41,72,77 In addition to Coulomb impurities and interfacial roughness, scattering due to sulfur vacancies is thought to play a major role in reducing the mobility in MoS2.41,72
The optical properties of 2D TMDs have been of great interest in recent years. Compared to the bulk, monolayer TMDs have a direct band gap and stronger photoluminescence (PL) intensities.78,79 The band gaps range from visible to near-infrared photon wavelength.2,80,81 Reduced screening in low dimensions results in the formation of stable excitons (bound electron–hole pairs) in semiconducting 2D TMDs, even at room temperature.82,83 Thus, 2D TMDs are being explored for applications in excitonic light emitting diodes, lasers, photovoltaics and so on.81,84,85 However, the PL quantum yield in 2D TMDs is typically 0.01–0.6%,16,49,78,80 meaning that the number of photons radiated is much lower than the number of generated electron–hole pairs. This low PL quantum yield has been attributed to defect-mediated nonradiative recombination80 and biexcitonic recombination.16 Another complication is the formation of a different many-body bound state, a charged exciton (trion), in 2D TMDs, due to the interaction between the exciton and charge carriers in the TMD. Depending on the application, the formation of trions may or may not be desirable. The conversion of excitons to negatively charged trions has been found to reduce the PL yield, because the recombination of excitons results in a larger PL intensity than the recombination of trions.52
In this review, we will show that combining organics with TMDs can overcome the above-mentioned difficulties, significantly improve the mobility and optical properties of 2D TMD materials.
3 Atomic structure of organic/2D TMD interfaces
Integration of ultrathin and uniform organic layers with 2D TMD compounds is the first essential step towards understanding chemical functionalization. Many strategies have been used to fabricate the organic–2D TMD hybrid structures, including vacuum epitaxial growth,26,86–89 chemical solvent deposition41,48,90 spin-coating,91 stamping92 and so on.38 Among them, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is a common approach for preparing high quality 2D organic and inorganic crystals with controllable thicknesses down to one monolayer,93–95 while chemical solvent deposition and spin-coating is an effective and low-cost method and widely used to functionalize TMDs through covalent bonding.41,96 In contrast, the physical method of stacking ultrathin 2D TMD flakes with organic crystals (e.g., rubrene microplates) using a micromanipulator92 is less common.
In general, the fabricated organic–2D TMD structures can be divided into two categories according to the interactions between the organic compounds and 2D materials: van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures and covalent hybrid heterostructures. The epitaxial self-assembly of organic layers on 2D materials can be driven by intermolecular electrostatic interactions and the relatively weak molecule–2D material interactions to form well-defined vdW organic–2D TMD heterointerfaces. Examples include perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) and fluorinated fullerene C60F48 on WSe2.88,89 On the other hand, defect sites73 and metallic phases (e.g., 1T MoS2, 1T WSe2, etc.) with high chemical reactivity can facilitate the formation of covalent bonds.97 Defects at organic/2D material interfaces cannot be neglected even for thicker organic layers, because they can significantly influence their electronic and photoelectric properties by facilitating or hindering carrier or energy transport crossover at the interfaces. For instance, it has been shown that defects at the pentacene/MoS2 interface can reduce the hole transfer yield in photovoltaic applications.25,34 Understanding the molecule–2D TMD interactions at interfaces is key to control the atomic configurations as well as electronic structures for the rational bottom-up design of devices.
3.1 Interfaces without covalent bonds
Due to the atomically smooth nature and absence of dangling bonds in the layered TMD materials, organics can form high-quality crystalline films on 2D TMDs, with atomically sharp interfaces, in many cases without covalent bonds. In such structures, the organics interact with the 2D TMDs predominantly via vdW interactions. The weak organic–2D TMD interactions allow the organic molecules to self-assemble according to the intermolecular interactions, similar to self-assembly on graphite and boron nitride (BN).18,98–100 For example, PTCDA molecules assemble in a monolayer on 2D WSe2, with molecules laid out in a characteristic herringbone pattern.88 This herringbone pattern results from electrostatic interactions between the PTCDA molecules and is almost identical to that observed on Au(111)101 and graphite,102 indicating that the interactions between PTCDA and the WSe2 layer are weak.
Selective self-assembly of organics on 2D TMDs has also been achieved by engineering the phase of the 2D TMD, with organics preferentially binding to the domains of the metastable phase. In recent work, intrinsically patterned monolayer platinum diselenide (PtSe2) was obtained by controlling the annealing temperature and Se coverage on a Pt(111) substrate.86,103Fig. 3a illustrates the atomic structure of the highly ordered triangular tiling patterns constructed by 1H and 1T phases in monolayer PtSe2, and the corresponding STM image is shown in Fig. 3b. Unlike monolayer MoS2 which favours the 1H structure, the stable form of PtSe2 monolayers is the 1T phase, which is semiconducting.103 It is found that pentacene molecules adsorb selectively on the metastable 1H domains due to its higher electron affinity, forming an ordered self-assembled pentacene/1H PtSe2 heterostructure (Fig. 3c and d).86 Such preferential adsorption of selected molecular species to one specific domain could be used in dual functionalization for catalysis or other applications.
 Fig. 3  Atomic structure of non-covalent organic/2D-TMD interfaces. (a–d) Selective adsorption on 1H/1T PtSe2 monolayer. (a) Schematic of the triangular tiling pattern constructed by alternating 1H and 1T phases in monolayer PtSe2, which are highlighted in blue and yellow, respectively. (b) High-resolution STM image of the 1H/1T tiling structure. (c) Pentacene molecules are selectively adsorbed on the 1H domains in the 1H/1T patterned surface, forming ordered triangular clusters. (d) An enlarged STM image of a pentacene-cluster. (e and f) Surface phase transformation of C60F48 on SL-WSe2/graphite from liquid phase (e) to solid phase (f) with the increasing coverage. Insets in the lower right corners show the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) images. The inset in the lower left corner in (f) shows a sub-molecular resolution STM image of the well-ordered close-packed C60F48 island. (a–d) Are adapted with permission form ref. 86. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (e and f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to vdW interactions, charge transfer across the interface can take place resulting in electrostatic interactions between the 2D TMD and the organics, especially for strong donor and acceptor molecules. The resulting charge on the organic molecules also play an important role in dictating the self-assembly of molecules on the TMD. Using photoemission measurements and density functional theory calculations, Song et al. demonstrated that fluorinated fullerene C60F48, a strong acceptor molecule, acquired electrons when deposited on a WSe2 monolayer supported by graphite.89,104 STM showed that at dilute coverages (e.g. 0.05 ML in Fig. 3e), the C60F48 molecules formed a loosely packed liquid phase, whereas at higher coverages (e.g. 0.01 ML in Fig. 3f), the molecules condensed to an ordered solid phase.104 The formation of the liquid phase indicates that repulsive lateral interactions must be present, without which the molecules would aggregate into close-packed islands due to attractive vdW forces between the molecules. Since the C60F48 molecules are non-polar, the most likely source of these repulsive forces is the intermolecular dipole–dipole interactions induced by interfacial charge transfer. As the density increases in the close-packed solid phase, intermolecular vdW interactions increase due to reduced intermolecular distances, while the amount of charge obtained per molecule decreases, resulting in a reduction in repulsive intermolecular interactions. These changes in intermolecular interactions with decreasing intermolecular separation drive the observed liquid–solid phase transition. Charge transfer at this interface will be further discussed in Section 4.
3.2 Interfaces with covalent bonds
In contrast to the interfaces discussed in Section 3.1, considerable effort has been made to synthesize organic/2D-TMD interfaces with covalent bonds, where electrons are shared between the organic and the 2D TMD. Typically, this synthesis procedure involves a chemical reaction where bonds are broken in the organic reactant. Covalent functionalization of 2D TMDs are important because covalent bonds are generally stronger than non-covalent ones, and potentially have larger impact on TMD properties. 2D TMDs are also of great interest as nanoscale, flexible chemical sensors105 and here, functionalization of the TMDs with specific molecules is required for selective detection of target molecules. For example, 2D MoS2 functionalized with glucose oxidase was used for the detection of glucose, with the MoS2 layer enhancing both the bioactivity and sensitivity of glucose oxidase as a glucose sensor.106
Pristine semiconducting 2D TMDs are generally inert and cannot easily form covalent bonds with organic molecules. Many of the studies on covalently functionalized TMDs involve the metallic TMDs,37,97,107–109 where the functionalized metallic TMDs are used as electrochemical sensors and catalysts. One covalent functionalization method is the reaction of organic halides with metallic T phase TMDs such as MoS2 (Fig. 4a) and WS2.108,109 As shown in Fig. 4a, single layer TMD nanosheets can be obtained from chemical exfoliation using butyllithium (BuLi) solution.97,110 The chemically exfoliated sheets contain a large fraction of negatively charged 1T-phase mixed with neutral 2H-phase. The formation of the 1T metallic phase from the 2H bulk is induced by the charge transfer from the butyl group of the BuLi to the TMDs during intercalation, and the charged 1T phase is more stable than 2H phase in common solvents. The mixed nanosheets are next functionalized with 2-iodoacetamide, iodomethane or other organic halides.37,97,108,111 Facilitated by electron transfer between the electron-rich 1T-phase and the organic halide reactants, the functional groups are covalently bonded to the 1T-TMD nanosheets leading to dramatic changes in the optoelectronic properties of the materials. As shown in Fig. 4b, two main peaks are observed for the functionalized 1T MoS2 (Fct-1T MoS2) (red curve) in contrast to the PL quenching in non-functionalized 1T phase (blue curve). The intensity of the PL peaks can be tuned by varying the proportion of functionalized nanosheets, which can be increased up to 30% (Fig. 4c). These PL spectra together with measured transport properties clearly indicate that in this case, covalent bonds with the organics have changed the metallic phase to a semiconducting one. Interestingly, by controlling the annealing temperature of the resultant functionalized T phase MoS2, a covalently functionalized H phase TMD can be obtained.108,109,111 Thus, phase engineering of the TMDs provides an elegant means to achieve basal plane covalent functionalization of otherwise inert H phase 2D TMDs. Many follow up studies have been performed, including both theoretical calculations112–114 and experimental measurements,111,115,116 which suggest that this methodology is versatile, and can be used to functionalize 2D-TMDs with desired novel properties (e.g., ferroelectric114) for future device applications.
 Fig. 4  Basal-plane functionalization through phase engineering. (a) Schematic shows the conversion of 2H MoS2 nanosheets to the 1T phase via intercalation using butyllithium (BuLi). The negatively charged 1T MoS2 is consequently functionalized by the use of 2-iodoacetamide or iodomethane (R–I) solution. (b) PL spectra obtained from single layer MoS2 samples: 2H phase, and metallic 1T phase before and after functionalizing. Inset: Optical image of a typical CVD-grown single layer MoS2 sheet on which the PL spectra were measured. (c) The PL intensity varies with the amount of the functionalized T phase MoS2 sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2014 Nature Publish Group. 
In addition to phase engineering, covalent functionalization on semiconducting 2D TMDs can be performed by selective adsorption on defect sites.41–43,96,117 Many of these studies have been on MoS2 with organosulfur compounds adsorbing at sulfur vacancy sites. An example is shown in Fig. 5 where dibenzothiophene (DBT) selectively adsorbs on the corner vacancy sites on MoS2 nanoclusters.73 The single-layered MoS2 nanoclusters with triangle shapes and various cluster sizes were synthesized on a Au(111) substrate.118 Two different terminated edges can be identified, i.e., S-edge and a “fully sulfide” Mo-edge,118 as illustrated in Fig. 5a and d, respectively. After exposure to atomic hydrogen at 300 K, S vacancies (indicated by arrows) are created at the corner sites of the S-edged nanoclusters, and some edge sites of the Mo-edges ones. DBT adsorbs preferentially at the corner S-vacancy sites of the S-edge-cluster (Fig. 5b and c), as indicated by the formation of a strong covalent bond between the molecule and the cluster. The very short Mo–S distance is 2 Å only, as depicted in the inset in Fig. 5c, and the strong binding interaction is consistent with the high desorption temperature of 520 K. For the Mo-edge-clusters, DBT molecules only adsorb at the corners but via relatively weak interactions, and can be removed by annealing at 400 K. No adsorption of DBT molecules is observed on any of the edge sites, or on the edge vacancies indicated by white arrows in Fig. 5f. This is because steric hindrance prevents adsorption of DBT on edge sites or edge vacancies. The atomic resolution results thus reveal unique site-selective catalytic behaviors.
 Fig. 5  The adsorption of DBT molecules on MoS2 nanoclusters. (a) The atomic structures of a S-edge-cluster (left) and a S vacancy formed at the corner (right). (b) The adsorption of the molecule to the corner site of the S-edge-cluster without and with S-vacancy, respectively. (c) STM image reveals the DBT binding to the S vacancy at the corner. (d) The atomic configurations illustrate a Mo-edge-cluster (left) and a created S vacancy at the edge (right). (e) The molecule adsorbs to the corner site (left) and vacancy site (right), respectively. (f) STM image shows that the DBT physisorbs to the corner site of the Mo-edge-cluster while the edges remain free. (a–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Following this work, many research groups successfully functionalized MoS2 flakes by thiol molecules with various functional groups.38,41–43,96,119–121 In Fig. 6a, a prototypical thiol molecule contains a carbon-bonded thiol depicted by R–SH formula. Here R represents an alkyl or other organic substituent. As shown in the schematic drawing, the thiol molecules graft to the MoS2 basal planes at sulfur vacancy sites via the S atoms, with the dissociation of the S–H bond.96,117 PL measurements revealed that the peak positions arising from the direct transitions are almost constant at ∼1.9 eV before and after thiol functionalization regardless of the “R” group.43,96 This indicates that the optical bandgap size is retained. However, the band positions, e.g., VBM and CBM, vary significantly with the tail group as shown in the energy diagram in Fig. 6b. Photoelectron spectroscopy in air showed that the VBM and CBM positions shift upward compared to pristine MoS2. Such shifts are induced by the weak Lewis base character and the dipole moments of the functional polar thiolate molecules. The magnitude of the shift can be tuned by the substituent group as well as the chain length, to as much as 0.5 eV. The capability to tune the band position is important for many applications requiring specific band edge matching between TMDs and other device components for optimal device operation. Detailed discussion on the energy levels at the organic–2D TMD interfaces is found in Section 4.
 Fig. 6  Surface functionalization with vacancies. (a) Schematic of thiol molecules with “R” group bounded to S vacancy sites to functionalize MoS2 monolayer. (b) Energy diagram shows the change of the MoS2 energy levels with different thiols with various substituent groups and chain lengths. The band gap size remains almost constant. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
It is worth noting that the use of vacancies for covalent functionalization of the TMD basal plane is limited by the density of defects. While atomic hydrogen can create vacancies in MoS2,73,122 it would appear that the use of phase engineering methods (Fig. 4) would be preferred for the formation of uniform, covalently bonded organic films on TMDs.
4 Fundamental electronic properties of organic/2D-TMD interfaces
Herbert Kroemer, in his Nobel Lecture in 2000, coined the famous phrase that “the interface is the device”.123 In organic/2D-TMD flexible nanodevices, the interface literally makes up most of the active layers, and therefore is even more so, the device, compared to bulk heterostructures. It is therefore of paramount importance to have a clear understanding of the fundamental electronic properties of organic/2D-TMD interfaces, as well as the chemical and physical processes that determine these properties.
Kroemer further noted that energy band diagrams are central to any semiconductor problem, and that interfaces in semiconductor heterostructures provide a new degree of freedom for device engineers to obtain effects not possible in homogeneous crystals.123 The importance of energy band diagrams, or the energy level alignment at interfaces, lies in the fact that it determines energy barriers for charge carriers to tunnel across the interface. These energy barriers are in turn critical determinants of the tunneling rates across the interface, and the interface resistance – important figures of merit for any device application. In this section, we examine the factors determining the interface ELA and discuss the complexities in organic/2D-TMD interfaces.
4.1 Energy level alignment
Energy level alignment (ELA) refers to the relative energies of the quasiparticle levels at both sides of a heterointerface. As shown in Fig. 7, different types of alignments can be formed for a semiconductor heterointerface, depending on the relative energy position of the occupied and unoccupied states in the semiconducting layers. In the case of organic materials with discrete orbitals, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) have to be considered instead of the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM). The ELA determines electron/hole tunneling barriers at the interface and the direction of charge transport, and thus is critical for any electronic device application or in solar cells. We note that electrons relax to lower energy levels while holes relax to higher energy levels among the interlayers. Therefore, type I alignments (Fig. 7) are useful for energy transfer, e.g., in organic light emitting diodes (OLED),124,125 while type II alignments are important for electron/hole separation across the interface, e.g. in photodetectors,21 photovoltaics25 and photodiodes.126 The type II alignment can be further divided into two categories, type IIa and IIb, depending on how close the VBM (HOMO) of semiconductor 1 is to the CBM (LUMO) of semiconductor 2 (Fig. 7). The type III interface is less commonly observed, because interface charge transfer effects would typically change it to a type IIb ELA, as discussed in Fig. 8d below. In these schematics, we have omitted band bending effects that are commonly seen in band diagrams for bulk semiconductor heterointerfaces.125,127,128 This is because band bending takes place over long length scales of several nanometers, whereas the organic/2D-TMD interfaces considered here are atomically thin.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of type I, type II and type III alignments of semiconducting organic–2D TMD heterointerface. Short solid lines represent VBM or HOMO, short dashed lines represent CBM or LUMO. Type IIa and type IIb are distinguished by the barrier between the VBM (HOMO) of the semiconductor 1 (SC1) to the CBM (LUMO) of the semiconductor 2 (SC2). 
 Fig. 8  Factors determining energy level alignment (ELA) at interfaces. (a) Interplay between ELA, chemical bond formation, charge transfer and electronic screening. (b) Schematic showing how the frontier molecular levels shift when a molecule is brought into contact with a metal surface. (c) Classical image charge calculation. The image charge q′ is given in terms of the charge q on the molecule, the dielectric constant ε of the substrate, the distance d of q from the substrate, and the image plane position z0. The interaction energy between q and q′ is given by ΔW, and the image charge energy is given by ΔW/2. (d) Schematic showing the interplay between charge transfer and ELA at a semiconductor (SC1)–semiconductor (SC2) interface. The schematic in (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In general, the ELA at the interface is determined by an interplay between charge transfer, electronic screening, and in some cases, chemical bond formation (Fig. 8a).128 It is useful to distinguish between the concept of energy level lineup (ELL) before two materials come into contact (using the vacuum level as a reference), and the final ELA at the interface after the two materials come into contact. The initial ELL can be quite different from the final ELA at the interface. The initial ELL determines the direction and magnitude of charge transfer, because when two materials come into contact, charge will flow to equilibrate the Fermi levels. The initial ELL also determines to some extent the nature of the chemical bonds, if any, between the two materials, because in a simplistic picture, bonds are formed by the hybridization of electronic states at the same energy levels. The charge transfer and chemical bond formation in turn contribute to the final ELA at the interface after equilibration. In particular, charge transfer results in the formation of interface dipoles which shift the levels at the interface. For example, in Fig. 8d, two semiconductors initially have a type III ELL before contact, resulting in electron transfer from SC1 to SC2. SC1 thus acquires some positive charge and SC2 some negative charge. The positive charge drives the local electrostatic potential at SC1 down, thus resulting in a downward shift of the levels in SC1. Similarly, the negative charge in SC2 results in an upward shift of the levels in SC2. This results in a type II ELA at the interface. Many researchers have worked to tune the ELA through the interface dipole at bulk heterointerfaces, including organic–organic, organic–metal, and organic–semiconductor (e.g., silicon) interfaces.123,127–130 In organic/2D-TMD heterointerfaces, the ELA can be tuned with the orientation, substitutional groups, and chain lengths of the organic molecule, analogous to the discussion for Fig. 6b. The use of organic materials thus provides a wide range of choices to tune the ELA at organic/2D-TMD interfaces, for particular application requirements.
Besides charge transfer and bond formation, electronic screening is also important for the ELA (Fig. 8a). This concept is best illustrated when considering the organic–metal interface, which we will discuss next. While in Fig. 7, we have focused on ELA at semiconductor interfaces, organic–metal interfaces are also ubiquitous in many devices, and are relevant to this review as well, because some 2D TMDs are metallic. In Fig. 8b, we illustrate how the energy levels of the molecule change as they approach and make contact with the metal surface.131 In addition to interfacial charge transfer and chemical bonding, there is a noticeable reduction in the HOMO–LUMO gap due to electronic screening from the metal surface. To understand this electronic screening effect, it is helpful to recall what the HOMO and LUMO levels represent. The HOMO level represents the amount of energy required to remove an electron from the molecule, while the LUMO level represents the amount of energy needed to add an electron to the molecule. The removal of an electron from the molecule (e.g., by photoemission) results in a hole being left behind. When the molecule is on the metal surface, the metallic electrons rearrange to screen the effect of the hole, thus stabilizing the hole and making it easier to remove the electron. This raises the HOMO level. Similarly, the added electron in the molecule (e.g., by inverse-photoemission) is stabilized by screening from the metallic electrons, thus lowering the LUMO level. This reduction in HOMO–LUMO gap can be as large as several eVs, e.g., for benzene on metallic surfaces.132–134
For single molecules physisorbed on metal surfaces, the substrate screening effect can be captured within a classical image charge model. This is shown in Fig. 8c where the substrate is generalized to a dielectric medium with dielectric constant ε. To screen the charge q on the molecule, the substrate electrons rearrange in a way that is equivalent to having an image charge q′ in the substrate. The position of the image charge q′ is determined by the image plane position z0 of the substrate, while its value depends on the dielectric constant ε of the substrate, as shown in Fig. 8c (being equal to −q for a metallic substrate). The charge q interacts with its image charge q′, giving the Coulombic interaction energy ΔW (Fig. 8c). The resulting image charge energy is equal to ΔW/2.135 This image charge energy is approximately the magnitude of the shift in HOMO and LUMO levels due to substrate screening effects, for single molecules physisorbed on substrates.132–134 In recent work, Chen et al. had shown that in the single molecule limit, the predominant effect of electronic screening on the ELA for molecules chemisorbed on metallic substrates can also be captured by this simple classical model.136 For chemisorbed molecular layers, however, additional substrate-induced intermolecular screening effects are present, which result in a larger reduction of the HOMO–LUMO gap compared to the gas phase molecule.136 Besides the formation of chemical bonds, charge transfer across the interface can also give rise to additional (dynamical) screening effects, which bring the HOMO or LUMO levels closer to the Fermi level.137 Thus, the screening effect and the ELA are interdependent quantities (Fig. 8a).
While electronic screening is present in all dielectric materials, the impact of substrate screening on the ELA at organic/inorganic interfaces is especially significant because of the much smaller electronic polarizability (i.e. smaller degree of screening) within the organic molecule, compared to the environment (substrate). Semiconducting 2D TMD layers also have small electronic polarizabilities because of reduced screening in low dimensions. As a result, the quasiparticle band gap of 2D TMDs is also renormalized by electronic screening from the substrate (although less so than in small organic molecules). For example, state-of-the-art calculations showed that both the quasiparticle band gap and the exciton binding energy in suspended SL-MoSe2 were reduced by about 0.1 eV when MoSe2 is placed on bilayer graphene substrate (the optical band gap, given by the difference between the quasiparticle band gap and the exciton binding energy, remained the same).59 This phenomenon can be understood from the fact that electronic screening from the substrate stabilizes the quasiparticles while also reduces the electron–hole interaction energy in the exciton.
Therefore, compared to traditional bulk semiconductor heterostructures, electronic screening (in addition to charge transfer and bond formation) is expected to have a large impact on the ELA at these low dimensional organic/2D-TMD heterostructures. It has been found that dielectric screening from the organic can significantly affect the electronic properties of the 2D material, and dielectric screening from the 2D material can likewise have an important effect on the electronic properties of the organic material.22,48,88 In real applications, the organic/2D-TMD heterostructures are usually integrated with other functional layers, e.g., dielectric substrates/gates and metal electrodes. This integration further complicates the ELA at the organic/2D-TMD interface. In the following, we discuss a few examples from the literature of fundamental studies of charge transfer and screening effects at the organic/2D-TMD interface. We also discuss experimental and theoretical approaches to determine these effects and their existing limitations.
4.2 Charge transfer at the interface
Surface adsorption of strong molecular electron acceptors or donors has been approved to be a simple and effective tool to tune the electronic properties of graphene.138,139 For example, the electron acceptor, tetrafluoro-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) and tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) have been used to modify the carrier density of graphene by p-type doping.138 On the other hand, 2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole (o-MeO-DMBI) was found to induce n-type doping for CVD-grown p-type graphene.33 Inspired by these studies, researchers have also begun to study the effect of strong electron accepting or donating molecular adsorbates on 2D TMDs.
Experimentally, photoelectron spectroscopy (photoemission and inverse photoemission), and scanning tunneling spectroscopy can be used to determine the energy positions of the frontier states and core levels of the organic and TMD layers, relative to a substrate. Subsequently, the shifts in core or frontier levels estimated from the energy diagram (e.g., Fig. 6b) are used as a probe of the changes of the local electrostatic potential, which in turn gives an idea of the direction and extent of charge transfer (Fig. 8d). Recently, the ELA in a metal/molecule/metal device geometry was determined using ballistic electron emission spectroscopy.140 For all these experimental techniques, the substrate or electrodes must be sufficiently conducting to prevent charging effects. Theoretically, first principles density functional theory calculations are very useful for providing atomic scale information on the electronic structure of the interface. Density functional theory (DFT) is based on the Hohenberg–Kohn theorems, which conclude that the total energy of a system can be expressed as a functional of the charge density E[ρ], and minimizing this functional with respect to the density ρ(r) gives the ground state density and corresponding ground state total energy. Thus, the ground state charge density is a natural quantity that comes out of any DFT calculation.
For the organic/2D-TMD systems of interest, the charge density obtained from DFT calculations provide an excellent way to analyze charge transfer effects. In particular, a very useful quantity is the differential charge density (DCD), defined as the difference between the charge density for the combined system and that for the individual subsystems, i.e., DCD Δρ = ρcombined − ρTMD − ρorganic. Fig. 9a, c and e show DCD plots for different organic/2D-TMD interfaces, with different colours representing electron accumulation and depletion due to the formation of the interface. It is clear that besides charge transfer, significant charge rearrangement can take place at the organic/2D-TMD interface. In order to compare the doping efficiencies of different molecular donors and acceptors, it is helpful to be able to estimate the amount of charge transferred per molecule. Quantifying the amount of charge transfer requires a way to partition in real space the charge density in the combined system, for example, using the popular Bader method.141
 Fig. 9  Charge transfer and ELA. (a) Side views of the isosurfaces of the differential charge density Δρ for TTF and TCNQ on single layer H phase MoS2. The differential charge density is defined as the difference between the charge density for the combined system and that for the individual subsystems, i.e. Δρ = ρcombined − ρTMD − ρorganic. Red (green) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (b) Band structures of TTF (left) and TCNQ (right) on single layer MoS2. (c) Differential charge density plots for pentacene on single layer MoS2 with different molecular orientations and TMD phases. Yellow (blue) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (d) Schematic energy level alignment expected at the pentacene–MoS2 interface (e) Differential charge density isosurface for a C60F48 molecule on single layer WSe2 supported on graphite (SL-WSe2/graphite). Blue (red) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (f) The total amount of the charge transfer and the dipole moment per molecule as a function of increasing molecular density on both SL-WSe2/graphene (red) and graphene (black) surfaces. (a and b) Are adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Is adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Is adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016. American Chemical Society. (e) Is adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (f) Is adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2018 American Physical Society. 

Table 1 lists the estimated charge transfer per molecule at organic/2D-TMD interfaces, for the low coverage limit with molecules lying flat on the surface. Different donor and acceptor molecules are listed. Benzyl viologen (BV) is found to be a strong donor giving about 0.25 electrons per molecule to single-layer H-phase MoS2.45 Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) (Fig. 9a) and dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine (DMPD) are also effective donors for 2D H-MoS2.44 On the other hand, C60F48 is a strong acceptor molecule,89 while tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) (Fig. 9a) and tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) are also effective acceptors.44Fig. 9b shows that a type II ELA is present for TTF/MoS2 and TCNE/MoS2 interfaces. For the electron donor (TTF), the HOMO is close to the CBM of MoS2, while for the electron acceptor (TCNQ), the LUMO is close to the VBM of MoS2 (Fig. 9b). These type II alignments are useful in photo-induced charge separation, as discussed above.
Table 1 Charge transferred per molecule at the organic/2D-TMD interface. All values are listed for single organic molecules lying flat on a single layer H phase MoS2 substrate, unless otherwise stated. Higher coverage would typically reduce the amount of charge transferred per molecule




Organic molecule
Charge gained per molecule (in units of |e|)




Donors


BV
−0.25 [ref. 45]


TTF
−0.13 [ref. 45]


DMPD
−0.13 [ref. 44]


CuPc
−0.061 [ref. 208]


TiOPc
−0.058 [ref. 208]






Acceptors


C60F48
0.29 (with single layer WSe2) [ref. 89]


TCNQ
0.03 to 0.05 [ref. 44 and 45]


TCNE
0.03 to 0.06 [ref. 44 and 45]




The amount of charge transfer per molecule also depends on the exact molecular orientations and the different substrate phases.142 In a DFT study on the pentacene/MoS2 interface, it was predicted that ∼0.437 electrons per molecule are transferred to metallic 1T-MoS2 (Fig. 9c), while ∼0.015 electrons per molecule are transferred from pentacene to H phase MoS2 for pentacene lying flat on the TMD surface.142 The much more significant charge transfer on the 1T-phase substrate is consistent with the larger reactivity of the metallic phase. The orientation of the molecule also affects the amount of interface charge transfer. For example, pentacene oriented vertically on H phase MoS2 shows very little charge rearrangement (Fig. 9c). The pentacene/MoS2 interface has been studied in device geometries26 where a simple band lineup according to the levels of bulk pentacene and MoS2 gave a type II alignment as shown in Fig. 9d.26 This ELA was consistent with the experimental observations showing charge separation across the interface.25 We note that while the schematic in Fig. 9d may not capture all the details of charge transfer and screening to give a quantitative estimate of the ELA, the theoretical calculations presented above cannot yet give a unified picture of the ELA and charge transfer mechanisms for the device geometry. This is because the pentacene/H-MoS2 interface in the device geometry has a higher coverage of pentacene (more than one layer), and the orientation of the pentacene molecules at the interface is unknown. Additionally, electronic screening effects, and the presence of defect states in the gap, as suggested by the schematic in Fig. 9d, can also change the ELA. This discussion highlights that there is room to strengthen the link between fundamental studies and device applications.
Another factor that influences the amount of charge transfer is the molecular density (the number of molecules per area) on the surface. In general, the amount of charge transfer per molecule decreases with increasing molecular density (Fig. 9f).44,104,142 This trend in Fig. 9f can explain the liquid–solid phase transition observed for C60F48 on graphite-supported WSe2, as discussed in Section 3 (Fig. 3e and f).
In addition to molecular orientation/interface morphology and molecular density, the substrate also contributes to the overall charge rearrangement at the interface. For example, in the C60F48/SL-WSe2/graphite system, about two-thirds of the negative charge transferred to the molecular acceptor comes from graphite.89 The WSe2 interlayer becomes polarized, with electrons accumulating on the top Se layer facing the molecule, and holes accumulating on the bottom Se layer facing graphite (Fig. 9e). This results in a vertical electric field across the WSe2 interlayer and gives rise to a band gap decrease of ∼0.24 eV (Fig. 10c and d), which is attributed to the Stark effect.143,144 Furthermore, compared to C60F48/graphite system, C60F48/SL-WSe2/graphite induces a slightly smaller charge transfer but a larger molecular dipole (Fig. 9f). Since most of the electron charge transferred to C60F48 comes from the graphite substrate, the increase in molecule–graphite distance caused by the WSe2 interlayer reduces the charge transfer but increases the molecular dipole. The underlying substrate thus plays an important role in defining the electronic structure of the heterojunction.
 Fig. 10  STM and STS studies on C60F48/SL-WSe2/graphite. (a) Schematic model of 1D intrinsic/doped interface in the SL-WSe2. (b) A molecular-resolved STM image shows a close-packed C60F48 island (0.5 ML) on the SL-WSe2, where the multicolored triangles denote the positions for the STS spectra recorded in (c). The variation of the WSe2 band gap is getting pronounced as the STM tip approaches the C60F48 island edge (0 nm). (d) Schematic diagram showing the upward band bending of the SL-WSe2 as a function of the distance from the molecular island edge. (e) Photoemission spectra of the valence band region after background subtraction and normalization. Three different contributions with fixed energetic positions can be well identified by fitting: pristine WSe2 (red), transition area between the undoped/doped WSe2 (green) and C60F48-doped WSe2 (orange). (f) A 0.7 eV shift is observed for the W 4f core level, the same as the VB. (a–f) Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Further investigations were carried out to understand the tunability of the WSe2 energy levels upon molecular adsorption.89 Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) spectra taken on the SL-WSe2 near the close-packed C60F48 island edge (Fig. 10b) reveal significant upward shifts for both valence and conduction bands, as highlighted by the dashed lines in Fig. 10c. Such upward shifts are further substantiated by photoemission (PES) measurements to determine the changes of work function, valence band (VB) (Fig. 10e) and core level spectra (W 4f in Fig. 10f), as a function of the C60F48 coverage. For the SL-WSe2 covered with a C60F48 monolayer (8 Å), a 0.7 eV shift is observed for the VB towards the Fermi level and also the W 4f core level, indicating the formation of an interfacial dipole induced by the charge transfer across the C60F48/SL-WSe2/graphite heterostructure. These observations all indicate that WSe2 can be efficiently doped by the C60F48 overlayer, consistent with the conclusions from the theoretical modeling in Fig. 9e and f.
More interestingly, an intrinsic/p-doped homogeneous junction can be obtained in the SL-WSe2 by precise control of the molecular coverage (Fig. 10a). Using atomically resolved STM/STS, the electronic structure of the atomically sharp 1D interface formed between the p-doped (covered with molecule) and undoped (bare) TMD regions is unrevealed, where a gradual band bending over several nanometers is observed in Fig. 10c and d. This transition area with band bending is also captured in the PES spectra, giving rise to the transient peak (green) halfway between the pristine (red) and the C60F48-doped (orange) WSe2 peak in Fig. 10e. The band bending over several nanometers at the interface can be explained by in-plane electrostatic screening. Based on nonlinear Thomas–Fermi theory, the Thomas–Fermi screening length is determined to be 2.3 ± 0.7 nm from the hole-doped edge, in intrinsic WSe2. In addition, the carrier density of the intrinsic SL-WSe2 can be deduced from the screening length, and the value is comparable with that deduced from transport measurements done on field effect transistors.89 The understanding of the 1D doped/undoped interface is important to design lateral organic TMD heterostructures for future devices.
4.3 Electronic screening at the interface
In Section 4.1, we have discussed the concept of electronic screening at the interface, and explained how electronic screening can affect the ELA (as well as exciton binding energies) (Fig. 8). We also noted that this effect is particularly important in low dimensional organic/2D-TMD interfaces. Due to electronic screening, the quasiparticle gap of the organic is smaller when placed next to the 2D-TMD, and likewise, that of the 2D-TMD is smaller when placed next to the organic. In Fig. 8c, we provided a schematic of the classical image charge model which can be used to compute the predominant effect of screening on the ELA for single molecules adsorbed on metallic surfaces and dielectrics (the correction to the levels being given by ±ΔW/2).132–134,136 The image plane position can be obtained using classical methods,145 and in the case of metal surfaces, quantum mechanical exchange correlation effects can be included as well.133 How do we estimate the image charge correction at the organic/2D-TMD interface? The static dielectric constant ε required to estimate the image charge correction to the ELA is well-defined only in three dimensional systems.21,146 Screening due to 2D TMDs is fundamentally different. For example, the in-plane dielectric screening in 2D materials has been shown to be highly nonlocal, showing a logarithmic divergence for small distances and reaching the unscreened Coulomb interaction at large distances.147 While significant progress has been made in understanding the effects of 2D screening on exciton binding energies within the 2D material,147 little is known about the effect on excitations adjacent to it, such as the quasiparticle gap of an adsorbed organic molecule. Thus, the effect of electronic screening on the ELA at organic/2D-TMD interfaces is a relatively open question, and efforts are underway in our group to address this timely issue. In the following, we present a recent experimental and theoretical study of the ELA for perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) physisorbed on SL-WSe2 supported on graphite.88 Despite the theoretical approximations made in this study, a consistent qualitative picture emerged, namely, that the monolayer WSe2 interlayer provided substantial dielectric screening at the interface.88
Theoretical prediction of the ELA is essential to clarify the structure–ELA relationship, which cannot be easily obtained from experiment. However, quantitative prediction of the ELA from first principles is a non-trivial task. The workhorse of first principles calculations is DFT. While DFT generally gives reliable ground state charge densities and total energies, the energy levels predicted from DFT are generally not quantitatively accurate, resulting in band gaps that are too small. The HOMO–LUMO gaps of molecules, especially, are usually underestimated by several eVs. This error can in part be rectified by the use of hybrid exchange–correlation functionals within the DFT calculation. However, unless a reliable estimate for screening is included in these functionals,133 the HOMO–LUMO gaps computed by DFT generally does not include effects of screening from the environment. Other commonly used approaches to quantitatively predict quasiparticle band gaps are the many-electron GW method148 for semiconductors, and the delta-SCF149,150 method for molecules. The practical limitations of these approaches are that the GW method and DFT with hybrid functionals are typically computationally too expensive for large interface calculations, and that the delta-SCF approach150 works only for localized systems. Thus, one typical way to predict the ELA at bulk semiconductor–semiconductor interfaces is as follows.151,152 First, one computes the DFT ELA at the interface, taking into account charge transfer and chemical bonding effects. We note that band bending effects are not accounted for due to the much larger length scales involved there. Next, one computes the quasiparticle levels accurately (using GW, delta-SCF methods, or DFT with suitable hybrid exchange–correlation functionals) for the separate bulk semiconductors. These calculations enable one to know the self-energy correction to the DFT levels in the separate semiconductors, Σseparate (given by the difference between the true quasiparticle levels and the DFT levels). Σseparate can then be added to the DFT ELA, thus giving a better estimate for the ELA at the bulk semiconductor–semiconductor interface. This procedure is illustrated schematically in step 1 of Fig. 11a. For the organic/2D-TMD interface, a further step (step 2, Fig. 11a) needs to be included, to account for the non-trivial effects of electron screening on the ELA in low dimensions. This correction, Σscreening, reduces the band gaps, and can be estimated using the approaches discussed in preceding paragraphs. A similar approach for the semiconductor/metal interface is shown in Fig. 11b. Here, the metal Fermi level does not need to be corrected because the DFT calculation can give a reliable work function.
 Fig. 11  Theoretical prediction of ELA at (a) semiconductor–semiconductor interfaces, and (b) metal–semiconductor interfaces. Solid lines represent the highest occupied level and dashed lines represent the lowest unoccupied level. Starting with the DFT ELA, which captures properly the charge transfer and bonding effects, the DFT levels have to be corrected because of large self-energy effects. In step 1, the self-energy corrections for each component of the heterointerface are computed separately, and added to the DFT ELA. This typically increases the quasiparticle gaps. For metals, no correction to the Fermi level is necessary, because the DFT work function is accurate. In step 2, self-energy corrections due to electronic screening at the interface are added. This typically reduces the size of the quasiparticle gaps. Together, the effects of chemical bonding, charge transfer and electronic screening (Fig. 8) are included in the theoretical prediction of the ELA. Note that step 2 is an additional step compared to typical procedures for predicting the ELA at bulk semiconductor interfaces, because the electronic screening effect on the ELA is more significant in low dimensions such as the organic/2D-TMD interface considered here. 
Combining STM/STS and first-principles calculations, Zheng et al. have explored the electronic screening and ELA for a PTCDA/SL-WSe2 heterostructure on top of a graphite substrate (Fig. 12).88Fig. 12a shows the schematic of a PTCDA monolayer on SL-WSe2, on the graphite substrate. Atomically resolved STM images of sub-monolayer PTCDA on SL-WSe2/graphite are shown in Fig. 12b and its inset. As shown in Fig. 12c, STS spectroscopy reveals the HOMO–LUMO band gap of PTCDA on SL-WSe2/graphite to be 3.73 eV, ∼0.6 eV larger than that on Au(111) and ∼0.2 eV larger than that on graphite (Table 2). First-principles calculations based on the two-steps approach in Fig. 11b reveal that the differences in HOMO–LUMO gaps on different substrates is due to the different dielectric screening from the substrates. In particular, the computed HOMO–LUMO gaps were the same on all substrates before Σscreening was included in the ELA. In this work, the screening from all substrates was approximated to be metallic, and the differences in Σscreening came only from differences in the computed image plane positions of the substrates. This approximation is not valid for the SL-WSe2/graphite substrate, but remarkably captured the most important trends and essential physics of screening in the system. The predicted ELA for PTCDA on different substrates (Fig. 12d) compares reasonably well with the measured ELA shown in Fig. 12c. Quantitative differences as shown in Table 2 can be attributed to the fact that the electric field in graphite is not fully screened at the graphite surface88 and that SL-WSe2 is not metallic. When SL-WSe2 is treated as a vacuum spacer, the theoretical predicted band gap is 4.3 eV, much higher than the measured value (3.7 eV). This indicates that the SL-WSe2 provides substantial screening to the organic–inorganic interface.88
 Fig. 12  ELA for PTCDA on graphite-supported SL-WSe2 and other substrates (a) Schematic of monolayer PTCDA on SL-WSe2/graphite. (b) STM image of sub-monolayer PTCDA adsorption on SL-WSe2/graphite. High-resolution STM image corresponding to PTCDA HOMO and corresponding calculated HOMO is shown in inset. The black rectangle indicates the unit cell of PTCDA. (c) STS of PTCDA on Au(111), graphite, and SL-WSe2/graphite. (d) Theoretically predicted ELA for PTCDA on Au(111), graphite, and SL-WSe2/graphite, obtained using the two-step approach in Fig. 11. The peaks are artificially broadened with a gaussian function. Adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Table 2 STS and computed HOMO–LUMO gaps (in eV) for PTCDA on different substrates from Fig. 1288




Substrate
STS (experiment)
Calculated




Au(111)
3.10
2.93


Graphite
3.49
2.99


SL-WSe2/graphite
3.73
3.29




More work needs to be performed to understand the effect of electronic screening by the 2D TMD on the organic HOMO–LUMO levels, as well as the effect of the organic on the band gap in the 2D material. The sensitivity of the ELA to environmental screening also suggests that the dielectric environment can be used as another knob to tune the ELA at the organic/2D-TMD interface.
5 Advanced TMD properties arising from organic/2D-TMD interactions
In Section 2, we highlighted a few challenges associated with as-prepared 2D TMDs, especially for electronic and optoelectronic applications. Here, we discuss how organics have been used to improve the properties of 2D TMDs (Fig. 1c), particularly their carrier mobility and photoluminescence yield.
5.1 Improved carrier mobility
The transport properties in the as-prepared 2D TMD layers are significantly limited by charge traps, impurities and short-range defect scattering. Sulfur vacancies are the most common defects in as-prepared MoS2.72,153 In addition to covalent functionalization as discussed in Section 3.2, thiol molecules can also be used to repair the sulfur vacancies in MoS2.41,42,154 Yu et al. revealed that (3-mercaptopropyl) trimethoxysilane (MPS) molecules repair the sulfur vacancies by two steps,41 as shown in Fig. 13a. In the first step, analogous to the functionalization process, MPS absorbs onto an S vacancy and the S–H bond dissociates to form a thiolate surface intermediate. Subsequently, the S–C bond of the thiolate intermediate breaks leaving the lone S atom in the vacancy site. The repair of sulfur vacancies is supported by comparing the vacancy densities of the as-exfoliated (Fig. 13b) with the MPS-treated (Fig. 13c) MoS2 samples via high-resolution TEM measurements. The density of sulfur vacancies is dramatically reduced from ∼6.5 × 1013 cm−2 for the as-exfoliated samples to ∼1.6 × 1013 cm−2 for the top-side treated samples. The improvement of the sample quality is further confirmed by the improved transport properties, where better conductivity and higher mobility were obtained from the MPS treated MoS2 flake (Fig. 13d and e). Here, μ = 81 cm2 V−1 s−1 achieved from the double-side treated MoS2 sample is the highest room temperature (field effect) mobility reported so far.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic plots the initial, transient and final states involved in the reactions between a sulfur vacancy and a MPS molecule. Inset shows the MPS structure. (b and c) High-resolution TEM images of as-exfoliated and MPS-treated monolayer MoS2 samples, respectively. A significant reduction of S vacancy density is observable. (d) The conductivity σ as a function of back gate voltage Vg for three devices fabricated by as-exfoliated (black), top-side treated (blue) and double-side treated (red) MoS2 monolayers at room temperature. (e) The corresponding μ–T curves for the three devices at n = 7.1 × 1012 cm−2, where the solid lines are theoretical fittings. Figures adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition, dielectric screening affects the carrier mobility because it reduces the electrostatic forces between the electrical carriers and charged impurities, and thus increases the time between Coulomb impurity scattering events. A remarkable improvement in the carrier mobility has been achieved in MoS2 by using a high-k dielectric material (e.g., HfO2) as the top-gate.155,156 It has also been found that polar organic molecules intercalated in layered TiS2 can be used to tune the electron mobility of the TiS2 layers up to a factor of three, using selected polar organics with increasing dielectric constants.48 However, the mobility in the organic/TMD hybrid structure is lower than that in pristine TiS2, due to Coulomb forces introduced between the negatively charged TiS2 layer and the positively charged organic layer. Thus, further work needs to be done to utilize organics to optimize the carrier mobility in 2D TMDs. On the other hand, the intercalation of polar molecules helped increase the carrier concentration and reduce the overall thermal conductivity, resulting in a significantly improved thermoelectric figure of merit ZT at room temperature.48 The reasons for the improved thermal properties in the organic/TMD hybrid systems are still unclear, and thus require further research efforts.
5.2 Enhanced photoluminescence
As described in Section 2, there has been much interest in the optical properties of 2D TMDs. In principle, the optical responses of 2D TMDs are dominated by the generation of electron–hole pairs and the subsequent transition and recombination processes, where the carrier concentrations and exciton lifetimes play critical roles. The adsorption of organic materials on 2D TMDs is thus expected to be an effective method to optimize the optical properties of the TMDs by controlling the carrier/impurity density and passivating the defect states as discussed in previous sections.
We first focus on the modulations of the PL with organic dopants. PL results from radiative recombination of a photo-excited electron–hole pair. A typical PL spectrum of pristine SL-MoS2 is shown in Fig. 14c (the blue curve) with two major peaks known as A (∼1.85 eV) and B (∼2.05 eV) excitons.52 Both A and B features arise from the direct optical transition at K (K′) point, and the energy difference between them corresponds to the VB splitting induced by the strong spin–orbit interaction in 2D TMDs.60,157,158 Precise fitting of the PL spectrum in Fig. 14d further reveals that the feature A contains two basic components, namely X− (negatively charged trion) and X (neutral exciton). The formation of the trion, a many-body bound state composed of an electron–hole pair and an electron or a hole (X− or X+), is a result of the interplay between the exciton and charge carrier.82,83 In general, X− and X are observable in the n-type TMDs, e.g., MoS2 and WS2;52,82,159 while all the excitonic species, X−, X+ and X, can be found in ambipolar MoSe2160 and WSe2.161 The concentrations of the different excitonic species are tunable via the applied electric field82,160 as well as chemical doping52,159 to control the available carrier species and densities, and thereby to modulate the PL intensity. As demonstrated in Fig. 14c, the PL intensity (feature A) is dramatically enhanced by the adsorption of a p-type organic dopant, F4TCNQ, which withdraws electrons from MoS2.52 The formation of the trions, which is dominant in the as-prepared sample (Fig. 14d),82 is significantly suppressed due to the reduced electron density. In consequence, exciton emission is dominant in the F4TCNQ-doped sample and the exciton PL intensity drastically increases without forming trions.52 Similar enhancements are achievable in SL-MoS2 and SL-WS2 with other p-type dopants like TCNQ and 2,2-bis-1,3-dithiolylidene.159,162 In contrast, n-type dopants, e.g., nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NaDH), result in a PL decrease by donating electrons to the MoS2 to increase the likelihood of trion formation.52
 Fig. 14  PL enhancement. (a) A schematic shows the charge transfer between F4TCNQ and SL-MoS2. (b) Energy level diagrams (vs. SHE) of SL-MoS2 and n- and p-type dopants. (c) PL intensity of SL-MoS2 is dramatically increased after doping with p-type molecules (F4TCNQ). (d) Analysis of the PL spectra of the MoS2 before and after F4TCNQ adsorption suggests a decrease of the X− trion and an increase of the X exciton. Significant PL enhancement is also revealed by PL images of a MoS2 monolayer before (e) and after superacid (TFSI) treatment (f). Insets show optical images of the sample. (g) The corresponding PL spectra for the as-exfoliated (blue) and TFSI-treated (red) MoS2 monolayers. The inset shows a normalization by a 190-fold increase. (a–d) Are adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Are adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 AAAS. 
2D TMDs exhibit extremely low quantum efficiency below 1% due to a large number of defect sites.29,108,160,163 That is, instead of the radiative recombination which is desired for many optoelectronic applications, the dominant mechanism is defect-assisted recombination in which electrons and holes are mainly captured by defects via Auger scattering.80 PL quantum yield (QY) here is defined as the ratio of the population of photons the material radiates over the population of the total generated electron–hole pairs. By treatment with an organic superacid, bis(trifluoromethane) (TFSI), Amani et al. managed to eliminate the defect-mediated nonradiative recombination in MoS2.49 As shown in Fig. 14e–g, the PL intensity of a TFSI-treated MoS2 monolayer has a 190-fold increase in magnitude without a visible change in the peak shape, indicating a significant improvement in the sample quality. A maximum QY >95% was extracted from the pump-power dependence of the calibrated luminescence intensity at a low pump intensity (10−2 W cm−2), and a much longer lifetime of ∼10 ns is obtained (compared with several tenths ns in the pristine MoS2). The near-unity QY suggests that the nonradiative recombination in the MoS2 is greatly removed by the TFSI treatment due to defect passivation, healing, or both, which is not yet fully understood.49
We note that the enhanced photoluminescence properties described above also translate into enhanced electroluminescence properties in the 2D-TMDs, as both processes involve the radiative recombination of excitons.164 Thus, organics can enhance the efficiency of 2D TMDs as excitonic light-emitting diodes.
6 Organic/2D-TMD devices
In Section 5, we discussed how organics can be used to improve the properties of 2D TMDs (Fig. 1c). Here, we focus on device properties of organic/2D TMD hybrid structures. Several recent studies have revealed the excellent potential of various organic–2D TMD junctions for future device applications.21,26,35,91,126,165,166 Many of these studies have been on organic/2D-TMD p–n junctions with type II level alignment (see Fig. 7). p–n junctions are one of the most essential components for many electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as diodes, bipolar transistors, photodiodes, and so on.167,168 p–n junctions have been engineered from 2D TMD semiconductor heterostructures, with their tunable bandgaps and carrier types offering a wide range of choice.169 By stacking or stitching the selected n-type and p-type TMD layers together, it is possible to engineer vertical or lateral p–n heterojunctions with desired properties for specific device applications.170–172 The integration of organic molecules with 2D TMDs enables one to go further, not only in terms of greater tunability, but also resulting in an improvement of device properties. The ultimate goal is to obtain desired optical and electrical properties by combining the advantages of both organics and 2D TMDs, e.g., by utilizing the relative high carrier transport mobility of 2D TMDs and the high absorption efficiency of organics (see Fig. 1a and b).
In this section, we review the recent developments in the field of organic/2D-TMD device applications, focusing on the photocurrent response and transfer characteristics of p–n junctions. In Section 6.1, we focus on organic/2D TMD p–n heterojunctions where both the organics and 2D TMD materials are active components (see Fig. 1b). In Section 6.2, we discuss TMD p–n homogeneous junctions formed via organic doping.
6.1 Organic/2D-TMD p–n heterojunctions
We first discuss the fundamental processes that take place when an organic/2D-TMD p–n heterojunction is illuminated. Experimentally, time-resolved pump–probe measurements give valuable information on the different time scales involved in these processes, as shown schematically in Fig. 15a for pentacene/MoS2, a prototypical type-II p–n heterojunction.25 For the 2D-TMD alone, e.g., SL-MoS2 in Fig. 15d, the relaxation pathways for the (photoinduced) excitons (considering A-exciton only) include radiative recombination (τ4: hundreds of ps), exciton–phonon scattering (τ3: tens of ps), and defect-assisted electron–hole recombination which consists of ultrafast (τ1 < 1 ps) and slow (τ4 > 100 ps) carrier trapping.25,49,80 We can see that radiative recombination, which is responsible for photoluminescence in MoS2, is associated with the longest time constant. This observation is consistent with the fact that PL is limited by defect-assisted electron–hole recombination, which takes place much faster, thus explaining the PL enhancement from defect passivation, as discussed in Section 5. In the pentacene/MoS2 heterojunction, an additional decay pathway exists for the intralayer exciton within the TMD (Fig. 15d). Specifically, the type-II alignment at the interface favours ultrafast hole transfer from the photoexcited TMD layer (e.g., MoS2) to the organic layer (e.g., pentacene) or vice versa (Fig. 15f) (τ2 = 6.7 ps < τ1 ≪ τ4 in ref. 25). The hole transfer process then leads to the formation of a different, interlayer exciton, or hybrid charge transfer exciton (HCTE) (Fig. 15e).22,173–175 The HCTE at the pentacene–MoS2 interface in turn has a relatively long charge recombination lifetime τ5 of ∼5 ns. This lifetime is much longer than any exciton relaxation time in the TMD monolayer (τ1, τ3 and τ4 in Fig. 15d). The dynamics of these processes is also reflected in the reduced PL intensities for the pentacene–MoS2 system (compared to MoS2) (Fig. 15b). Conversion of the intralayer exciton to the interlayer exciton takes place faster than the radiative recombination of the intralayer exciton, while the interlayer exciton has a long lifetime, with a low PL quantum yield, due to the spatial separation of the electron and hole.176 Thus, the PL intensity is greatly quenched. Similar PL quenching is also observed for the PTCDA/WS2 type II heterointerface (Fig. 15g). We note that the processes described above rely on the type II level alignment, without which the intralayer exciton in the 2D TMD would not dissociate across the interface. Researchers have made use of this fact to modulate the optoelectronic properties of organic/2D-TMD devices, e.g., using metal phthalocyanines or fullerenes interfaced with MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2 and so on.90,175
 Fig. 15  Ultrafast exciton dissociation. (a) Schematic drawing of a MoS2–pentacene heterojunction probed by transient absorption spectroscopy. (b) PL spectra and (c) ground-state absorption spectra taken for MoS2 monolayer (blue), pentacene film (orange) and MoS2–pentacene heterojunction (green). Integrating MoS2 with pentacene leads to quenching of PL in (b), and an enhanced optical absorption in (c). Schematic of exciton dynamics in the MoS2 monolayer (d) and in the MoS2–pentacene p–n heterojunction (e). (f) Structural schematic and energy level diagram of a type-II PTCDA–WS2 hererojunction. Hybrid charge transfer excitons (HCTE) form at the interface. (g) PL spectra of PTCDA (black squares), WSe2 (blue triangles) and PTCDA/WS2 heterojunction (red circles). The WS2 PL signals extracted from the mixed emission spectrum is shown by the green down-triangles. (h) Absorption coefficients of the WS2-donor (blue) and the PTCDA-acceptor (green) layers in the photodiode fabricated by the PTCDA/WS2 heterojunction (inset). (a–e) Are adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f–h) Are adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
These type II organic/2D-TMD heterojunctions have several advantages for applications in photovoltaic and other optoelectronic devices. Firstly, the absorption coefficient is greatly enhanced compared to the 2D TMD alone, because of the large absorption coefficient of the organic molecules (Fig. 15c and h). Secondly, the long charge recombination time for the HCTE enables the generation of larger photocurrents, increasing the quantum efficiency of solar cells, photodiodes and photodetectors (quantum efficiency being defined as the ratio of electron–hole pairs collected over incident photons). This charge recombination time is about 2–60 times longer than that in type II heterojunctions based on 2D TMDs alone.24,177–179 However, the charge recombination time is still shorter than that in optimized organic–organic bulk heterojunctions, which can reach the time scale of μs.180 Thus, while the integration of organics with 2D TMDs enhance the performance of flexible nanoscale photovoltaic devices, further work is needed to match the performance of bulk photovoltaic devices. Finally, organic/2D-TMD heterojunctions can have larger theoretical maximum open circuit voltages than 2D–2D heterojunctions.24,177,181 In another pentacene/MoS2 device (Fig. 16a), a photovoltaic effect is observed upon illumination with an open circuit voltage VOC ∼ 0.3 V and a short circuit current ISC ∼ 3 nA (Fig. 16c).26 This VOC value is comparable to that reported for the optimized pentacene–C60 junction (VOC ≤ 0.4 V),182,183 suggesting large potential applications of such organic–2D TMD hybrid structures in solar cells after careful design and optimization.
 Fig. 16  Electronic properties and photovoltaic effect. (a) Schematic structure of the pentacene/MoS2 p–n heterojunction. (b) Semilog transfer curves of the pentacene (red, VD = 10 V), MoS2 (blue, VD = 1 V) and pentacene/MoS2 FETs (green, VD = 10 V). The pentacene/MoS2 p–n junction shows an asymmetric antiambipolar characteristic. (c) Semilog ID–VD curves for the p–n junction at VG = 0 V (dark: black; with illumination: red) reveal a photovoltaic effect with a VOC = 0.3 V and ISC = −3 nA. (d) Fabrication of a vertical p–n homogeneous junction in a few-layer MoS2 flake by chemical doping. In the final MoS2 p–n junction, the top is p-type doped by AuCl3 and the bottom is n-type doped by BV. (e) Gate-dependent ID–VD (output) characteristics at various VG between 60 V and −60 V with steps of 10 V. Inset: The output at VG = 60 V on the logarithmic scale shows a current-on state. (f) The photoresponses with and without laser illumination for both forward and reverse sweeps. (a–c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
As shown in Fig. 16a, parts of the mechanically exfoliated MoS2 (2-layer) flake and electrodes were covered with a PMMA film to avoid electrode shorting by the molecule, and then the pentacene (40 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation.26 The transfer curve for the p–n heterojunction (green) in Fig. 16b demonstrates a gate-tunable current ID–VG with anti-ambipolar behavior. That is, the heterojunction shows a highly rectifying output current in an intermediate VG range, from ∼−70 V to ∼40 V, but not outside this range. Such anti-ambipolar characteristics have been observed in 2D–2D heterojunctions such as MoS2–WSe2184,185 SnS2–WSe2,186 and MoS2-black phosphorus.187 The asymmetry of the pentacene–MoS2 transfer curve corresponding to different transconductances on either side could be a favorable feature for future circuit applications and wireless telecommunication technologies.
Similarly, Liu et al.188 designed another organic–2D TMD vdW p–n junction by integrating organic rubrene single crystal with MoS2 thin film which are used as p- and n-type semiconducting materials, respectively. Rubrene was chosen as a promising organic single crystal with hole mobility as high as 43 cm2 V−1 s−1189,190 and high quantum efficient photoluminescence.191,192 The p–n diode exhibits good current rectifying characteristics, photoresponse and gate tunability. In particular, the rectifying ratio, defined as the ratio of the forward current to the reverse current at the same bias, can be modulated from 102 to 105 as a function of gate voltage, which is larger than that obtained from a MoS2/WSe2 p–n heterojunction193 and comparable to the MoS2-black phosphorus junction.194 Other organic materials that have been used include C8-BTBT,195 C60,196 and pentacene32,197 combined with various 2D TMDs to form vertical p–n heterojunctions, and all exhibit excellent rectifying behaviors as well as strong photovoltaic responses.
6.2 TMD p–n homogeneous junctions via organic doping
Besides using 2D TMD and organic molecules as p- and n-type materials or vice versa to form p–n heterojunctions, an alternative is to fabricate homogeneous TMD p–n junctions using organic layers as dopants to tune the carrier type in the 2D materials, as discussed in Section 4. Fig. 16d shows a vertical MoS2 p–n homogeneous junction fabricated by Li et al.35 In the as-fabricated back-gate FET, a few-layer mechanical exfoliated MoS2 flake with thickness of 11 nm was used as the channel. The bottom surface was n-doped by a spin-coated benzyl viologen (BV) layer, and the top surface was p-doped by AuCl3. A Cr/Pd top electrode (drain) and a Cr/Pd/Cr bottom electrode (source) were contacted with the top and bottom surfaces of the MoS2 flake, respectively. The transfer curve in Fig. 16e shows a clear rectifying effect on the output current, with the current rectification ratio extracted to be ∼100. Ambipolar carrier transport characteristic is observed in Fig. 16f with a hysteresis window of 60 V, due to the presence of electron and hole transport at the bottom n-doped MoS2 and the top p-doped MoS2 regions, respectively. A photocurrent is also observed at both forward and reverse bias, as indicated in Fig. 16f. Interestingly, a small current near zero gate bias is observable in Fig. 16e and f, which is attributed to pristine MoS2. This observation is consistent with the fact that the chemical doping depth is very limited. The authors further investigated the thickness-dependent electrical and optoelectronic performances of the vertical p–n homojunction devices by varying MoS2 layer numbers, and revealed that the chemical doping depth is 1.5 nm only (two layers of MoS2). Correspondingly, the thinnest p–n homogeneous junction obtained in this way was 3 nm; reducing the thickness below 3 nm results in one type of doping overwhelming the other. Moreover, current rectification behavior only occurred in the p–n junctions with MoS2 films thicker than 8 nm, while a reversed rectification dominated by tunneling was found for films thinner than 8 nm. The understanding of the depth limit for surface charge transfer doping, and the thickness-dependent performance of these TMD p–n junctions is of significant importance for the design of flexible, transparent electronic and optoelectronic devices.
7 Future perspectives
We present a current review of the literature on the organic/2D-TMD interface and its hybrid structures. The current understanding of the chemical and physical interactions between organic molecules and 2D-TMD layers is reviewed, including interfaces with and without covalent bonds. We discuss in some detail the fundamental electronic properties of the interface, specifically the energy level alignment (ELA) as well as charge transfer and electronic screening effects. We highlight unique properties of the low dimensional organic/2D-TMD interface that makes several of these physical effects particularly important and interesting. We also discuss reports demonstrating that organic molecules can be used to overcome existing limitations in 2D TMDs, giving rise to superior TMD properties such as enhanced carrier mobility and photoluminescence yields. Finally, we review the relatively recent work on devices based on organic/2D-TMD heterojunctions, which show promising device characteristics.
We believe that this field of organic–2D hybrid interfaces and devices will progress rapidly in the coming years, just as the separate fields of organic and 2D materials have progressed and matured over the years. The technology developed for both organic and 2D materials can be utilized to synthesize and study organic–2D hybrid interfaces more extensively. In addition to organic–2D TMD interfaces, organic-black phosphorus (BP) interfaces have also been recently synthesized. These organic materials passivate, dope and even modify the electronic band structure of BP by non-covalent and covalent functionalization.163,198–202 As discussed in Section 1 and Fig. 1, organics and 2D TMDs (and more generally 2D materials including BP and X-enes203) have many complementary strengths, and marrying the two fields carries huge potential, much of which remains largely untapped. For example, just as dye-sensitized solar cells made an impact in the solar cell community by harnessing the light absorption efficiency of dyes and the carrier mobility in the semiconductors,204 significant breakthroughs may be possible with organic–2D hybrid devices that combine various positive attributes of both organics and 2D materials. Furthermore, combining organics with 2D materials provides more parameters to tune the properties of the hybrid devices, with organics and 2D materials responding to different external stimuli (e.g., photo-induced conformational changes in organics versus doping-induced phase transformations in 2D TMDs). The fact that both organic and 2D materials are flexible materials implies that progress in this field could be spurred by potential applications in the fields of flexible electronics and wearable devices, where the superior properties of 2D materials could replace some components in organic electronic devices.
Another up and coming development that has not been covered in this review is the chemical enhancement of Raman intensities at interfaces between organics and 2D materials, including TMDs.205–207 This development holds promise for the use of 2D materials to detect organics with high level of specificity, without the need for covalent functionalization. While the chemical enhancement has been attributed in general to charge transfer effects and/or dipole–dipole interactions, more studies are required to understand at the atomic level the exact nature of this chemical enhancement mechanism.
Although interface physics and chemistry is a well-established field, the low dimensionality of organics and 2D materials brings new perspectives to the problem. As we have discussed in Section 4.3, a clear fundamental understanding of the electronic screening effects by 2D materials is lacking at present. Chemical bond formation and charge transfer effects at the interface further complicate the effects of electronic screening on the ELA.49,136 Furthermore, the theoretical studies on charge transfer at organic/2D-TMD interfaces have thus far focused on ordered sub-monolayer or monolayer coverages, different from the organic/2D-TMD interfaces present in actual device geometries. A more extensive study of the effects on atomic-scale morphology on interface properties, including the effects of higher coverage, disorder and defects, is required to strengthen the link between fundamental scientific studies and device applications.
In conclusion, we believe the field of organic/2D hybrid structures is very much in its infancy and has immense potential for further development, both on the scientific and technological fronts. Here, we have reviewed what is known about organic/2D-TMD interfaces and highlighted a few open questions worthy of further study.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
SYQ acknowledges support from MOE grant MOE2016-T2-2-132, and grant NRF-NRFF2013-07 from the National Research Foundation, Singapore. AW acknowledges support from MOE grant R-144-000-321-112. SYQ and AW acknowledge support from the Singapore National Research Foundation, Prime Minister's Office, under its medium-sized centre program. Y. L. H. and D. C. acknowledge the A-STAR SERC grant support for the 2D growth project under the 2D pharos program (SERC 1527000012).
References
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Balog, B. Jorgensen, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen, E. Rienks, M. Bianchi, M. Fanetti, E. Laegsgaard, A. Baraldi, S. Lizzit, Z. Sljivancanin, F. Besenbacher, B. Hammer, T. G. Pedersen, P. Hofmann and L. Hornekaer, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 315–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Choi, S. H. Jhi and Y. W. Son, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3486–3689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhou, G. H. Gweon, A. V. Fedorov, P. N. First, W. A. de Heer, D. H. Lee, F. Guinea, A. H. Castro Neto and A. Lanzara, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 770–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Zhang, J. Q. Zhong, J. D. Lin, W. P. Hu, K. Wu, G. Q. Xu, A. T. Wee and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2998–3022 RSC .
H. M. D. Bandara and S. C. Burdette, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1809–1825 RSC .
S. Y. Quek, L. Venkataraman, H. J. Choi, S. G. Louie, M. S. Hybertsen and J. B. Neaton, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3477–3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Quek, M. Kamenetska, M. L. Steigerwald, H. J. Choi, S. G. Louie, M. S. Hybertsen, J. B. Neaton and L. Venkataraman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan and L. Huang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7402–7408 RSC .
Editorial, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, C. Troadec, A. T. S. Wee and Y. L. Huang, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3285–3293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 605–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, W. Zheng, Y. Qiu and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23362–23370 CAS .
T. R. Kafle, B. Kattel, S. D. Lane, T. Wang, H. Zhao and W. L. Chan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10184–10192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Homan, V. K. Sangwan, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, E. A. Weiss and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 164–169 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bettis Homan, V. K. Sangwan, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, E. A. Weiss and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, S. L. Howell, K. S. Chen, J. M. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, S. A. Filippone, R. Turrisi, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Gan, Q. Zhang, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlogl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1445–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Ma, W. F. Fu, G. W. Huang, H. Z. Chen and M. S. Xu, Acta Chim. Sin., 2015, 73, 949–953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velez, D. Ciudad, J. Island, M. Buscema, O. Txoperena, S. Parui, G. A. Steele, F. Casanova, H. S. J. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and L. E. Hueso, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15442–15449 RSC .
R. Chen, C. Lin, H. Yu, Y. Tang, C. Song, L. Yuwen, H. Li, X. Xie, L. Wang and W. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4300–4306 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9332–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, F. Liu, F. Wang, J. Wang, M. Li, Y. Wen, L. Wang, G. Wang, J. He and C. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7519–7525 RSC .
D. W. He, Y. M. Pan, H. Y. Nan, S. A. Gu, Z. Y. Yang, B. Wu, X. G. Luo, B. C. Xu, Y. H. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. H. Ni, B. G. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Chai, Y. Shi and X. R. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 Search PubMed .
J. K. Kim, K. Cho, T. Y. Kim, J. Pak, J. Jang, Y. Song, Y. Kim, B. Y. Choi, S. Chung, W. K. Hong and T. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Li, D. Lee, D. Qu, X. Liu, J. Ryu, A. Seabaugh and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Liu, W. L. Chow, X. X. He, P. Hu, S. J. Zheng, X. L. Wang, J. D. Zhou, Q. D. Fu, W. Fu, P. Yu, Q. S. Zeng, H. J. Fan, B. K. Tay, C. Kloc and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5865–5871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Presolski, L. Wang, A. H. Loo, A. Ambrosi, P. Lazar, V. Ranc, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril, O. Tomanec, J. Ugolotti, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2066–2073 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, H. W. Yoo, H. O. Choi and H. T. Jung, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5941–5947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Li, H. Q. Luo, J. L. Lei and N. B. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24256 RSC .
J. H. Park, A. Sanne, Y. Z. Guo, M. Amani, K. H. Zhang, H. C. P. Movva, J. A. Robinson, A. Javey, J. Robertson, S. K. Banerjee and A. C. Kummel, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701661 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, Z. Y. Ong, T. Xu, R. Xin, L. Pan, B. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cho, M. Min, T. Kim, H. Jeong, J. Pak, J. Kim, J. Jang, S. J. Yun, Y. H. Lee, W. K. Hong and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8044–8053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ding, K. J. Czech, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12734–12742 CAS .
Y. Cai, H. Zhou, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8611–8621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jing, X. Tan, Z. Zhou and P. W. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16892–16897 CAS .
Y. C. Du, H. Liu, A. T. Neal, M. W. Si and P. D. Ye, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 1328–1330 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kiriya, M. Tosun, P. D. Zhao, J. S. Kang and A. Javey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7853–7856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Wan, Y. Kodama, M. Kondo, R. Sasai, X. Qian, X. K. Gu, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, R. G. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6302–6308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amani, D. H. Lien, D. Kiriya, J. Xiao, A. Azcatl, J. Noh, S. R. Madhvapathy, R. Addou, K. C. Santosh, M. Dubey, K. Cho, R. M. Wallace, S. C. Lee, J. H. He, J. W. Ager, X. Zhang, E. Yablonovitch and A. Javey, Science, 2015, 350, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. V. Han, A. Y. Lu, L. S. Lu, J. K. Huang, H. N. Li, C. L. Hsu, Y. C. Lin, M. H. Chiu, K. Suenaga, C. W. Chu, H. C. Kuo, W. H. Chang, L. J. Li and Y. M. Shi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1454–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Luo, W. Q. Huang, W. Hu, P. Peng and G. F. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13383–13391 RSC .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Li, K. Tsukagoshi, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 118–151 RSC .
M. Gobbi, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1706103,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201706103 .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 170–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
Y. L. Huang, Y. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Y. Quek, C.-H. Chen, L.-J. Li, W.-T. Hsu, W.-H. Chang, Y. J. Zheng, W. Chen and A. T. S. Wee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6298 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, F. H. da Jornada, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, F. Wang, S. G. Louie and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1091–1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Suzuki, M. Sakano, Y. J. Zhang, R. Akashi, D. Morikawa, A. Harasawa, K. Yaji, K. Kuroda, K. Miyamoto, T. Okuda, K. Ishizaka, R. Arita and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 611–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Y. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. X. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuc and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2603–2614 RSC .
V. Sorkin, H. Pan, H. Shi, S. Y. Quek and Y. W. Zhang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2014, 39, 319–367 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Liu, D. Xiao, Y. G. Yao, X. D. Xu and W. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2643–2663 RSC .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. F. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. L. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. M. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J. C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Hong, Z. X. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. H. Lv, X. N. Yang, L. Gu, N. N. Mao, Q. L. Feng, L. M. Xie, J. Zhang, D. Z. Wu, Z. Y. Zhang, C. H. Jin, W. Ji, X. X. Zhang, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
H. P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 125304 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, B. R. Carvalho, E. Kahn, R. T. Lv, R. Rao, H. Terrones, M. A. Pimenta and M. Terrones, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 022002 CrossRef .
H. Qiu, T. Xu, Z. L. Wang, W. Ren, H. Y. Nan, Z. H. Ni, Q. Chen, S. J. Yuan, F. Miao, F. Q. Song, G. Long, Y. Shi, L. T. Sun, J. L. Wang and X. R. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2642 Search PubMed .
A. Tuxen, J. Kibsgaard, H. Gobel, E. Laegsgaard, H. Topsoe, J. V. Lauritsen and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4677–4682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Huang, Z. J. Ding, W. J. Zhang, Y. H. Chang, Y. M. Shi, L. J. Li, Z. B. Song, Y. J. Zheng, D. Z. Chi, S. Y. Quek and A. T. S. Wee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3682–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Noh, H. Kim and Y. S. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 12 CrossRef .
G. Q. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Qiao, Y. F. Yu, D. Peterson, A. Zafar, R. Kumar, S. Curtarolo, F. Hunte, S. Shannon, Y. M. Zhu, W. T. Yang and L. Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16632–16638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaasbjerg, K. S. Thygesen and A.-P. Jauho, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235312 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Zhang and F. Rana, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 026803 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiao, M. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 1309–1328 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, J. C. Lu, Y. Shao, Y. Y. Zhang, X. Wu, J. B. Pan, L. Gao, S. Y. Zhu, K. Qian, Y. F. Zhang, D. L. Bao, L. F. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Z. L. Liu, J. T. Sun, T. Lei, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, K. Ibrahim, D. N. Leonard, W. Zhou, H. M. Guo, Y. L. Wang, S. X. Du, S. T. Pantelides and H. J. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 717–721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Arramel, X. Yin, Q. Wang, Y. J. Zheng, Z. Song, M. H. Bin Hassan, D. Qi, J. Wu, A. Rusydi and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5566–5573 CAS .
Y. J. Zheng, Y. L. Huang, Y. Chenp, W. Zhao, G. Eda, C. D. Spataru, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Chang, L.-J. Li, D. Chi, S. Y. Quek and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2476–2484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, T. Schultz, Z. Ding, B. Lei, C. Han, P. Amsalem, T. Lin, D. Chi, S. L. Wong, Y. J. Zheng, M. Y. Li, L. J. Li, W. Chen, N. Koch, Y. L. Huang and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9128–9135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, H. Y. Zhang and J. H. Choi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1671–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Shastry, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, S. H. Amsterdam, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10573–10579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Park, C. Seo, J. Kim and J. Joo, Synth. Met., 2016, 220, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, S. Cheng, X. Zhang, X. Ren, R. Li, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702415 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Arthur, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 189–217 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tian and C.
J. Shih, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 10552–10581 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Nguyen, B. J. Carey, J. Z. Ou, J. van Embden, E. D. Gaspera, A. F. Chrimes, M. J. Spencer, S. Zhuiykov, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6225–6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Goswami, R. Kappera, C. E. Silva Cde, D. Kaplan, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 45–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. S. Wee and W. Chen, Phys. Scr., 2012, T146, 014007 CrossRef .
A. Matkovic, J. Genser, D. Luftner, M. Kratzer, R. Gajic, P. Puschnig and C. Teichert, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, K. Banerjee and P. Liljeroth, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 082001 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nicoara, E. Roman, J. M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. A. Martin-Gago and J. Mendez, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 287–294 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ludwig, B. Gompf, J. Petersen, R. Strohmaier and W. Eisenmenger, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1994, 93, 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wang, L. F. Li, W. Yao, S. R. Song, J. T. Sun, J. B. Pan, X. Ren, C. Li, E. Okunishi, Y. Q. Wang, E. Y. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Y. Zhang, H. T. Yang, E. F. Schwier, H. Iwasawa, K. Shimada, M. Taniguchi, Z. H. Cheng, S. Y. Zhou, S. X. Du, S. J. Pennycook, S. T. Pantelides and H. J. Gao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4013–4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, Q. Wang, M.-Y. Li, L.-J. Li, Y. J. Zheng, Z. Wang, T. Lin, D. Chi, Z. Ding, Y. L. Huang and A. T. S. Wee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2018, 97, 134102 CrossRef .
J. Ping, Z. Fan, M. Sindoro, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605817 CrossRef .
S. Wu, Z. Zeng, Q. He, Z. Wang, S. J. Wang, Y. Du, Z. Yin, X. Sun, W. Chen and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2264–2270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Presolski and M. Pumera, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Knirsch, N. C. Berner, H. C. Nerl, C. S. Cucinotta, Z. Gholamvand, N. McEvoy, Z. X. Wang, I. Abramovic, P. Vecera, M. Halik, S. Sanvito, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, J. N. Colernan and C. Backes, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6018–6030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, Y. K. Huang, J. Kim, B. Kaehr, B. M. Foley, P. Lu, C. Dykstra, P. E. Hopkins, C. J. Brinker, J. Huang and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1742–1745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Sim, H. J. Han, S. Yim, M. J. Choi, J. Jeon and Y. S. Jung, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 4678–4687 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang and D. E. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3743–3748 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vishnoi, A. Sampath, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 886–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wu, S. Dong, K. L. Yao, J. M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7309–7315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manjunatha, S. Rajesh, P. Vishnoi and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Res., 2017, 32, 2984–2992 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, H. Zhang, S. A. Schuman, S. U. Nanayakkara, N. D. Bronstein, S. Ferrere, J. L. Blackburn and E. M. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 441–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Makarova, Y. Okawa and M. Aono, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22411–22416 CAS .
J. V. Lauritsen, J. Kibsgaard, S. Helveg, H. Topsoe, B. S. Clausen, E. Laegsgaard and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Sim, M. Kim, S. Yim, M. J. Choi, J. Choi, S. Yoo and Y. S. Jung, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12115–12123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, M. De, J. Kim, S. Byun, C. Dykstra, J. Yu, J. Huang and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4584–4587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, N. C. Berner, C. Backes, G. S. Duesberg and A. R. McDonald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5803–5808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Leong, Y. Li, X. Luo, C. T. Nai, S. Y. Quek and J. T. Thong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10823–10831 RSC .

          H. Kroemer, Nobel Lectures, Physics 1996–2000,  2000, pp. 449–469 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, D.-C. Qi, H. Huang, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 410–424 CrossRef CAS .
A. Opitz, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 133001 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Gu, K. Ding, D. Fan, X. Hu, Y. W. Tseng, Y. H. Lee, V. Menon and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3176–3181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, D. Qi, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 279–321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ishii, i. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605–625 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, H. Ding, N. Peor, M. Lu, D. A. Corley, B. Chen, Y. Ofir, Y. Gao, S. Yitzchaik and J. M. Tour, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1699–1710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Cohen, G. Ashkenasy, A. Shanzer and D. Cahen, in Semiconductor Electrodes and Photoelectrochemistry, ed. A. J. Bard, M. Stratmann and S. Licht, Wiley, Weinheim,  2002, pp. 127–152 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Quek and K. H. Khoo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3250–3257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Neaton, M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, Z. F. Liu, J. B. Neaton and L. Kronik, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2448–2455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Garcia-Lastra, C. Rostgaard, A. Rubio and K. S. Thygesen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 245427 CrossRef .

          D. J. Griffiths, Introduction to Electrodynamics, Cambridge University Press, 4th edn,  2017, vol. 2 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Chen, I. Tamblyn and S. Y. Quek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13125–13134 CAS .
J. D. Sau, J. B. Neaton, H. J. Choi, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 026804 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Mao, Y. H. Lu, J. D. Lin, S. Zhong, A. T. S. Wee and W. Chen, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2013, 88, 132–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gobbi, L. Pietrobon, A. Atxabal, A. Bedoya-Pinto, X. Sun, F. Golmar, R. Llopis, F. Casanova and L. E. Hueso, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4161 CAS .
R. F. W. Bader, T. T. Nguyen-Dang and Y. Tal, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1981, 44, 893–948 CrossRef .
N. Shen and G. Tao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601083 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Z. Qiu, A. Carvalho, Y. Bao, H. Xu, S. J. Tan, W. Liu, A. H. Castro Neto, K. P. Loh and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1970–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kang, B. Kim, S. H. Ryu, S. W. Jung, J. Kim, L. Moreschini, C. Jozwiak, E. Rotenberg, A. Bostwick and K. S. Kim, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1610–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lam and R. J. Needs, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1993, 5, 2101–2108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Latini, T. Olsen and K. S. Thygesen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 245123 CrossRef .
P. Cudazzo, I. V. Tokatly and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085406 CrossRef .
M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 5390–5413 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Jones and O. Gunnarsson, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1989, 61, 689–746 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. Martin, Cambridge University Press,  2005 Search PubMed .
R. Shaltaf, G. M. Rignanese, X. Gonze, F. Giustino and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 186401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kharche, J. T. Muckerman and M. S. Hybertsen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Hong, Z. X. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. H. Lv, X. N. Yang, L. Gu, N. N. Mao, Q. L. Feng, L. M. Xie, J. Zhang, D. Z. Wu, Z. Y. Zhang, C. H. Jin, W. Ji, X. X. Zhang, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Forster, S. Gemming, G. Seifert and D. Tomanek, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9989–9996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Qiu, F. H. da Jornada and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 216805 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Peimyoo, W. Yang, J. Shang, X. Shen, Y. Wang and T. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11320–11329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, S. Wu, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, A. M. Jones, G. Aivazian, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1474 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Jones, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Rivera, A. P. S. Gaur, S. Sahoo and R. S. Katiyar, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 105102 CrossRef .
Y. He, F. Xia, Z. Shao, J. Zhao and J. Jie, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4701–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ren, Q. Xu, H. Xia, X. Luo, F. Zhao, L. Sun, Y. Li, W. Lv, L. Du, Y. Peng and Z. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2017, 51, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Velusamy, M. A. Haque, M. R. Parida, F. Zhang, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605554 CrossRef .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Taniyasu, M. Kasu and T. Makimoto, Nature, 2006, 441, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736 RSC .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Renshaw and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 045302 CrossRef .
J. Gu, X. Liu, E.-C. Lin, Y.-H. Lee, S. R. Forrest and V. M. Menon, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baek, T. Umeyama, W. Choi, Y. Tsutsui, H. Yamada, S. Seki and H. Imahori, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1561–1572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Wen, J. Zhang, T. Wu, Y. Gong, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, C. Yi, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, W. Zhuang, G. Zhang and J. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ceballos, M. Z. Bellus, H.-Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12717–12724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ceballos, M. Z. Bellus, H. Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17523–17528 RSC .
P. Rivera, J. R. Schaibley, A. M. Jones, J. S. Ross, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, P. Klement, K. Seyler, G. Clark, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, M. A. Loi, N. S. Sariciftci and C. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3001–3003 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S. F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang and T.-Q. Nguyen, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 566–574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheyns, H. Gommans, M. Odijk, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Huang, X. Wang, X. Li, H. X. Deng, Z. Wei and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15574–15581 CAS .
V. K. Sangwan, M. E. Beck, A. Henning, J. Luo, H. Bergeron, J. Kang, I. Balla, H. Inbar, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, W. L. Chow, X. He, P. Hu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Q. Fu, W. Fu, P. Yu, Q. Zeng, H. J. Fan, B. K. Tay, C. Kloc and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5865–5871 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Sundar, J. Zaumseil, V. Podzorov, E. Menard, R. L. Willett, T. Someya, M. E. Gershenson and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2004, 303, 1644–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Podzorov, E. Menard, A. Borissov, V. Kiryukhin, J. A. Rogers and M. E. Gershenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mitrofanov, D. V. Lang, C. Kloc, J. M. Wikberg, T. Siegrist, W. Y. So, M. A. Sergent and A. P. Ramirez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 166601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. H. Baugher, H. O. H. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. He, Y. Pan, H. Nan, S. Gu, Z. Yang, B. Wu, X. Luo, B. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Ni, B. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Chai, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 183103 CrossRef .
R. Chen, C. Lin, H. Yu, Y. Tang, C. Song, L. Yuwen, H. Li, X. Xie, L. Wang and W. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4300–4306 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, K. Cho, T.-Y. Kim, J. Pak, J. Jang, Y. Song, Y. Kim, B. Y. Choi, S. Chung, W.-K. Hong and T. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sofer, J. Luxa, D. Bousa, D. Sedmidubsky, P. Lazar, T. Hartman, H. Hardtdegen and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9891–9896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Liu, B. Zhang, S. Song, F. Fan and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Niu, B. Liu, S. Wang, X. Wei, Y. Liu, H. Xie and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18084–18094 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Zhou, Q. Li, X. Yao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603990 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Wei, I. Balla, A. J. Mannix, N. P. Guisinger, E. Luijten and M. C. Hersam, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602356 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
X. Ling, W. Fang, Y. H. Lee, P. T. Araujo, X. Zhang, J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva, Y. Lin, J. Zhang, J. Kong and M. S. Dresselhaus, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3033–3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, L. Ma, Z. Gao, M. Chen and F. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2621–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. H. Yu, E. Hwang, C. Lee, J. H. Ahn and J. H. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 180–187 CrossRef CAS .
P. Choudhury, L. Ravavarapu, R. Dekle and S. Chowdhury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2959–2967 CAS .

Footnotes† These authors contributed equally to this work.‡ Photo is copyrighted by A*STAR/SCEI.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Yu Li Huang
	Dr Yu Li Huang is a research scientist in IMRE, A*STAR, Singapore. She graduated with a BA in Physics from Shandong University, China (2006), and obtained her PhD in Physics from National University of Singapore (2010). She was awarded the JSPS fellowship in Chiba University (Japan) during 2010–2013. After that, she joined Prof. Andrew Wee's group as a Research Fellow. She moved to IMRE in 2014. Her current research interest focuses on surface and interfacial properties of 2D materials and organic–inorganic heterostructures studied by scanning tunneling microscopy and photoemission spectroscopy.

Yu Jie Zheng
	Dr Yu Jie Zheng received his BA degree in Physics from Sichuan University (SCU, China) in 2013 and completed his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Andrew Wee and Prof. Su Ying Quek at the Physics Department of National university of Singapore (NUS) in 2017. He is currently a research assistant in Prof. Quek's group. His current research interests focus on combining first principles calculations and scanning tunneling microscopy to study two-dimensional materials.

Andrew T. S. Wee
	Professor Andrew Wee is a Professor of Physics, and Vice President (University and Global Relations) at the National University of Singapore (NUS). His research interests include scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and synchrotron radiation studies of the molecule–substrate interface, graphene and 2D materials, and related device studies. He is an Associate Editor of ACS Nano, and on the Editorial Boards of several other journals. He holds a BA (Hons) and MA from the University of Cambridge, and received his DPhil from the University of Oxford.

Su Ying Quek
‡
	Dr Su Ying Quek is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics at the National University of Singapore (NUS). Her research group uses first principles approaches to make predictions on the electronic structure, vibrational properties and transport properties of emerging materials. Before joining NUS in 2013, she was an Independent Investigator at the Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore and a postdoc in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USA. She holds a BA Honors (1st class) in Mathematics from the University of Cambridge in 2000 and received her PhD in Applied Physics from Harvard University in 2006.

 	Fig. 1  Benefits of combining organics with 2D TMD materials. (a) Relative advantages and disadvantages of organics and 2D TMD materials. (b) Organics and 2D TMDs can both form integral components of functional flexible devices. (c) Organics can be used to enhance and tune the properties of 2D TMDs, the latter being the primary functional component.	 

 	Fig. 2  Atomic structures and electronic properties of 2D TMDs. (a and b) Top and side view sketch of monolayer MX2 with hexagonal (1H) and tetragonal (1T) symmetries. (c) Band structures of bulk, bilayer and monolayer MoS2 calculated at the DFT/PBE level exhibit an indirect-to-direct bandgap crossover and a bandgap increase with the decreasing layer numbers. The arrows indicate the fundamental bandgap for a given system. (d) A large-scale STM image reveals a MoS2 flake containing single-layer (SL), bilayer (BL) and trilayer (TL) regions. (e) Typical honeycomb structure (blue rhombus) is observed in SL-MoS2 with visible moiré superstructure (black rhombus). (f) dI/dV spectra taken at the SL-, BL- and TL-MoS2 in panel (d), respectively, reveal the bandgap varying with the layer thickness. (c) Is adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Physical Society. (d–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  Atomic structure of non-covalent organic/2D-TMD interfaces. (a–d) Selective adsorption on 1H/1T PtSe2 monolayer. (a) Schematic of the triangular tiling pattern constructed by alternating 1H and 1T phases in monolayer PtSe2, which are highlighted in blue and yellow, respectively. (b) High-resolution STM image of the 1H/1T tiling structure. (c) Pentacene molecules are selectively adsorbed on the 1H domains in the 1H/1T patterned surface, forming ordered triangular clusters. (d) An enlarged STM image of a pentacene-cluster. (e and f) Surface phase transformation of C60F48 on SL-WSe2/graphite from liquid phase (e) to solid phase (f) with the increasing coverage. Insets in the lower right corners show the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) images. The inset in the lower left corner in (f) shows a sub-molecular resolution STM image of the well-ordered close-packed C60F48 island. (a–d) Are adapted with permission form ref. 86. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (e and f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Basal-plane functionalization through phase engineering. (a) Schematic shows the conversion of 2H MoS2 nanosheets to the 1T phase via intercalation using butyllithium (BuLi). The negatively charged 1T MoS2 is consequently functionalized by the use of 2-iodoacetamide or iodomethane (R–I) solution. (b) PL spectra obtained from single layer MoS2 samples: 2H phase, and metallic 1T phase before and after functionalizing. Inset: Optical image of a typical CVD-grown single layer MoS2 sheet on which the PL spectra were measured. (c) The PL intensity varies with the amount of the functionalized T phase MoS2 sheet. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2014 Nature Publish Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  The adsorption of DBT molecules on MoS2 nanoclusters. (a) The atomic structures of a S-edge-cluster (left) and a S vacancy formed at the corner (right). (b) The adsorption of the molecule to the corner site of the S-edge-cluster without and with S-vacancy, respectively. (c) STM image reveals the DBT binding to the S vacancy at the corner. (d) The atomic configurations illustrate a Mo-edge-cluster (left) and a created S vacancy at the edge (right). (e) The molecule adsorbs to the corner site (left) and vacancy site (right), respectively. (f) STM image shows that the DBT physisorbs to the corner site of the Mo-edge-cluster while the edges remain free. (a–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Surface functionalization with vacancies. (a) Schematic of thiol molecules with “R” group bounded to S vacancy sites to functionalize MoS2 monolayer. (b) Energy diagram shows the change of the MoS2 energy levels with different thiols with various substituent groups and chain lengths. The band gap size remains almost constant. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of type I, type II and type III alignments of semiconducting organic–2D TMD heterointerface. Short solid lines represent VBM or HOMO, short dashed lines represent CBM or LUMO. Type IIa and type IIb are distinguished by the barrier between the VBM (HOMO) of the semiconductor 1 (SC1) to the CBM (LUMO) of the semiconductor 2 (SC2).	 

 	Fig. 8  Factors determining energy level alignment (ELA) at interfaces. (a) Interplay between ELA, chemical bond formation, charge transfer and electronic screening. (b) Schematic showing how the frontier molecular levels shift when a molecule is brought into contact with a metal surface. (c) Classical image charge calculation. The image charge q′ is given in terms of the charge q on the molecule, the dielectric constant ε of the substrate, the distance d of q from the substrate, and the image plane position z0. The interaction energy between q and q′ is given by ΔW, and the image charge energy is given by ΔW/2. (d) Schematic showing the interplay between charge transfer and ELA at a semiconductor (SC1)–semiconductor (SC2) interface. The schematic in (b) is adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Charge transfer and ELA. (a) Side views of the isosurfaces of the differential charge density Δρ for TTF and TCNQ on single layer H phase MoS2. The differential charge density is defined as the difference between the charge density for the combined system and that for the individual subsystems, i.e. Δρ = ρcombined − ρTMD − ρorganic. Red (green) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (b) Band structures of TTF (left) and TCNQ (right) on single layer MoS2. (c) Differential charge density plots for pentacene on single layer MoS2 with different molecular orientations and TMD phases. Yellow (blue) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (d) Schematic energy level alignment expected at the pentacene–MoS2 interface (e) Differential charge density isosurface for a C60F48 molecule on single layer WSe2 supported on graphite (SL-WSe2/graphite). Blue (red) represents electron accumulation (depletion). (f) The total amount of the charge transfer and the dipole moment per molecule as a function of increasing molecular density on both SL-WSe2/graphene (red) and graphene (black) surfaces. (a and b) Are adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Is adapted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Is adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016. American Chemical Society. (e) Is adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (f) Is adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2018 American Physical Society.	 

Donors
BV	−0.25 [ref. 45]
TTF	−0.13 [ref. 45]
DMPD	−0.13 [ref. 44]
CuPc	−0.061 [ref. 208]
TiOPc	−0.058 [ref. 208]


Acceptors
C60F48	0.29 (with single layer WSe2) [ref. 89]
TCNQ	0.03 to 0.05 [ref. 44 and 45]
TCNE	0.03 to 0.06 [ref. 44 and 45]

 	Fig. 10  STM and STS studies on C60F48/SL-WSe2/graphite. (a) Schematic model of 1D intrinsic/doped interface in the SL-WSe2. (b) A molecular-resolved STM image shows a close-packed C60F48 island (0.5 ML) on the SL-WSe2, where the multicolored triangles denote the positions for the STS spectra recorded in (c). The variation of the WSe2 band gap is getting pronounced as the STM tip approaches the C60F48 island edge (0 nm). (d) Schematic diagram showing the upward band bending of the SL-WSe2 as a function of the distance from the molecular island edge. (e) Photoemission spectra of the valence band region after background subtraction and normalization. Three different contributions with fixed energetic positions can be well identified by fitting: pristine WSe2 (red), transition area between the undoped/doped WSe2 (green) and C60F48-doped WSe2 (orange). (f) A 0.7 eV shift is observed for the W 4f core level, the same as the VB. (a–f) Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Theoretical prediction of ELA at (a) semiconductor–semiconductor interfaces, and (b) metal–semiconductor interfaces. Solid lines represent the highest occupied level and dashed lines represent the lowest unoccupied level. Starting with the DFT ELA, which captures properly the charge transfer and bonding effects, the DFT levels have to be corrected because of large self-energy effects. In step 1, the self-energy corrections for each component of the heterointerface are computed separately, and added to the DFT ELA. This typically increases the quasiparticle gaps. For metals, no correction to the Fermi level is necessary, because the DFT work function is accurate. In step 2, self-energy corrections due to electronic screening at the interface are added. This typically reduces the size of the quasiparticle gaps. Together, the effects of chemical bonding, charge transfer and electronic screening (Fig. 8) are included in the theoretical prediction of the ELA. Note that step 2 is an additional step compared to typical procedures for predicting the ELA at bulk semiconductor interfaces, because the electronic screening effect on the ELA is more significant in low dimensions such as the organic/2D-TMD interface considered here.	 

 	Fig. 12  ELA for PTCDA on graphite-supported SL-WSe2 and other substrates (a) Schematic of monolayer PTCDA on SL-WSe2/graphite. (b) STM image of sub-monolayer PTCDA adsorption on SL-WSe2/graphite. High-resolution STM image corresponding to PTCDA HOMO and corresponding calculated HOMO is shown in inset. The black rectangle indicates the unit cell of PTCDA. (c) STS of PTCDA on Au(111), graphite, and SL-WSe2/graphite. (d) Theoretically predicted ELA for PTCDA on Au(111), graphite, and SL-WSe2/graphite, obtained using the two-step approach in Fig. 11. The peaks are artificially broadened with a gaussian function. Adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

Au(111)	3.10	2.93
Graphite	3.49	2.99
SL-WSe2/graphite	3.73	3.29

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic plots the initial, transient and final states involved in the reactions between a sulfur vacancy and a MPS molecule. Inset shows the MPS structure. (b and c) High-resolution TEM images of as-exfoliated and MPS-treated monolayer MoS2 samples, respectively. A significant reduction of S vacancy density is observable. (d) The conductivity σ as a function of back gate voltage Vg for three devices fabricated by as-exfoliated (black), top-side treated (blue) and double-side treated (red) MoS2 monolayers at room temperature. (e) The corresponding μ–T curves for the three devices at n = 7.1 × 1012 cm−2, where the solid lines are theoretical fittings. Figures adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  PL enhancement. (a) A schematic shows the charge transfer between F4TCNQ and SL-MoS2. (b) Energy level diagrams (vs. SHE) of SL-MoS2 and n- and p-type dopants. (c) PL intensity of SL-MoS2 is dramatically increased after doping with p-type molecules (F4TCNQ). (d) Analysis of the PL spectra of the MoS2 before and after F4TCNQ adsorption suggests a decrease of the X− trion and an increase of the X exciton. Significant PL enhancement is also revealed by PL images of a MoS2 monolayer before (e) and after superacid (TFSI) treatment (f). Insets show optical images of the sample. (g) The corresponding PL spectra for the as-exfoliated (blue) and TFSI-treated (red) MoS2 monolayers. The inset shows a normalization by a 190-fold increase. (a–d) Are adapted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Are adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 15  Ultrafast exciton dissociation. (a) Schematic drawing of a MoS2–pentacene heterojunction probed by transient absorption spectroscopy. (b) PL spectra and (c) ground-state absorption spectra taken for MoS2 monolayer (blue), pentacene film (orange) and MoS2–pentacene heterojunction (green). Integrating MoS2 with pentacene leads to quenching of PL in (b), and an enhanced optical absorption in (c). Schematic of exciton dynamics in the MoS2 monolayer (d) and in the MoS2–pentacene p–n heterojunction (e). (f) Structural schematic and energy level diagram of a type-II PTCDA–WS2 hererojunction. Hybrid charge transfer excitons (HCTE) form at the interface. (g) PL spectra of PTCDA (black squares), WSe2 (blue triangles) and PTCDA/WS2 heterojunction (red circles). The WS2 PL signals extracted from the mixed emission spectrum is shown by the green down-triangles. (h) Absorption coefficients of the WS2-donor (blue) and the PTCDA-acceptor (green) layers in the photodiode fabricated by the PTCDA/WS2 heterojunction (inset). (a–e) Are adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f–h) Are adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Electronic properties and photovoltaic effect. (a) Schematic structure of the pentacene/MoS2 p–n heterojunction. (b) Semilog transfer curves of the pentacene (red, VD = 10 V), MoS2 (blue, VD = 1 V) and pentacene/MoS2 FETs (green, VD = 10 V). The pentacene/MoS2 p–n junction shows an asymmetric antiambipolar characteristic. (c) Semilog ID–VD curves for the p–n junction at VG = 0 V (dark: black; with illumination: red) reveal a photovoltaic effect with a VOC = 0.3 V and ISC = −3 nA. (d) Fabrication of a vertical p–n homogeneous junction in a few-layer MoS2 flake by chemical doping. In the final MoS2 p–n junction, the top is p-type doped by AuCl3 and the bottom is n-type doped by BV. (e) Gate-dependent ID–VD (output) characteristics at various VG between 60 V and −60 V with steps of 10 V. Inset: The output at VG = 60 V on the logarithmic scale shows a current-on state. (f) The photoresponses with and without laser illumination for both forward and reverse sweeps. (a–c) Are adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Are adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnotes
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Photo is copyrighted by A*STAR/SCEI.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
