A review on recent advances in polymer and peptide hydrogels  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SM02127B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SM02127B
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 1404-1454A review on recent advances in polymer and peptide hydrogels

        
          
            Sanjoy 
            Mondal†
, 
      
        
          
            Sujoy 
            Das†
 and 

        
          
            Arun K. 
            Nandi
          
          
        
      *
      Polymer Science Unit, School of Materials Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India. E-mail: psuakn@iacs.res.in
Received 
      26th October 2019
    , Accepted 4th January 2020First published on 8th January 2020AbstractIn this review, we focus on the very recent developments on the use of the stimuli responsive properties of polymer hydrogels for targeted drug delivery, tissue engineering, and biosensing utilizing their different optoelectronic properties. Besides, the stimuli-responsive hydrogels, the conducting polymer hydrogels are discussed, with specific attention to the energy generation and storage behavior of the xerogel derived from the hydrogel. The electronic and ionic conducting gels have been discussed that have applications in various electronic devices, e.g., organic field effect transistors, soft robotics, ionic skins, and sensors. The properties of polymer hybrid gels containing carbon nanomaterials have been exemplified here giving attention to applications in supercapacitors, dye sensitized solar cells, photocurrent switching, etc. Recent trends in the properties and applications of some natural polymer gels to produce thermal and acoustic insulating materials, drug delivery vehicles, self-healing material, tissue engineering, etc., are discussed. Besides the polymer gels, peptide gels of different dipeptides, tripeptides, oligopeptides, polypeptides, cyclic peptides, etc., are discussed, giving attention mainly to biosensing, bioimaging, and drug delivery applications. The properties of peptide-based hybrid hydrogels with polymers, nanoparticles, nucleotides, fullerene, etc., are discussed, giving specific attention to drug delivery, cell culture, bio-sensing, and bioimaging properties. Thus, the present review delineates, in short, the preparation, properties, and applications of different polymer and peptide hydrogels prepared in the past few years.
Sanjoy Mondal
Dr Sanjoy Mondal received his MSc degree in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Guwahati, India in 2012, and then he joined Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group in 2013 at the Polymer Science Unit, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science as a CSIR fellow. He received his PhD degree in May 2019 for his thesis entitled “Studies on Optoelectronic Properties of Synthetic Supramolecular Gel”. Presently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group, at School of Material Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. His current research interests focus on polymer synthesis and polymer–peptide conjugate.
Sujoy Das
Dr Sujoy Das received his MSc degree in Organic Chemistry from Vidyasagar University in 2013 and then he joined Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group in 2014 at The Polymer Science Unit, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science as a CSIR fellow. He received his PhD degree in July 2019, from Calcutta University for his thesis entitled “Conducting Polymer Hybrid Gels for Different Applications”. Presently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Eyal Zussman's lab at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Israel. His current research interests focus on self-healing adhesive conductive hydrogels toward wearable electronics.
Arun K. Nandi
Prof. Arun K. Nandi obtained his PhD degree on “Thermodynamics of Polymer–Polymer and Polymer-Solvent Mixing” and joined the Chemistry Department, North Bengal University, Darjeeling. He did post-doctoral work at the Florida State University with Prof. L. Mandelkern in the crystallization of polymers. In 1992, he joined the Polymer Science Unit of Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS) and he retired from the senior Professor position in February, 2019. Presently, he is Emeritus Scientist (CSIR) at IACS. His research interests focus on polymer blends, polymer crystallization, polymer and supramolecular gels, polymer nanocomposites, polymer grafting, biomolecular hybrids, and polymer photovoltaics. He is the author of more than 230 papers and has supervised 35 PhD students to date.
1. Introduction
Gels are intermediate state of matter between solid and liquid states, and are an important class of soft matter. It is difficult to define a gel but it is easy to realise as it does not flow when the containing tube of the gel is inverted. It contains a three-dimensional fibrillar percolation network structure and in between, a large amount of solvent remains trapped. Mechanically, it behaves as a solid and it is viscoelastic in nature.1–3 The gels may be classified as organogel and hydrogel depending on the nature of the solvent trapped in the gel. Organic solvents are trapped in organogels but in hydrogels, water remains trapped as it acts as the gelation medium. Organogels are very useful, particularly for producing porous materials and here, both small molecules and long chain polymers are used. From the application point of view, hydrogels have great importance because of their significant use in the biomedical field. Though small molecular hydrogels are now growing overwhelmingly because of their diversity in structure, large abundance, and varieties in properties showing applications in diverse fields, however, there a large number of reviews are already available in this area.4–7 So, the main thrust of this review is on polymer and peptide hydrogels because in recent times, there has been tremendous growth in this important area of research with respect to their applications in diverse fields, especially in energy and biomedical fields.
The area of polymer gels has a long history dealing with their structure, origin of gel formation, and physical and mechanical properties8–13 but even now it is an interesting area of research, particularly, finding applications in drug delivery by utilizing the stimuli-responsive and biocompatible properties of the polymers. The polymer gels can be classified as thermo-reversible and thermo-irreversible. In the former, there exists physical cross linking via interchain non-covalent interaction and in the latter, they are chemically crosslinked through a crosslinker; however, both the gels have found different applications. Compared to the small molecular gels, polymer gels are much superior because of their very good mechanical properties contributed by the long covalent chain of the polymer. Here, we would like to discuss about the present progress in both thermoreversible and thermoirreversible gels in diverse fields, e.g., in biomedical (targeted drug delivery, adhesion, and proliferation of cells, tissue engineering, etc.), conductivity, photocurrent, energy generation and storage devices, and dielectric and optoelectronic materials.
Peptide based hydrogels made from supramolecular approach have gained significant attention in recent years. Like polymer hydrogels, the peptide hydrogels have a three-dimensional fibrillar network structure. The fibrills are associated with α-helices, β-sheets, vesicles, micelles, fibers, ribbons, tapes, tubes, and coiled morphologies. Peptide-based hydrogels are prepared by using simple heating–cooling, sonication, and by adjusting the pH of the solutions. The peptide-based hydrogels exhibit multi-stimuli responsive behavior in the presence of external stimuli that have been given great attention to researchers because of their biocompatibility and biodegradibility. So, the peptide hydrogels have now been widely used in different biomedical applications such as drug delivery, protein separation, biosensors, tissue engineering, and wound healing applications due to their low toxicity. Thus, the research on peptide hydrogels is growing profoundly and in this review, glimpses of peptide hydrogels are also included along with polymer hydrogels.
2. Polymer hydrogels
Polymer hydrogels can be produced in different ways and depending on their source, preparation procedure, and properties, the polymer hydrogels can be classified into three categories, e.g., (i) cross-linking polymer hydrogel, (ii) conducting polymer hydrogel, and (iii) natural polymer hydrogel, and we will discuss them in the following sections.
2.1 Cross-linking polymer hydrogel
Polymeric hydrogels have three dimensional fibrillar networks, cross-linked through chemical or physical interactions and are able to entrap a substantial amount of water within its matrix. Polymer hydrogels can be classified into chemical and physical hydrogels based on their cross-linking mechanism. Chemical or permanent hydrogels are made by covalent crosslinking of polymer chains whereas physical crosslinking hydrogel are not permanent in nature, as they are formed via hydrogen bonding, entangled chains, hydrophobic interaction, crystalline interaction, host–guest mechanism, etc., giving them a reversible character. Another category is the double network hydrogel, which is made by the amalgamation of chemical and physical crosslinking because of electrostatic interactions. Recently, they have been widely employed due to their versatile properties and according to the method of preparation, the polymer gels can be classified into three categories (Scheme 1). Chemical crosslinking polymer hydrogels (CCPH) are formed by cross-linking through covalent bonds, resulting in CCPH that can resist mechanical strain. On the other hand, physical crosslinked polymer hydrogels (PCPH) are produced by non-covalent forces, crystallization, and molecular entanglement, resulting in weak mechanical properties, thus imparting viscoelastic behavior. Hybrid double network polymer hydrogels (HDNPH) contain two interpenetrating polymer networks; one is a strongly covalently cross-linked polymer network and the other is a loosely crosslinked physical network that approves energy dissipation at large strains. So, these hydrogels display very high mechanical strength and toughness when compared to individual CCPH and PCPH systems. There is no unique experimental technique to characterize the different types of crosslinking present in the hydrogel. Mainly, NMR and FTIR spectra characterize the chemical crosslinking while physical crosslinking is understood from the FTIR, UV-vis, and WAXS data.
 Scheme 1  Schematic presentation of the hydrogels fabricated through chemical crosslinking, physical crosslinking or double network. 

2.1.1 Chemically cross-linked polymer hydrogels (CCPH). 
Chemically cross-linked polymer hydrogels (CCPH) are synthesized by applying a cross-linker through covalent interactions to interconnect two polymer chains. The covalent bonds in CCPH are stable at ambient conditions owing to their rigid and irreversible nature.14 Most common cross-linkers, such as epichlorohydrin, glutaraldehyde, and polyaldehydes are used to prepare CCPH networks of various natural and synthetic polymers. The CCPH have superior mechanical properties with good solvent resistance, which cause brittleness and make them suitable for various engineering applications. In 1960, Wichterle and Lim introduced the first polymeric hydrogels by crosslinking 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) in the presence of a suitable crosslinking agent (e.g., ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) for biomedical applications.15 Park and co-workers synthesized reaction-induced poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAM) hydrogel in the presence of N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) (BIS, a chemical cross-linker) and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyletyhlenediamine (TEMEDA) (an accelerator) by chemical gelation process.16 The gelation process was monitored through time-resolved Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), principal component analysis, and two dimensional correlation spectroscopy (2D COS) below and above the LCST of PNIPAAM aqueous solution (Fig. 1a). The spectroscopic evidence yields the specific time spans in the two-step reaction process: the first-phase shows the formation of linear and branched random NiPAAm co-polymers and the second-step shows the cross-linking of the macroscopic PNiPAAm networks. Furthermore, the 2D COS spectroscopy of the first and second step processes have produced highly superposed spectra in amide I and amide II areas into the fundamental spectra containing the superposed spectra. However, utilizing the same method, Su et al. reported a poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PNIPAM-co-HEMA) permanent hydrogel showing micro dynamic mechanism of the volume phase transition behavior.17 During the phase transition, water molecules are expelled out from the hydrogel network. Perturbation correlation moving window (PCMW2D) spectra shows that the phase transition occurs through two processes (I and II) upon heating and the temperature regions of the processes I and II are 21.8–31.4 °C and 31.4–36.5 °C, respectively. In a follow-up work, Xu et al. showed potential in the drug delivery application of poly(acrylic acid)-co-poly-(N-isopropylacrylamide) with macromolecular cross-linker poly-(L-lactide)-co-polyethyleneglycol-co-poly(L-lactide) dimethacrylates based chemical hydrogel. It was noticed that the hydrogel is biodegradable and pH-responsive in nature.18 The hydrogel shows maximum swelling at pH 7.4 and is non-toxic to the cell. Utilizing the latter property, doxorubicin (DOX) was incorporated within the hydrogel matrix and its release property was studied at different pH. At pH 7.4, it showed maximum release efficiency and the DOX loaded hydrogel also destroyed the HeLa cells.
 Fig. 1  (a) NiPAAm gelation process showing (1) chemical reaction occurring in a whole stage, (2) the first-stage reaction process to create the copolymer chains, and (3) the second-stage reaction process to create cross-linking in macrogels at T < TLCST (one-step cross-linking) and T > TLCST (two-step cross-linking), reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Synthesis mechanism of the c-Dxt/pAA hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In another eye-catching work for the drug delivery purpose, Das and co-workers prepared a chemically cross-linked dextrin and poly(acrylic acid) (c-Dxt/pAA) hydrogel using N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) (BIS) as the cross-linker via Michael-type addition reaction (Fig. 1b).19 The crosslinking density of the c-Dxt/pAA hydrogel was measured using the peak intensity of sp3 carbon protons and was observed to be 52.26%. The hydrogel showed significant temperature and pH sensitivity. Moreover, this hydrogel provided high storage modulus (G′) and has shown non-cytotoxic behavior in human mesenchymal stem cells. The biodegradability studies confirm that Dxt/pAA is biodegradable in nature. The in vitro release studies of ornidazole and ciprofloxacin drugs demonstrate that the hydrogel can release both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs, and exhibits sustained release of both the drugs. Using a different strategy, Wang et al. reported natural polysaccharide chitosan-based pH responsive hydrogel for different drug delivery. They prepared a chemical hydrogel using chitosan cross-linked poly(acrylic acid) and maleic anhydride as the chemical cross-linker between chitosan and poly(acrylic acid). The hydrogel exhibited sustained release of amoxicillin and meloxicam drugs. The rate of drug release has increased with increase in pH and the release data, fitted by Korsemeyer–Peppas and Weibull models, demonstrated that the release process follows the combination of hydrogel relaxation and drug diffusion processes.20 In another work, highly swellable, stretchable, low creep, non-cytotoxic chemically cross-linked hydrogel was reported by Ganguly and co-workers, who prepared the nano-composite psyllium-g-poly(acrylic acid-co-sodium acrylate)/cloisite hydrogel. The hydrogel is viscoelastic and thixotropic in nature. The mechanical property of the hydrogel was enhanced by mixing with clay nanosheets and the random distribution of clay nanosheets in the hydrogel increased the G′ and loading–unloading cycle measurement.21 This property served the basis for developing a drug delivery system that causes sustained release of drugs. Although the study of cyclodextrin based hydrogels exhibits significant progress in the last two decades, some challenges for the biomedical system still continue. For example, Roy and co-workers prepared a pH responsive chemically crosslinked β-cyclodextrin and N-vinyl pyrollidone (cl-β-CD/pVP) hydrogel via radical polymerization, in the presence of diurethane dimethacrylate (DUDMA) (as crosslinker).22 Different types of cl-β-CD/pVP hydrogels were produced from varying monomer and initiator concentrations having different crosslinking densities, variable gel strength, and different % swelling ratio. The swelling behavior of the gel was measured at acidic and biological pH, and the equilibrium swelling ratio was found to be higher at biological pH. The hydrogel showed different mechanical properties at different pH and at lower pH, it exhibited higher strength because of the lower equilibrium swelling ratio. The hydrogel is non-toxic and biodegradable in nature. Due to its good biocompatibility, amoxicillin was incorporated into the hydrogel, which shows sustained release of amoxicillin. For stimuli responsive hydrogel, Su and co-workers reported the chemically crosslinked temperature sensitive poly(N-vinylcaprolactam-co-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PVCL-co-EMA) hydrogel in the presence of a BIS cross-linker, via free radical polymerization.23 The combined temperature-dependent FTIR spectra with scaling moving window two dimensional (scaling-MW2D) correlation spectroscopy was used to explore the volume phase transition (VPT) mechanism of the hydrogel on heating and showed a distinct VPT nature. Because of PHEMA incorporation into the PVCL hydrogel networks, the scaling-MW2D spectra exhibited that the phase transition of the hydrogel is separated into two steps (I and II), and the two steps are at 25.0–32.3 °C and 32.3–46.8 °C, respectively.
The CCPHs are not homogeneous and contain regions of low water swelling dispersed within high swelling regions; the former is produced from high crosslink density, while the latter is produced from low crosslink density. The cross-linking does not take place isotropically because of viscosity and steric factor, which hinder the movement of reactants, thus restricting the cross-linking reaction at equal intervals of the main chain. Due to variation in the cross-link density, different size pores are present in the CCPH gels and drug molecules of different sizes can be embedded in CCPHs. Further, the degree of swelling varies with temperature, so the embedded drug can be released by varying the temperature and pH, which usually occurs during illness of the body. Most importantly, it is the better mechanical property of the CCPH gel compared to the physically crosslinked polymer hydrogel (PCPH) that facilitates the dealing of the drug incorporated gel for its use. PCPHs also have multi-porosity, so drugs of different sizes can also be accommodated here. The incorporation of drugs into CCPH is difficult as only water-soluble drugs can be incorporated via the diffusion process. On the other hand, physically cross-linked polymer hydrogels (PCPH) can be easily used to incorporate both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs due to their thermoreversible and thixotropic character, and in the following section, we shall discuss the recent advances in PCPHs.
The individual properties of the polymers are very important for their use in specific organs and different CCPHs would be useful for different organs. Undoubtedly, biodegradation is an important part for these gels, which carries the drug through the stomach and small intestine, then to the respective organs. So, different degradation mechanism of CCPH takes place at different parts of the body and in most cases, enzymatic degradation occurs. For example, Guar gum, a polysaccharide gel, is proven to be the best suited for colonic drug delivery as here the hydrolytic cleavage of the glycosidic bonds occurs via enzymatic degradation.24 In the following section, we shall discuss the recent advances in PCPHs.


2.1.2 Physically cross-linked polymer hydrogel (PCPH). 
Physically cross-linked polymer hydrogels are formed through non-covalent supramolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, and crystallite formation between polymer chains. These hydrogels are usually reversible (by temperature, pressure, or other stimuli) but they are sufficient to cause insolubility of the hydrogels in aqueous media. They are produced by making solutions at high temperature or by sonication and then cooling to room temperature, where the gel is produced on standing. Physically cross-linked polymer hydrogels (PCPH) are usually obtained from natural polysaccharides, poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(ethylene glycol), poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), poly(acrylic acid), poly(vinyl imidazole), etc. These stimuli responsive hydrogels are very useful in drug delivery, cell culture, tissue engineering, 3D-printing, etc.
Physical hydrogels with outstanding mechanical performance were developed by Li et al. with tuneable isotropic/anisotropic structure, consisting of polyacrylamide (PAAm) and poly(dodecyl glyceryl itaconate) (PDGI).25 PDGI acts as a physical crosslinking group in PAAm/PDGI hydrogel via hydrogen bond formation. Here, PDGI produces a lamellar double layer structure and PAAm chains adsorb over the bilayer structure of PDGI through hydrogen bonding. Also, the hydrogel exhibited isotropic/anisotropic swelling in water and DMSO, and the hydrogels displayed high tensile strength. Cyclic tensile loading/unloading studies exhibited the mechanical properties recovery greater than 90% within 30 min at 20 °C. Sun and co-workers synthesized a physical polyampholyte hydrogel via one step random copolymerization of an anionic sodium p-styrenesulphonate (NaSS) monomer and a cationic 3-(methacryloylamino)propyl-trimethylammonium chloride (MPTC) monomer in the presence of 2-oxoglutaric acid that acts as a UV initiator.26 The polyampholyte hydrogels exhibited elasticity with tunable mechanical properties over wide ranges by using different ionic combinations. Also, the hydrogels showed 100% self-recovery and therefore, had high fatigue resistance.
Zhang and co-workers produced a physical double network hydrogel containing an amphiphilic triblock copolymer consisting of a hydrophobic unit at the end blocks of poly(butyl methacrylate) (PBMA) and at the middle hydrophilic block unit of poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) with polyacrylamide (PAAm).27 The –NH2 groups of PAAm form hydrogen bonds with the –COOH groups on the PMAA to produce a supramolecular physical network. This special combination in this hydrogel is responsible for high mechanical performance with high toughness, fatigue resistance, and stiffness. In another work, Hu and co-workers produced physically cross-linked hydrogels of poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) (PAm-co-Ac) with clay nano-sheet and Fe3+ ions as the cross-linkers (Fig. 2a).28 The hydrogel exhibited good and tuneable mechanical properties by varying the molar ratio of the Ac/Am monomer with clay and Fe3+ ion concentration. It exhibited excellent mechanical properties with a high tensile strength of 3.52 MPa, good fracture strain of 2113%, elastic modulus of 0.637 MPa, and toughness of 49.11 MJ m3. This hydrogel showed hysteresis behavior during loading–unloading processes. In a similar strategy, Liang et al. a reported poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid)/Na alginate/Fe3+ hydrogel via the formation of dual cross-linking hydrogen bonds and ionic interactions (Fig. 2b).29 This hydrogel possessed high elastic modulus (24.6 MPa), tensile strength (10.4 MPa), compression strength (44 MPa), and toughness (4800 J m−2). The self-recovery of the hydrogel, studied at room temperature, showed good self-recovery at 100% strain.
 Fig. 2  (a) Preparation of DPC hydrogels: in situ polymerization of Am and Ac in the presence of clay to form physically cross-linked network; the interaction of –COO– groups of polymer chains with Fe3+ and then reorganization of Fe3+ coordinates to introduce Fe3+ coordination physically cross-linked points. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Synthesis route of hybrid ionic-hydrogen bond cross-linked P(AM-co-AA)/Na-alginate/Fe3+ hydrogels and the possible cross-linking structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Zhang and co-workers reported a triblock copolymer based thermo-reversible hydrogel having a dominant poly(ethylene oxide) block and terminal poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm) block with ureido pyrimidinone (UPy) groups incorporated randomly (Fig. 3a).30 UPy moiety acts as the supramolecular cross-linker between different triblock copolymer (Fig. 3b). On increasing the temperature above the lower critical solution temperature (LCST), the PNIPAm part in the triblock copolymer becomes dehydrated producing a micellar structure. Consequently, the hydrophobic UPy moiety causes dimerization to grip the polymer chains, thus producing hydrogen bonded cross-linking side. This supramolecular hydrogel exhibits attractive self-healing, shear-thinning, thermo-reversible, and injectable properties. The self-healing property was examined by strain amplitude cyclic tests (γ = 0.5% or 200%) of the hydrogel (Fig. 3c) and the injectable nature is presented in Fig. 3d.
 Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structure of the ABA triblock copolymer and (b) schematics of reversible sol–gel transition of the prepared hydrogel under temperature switching; (c) dynamic strain amplitude cyclic test (γ = 0.5% and 200%) of the hydrogel at 37 °C showing rapid self-healing behavior. (d) Viscosity measurement of the hydrogel (inset: injection test of the hydrogel at room temperature). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Zhong and co-workers produced physically cross-linked hydrogels of acrylic acid (AA) with vinyl silica nanoparticles (VSNPs) and Fe3+ ions.31 Herein, hydrogen bonding and Fe3+ ions mediated ionic interactions act as physical cross-linking between the PAA polymer chains, yielding ionic nanocomposite physical hydrogels. This hydrogel exhibits excellent mechanical properties showing tensile strength of 860 kPa and 2300% elongation at break. Also, the hydrogels exhibit first-rate self-healing properties and the healed hydrogel can be stretched to about fifteen times of its original length. Li and co-workers prepared a thermo-responsive hydrogel having a cellulose nanocrystal surface-functionalized by temperature-responsive (PNiPAM) polymer through RAFT polymerization.32 They utilized the thermo-responsive hydrogel as a growth component for cancer spheroids (CSs) at 37 °C and studied the release property of the hydrogel at the temperature below the LCST of PNIPAM. The hydrogel is also useful in drug screening. In another work, Guo et al. reported physical hydrogels having telechelic block-like copolymers with corresponding 2-ureido-4[1H]-pyrimidinone (UPy) groups encapsulated within hydrophobic PEG domains.33 The amphiphilic hydrogel network has high water content due to the high PEG weight segment within the polymers. The hydrogels possess good mechanical strength and pliability upon deformation, which is responsible for UPy–UPy interactions within the hydrophobic nanoscale pockets that maintain the network despite extensive water content. Also, this hydrogel exhibits shape memory behavior.
Cyclodextrins (CDs) based host–guest interaction between CDs and guest moieties via inclusion complexation have inspired the construction of new supramolecular physical hydrogels. Various homopolymers such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) or polyethylene glycol (PEG), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), and poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) have been studied for the synthesis of CD-based poly(pseudo)rotaxanes.34 In addition to polymer chains, lots of small guest moieties can also be encapsulated in the CD cavities through host–guest interaction, forming a physical supramolecular hydrogel. These hydrogels always exhibit thixotropic property and have attracted widespread attention for biological applications. Bian and co-workers fabricated a host–guest macromer (HGM) based supramolecular hydrogel.35 The HGM hydrogel was prepared via host–guest complexation between adamantine (AD) functionalized hyaluronic acid (ADxHA) as guest polymers and monoacrylated β-cyclodextrins (mono-Ac-βCD) as host monomers. The hydrogels are robust and are easily self-healable because of the reversible host–guest interaction. They showed good protection for the encapsulated stem cells in the compression remoulding process, suggesting that they can easily carry the therapeutic cells and can adapt to the nearby tissues very fast. Similarly, Burdick et al. demonstrated a novel hyaluronic acid (HA) based thixotropic and reversible hydrogel,36 where HA is functionalized either with β-CD or with adamantanes and forms the hydrogel upon complexation. The HA hydrogels are injectable in nature and are pronounced for biomedical applications, such as in an injection system with cells or therapeutic agents in vivo and also in 3D-printing “bio-ink”.


2.1.3 Hybrid double network polymer hydrogels (HDNPH). 
Hybrid double network polymer hydrogels (HDNPH) have two networks. The “first network” in DNPH is generally rigid and is tightly crosslinked through covalent bonds.37 On the other hand, the “second network” is generally soft and is loosely crosslinked through supramolecular interactions (such as hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, coordination interactions, etc.) (Scheme 1). HDNP hydrogels have large water content (ca. 90 wt%), and high mechanical strength and toughness.38 These HDNP hydrogel network structures and properties can be tuned by varying the first network along with the second network. Fig. 4 provides some typical examples of HDNP hydrogels with different types of crosslinkers. Sun and co-workers reported three different stretchable HDNP hydrogels through covalently and ionically crosslinked networks (Fig. 4a–c). BIS acts as the covalent crosslinker for polyacrylamide chains and divalent cations Ca2+ acts as an ionic crosslinker of alginate chains through electrostatic interaction.39 The polyacrylamide-alginate was stretched >20 times its original length without rupture. Guo et al. prepared a thermoplastic double network hydrogel (TPG) via in situ photo polymerization of acrylamide monomer (AAm) in agarose hydrogel matrix in the presence of a little amount of BIS and 2-hydroxy-4′-(2-hydroxyethoxy)-2-methylpropiophenone as the crosslinker and the photoinitiator, respectively (Fig. 4d).40 The TPGs exhibit high mechanical strength with transformable arbitrary 3D-shapes, including a helix that is twisted by the heating–cooling process (Fig. 4e and f). The gels exhibit impressive affinity for the adhesion and proliferation of cells, thus showing potential applications in tissue engineering.
 Fig. 4  (a) In an alginate gel, the G blocks on different polymer chains form ionic crosslinks through Ca2+ (red circles). (b) In a polyacrylamide gel, the polymer chains form covalent crosslinks through N,N-methylenebisacrylamide (MBAA; green squares). (c) In an alginate–polyacrylamide hybrid gel, the two types of polymer network are intertwined and joined by covalent crosslinks (blue triangles) between amine groups on polyacrylamide chains and carboxyl groups on alginate chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 the Nature publishing group. The softening and hardening cycles and macro-shaping and micro-pattering of the TPG (5 wt% agarose, 2 M acrylamide): (d and e) schematic changes in the network structure of the TPGs and their corresponding photographs after heating and cooling process. (f) The storage modulus variation of the TPGs during heating and cooling cycles measured by rheology. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another important work, Le and co-workers introduced a triple shape memory DN hydrogel obtained from AAm polymerized in the presence of supramolecular network-phenylboronic acid-grafted alginate (Alg–PBA) and PVA. Afterwards, the hydrogel was dipped into an alkaline solution to introduce reversible PBA–diol ester bonds into the Alg–PBA–PVA gel network.41 Ca2+ ions can chelate the alginate chain via an egg-box-like structure. So, Ca2+ in the Agl–PBA–PVA network acts as a “switching segment” to fix the temporary shape. When the hydrogel is dipped into K2CO3 solution, the Ca2+ ions are extracted by CO32− and the hydrogel recovers to its original shape. The dynamic PBA–diol ester bonds and supramolecular interactions of Ca2+-alginate in Agl–PBA–PVA gels do not disturb each other, and easily form a reversible triple shaped memory. In another work, Zhao and co-workers introduced double crosslinked (DC) cellulose hydrogels in the presence of epichlorohydrin as the chemical crosslinker and anhydroglucose unit.42 This hydrogel exhibits higher mechanical property than that of pure cellulose hydrogels. The flexibility and elasticity are studied by compression experiment that demonstrates the recovery of DC hydrogels to their original shape without any estrangement.
In a similar strategy, Chen et al. prepared a hybrid chemical and physical crosslinked DN gel by agar and polyacrylamide (PAM).43 This agar/PAM DN hydrogel was prepared by covalently crosslinked PAM chains and by physical crosslinking of agar. The agar/PAM hydrogel displayed high tensile rupture strength of 10 MPa, fracture tensile strain of 2000%, large toughness of 500–1000 J m−2, and excellent mechanical recoverability (within 10 min). However, the chemically linked DN gels and agar/PAM DN gels exhibit different necking behavior, stress/strain, no stable necking platform, and simultaneous necking. Ouyang et al. reported dual cross-linking biomaterials with hyaluronic acid (HA) based host–guest and covalent cross-linking. β-Cyclodextrin (CD) as host and adamantane (Ad) as guest moieties are separately coupled to HA to produce two different HA based precursors that make a supramolecular assembly on mixing (Fig. 5a).44 Then, to increase the rigidity of the supramolecular host–guest hydrogel, they established that the methacrylate group acts as a photo cross-linker to the macromers. The rheological properties show that the hydrogels are injectable in nature and are good materials for bioinks in 3D printable applications. Time sweep experiment shows greater G′ and G′′ values (∼1000 Pa) observed in the host–guest HA hydrogel (Fig. 5b). The viscosity of the supramolecular cross-linked hydrogel is higher (Fig. 5c) and it breaks down at high strain and quickly recovers the mechanical strength at low strain (Fig. 5d). The advantage of the dual supramolecular and covalent cross-linking hydrogel is that it acts as a good material for 3D printable structure. Azevedo and co-workers reported another double cross-linked hydrogel by covalent crosslinking of genipin (GP) as a cytocompatible chemical crosslinker of chitosan free amine groups with non-covalent coordination bonds between the catechol groups present in polysaccharide deacetylated chitin functionalized with catechol groups (DOPA-CHT) and Fe3+ ions.45 The hydrogels provide a maximum compressive strength of 1.05 ± 0.19 MPa, without deformation until 90% of deformation (E = 28.50 ± 2.09 kPa). The biocompatibility of these hydrogels is proved from the proliferation of seeding ATDC5 cells over the surface of the hydrogels. After 7 days of incubation, the cell viability is good for these hydrogels, as proved by the number of living cells (∼91%). Guo et al. prepared a 4D printing DN hydrogel by in situ polymerization of AAm monomer in the agarose LAPONITE® hydrogel matrix.46 LAPONITE® plays a crucial role in the development of 4D printing, for example, endowing the ink with shear thinning behavior and good shape stability after printing. Upon heating, the hydrogel based soft whale-like matter becomes softened on heating at 95 °C for 15 min and becomes hardened on cooling down. MTT proliferation proves that the hydrogel is non-toxic in nature and the relative cell viability is 90% after 3 days of culture.
 Fig. 5  (a) Macromer structures investigated for 3D printing. Modified hyaluronic acid (HA): methacrylated HA (MeHA) for photopolymerization, Ad-HA/CD-HA for guest–host (GH) assembly, and Ad-MeHA/CD-MeHA for dual-cross-linking (DC). Rheological properties of hydrogels. (b) Oscillatory time sweeps of different modified HA macromers (frequency 10 Hz and strain 0.5%), G′ (closed symbols) and G′′ (open symbols). (c) Continuous flow tests of MeHA and GH materials at shear rates equivalent to those experienced during printing, showing shear-thinning behavior with viscosities of GH assemblies approaching that of the MeHA solution at high shear rates. (d) Cyclic strains of 0.5% (low, unshaded area) and 250% (high, shaded area) at 10 Hz for the 5 wt% DC hydrogel prior to light exposure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In an elegant way, Xu and co-workers introduced chitin and poly(β-(1 → 4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine) domains in chemical and physical cross-linking hydrogels.47 Herein, epichlorohydrin (ECH) was used as the chemical cross-linker of chitin chains and physical cross-linking arises from hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and the development of crystalline hydrates in aqueous ethanol, providing a double-cross-linked chitin hydrogel. These hydrogels are transparent and colourless, and the gel contains mostly water (∼90%), exhibiting superior mechanical properties under compression, stretching, wrapping, and knotting. To fabricate a stiff and tough hydrogel, another work was reported by the mechanical strengthening of Ca2+-alginate/polyacrylamide hydrogels on the addition of Fe3+ ions. Fe3+ cross-links the Ca2+ ions, producing an additional and low flexibility trivalent ionically cross-linked network.48 Here, Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ inside the stiff and tough hydrogel matrix on exposure to ascorbic acid, which produces flexible divalent ionically cross-linked network, providing swift softening of the stiff and tough hydrogels.

2.2 Conducting hydrogels
In terms of conductivity, polymer hydrogels are classified into two categories, such as ionic conducting hydrogel (polymer hydrogel ionotronics) and conducting polymer hydrogel; their conduction mechanisms are presented in Scheme 2. Because of their conductivity, these hydrogels are very useful from the technological viewpoint.
 Scheme 2  Representation of different conduction mechanisms of ion-conducting hydrogel and electrical conducting polymer hydrogel. 

2.2.1 Ionic conducting polymer hydrogel. 
Ionic conducting polymer hydrogels have great potential for many advanced applications because of the combination of interesting properties of both hydrogels and ionic conductors. In these ionic hydrogels, the polymer network makes the hydrogel stretchable and the mobile ion accompanying the water molecules makes the ionic hydrogel conducting.49–55 The ionic hydrogel based devices function through a hybrid circuit of mobile electrons and mobile ions. The moderate conductivity (e.g., conductivity σ = 0.1 to 10 S m−1) of these hydrogels has made them promising materials for next-generation actuators, bioelectronic interfaces, artificial muscles, artificial skins, artificial axons, liquid crystal devices, energy generators, soft robotics, etc. Also, the ionic gels offer exceptional performance as gate dielectrics in organic field effect transistors (OFETs). Keplinger et al. synthesized polyacrylamide (PAAm) based ionic, highly stretchable, fully transparent hydrogels by varying the concentration of NaCl for actuators (Fig. 6a and b). An impressive ionic conductivity of 10 S cm−1 was obtained for the hydrogels. The resistivity of the hydrogel increased when the hydrogel was stretched. They produced a transparent loudspeaker using the hydrogel that produced sound across the entire audible range, from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. The loudspeaker is located in front of a laptop, which plays music videos (Fig. 6c and d). The laptop screen was visible through the loudspeaker. The hydrogel exhibits 98.9% average transmittance in the visible range when the hydrogel contains 5.48 M NaCl.50 In a similar way, Li and co-workers prepared a PAAm/LiCl based ionically conductive hydrogel for soft robotic electronic fish.56 The robotic fish exhibited wide temperature range and permitted stealth sailing due to its nearly transparent nature. Pharr and co-workers prepared a stretchable dielectric elastomer composed of acrylic acid hydrogel.57 They showed that the stretch at rupture and fracture produced energy using the hydrogel of different heights at different stretch-rates. Parida and co-workers reported triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) fabricated using stretchable, transparent ionically conductive hydrogel consisting of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) polymer network and sodium tetraborate.58 The electrical double layer (EDL) in the hydrogel improved the energy-harvesting performance significantly. The ionic-skin TENG (IS-TENG) based on ionic hydrogel exhibited a transparency of 92% transmittance and its energy-harvesting performance was much greater than the silver-based electronic current collectors (12 times). They showed that the hydrogel has high mechanical stretchability up to 700% uniaxial strain, yielding stretchable mechanical energy harvesters. Here also, the hydrogel demonstrated self-healing properties and recovered up to 300 times after complete bifurcation.
 Fig. 6  A basic design of stretchable ionics. (a) An electrolyte and a dielectric are in series. When they are elastomeric, the device is solid and stretchable. When a voltage V is applied between the two electrodes, the voltage across the electrode/electrolyte interface is much smaller than the voltage across the dielectric, VEDL ≪ VD. (b) The electrode/electrolyte interface forms an electrical double layer. (c) When the voltage across the interface is within a certain range, electrons and ions do not cross the interface, no electrochemical reaction occurs, and the electrical double layer behaves like a capacitor. Transparent loudspeaker is capable of producing sound across the entire audible range. (d) The voltage signal from the audio output of a laptop was fed through a high-voltage amplifier to the loudspeaker. The loudspeaker transformed the voltage signal into sound, which was recorded with a microphone loudspeaker. (e) The screen of the laptop was visible through the loudspeaker. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 Science Publishing Group. 
The hydrogel ionotronics were prepared using biocompatible ionic hydrogel made by PVA, silk fibroin, and borax (PSB).59 PVA and borax enhanced the stretchability and conductivity, respectively, and the silk fibroin increased the stability of the hydrogel. The conductivity of the hydrogels increased from 0.42 S cm−1 to 0.63 S cm−1 when the water content of the hydrogels increased from 60 to 75%. In 2017, Pu and co-workers reported a ionic hydrogel by copolymerization of acrylamide monomer in the presence of LiCl, BIS, ammonium persulfate (APS), and TEMEDA (an accelerator).60 The hydrogel has application in soft skin-like triboelectric nanogenerator (STENG) and the STENG permits both sensing by hybridizing elastomer and biomechanical energy harvesting. Hydrogel based energy-harvesting devices have ultrahigh stretchability, capable of sustaining 1160% strain and good transparency (96.2%) towards visible light. TENG yields electricity with an impulsive peak power density of 35 mW m−2. Similarly, Xu et al. reported hydrogel-based TENG with high flexibility using poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS).61 The dependence of electric outputs on the frozen time, the concentration of PVA, and the dimensions of the standard device have been systematically investigated. Utilizing the electrical properties, the TENG based device exhibits open circuit voltage of 200 V and short circuit current of 22.5 μA with the highest power of ≈2 mW at a load resistance of 10 MΩ. They have also prepared tube shaped TENG for harvesting mechanical energies from different types of motions, such as twisting, bending, and stretching.
Yang et al. prepared ionic hydrogel based artificial axon device using PAAm, LiCl, BIS (crosslinking agent), APS (thermo-initiator), and TEMED (accelerator).62 The hydrogel exhibits conductivity of 10 S cm−1. They prepared an ionic cable using the hydrogel and the ionic cable is highly stretchable (∼eight times its original length) and transparent. The diffusivity of signals in the ionic cable is about 16 times higher than the diffusivity of ions. Lei and co-workers reported a skin made with ionic hydrogel composed of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) nanoparticles, polyacrylic acid (PAA), and alginate chains.63 Herein, ACC nanoparticles act as physical crosslinker of PAA and alginate chains and make the gel highly robust. The SEM image of the ACC/PAA/alginate xerogel indicates the unified porous architecture. The self-healing properties of the hydrogel were examined through rheological experiments and exhibited 83% recovery of G′. The ionic hydrogel based artificial skin sensor could be useful in human motion detection and muscle movements during speaking. The ionic hydrogel has also been used as a sensor in a blood pressure measuring instrument. Wu and co-workers reported a 3D printable thermo responsive ionic dual network hydrogel composed of poly-dimethyl acrylamide (PDMA), hydrophobic n-octadecyl acrylate (C18), sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), and NaCl.64 The mechanical property of the hydrogel changes by varying the concentration of DMA and C18. The hydrogel-based capacitor circuit is applicable in skin-like sensors and exhibited comparatively moderate sensitivity (0.09 kPa−1). Similarly, Wu et al. also prepared a polyelectrolyte hydrogel by random copolymerization of AA and zwitterionic 3-dimethyl(methacryloyloxyethyl)ammoniumpropane sulfonate (DMAPS) in the presence of NaCl.65,66 Polyelectrolyte hydrogels exhibit high mechanical properties, together with flexibility, excellent stretch-ability, autonomous self-healing ability, and robust elasticity. The polyelectrolyte networks are capable of acting as an artificial skin to sense external stimuli such as temperature, strain, and stress. In 2017, Schroeder and co-workers demonstrated an artificial electric-eel using gradients of ions between polyacrylamide hydrogel partitions bound by a repeating arrangement of cation- and anion-selective hydrogel membranes.67 The artificial electric-eel can produce 110 volts at open circuit as well as 27 mW per square metre upon concurrent. These devices are flexible, transparent, soft, and potentially biocompatible. In an elegant work, He et al. reported a self-healing conductive hydrogel consisting of polyionic liquids (P(VBIm-Cl)), poly(sodium p-styrenesulfonate hydrate) (PNaSS), and Au nanoparticles embedded PVA (Fig. 7).68
 Fig. 7  Preparation procedure of the hydrogel of P(NaSS)/P(VBIm-Cl)/PVA@Au. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The hydrogel displayed a maximum compressive strength of 7.26 MPa. The conductivity of the hydrogel depends upon the P(VIBm-Cl) concentration and increased from 0.45 S m−1 to 2.92 S m−1 with increasing concentration from 10 to 30%. Also, the hydrogel showed thermoplastic property, so it can be reformed easily into different shapes.
Thus, the ionic conductive hydrogel has a unique combination of transparency, ionic conductivity, and stretchability, and possesses useful applications in ionotronic luminescence, high-speed artificial axons, highly stretchable liquid crystal devices, etc. They have the advantage as polymeric solid conductors, which have high stretchability and transparency. But they have some disadvantages as the conductivities of these hydrogels have moderate values (1 × 10−4 to 10−2 S cm−1), which restricts their use in different applications, particularly where metallic conductivity is required and for this purpose, conducting polymer hydrogels are very important.


2.2.2 Conducting polymer hydrogels. 
Conductive polymers are organic polymers that can conduct electricity through polymer chains via π-electron conjugation. Herein, the atoms in the chain of the conducting polymer are connected through conjugated unsaturated bonding causing delocalization of electrons through the conjugated bond of the polymer. Some examples of important conjugated conducting polymers are polyacetylene, polypyrrole, polyaniline, and polythiophene. The electrical conductivity of these conducting polymers (10−6 to 101 S cm−1) is higher than that of insulating polymers and lower than that of typical metallic conductivity. The conductivity of the conducting polymer can be tuned by changing the dopant and the dopant concentration added externally. Also, conductive polymers exhibit unique mechanical and optical properties due to their curbed dimensions at the nanoscale level. Gels have a cross-linked network structure that shows intermediate properties between soft and hard matter exhibiting viscoelastic nature in the material. Motivated by the 3D structural features and easy synthetic approaches of supramolecular gels, conductive polymer hydrogel (CPHGs) with 3D structural features were recently prepared by crosslinking the polymer chains using molecules with multiple functional groups. Conductive polymers are organic polymers that conduct electricity through the polymer chains by π-electron conjugation. Herein, the atoms in the conducting polymer are connected through unsaturated bonding, i.e., by making conjugated bonds; then, delocalization of electron may occur through the conjugated bond of the polymer. This kind of polymer is termed as a conducting polymer. Several examples of conjugated conducting polymers are polyacetylene, polypyrrole, polyaniline, and polythiophene. The electrical conductivity of this conducting polymer (10−6 to 101 S cm−1) is higher than that of other insulator polymers and lower than that of a typical metallic conductor. The conductivity of the conducting polymer can be tuned by changing the dopant and the dopant ratio. In addition, conducting polymers exhibit unique mechanical and optical properties due to their curbed dimensions at the nanoscale level. Gels have a cross-linked network structure that shows intermediate properties between soft and hard, exhibiting viscoelastic nature. Motivated by the 3D structural features and easy synthetic approaches of supramolecular gels, conductive polymer hydrogel (CPHGs) with 3D structural features have recently been prepared by crosslinking the polymer chains using molecules with multiple functional groups.69–72 Conducting polymer hydrogels are gels, which contain a conducting polymer along with a supporting multifunctional dopant as well as a gelator. Polyaniline, polypyrrole, polythiophene, or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) represent the conducting moiety in the conducting polymer hydrogels. CPHGs with 3D nanostructure show great potential in a wide range of applications, such as energy storage/conversion, solar cell, hydrogen evolution reaction, and bioelectronics. Mainly, conductive polymer polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PTh), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) based conductive polymer hydrogels are widely studied (Fig. 8) and are discussed here.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of conductive polymers. 
The most common property among the polyaniline, polypyrrole, and polythiophene based hydrogels is that they are all electronically conducting, showing conductivity in the semiconductor region. The advantage in the gel from the pristine polymer is that the three dimensional network structure helps to increase the conductivity in the gel state due to flow of charges both in longitudinal and lateral directions. However, in all the conducting polymers, doping by foreign substances increases the conductivity both in the gel and xerogel states, and the nature of dopants varies from polymer to polymer as in their pristine states. For example, polyaniline is doped very well by organic or inorganic acids, polythiophene is well doped by keeping the gel over iodine vapour, mixing with LiClO4, etc., and polypyrrole can be doped with biotin, methyl orange, or carbon nanotubes (CNTs). It is necessary to mention here that no single dopant can dope all the conducting polymers and hence also their gels. Also, the most common property in the gels of conducting polymers is their chromic response but there is a difference in their absorption peak positions, which attributes different colours to different conducting polymer gels. Also, the fluorescence property of the gels of the three conducting polymers are different; only polythiophene gels exhibit good fluorescence but there are scarce reports on the fluorescence property of polyaniline and polypyrrole gels.
2.2.2.1 Polyaniline based conducting hydrogels. 
PANI hydrogels consist of conductive PANI polymer, non-conductive dopant, and gelator components yielding a conductive gel matrix. These are often engineered by adding the conductive polymer PANI to the gel matrix or by polymerizing ANI monomer within a non-conducting gel matrix. The in situ polymerization of ANI to PANI hydrogel is usually called as a dual network gel. Herein, the second network of PANI chains is produced inside a pre-formed polymer gel network. Recently, we have shown that small molecules with multiple crosslinking sites can act as gelators, dopants, as well as crosslinkers to conductive polymer chains, leading to 3D nanostructure conductive polymer gels. In 1992, MacDiarmid and co-workers first reported PANI based gels.73 They showed that a concentrated solution (20 wt%) of PANI in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) formed gels with aging time and the gelation time decreased with increasing molecular weight.
Bao and co-workers produced a PANI hydrogel using phytic acid as the gelling agent as well as the dopant. Phytic acid has six acid groups that are capable of interacting with more than one PANI chain, thus forming a crosslinking hydrogel network.74 The hydrogels show dendritic coral-like nanofibers possessing high surface area and 3D inter-connected pores. The phytic acid/PANI hydrogel exhibits high conductivity of 0.11 S cm−1. Owing to their high conductivity and large surface area, the hydrogels have potential for application as supercapacitor materials with high specific capacitance (∼480 F g−1), brilliant rate capability, and cyclic stability (∼83% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles). Also, the PANI hydrogels act as glucose oxidase sensors with quick response time (∼0.3 s) and high sensitivity (∼16.7 μA mM−1).
Shi and co-workers reported a thermo-responsive PNIPAM/PANI hydrogel in the presence of phytic acid as dopant as well as crosslinker of PANI chains.75 The hydrogels are prepared by in situ polymerization technique and exhibit good electrical conductivity (0.8 S m−1) because of the development of a 3D conductive polymer network that acts as better transporting path for electrons. In a very exciting work, Li et al. utilized a supramolecular strategy for the preparation of conductive polyaniline–poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel (PPH) through dynamic boronate bonding.76 Herein, boronic acid groups introduced into PANI by copolymerization of aniline (ANI), 3-aminophenylboronic acid (ABA) monomer, and boronic acid serve as cross-linker groups to PVA and PANI (Fig. 9a and b). The PPH hydrogel is mechanically robust and exhibited Young's modulus of 27.9 MPa, tensile strength of 5.3 MPa, and 250% elongation at break. The PPH shows high specific capacitance value of 928 F g−1. Also, the hydrogel based flexible solid-state supercapacitor yields a large capacitance (306 mF cm−2 and 153 F g−1) and high energy density of 13.6 W h kg−1. Furthermore, the robustness of the solid state supercapacitor device was analysed by 1000 mechanical folding cycles and exhibited 100% capacitance retention.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of polyaniline bearing boronic acid groups. (b) PPH at three length-scales. Left: A photograph of PPH; middle: a SEM image of PPH; right: a schematic molecular structure of PPH showing the crosslink between PANI and PVA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Dong and co-workers synthesized a self-healing conductive PANI hydrogel as the cell delivery vehicle for cardiac regeneration.77 Aniline tetramer grafted on chitosan (CS-AT) and dibenzaldehyde terminated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-DA) formed a hydrogel in acetic acid medium at 37 °C for 1 min. The self-healing behavior of the hydrogel was observed through rheological measurement. The highest conductivity of the hydrogels was 2.42 × 10−3 S cm−1, which is closer to that of cardiac tissues. Also, the hydrogel displays good biocompatibility and they used the hydrogel to release two different types of cells with a tunable release rate. The in vivo cell retention of the hydrogels was also measured by them.
Zhou and co-workers applied another innovative strategy to prepare pure polyaniline (PANI) hydrogels by static in situ polymerization process, in the presence of vanadium pentoxide hydrate (V2O5·nH2O) nanowires as oxidant as well as sacrificial template.78 V2O5·nH2O accelerates the oxidative polymerization of aniline, leading to the quick formation of ultrathin PANI nanofibers in the 3D gel networks. The sacrificial template of V2O5·nH2O is simultaneously removed by converting into a soluble salt, so the hydrogel consists of pure PANI nanofibers. The specific surface area of freeze-died PANI hydrogel was found to be 55 m2 g−1 and it also shows high conductivity of 0.12 S cm−1. The porous structure and ultrathin fibrillar network of the PANI hydrogels was tacitly used as a supercapacitor electrode material, exhibiting a high specific capacitance of 636 F g−1. A stretchable and transparent conducting hydrogel based on PANI with α-CD functionalised polyacrylamide was reported by Hao and co-workers.79 They showed that the α-CD–PAAm/PANI hydrogel is highly stretchable, flexible, and can withstand twisting in random direction, thus also exhibiting an impressive conductivity of 0.39 S cm−1. The surface area of the gel was 16 m2 g−1 as measured from BET studies, indicating that the hydrogel is porous in nature. Furthermore, the hydrogel based foldable and stretchable supercapacitor electrodes were prepared, showing a high specific capacitance of 315 F g−1. Sodium alginate–PANI (PANI–SA) hydrogel was prepared via in situ polymerization for producing supercapacitor.80 The reinforced PANI–SA hydrogel exhibits good conductivity of ∼10−3 S cm−1 and it shows an impressive compressive strength of ∼41 kPa. The PANI–SA hydrogel does not contain any adhesive and conducting filler but it is directly used as an electrode material for supercapacitors and shows moderate specific capacitance value (252 F g−1 at 0.5 A g). In a very exciting work, Luo and co-workers prepared PANI/graphene and PANI/N-doped graphene hydrogel through the hydrothermal process.81 The morphology of the polyaniline/graphene hydrogel is tunable by the addition of p-phenylenediamine (PPD) and endowed PANI/N-doped graphene hydrogel with dendritic to long fibrillar networks. Compressive strain–stress studies reveal that PANI/N-doped graphene hydrogel has higher stress value (75.8 kPa) compared to the PANI/graphene hydrogel (9.6 kPa). Also, these hydrogel-based supercapacitors exhibit a maximum specific capacitance value of 610 F g−1.
For bio-electronics purpose, Bettinger et al. reported a robust electronic-ionic conductive PANI hydrogel, which was fabricated in a biologically derived heparin gel framework.82 Methacrylate groups act as photo-cross-linker in heparin and the heparin hydrogel was made via photo-cross-linking of heparin-methacrylate (Hep-MA) under UV irradiation (λ = 365 nm). PANI was grown inside the Hep-MA hydrogel network through static in situ polymerization of the aniline monomer to prepare a double network of heparin-doped polyaniline hydrogels (Hep-MA/PANI). The Hep-MA/PANI hydrogel displayed storage moduli (G′) = 900 ± 100 Pa and very low impedance value Z = 4.17 Ω at 1 kHz. The hydrogel supported the adjunct proliferation and differentiation of C2C12 murine myoblasts deprived of any surface treatments. Also, Hep-MA/PANI hydrogel is good for electronically active bio-interface material with the mechanical properties of soft tissues collected from excitable cells. Zhao et al. reported an injectable, antibacterial, electrically conductive hydrogel using quaternized chitosan (QCS) grafted PANI with oxidized dextran as the chemical crosslinker.83 QCS was prepared by the reaction of chitosan with glycidyltrimethylammonium chloride in acetic acid medium. The hydrogel is biodegradable in nature and exhibited impressive conductivity of 15.7 × 10−4 S cm−1. The injectability of the gel was examined through in vivo subcutaneous injection on a Sprague Dawley rat and the antibacterial activity was verified by employing antibacterial assay using Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus in vitro.
Duan and co-workers prepared a stretchable and force-sensitive electrically conductive chitosan/polyacrylamide/polyaniline hybrid (MC) hydrogel. First, microspheres of chitosan (CSM) were synthesized via the emulsion process and they were dipped into acrylamide and BIS solution for swelling. Then, the polymerization of AAm in CSM was done to get transparent chitosan/polyacrylamide hydrogels, where PANI is grown into the gel via static in situ polymerization of aniline.84 The resistance of the MC hydrogel decreased from 22.45 to 1.25 kΩ with increasing pressure from 100 Pa to 6 MPa. However, the resistance of the MC hydrogel increased from 13.8 to 120.4 kΩ with increase in the tensile stress from 100 Pa to 0.4 MPa. Also, the MC-gel based E-skin device performed very well. There are some reports of PANI hybrid with 2D materials to produce 3D hierarchical hydrogel network having high conductivity. Jiang and co-workers reported PANI/carbon nitride nanosheets (CNNS) hydrogel with 3D hierarchical nanostructure.85 The 3D hierarchical morphology makes them robust, separation-free, and easy to recycle. The hydrogel exhibits good potential for removing organic pollutants through adsorptive preconcentration followed by photocatalytic oxidation. First, pollutants are adsorbed on the 3D hierarchical nanostructure, then the pollutants are in situ oxidized through photocatalysis. Similarly, Jiang et al., prepared a PANI/TiO2 nano-composite hydrogel for photocatalytic degradation.86 They proposed a mechanism of adsorption-enrichment and in situ photocatalytic degradation by synergistic interaction between the components.
Various nanomaterials including nanocarbons and metal nanoparticles may be incorporated in conductive polymer-based hydrogels. Nanocarbon materials such as graphene oxide (GO), porous carbon, and carbon nanotube (CNT) forming assembly with PANI to produce conductive hydrogels have been successfully demonstrated. These gels have high surface area and excellent electrical conductivity, which are contributed by the carbon material. Zou and co-workers reported robust dual crosslinked functionalized graphene/polyaniline stiff hydrogels (DN-PGH/PANI) through the polymerization of aniline and graphene (PGH) hydrogel matrix.87 PANI exhibits two types of morphologies: nanodot protrusions and nanofibers, where PANI nanodot protrusions are strongly anchored to graphene and thus, PANI nanofibers form crosslinks with graphene sheets. The hydrogel possesses high mechanical strength with good tensile strength of 1.39 MPa at a small ruptured elongation of 0.42%. This DN-PGH/PANI gel was utilized to form a symmetric supercapacitor electrode material, showing high areal specific capacitance of 3488.3 mF cm−2 and volumetric specific capacitance of 872 F cm−3. The hydrogel-based device exhibits high energy density of 155 mW h cm−2 at 200 mW cm−2 and also exhibits excellent power density of 20015 mW cm−2 at 67.5 mW h cm−2. Another system on graphene/PANI and N-doped graphene/PANI hydrogels was reported by Zou and co-workers via hydrothermal process.88 N-Doped hydrogels were prepared by the incorporation of m-phenylenediamine (mPD) into GO and PANI, guarding the intrinsic conjugated structure of PANI. The graphene/PANI and N-doped graphene/PANI hydrogels were utilized as supercapacitor electrode materials showing specific capacitance of 375 F g−1 and 514 F g−1, respectively. In a modern approach, Li and co-workers reported graphene oxide (GO)/PANI and RGO/PANI hydrogels using macromolecular interconnected 3D GO and RGO with nanostructured PANI through self-assembly of PANI with GO and RGO macrostructures.89 They have synthesized a symmetric all hydrogel fibrous supercapacitor device for fuel cells, where two similar PANI/RGO fibers (active length 1.0 cm) are placed in parallel to avoid contact of each other, followed by coating with the PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte. It is then dipped into 3 M H2SO4 solutions containing 4% glutaraldehyde to promote the gelation of electrolyte that yields an all hydrogel-state supercapacitor device. It exhibits good specific capacitance value of 112 F g−1 (148 F cm−3) at a current density of 0.08 A g−1. The CV curves of the cell in normal, twisted, and knotted states have been demonstrated (Fig. 10a) with little changes in capacitance, suggesting good flexibility of the device. They have also investigated the stability of the spring-shaped device by varying the stretching stains and increasing the stretching cycles (Fig. 10b–d) and little change in the capacitance was observed, suggesting the excellent stretchability of the device with the spring-like shape. When several devices are connected in series, their charge–discharge curve shows their potential for practical applications. Moreover, 12 devices on connecting in a series (Fig. 10e and f) can easily power two tandem LEDs in the normal and curved state.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogels formation and further shaping/reduction process; photos of the self-assembly of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogels and the reduction of PANI/RGO (the inset) as well as the corresponding SEM and TEM images of samples after freeze-drying (the scale bar is 500 nm). CVs of the assembled all-hydrogel-state cell in normal, curved, and twisted states (b); the elasticity of the spring-like full cell (c and d); several full cells connected in series (e); a demonstration of a fabricated yarn powering two LEDs in the normal and curved states (the scale bars are 2 cm) (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, our research group reported some works on the PANI hydrogel where PANI chains form assembly with low molecular weight gelator molecule (LMWG) to produce a 3D network. The LMWG such as 5,5′-(1,3,5,7-tetraoxopyrrolo[3,4-f]isoindole-2,6-diyl)-diisophthalic acid (P) (Fig. 11a), naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NDI) (Fig. 11b), N-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl phenylalanine (FP) (Fig. 11c), folic acid (F) (Fig. 11d), and N,N′-dibenzoyl-L-cystine (DBC) (Fig. 11e) can act as gelators, dopants, as well as crosslinkers for conducting polymer chains, leading to the formation of 3D nanostructure conducting polymer hydrogels.90–97 The above mentioned molecules can react with more than one PANI chain by the protonated nitrogen atom of the polymer through electrostatic interactions, thus acting as cross-linker, dopant, and gelling agent. In our first work, we have prepared a donor–acceptor based conductive hydrogel using diisophthalic acid derivative P (as acceptor) with PANI (as donor).90 The co-assembled hydrogel exhibited 51-fold higher storage modulus and elasticity, with 1.4 times larger stiffness, compared to the pure P hydrogel. The hydrogel based photovoltaic devices display photocurrent rectification property and the rectification ratio is 4.4. Also, a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has been fabricated using the xerogel as the active material, which displayed the PCE value of 0.1%. Similarly, another donor–acceptor NDI-PANI co-assembled hydrogel was prepared using the previous approach, which displays different electric behavior in hydrogel and xerogel states.92 Interestingly, the wet hydrogel based devices show rectification properties and negative differential resistance concomitantly in I–V plots. The xerogels exhibit the characteristics of a semiconducting behavior in the I–V curves. Herein, the electrons and holes easily diffuse via the aqueous medium, resulting in the above properties. We further prepared a supramolecular co-assembled hydrogel of N-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) phenylalanine (FP) with aniline (FP–ANI).91 Then, the polymerization of aniline inside the supramolecular hydrogel matrix provided a dark green coloured FP–PANI hydrogel, which shows a high conductivity value of 1.2 × 10−2 S cm−1. The Nyquist plot in impedance spectroscopy exhibited a semicircle signifying that it has both resistor and capacitor connected in a parallel manner, as revealed in the equivalent R–C circuit. Further, for the application purpose, we synthesized folic acid–PANI (FP) hybrid hydrogel.93 The FP xerogels provide 3D hierarchical porous structures consisting of coral-like dendritic nanofibers, with BET surface area of 238 m2 g−1 and electrical conductivity value of 0.04 S cm−1. The xerogel displays good potential towards energy storage (specific capacitance of 295 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1) and photo response property with photocurrent increment of ∼2 mA under white-light illumination. Furthermore, to increase the conductivity of the FP xerogel, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are grown in situ. The AgNPs embedded FP2Ag xerogel shows five times increase in the conductivity value (0.21 S cm−1). Also, the formation of AgNPs significantly enhances the specific capacitance to 646 F g−1 and photocurrent to 56 mA. The FP2Ag xerogel based device provides faster rise and decay in time-dependent photo-illumination compared to that of the FP xerogel based device. In the FP hydrogel, PANI exists in the doped radical cation emeraldine salt (ES) form, which helps in the adsorption of anionic pollutants.94 The FP xerogel could selectively absorb Cr2O72−(VI) and anionic dyes (rose Bengal, eosine yellow, and methyl orange) from water, while displaying low adsorption capacities to cationic (Pb(II), Hg(II), rhodamine B, methylene blue, and bismark brown Y) and neutral pollutants (neutral red). The selectivity in absorption behavior is due to the electrostatic attraction between the anion and the positively charged doped PANI.
 Fig. 11  Chemical structures of (a) 5,5′-(1,3,5,7-tetraoxopyrrolo[3,4-f]isoindole-2,6-diyl)-diisophthalic acid (P), (b) naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NDI), (c) fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl phenylalanine (FP), (d) folic acid (F), (e) N,N′-dibenzoyl-L-cystine (DBC). 
Very recently, we prepared MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) hybrid with DBC–PANI hydrogel network for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalyst (Fig. 12).95 MoS2 QDs with larger quantity of catalytic edge were prepared by breaking down the bulk MoS2 sheet using solvent exfoliation technique. Here, conductive PANI matrix was prepared by in situ polymerization of aniline, where DBC acts as a gelator, dopant, and crosslinker. The hybrid conductive aerogels thus produced act as efficient electrocatalysts, showing lower HER overpotential in comparison to MoS2 sheets and MoS2 QDs. It provides an optimum overpotential value, 196 mV at 10 mA cm−2, a favorable Tafel slope, 58 mV dec−1, and an excellent electrocatalytic stability. Similarly, using DBC (as gelator) with metallic (1T) MoS2 QDs and PANI (DMP) hydrogel was prepared for supercapacitor electrode materials.96 Pure DP xerogel exhibits BET surface area value of 131.2 m2 g−1 and incorporation of MoS2 QDs into the gel increases the BET surface area value to 244.3 m2 g−1. The hybrid DMP gel exhibits a high specific capacitance value of 791 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 in a three-electrode system. For practical applications, an all-solid-state flexible supercapacitor device was fabricated from the above DMP gel. The supercapacitor provides a specific capacitance value of 331 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, an energy density of 29.4 W h kg−1, a power density of 398 W kg−1, and 84.2% capacitance retention after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. Four solid-state supercapacitors connected in series form a tandem SC that can glow different coloured light emitting diode bulbs for a long time.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of DBC–MoS2–PANI aerogel preparation and their electrocatalytic properties showing hydrogen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, PANI based hydrogel has attracted growing attention for conversion into functional biosensors.1–6,98–103 Zhai and co-workers prepared Pt nanoparticles (PtNPs)–polyaniline (PANI) hydrogel heterostructures for the detection of glucose enzyme sensor.4 The hydrogel and PtNPs nanostructures have synergistic interaction between PANI hydrogel and Pt nanoparticle, which is catalysed by high density immobilization of the enzyme. Herein, the PANI hydrogel easily penetrates the water-soluble molecules inside the porous hydrogel structures and easily helps in catalyzing the oxidation of glucose. In another work, inkjet printing of PANI hydrogel is used for multiplex detection of lactate, glucose, and triglycerides, particularly in real time and with good sensitivity.5 The hydrogel-based printing devices enable to fabricate pages of sensor containing 96 electrodes in ∼5 minutes. In comparison, traditional photolithography patterning methods would be more time consuming. Ma et al. in 2018 reported a PANI gel-based gas sensor for the measurement of different biogenic amines for food spoilage detection.6
2.2.2.2 Polypyrrole based conducting hydrogels. 
Polypyrrole (PPy) is rigid and insoluble because of the delocalised π-electrons in the polymeric chains; therefore, the synthesis of PPy based conductive hydrogel remains challenging. PPy hydrogels are not as common as PANI hydrogel. In 2013, Wei et al. reported a PPy hydrogel using methyl orange (MO) as the dopant and FeCl3, Fe2(SO4)3, and Fe(NO3)3 as the oxidants under static in situ polymerization of pyrrole and obtained self-assembly of nanotubes.104 The electrical conductivity of the hydrogel varies by ∼1 order with the shrinking–swelling cycles. In the shrinkage process, the PPy chains come closer, thereby smoothing electron transfer, resulting in increase in conductivity (1.7 × 10−2 S cm−1). But in the swelled condition, the PPy chains become separated and the conductivity decreases to 8.2 × 10−3 S cm−1.
In a very exciting work, Deng and co-workers reported a conductive self-healing hydrogel consisting of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD), N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM), CNT, and nanostructured polypyrrole (PPY).105 The self-healing hydrogels were synthesized by copolymerization of NIPAM, acryloyl-β-cyclodextrin (AC-β-CD), and (poly-(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(propylene glycol)-b-poly(ethylene glycol) (PF127))/CNT, and then subsequent pyrrole polymerization inside the gel matrix (Fig. 13a and b). The poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogel exhibited a high conductivity value of 34.9 S m−1. The self-healing properties of the hydrogel were observed from the rheological experiment (Fig. 13c) and the excellent self-healing ability is presented in Fig. 13d and e. The hydrogel exhibited fast response rates towards temperature and near infrared (NIR) light. They also prepared a hydrogel based electrical circuit for bulky pressure-dependent sensors and self-healable electronic device. Also, it was observed that L929 cells and C2C12 cells possessed higher proliferation rate after three days when cultured on poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogel. The synthesis of PPy hydrogels using PAM/chitosan (CS) hydrogel framework as molecular templates yielded the PPy–PAM/CS hydrogel that exhibited high electrical conductivity, excellent mechanical properties, and good biocompatibility.106 The hydrogel displayed a compressive strength of 6.5 MPa, high compressive modulus of 136 MPa, stretchability >250%, and a fracture energy of 12000 J m−2. The conductivity of the hydrogel increased when PPy was grown in situ, showing the highest value to be ∼0.3 S cm−1. The hydrogel has good biocompatibility and electroactivity. Also, this hydrogel is capable of propagating electrical signals into cell/tissue and subsequently improves the cell activity.
 Fig. 13  (A) Synthetic route of self-healing hydrogels of poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD). (B) Scheme of preparing conductive self-healing hydrogels poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY. (C) Alternate step strain sweep test with small strain (γ = 1.0%) to subsequent large strain (γ = 400%) with 100 s for every strain interval at a fixed angular frequency (10 rad s−1) at 25 °C. (D) Photographs of self-healing behavior of the poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogels with mechanical damage (scale bar = 5 mm). (E) Photographs and illustration of the self-healing behavior of poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogel for a designed circuit. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright the 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Yu and co-workers reported some PPy based hydrogels for various applications. In 2015, they synthesized a self-healing metal–ligand supramolecule with a conductive polypyrrole hydrogel.107 They prepared a supramolecular metallo-organic gel with cubic architecture consisting of 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine (tpy) as the organic ligand and Zn(II) as the gluing element. Then, phytic acid doped PPy was introduced in the metal organic gel via reversible sol–gel transition, to produce hybrid metal organic conducting polymer (PPy/G-Zn-tpy) hybrid hydrogel. The gel exhibited high electrical conductivity of 12 S cm−1. Also, the hydrogel-based self-healable electronic circuit showed good potential applications in various fields such as self-healing electronics, artificial skins, and soft robotics. Also, they introduced a supramolecular strategy to synthesize different morphologies of PPy conducting hydrogels using a dopant copper phthalocyanine-3,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt (CuPcTs).108 Herein, CuPcTs acts as both dopant and gelling agent. The morphology of the CuPcTs–PPy hydrogel exhibited interconnected nanofibers and the fibre diameter increased with decreasing CuPcTs concentration. The CuPcTs–PPy hydrogel displayed a conductivity value of 7.8 S cm−1, which is higher than that of pristine PPy. Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the CuPcTs–PPy hydrogel exhibits a specific capacitance of ∼400 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, which is higher than that of pristine PPy (∼232 F g−1). The CuPcTs/PPy hydrogel hybrid with commercial lithium iron phosphate (C-LFP) particles were used as model cathode materials to obtain a hybrid inorganic–organic hydrogel matrix for high performance Li+ ion hydrogel suitable for high performance Li-ion battery.109 Uniform coating of C-LFP particle with PPy prevents C-LFP aggregation, enabling full access to each particle. Similarly, Fe3O4 nanoparticle hybrid CuPcTs–PPy hydrogel also acts as a good material for Li-ion battery.110
Chen et al. synthesized a stretchable, fast self-healing, and adhesive conductive hydrogel by in situ polymerization of pyrrole in a supramolecular polymer matrix consisting of poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate (PEGMA), and 2-ureido-4[1H]-pyrimidinone (UPy) group modified 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA-UPy) cross-linked by multiple hydrogen-bonding to obtain an elastic network.111 In an eye-catching work, Park et al. reported a self-healing and thermoplastic conducting hydrogel prepared by linear polysaccharide derivative of agarose with PPy. Agarose itself produces reversible hydrogel by varying the temperature.112 Pyrrole monomer and copper(II) chloride (an oxidizing agent) were mixed with molten agarose matrix (∼40 °C). Then, on decreasing the temperature of the mixed molten agarose to 25 °C, concomitant gelation of agarose and homogeneous polymerization of pyrrole monomer inside the agarose hydrogel matrix resulted in the formation of the PPy/agarose (APy) hydrogel. The APy hydrogel displayed dc-conductivity of ∼1.95 × 10−1 S cm−1 at a pyrrole concentration of 450 mM. The thermoplastic property of the APy hydrogel persisted till the pyrrole concentration of 150 mM. The APy hydrogel exhibited a Young's modulus of 27–46 kPa, which is closer to that of human skin of 5 kPa, thus permitting the hydrogel to be directly painted on human skin and used as stretchable and bendable bioelectrode.
Chen et al. synthesised a strong and elastic conducting polypyrrole (PPy) hydrogel using PVA, SDS, and APS as the oxidants under static reaction conditions.113 The PPy hydrogel had a spongy biphasic microstructure that was simultaneously produced during the hydrogel formation. It had a high tensile strength of 2 MPa, good stretchability (elongation at break 500%), and high elasticity. The conductivity of the hydrogel was 0.8 S cm−1. The PVA/PPy hydrogel was utilized as a stretchable supercapacitor (SSC) electrode material. The PPy hydrogel-based SSC provided an areal capacitance of 950 mF cm−2 at a current density of 1.6 mA cm−2. 96% of the capacitance of this SSC device was retained when elongated to 100% strain and 81% after 500 stress–strain cycles. In another eye-catching work, Ding and co-workers reported a multifunctional hybrid conductive hydrogel based on viscoelastic PVA–borax (PB) gel matrix and nanostructured cellulose nanofibers (CNFs)–PPy complexes. The CNF–PPy complexes were prepared via static polymerization of pyrrole monomer over the surface of CNF templates, which were well-dispersed on the PB hydrogel network to obtain homogeneous CNF–PPy/PB hybrid hydrogels (Fig. 14a–d).114 Herein, the CNF–PPy network tangled with PVA chains through hydrogen bonds and reversible cross-links with borate ions. The stress–strain experiment revealed that the CNF–PPy/PB hydrogel displayed maximum storage modulus of ∼0.1 MPa and high compression stress (∼22 MPa). The CNF–PPy/PB hydrogel provides maximum conductivity of 3.65 ± 0.08 S m−1 and shows maximum specific capacitance of 236.9 F g−1. Also, the CNF–PPy/PB hydrogel demonstrated excellent biocompatibility, pH sensitivity, plasticity, and fast self-healing ability without additional external stimuli.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of preparation and synthesis process of CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels. (b) CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels molded into various shapes. (c) Formation mechanism of the integrated 3D network within CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels. (d) Multi-complexation between PVA, CNF–PPy, and borax. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.3 Polythiophene based hydrogel. 
Thiophene monomer can be modified at α and β positions by hydrophilic groups to make it water-soluble. The chemical structures of water-soluble polythiophenes used to fabricate conductive hydrogels are presented in Fig. 15. In 2000, Chen and co-workers first reported a polythiophene-based hydrogel by chemically cross-linking poly(3-thiophene acetic acid) (PTAA) in aqueous medium.115 Herein, adipoyl dihydrazide was used as the chemical crosslinker of the functional carboxylic groups of PTAA and N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) as the condensation agent to produce the 3D network of the hydrogel. The swollen hydrogel exhibited a conductivity 7 × 10−4 S cm−1 and the conductivity of the hydrogel increased to 10−2 S cm−1 when the hydrogel was doped with HClO4. In a follow up study, Mawad et al. reported a chemically crosslinked PTAA hydrogel using 1,1′-carbonyldiimidazole (DCI) as the crosslinking agent.116 The advantage of DCI is its waste products, which are soluble in water and are easily washed from the hydrogel network. The swelling ratio and the mechanical properties of the hydrogel could be tuned by changing the crosslinker ratio to the monomeric unit of PTAA. Single component PTAA hydrogel exhibited high conductivity of ∼10−2 S cm−1 and good electroactivity in physiological conditions and the hydrogel was tested as a scaffold for tissue engineering.
 Fig. 15  Chemical structures of water-soluble polythiophenes. PTAA [poly(3-thiophene acetic acid)], POWT [poly(3-((S)-5-amino-5-carboxyl-3-oxapentyl)-2,5-thiophene)hydrochloride], PEDOT-COOH [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)carboxylic acid], PEDOT:PSS [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)]. 
PEDOT based hydrogel is of great interest because of its high conductivity and good stability in aqueous medium, and versatility of side chain functionalization. To this effect, it has been utilized for the construction of conductive hydrogels. Dai et al. utilized supramolecular self-assembly for the fabrication of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS) based conducting hydrogel. EDOT and SS monomers were polymerized in aqueous medium in the presence of Fe3+ ions, which act both as oxidant and ionic crosslinker to produce the hydrogel.117 The AFM images demonstrated that the assembly of spherical grains in the hydrogel originated from physical crosslinking of the PEDOT–PSS particles. The hydrogel provided a conductivity of 4.1 × 10−3 S cm−1 in the swollen state but the conductivity increased in the dry compressed state to a value of 4.3 S cm−1. In another work, alkoxysulfonate functionalised PEDOT based hydrogel was fabricated via one-step polymerization of sodium 4-(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-2-yl)-methoxybutane-1-sulfonate (EDOT-S) monomer in the presence of oxidant FeCl3 or APS.118 The SEM images demonstrated that the interior 3D structure of the PEDOT-S hydrogels could be controlled depending on the oxidant and its ratio. The gels showed a maximum conductivity of 102 S cm−1, and the conductivity depended on the oxidant type and concentration of the monomer. The authors described the mechanism as follows: in aqueous medium, amphiphilic EDOT-S exists in micellar form, which upon polymerization fuse together to form lamellar sheets budding into a 3D hydrogel network. In a splendid work, Mawad and co-workers synthesized a conducting hydrogel based on N-(3-aminopropyl)methacrylamide hydrochloride functionalised PEDOT co-polymerized with acrylic acid (AA) in the presence of poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate (PEG-DA) as a crosslinker.119 The hydrogel based film exhibited good electrochemical peaks at both anodic and cathodic regions, indicating that the electron transfer ability of PEDOT was not hindered by functionalization with carboxylic group. The swelling studies revealed that the freeze-dried xerogel exhibited incredible water uptake after 48 h (∼5000%). Also, the hydrogel scaffolds were used as hydrated 3D structures for proliferation, adhesion, and differentiation of C2C12 cells.
Yao et al. reported that pure acid treated PEDOT:PSS (AT-PEDOT:PSS) hydrogels could be synthesized by adding concentrated H2SO4 into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution, followed by thermal treatment.120 The AT-PEDOT:PSS hydrogels displayed high electrical conductivity of 8.8 S cm−1 with over 95% water content. Air dried fibers were made by the AT-PEDOT:PSS hydrogel and were utilized in current free collector fiber-shaped solid supercapacitor electrode. This fibre supercapacitor shows high volumetric capacitance of 202 F cm−3 at 0.54 A cm−3 with high-rate performance. It also delivers brilliant electrochemical stability and good flexibility towards energy-storage devices. In an interesting work, the strategy of green method was applied to synthesize stretchable supercapacitors using harmless conductive polymer hydrogels of PEDOT:PSS/PVA/PMAA.121 The hydrogel possessed large stretchability, excellent conductivity (3.1 S cm−1), as well as good air stability. Using this hydrogel as current collector and electrode material for stretchable and flexible supercapaciator, the device provided a specific capacitance of 7.38 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1, and displayed 82% capacitance retention after 2000 charge–discharge cycles examined at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The excellent mechanical properties were observed when the device was stretched up to 100% strain without disturbing the electrochemical performance.
The preparation of tough, stretchable, robust double conducting hydrogels was carried out by simply soaking preformed PEDOT–PVA hydrogel in sulfosuccinic acid (SA) aqueous medium.122 The attachment of SA/PVA/PEDOT in the hydrogel greatly enhanced the mechanical properties and conductivity of the gels due to its high ionic strength and enriched ionic functional groups. The SA/PVA/PEDOT containing gels had high tensile stress ∼2.5 MPa, elongation >600%, and maximum conductivity of ∼25 S cm−1. The self-healing properties of the gels were examined through a rheological experiment that displayed fast self-healing property with the aid of hot water. The SA/PVA/PEDOT hydrogel was utilized for the fabrication of a strain sensor device.
In an innovative strategy, Xu and co-workers reported physical conducting hydrogel based on poly(ethylene glycol)–peptide and PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 16a and b).123 Remarkably, the non-covalent crosslinking peptide-based hydrogel possessed injectable as well as self-healing properties. Cyclic voltammetry studies showed that the hydrogel is electro active in the anodic as well as in the cathodic region. Also, the hydrogel exhibited low impedance value of 35 Ω.
 Fig. 16  (a) Assembly of peptide–PEG and negatively charged PEDOT:PSS nanostructures, resulting in a non-covalent network. In addition to the peptide/PSS interaction, the π–π stacking among PEDOT nanoparticles and the anion–π interaction between PEDOT and PSS are also involved in the non-covalent network. (b) Representative hydrogel formation by mixing PEDOT:PSS and KA7–PEG-5k solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The gel scaffolds were also utilized as 3D cell cultures with incorporated electrical stimulation (ES), as presented by its support of the survival and proliferation of encapsulated mesenchymal stromal cells and their differentiation under ES. A dual network polysaccharide based conductive PEDOT hydrogel was reported through host–guest interaction (Fig. 17).124 First, they prepared bio-electroconductive polymer PEDOT: adamantly modified sulfated alginate (S-Alg-Ad) via oxidative polymerization of EDOT in the presence of S-Alg-Ad, which provided the hydrogel with poly-β-cyclodextrin (Pβ-CD) through host–guest interaction. The PEDOT:S-Alg-Ad hydrogel possessed injectable and self-healing properties, and exhibited superior biocompatibility. The conductive hydrogel had better proliferation rate compared to that of non-conductive Pβ-CD/S-Alg-Ad hydrogel when myoblast C2C12 cells were encapsulated.
 Fig. 17  Schematic of dynamic cross-link formation utilizing guest–host complexation. While the Ad group is on the alginate chain, to facilitate graphic representation, the structure of PEDOT:S-Alg-Ad nanoparticles was simplified. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Cao and co-workers reported a hybrid conductive boron nitrogen nanosheet (f-BNNS)/PEDOT:PSS/PNIPAM hydrogel.125 Herein, f-BNNS greatly enhanced the mechanical properties of the hydrogel with 700 kPa compressive strength, 2666% stretchability, photothermal conversion capability, as well as high adhesion. Also, the dynamic hydrogen bonding cross-linking centre between f-BNNS and PSS as well as PNIPAM and PSS provided better mechanical and self-healing properties.
We recently reported a robust trihybrid conducting hydrogel using the well known acceptor with the gelator 5,5-(1,3,5,7-tetraoxopyrrolo[3,4-f]isoindole-2,6-diyl)diisophthalic acid (P), co-acceptor graphene oxide (GO), and PEDOT–PSS as a donor (Fig. 18a).126,127 The introduction of GO drastically improved the mechanical properties of the gels. Three sets of trihybrid gels were prepared by varying the PEDOT–PSS concentration and the highest dc conductivity was found to be 1.12 × 10−2 S cm−1. It was observed that the trihybrid xerogels displayed good photoresponse behavior and dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) (Fig. 18b) fabricated with xerogels acting as an active material that displayed maximum power conversion efficiency of 4.5% under ambient conditions. The impedance spectra (Fig. 18c) of DSSC devices provided the Cole–Cole plot that corresponds to three equivalent R–C circuits, thus well explaining the PCE values of the gels of different compositions.
 Fig. 18  (a) Molecular structures of P, GO, abd PEDOT:PSS, and digital images of the GPPS gel (b) plot of J–V characteristics of GPPS1, GPPS2, and GPPS3 under AM 1.5G light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of GPPS1, GPPS2, and GPPS3 based DSSCs (inset: equivalent circuit of the DSSC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2.2.4 Hydrogels with combined ionic and electronic conductivity. 
There are also some reports on the combined ionic and electronic conductivity in the hydrogels.128 Manthiram and his coworkers produced randomly stacked holey graphene anodes for lithium ion batteries, exhibiting high charge–discharge rate because of the large surface area of the anode that was readily accessible to the electrolyte, thus reducing the electronic and ionic transport length and facilitating a rapid charge–discharge even at high current density.129 Wang et al. produced a three-dimensional porous LiFePO4 cathode material modified with a nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel for high-power lithium ion batteries. The cyclic voltammetry results showed symmetric and sharp redox peaks, suggesting that the redox kinetics were enhanced due to the improved conductivity (electronic and ionic) and the reduced diffusion length. This yielded ultrahigh power density of 8.6 kW kg−1 with high energy density of 4 9 W h kg−1.130
Pan et al. showed that the PANI hydrogels with phytic acid gelator having 3D hierarchical porous nanostructure exhibited very high conductivity of 0.11 S cm−1 and showed superior performance in electrochemical devices. Basically, it involved both ionic and electronic transport processes at the electrode and the electrolyte interface. For conducting polymers, the pseudocapacitance arises from faradaic reactions (doping and undoping) occurring close to the surface of the active electrode materials. This 3D hierarchical hydrogel afforded a short diffusion path for the ions to access the electron conducting surface of PANI, thus improving the electrochemical performance. The system yielded a specific capacitance of ∼480 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 showing excellent rate performance with only ∼7% capacitance loss when the current density was increased by a factor of 10, indicating an exceptional rate capability for high power performance. This high rate performance was attributed to the facile electronic and ionic transport due to the hierarchical conducting network.131 Kalupson et al. fabricated symmetric carbon nanotube capacitors using highly ionically conducting poly(vinyl alcohol)-based hydrogel membranes absorbing sulfuric acid. The system behaved as a supercapacitor, showing high power density (1040 kW kg−1) and excellent cyclic stability (>10000 cycles) with good coulombic efficiency and energy density. This may be attributed to both the electronic and ionic conductivities present in the system.132

2.3 Natural polymer hydrogels
Natural polymers are the most popular biopolymers, crucial ingredients of marine animals, green plants, bacteria, algae, etc. Sustainability, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and low cytotoxicity of the natural polymers provide large number of applications in the biomedical field. Most common natural polymers and polysaccharide, for e.g., cellulose, chitosan (a chitin derivative), and hyaluronic acid (HA), are used for hydrogel preparation. Cellulose, having β-(1–4) glycosidic bonds between D-glucose units (Fig. 19a),133 provides a linear chain syndiotactic polymer with hydroxyl groups present in an equatorial position. Cellulose with stiff rod-like conformational arrangement gives crystalline fibrous materials. Cellulose based hydrogels can be prepared by two different methodologies: (a) cellulose-based matrices and (b) nanocellulose incorporating into composites.134,135 Nowadays, cellulose based-hydrogels are perfect materials for tissue engineering applications because of their intrinsic properties such as biocompatibility, non-toxicity, porous microstructure, and good mechanical properties.
 Fig. 19  (a) Scheme of the linear molecular chain (green box), the syndiotactic repeating unit (garnet), the establishment of glycosylic bonds between glucose rings (violet ellipsoid), and intra and intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (b) Schematic illustration of the ionic hydrogel synthetic process that includes in situ polymerization to form composite hydrogels and then immersion in cation solution to produce ionic coordination. (c) Ionic coordination leads to CNF aggregation in ionic gels with increased opacity by visual observation and (d) corresponding absorbance in the UV-vis spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic representation of the polymer-network hydrogels cross-linked by ultrafast complexation of metal ions and chitosan chains in water. (f) Chemical structures of chitosan and their interwoven networks driven by the complexation between metal ions and OH and NH2 groups in the chitosan chains. (g) The complexation in (f) leads to the formation of hydrogels (from left to right: CS–Ag, CS–Cu, CS–Co, CS–Ni, CS–Zn, CS–Cd, and CS–Pd, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Lin et al. prepared amorphous alginate-oxidized nanocellulose hydrogel in the presence of Ca2+ as the ionic crosslinking agent.136 Carboxyl groups over nanocellulose surface were introduced by chemical oxidization through 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO). By freeze-drying, the hydrogel sponges were prepared and these sponges showed great potential as thermal and acoustic insulating materials, kinetic energy absorbers, reinforcing platforms, and scaffolds for nanocomposites. Using a similar method, Syverud and co-workers reported a cellulose nanofibrillar (CNF) hydrogel using TEMPO mediated oxidation and fibrillation.137 Herein, a number of carboxyl and aldehyde groups were introduced over the CNF surfaces during this process. The aldehyde groups easily formed crosslinks with ethylenediamine and hexamethylenediamine producing elastic hydrogels. The CNF based hydrogel can be applicable in tissue engineering. A ionic-covalent cross-linked CNFs hydrogel was synthesized using oxidised CNFs reinforced covalent polyacrylamide (PAAm) with multivalent cations (Ca2+, Zn2+, Al3+, and Ce3+) (Fig. 19b and c).138 The multivalent cations induced the formation of porous networks of nanofibrils by attracting repulsive negative charges on CNF and the UV-vis spectra is presented in Fig. 19d. The ionic hydrogels provide good stiffness (Young's modulus 257 kPa) and toughness (fracture toughness 386 kJ m−3) properties.
In an eye-catching work, Yang and co-workers reported cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) skeleton induced covalently cross-linked polyacrylamide (PAAm) composite hydrogel.139 The synergistic interaction between the CNC skeleton and the elastic PAAm hydrogel provided a tensile stress of 181 kPa, compressive strength of 1.01 MPa, and 1392% elongation at break with high breaking energy (2.82 kJ m−2). Also, loading–unloading cycles (after eight cycles) reveal that the hydrogels showed more than 70% recovery. Maleimide-functionalized CNCs based hydrogels were prepared by effective cross-linking of gelatin and chondroitin sulfate, which formed stiffer networks with lower swelling ratios.140 The nanocomposites provided high strength, modulus, and toughness because of the good interfacial adhesion and stress transfer from the chemical linkage between the polymeric matrix and nanofillers. For tissue-engineering purposes, bacterial cellulose (BC) can be used as a transplant replacement tissue for skin.141 BC with hierarchical structure facilitates the healing process. Biological effects of the top and bottom sides were examined by BC film and the in vitro experiments suggested that the cells provided better viability and proliferation rate on the bottom side than on the top side. The BC membrane was used as a carrier for controlled release of berberine hydrochloride and berberine sulphate.142 The release curve was analysed through Ritger–Peppas model showing free diffusion as the most prominent mechanism of drug release. In another work, BC hydrogel was used for various strain rate hardening, softening, or strain-rate insensitivity.143 BC nanofibers are haphazardly spread in a fibrous cover; few fibres act as cross-linkers to interconnect the fibrous layers, developing a multi-layered network structure. These hydrogels provide high crystallinity of 60–90%. Liu and co-workers reported a stimuli responsive cellulose hydrogel prepared from cellulose acetoacetate (CAA) and cystamine dihydrochloride (CYS).144 The hydrogel exhibited reversible sol–gel transition on varying the pH and redox triggers.
Chitosan (CS) is a linear polysaccharide consisting of randomly present β-(1–4)-linked D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine units, and is synthesized by the exhaustive deacetylation of chitin. Chitosan is the second most abundant natural polymer on earth after cellulose. The physical properties of chitosan can be tuned by varying the molecular weight of the precursor, deacetylation, and degree of depolymerization. The ionic character of chitosan helps to produce hydrogels via electrostatic interactions.145 Sun et al. reported supramolecular hydrogels consisting of biopolymer chitosan with a variety of metal ions (specifically, Ag+, Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+) (Fig. 19e–g).146 They demonstrated a series of transparent hydrogels within a few seconds via supramolecular complexation. Chitosan (CS) with Ag+ ions forms CS–Ag hydrogel that exhibits distinct phase transitions behavior under external stimuli, such as pH, cations, anions, neutral species, and chemical redox reactions. Ionotropic chitosan metal hydrogels was synthesized by the in situ formation of colloidal metal salts in chitosan solution.147 Herein, chitosan, present in the polycationic state, attracted the negatively charged surface of the metal salts, thus forming gel networks. They used Al3+, Cu2+, Fe3+, Cr3+, V2+, Ni2+ and the rare-earths such as Ce4+, Pr3+, Nd3+, Y3+, Sm3+,Eu3+, La3+, Gd3+, and Tb3+ based colloidal metal salts for the gelation purpose. These hydrogels were found to be self-healing in nature, and the Fe3+ based gel showed antimicrobial nature and low cytotoxicity. Similarly, Wahid et al. fabricated a novel type of carboxymethyl chitosan supramolecular hydrogel through cross-linking with metal ions (Ag+, Cu2+, and Zn2+).148 Simple mixing of chitosan in aqueous solution with metallic salt solutions at an appropriate pH formed the hydrogels within a few seconds. The antibacterial activities of the hydrogels were examined through Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli by diffusion method, and they showed outstanding antibacterial activities. CS hydrogel has been used in many drug delivery systems, present in the unionized amine state at the alkaline/neutral pH condition, whereas anionic polyelectrolyte exists in the ionized state. To overcome this difficulty, modified chitosan such as quaternized chitosan (QCS) was used.149 QCS was synthesized by reacting chitosan with 3-chloro-2-hydroxypropyltrimethylammonium chloride and urea in alkaline solutions. QCS with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) based polyelectrolyte complex hydrogels was made by in situ polymerization of the AA monomer. The mechanical properties of the hydrogels were precisely tuned from the soft and elastic to stiff and viscoelastic by varying the PAA concentration. Hu and co-workers reported a dual network of N-carboxymethyl chitosan and alginate hydrogels, prepared by both divalent chelation and electrostatic interaction.150 The hydrogel provided wound healing and cell proliferation via epidermal growth factor. Jing et al. synthesized a chitosan/GO/polydopamine based conducting hydrogel by oxidizing dopamine and simultaneous reduction of GO.151 The hydrogel provided three times more adhesive strength than chitosan–dopamine based hydrogel. Also, the cell viability results proved that the hydrogel improved the proliferation and cell viability of human embryonic stem cell-derived fibroblasts and myocardial cells. Chen and co-workers synthesized a new microporous chitosan hydrogel, which depended upon the self-crosslinking reactions between maleimide and amine on the modified chitosan even below the freezing point.152 The chitosan based hydrogel exhibited good potential as a pollutant remover. Yu and co-workers fabricated a sponge-like composite hydrogel by the combination of chitosan, reduced graphene oxide (RGO), and montmorillonite clay.153 The resulting hydrogel provided good potential for the removal of hexavalent chromium ions (Cr(VI)). The Cr(VI) ion sorption of the hydrogels is greatly pH dependent and was maximum at pH = 2 and maximum Cr(VI) uptake by the hydrogel was 87.03 mg g−1 at 288 K.
Hyaluronic acid (HA) is an immunoneutral polysaccharide that consists of alternating units of a repeating disaccharide, β-1,4-D-glucuronic acid-β-1,3-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.154 HA can be modified in different ways to alter the physical properties of the newly modified HA, which gives hydrophobicity and biological activity. Shin and co-workers reported a catechol-modified HA (HA–CA) hydrogel prepared via oxidative crosslinking, which provides good biocompatibility and tissue-adhesive properties. The HA–CA hydrogel has been applied to immobilize hydrogels in vivo.155 HA can also from hydrogels by harnessing non-covalent associations that define supramolecular assemblies. For example, water-soluble monofunctionalized cucurbit[6]uril–hyaluronic acid (CB[6]–HA), guest moieties diaminohexane conjugated HA (DAH–HA), and drug conjugated CB[6] (drug-CB[6]) crosslink through host–guest interactions forming the hydrogel network.156 The hydrogels possess good potential in controlled drug delivery for cartilage regeneration and several other tissue engineering applications.
3. Hydrogels of functionalized amino acid derivatives
The development of amino acid based functional soft materials using a supramolecular approach has gained significant attention in the recent years.157 In particular, supramolecular hydrogels derived from amino acids and its derivatives through non-covalent interactions have been widely used as biomaterials in the fields of drug delivery, tissue engineering, biosensors, protein separation, and wound healing applications because of their low toxicity, biocompatibility, and biodegradability.158–160 Biocompatibility is defined as the relationship between a material and the organism so that it neither produces undesirable effects but generate appropriate beneficial cellular or tissue response, thus optimising the clinically relevant performance of the therapy.161 The standard values of biocompatibility of materials have been evaluated by the international standard ISO 10993 series. Biodegradability is the ability of substances (organic, polymers, and materials) to be broken down into simpler substances by bacteria or other living organisms, thus avoiding pollution. Toxicity is the degree to which a chemical substance or a particular mixture of substances can damage an organism. The adverse effect can vary from a minor side effect to a major threat to life or survival of the patient. Toxicity can be acute, subchronic, and chronic. Acute toxicity involves harmful effects in an organism through a single or short-term exposure. Subchronic toxicity is the ability of a toxic substance to cause effects for more than one year but less than the lifetime of the exposed organism. Chronic toxicity is the ability of a substance to cause harmful effects over an extended period.162,163 Low toxicity means toxicity much below acute toxicity, which varies from substance to substance and also with their concentration in the medium. Toxicity is a dose dependent parameter and recently, Dixit has proposed “Drug Toxicity Index” (DTI), where the author has provided mechanistic insights and has predicted outcomes clinically.164 Toxicity can be measured by its effects on the target. The lethal dose of toxin, radiation, and pathogen are measured by using median lethal dose (LD50) and lethal concentration, 50% (LC50). Duffus has also proposed different terms and the lethal dose used in toxicology.165
The non-proteinaceous aromatic groups are incorporated into the peptide/amino acid derivatives to enhance the intermolecular interactions and thus, increase the gelation stability. For example, fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (Fmoc) acts as N-terminus protecting group for peptide synthesis and the presence of Fmoc in the amino acid/peptide framework enhances π–π stacking as well as the self-assembly process. Recently, the development of supramolecular hydrogels from Fmoc-amino acid derivatives has received great attention due to their increasing applications in numerous fields of material and biochemical sciences.166–171 Fmoc-Phe-DAP molecular systems spontaneously and rapidly form self-assembly in aqueous medium upon addition of physiologically relevant concentrations of sodium chloride leading to the formation of hydrogels.172 The reported hydrogels exhibited stable mechanical property, robust shear-thinning behavior and drug release profiles, which demonstrate that these hydrogels could be used as injectable materials for delivering the drug in vivo. The functionalization of amino acids by suitable π-conjugated aromatic chromophores results in the formation of bio-functional materials for bio-sensing and imaging applications. In this perspective, Lin and co-workers developed a series of biocompatible pyrene–amino acid conjugate hydrogelators. They reported that the combination of two different oppositely charged derivatives of pyrene-capped amino acids provided mechanically strong and biocompatible hydrogels.173 Reddy et al. reported pyrene and fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl functionalized L-lysine based supramolecular ambidextrous gels (acting as donor) exhibiting charge transfer (CT) behavior when mixed with an electron acceptor such as 2,4,7-trinitro-9-fluorenone (TNF).174D-Biotin is a vitamin (B7) playing a crucial role in the cell cycle, various biochemical processes, and in metabolic reactions. Shanmugam and co-workers developed biocytin based supramolecular hydrogelator from the amidation product of D-biotin and L-lysine. They reported that the hydrogel has a specific bactericidal activity against E. coli and showed a favorable cell proliferation.175 The improvement in gelation properties by incorporation of metal cations has recently gained immense interest due to their impressive properties and control over self-assembly process by alternating metal–ligand coordination. For example, Basak et al. reported a phenylalanine based amphiphile system 1 (Fig. 20a–c), which formed a hydrogel in a phosphate buffer solution. On addition of metal cations such as Co2+ and Ni2+ to the gel matrix, dramatical enhancement in the thermal and mechanical stability was noticed.176
 Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of the hydrogelator 1. (b) Photograph of native hydrogel and metallo-hydrogels (1:0.5 of gelator to metal ion ratio) obtained from gelator 1 at pH 7.4. Gelator concentration maintained at 16 mM. (c) Probable self-assembly of gelator 1 without any metal ions and in the presence of metal ions (M2+ = Ca2+, Co2+, and Ni2+). The role of metal ion is binding of two gelator molecules through complex formation, which therefore self-assemble with the help of various non-covalent interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.1 Peptide hydrogels
Peptide-based supramolecular gelators form self-assembled fibrillar network obeying 3D percolation model produced through non-covalent interactions and thereafter, the developed structures lead to gel formation by encapsulating solvents.177,178 The nanofibres with 3D network structures of peptides are associated with α-helices, β-sheets, vesicles, micelles, fibers, ribbons, tapes, tubes, and coil-like morphologies.179–181 Peptide based hydrogels are very important due to their biocompatibility and low toxicity, thus innovating different applications in biomedical science. They are prepared by simple heating–cooling, sonication, and by adjusting the pH of the solutions. Besides, the peptide hydrogels are also prepared by adding a suitable salt to the peptide solutions at high pH182,183 and by performing enzymatic reaction on the precursor of the peptide gelator.184 The peptide-based hydrogels can exhibit multi-stimuli responsive behavior in the presence of external stimuli, for e.g., temperature, pH, ions, enzymes, strain, light, redox, and ultrasound, which makes them prominent candidates in different research fields.185,186 The most important features of the self-assembled peptide hydrogels are their non-toxicity and stability under physiological conditions, which make them ideal for a variety of biological187–190 and non-biological applications.191 Recently, short peptide based hydrogels have become very attractive in this respect due to their inherent biocompatibility, tunable bioactivity, structural diversity, and easy and cost-effective synthesis, and could offer a myriad of potential uses in biomedical, biochemical, biotechnological, and electrical applications.192–197 Depending on the peptide linkages (amide bonds), the short peptides can be categorized into dipeptides, tripeptides, tetrapeptides, and so on. The di or tripeptides have advantages due to their low-cost and ease of preparation, relative to longer peptides or more elaborate peptide derivatives. In peptides, as the sequence increases from di- to tri- to oligo- and polypeptides, the number of peptide (–CONH–) linkages increase, thus facilitating the formation of more intermolecular hydrogen bonding in the system. This changes the physical properties of the peptides including the mechanical properties, which find applications in different systems. Also, depending on the nature of amino acids in the peptide, the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity vary, thus affecting the gelation properties. Thus, drug loading and release behaviors of the peptide hydrogels depend both on the sequence length and chemical nature of the sequence present in the system. Herein, we are going to briefly discuss about the preparation, properties, and uses of short peptides to polypeptide based hydrogels, chronologically.

3.1.1 Dipeptide hydrogels. 
Dipeptide is the shortest peptide in the class of short peptides. Dipeptide based hydrogels are rapidly gaining popularity due to their low-cost and ease of synthesis through solid phase peptide synthesis by using bio-relevant amino acid residues, and can be used as potential candidates for drug delivery, tissue engineering, cell scaffolding, as well as non-biological applications.198,199 From structural investigations, it has been resolved that the dipeptide-like short peptide hydrogelators typically require presence of additional aromatic groups in order to enhance the gel formation as well as the mechanical properties.200–204 The hydrogels showing thixotropic as well as self-healing properties can be used as injectable materials for sustainable drug carriers to the target site. In this regard, Banerjee and co-workers developed a dipeptide based thixotropic injectable hydrogel by modifying the molecular structure, which exhibited antibacterial activity against Gram negative bacteria Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.205 The authors also reported that the hydrogel exhibited stability towards proteolytic enzymes present inside the cells and showed negligible toxicity towards human erythrocytes and human fibroblast cells. A class of Amoc (9-anthracenemethoxycarbonyl)-capped dipeptide-based biocompatible, self-healable, and injectable hydrogels has been developed by Das and co-workers.206,207 The gelator molecules (2 and 3) presented in Fig. 21 showed excellent gelation ability due to the presence of suitable aromatic groups responding to π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions. At pH 7.4, the gelator molecules form self-supported hydrogels, showing antibacterial activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. They reported that hydrogel 2 showed antibacterial activity towards Gram-positive bacteria at higher gelator concentrations, whereas hydrogel 3 exhibited antibacterial activity against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. At lower gelator 2 concentrations, there is a marginal positive impact on cell viability and proliferation. But gelator 3 at higher concentrations does not exert any toxicity on the cell viability. Ferreira and co-workers reported that dehydrodipeptides containing Naproxen N-capped tryptophan formed hydrogels by peptide self-assembly via hydrogen-bonding and π–π stacking interactions.208 The authors revealed from the fluorescence and Förster resonance energy transfer experiments that the loaded drug in the hydrogel matrix was located in a hydrophobic environment associated with the peptide fibers, indicating that this hydrogel is a good candidate for the drug-nanocarrier. The in situ detection of cellular biomolecules by using peptide based bio-interface has practical significance in cell function, pathology, physiology, and toxicology. Lian et al. constructed a smart bio-interface by using Fmoc-diphenylalanine nanofibrous hydrogel for enzyme-based electrochemical biosensor and cell monitoring applications.209 Again, a 3D culture model-based cellular biosensing system was reported by Lian et al. by immobilizing living cells and enzymes as sensing elements into a dipeptide-derived hydrogel matrix through simple one-pot self-assembly for the detection of superoxide anion (O2˙−).210
 Fig. 21  Schematic representation of self-assembly leading to the formation of nanofibrillar hydrogels and biological evaluations with the self-supporting hydrogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 Tripeptide hydrogels. 
Tripeptide is a class of short peptides that may be N-terminal protected211 or N-terminal non-protected tri-amide building blocks that has been recognized as biocompatible soft material212 and has potential uses in biomedical and sensing applications.213 Herein, the contribution of the hydrophobic part such as aromatic or poly-aromatics groups or other π-conjugated systems attached into peptide based molecular building block for efficient gel formation by π–π-stacking interactions is discussed.214 The presence of hydrophobic part in the tripeptide frameworks has a great importance in the gel formation mechanism. Lin and colleagues reported the structural properties’ correlation of synthesized naphthalimide capped tripeptides hydrogelators.215 Weiss and coworkers designed and synthesized a series of Fmoc protected tripeptide based supramolecular systems containing β-amino acid in order to develop proteolytically stable, thermoreversible, and pH-sensitive hydrogels. The authors proposed that the tripeptides form long nanofibrils by self-assembly, which are interconnected, leading to the formation of gels with 3-D network structures. They also reported that the peptide hydrogels exhibited proteolytic stability against proteinase K enzyme in vitro.216 Yang et al. reported that Fmoc protected phenylalanine–phenylalanine–cysteine tripeptide forms micelles through self-assembly at higher pH, leading to the formation of a viscous solution, which spontaneously transforms into a stable self-supporting, thixotropic, printable hydrogel with time.217


3.1.3 Tetrapeptide hydrogels. 
Like the above short peptides, tetrapeptides also form self-assembled hydrogels with 3-D nanostructure morphologies through non-covalent interactions, which can be widely used in various applications.218–220 Li and co-workers synthesized Nap-protected tetrapeptide hydrogels for ophthalmic drug delivery.221 In this case, a commercial eye drop, diclofenac sodium (DIC), is loaded into the hydrogel network by simple physical mixing and it is rapidly released from the gel matrix within 24 hours. The authors reported from an ocular tolerance test that after a single instillation of the DIC-loaded Nap-GFFY hydrogel, no eye irritation occurs. They also reported that the synthesized Nap-GFFY hydrogel has no toxic effect against different cell lines after incubation for 24 hours. Zhao et al. reported a tetrapeptide based supramolecular hydrogel serving as a novel vaccine delivery system.222 When protein molecules are encapsulated in the hydrogel network, then the mechanical property of the hydrogel is enhanced up to 15-fold and there also occurs a conformational transition from β-sheet to α-helix structure. The resulting protein–peptide hydrogels enhances antigen uptake capacity and moderately promotes dendritic cell (DC) maturation in vitro. Interestingly, this peptide hydrogel can promote antigen specific antibody creation in vivo and splenocyte proliferation ex vivo.


3.1.4 Pentapeptide hydrogels. 
The construction of functional hydrogel based biomaterials from pentapeptide building blocks by supramolecular approach have attracted great interest in biomedical and chemical fields of applications.223 Lampe and co-workers developed stimuli-responsive pentapeptide based hydrogels with nanofiber network structures for tissue engineering.224 They reported that the mechanical properties of the pentapeptide hydrogels changed due to variations in the peptide sequences, peptide concentration, and pH. The authors also reported that the peptides can form sequence-dependent fibrillar morphologies via self-assembly. The hydrogels also exhibited shear-thinning and self-healing properties induced by the facile formation of β-sheet structures. For the tunable structural and mechanical properties of these supramolecular pentapeptide scaffolds, these hydrogel systems can be made suitable injectable materials for tissue engineering and cell delivery applications. Later on, Lampe and colleagues developed an injectable biomaterial hydrogel based on the pentapeptide scaffold that exhibited shear-thinning and rapid self-healing behavior.225 They reported that the hydrogels possessed nanofiber morphology that can serve as a cell carrier for cell transplantation.


3.1.5 Hexapeptide hydrogels. 
Hexapeptide is a family member of oligopeptides that form supramolecular hydrogels similar to that of other peptides and have been shown considerable attention in various biomedical applications due to their multifunctionality, biocompatibility, and biodegradability properties.226,227 A hexapeptide based supramolecular self-assembling hydrogel with nanofiber morphology was developed by Qi et al.228 Interestingly, this nanofibrous hydrogel transformed into well-organized nanofibers with an antiparallel β-sheet structure in the presence of chemotherapeutic drugs such as doxorubicin (Dox) (Fig. 22a). The authors found that when the Dox loaded hydrogel was injected at the tumor site of mice, it inhibited the re-growth of the cancer cell at the primary tumor site and reduced distant metastasis. Zhong and coworkers developed a fluorescent hydrogel containing a fluorescent moiety and a hexapeptide unit for accurate and reversible measurement of pH.229
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the peptide hydrogel and its characterization. Molecular structure of the peptide FEFFFK that self-assembled into an antiparallel β-sheet arrangement. Dox influenced the aggregation of nanofibers within the hydrogel matrix. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and (b) pH-responsive hydrogel consisting of a self-assembled peptide for the delivery of paclitaxel against tumor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.6 Oligo-peptide hydrogels. 
Oligo-peptides are short chain peptides produced by connecting more than two and less than twenty peptide linkages. We have already discussed a number of oligopeptides including dipeptides, tripeptides, tetrapeptides, pentapeptides, and hexapeptides; herein, we will briefly discuss the rest of the oligopeptides. Recently, oligopeptide-based materials have gained great interest for a variety of biomedical and technological applications due to their interesting properties such as piezoelectric activity, high optical non-linearity, nanoscale wettability, electrochemical behavior, magnetic susceptibility, and luminescence properties. Like other supramolecular systems, oligopeptide based materials can also form self-assembly through non-covalent interactions and can lead to the formation of gels with 3-D network, showing a variety of nanostructures (including β-sheets, helical, or β-hairpin-based fibrils and nanotubes).230–235 The self-assembly as well as supramolecular architecture based on the peptide fragment is highly dependent on the peptide sequence, which comes from the composition of amino acids.236 It is well known that, for the formation of gels, various non-covalent interactions are required to construct the self-assembled 3-D structure; beyond that, a perfect balance between the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity has to be maintained for designing oligopeptide based gelators. The hydrogels obtained from oligopeptides can be utilized as nanoparticles, drug and cells carrier, vaccine nodule, catalysts, biosensors, and biomaterials with piezoelectric and hybrid biodegradable materials for bioelectronics.237–241
“Cancer” is one of most traumatic diseases amongst all kinds of known diseases. Till now, researchers have being trying to finding the right way to cure cancer. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), cancer is a serious menace to the health of humans and animals worldwide. Cancer cells are unusually and uncontrollably divided without any limitations and can attack adjacent normal cells and tissues, thus hampering their normal physical activities. Chemotherapy is known as the most effective method for treatment of cancer. Various anti-cancer drugs have been developed and are used specifically for the treatment of cancer by monitoring the type of cancer. Therefore, it is very important to choose the delivery systems for chemotherapeutics agents that can selectively deliver drugs to the cancer sites. From this perspective, a number of different drug carrier systems such as nanoparticles, vesicles, micelles, and nanofibers have been developed. Furthermore, a number of drug carrier systems have been constructed, which can exhibit stimuli responsive behavior in the presence of external stimuli such as pH and temperature. These types of drug carrier systems play an important role for delivering the chemotherapeutic agents to the specific target site of the tumor in the presence of stimuli. In general, the surroundings of the cancer cells site are more acidic (low pH) in comparison to that of the normal cells site. Therefore, pH responsive hydrogels, which form gels at neutral or basic pH but convert into sol at lower pH, play an important role in delivering anti-cancer drugs to the specific site of cancer cells. Karavasili et al. established an oligopeptide hydrogel as a vehicle for simultaneous delivery of Doxorubicin and Curcumin drug for the treatment of head and neck cancer.242 Paclitaxel (PTX) is an important anti-cancer hydrophobic drug that belongs to the taxane family and has been widely used for a variety of cancer treatments. Raza et al. developed a pH responsive octapeptide hydrogel for the carrier of anti-cancer drug such as Paclitaxel.243 The peptide molecules form a stable hydrogel with high drug loading capacity at pH 7.4 (Fig. 22b). The authors found that this peptide hydrogel transforms into a sol and sustainably releases PTX at the tumor site of mice at pH 5.5, and it efficiently enhances tumor inhibition.
MAX8 is an oligopeptide molecule containing twenty amino acid residues, which exhibit self-assembly behavior. The MAX8 molecule is associated with alternative hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acid residues, which promote β-strand formation. The motif VDPPT is known as an important part of MAX8 and forms β-turn. The β-strands of MAX8 molecule form β-hairpin with the help of β-turn.244 β-Hairpin peptide hydrogels is known as a vehicle for therapeutic drug delivery due to their biocompatible nature.245,246 Langhans and co-workers reported a β-hairpin hydrogel obtained from MAX8 oligopeptide, bearing unique shear thinning properties and it exhibited immediate re-healing after the removal of mechanical forces, making this hydrogel an excellent material for injectable drug delivery vehicle at the localized injury site.247 Pochan and co-workers248 developed a MAX8 β-hairpin peptide hydrogel for delivering a hydrophobic drug vincristine for the purpose of chemotherapy.
The cyclic peptide (CDPs) is a class of oligopeptide, generally formed by head-to-tail intramolecular cyclization of the corresponding linear dipeptide residues.249,250 They are universally found in nature ranging from bacteria to human with different biological functions. One of the most important properties of their structural rigidity is due to cyclic conformation, which significantly enhances the resistance power towards the enzymatic hydrolysis and physiological stability than that of their linear counterparts. CDP derivatives are able to form gels in many organic and aqueous solvents via self-assembly by non-covalent interactions with the help of physical stimuli such as temperature, shear force, and pH, as reported by Govindaraju and co-workers.251 Due to the unique physical and chemical properties, CDPs can be used as important candidates for controlled drug delivery and other biological applications (Fig. 23A and B).
 Fig. 23  (A) Molecular structures of cyclic dipeptide derivatives; (B) schematic representation of CDP molecular self-assembly, gelation, and host–guest (β-CD-AC) interaction driven modulation of CDP self-assembly and gelation: CDP, cyclic dipeptide derivative; β-CD, β-cyclodextrin; AC, 1-adamantane carboxylic acid; C, concentration of CDP; MGC, minimal gelation concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Peptidomimetic is a compound that mimics to a natural peptide or protein and has been prepared by modifying existing peptide residues.252 These molecular motifs have the ability to interact with the biological target and exhibit identical biological effect.253 A series of Fmoc-protected peptidomimetic hydrogels was developed by Tomasini and coworkers.254 The authors successfully performed a comparative study of gelation using different peptidomimetic residues. They have established that Fmoc-L-Tyr-D-Oxd-OH is an excellent gelator to form a strong, transparent, and viscoelastic gel amongst others.
Pseudopeptide is a synthetic oligopeptide analog, which mimics the extra cellular matrix and is metabolically more stable than a natural protein or peptide. Tomasini et al. reported a series of pseudo-peptide hydrogels prepared from Fmoc-L-Phe-D-Oxd-OH by varying gelator concentration and by adding graphene oxide to the aqueous solution.255 In this case, the pristine hydrogel and graphene oxide loaded hydrogel efficiently trap cationic dye methylene blue (MB) and anionic dye eosin Y (EY) with the help of electrostatic and π–π interactions. Tomasini et al. also fabricated a pseudo-peptide hydrogel system for the purpose of 3D cell culture application.256


3.1.7 Polypeptide hydrogels. 
The polypeptide is a long chain peptide motif, containing 20–50 amide linkages. Depending on the sequence of amino acid residues in polypeptides, different types of secondary structures such as α-helix, β-sheet, and random coil are obtained by supramolecular assembly formation.257 These type of secondary structures of polypeptide also exhibit structural transitions in the presence of external stimuli such as light, pH, and temperature.258 Again, the incorporation of external motifs or ligands in polypeptides have also exhibited a structural transition.259 Due to biocompatibility, tunable physical, mechanical, architectural, and multiple functionalities, the polypeptides play a significant role in the construction of supramolecular assembled hydrogels for differential applications.260–265 Wooley and co-workers developed a multi-responsive polypeptide hydrogel for delivering non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.266 Hartgerink et al. reported the self-assembled nanofibrillar structure of multidomain peptide that transforms it into an anisotropic hydrogel string with modest shear stress by the incorporation of the amino acid DOPA (3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine).267
The polypeptide hydrogels with similar properties such as extra cellular matrix (ECM) have been widely investigated in cell culture and tissue engineering.268 Arginylglycylaspartic acid (RGD) is a short peptide motif commonly used for cell adhesion to ECM.269 Chen and co-workers developed a novel poly(L-glutamic acid)-based injectable hydrogel fabricated by RGD (Fig. 24A and B).270 They showed that the incorporation of RGD motif in the polypeptide framework increased the cell adhesion and cell proliferation by developing cell–matrix interactions. The authors also reported that the conjugation of RGD with the network by disulfide bonds helped to control the bioactivity of the hydrogel by tuning the RGD concentration. For targeted drug delivery and tumor chemo-photothermal therapy, a hybrid nanogel matrix was developed by Liu and coworkers.271 When gold nanorods were coated with a triblock polypeptide, then a stable biocompatible hydrogel was obtained by self-assembly. Again, to promote cellular uptake on the surface of the hybrid nanogels, the authors introduced arginine–glycine–aspartic acid motif into the polypeptide. Lee and his group developed a series of multi-stimuli responsive bioresorbable block copolymers based polypeptide hydrogels by ring-opening polymerization for controlled delivery of the therapeutic protein.272 Olsen and co-workers reported a homopolypeptide obtained from the polymerization of L-proline and it formed a supramolecular hydrogel with left helical structural morphology.273 Peptoid or poly-N-substituted glycine is a member of the peptomimetic family and is developed for different biomedical applications. In peptoid moieties, nitrogen atoms are engaged by alkyl substitution. Like normal peptides, peptoids do not show secondary structures due to the lack of amide hydrogen. A series of copolypeptiod based thermo-reversible injectable hydrogels were prepared via ring opening polymerization by Zhang and coworkers.274 The hydrogels exhibit less cytotoxic effect on human adipose derived stem cells and also show bioactivity by inducing chondrogenesis of human adipose derived stem cells. The encapsulation of water-soluble enzyme into the hydrogel matrix by sol–gel transition demonstrated its practical utility in tissue engineering and in other biological fields.
 Fig. 24  (A) Photographs of the solution to hydrogel transition and (B) the network Structure of the in situ Formed P1 + P1-RGD Gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of the design and application of the photo-responsive injectable hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A biocompatible photo-degradable injectable self-healing hydrogel was obtained from star poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(g-o-nitrobenzyl-L-glutamate) and polypeptide by developing physical crosslinking induced by supramolecular self-assembly (Fig. 24C).275 The crosslink networks of the hydrogel created a hydrophobic domain, which could encapsulate a hydrophobic drug such as doxorubicin (DOX). It was observed that upon UV irradiation, the photolabile o-nitribenzyl ester group was fully cleaved, resulting in hydrophobic crosslinks to be disrupted and could effectively release the encapsulated doxorubicin.

3.2 Hydrogels of peptide amphiphiles
Peptide amphiphile is a class of synthetic biomaterials in which hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids are arranged in an alternative manner and it has been widely used in biomedical applications.276–279 The peptide amphiphilicity is responsible for the creation of secondary structures, which subsequently self-assemble into 3-D networks with different morphological structures such as fibrils, nanotube, nanofibers, and β-sheets.280–283 The incorporation of acidic, basic, and charged motifs into the peptide amphiphilic residues is carried out in order to enhance the self-assembly formation, followed by the gelation process.284 pH and thermo-responsive anionic hydrogel derived from the acidic amphiphilic scaffold exhibits shear-thinning and thixotropic behavior, reported by Schneider and coworkers.285 Rapaport et al. reported the effect of cationic, anionic, and zwitterionic β-sheet amphiphilic peptides on blood clotting/coagulation.286 The 3-D entangled network of amphiphilic hydrogels, which mimics the extracellular matrix (ECM), have been widely used as potential drug carriers.287,288 Fu et al. reported the three-dimensional networks of nanofibers formed by self-assembly of peptide amphiphiles that can be used as a biomimetic hydrogel scaffold for tissue engineering.289 A series of multi-stimuli responsive injectable peptide amphiphilic hydrogels with β-sheets and nanofibrous network structures were developed by Mehra et al.290 In this case, the authors synthesized hydrogel nanoparticles from amphiphilic peptides, which can deliver anticancer drugs such as 5-fluoro uracil/doxorubicin at physiological conditions. Guler et al. reported a supramolecular nanofibrous injectable hydrogel from the peptide amphiphile, which have the ability to encapsulate and slowly release the anti-cancer (DOX) drug (Fig. 25a–e).291 In this case, the non-cytotoxicity and encapsulation strategy of nanofiber gels increased the activity of the drug molecules on cellular viability. Ballet and co-workers developed a new class of amphipathic peptide hydrogelators consisting of mixed α/β-peptide form transparent self-supporting gels with good shear-thinning behavior after dissolution in water or phosphate buffer.292 The authors also enhanced the proteolytic stability of the mixed α/β-peptide gelators by incorporation of β3-homoamino acid residues for the purpose of tissue engineering and drug delivery applications. Besides the drug delivery ability to the target site, the peptide amphiphilic hydrogels exhibited antibacterial activity against different types of bacteria.293 Wan et al. prepared a series of supramolecular hydrogels from cationic peptide amphiphiles by ring opening polymerization and post-modification strategy.294 Interestingly, by incorporation of lysine residues into peptide amphiphile motif, the resulting hydrogel showed pH responsive behavior and antibacterial activity. The controlled release of H2S gas from the peptide amphiphilic based hydrogel network was reported by Matson and coworkers.295 Roy and coworkers fabricated stimuli responsive amphiphilic peptide hydrogels containing histidine scaffold.296 Herein, the authors observed that the hydrogels exhibit gel to sol transition by incorporation of various metal ions (Cu2+, Ni2+, and Co2+) at physiological pH and thereafter, the resulting peptide–metal ion complex is shifted to the gel phase at lower pH (pH 3). They attributed the strong interaction between the peptide residues and metal ions due to the incorporation of metal salts.
 Fig. 25  (a) Chemical representations of E3PA and K3PA molecules, (b) the zeta potential change in E3PA upon addition of K3PA at pH 7.4 in water, (c) the supramolecular PA network showing self-supporting gel properties, and (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the coassembled PA nanonetwork and nanofibers, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A lipopeptide is a bio-surfactant molecular building block in which a lipid motif is connected to a peptide residue that exhibits self-assembly behavior with nanostructure morphology in aqueous solution.297,298 The peripheral arrangement of peptide residues makes the molecule bioactive and potentially useful in biomedical applications. Rambo and coworkers performed a comparative study of N-terminal lipidated heptapeptide and unlipidated peptide fragment. They reported that the lipidated peptide fragment showed pH dependent self-assembly behavior at higher concentration, whereas its parent peptide fragment, i.e., the un-lipidated form, was unable to exhibit the self-assembly behavior. At pH 7, the lipidated heptapeptide unit formed a hydrogel with fibrillar network coming from β-sheet structures. The authors also found that the lipidated peptide produces pH dependent aggregated structures such as micelles, fibrils, and nanosheets. But in case of the native peptide, no distinct aggregated structure was obtained.235 Adak et al. developed a lipopeptide based biocompatible hydrogel consisting of a hydrophobic long chain, hydrophilic amino acids, and microtubule stabilizing peptide.299 The amphiphilicity of the molecule assists in the self-assembly and gel formation process (Fig. 26a–g). The author reported that the hydrogel exhibits neuroprotection behavior against anti-NGF-induced toxicity in neuron cells. The hydrogel had an excellent ability to carry and deliver anti-Alzheimer and anticancer hydrophobic drugs to the specific site 3D spheroid of neuron cancer cells.
 Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structure of palmitic acid (PA) conjugated with NK peptide (PA–NK) containing microtubule (MT) stabilizing and neuroprotective residues. (b) Snapshot of an inverted glass vial shows PA–NK hydrogel with 1 wt% compound in PBS buffer. (c) TEM image of PANK hydrogel reveals interconnected fibril network structure. (d) AFM image of the PA–NK hydrogel reveals a densely packed fibril structure. (e) Dynamic frequency sweep study of the PA–NK hydrogel (2 wt%) at 1% strain; G′ and G′′ refer to the storage and loss modulus, respectively. (f) Cell viability study reveals that the PA–NK hydrogel is non-cytotoxic in nature. (g) Microscopic image in the DIC mode of Neuro-2a cell in the PA–NK hydrogel reveals that the cells are healthy in nature. The scale bar corresponds to 20 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Advantages and disadvantages of peptide hydrogels
The advantages of peptide hydrogels are: the hydrogel environment can protect the cells and the drug, and the peptide may be modified with the cell adhesion ligands. The drug loaded gel can be injected into the body as a liquid due to thixotropic properties that may form gels at body temperature/pH and the peptide molecules are usually biocompatible with very low toxicity. The disadvantages of peptide hydrogels are that they are difficult to handle as they are mechanically weak. These gels also find some difficulty in loading drugs and cells, and then to crosslink in vitro as a prefabricated matrix.
So, mechanically strong peptide hydrogels with thixotropic properties can be an agreeable solution and it can be made by adding nanofillers or by using long chain peptides where there would be a large number of H-bonding interactions with the –CONH– groups. The incorporation of aromatic moieties in the peptide chain may improve the mechanical properties due to π-stacking interaction; however, care should be taken to keep the toxicity low and the final hydrogel should be biocompatible.
Further, employing synthetic end-capping groups (e.g., naphthalene, fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl, anthracene, etc.) would play a prominent role in improving the mechanical and gelation properties of the small peptides. Peptide based hybrid, co-assembled, metal coordinated hydrogels also remedy the above difficulties and we will discuss it in the next sections.
3.4 Peptide based hybrid hydrogel
Peptide based hybrid hydrogels are prepared by mixing two or more components for gaining some special or specific properties, which are not exhibited by the individual components.300 In some cases, two or more components form gels with a perfect combination but they do not form gels individually. On the other hand, some non-gelling agents such as polymers, surfactants, bioactive materials, nucleotides, photoactive materials, nanoparticle, salts, graphene based materials, and fullerenes are added to the gelling agents (peptide residues mainly) to improve the gelation properties, biological activity, drug encapsulation and release efficiency, cell culture, and electrical and bio-sensing properties for the purpose of a variety of applications.301–307 Das Mahapatra et al. reported a poly(vinyl alcohol) embedded hybrid hydrogel of a β-amino acid-containing Fmoc-protected tripeptide.308 They observed that the hydrogel of pure tripeptide was unstable and became a sol after half an hour; addition of water soluble polymer PVA into the gel matrix formed a mechanically and thermally stable peptide–polymer hybrid hydrogel exhibiting thixotropic property (Fig. 27a). The thixotropic nature of the hydrogel promoted the encapsulation and release of the anticancer drug under physiological conditions.
 Fig. 27  (a) The appearance of Fmoc-Val-Car hydrogels in the presence and absence of PVA (1% w/v); inset: chemical structures of Fmoc-Val-Car, DOX, and PVA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of injectable peptide-based fibrous hydrogels for the delivery of a photosensitive drug (Ce6) and antitumor photodynamic therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Melittin is a cationic antimicrobial polypeptide motif containing 26 amino acid residues discovered from bee venom and is known as a potent anti-cancer agent. Therefore, the use of melittin for the purpose of cancer therapy has gained a significant role; however, it cannot be used alone in vivo applications because its activity is hampered by hemolysis. In this regard, the encapsulation of melittin into the hydrogel matrixes has been developed for reducing the hemolysis by shielding the direct interaction with normal tissue cells and red blood cells.309 Yang and coworkers developed a melittin–RADA32 hybrid peptide hydrogel for controlled drug release.310 The authors reported that the hybrid hydrogel with nanofiber network morphology showed biocompatibility, controlled release of anti-tumor drug, and efficiently destroyed the melanoma cells. An injectable hybrid hydrogel obtained from peptide and glycosaminoglycan for restoring the compressive stiffness of denucleated bovine intervertebral discs was reported by Wilcox and coworkers.311 The glycosaminoglycan that is present in hybrid gel not only restored the biomechanical function but also enhanced the gelation kinetics and thermodynamic stability. Yousaf et al. engineered functional 3D hydrogels from peptide and oligonucleotide building blocks for the detection of un-labelled nucleic acid sequences at low levels with high specificity.312 This hybrid oligonucleotide–peptide hydrogel detector was able to ‘fish out’ the perfect match target sequences even from a complex analytical sample in the presence of other DNA and RNA sequences.
Light responsive peptide hybrid hydrogels have attained immense interest in biomedical fields.313 Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is known as an effective therapeutic treatment against tumor and multi-registrant bacteria due to its high selectivity and non-invasive properties. Yan and coworkers developed an injectable supramolecular hybrid hydrogel by combining N-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl diphenylalanine (Fmoc-FF) and poly-L-lysine (PLL) residue.314 The hybrid hydrogel exhibited multiple favorable therapeutic properties such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, self-healing, and shear-thinning properties. The authors reported that the hybrid hydrogel could encapsulate and cause sustainable release of a photosensitive antitumor drug chlorin e6 (Ce6) at the tumor site in vivo through photodynamic therapy (Fig. 27b). The effective photosensitizers such as fullerenes have the highest tendency to stop bacterial activity by photodynamic therapy (PDT). Due to the limited solubility in water and aggregation behavior, fullerene motif alone is not considered as a suitable candidate in biomedical applications. A supramolecular hybrid hydrogel fabricated by the combination of an amphiphilic small peptide (Fmoc-FF) and a fullerene derivative for targeted and sustained photodynamic antibacterial therapy (Fig. 28) was reported by Yan and colleagues.315 The authors observed that the efficiency of PDT of the hybrid hydrogel was significantly improved as compared to that of pure fullerene. Again, the mechanical property of the fullerene incorporated hybrid hydrogel was profoundly enhanced, which makes this hybrid hydrogel as a potential injectable material for biomedical applications.
 Fig. 28  Self-assembled Fmoc-FF/C60-PTC hybrid hydrogels for photodynamic antibacterial therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gold nanoparticles (GNPs) are recognized as effective biomaterials due to their diverse properties such as biocompatibility, catalytic, electrical, and optical properties. Modified GNPs with biomolecules show more promising functions as compared with their pristine precursors and have been widely utilized in biomedical fields. Polypeptide–gold nanoparticle-based hybrid nanogels prepared using PC10A(RGD) act as templates and photoinitiator I-2959 under 365 nm photo-irradiation for photoacoustic imaging.316
Recently, a hybridized hydrogel matrix was developed by the incorporation of graphene-based nanofillers into the hydrogel framework in order to increase the binding sites for bio-functionalization, mechanical stability, and conductivity.317 For this purpose, Saiani and coworkers prepared hybrid hydrogels by combining self-assembling peptides possessing varying physiochemical properties and graphene derivatives with varying surface chemistry for biomedical applications.318 Wang and colleagues fabricated a nanofiber hybrid hydrogel by combining peptides and graphene oxide to obtain a new composite as a β-glucosidase mimic for efficient cellulose hydrolysis.319 Ko et al. synthesized graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) hybridized Fmoc-FF nanofibers (Fmoc-FF/g-C3N4) that could immediately form nanofibers and g-C3N4 nanosheets, disabling the van der Waals interaction of the C–N groups occurring in the g-C3N4 nanosheets.320 In this case, the encapsulation of high content of water in the Fmoc-FF/g-C3N4 hydrogel matrix is used as a key component of photosynthetic reactions making self-assembled hydrogel through π–π interaction between aromatic rings present in Fmoc-FF (Fig. 29). It has been noted that the supramolecular network structure of the Fmoc-FF/g-C3N4 hydrogel permits efficient photoexcited electrons transfer from g-C3N4 to NAD+ through an electron mediator M {[Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+, Cp* = C5Me5, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine} in a limited space of the nanofiber network. The authors also demonstrated that with the help of the light-harvesting peptide hydrogel, regeneration of NADH occurred photochemically for driving the redox enzymatic reactions using a model NADH dependent enzyme and L-glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH).
 Fig. 29  Schematic illustration of photosynthesis in green plants (top) and light-driven enzymatic light-energy conversion by self-assembled, light-harvesting hydrogel (bottom). In chloroplast, light driven regeneration of cofactors (i.e., NADPH) takes place, followed by NADPH-dependent enzymatic reactions in the Calvin cycle. The self-assembled Fmoc-FF hydrogel was hybridized with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a photosensitizer, for light energy conversion by NADH-dependent enzymatic reaction with triethanolamine (TEOA) as an electron donor. The photoexcited electrons were transferred from g-C3N4 to NAD+ through an electron mediator {M = [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+, Cp* = C5Me5, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine}. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Co-assembled peptides hydrogel
Co-assembled peptide hydrogel is a typical hybrid gel matrix with ordered structure formed by mixing two or more assembly building blocks and it exhibits high stability, improved bio-functionality, developed new architectural diversity, enhanced charge transfer (CT), and tunable mechanical properties.321–326 In this regard, Accardo and colleagues fabricated a biocompatible co-assembled hydrogel obtained by co-aggregation of the hydrogelator Na-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl diphenylalanine (Fmoc-FF) and hexapeptide based soft hydrogelator PEG8–(FY)3, containing three repetitions of the Phe–Tyr units and a N-terminus PEG moiety.327 Co-assembled β3-tripeptides hydrogels were fabricated from a mixture of fluorophore attached non-lipidated β3-tripeptide P1 or lipidated β3-tripeptide P2 and a non-fluorescent lipidated β3-tripeptide P3 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) by Borgo and coworkers.328 The authors demonstrated that the co-assembled hydrogel obtained from peptide P2 and P3 with 1:49 ratio (Fig. 30A–C) exhibited shear thinning behavior with very fast recovery ability, suggesting that it could be used as a bioactive injectable material. The implantation of 80 μL of this hydrogel via subcutaneous injections in C57 mice was performed for serial monitoring using a non-invasive IVIS spectrum. They observed from the fluorescence experiment that there was no significant change in the fluorescence intensity up to 14 days and they also notified that were no degradation products appeared during imaging. The poly-L-lysine (PLL) is well-known as a cationic biomacromolecule that exhibits excellent biocompatibility behavior. It can be used as an enhancing penetrator through (negatively charged) cell membranes. N-Fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl diphenylalanine (Fmoc-FF) can form fibrous hydrogels via self-assembly under mild conditions but it has limited application as injectable hydrogels due to its poor mechanical properties. In this perspective, Yan and co-workers developed a smart switch by electrostatic coupling between the positively charged PLL and the negatively charged self-assembling dipeptide (Fmoc-FF) that led to the formation of supramolecular hydrogels with adjustable rheological properties, exhibiting shear thinning and self-healing properties, which is suitable for injectable materials (Fig. 30D).329 The authors also constructed an injectable hydrogel from the Fmoc-FF and PLL-SH mixture, which is useful for antitumor therapeutic applications. They also noted that the self-assembled nanofibers with helical structures were stabilized through the formation of the disulfide bond by incorporation of thiol groups, which can serve as a promising vaccine to activate the T cell response and can efficiently suppress tumor growth without the necessity of antigens, adjuvants, and immune regulatory factors. The structurally distinct peptide- and lipid-type hydrogelators form supramolecular nanofibers through different non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding/π–π interactions and hydrophobic/hydrogen bonding interactions, respectively. When a small library of hydrogelators having different chemical structures, charge, and hydrophobicity is constructed, then the self-assembly behaviors (self-sorting or co-assembly) of these pairs are directly visualized under confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) with appropriate fluorescent probes. From the systematic study, it was revealed that two important factors influence the self-sorting phenomenon. They are: (i) the degree of hydrophobicity of the side chain on the peptide-type hydrogelators and (ii) the surface charge of the hydrogelators.330
 Fig. 30  (A) Lipidated β3-tripeptides synthesized with and without a fluorophore P2 and P3 (R4 corresponds to a fluorescent moiety) are hypothesized to (B) coassemble via head-to-tail self-assembly to (C) afford a fully integrated fluorescent hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic diagram for the formation of Fmoc-FF/PLL-SH hydrogels based on electrostatic interaction-triggered coassembly. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Natural bone is a nano-composite species possessing remarkable mechanical strength and toughness, obtained from organic–inorganic materials. The destruction or shape defect of the bone caused by damage or disease, requires orthopedic clinical treatment either by surgical or by bone transplantations. Recently, the researchers concentrated on bone tissue engineering using scaffold materials, which acts as an extra cellular matrix (ECM) such as stem cell- or bioactive factor required to integrate into the surrounding damage bone tissue areas for bone reconstruction. Abramovich and co-workers developed a peptide-based co-assembled hydrogel composed of two building blocks such as Fmoc-diphenylalanine (Fmoc-FF) and Fmoc-arginine (Fmoc-R), and by incorporating hydroxyapatite (HAP) into the hydrogel matrix, a 3D scaffold was constructed for bone tissue regeneration.331 Stromal cell derived factor-1 (SDF-1) is a chemokine protein and is potentially used for periodontal tissue reconstruction. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) also perform a vital role in the regeneration of bones. Liang and coworkers standardized a biocompatible supramolecular hydrogel SDF-1/BMP-2/NapFFY by co-assembling hydrogelator NapFFY with SDF-1 and BMP-2 for regeneration and reconstruction of periodontal bone tissues (Fig. 31).332 In this case, the hydrogel Nap-Phe-Phe-Tyr-OH (NapFFY) was chosen as a soft biomaterial scaffold because it can cover the bone defect area well and changes its ECM-like structure that promoted the adhesion and proliferation of cells. When SDF-1 and BMP-2 were dissolved in PBS solution of NapFFY at pH 8.0 and 37 °C, followed by cooling, a transparent SDF-1/BMP-2/NapFFY supramolecular hydrogel with nanofibrillar morphology was formed. Thereafter, SDF-1 and BMP-2 loaded hydrogel was filled in the defect area of the bone, which were slowly released from the hydrogel matrix and initiated the periodontal bone regeneration process. A comparative study using different compositions of SDF-1 and BMP-2 with hydrogelator Nap-FFY (Fig. 31A and B) for regeneration and reconstruction of the periodontal bone defect area was performed. From the figure, it is apparent that hydrogel SDF-1/BMP-2/NapFFY was able to repair the bone defect area effectively within 8 weeks.
 Fig. 31  (A) Micro-CT images of the periodontal bone defect areas in the maxillae of rats of different groups (size of each bone defect is about 20 mm3). (B) Bone volume fractions of defect areas in different groups at 8 weeks. Data are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, compared with the Ctrl group. Not significant (ns): p > 0.05. Scale bar = 2 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
The combination of three distinct peptide based π-electron systems (oligo p-phenylenevinylene, quaterthiophene, and naphthalenediimide) form assemblies in aqueous medium under acidic conditions, was reported by Adams and coworkers.333 In this case, the oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) based peptides (OPV3) act as an energy donor upon photo-excitation and could funnel the energy to the quaterthiophene based peptide system (OT4-Ac) that acts as an acceptor (Fig. 32a–c). Again, the OT4-Ac unit serves as an electron donor in the excited-state to the naphthalenediimide based peptide (OT4-NDI) unit that acts as an acceptor here. The combination of electron donor–acceptor pairs and photonic donor–acceptor pairs within one nanostructure allows potentially simultaneous and/or sequential electron- and energy-transfer phenomenon, and supports the making of localized electric fields between the donor and acceptor units that come from the charge separation. In order to control the kinetics of assembly and the molecular ordering of binary peptide mixtures, the authors used a different assembly that could lower the pH of the peptide solutions at different rates. When the pH of a mixture of two peptide components having different pKa values is gradually decreased on slow hydrolysis by glucono-δ-lactone (GdL), then the self-sorting event is induced. Therefore, it is expected that on slowly decreasing the pH, a greater extent of protonation/charge screening for the higher pKa of peptides solutions trigger it to preferentially favor the formation of essentially self-sorted structures (Fig. 32b). The randomly co-assembled structure is obtained upon rapid addition of acid to the solutions of essentially dissolved peptide units; in this case, the universal protonation/charge screening of all peptides occurs, irrespective of the pKa.
 Fig. 32  (a) Molecular structures of the peptides studied herein and (b and c) diagrams of the potential energy (e.g., resonance-energy transfer (RET)) and electron-transfer events occurring within a two-component peptidic nanostructure with three π-electron units for (b) self-sorted and (c) randomly coassembled systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 333. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Oil spill recovery is a serious issue in the recent century due to the diverse bad effects of spilled oils on microorganisms and also on the ecosystem. Many techniques have been developed for this purpose. Aerogel is a porous material with a large surface area derived from a gel by substituting liquid solvents with air by keeping the network structure intact. Due to its large surface area and high porosity, the aerogel can separate oil–water mixtures easily by absorbing water from the mixtures and can be widely used as biocompatible absorbents. Yang et al. developed a novel peptide–polysaccharide co-assembled aerogel obtained from fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl-diphenylalanine (Fmoc-FF) peptide and polysaccharide konjac glucomannan (KGM) mixture.334 The author observed that the co-assembled hybrid aerogel possessing high porosity and hydrophobicity, and tunable architecture property exhibited good performance for the separation of a wide variety of oil–water mixtures (Fig. 33a–d).
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration showing the aerogel preparation and application. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
3.6 Peptide-functionalized or peptide-conjugated hydrogel
Recently, the development of supramolecular hydrogels from peptide functionalized or peptide conjugated or peptide appended molecular building blocks has gained immense interest in broad research fields.335–337 The functionalization on peptides or by peptides are carried out for improvement of various properties such as gelation stability,338,339 biocompatibility,340 efficacy of drug loading and release,341,342 antibacterial activities, detection abilities, non-cytotoxicity, cell culture properties,343 adhesive,344 charge transfer and electrical properties for different biomedical as well as biotechnological applications.345–350 The preparation of artificial biomimetic scaffolds by functionalizing peptide residues for cell delivery, adhesion, and growth have attracted special attention in tissue engineering applications in recent times.351–354 A self-delivery drug system is constructed by the formation of covalent bonds between the drug molecules and the self-assembling peptide residues. Liu and colleagues fabricated a biocompatible self-delivery drug system containing two antineoplastic drugs, a small molecule drug chlorambucil (CRB), and a peptide drug tyroservatide YSV (Fig. 34A and B).355 The authors reported that this molecular scaffold formed a stable nanofiber hydrogel against proteinase K degradation showing good cellular uptake performance in comparison to that of free molecules. This biocompatible hydrogel matrix also exhibits excellent antitumor efficiency both in vivo and in vitro. Xu and coworkers demonstrated a biocompatible self-assembling peptide hydrogel obtained from amphiphilic peptides and cell adhesive motifs, with the help of enzymatic functionalization and gelation techniques.356 They reported that amphiphiles containing Gln residues and an adhesive motif RGDS were conjugated onto the peptide nanofiber surface catalyzed by Transglutaminase (TGase). The TGase meditated conjugation rapidly generated the hydrogel by reducing electrostatic interactions among the nanofibers of the peptides. Furthermore, the introduction of the preosteoblast cells on the surface of bioactive gel, exhibits remarkable 3D migration and undergoes differentiation within the gel. Injury or damage to spinal cord causes permanent neurological damage. The implantation of biomaterial scaffolds and stem cells is considered to be a promising strategy for the treatment of spinal cord injury. In this regard, the removal of lost or damaged neurons by implantation with stem cells is considered as the best method but in the absence of extracellular matrix and other non-physiological microenvironment, the implanted cells struggle to survive and function. Therefore, the use of biomaterial scaffolds with or without stem cells for this purpose has attracted great attention. Tabata and co-workers developed a modified peptide matrix obtained from hyaluronic acid and an adhesive peptide PPFLMLLKGSTR for conferring its functions on mesenchymal stem cells and spinal cord tissue restoration.357 Hu and coworkers reported an antioxidant supramolecular hydrogel derived from feruloyl-modified peptide and glycol chitosan through a mild laccase-mediated crosslinking reaction (Fig. 35).358 The functionalization of feruloyl motifs into the gel matrix via covalent bonds exhibited antioxidant behavior, which prevented the harmful effect of free radicals existing in a cutaneous wound. Furthermore, the feruloyl-functionalized antioxidant hydrogel improved the cutaneous wound healing process.
 Fig. 34  (A) Chemical structure of CRB-FFE-YSV and optical image of the CRB-FFE-YSV hydrogel formed by the heating–cooling process; (B) schematic illustration for hydrogel formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 355. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the antioxidant hydrogel preparation via laccase-mediated crosslinking of FerFFK (1.0 wt%) and GC-Fer (1.0 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Fluorenyl-9-methoxycarbonyl (Fmoc)-functionalized peptides are known as one of the most studied low molecular weight gelators and form rigid hydrogels without the necessity of extra crosslinking agent, resulting in biocompatible hydrogel materials that mimic the extracellular matrices. The hydroxyapatite (HAP) is well known as an inorganic material and the incorporation of HAP into hydrogel matrices promotes the cellular growth of human osteoblasts, increases bone mineralization, and also supports angiogenic and osteogenic activity in the collagen matrix after subcutaneous ectopic imbedding in mice and also improves the mechanical properties of the composite material. HAP is able to create a high calcium ion layer and a faintly basic atmosphere, which can effectively promote osteoblast adhesion, matrix secretion, and proliferation. Xu et al. established the use of surface-induced self-assembly/hydrogelation of peptide based material as an effective method for the detection of enzymes in biological fluids including blood and cell lysates. They reported a clear PBS solution (pH = 7.4), at 0.5 wt% concentration of NBD–FFpY (Fig. 36). Interestingly, at the same concentration of NBD–FFpY, the solution is changed into NBD–FFY hydrogel after the addition of phosphatase (2 U mL−1) within 30 min, suggesting that the NBD-FFY molecule has excellent tendency to form self-assembling hydrogel (Fig. 36A–C). The rheological result obtained by dynamic time sweep experiment indicates rapid gel formation and from the dynamic frequency sweep experiment, they found that the storage modulus (G′) of the resulting gel is about 10 times greater than the loss modulus (G′′) value.359 The prepared glass plate was used for the detection of enzyme activity in complex fluids such as blood. For that case, the modified glass plates were immersed in PBS solution of NBD–FFpY (800 μM, 300 μL). Thereafter, blood samples (containing different concentrations of phosphatase) were added to the solutions (Fig. 36D). After incubation for 1 hour, the upper parts of the solutions were taken out for fluorescence experiment (Fig. 36E). From the figure, it has been shown that, the fluorescence intensity has gradually increased with the amounts of phosphatase present in the blood samples and the fluorescence intensity at the wavelength of 549 nm also showed a linear relationship with the concentration of enzymes (Fig. 36F). They also observed that when higher concentrations of enzyme were added to the blood, the amounts of deposition of yellowish NBD–peptide at the surface of the glass plates were larger. The enzyme activity was studied by naked eye by judging the color depth and thickness of the hydrogels at the surface of the glass plates (Fig. 36G).
 Fig. 36  (A) Chemical structures of peptides used in this study and schematic illustration of the enzyme-triggered conversion; (B) schematic illustration of the process for the preparation of a positively charged glass plate surface; (C) illustration for “surface-induced hydrogelation” at the modified glass plate surface. (D) Emission spectra of glass plates incubated with PBS solution of NBD-FFpY (800 μM, 300 μL) and 100 μL of blood with different concentrations of phosphatase at 1 h time point and (E) 100 μL of different cell lysates at 1 h time point; (F) linear relationships between fluorescence intensity from the glass plates and enzyme concentration in the blood; (G) optical images of the glass plates for the samples after panels (D and E) treatments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Naphthalene diimide (NDI)-appended peptide amphiphile (PA) forms hydrogels by step-wise self-assembly through H-bonding among the peptide moiety, π-stacking between NDI, and hydrophobic interactions within the alkyl chain, which was reported by Das and co-workers (Fig. 37A–C).360 In this case, the incorporation of Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (RGDS) peptide fragment was carried out by considering its tumor homing and cell adhesion properties as well as its hydrophilicity that contributed an important role in gel formation. This peptide scaffold efficiently formed self-assembled hydrogels with fibrous morphology at physiological conditions, which exhibited non-toxicity and cell permeability, and can be used for cell imaging, with an extended biological application for measuring intracellular pH. Baek et al. reported a supramolecular hydrogel with nanofiber network constructed from nucleo-tripeptide hydrogels through Watson–Crick base pairing and π–π stacking interactions.361
 Fig. 37  (A) Chemical structure of PA-1 showing different interactions and functional sites in the molecule, (B) photograph of a 2 wt% (16.9 mM) hydrogel of PA-1 in water under UV light, and (C) pictorial representation of the stepwise hierarchical aggregation of PA-1 to form a hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.7 Metal-coordinated and metal nanoparticle peptide hydrogels
Amino acids and peptide residues with various functional groups present in their side chains are considered as good candidates for chelating metal ions. Like other non-covalent interactions, the metal–ligand interaction is responsible for the formation of metal-coordinated supramolecular metallo-hydrogel and there are a large number of research articles based on metallo-hydrogels that have been developed for different applications.362 Furthermore, the fabrication of metal coordinated peptide hydrogels has achieved improvement in different functional properties, which facilitate chemical and biochemical applications.363
Banerjee and colleagues reported metallo-hydrogel formation at pH 6.6 in the presence of Fe3+ and Hg2+ ions using histidine-based amphiphile (AM1) (Fig. 38a and b).364 In this case, the imidazole residue present in the histidine scaffold plays a crucial role in metal-ion binding. The authors demonstrated that both amphiphilic and metal ion induced hydrogels exhibit catalytic activity towards ester hydrolysis. The catalytic activity of ferric ion coordinated hydrogel was found to be better than that of self-assembling hydrogel of AM1. Gazit and coworkers investigated the effect of metal ions on the inhibition of amyloid-like β-sheet dipeptide self-assembly. They reported that variation in the ratio of metal ion/dipeptide mixture caused structural transformation from β-sheet to random coil or superhelix. The positive charge of the metal/dipeptide complex induced by gelation exhibited excellent binding ability of DNA and diffusion capability in vitro.365
 Fig. 38  (a) Chemical structure of amphiphile AM1; (b) FeCl3- and HgCl2-induced hydrogel of compound AM1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 364. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Formation of supramolecular metallo-hydrogel with a nanofibrous morphology upon the interaction of histidine with Zn2+ ions in alkaline medium and the proposed structure of the complex formed upon interaction of histidine with Zn2+ ions. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Fei and coworkers developed a peptide hydrogel whose antibacterial activity was induced by coordination of Ag+ ions with a histidine-containing aliphatic peptide along with a conformational transformation from antiparallel to parallel β-sheet. They observed that the resultant Ag coordinated peptide hydrogel can substantially enhance the mechanical stability as well as controlled release of Ag+.366 Pal and colleagues fabricated a multi-stimuli responsive, thixotropic, self-healing metallo-hydrogel by coordination of Zn+ ions with histidine residue (Fig. 38c).367 The authors found that Zn-mediated peptide metallo-hydrogel exhibited tunable chirality by changing the ratio of the two chiral species, L- and D-amino acids.
Another research group, Zhong and colleagues, fabricated a new class of histidine encompassing hexapeptide derivatives (Nap-1 and ID-1), which are able to form in situ hydrogels at the prostate tissue containing higher proportion of zinc ions.368 Again, ID-1 motif was chosen for further conjugation with a prostate cancer drug bicalutamide (BLT), resulting in ID-1-BLT scaffold showing ability of self-assembly with zinc ions and also at the prostate site. The authors demonstrated that the biocompatible ID-1-BLT hydrogel matrix was capable of sustained release of drugs at the prostate cancer site, with a superior in situ drug distribution profile compared to that of aqueous solution of BLT alone.
The development of nanoparticles for therapeutics, mainly for drug carrier, has gained immense interest in nanotechnology and biomedical fields because the produced nanoparticles exhibit excellent drug delivery efficiency with lower adverse side effects. The synthesis of nanoparticles in the supramolecular peptide–hydrogel matrix has received great attention in the recent decade.369 Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are known as biocompatible materials compared to other metal nanoparticles due to their antioxidant activity, physicochemical properties, and low toxicity to mammalian cells, which can be used in the production of the hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) to kill bacterial cells such as Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. In this regard, it is very important to establish a stable biocompatible AgNPs for the reduction of cellular toxicity in health care as well as in biomedical applications. Different nanocomposite materials have been constructed to stabilize AgNPs for biomedical applications. Ko and colleagues developed a N-terminally Nap-protected tripeptide (Nap-FFC) based supramolecular system that produced a stable and transparent silver nanoparticle-based hydrogel (Fig. 39).370 Herein, the naphthalene (Nap)-protected tripeptide nanofibrous framework was used for the mineralization and stabilization of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) produced in situ. The authors reported that the nanocomposite hydrogel (AgNPs@Nap-FFC) exhibited long term stability, excellent monodispersity, and functional flexibility than that of the other AgNP based nanocomposites. The nanocomposite hydrogels exhibit strong inhibition against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria and they also exhibit good cell viability towards human cervical carcinoma cells. A series of novel dehydropeptide-based magnetogels possessing manganese ferrite nanoparticles were developed by Castanheira and colleagues.371 They observed that magnetogels efficiently delivered two anti-tumor fluorescent drugs such as thienopyridine derivative and curcumin.
 Fig. 39  Schematic illustration for the preparation process of the AgNPs@Nap-FFC nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 370. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Protein hydrogels
Proteins are bio-macromolecules composed of one or more polypeptide residues, which are essential building blocks of all living organisms. Each and every protein residue has a unique feature together with a new functional property and the most of the proteins available in the environment are synthesized by nature itself. Nowadays, a variety of artificial proteins are being prepared synthetically by varying the amino acid sequence in the long chains of peptide for different biomedical applications. Recent research greatly focuses on the development of biocompatible and biodegradable protein hydrogels because of their increasing significance in the field of biomaterials for their biomedical applications in therapeutic delivery and tissue engineering.372–382 The physically crosslinked networks are developed by protein domains, which lead to stimuli responsive behavior of protein-hydrogels383,384 in the presence of external stimuli such as, pH, redox, light, and enzyme, which has drawn considerable attention in research fields in recent times.
Nature-derived protein hydrogels (extracted from nature) have been widely studied in the chemical and biochemical fields.385–387 Soy protein isolate (SPI), the most abundant nature-derived plant protein, can form a hydrogel and is widely used as a promising material for biotechnological and biomedical applications. Dutta and co-workers established the structure–property relationship of photo-cross-linked SPI and SPI/silk fibroin (SF) hybrid hydrogels.388 Liu et al. fabricated a protein composite hydrogel obtained from a functional component polyethyleneimine (PEI) and soy protein isolate (SPI) for the selective removal of copper ion from aqueous solution.389
A shear-thinning injectable protein hydrogel with excellent encapsulation and long-term delivery efficacy was developed by Huang and coworkers for cell transplantation. The prepared hydrogel was able to protect from cell membrane damage during syringe flow and its crosslinking network was formed in situ, providing a reinforcing network to improve cell retention.390 Fibroin is a nature-derived insoluble protein, available in silk extracted from cocoons of Bombyx mori and other moths, having potential uses in biocompatible and biodegradable hydrogels for biomedical applications.391 Tannic acid is a biocompatible natural plant-derived polyphenol molecule and has antibacterial, antioxidative, and anti-inflammatory activities. Li and coworkers developed a multifunctional hybrid hydrogel from silk fibroin protein and tannic acid.392 They reported that the protein–hybrid hydrogel was produced from hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, and π–π stacking interactions. The resulting hydrogel exhibited a number of advantageous properties such as shear thinning, thixotropic, and good cell adhesive properties. More importantly, due to functionalization with tannic acid, the hybrid hydrogel scaffolds showed antibacterial activity towards both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria in vitro. Highly biocompatible and injectable hybrid hydrogels with inherent antibacterial and antioxidant activity are also beneficial for improving wound healing. Cha and colleagues developed a nature-derived, mechanically stable, silk-like protein hydrogel extracted from sea anemone. The authors reported that this protein hydrogel showed adequate swelling ability and microstructure, which are useful for facilitating mass transport and cell proliferation.393
Hydrogels made from coiled-coil proteins are reversible; they can be disassembled and reassembled rapidly by external stimuli such as temperature or mechanical stress. Rapp et al. reported the use of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) to characterize the interplay between strand exchange and chain mobility in associative protein hydrogels.394 The hydrogels were obtained from an engineered triblock protein (designated “PEP”) having two identical coiled-coil domains (“P”) at the C- and N- termini, flanking a water-soluble midblock (“E”) having elastin-like polypeptide repeats (Fig. 40A and B). The P domain is obtained from the N-terminal fragment of rat cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP), which produces homopentameric coiled-coil bundles. The reversible assemblies of PEP produced from the association of P domains are converted into optically transparent, physically cross-linked networks. The viscoelastic nature of PEP networks is similar to that of other assembled networks due to the association of coiled-coil domains. Herein, the authors used FRAP for determining the diffusion coefficients and equilibrium binding constants of fluorescently labeled PEP chains present in the PEP hydrogels. They observed that the reversible network association reduced the mobility of PEP chains significantly. They also demonstrated that the mobility of the tracer chain was highly sensitive to structural changes in the coiled-coil end blocks.
 Fig. 40  Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching in labeled PEP hydrogels. (A) Labeling of PEP hydrogels was achieved by the addition of a fluorescent PEP analogue (PECP-f5m) at low concentrations. (B) FRAP in 10% w/v PEP hydrogels as monitored by confocal microscopy. A circular bleach spot with a radius (a) of 12.5 μm recovers slowly over a period of 30 min (blue curve). The same network solubilized in 8 M urea shows accelerated fluorescence recovery (red curve). Scale bar 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
4.1 Protein based polymer hydrogels
Proteins have also been conjugated to larger synthetic polymeric backbones in order to create a wider range of supramolecular hybrid materials and nanostructures, including protein–polymer hybrid hydrogels, fibrils, spherulities, and micells. PEG is an attractive component in hydrogels and has been extensively investigated for 3D cell culture, and is widely used in large number of clinical and pharmaceutical applications.395 Keratin is a family of natural fibrous protein mainly found in wool, hair, horn, nail, hooves of mammals, and bird feathers. Keratin comprises peptide sequences and secondary structures that interact with the surface of the cell receptors to support cell adhesion, differentiation, and maturation. Jabbari and co-workers reported an injectable and photo-polymerizable hydrogel from keratin, extracted from poultry feather, for the encapsulation and delivery of stem cells in tissue regeneration.396
5. Summary and scope of future work
So far, we have portrayed a broad picture on recent advances on polymer and peptide hydrogels developed in the past few years. The progress in polymer hydrogels is discussed by classifying them into three categories, for e.g., (i) cross-linking polymer hydrogel, (ii) conducting polymer hydrogel and (iii) natural polymer hydrogel. The crosslinking polymer hydrogels are discussed in the subheading of chemically cross-linked polymer hydrogel, formed by covalent crosslinking; physically cross-linked polymer hydrogel formed by non-covalent interactions and hybrid double network polymer hydrogels, where the hybrid gels, are formed both by chemical and physical crosslinking processes among the components. All these types of gels have different applications both from the biomedical and technological viewpoints such as shape memory, 3D printing, and self-healing. The conducting gels are classified mainly as ion and electronic conducting gels and the recent progress in the gels are summarized with concrete examples of different classes of conducting gels, extending their applications in ionic skin, energy harvester on different stimuli, artificial skin sensor, blood pressure sensor, photovoltaics, supercapacitor, Li+ ion battery, polymer robotics, etc. In natural polymer hydrogels, mainly the gelation behavior of various carbohydrate polymers, for e.g., cellulose and chitosan, in the presence of different solvents, ions, nanoparticles, etc., are discussed, extending their applications in targeted drug delivery, tissue engineering, cartilage regeneration, cell adhesion, etc.
In peptide hydrogels, we have discussed the recent advances in the gelation properties of different peptides, for e.g., dipeptide, tri-, tetra-, penta-, hexa-, oligo, and polypeptides. Apart from their preparation procedures, the properties, their uses in biomedical fields, for e.g., drug delivery, tissue engineering, biosensors, protein separation, and wound healing are delineated very well. In peptide-based hybrid hydrogels, in the presence of polymer, oligonucleotide, amino acids, fullerene, metallic nanoparticles, etc., are discussed, showing applications in drug delivery, photoacoustic imaging, catalyst, photodynamic therapy, etc. In the co-assembled hybrid hydrogels having two different peptides, fluorophores are tagged with the peptide, extending their uses in cell imaging, bone tissue engineering, etc. Due to the good biocompatibility of peptides, different drugs are loaded by covalent/noncovalent bonding and released at the targeted area by different stimuli. The peptide hydrogels are used for the detection of enzymes in biological fluids including blood and cell lysates. Thus, in short, the peptide hydrogels have found enormous practical applications in biomedical field.
While there is already a substantial progress in polymer gels, there is still enough room for future developments. In polymer gels, new research is required to develop polymer solar cells with high efficiency using different nanoparticles as acceptor and polymers as donor, vis-a-vis, efficient polymeric supercapacitor of xerogels derived from the hydrogels as in the hydrogel, intimate mixing of the components takes place. Hybrid polymer hydrogels may be produced with two different polymers using in situ polymerization techniques, which can generate new properties of the hydrogels that are not present in single polymer hydrogels, with an expectation of high mechanical and stimuli-responsive property. In polymer hydrogels, LMWGs can be used to act as concomitant gelators, importing both stimuli-responsiveness with good mechanical property. These hydrogels could act as suitable candidates for biomedical and electronic applications. Different carbon nanomaterials, e.g., carbon nanotubes, carbon dots, graphene, etc., can be introduced into the polymer gels to enhance their mechanical and optoelectronic properties as the above nano-materials can reinforce the properties of the polymer hydrogels for large surface area and synergistic interaction between the components. The conductivity and capacitance properties of such hybrid systems are expected to increase significantly. Besides, the hybrid hydrogels can be used for drug delivery and also for cell imaging and tissue engineering applications. Also, the applications of the conducting hybrid hydrogels can be extended to produce artificial skin, soft robotics, tissue generation, 3D printing, etc.
In peptide hydrogels, there is immense scope for future work as they have low toxicity and biocompatibility. Special attention can be given to peptide-based hybrid hydrogels. The mixing of different water-soluble polymers with the peptide hydrogels would not only improve the mechanical properties but also enhance the stimuli responsivity, optoelectronic property, etc. Recently, there have been many newly discovered water-soluble conducting polymers and making hybrid hydrogels of these polymers with the peptide hydrogels would impart new optoelectronic properties, which would be suitable for monitoring different biological processes. Apart from mixing with the polymer, metallic and carbon nanoparticles can be mixed to produce hybrid peptide gels having synergistic properties. The optical property of the nanoparticles together with the biocompatibility of peptides can be used in practical applications, particularly for cell imaging, tissue engineering, and cell growth apart from drug delivery applications. As far as our intuitions are concerned, hybrid polymer or hybrid peptide gels would certainly become the most important area of material science, promising its use as soft materials in both biomedical and technological applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge SERB (grant number EMR/2016/005302) and CSIR (ES grant number 21(1055)/18-EMR-II) for financial support. S. D. acknowledges CSIR, New Delhi for the fellowship.
References

          J. M. Guenet, Thermoreversible Gelation of Polymers and Biopolymers, Academic Press, London,  1992 Search PubMed.
P. Terech and R. G. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 3133 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Chakraborty, S. Das and A. K. Nandi, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 189–219 CrossRef CAS.
N. M. Sangeetha and U. Maitra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 821–836 RSC.
S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1973–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Roy, P. Bairi and A. K. Nandi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1708–1734 RSC.
X. Du, J. Zhou, J. Shi and B. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13165–13307 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. K. Dikshit and A. K. Nandi, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 8886–8892 CrossRef CAS.
T. Jana and A. K. Nandi, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5768–5774 CrossRef CAS.
T. Vikki, J. Ruokolainen and O. Ikkala, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 4064–4072 CrossRef CAS.
A. Shukla, A. P. Singh, T. Dubey, S. Hemalatha and P. Maiti, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 1762–1771 CrossRef CAS.
P. J. P. Yadav, G. Ghosh, B. Maiti, V. K. Aswal, P. S. Goyal and P. Maiti, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 4594–4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Tanaka, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2005, 30, 1–9 CrossRef CAS.
K. Imato, T. Ohishi, M. Nishihara, A. Takahara and H. Otsuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11839–11845 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
O. Wichterle and D. Lim, Nature, 1960, 185, 117–118 CrossRef.
Y. Park, C. Hashimoto, T. Hashimoto, Y. Hirokawa, Y. M. Jung and Y. Ozaki, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3587–3602 CrossRef CAS.
G. Su, T. Zhou, X. Liu and Y. Ma, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 865–878 RSC.
L. Xu, L. Qiu, Y. Sheng, Y. Sun, L. Deng, X. Li, M. Bradley and R. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 510–517 RSC.
D. Das, P. Ghosh, S. Dhara, A. B. Panda and S. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4791–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. M. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Y. Yuan, H. Y. Han, T. Li, L. Li and X. H. Guo, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 152, 252–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Ganguly, S. Mondal, P. Das, P. Bhawal, P. P. Maity, S. Ghosh, S. Dhara and N. C. Das, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 111, 983–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Roy, P. P. Maity, S. Dhara and S. Pal, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 45939 CrossRef.
X. Li, T. Kurokawa, R. Takahashi, M. A. Haque, Y. Yue, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS.
C. M. Ji, H. N. Xu and W. Wu, J. Biomater. Appl., 2009, 23, 311–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. L. Sun, T. Kurokawa, S. Kuroda, A. B. Ihsan, T. Akasaki, K. Sato, M. A. Haque, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 932–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. H. Su, L. Y. Jia, X. Q. Zhang, Y. L. Zhang, P. C. Deng and T. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 23013–23024 RSC.
H. J. Zhang, T. L. Sun, A. K. Zhang, Y. Ikura, T. Nakajima, T. Nonoyama, T. Kurokawa, O. Ito, H. Ishitobi and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4884–4890 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Hu, Z. Du, X. Deng, T. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Zhou and C. Wang, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5660–5668 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Liang, J. Xue, B. Du and J. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5441–5454 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Deng, T. Ngai and C. Wang, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 641–646 CrossRef CAS.
M. Zhong, X.-Y. Liu, F.-K. Shi, L.-Q. Zhang, X.-P. Wang, A. G. Cheetham, H. Cui and X.-M. Xie, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 4235–4241 RSC.
Y. Li, N. Khuu, A. Gevorkian, S. Sarjinsky, H. Therien-Aubin, Y. Wang, S. Cho and E. Kumacheva, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6083–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Guo, L. M. Pitet, H. M. Wyss, M. Vos, P. Y. W. Dankers and E. W. Meijer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6969–6977 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Liu, Q.-J. Yuan, G. Hollett, W. Zhao, Y. Kang and J. Wu, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3436–3449 RSC.
K. Wei, M. Zhu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, Q. Feng, S. Lin, T. Wu, J. Xu, F. Tian, J. Xia, G. Li and L. Bian, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 866–875 CrossRef CAS.
C. Loebel, C. B. Rodell, M. H. Chen and J. A. Burdick, Nat. Protoc., 2017, 12, 1521–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Q. Chen, H. Chen, L. Zhu and J. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3654–3676 RSC.
J. P. Gong, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2583–2590 RSC.
J. Sun, X. Zhao, W. R. Illeperuma, O. Chaudhuri, K. H. Oh, D. J. Mooney, J. J. Vlassak and Z. G. Suo, Nature, 2012, 489, 133 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Guo, J. Duan, S. Wu, J. Guo, C. Huang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8446–8450 RSC.
X. X. Le, W. Lu, J. Zheng, D. Y. Tong, N. Zhao, C. X. Ma, H. Xiao, J. W. Zhang, Y. J. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6715–6720 RSC.
D. Zhao, J. Huang, Y. Zhong, K. Li, L. Zhang and J. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6279–6287 CrossRef CAS.
Q. Chen, L. Zhu, L. Huang, H. Chen, K. Xu, Y. Tan, P. Wang and J. Zheng, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2140–2148 CrossRef CAS.
L. Ouyang, C. B. Highley, C. B. Rodell, W. Sun and J. A. Burdick, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1743–1751 CrossRef CAS.
S. Azevedo, A. M. S. Costa, A. Andersen, I. S. Choi, H. Birkedal and J. F. Mano, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700759 CrossRef PubMed.
J. Guo, R. Zhang and L. Zhang, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 442–446 CrossRef CAS.
D. Xu, J. Huang, D. Zhao, B. Ding, L. Zhang and J. Cai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5844–5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Wang, T. Li, F. Chen, D. Zhou, B. Li, X. Zhou, T. Gan, S. Handschuh-Wang and X. Zhou, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800143 CrossRef PubMed.
C. Yang and Z. Suo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 125–142 CrossRef CAS.
C. Keplinger, J.-Y. Sun, C. C. Foo, P. Rothemund, G. M. Whitesides and Z. Suo, Science, 2013, 341, 984–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Y. Sun, C. Keplinger, G. M. Whitesides and Z. Suo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7608–7614 CrossRef CAS.
B. Chen, Y. Bai, F. Xiang, J. Y. Sun, Y. Mei Chen, H. Wang, J. Zhou and Z. Suo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 1055–1060 CrossRef CAS.
F. B. Madsen, A. E. Daugaard, S. Hvilsted and A. L. Skov, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 378–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. M. Opris, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703678 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Zhang, Z. Gao, Y. Wang, L. Guo, C. Yin, X. Zhang, J. Hao, G. Zhang and L. Chen, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 2531–2541 CrossRef CAS.
T. Li, G. Li, Y. Liang, T. Cheng, J. Dai, X. Yang, B. Liu, Z. Zeng, Z. Huang and Y. Luo, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602045 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Pharr, J.-Y. Sun and Z. Suo, Rupture of a highly stretchable acrylic dielectric elastomer, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 104114 CrossRef.
K. Parida, V. Kumar, W. Jiangxin, V. Bhavanasi, R. Bendi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702181 CrossRef PubMed.
N. Yang, P. Qi, J. Ren, H. Yu, S. Liu, J. Li, W. Chen, D. L. Kaplan and S. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23632–23638 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Pu, M. Liu, X. Chen, J. Sun, C. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700015 CrossRef PubMed.
W. Xu, L. B. Huang, M. C. Wong, L. Chen, G. Bai and J. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601529 CrossRef.
C. H. Yang, B. Chen, J. J. Lu, J. H. Yang, J. Zhou, Y. M. Chen and Z. Suo, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2015, 3, 59 CrossRef.
Z. Lei, Q. Wang, S. Sun, W. Zhu and P. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700321 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Lei, Q. Wang and P. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 694–700 RSC.
Z. Lei and P. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1134 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Lei and P. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12860–12868 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. B. Schroeder, A. Guha, A. Lamoureux, G. VanRenterghem, D. Sept, M. Shtein, J. Yang and M. Mayer, Nature, 2017, 552, 214 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Y. He, C. Y. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. L. Zhang, L. Q. Liu and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11134–11143 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC.
F. Zhao, Y. Shi, L. Pan and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1734–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. Zhao, J. Bae, X. Zhou, Y. Guo and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801796 CrossRef.
Y. Guo, J. Bae, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 335–348 CrossRef.

          A. G. MacDiarmid and X. Tang, US Pat., 147913,  1992, vol. 5 Search PubMed.
L. J. Pan, G. H. Yu, D. Y. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. T. Zhao, N. Liu, H. L. Wang, B. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. N. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Shi, C. Ma, L. Peng and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1219–1225 CrossRef CAS.
W. Li, F. Gao, X. Wang, N. Zhang and M. Ma, Angew. Chem., 2016, 55, 9196–9201 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Dong, X. Zhao, B. Guo and P. X. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17138–17150 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Zhou, Y. He, Q. Xu, Q. E. Zhang, A. A. Zhou, Z. Lu, L.-K. Yang, Y. Jiang, D. Ge, X. Y. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5888–5894 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G.-P. Hao, F. Hippauf, M. Oschatz, F. M. Wisser, A. Leifert, W. Nickel, N. Mohamed-Noriega, Z. Zheng and S. Kaskel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7138–7146 CrossRef CAS.
H. Huang, X. Zeng, W. Li, H. Wang, Q. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16516–16522 RSC.
J. W. Luo, W. B. Zhong, Y. B. Zou, C. L. Xiong and W. T. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 73–81 CrossRef CAS.
H. J. Ding, M. J. Zhong, Y. J. Kim, P. Pholpabu, A. Balasubramanian, C. M. Hui, H. K. He, H. Yang, K. Matyjaszewski and C. J. Bettinger, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4348–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Zhao, P. Li, B. Guo and P. X. Ma, Acta Biomater., 2015, 26, 236–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Duan, X. Liang, J. Guo, K. Zhu and L. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8037–8044 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Jiang, W. Luo, R. Zong, W. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Zhu, Small, 2016, 12, 4370–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Jiang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, M. Zhang, W. Luo and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500502 CrossRef.
Y. Zou, R. Liu, W. Zhong and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8568–8578 RSC.
Y. Zou, Z. Zhang, W. Zhong and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9245–9256 RSC.
P. Li, Z. Jin, L. Peng, F. Zhao, D. Xiao, Y. Jin and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800124 CrossRef PubMed.
P. Bairi, P. Chakraborty, A. Shit, S. Mondal, B. Roy and A. K. Nandi, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7547–7555 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Chakraborty, P. Bairi, S. Mondal and A. K. Nandi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 13969–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Chakraborty, S. Das, S. Mondal and A. K. Nandi, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8093–8104 RSC.
S. Das, P. Chakraborty, S. Mondal, A. Shit and A. K. Nandi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28055–28067 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Das, P. Chakraborty, R. Ghosh, S. Paul, S. Mondal, A. Panja and A. K. Nandi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9325–9337 CrossRef CAS.
S. Das, R. Ghosh, P. Routh, A. Shit, S. Mondal, A. Panja and A. K. Nandi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2306–2316 CrossRef CAS.
S. Das, R. Ghosh, D. Mandal and A. K. Nandi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6642–6654 CrossRef CAS.
S. Das and A. K. Nandi, Macromol. Symp., 2019, 386, 1800242 CrossRef.
Y. Zhao, B. R. Liu, L. J. Pan and G. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856–2870 RSC.
L. Li, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Shi and G. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2920–2930 RSC.
Z. Ma, W. Shi, K. Yan, L. Pan and G. Yu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6232–6244 RSC.
D. Zhai, B. Liu, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Wang, B. Li, R. Zhang and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3540–3546 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Li, L. Pan, Z. Ma, K. Yan, W. Cheng, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3322–3327 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z. Ma, P. Chen, W. Cheng, K. Yan, L. Pan, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4570–4575 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. Wei, X. Lin, L. Li, S. Liang, S. Shang, M. C. Yuen and Y. Yu, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 2832–2836 RSC.
Z. Deng, Y. Guo, X. Zhao, P. X. Ma and B. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1729–1742 CrossRef CAS.
D. Gan, L. Han, M. Wang, W. Xing, T. Xu, H. Zhang, K. Wang, L. Fang and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36218–36228 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Shi, M. Wang, C. B. Ma, Y. Q. Wang, X. P. Li and G. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6276–6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Q. Wang, Y. Shi, L. J. Pan, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Shi and G. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7736–7741 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Shi, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, A. M. Bruck, A. C. Bond, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1906–1914 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Shi, J. Zhang, A. M. Bruck, Y. Zhang, J. Li, E. A. Stach, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok, E. S. Takeuchi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603922 CrossRef PubMed.
J. Chen, J. Liu, T. Thundat and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18720–18729 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Hur, K. Im, S. W. Kim, J. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T.-H. Kim, K. H. Jo, J. H. Hahn, Z. Bao, S. Hwang and N. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10066–10076 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. Chen, Q. Chen, Q. Song, H. Lu and M. Ma, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900133 CrossRef.
Q. Ding, X. Xu, Y. Yue, C. Mei, C. Huang, S. Jiang, Q. Wu and J. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27987–28002 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Chen, B. Kim, M. Nishino, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1232–1236 CrossRef CAS.
D. Mawad, E. Stewart, D. L. Officer, T. Romeo, P. Wagner, K. Wagner and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS.
T. Dai, X. Jiang, S. Hua, X. Wang and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4279–4281 RSC.
R. Du, Y. Xu, Y. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Zhang and G. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6287–6289 RSC.
D. Mawad, A. Artzy-Schnirman, J. Tonkin, J. Ramos, S. Inal, M. M. Mahat, N. Darwish, L. Zwi-Dantsis, G. G. Malliaras, J. J. Gooding, A. Lauto and M. M. Stevens, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6080–6088 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700974 CrossRef PubMed.
C. C. Shih, Y. C. Lin, M. Y. Gao, M. Wu, H. C. Hsieh, N. L. Wu and W. C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 205–215 CrossRef CAS.
S. Wang, G. Guo, X. Lu, S. Ji, G. Tan and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19133–19142 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Xu, X. Yang, A. K. Thomas, P. A. Patsis, T. Kurth, M. Kraeter, K. Eckert, M. Bornhaeuser and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14418–14425 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Xu, M. Cui, P. A. Patsis, M. Günther, X. Yang, K. Eckert and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7715–7724 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Cao, X. Tong, K. Dai and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8204–8209 RSC.
S. Das, P. Chakraborty, A. Shit, S. Mondal and A. K. Nandi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4194–4210 RSC.
S. Das, P. Chakraborty and A. K. Nandi, Macromol. Symp., 2016, 369, 119–124 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 738–762 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Jiang, B. Pei and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7775–7781 RSC.
B. Wang, W. A. Abdulla, D. Wang and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 869–875 RSC.
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C.-K. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Kalupson, D. Ma, C. A. Randall, R. Rajagopalan and K. Adu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2943–2952 CrossRef CAS.
L. J. del Valle, A. Díaz and J. Puiggalí, Gels, 2017, 3, 27 CrossRef PubMed.
L. Fu, J. Zhang and G. Yang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 92, 1432–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z. Shi, X. Gao, M. W. Ullah, S. Li, Q. Wang and G. Yang, Biomaterials, 2016, 111, 40–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Lin, C. Bruzzese and A. Dufresne, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4948–4959 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Syverud, S. R. Pettersen, K. Draget and G. Chinga-Carrasco, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 473–481 CrossRef CAS.
J. Yang, F. Xu and C. R. Han, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1019–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Yang and C. R. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25621–25630 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Chen, N. Lin, J. Huang and A. Dufresne, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4385–4395 RSC.
Y. Li, S. Wang, R. Huang, Z. Huang, B. Hu, W. Zheng, G. Yang and X. Jiang, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 780–789 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Huang, X. Chen, T. X. Nguyen, H. Tang, L. Zhang and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2976–2984 RSC.
X. Gao, Z. Shi, A. Lau, C. Liu, G. Yang and V. V. Silberschmidt, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 62, 130–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Liu, L. Rong, B. Wang, R. Xie, X. Sui, H. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhong and Z. Mao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 176, 299–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Shen, J. L. Shamshina, P. Berton, G. Gurau and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 53–75 RSC.
Z. F. Sun, F. C. Lv, L. J. Cao, L. Liu, Y. Zhang and Z. G. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7944–7948 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Ravishankar, H. Kanniyappan, K. M. Shelly, V. Muthuvijayan and R. Dhamodharan, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11582–11585 RSC.
F. Wahid, H.-S. Wang, C. Zhong and L.-Q. Chu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 165, 455–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. You, S. Xie, J. Cao, H. Ge, M. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhou, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1049–1059 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Ding, D. Li, C. Shen and F.-J. Xu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800069 CrossRef PubMed.
X. Jing, H. Y. Mi, B. N. Napiwocki, X. F. Peng and L. S. Turng, Carbon, 2017, 125, 557–570 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Chen, L. Huang, X. Dai, Q. Tian, M. Yu, M. Agheb, K. R. Boheler and H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9291–9299 RSC.
P. Yu, H.-Q. Wang, R.-Y. Bao, Z. Liu, W. Yang, B.-H. Xie and M.-B. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1557–1566 CrossRef CAS.
J. A. Burdick and G. D. Prestwich, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, H41–H56 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Shin, J. S. Lee, C. Lee, H.-J. Park, K. Yang and Y. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3814–3824 CrossRef CAS.
H. Jung, J. S. Park, J. Yeom, N. Selvapalam, K. M. Park, K. Oh, J.-A. Yang, K. H. Park, S. K. Hahn and K. Kim, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 707–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Fichman, T. Guterman, L. Adler-Abramovicha and E. Gazit, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8105–8112 RSC.
S. D. Bhagat and A. Srivastava, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4369–4373 RSC.
S. Gupta, M. Singh, A. Reddy M., P. S. Yavvari, A. Srivastava and A. Bajaj, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 19751–19757 RSC.
P. Tiwari, A. Basu, S. Sahu, S. Gound, R. M. Christman, A. K. Tiwari, P. Trivedi and A. Dutt Konar, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4915–4922 RSC.
D. F. Williams, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2941–2953 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          J. Buckle, Clinical Aromatherapy, Churchill Livingstone, 3rd edn,  2015 Search PubMed.

          R. Tisserand and R. Young, Essential Oil Safety, Churchill Livingstone, 2nd edn,  2014 Search PubMed.
V. A. Dixit, Toxicol. Res., 2019, 8, 157–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. H. Duffus, Pure Appl. Chem., 1993, 65, 2003–2122 CAS.
S. M. M. Reddy, G. Shanmugam, N. Duraipandy, M. S. Kiran and A. B. Mandal, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 8126–8140 RSC.
A. Rajbhandary, D. M. Raymond and B. L. Nilsson, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5803–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. M. Hashemnejad and S. Kundu, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 7769–7779 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Xie, R. Huang, W. Qi, Y. Wang, R. Sub and Z. He, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 844–851 RSC.
J. Chen, N. Tao, S. Fang, Z. Chen, L. Liang, X. Sun, J. Li and Y.-N. Liu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9651–9657 RSC.
S. Grijalvo, G. Puras, J. Zárate, R. Pons, J. L. Pedraz, R. Eritja and D. Díaz Díaz, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39688–39699 RSC.
D. M. Raymond, B. L. Abraham, T. Fujita, M. J. Watrous, E. S. Toriki, T. Takano and B. L. Nilsson, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 2116–2124 CrossRef CAS.
S. R. Nelli, R. D. Chakravarthy, Y.-M. Xing, J.-P. Weng and H.-C. Lin, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 8402–8407 RSC.
S. M. M. Reddy, P. Dorishetty, G. Augustine, A. P. Deshpande, N. Ayyadurai and G. Shanmugam, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 13504–13514 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. M. M. Reddy, G. Augustine, N. Ayyadurai and G. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 1382–1388 CrossRef CAS.
S. Basak, I. Singh, A. Banerjeec and H.-B. Kraatz, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 14461–14465 RSC.
S. Malik, S. K. Maji, A. Banerjee and A. K. Nandi, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2002, 1177–1186 RSC.
S. K. Maji, S. Malik, M. G. B. Drew, A. K. Nandi and A. Banerjee, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 4103–4108 CrossRef CAS.
V. R. Aldilla, S. Nizalapur, A. Martin, C. E. Marjo, A. Rich, E. Yee, P. Suwannakot, D. StC. Black, P. Thordarson and N. Kumar, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 13462–13471 RSC.
E. Mayans, G. Ballano, J. Casanovas, L. J. del Valle, M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, F. Estrany, A. I. Jiménez, J. Puiggalí, C. Cativiela and C. Alemán, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 5475–5488 RSC.
M. A. Ziganshin, A. S. Safiullina, S. A. Ziganshina, A. V. Gerasimov and V. V. Gorbatchuk, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13788–13797 RSC.
A. Z. Cardoso, L. L. E. Mears, B. N. Cattoz, P. C. Griffiths, R. Schweinsc and D. J. Adams, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 3612–3621 RSC.
F. Aviño, A. B. Matheson, D. J. Adams and P. S. Clegg, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 6342–6348 RSC.
Z. Yang, G. Liang and B. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 315–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Bian, H. Cai, Y. Cui, M. He, W. Cao, X. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Liang, Y. Fan and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3667–3674 RSC.
Y. Matsumoto, A. Shundo, M. Ohno, N. Tsuruzoe, M. Goto and K. Tanaka, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 7433–7440 RSC.
H. Vilaça, T. Castro, F. M. G. Costa, M. Melle-Franco, L. Hilliou, I. W. Hamley, E. M. S. Castanheira, J. A. Martins and P. M. T. Ferreira, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8607–8617 RSC.
C. Karavasili, A. Komnenou, O. L. Katsamenis, G. Charalampidou, E. Kofidou, D. Andreadis, S. Koutsopoulos and D. G. Fatouros, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 3386–3394 CrossRef CAS.
S. Das, R. Kumar, N. N. Jha and S. K. Maji, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700368 CrossRef PubMed.
S. Das, K. Zhou, D. Ghosh, N. N. Jha, P. K. Singh, R. S. Jacob, C. C. Bernard, D. I. Finkelstein, J. S. Forsythe and S. K. Maji, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e304 CrossRef CAS.
X. Zhou and Z. Li, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800020 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Conejero-Muriel, R. Contreras-Montoya, J. J. Díaz-Mochón, L. Álvarez de Cienfuegos and J. A. Gavira, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 8072 RSC.
H. Tao, Y. Wu, H. Li, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Li, T. Wen, X. Wang, Q. He, D. Wang and D. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17076–17087 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Li, J. Xu, X. Li, W. Gao, L. Wang, L. Wu, M. Lee and W. Li, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 5572–5580 RSC.
H. Zheng, T. Yoshitomi and K. Yoshimoto, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 538–543 CrossRef CAS.
D. Wang, Y. Sun, M. Cao, J. Wang and J. Hao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95604–95612 RSC.
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, R. Fei, C. Cao, M. Wang, J. Wang, J. Bai, H. Cox, T. Waigh, J. R. Lu and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17833–17841 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
V. R. Aldilla, A. D. Martin, S. Nizalapur, C. E. Marjo, A. M. Rich, K. K. K. Ho, L. M. Ittner, D. StC. Black, P. Thordarson and N. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6089–6098 RSC.
Md. M. Hassan, A. D. Martin and P. Thordarson, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 9269–9276 RSC.
A. D. Martin, J. P. Wojciechowski, H. Warren, M. in het Panhuisb and P. Thordarson, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 2700–2707 RSC.
R. Jain, G. Khandelwal and S. Roy, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 5878–5889 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Misra, A. Sharma, A. Shiras and H. N. Gopi, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 7762–7768 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. D. Martin, J. P. Wojciechowski, M. M. Bhadbhade and P. Thordarson, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 2245–2250 CrossRef CAS.
N. Brown, J. Lei, C. Zhan, L. J. W. Shimon, L. Adler-Abramovich, G. Wei and E. Gazit, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3253–3262 CrossRef CAS.
A. Baral, S. Roy, S. Ghosh, D. Hermida-Merino, I. W. Hamley and A. Banerjee, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1836–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. K. Gavel, H. S. Parmar, V. Tripathi, N. Kumar, A. Biswas and A. K. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2849–2859 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. K. Gavel, D. Dev, H. S. Parmar, S. Bhasin and A. K. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10729–10740 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Vilaça, A. C. L. Hortelão, E. M. S. Castanheira, M.-J. R. P. Queiroz, L. Hilliou, I. W. Hamley, J. A. Martins and P. M. T. Ferreira, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3562–3573 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Lian, X. Chen, Y. Lu and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25036–25042 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Lian, L. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Chen, W. Yang and T. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 12843–12849 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. McEwen, E. Y. Du, J. P. Mata, P. Thordarson and A. D. Martin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9412–9417 RSC.
S. Marchesan, K. E. Styan, C. D. Easton, L. Waddingtonb and A. V. Vargiuc, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 8123–8132 RSC.
D. Zheng, Z. Gao, T. Xu, C. Liang, Y. Shi, L. Wang and Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21459–21465 RSC.
J. K. Sahoo, C. Nazareth, M. A. VandenBerga and M. J. Webber, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 9168–9174 RSC.
M.-Y. Yeh, C.-T. Huang, T.-S. Lai, F.-Y. Chen, N.-T. Chu, D. T.-H. Tseng, S.-C. Hung and H.-C. Lin, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 7630–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. D. Mahapatra, J. Dey and R. G. Weiss, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12989–12999 CrossRef PubMed.
X. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Qi, R. Xing, X. Yang, Q. Xing, R. Su and Z. Hea, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 2981–2988 RSC.
A. P. McCloskey, M. Lee, J. Megaw, J. McEvoy, S. M. Coulter, S. Pentlavalli and G. Laverty, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 2584–2589 CrossRef CAS.
M. Tena-Solsona, B. Escuder and J. F. Miravet, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3358–3365 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Wang, C. Liang, F. Shi, T. He, C. Gong, L. Wang and Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14058–14064 RSC.
R. Liang, Z. Luo, G. Pu, W. Wu, S. Shi, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, H. Chen and X. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76093–76098 RSC.
Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Mei, Z. Jiang, Y. Feng, R. Gao, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 1519–1524 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Maiti, S. Bhattacharjee and S. Bhattacharya, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2223–2230 RSC.
J. D. Tang, C. Mura and K. J. Lampe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4886–4899 CrossRef CAS.
J. D. Tang, E. B. Roloson, C. D. Amelung and K. J. Lampe, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 2117–2121 CrossRef CAS.
K. F. Bruggeman, Y. Wang, F. L. Maclean, C. L. Parish, R. J. Williams and D. R. Nisbet, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13661–13669 RSC.
Y. Gao, C. Zhang, J. Chang, C. Yang, J. Liu, S. Fan and C. Ren, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 1477–1485 RSC.
Y. Qi, H. Min, A. Mujeeb, Y. Zhang, X. Han, X. Zhao, G. J. Anderson, Y. Zhao and G. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6972–6981 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Mei, S. He, L. Zhang, K. Xu and W. Zhong, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2019, 17, 939–944 RSC.
D. DiGuiseppi, J. Kraus, S. E. Toal, N. Alvarez and R. Schweitzer-Stenner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 10079–10090 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. M. Dao, J. Chen, B. S. Tucker, V. Thomas, H.-W. Jun, X.-C. Li and S. Jo, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2435–2442 CrossRef CAS.
E. T. Pashuck, B. J. R. Duchet, C. S. Hansel, S. A. Maynard, L. W. Chow and M. M. Stevens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11096–11104 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Pellach, S. Mondal, L. J. W. Shimon, L. Adler-Abramovich, L. Buzhansky and E. Gazit, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4341–4348 CrossRef CAS.
N. Hauptstein, L. M. D. Leon-Rodriguez, A. K. Mitra, Y. Hemar, I. Kavianinia, N. Li, V. Castelletto, I. W. Hamley and M. A. Brimble, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2733–2738 CrossRef CAS.
J. A. Hutchinson, I. W. Hamley, C. J. C. Edwards-Gayle, V. Castelletto, C. Piras, R. Cramer, R. Kowalczyk, J. Seitsonen, J. Ruokolainen and R. P. Rambo, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2019, 17, 4543–4553 RSC.
Y. Zheng, L. Yu, Y. Zou, Y. Yang and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5403–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Yang, H. Song, Y. Qin, P. Huang, C. Zhang, D. Kong and W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4377–4385 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Ma, Z. Li and K. Numata, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 697–706 CrossRef CAS.
T. Jiang, T. Wang, T. Li, Y. Ma, S. Shen, B. He and R. Mo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9693–9701 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. K. Restu, Y. Nishida, S. Yamamoto, J. Ishii and T. Maruyama, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 8065–8074 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Cheng, M.-C. Tang, C.-S. Wu, T. Simon and F.-H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19306–19315 CrossRef CAS.
C. Karavasili, D. A. Andreadis, O. L. Katsamenis, E. Panteris, P. Anastasiadou, Z. Kakazanis, V. Zoumpourlis, C. K. Markopoulou, S. Koutsopoulos, I. S. Vizirianakis and D. G. Fatouros, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2019, 16, 2326–2341 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. Raza, Y. Zhu, L. Chen, X. You, J. Zhang, A. Khan, M. W. Khan, M. Hasnat, H. Zafar, J. Wu and L. Ge, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2023–2036 RSC.
S. R. Leonard, A. R. Cormier, X. Pang, M. I. Zimmerman, H.-X. Zhou and A. K. Paravastu, Biophys. J., 2013, 105, 222–230 CrossRef CAS.
K. Nagy-Smith, Y. Yamadaa and J. P. Schneider, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1999–2007 RSC.
K. Nagy-Smith, P. J. Beltramo, E. Moore, R. Tycko, E. M. Furst and J. P. Schneider, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 586–597 CrossRef CAS.
S. Lindsey, J. H. Piatt, P. Worthington, C. Sönmez, S. Satheye, J. P. Schneider, D. J. Pochan and S. A. Langhans, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2672–2683 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. E. P. Sun, B. Stewart, A. Litan, S. J. Lee, J. P. Schneider, S. A. Langhans and D. J. Pochan, Biomater. Sci., 2016, 4, 839–848 RSC.
H. Geng, L. Ye, A.-Y. Zhang, J. Li and Z.-G. Feng, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 4586–4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Manchineella and T. Govindaraju, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 88–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Manchineella, N. Arul Murugan and T. Govindaraju, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3581–3590 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Tomasini and N. Castellucci, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 156–172 RSC.
J. Vagner, H. Qu and V. J. Hruby, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2008, 12, 292–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Zanna, A. Merlettini, G. Tatulli, L. Milli, M. L. Focarete and C. Tomasini, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 12240–12250 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Milli, N. Zanna, A. Merlettini, M. D. Giosia, M. Calvaresi, M. L. Focarete and C. Tomasini, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 12106–12112 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Zanna, S. Focaroli, A. Merlettini, L. Gentilucci, G. Teti, M. Falconi and C. Tomasini, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S.-T. Wang, Y. Lin, R. K. Spencer, M. R. Thomas, A. I. Nguyen, N. Amdursky, E. T. Pashuck, S. C. Skaalure, C. Yu Song, P. A. Parmar, R. M. Morgan, P. Ercius, S. Aloni, R. N. Zuckermann and M. M. Stevens, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8579–8589 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Matsumoto, A. Kawamura and T. Miyata, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 2136–2144 CrossRef CAS.
T. Kaneko, M. A. Ali, I. Captain, P. Perlinb and T. J. Deming, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3466–3472 RSC.
L. Lu, M. B. Parmar, M. Kulka, P. Kwan and L. D. Unsworth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6107–6117 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. Oveissi, S. Naficy, T. Y. L. Le, D. F. Fletcher and F. Dehghani, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 926–937 RSC.
M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, M. G. Edo, A. Díaz, J. Puiggalí and C. Alemán, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3182–3193 CrossRef.
Q. Xu, C. He, Z. Zhang, K. Ren and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30692–30702 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. K. Nguyen, B. Sarkar, Z. Siddiqui, M. McGowan, P. Iglesias-Montoro, S. Rachapudi, S. Kim, W. Gao, E. J. Lee and V. A. Kumar, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 865–870 CrossRef CAS.
X. Zhou and Z. Li, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800020 CrossRef.
J. Fan, R. Li, H. Wang, X. He, T. P. Nguyen, R. A. Letteri, J. Zou and K. L. Wooley, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 5145–5154 RSC.
I.-C. Li and J. D. Hartgerink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8044–8050 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. L. Francis, N. K. Bennett, A. Halikere, Z. P. Pang and P. V. Moghe, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1030–1038 CrossRef CAS.
H. Green, G. Ochbaum, A. Gitelman-Povimonsky, R. Bitton and H. Rapaport, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10072–10080 RSC.
Q. Xu, Z. Zhang, C. Xiao, C. He and X. Chen, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1411–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Yang, M.-H. Yao, R.-M. Jin, D.-H. Zhao, Y.-D. Zhao and B. Liu, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 2391–2398 CrossRef CAS.
Md. H. Turabee, T. Thambi, J. S. Lym and D. S. Lee, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 837–848 RSC.
M. Gkikas, R. K. Avery and B. D. Olsen, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 399–406 CrossRef CAS.
S. Xuan, C.-U. Lee, C. Chen, A. B. Doyle, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, V. T. John, D. Hayes and D. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 727–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. Zhao, Q. Tang, Q. Zhou, K. Peng, H. Yang and X. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 7420–7428 RSC.
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Hou, X. Cui, Y. Zhao and H. Xu, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3563–3571 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Bai, C. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Cox, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Penny, T. Waigh, J. R. Lu and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15093–15102 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Ghosh, R. Barman, J. Sarkar and S. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 5909–5915 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Han, J. Zhou, C. Liang, B. Liu, X. Pan, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Yan, W. Xie, F. Liu, X.-Y. Yu and Y. Li, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2920–2933 RSC.
H. T. West, C. M. Csizmar and C. R. Wagner, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2650–2656 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. U. Yaylaci, M. Sen, O. Bulut, E. Arslan, M. O. Guler and A. B. Tekinay, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 871–878 CrossRef CAS.
A. Dasgupta, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 4352–4360 RSC.
Y. Wan, Z. Wang, J. Sun and Z. Li, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 7512–7518 CrossRef CAS.
C. Redondo-Gómez, Y. Abdouni, C. R. Becer and A. Mata, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2276–2285 CrossRef PubMed.
C. Sinthuvanich, K. J. Nagy-Smith, S. T. R. Walsh and J. P. Schneider, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5643–5651 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Azoulaya and H. Rapaport, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3859–3867 RSC.
C. Martin, M. Dumitrascuta, M. Mannes, A. Lantero, D. Bucher, K. Walker, Y. V. Wanseele, E. Oyen, S. Hernot, A. V. Eeckhaut, A. Madder, R. Hoogenboom, M. Spetea and S. Ballet, J. Med. Chem., 2018, 61, 9784–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. T. J. Hwang, D. K. Shah, J. A. Garcia, G. C. Alexander, D.-J. Lim, W. Cui, D. K. Cooper, A. Shalev, T. Kin, J.-A. Kim and H.-W. Jun, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 2110–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. W. Fu and H. D. Nguyen, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2209–2219 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. R. Mehra, P. Tiwari, A. Basu and A. DuttKonar, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 11666–11678 RSC.
G. Cinar, A. Ozdemir, S. Hamsici, G. Gunay, A. Dana, A. B. Tekinay and M. O. Guler, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 67–76 RSC.
J. Mangelschots, M. Bibian, J. Gardiner, L. Waddington, Y. V. Wanseele, A. V. Eeckhaut, M. M. D. Acevedo, B. V. Mele, A. Madder, R. Hoogenboom and S. Ballet, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 437–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Nandi, K. Gayen, S. Ghosh, D. Bhunia, S. Kirkham, S. K. Sen, S. Ghosh, I. W. Hamley and A. Banerjee, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3621–3629 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Wan, L. Liu, S. Yuan, J. Sun and Z. Li, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3234–3240 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Qian, K. Kaur, J. C. Foster and J. B. Matson, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 1077–1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Sharma, H. Kaur and S. Roy, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2610–2624 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
V. Castelletto, A. Kaur, R. M. Kowalczyk, I. W. Hamley, M. Reza and J. Ruokolainen, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 2013–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Adak, S. Ghosh, V. Gupta and S. Ghosh, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 1889–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Adak, G. Das, S. Barman, S. Mohapatra, D. Bhunia, B. Jana and S. Ghosh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5067–5076 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Tsuzuki, M. Kabumoto, H. Arakawa and M. Ikeda, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 4595–4600 RSC.
G. Li, Y. Wang, L. Wang, A. Song and J. Hao, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12100–12109 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Chakraborty, T. Guterman, N. Adadi, M. Yadid, T. Brosh, L. Adler-Abramovich, T. Dvir and E. Gazit, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 163–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Li, G. Pu, X. Yu, S. Shi, J. Yu, W. Zhao, Z. Luo, Z. He and H. Chen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 62434–62438 RSC.
B. Cheng, Y. Yan, J. Qi, L. Deng, Z.-W. Shao, K.-Q. Zhang, B. Li, Z. Sun and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12474–12484 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Hoa San, J. N. Hwang, S. Sampath, Y. Li, L. L. Bennink and S. M. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16640–16649 CrossRef PubMed.
H. Li, J. Gao, Y. Shang, Y. Hua, M. Ye, Z. Yang, C. Ou and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24459–24468 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Zhan and D. W. P. M. Löwik, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808505 CrossRef.
R. D. Mahapatra, J. Dey and R. G. Weiss, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 433–441 RSC.
H. Jin, G. Zhao, J. Hu, Q. Ren, K. Yang, C. Wan, A. Huang, P. Li, J.-P. Feng, J. Chen and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25755–25766 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Jin, C. Wan, Z. Zou, G. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y. Geng, T. G. Chen, A. Huang, F. Jiang, J.-P. Feng, J. F. Lovell, J. Chen, G. Wu and K. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3295–3310 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. E. Miles, E. A. Mitchell, N. Kapur, P. A. Beales and R. K. Wilcox, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3225–3231 RSC.
S. Yousaf, P. J. S. King, A. F. Miller, A. Saiani, D. J. Clarke, L. T. Trivoluzzi, H. S. Aojula and E. V. Bichenkova, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 10016–10025 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Wu, J. Liu, B. Liu, S. He, G. Dai, B. Xu and W. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3134–3142 RSC.
M. Abbas, R. Xing, N. Zhang, Q. Zou and X. Yan, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2046–2052 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Q. Zou, R. Xing, T. Jiao and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 7335–7342 RSC.
R.-M. Jin, M.-H. Yao, J. Yang, D.-H. Zhao, Y.-D. Zhao and B. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9841–9847 CrossRef CAS.
D. Iglesias, M. Melle-Franco, M. Kurbasic, M. Melchionna, M. Abrami, M. Grassi, M. Prato and S. Marchesan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5530–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. K. Wychowaniec, M. Iliut, M. Zhou, J. Moffat, M. A. Elsawy, W. A. Pinheiro, J. A. Hoyland, A. F. Miller, A. Vijayaraghavan and A. Saiani, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2731–2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. He, F. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Fang and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18066–18074 RSC.
J. W. Ko, W. S. Choi, J. Kim, S. K. Kuk, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3551–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Li, N. L. McRae, D. R. McCulloch, M. Boyd-Moss, C. J. Barrow, D. R. Nisbet, N. Stupka and R. J. Williams, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 825–837 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. R. Nelli, R. D. Chakravarthy, Md. Mohiuddin and H.-C. Lin, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14753–14759 RSC.
K. Matsumoto, A. Shundo, M. Ohno, K. Saruhashi, N. Miyachi, N. Tsuruzoe and K. Tanaka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26724–26730 RSC.
S. Biswas and A. K. Das, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 2383–2391 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. R. Nelli, J.-H. Lin, T. N. A. Nguyen, D. T.-H. Tseng, S. K. Talloj and H.-C. Lin, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1229–1234 RSC.
C. Guo, Z. A. Arnon, R. Qi, Q. Zhang, L. Adler-Abramovich, E. Gazit and G. Wei, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8316–8324 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Diaferia, M. Ghosh, T. Sibillano, E. Gallo, M. Stornaiuolo, C. Giannini, G. Morelli, L. Adler-Abramovich and A. Accardo, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 487–496 RSC.
K. Kulkarni, J. Hung, A. J. Fulcher, A. H. P. Chan, A. Hong, J. S. Forsythe, M.-I. Aguilar, S. G. Wise and M. P. D. Borgo, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 3843–3847 CrossRef CAS.
R. Xing, S. Li, N. Zhang, G. Shen, H. Möhwald and X. Yan, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3514–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Kubota, S. Liu, H. Shigemitsu, K. Nakamura, W. Tanaka, M. Ikeda and I. Hamachi, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 2058–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Ghosh, M. Halperin-Sternfeld, I. Grigoriants, J. Lee, K. T. Nam and L. Adler-Abramovich, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3541–3550 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Tan, M. Zhang, Z. Hai, C. Wu, J. Lin, W. Kuang, H. Tang, Y. Huang, X. Chen and G. Liang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5616–5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. A. M. Ardoña, E. R. Draper, F. Citossi, M. Wallace, L. C. Serpell, D. J. Adams and J. D. Tovar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8685–8692 CrossRef PubMed.
X. Yang, Y. Xie, Y. Wang, W. Qi, R. Huang, R. Su and Z. He, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10732–10738 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Nandi, S. Basak, S. Kirkham, I. W. Hamley and A. Banerjee, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13226–13233 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. E. Smithmyer, J. B. Spohn and A. M. Kloxin, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 3304–3316 CrossRef CAS.
W. Wang, J. Hu, M. Zheng, L. Zheng, H. Wang and Y. Zhang, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 11492–11498 RSC.
N. Zanna, D. Iaculli and C. Tomasini, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 5797–5804 RSC.
S. Dånmark, C. Aronsson and D. Aili, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 2260–2267 CrossRef PubMed.
S.-M. Hsu, R. D. Chakravarthy, H. Cheng, F.-Y. Wu, T.-S. Lai and H.-C. Lin, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4443–4449 RSC.
S. Yu, D. Zhang, C. He, W. Sun, R. Cao, S. Cui, M. Deng, Z. Gu and X. Chen, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 4341–4348 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Wang, X. Yu, X. Wang, M. Qi, J. Pan and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Zhao, D. L. Sellers, Y. Cheng, P. J. Horner and S. H. Pun, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 2723–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Xu, X. Li, X. Li, B. Li, L. Wu, W. Li, X. Xie and R. Xue, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3524–3530 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Yuan, J. Xu, E. P. van Dam, G. Giubertoni, Y. L. A. Rezus, R. Hammink, H. J. Bakker, Y. Zhan, A. E. Rowan, C. Xing and P. H. J. Kouwer, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 9058–9065 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Mehrban, B. Zhu, F. Tamagnini, F. I. Young, A. Wasmuth, K. L. Hudson, A. R. Thomson, M. A. Birchall, A. D. Randall, B. Song and D. N. Woolfson, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 1, 431–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Wu, M. N. Nizam, X. Ding and F.-J. Xu, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2018–2025 CrossRef CAS.
R. W. Chakroun, F. Wang, R. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Su, D. Pompa and H. Cui, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7780–7790 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Xue, V. Kozlovskaya, Md. A. Sherwani, S. Ratnayaka, S. Habib, T. Anderson, M. Manuvakhova, L. Klampfer, N. Yusuf and E. Kharlampieva, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 4084–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. T. Speidel, D. J. Stuckey, L. W. Chow, L. H. Jackson, M. Noseda, M. A. Paiva, M. D. Schneider and M. M. Stevens, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 338–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Liu, Z. Sun, Y. Yuan, X. Tian, X. Liu, G. Duan, Y. Yang, L. Yuan, H.-C. Lin and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6917–6924 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Qi, Y. Yan, B. Cheng, L. Deng, Z. Shao, Z. Sun and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6180–6189 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Q. Zeng, M. S. Desai, H.-E. Jin, J. H. Lee, J. Chang and S.-W. Lee, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 2619–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Kambe, A. Murakoshi, H. Urakawa, Y. Kimurac and T. Yamaoka, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7557–7571 RSC.
L. Yang, C. Zhang, C. Ren, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Huang, L. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 331–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Chen, J. Wang, R. Hao, Z. Wang, Z. Hou, Y. Zhao, C. Zong and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 2110–2119 CrossRef CAS.
L.-M. Li, M. Han, X.-C. Jiang, X.-Z. Yin, F. Chen, T.-Y. Zhang, H. Ren, J.-W. Zhang, T.-J. Hou, Z. Chen, H.-W. Ou-Yang, Y. Tabata, Y.-Q. Shen and J.-Q. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3330–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Q. Wei, J. Duan, G. Ma, W. Zhang, Q. Wang and Z. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 2220–2225 RSC.
T. Xu, C. Liang, S. Ji, D. Ding, D. Kong, L. Wang and Z. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7318–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Singha, P. Gupta, B. Pramanik, S. Ahmed, A. Dasgupta, A. Ukil and D. Das, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3630–3641 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Baek, A. D. Noblett, P. Ren and L. J. Suggs, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 2812–2821 CrossRef CAS.
X. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Qi, R. Sua and Z. Hea, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15323–15331 RSC.
X. Xin, Y. Gao, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Sun, S. Yuan and H. Xia, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 8352–8360 RSC.
K. Gayen, K. Basu, D. Bairagi, V. Castelletto, I. W. Hamley and A. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 1717–1724 CrossRef CAS.
W. Ji, C. Yuan, S. Zilberzwige-Tal, R. Xing, P. Chakraborty, K. Tao, S. Gilead, X. Yan and E. Gazit, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7300–7309 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Guo, S. Wang, H. Du, X. Chen and H. Fei, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 558–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Sharma, A. Singh, T. K. Sarma, N. Sardana and A. Pal, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6427–6432 RSC.
S. He, L. Mei, C. Wu, M. Tao, Z. Zhai, K. Xu and W. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5030–5037 RSC.
M. Maity, V. S. Sajisha and U. Maitra, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90712–90719 RSC.
T. Simon, C.-S. Wu, J.-C. Liang, C. Cheng and F.-H. Ko, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 2036–2043 RSC.
S. R. S. Veloso, C. A. B. Magalháes, A. R. O. Rodrigues, H. Vilaça, M.-J. R. P. Queiroz, J. A. Martins, P. J. G. Coutinho, P. M. T. Ferreira and E. M. S. Castanheira, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 10377–10390 RSC.
D. S. Hernandez, E. T. Ritschdorff, S. K. Seidlits, C. E. Schmidt and J. B. Shear, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1818–1826 RSC.
H. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Wang and Z. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 891–901 RSC.
X. Gao, J. Fang, B. Xue, L. Fu and H. Li, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 2812–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Gao, S. Lyu and H. Li, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3726–3732 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Yang, S. Kou, X. Wei, F. Zhang, F. Li, X.-W. Wang, Y. Lin, C. Wan, W.-B. Zhang and F. Sun, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 1468–1474 CrossRef CAS.
A. Parisi-Amon, D. D. Lo, D. T. Montoro, R. E. Dewi, M. T. Longaker and S. C. Heilshorn, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 750–756 CrossRef CAS.
J. Luo, X. Liu, Z. Yang and F. Sun, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 1735–1740 CrossRef CAS.
Q. He, D. Huang, J. Yang, Y. Huang and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 3352–3361 CrossRef CAS.
R. S. Jacob, D. Ghosh, P. K. Singh, S. K. Basu, N. N. Jha, S. Das, P. K. Sukul, S. Patil, S. Sathaye, A. Kumar, A. Chowdhury, S. Malik, S. Sen and S. K. Maji, Biomaterials, 2015, 54, 97–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. M. Madl, L. M. Katz and S. C. Heilshorn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3612–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Das, R. S. Jacob, K. Patel, N. Singh and S. K. Maji, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 1826–1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Kou, X. Yang, Z. Yang, X. Liu, S. V. Wegner and F. Sun, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 773–778 CrossRef CAS.
X. Zhang, C. Dong, W. Huang, H. Wang, L. Wang, D. Ding, H. Zhou, J. Long, T. Wang and Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16666–16670 RSC.
M. S. Desai, E. Wang, K. Joyner, T. W. Chung, H.-E. Jin and S.-W. Lee, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 2409–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Ozel, O. Aydin, L. Grunin and M. H. Oztop, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 9542–9555 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. E. U. Rojas, B. B. Gerbelli, A. O. Ribeiro, I. L. Nantes-Cardoso, F. Giuntini and W. A. Alves, Biopolymers, 2019, 110, e23245 Search PubMed.
P. Dorishetty, R. Balu, A. Sreekumar, L. de Campo, J. P. Mata, N. R. Choudhury and N. K. Dutta, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9257–9271 CrossRef CAS.
J. Liu, D. Su, J. Yao, Y. Huang, Z. Shao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4163–4171 RSC.
A. A. Foster, R. E. Dewi, L. Cai, L. Hou, Z. Strassberg, C. A. Alcazar, S. C. Heilshorn and N. F. Huang, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 614–622 RSC.
B. K. Bhunia and B. B. Mandal, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 870–886 CrossRef CAS.
J. Jing, S. Liang, Y. Yan, X. Tian and X. Li, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 4601–4611 CrossRef CAS.
Y. J. Yang, C. S. Kim, B.-H. Choi and H. J. Cha, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3819–3826 CrossRef CAS.
P. B. Rapp, A. K. Omar, J. J. Shen, M. E. Buck, Z.-G. Wang and D. A. Tirrell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3796–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. K. Włodarczyk-Biegun, C. J. Slingerland, M. W. T. Werten, I. A. van Hees, F. A. de Wolf, R. de Vries, M. A. C. Stuart and M. Kamperman, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 2063–2072 CrossRef PubMed.
D. Barati, S. Kader, S. R. P. Shariati, S. Moeinzadeh, R. H. Sawyer and E. Jabbari, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 398–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

Footnote† Equal contribution of both the authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Sanjoy Mondal
	Dr Sanjoy Mondal received his MSc degree in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Guwahati, India in 2012, and then he joined Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group in 2013 at the Polymer Science Unit, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science as a CSIR fellow. He received his PhD degree in May 2019 for his thesis entitled “Studies on Optoelectronic Properties of Synthetic Supramolecular Gel”. Presently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group, at School of Material Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. His current research interests focus on polymer synthesis and polymer–peptide conjugate.

Sujoy Das
	Dr Sujoy Das received his MSc degree in Organic Chemistry from Vidyasagar University in 2013 and then he joined Prof. Arun K. Nandi's group in 2014 at The Polymer Science Unit, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science as a CSIR fellow. He received his PhD degree in July 2019, from Calcutta University for his thesis entitled “Conducting Polymer Hybrid Gels for Different Applications”. Presently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Eyal Zussman's lab at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Israel. His current research interests focus on self-healing adhesive conductive hydrogels toward wearable electronics.

Arun K. Nandi
	Prof. Arun K. Nandi obtained his PhD degree on “Thermodynamics of Polymer–Polymer and Polymer-Solvent Mixing” and joined the Chemistry Department, North Bengal University, Darjeeling. He did post-doctoral work at the Florida State University with Prof. L. Mandelkern in the crystallization of polymers. In 1992, he joined the Polymer Science Unit of Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS) and he retired from the senior Professor position in February, 2019. Presently, he is Emeritus Scientist (CSIR) at IACS. His research interests focus on polymer blends, polymer crystallization, polymer and supramolecular gels, polymer nanocomposites, polymer grafting, biomolecular hybrids, and polymer photovoltaics. He is the author of more than 230 papers and has supervised 35 PhD students to date.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic presentation of the hydrogels fabricated through chemical crosslinking, physical crosslinking or double network.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) NiPAAm gelation process showing (1) chemical reaction occurring in a whole stage, (2) the first-stage reaction process to create the copolymer chains, and (3) the second-stage reaction process to create cross-linking in macrogels at T < TLCST (one-step cross-linking) and T > TLCST (two-step cross-linking), reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Synthesis mechanism of the c-Dxt/pAA hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Preparation of DPC hydrogels: in situ polymerization of Am and Ac in the presence of clay to form physically cross-linked network; the interaction of –COO– groups of polymer chains with Fe3+ and then reorganization of Fe3+ coordinates to introduce Fe3+ coordination physically cross-linked points. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Synthesis route of hybrid ionic-hydrogen bond cross-linked P(AM-co-AA)/Na-alginate/Fe3+ hydrogels and the possible cross-linking structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structure of the ABA triblock copolymer and (b) schematics of reversible sol–gel transition of the prepared hydrogel under temperature switching; (c) dynamic strain amplitude cyclic test (γ = 0.5% and 200%) of the hydrogel at 37 °C showing rapid self-healing behavior. (d) Viscosity measurement of the hydrogel (inset: injection test of the hydrogel at room temperature). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) In an alginate gel, the G blocks on different polymer chains form ionic crosslinks through Ca2+ (red circles). (b) In a polyacrylamide gel, the polymer chains form covalent crosslinks through N,N-methylenebisacrylamide (MBAA; green squares). (c) In an alginate–polyacrylamide hybrid gel, the two types of polymer network are intertwined and joined by covalent crosslinks (blue triangles) between amine groups on polyacrylamide chains and carboxyl groups on alginate chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 the Nature publishing group. The softening and hardening cycles and macro-shaping and micro-pattering of the TPG (5 wt% agarose, 2 M acrylamide): (d and e) schematic changes in the network structure of the TPGs and their corresponding photographs after heating and cooling process. (f) The storage modulus variation of the TPGs during heating and cooling cycles measured by rheology. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Macromer structures investigated for 3D printing. Modified hyaluronic acid (HA): methacrylated HA (MeHA) for photopolymerization, Ad-HA/CD-HA for guest–host (GH) assembly, and Ad-MeHA/CD-MeHA for dual-cross-linking (DC). Rheological properties of hydrogels. (b) Oscillatory time sweeps of different modified HA macromers (frequency 10 Hz and strain 0.5%), G′ (closed symbols) and G′′ (open symbols). (c) Continuous flow tests of MeHA and GH materials at shear rates equivalent to those experienced during printing, showing shear-thinning behavior with viscosities of GH assemblies approaching that of the MeHA solution at high shear rates. (d) Cyclic strains of 0.5% (low, unshaded area) and 250% (high, shaded area) at 10 Hz for the 5 wt% DC hydrogel prior to light exposure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Representation of different conduction mechanisms of ion-conducting hydrogel and electrical conducting polymer hydrogel.	 

 	Fig. 6  A basic design of stretchable ionics. (a) An electrolyte and a dielectric are in series. When they are elastomeric, the device is solid and stretchable. When a voltage V is applied between the two electrodes, the voltage across the electrode/electrolyte interface is much smaller than the voltage across the dielectric, VEDL ≪ VD. (b) The electrode/electrolyte interface forms an electrical double layer. (c) When the voltage across the interface is within a certain range, electrons and ions do not cross the interface, no electrochemical reaction occurs, and the electrical double layer behaves like a capacitor. Transparent loudspeaker is capable of producing sound across the entire audible range. (d) The voltage signal from the audio output of a laptop was fed through a high-voltage amplifier to the loudspeaker. The loudspeaker transformed the voltage signal into sound, which was recorded with a microphone loudspeaker. (e) The screen of the laptop was visible through the loudspeaker. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 Science Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Preparation procedure of the hydrogel of P(NaSS)/P(VBIm-Cl)/PVA@Au. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of conductive polymers.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of polyaniline bearing boronic acid groups. (b) PPH at three length-scales. Left: A photograph of PPH; middle: a SEM image of PPH; right: a schematic molecular structure of PPH showing the crosslink between PANI and PVA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogels formation and further shaping/reduction process; photos of the self-assembly of PANI/GO hybrid hydrogels and the reduction of PANI/RGO (the inset) as well as the corresponding SEM and TEM images of samples after freeze-drying (the scale bar is 500 nm). CVs of the assembled all-hydrogel-state cell in normal, curved, and twisted states (b); the elasticity of the spring-like full cell (c and d); several full cells connected in series (e); a demonstration of a fabricated yarn powering two LEDs in the normal and curved states (the scale bars are 2 cm) (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structures of (a) 5,5′-(1,3,5,7-tetraoxopyrrolo[3,4-f]isoindole-2,6-diyl)-diisophthalic acid (P), (b) naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NDI), (c) fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl phenylalanine (FP), (d) folic acid (F), (e) N,N′-dibenzoyl-L-cystine (DBC).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of DBC–MoS2–PANI aerogel preparation and their electrocatalytic properties showing hydrogen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Synthetic route of self-healing hydrogels of poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD). (B) Scheme of preparing conductive self-healing hydrogels poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY. (C) Alternate step strain sweep test with small strain (γ = 1.0%) to subsequent large strain (γ = 400%) with 100 s for every strain interval at a fixed angular frequency (10 rad s−1) at 25 °C. (D) Photographs of self-healing behavior of the poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogels with mechanical damage (scale bar = 5 mm). (E) Photographs and illustration of the self-healing behavior of poly(NIPAM-co-β-CD)/CNT/PPY hydrogel for a designed circuit. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright the 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of preparation and synthesis process of CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels. (b) CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels molded into various shapes. (c) Formation mechanism of the integrated 3D network within CNF–PPy/PB hydrogels. (d) Multi-complexation between PVA, CNF–PPy, and borax. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chemical structures of water-soluble polythiophenes. PTAA [poly(3-thiophene acetic acid)], POWT [poly(3-((S)-5-amino-5-carboxyl-3-oxapentyl)-2,5-thiophene)hydrochloride], PEDOT-COOH [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)carboxylic acid], PEDOT:PSS [poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)].	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Assembly of peptide–PEG and negatively charged PEDOT:PSS nanostructures, resulting in a non-covalent network. In addition to the peptide/PSS interaction, the π–π stacking among PEDOT nanoparticles and the anion–π interaction between PEDOT and PSS are also involved in the non-covalent network. (b) Representative hydrogel formation by mixing PEDOT:PSS and KA7–PEG-5k solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of dynamic cross-link formation utilizing guest–host complexation. While the Ad group is on the alginate chain, to facilitate graphic representation, the structure of PEDOT:S-Alg-Ad nanoparticles was simplified. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Molecular structures of P, GO, abd PEDOT:PSS, and digital images of the GPPS gel (b) plot of J–V characteristics of GPPS1, GPPS2, and GPPS3 under AM 1.5G light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of GPPS1, GPPS2, and GPPS3 based DSSCs (inset: equivalent circuit of the DSSC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Scheme of the linear molecular chain (green box), the syndiotactic repeating unit (garnet), the establishment of glycosylic bonds between glucose rings (violet ellipsoid), and intra and intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (b) Schematic illustration of the ionic hydrogel synthetic process that includes in situ polymerization to form composite hydrogels and then immersion in cation solution to produce ionic coordination. (c) Ionic coordination leads to CNF aggregation in ionic gels with increased opacity by visual observation and (d) corresponding absorbance in the UV-vis spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic representation of the polymer-network hydrogels cross-linked by ultrafast complexation of metal ions and chitosan chains in water. (f) Chemical structures of chitosan and their interwoven networks driven by the complexation between metal ions and OH and NH2 groups in the chitosan chains. (g) The complexation in (f) leads to the formation of hydrogels (from left to right: CS–Ag, CS–Cu, CS–Co, CS–Ni, CS–Zn, CS–Cd, and CS–Pd, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of the hydrogelator 1. (b) Photograph of native hydrogel and metallo-hydrogels (1:0.5 of gelator to metal ion ratio) obtained from gelator 1 at pH 7.4. Gelator concentration maintained at 16 mM. (c) Probable self-assembly of gelator 1 without any metal ions and in the presence of metal ions (M2+ = Ca2+, Co2+, and Ni2+). The role of metal ion is binding of two gelator molecules through complex formation, which therefore self-assemble with the help of various non-covalent interactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic representation of self-assembly leading to the formation of nanofibrillar hydrogels and biological evaluations with the self-supporting hydrogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the peptide hydrogel and its characterization. Molecular structure of the peptide FEFFFK that self-assembled into an antiparallel β-sheet arrangement. Dox influenced the aggregation of nanofibers within the hydrogel matrix. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society and (b) pH-responsive hydrogel consisting of a self-assembled peptide for the delivery of paclitaxel against tumor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Molecular structures of cyclic dipeptide derivatives; (B) schematic representation of CDP molecular self-assembly, gelation, and host–guest (β-CD-AC) interaction driven modulation of CDP self-assembly and gelation: CDP, cyclic dipeptide derivative; β-CD, β-cyclodextrin; AC, 1-adamantane carboxylic acid; C, concentration of CDP; MGC, minimal gelation concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Photographs of the solution to hydrogel transition and (B) the network Structure of the in situ Formed P1 + P1-RGD Gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of the design and application of the photo-responsive injectable hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Chemical representations of E3PA and K3PA molecules, (b) the zeta potential change in E3PA upon addition of K3PA at pH 7.4 in water, (c) the supramolecular PA network showing self-supporting gel properties, and (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the coassembled PA nanonetwork and nanofibers, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structure of palmitic acid (PA) conjugated with NK peptide (PA–NK) containing microtubule (MT) stabilizing and neuroprotective residues. (b) Snapshot of an inverted glass vial shows PA–NK hydrogel with 1 wt% compound in PBS buffer. (c) TEM image of PANK hydrogel reveals interconnected fibril network structure. (d) AFM image of the PA–NK hydrogel reveals a densely packed fibril structure. (e) Dynamic frequency sweep study of the PA–NK hydrogel (2 wt%) at 1% strain; G′ and G′′ refer to the storage and loss modulus, respectively. (f) Cell viability study reveals that the PA–NK hydrogel is non-cytotoxic in nature. (g) Microscopic image in the DIC mode of Neuro-2a cell in the PA–NK hydrogel reveals that the cells are healthy in nature. The scale bar corresponds to 20 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 299. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The appearance of Fmoc-Val-Car hydrogels in the presence and absence of PVA (1% w/v); inset: chemical structures of Fmoc-Val-Car, DOX, and PVA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of injectable peptide-based fibrous hydrogels for the delivery of a photosensitive drug (Ce6) and antitumor photodynamic therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Self-assembled Fmoc-FF/C60-PTC hybrid hydrogels for photodynamic antibacterial therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic illustration of photosynthesis in green plants (top) and light-driven enzymatic light-energy conversion by self-assembled, light-harvesting hydrogel (bottom). In chloroplast, light driven regeneration of cofactors (i.e., NADPH) takes place, followed by NADPH-dependent enzymatic reactions in the Calvin cycle. The self-assembled Fmoc-FF hydrogel was hybridized with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a photosensitizer, for light energy conversion by NADH-dependent enzymatic reaction with triethanolamine (TEOA) as an electron donor. The photoexcited electrons were transferred from g-C3N4 to NAD+ through an electron mediator {M = [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+, Cp* = C5Me5, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine}. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) Lipidated β3-tripeptides synthesized with and without a fluorophore P2 and P3 (R4 corresponds to a fluorescent moiety) are hypothesized to (B) coassemble via head-to-tail self-assembly to (C) afford a fully integrated fluorescent hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic diagram for the formation of Fmoc-FF/PLL-SH hydrogels based on electrostatic interaction-triggered coassembly. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Micro-CT images of the periodontal bone defect areas in the maxillae of rats of different groups (size of each bone defect is about 20 mm3). (B) Bone volume fractions of defect areas in different groups at 8 weeks. Data are expressed as mean ± SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, compared with the Ctrl group. Not significant (ns): p > 0.05. Scale bar = 2 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Molecular structures of the peptides studied herein and (b and c) diagrams of the potential energy (e.g., resonance-energy transfer (RET)) and electron-transfer events occurring within a two-component peptidic nanostructure with three π-electron units for (b) self-sorted and (c) randomly coassembled systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 333. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration showing the aerogel preparation and application. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 334. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  (A) Chemical structure of CRB-FFE-YSV and optical image of the CRB-FFE-YSV hydrogel formed by the heating–cooling process; (B) schematic illustration for hydrogel formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 355. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the antioxidant hydrogel preparation via laccase-mediated crosslinking of FerFFK (1.0 wt%) and GC-Fer (1.0 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2019 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) Chemical structures of peptides used in this study and schematic illustration of the enzyme-triggered conversion; (B) schematic illustration of the process for the preparation of a positively charged glass plate surface; (C) illustration for “surface-induced hydrogelation” at the modified glass plate surface. (D) Emission spectra of glass plates incubated with PBS solution of NBD-FFpY (800 μM, 300 μL) and 100 μL of blood with different concentrations of phosphatase at 1 h time point and (E) 100 μL of different cell lysates at 1 h time point; (F) linear relationships between fluorescence intensity from the glass plates and enzyme concentration in the blood; (G) optical images of the glass plates for the samples after panels (D and E) treatments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 359. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  (A) Chemical structure of PA-1 showing different interactions and functional sites in the molecule, (B) photograph of a 2 wt% (16.9 mM) hydrogel of PA-1 in water under UV light, and (C) pictorial representation of the stepwise hierarchical aggregation of PA-1 to form a hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Chemical structure of amphiphile AM1; (b) FeCl3- and HgCl2-induced hydrogel of compound AM1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 364. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Formation of supramolecular metallo-hydrogel with a nanofibrous morphology upon the interaction of histidine with Zn2+ ions in alkaline medium and the proposed structure of the complex formed upon interaction of histidine with Zn2+ ions. Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic illustration for the preparation process of the AgNPs@Nap-FFC nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 370. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 40  Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching in labeled PEP hydrogels. (A) Labeling of PEP hydrogels was achieved by the addition of a fluorescent PEP analogue (PECP-f5m) at low concentrations. (B) FRAP in 10% w/v PEP hydrogels as monitored by confocal microscopy. A circular bleach spot with a radius (a) of 12.5 μm recovers slowly over a period of 30 min (blue curve). The same network solubilized in 8 M urea shows accelerated fluorescence recovery (red curve). Scale bar 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Equal contribution of both the authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
