A systematic review on plastic waste conversion for a circular economy: recent trends and emerging technologies  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CY02066A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CY02066A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, 13, 2291-2302A systematic review on plastic waste conversion for a circular economy: recent trends and emerging technologies

        
          
            Rajesh Banu 
            J
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Godvin Sharmila 
            V
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Biotechnology, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Neelakudi, Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu-610005, India
bDepartment of Civil Engineering, Rohini College of Engineering and Technology, Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: sharmilagodvin@gmail.com
Received 
      2nd December 2022
    , Accepted 3rd March 2023First published on 16th March 2023AbstractOur biosphere has been adversely affected by plastic waste pollution, especially non-biodegradables in landfills, which induces hazardous chemical leaching and toxic gas emissions on burning into the atmosphere. Conventional methods for recycling plastic waste typically result in products with a lower significance than that of the original plastic or ineffective thermal energy recovery. Upcycling methods have recently been identified as a viable way to turn plastic waste into goods with added benefits. In this article, we provide a minireview on plastic waste generation, recent developments in the upcycling of plastic waste, technical difficulties, potential future advancements, and new opportunities for a sustainable society.Rajesh Banu JRajesh Banu J is presently working as an Associate Professor at the Department of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu (CUTN), India. He is also a visiting professor at the Center for Excellence in Environmental Studies, King Abdul Aziz University, Saudi Arabia. He is the author of 290 publications in SCI and SCIE journals with a cumulative impact factor of 1852. His publications have achieved more than 10500 citations, giving him an h-index of 56. His name is included among the top 2% of scientists worldwide by independent researchers of Stanford University. He was awarded the Think of Ecology Award by Hiyoshi, Japan, for the year 2018. His research interests are waste to energy, value-added product recovery from waste, biological wastewater treatment, nutrient removal, membrane bioreactors, and microbial fuel cells.Godvin Sharmila VGodvin Sharmila V obtained her Ph.D. from Anna University Chennai, India in 2019 under the supervision of Associate Professor Rajesh Banu J. She is the author of 26 publications in SCI and SCIE journals with a cumulative impact factor of 203. She also worked as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Civil Engineering, Rohini College of Engineering and Technology, Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India. Her research interests are biomass conversion to bioenergy, algal biorefinery, wastewater remediation, photocatalytic immobilization, sludge management, and advanced oxidation processes.
1. Introduction
The worldwide output of plastic has increased throughout the centuries in accordance with the increased demand for various products such as wrapping materials, packaging films, rubbish bags, shopping bags, toys, apparel, building materials, and fluid containers.1 Globally, nearly 1.5 million tonnes of plastic was produced in 1950, and the amount of plastics produced reached 359 million tonnes in 2018. The manufacture of plastic utilizes approximately 8% to 10% of the total crude oil output of the entire world. Since 1907 (the first synthetic polymer was created), different plastics have been produced and employed more often because of their processability, safety, toughness, and affordability in an ever-growing range of applications.2 As a result of their widespread use and vital prominence in today's society, materials based on plastics have a variety of uses that are not replaceable. Proper destruction of post-consumer plastic waste is an emerging issue due to its strong and long lasting polymer constituents, which goes in concert with over-reliance on plastic items. The process of breaking down bigger plastic waste into smaller plastic bits (secondary microplastics) occurs due to physical crushing, photooxidation under solar radiation, and biodegradation in the environment.3 Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene (PP), polyurethane (PU), and polystyrene (PS) are some of the plastic polymers that are frequently used in domestic products which are shown Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Various types of plastic waste and their source of generation. 
In addition to polluting the environment, inappropriate treatment of plastic garbage results in a significant loss of economic value. Recycling plastic garbage is thought to save about 3.5 billion oil barrels worldwide or around $176 billion in energy costs.4 Despite the investigation of a number of recycling systems, their widespread poor advantages, high prices, and secondary emissions limit their practical applicability. To avoid its spread into the natural environment, it is essential to find affordable, environmentally responsible, and effective methods for turning plastic waste into goods with value-added products.5 Additionally, the treatment of non-recoverable plastic wastes requires the development of efficient catalytic degradation technologies, recycling methods and upscaling processes. Upcycling, which emphasises the explorations of the significance of plastic waste, has been devised as an alternative and far more alluring replacement for conventional techniques to solve the fundamental problem. Research on the upscaling process is still in the stage of infancy. Thus, this review focuses on the basic concepts of various emerging and recent technologies in the plastic waste conversion process, along with the challenges and opportunities for creating a circular plastic economy. This unified perspective review on plastic waste conversion provides enhanced insights into existing technologies and, more importantly, may open up new avenues for future advancement.
2. Plastic waste generation in the recent scenario and recycling/upscaling techniques
Over 2.1 billion tonnes of MSW is estimated to be produced each year globally. About 16% of MSW gets recycled annually and 46% of MSW is forcibly disposed of.6 In cities in particular, urbanization has decreased the amount of land suitable for landfills. According to the United Nations Environment Policy (UNEP), plastic pollution causes a minimum loss of $ 8 billion globally, harming the marine environment each year. According to a recent World Watch Institute survey, the average person in Western Europe or North America uses 100 kg of plastic annually. Asian countries produce nearly 20 kg of plastic garbage/person annually, which is expected to rise quickly due to the region's rapid economic development. Asia is the region with the highest levels of plastic pollution worldwide. Meanwhile, according to estimates in 2016, each German has added 38 kg of plastic waste to the world's entire generation.7 As a result of resource unavailability and lack of comprehensive garbage processing, several industrialised nations have been exporting their plastic waste. Generally, developed countries are the main exporters, whereas developing countries like Asian countries are the importers. In 2018, Japan was the second-largest exporter of plastic garbage behind the United States (US). In 2017, Europe shipped 1/6th of its plastic garbage to Asia. Although China is the major marine source of plastic, it has enacted a restriction on importing plastic waste from foreign nations in Jan 2018 to address this issue. Since the second half of 2017, the sale of plastic garbage to Chinese-based customers has essentially ceased. Besides China, Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam have also initiated restrictions on the import of low quality mixed waste plastics.1
The COVID-19 epidemic has caused a significant effect on the ecosystem along with health and financial crises. During this crisis, more disposable medicinal plastic waste has been generated all throughout the world. As a result of the actions taken to stop the spread of COVID-19, plastic manufacturing has greatly expanded globally. Every month, about 65 billion pairs of roughly plastic gloves and about 129 billion of face masks are discarded globally.8 In addition, the plastic waste generated by countries in 2022 is provided in Fig. 2. The growing amount of medical waste increases its risk to the ecosystem in the succeeding years, which is impossible to segregate and calls for a strategy of sustainable waste management. Exertion of efforts to comprehend the circular economy would greatly help to address this enormous waste problem.9 Hence, recycling is considered to be a prior option to treat plastic waste.
 Fig. 2  Various countries involved in plastic waste generation. 
Recycling of plastic waste refers to reusing plastic garbage rather than discarding it. When plastic waste is recycled, it is referred to as downcycling, but the recovered substance loses its original qualities.10 Conversely, plastic waste is upcycled as soon as it can be reused without losing its performance or value intended for subsequent usage.11 The upcycling technique provides a scientific explanation for more efficient waste management, the production of new products, and the circular economy by reusing plastic waste to produce a new, better or more valuable material than the original. Modern upcycling ideas (compounding, reforming, transformation, etc.) utilise physical, chemical, and biological processes to transform plastic waste into polymers. Upscaling is mainly based on the catalytic conversion of plastics. Finding methods for recycling and upcycling plastic garbage can decrease waste accumulation in oceans and landfills, emissions of carbon, and the reliance on non-renewable petroleum resources to create polymers to recover the economic value of materials. Hence, a glimmer of hope has been offered by the approach of plastic recovery, recycling, and upcycling to address the issues on plastics.
3. Emerging technology in plastic waste conversion
3.1. Thermal catalytic upscaling using nanocatalysts
Currently, plastic waste upscaling via direct hydrogenolysis to produce value added chemicals focuses mostly on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene (PE). In contrast to methods that focus on hydrolysis or transesterification, catalytic hydrogenolysis12 has offered quite an attainable and enticing choice for the depolymerization of PET wastes into value-added chemicals (Fig. 3) and the drop-in assimilation of plastic valorization with more industrial applications within the path of a circular economy. PET is preferentially depolymerized to TPA (terephthalic acid) and ethylene at 260 °C mostly in 1 atmosphere of H2 using the catalyst carbon supported single site molybdenum dioxide (C/MoO2), which is unusual in conventional chemical and biological depolymerization processes. This procedure is carried out without the application of solvents13 which is detailed in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Various depolymerization approaches for PET. 
Furthermore, about 75–85% arenes were yielded through catalytic hydrogenolysis of various aromatic compounds using a catalyst, Ru/Nb2O5. This versatile Ru/Nb2O5 catalyst can directly upgrade aromatic plastic waste into arenes with remarkably high yields.14 In addition to selectively converting single-component plastic waste (PET to p-xylene and PPO to m-xylene) into bulk chemicals, Ru/Nb2O5 facilitates the conversion of mixed aromatic plastics into arenes. With the help of this catalyst, it is possible to produce monocyclic arenes by activating C–C bonds and NbOx species for C–O bonds, respectively. Hence, Ru species on Nb2O5 exist as sub-nanoparticles with a low coordination number (C.N. = 5–6), which prevents hydrogenation of the benzene ring and provides a distinct selectivity to arenes. With a shortage of extra solvent or molecular hydrogen and minimal production of light gases, tandem catalytic conversion using platinum supported on g-alumina transforms various high grades of polyethylene to low molecular-weight liquid/wax products. Alkylnaphthenes and valuable long-chain alkylaromatics are the main hydrocarbons obtained in the form of wax during this process.15 About 78.9 mol% arenes is produced when PET is converted in a one-pot reaction that combines hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) and depolymerization over a Co/TiO2 catalyst under optimal conditions (toluene and xylene).16
The polymer and the coordination of the metal are typically critical to perform catalyzed processes since plastics are formed as a subcategory of polymers. Also, within the coordination environments, there is flexibility in the active metal sites for enzymatic and molecular metal catalysts, but nanocatalysts are highly rigid.17 Additionally, compared to a homogenous catalytic system, supported metal nanoparticles have substantially higher stability, particularly in hostile environments. This demonstrates the robust collaboration between the adjacent coordination environment and the metal core. However, this intense collaboration constricts the polymers' approachability to active metals because of the restricted disclosure of these bulk species to the active metal sites without coordination, determining the end-product selectivity and reactivity. Hence, performing chemical upcycling over nanocatalysts is challenging due to the characteristics of the support and the vital environmental coordination around the polymers and metal for the heterogeneous distribution of active metal sites. Waste plastic mixtures (such as PE and PP) are processed using catalytic pyrolysis when a catalyst (a solid acid or Lewis acid) is present. This process generates primarily gaseous and aromatic compounds through isomerization, carbocation catalysis, cracking through β scission reactions or cyclization (and aromatization).18 For instance, penta-coordinated carbenium ions are used in wax catalytic cracking, which is a by-product of polyolefin pyrolysis. This catalyst breaks down the wax of longer-chain wax to shorter-chain olefins through random/β/end chain scission reactions. Therefore, the nanocatalyst synthesis method significantly impacts the pyrolysis performance.
In order to evaluate the pyrolysis of PC wastes, Fe–Ce@Al2O3 (ternary metal oxides) nanocatalysts are preferred, which are prepared by impregnation, coprecipitation, and a direct mixing approach. In comparison with the other two preparation techniques, the coprecipitation method (FC@CP) produced ternary metal oxides which had the highest concentration of weak acid sites of 0.21 mmol g−1, the highest surface area of 104 m2 g−1, the finest dispersion of Fe and Ce active species attributable to nanoparticles of ultrafine size (7.5 nm) and the largest pore volume of 0.19 cm3 g−1. Compared to other techniques, FC@CP enhanced the formation of target monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from PC wastes using catalytic conversion as a result of the said benefits of the nanostructures.18 The ex situ catalytic co-pyrolysis was performed in polyethylene and lignin over HZSM-5 under a series of pressures (0.1–0.8 MPa) in a pyrolyzer-gas chromatography/mass spectrometry system.19 When polyethylene and lignin are pyrolyzed together under pressure, the relative yield of benzene–toluene–ethylbenzene–xylene (BTEX) increases significantly while the catalyst remains stable. At 650 °C, 0.5 MPa of pressure, a polyethylene to lignin ratio of 1:1, and a catalyst to raw material ratio of 4:1, a very high BTEX relative yield of 70.94% is achieved.
The pyrolysis of a discarded polymer usually produces C1–C5 non-condensable gases. These gaseous by-products get collapsed by transition-metal nanocatalysts producing nanomaterials made of carbon and/or hydrogen at the catalyst surface. This simultaneous method, known as carbonization or/and pyrolysis–gasification, is normally carried out in a two-stage system. This makes it essential to attract numerous studies in a similar discipline. The complex reaction mechanism of carbonization or/and pyrolysis–gasification has been a long-standing dispute.20 Typically, a dissociation–diffusion–precipitation pathway predominates when there is a nanocatalyst present. Small molecular hydrocarbons produced by the pyrolysis of the plastic are first dissociated. This dissociation reaction creates carbon by dissolving the hydrocarbons into NPs. After supersaturation, these NPs get precipitated to form CNT. During this time, hydrogen is also created by the dissociation reaction in the form of hydrogen atoms or species. However, given that the latter deactivates the catalyst, the carbon (coke deposition) and hydrogen co-production on the catalyst's surface seems incompatible. As a result, the reaction should eventually come to an end. In this case, the selection of the nanocatalyst will determine the volume of either hydrogen-only materials or hydrogen and carbon substances that will be produced. The most effective nanocatalyst Ru is highly effectual for producing hydrogen-rich syngas, as evidenced by a significant increment in hydrogen yield (Fig. 3) and carbon conversions through the gasification of polymers (PP and PS).21 As a result, a cost issue occurs in the exploration of Ni and Ru nanocatalyst induced plastic waste pyrolysis–gasification. Ni based nanocatalysts showed activation abilities and strong coordination for C–C and C–H bonds preventing coke deposition. However, the development of coke on the catalyst surface during the process of nanocatalysed assisted carbonation was seen.18 On the other hand, the deposition of coke results in the inactivation of the catalyst by creating a layer of non-active surface. The deactivated coked nanomaterial can be used as an adsorbent to remove organic contaminants, but it is no longer useful in this procedure. Valuable carbon nanoparticles with various uses are created when plastic waste is pyrolyzed and carbonised using a nanocatalyst.22 For instance, creating amorphous-type carbon enclosed within the Ni NPs of a Mg Ni Al nanocatalyst enhanced the PS pyrolysis and carbonation. But graphitic type carbon grew away from the catalyst surface on carbonizing HDPE and PP using nanocatalysis.23
During the nanocatalysed solvolysis, the surface of the metal gets coordinated to the long-chain polymeric materials of plastic wastes which get depolymerized with the solvent. The reactants used are solvents that produce monomers with virgin grade properties and are then re-polymerized to the initial resources. The solvolysis of plastic is classified as ammonolysis, hydrolysis, alcoholysis (methanolysis and glycolysis), phosphorolysis, or aminolysis, depending on the solvent used.24 This process is typically carried out at a high temperature with catalyst assistance to insure the depolymerization adequacy. Research on depolymerization of PP, PE, PA, polyvinyl chloride, and PS is currently limited owing to insufficient catalysis and high energy costs. Most advancements are made through nucleophilic substitutions in the solvolysis of PET and PU, which are made up of polycarbonates, polyesters, and polyamides (Table 1).
Table 1 Some research results on plastic waste solvolysis




Plastic waste substrate used
Catalyst used
Parameters
Reactor
Process efficiency
Product obtained
Ref.




10 g PET
0.07 g ZnO
160 °C/—/0.5 h
Teflon-lined, stainless-steel autoclave
80.7%
DMT 73%

30



60 mg Co Np
4.0 g PET
180 °C/1 atm/3 h
—
96%
BHET 77%

11



ZnMn2O4
0.3 g PET (4 mm × 2.8 mm × 3.2 mm)
260 °C/5 atm/1 h
Stainless steel batch-type autoclave reactor
—
BHET 92.2%

31



GO–Mn3O4
0.3 g PET (3 mm × 3 mm)
300 °C/1.1 MPa/80 min−1
Stainless steel batch-type autoclave
—
BHET 90%

11



MnO2/HGO
0.3 g PET
200 °C/—/10 min
Three-neck flask reactor
100%
BHET 100%

31



ϒ-Fe2O3/Nitrogen doped graphene
0.3 g PET
195 °C/1 atm/3 h
Around-bottom flask
100%
BHET 100%

32



Fe2O4/h-BNNS
0.3 g PET
200 °C/—/5 h
Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave
100%
BHET 100%

11



Fe2O3@MoS2
2 g PET (<200 ml, 56.780 g mol−1)
200 °C/—/5 h
Teflon reactor
94%
BHET 100%

33, 34


Pd/h BN
PET (10 g, <80 mesh, 2 2 mm2)
200 °C/—/5 h
T–C reactor
98.4%
BHET 92.1%

33



Fe3O4/MWCNT
2 g PET (4 mm, 2.8 mm, 3.2 mm)
190 °C/1 atm/2 h
Two-necked round bottom flask
100%
BHET 100%

35





In the solvolysis of PET and PU, the majority of advancements are achieved through nucleophilic replacements. Catalysts have effectively made it possible for the creation of coke and a decrease in reaction temperature. In fact, for the hydrocracking of alkanes, bifunctional catalysts were subsequently used in the middle of the 1960s. Due to the complexity of the latter systems, the information could not be readily applied to the hydrocracking of plastic waste. On the other hand, hydrogen support also offers several benefits: 1) by lowering the temperature and reaction time, it enhances the reaction kinetics; 2) it decreases coke formation, extending the useful life of catalysts; 3) it produces more highly saturated products (such as alkanes), which is advantageous for downstream synthesis of PE and PP.25,26 Thus, in such circumstances, hydrocracking using nanocatalysis transforms plastic wastes into small molecules which are considered to be a crucial component for yielding high-quality liquid fuels through a process of one or two-stage liquefaction in which plastic is first pyrolyzed and then hydrotreated.27 Active investigation is carried out to use tandem processes in which tandem catalysts are used to treat plastics with carbonyl groups for the generation of chemicals. The initial stage of this tandem process often entails solvolysis, followed by hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation (HDO). For example, PET wastes undergo a non-catalytic methanolysis process, producing a high yield of the DMT monomer before converting C7–C8 cycloalkanes and aromatics.
Thus, the electrochemical method powered by green energy is promising since it allows safe plastic upcycling under favourable circumstances. Under alkaline conditions, waste plastic is depolymerized electrochemically by oxidatively cleaving a C–C bond at the anode promoting hydrogen evolution at the cathode.28 To insure a sufficient concentration of the polymer in aqueous solutions, pretreatment of the waste plastic is crucial (typically in KOH). However, with a restricted variety of polymers, electrochemical recycling of plastic is extremely difficult. For instance, the lack of functionalities and an effective electrocatalyst makes hydrocarbon-based polymers (like PP) more challenging to handle than PET.29 As a result, PET has seen the highest success in the electrochemically induced depolymerization of plastics.
3.2. Biotechnological upscaling
The use of pyrolysis and microbes to transform non-biodegradable polymers like PET, PE, and PS into biodegradable substances called polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) provides a novel way to combine the circular economy's technological and biological components.35 Given that there are several enzymes in nature that break down complicated polymers, enzymatic hydrolysis of plastics offers enormous potential.36Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6, a newly discovered bacterium, has a peculiar capacity to break down PET and assimilate its monomers. Although this bacterium has a limited capacity for PET breakdown, it shows that nature can degrade polymers. The I. sakaiensis main enzymes involved in PET breakdown, known as PETase and MHETase, have now been characterized and engineered (Fig. 4), with a lot of promise for future engineering. The underutilized polymeric carbon content was intended to be turned into triglycerides (TGs) using a two-stage process.37 First, hydrothermal processing (HTP) was utilised to treat polyethylene (PE) to produce PE oils, which were then employed as a carbon source for fermentation with Yarrowia lipolytica and converted into TGs. For the biotechnological stage, the HTP PE oil produced at 425 °C for 120 min was discovered to be the best carbon source. In these ideal circumstances, 75% of the PE mass was converted into a PE oil that Yarrowia could use as a carbon source to grow and make TGs. In the biotechnological stage, a 15 g l−1 oil concentration in the fermentation medium also enhanced the fermentation performance compared to a 10 g l−1 concentration expansion of biomass and generation of TGs.38 Scientists believe that such enzymes could play an important role in the development of innovative upcycling schemes in the future.
 Fig. 4  Biotechnological upscaling approach for the PET polymer. 
In a circular economy, the utilisation of enzymes for biodegradation and microorganisms or enzymes for product synthesis would amount to a fully biological recycling of plastics. A unique microbial platform capable of turning carbon trapped in plastic into useful chemicals utilising a single organism could be created by integrating hydrolytic enzymes into a microbial biosynthesis chassis.13,39 The design process of biotechnological products made from recycled plastic must consider the environment. Our research unequivocally demonstrates the need to manage biodegradable plastics rather than release them into the environment, which leads to effective access to the carbon trapped in these biodegradable polymers, resulting in much greater resource/carbon efficiency.40
3.3. Microwave-assisted pyrolysis
In comparison with traditional heating, microwave-assisted heating has some benefits, including the ability for quasi thermal conduction and an improvement in efficiency. During microwave-assisted pyrolysis, adding microwave absorbing susceptors to the feedstock helps to speed up the heating process and cut down on the processing time.41 High-loss tangent materials transform microwave energy into heat and must be used as absorbents.42 In some particular configurations and with certain feedstocks, this microwave heating can result in a uniform dispersion of heat. Fig. 5 shows the experimental setup and reaction method of microwave assisted pyrolysis. For instance, a potato with dimensions of roughly 60 × 40 × 9 mm3 is used in a microwave cavity with a sliding base for pyrolysis based on a phase-shifting heating approach. The issue of non-uniform heating during this process was resolved by implementing the phase-shifting heating technique, which induces changes in the sliding base. The potato's coefficient of temperature variation was determined to be 0.5. There was a rise in heat distribution uniformity of about 60% at which the coefficient of temperature variation dropped to 0.2 when NaCl was used in the phase-shifting heating approach. A novel method of pyrolysis called microwave-assisted pyrolysis converts microwave energy into heat within the feedstock particles. One frequent by-product of the pyrolysis of plastic waste through microwaves is bio-oil. LDPE and spent bleaching clay (SBC) were co-pyrolyzed using microwaves and produced 85.73% of bio-oil, which is high in monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (MAHs).19,33 There occurred a sharp rise in temperature when halogenated plastics were pyrolyzed using a microwave. The bio-oil produced was appropriate for use as fuel with a greater than 41 MJ kg−1 heating value.
 Fig. 5  Experimental setup and reaction process of microwave-assisted pyrolysis. 
The synergetic effects of the various components of plastic components and fillers are enhanced during the process of microwave-assisted co-pyrolysis. For instance, researchers revealed that a maximum volume of bio-oil yield was achieved due to the synergistic impact between PP and bamboo during the process of microwave-assisted co-pyrolysis being greater than expected. On PP and rice husks, co-pyrolysis produces significantly greater bio-oil of a higher heating value (42 MJ kg−1) using the respective biomass sources. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that bio-oil produced using microwave-assisted co-pyrolysis has a lower moisture content and acidity than bio-oil produced from separate biomass sources using a similar pyrolysis technique. This thermochemical approach can turn mixed garbage into bio-oil through microwave-assisted co-pyrolysis of biomass and plastic, although the elemental makeup of polymers and biomass varies greatly.43 According to the type of feedstock and the conditions of pyrolysis, the yields of microwave-assisted pyrolysis varied significantly with the microwave power and heating rate. One particular difficulty is enhancing the microwave-assisted conversion procedure for simple operation and accessibility. The energy from electromagnetic waves is changed into thermal energy for the microwave system of heating.44 The energy from the microwave that enters the material is stored there and eventually transformed to heat within the core of the material.
To transform the product spectrum in the desired way, microwave-assisted catalytic co-pyrolysis (MACCP) of biomass and plastics employing in situ and ex situ catalytic up-gradation would be advantageous. An ex situ configuration is preferable over in situ due to its simplicity in handling, regeneration, and separation. During pyrolysis, a catalyst would stimulate reactions like Diels–Alder condensation, cyclization, decarboxylation, hydrocracking, cracking, aromatization, and alkylation.44 Zeolite catalysts have been extensively researched to improve the vapours from biomass pyrolysis since they have been discovered to be successful in boosting the synthesis of aromatic chemicals. When lignin was combined with polyethylene plastic using the MACCP method, the ZSM-5 catalyst among zeolites produced aromatics. The narrow product distribution could result from the pyrolysis heating properties. Microwave-assisted pyrolysis has advantages over conventional pyrolysis, including process energy savings, high heating efficiency, homogeneous heating, and fast reaction.45 Microwave radiation can degrade heavy hydrocarbon components and transform waste or biomass into lighter hydrocarbon fractions via the chain brake process that occurs during microwave pyrolysis, potentially leading to the creation of liquid light hydrocarbon fuels.42 Some materials don't absorb microwave energy well; hence microwave absorbers must be introduced during the pyrolysis process. According to a prior study, the inclusion of microwave absorbents can shorten the heating time. According to research,18 utilising SiC as a microwave absorbent bed increases the yield of hydrocarbons, particularly high-value alkanes and aromatics. However, the absorption capacity of SiC will decline with each reaction. This suggests that additional research is needed to optimise the efficiency of catalysis during microwave-assisted pyrolysis or co-pyrolysis by reducing coke production, for example, by adding an Mg promoter to limit the deposition of carbon attributable to oxygen storage capabilities.23
Other products are created from plastic waste conversion with microwave assistance in addition to bio-oil. For instance, using microwave heating and sulfuric acid soaking, porous sulfonated carbon was formed from LDPE plastic. High energy density lithium–sulfur batteries have been investigated as potential next-generation batteries. To increase the sulfur cathode capacity in lithium–sulfur batteries, the interlayer utilized was porous sulfonated carbon. In contrast to the pyrolysis of biomass waste to form carbon compounds, this microwave treatment method of processing LDPE plastic can be applied to different polymers.21 In a different study, PET waste was depolymerized using a chemical decomposition process carried out in a neutral environment to yield terephthalic acid (not alkaline or acidic conditions). A thorough chemo-microbial hybrid approach was then employed to manufacture 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylic acid from terephthalic acid, which is a valuable monomer utilized to form biodegradable polymers. These investigations demonstrate that, depending on the end products obtained, such as bio-oil, porous carbon, and monomers, microwaves can be used both in pyrolysis and neutral hydrolysis.
3.4. Plasma and supercritical water assisted gasification
Plasma and supercritical water have also been utilised in conjunction with existing technology to upcycle waste plastic and microwaves.46,47 Plastics may be effectively transformed into hydrogen-rich syngas using plasma gasification, which can synthesize chemicals, fuels, and electricity.48 In plasma gasification, thermal plasma commonly originates from direct current and non-transferred arc plasma torches, which generate heat. The fourth state of matter, known as plasma, is the state in which certain gaseous molecules or atoms are ionised. Charged particles can interact with nearby particles through plasma. A gasification reactor with a plasma cupola and torch can be the foundation for a plasma gasification facility. According to reports, the plasma gasification of MSW could provide 95% cold gas, 32% thermal energy, and 80% electrical energy with 32% electrical energy efficiency. Although this technology is still relatively young, it has a variety of uses, thanks to the deployment of certain waste-to-energy pilot projects and a few commercial facilities. Despite certain financial and technological difficulties, it is nevertheless recognised as a technology that is ready for commercial use.49 Thermal plasma gasification has some benefits over conventional gasification, including a lower tar content, a higher syngas production, and the abundant use of effective energy. The high reaction temperature (e.g., >1000 °C) and energy density caused by plasma processing may encourage interactions between particles and excited ions.
Considering the plasma gasification of MSW, Yayalik50 suggested a few possible reaction routes. For instance, the breakdown of MSW results in H2, CO2, CO, H2O, and C production. The primary formation reactions are those between C and H2O, which result in C and CO2, and CO and H2, which result in CO. During the gasification–plasma process, a two-stage fluid bed was utilized for waste-derived fuel gasification (including plastic). It was discovered that plasma is useful for tar removal and syngas purification.51 Tar, which is regarded as a relatively low-value commodity, has the potential to obstruct reactor pipes. Another study used a plasma reactor to perform air and steam-assisted plasma gasification of household garbage that contained around 5 wt% plastic. According to calculations, air and steam plasma gasification of domestic wastes can yield syngas of high-calorific value with 82 and 95 vol% concentrations, respectively. There are harmful materials in household garbage that are frequently difficult to manage. However, highly poisonous dioxins, furans, and benzo(a)pyrene can all be successfully eliminated by plasma gasification but not by traditional incineration.52
Supercritical water has also become a potential contender for gasifying plastic waste. Supercritical water acts as a solvent in the supercritical water gasification process to promote a homogeneous reaction.53 The reactor setup for the supercritical water assisted gasification is shown in Fig. 6. Due to the H-radicals at high temperatures and high ion generation close to critical points, supercritical water also acts as a catalyst to speed up the reaction rate.54 Additionally, supercritical water can prevent coking in the reaction and can tolerate wet plastic waste without a drying pretreatment. The reaction pressure, temperature, and tube volume affect the quantity of water added to a quartz tube reactor. Together with the water–gas shift process, CO creation is the main source of H2 formation.55 One analysis revealed that the efficiency of carbon gasification was over 98% when the gasification of supercritical water with fuel sourced from waste was carried out in a batch reactor at 450 °C with RuO2/r-Al2O3 catalysts. The reactivity of the feedstock depended on its composition when other MSW components, such as waste textile and wood, were gasified since the generated gas composition varied significantly. A supercritical water gasification mechanism of oily sludge containing polymers has various reaction routes such as methanation, steam reforming, coking, water–gas shift, and pyrolysis process.55–58
 Fig. 6  Experimental setup of supercritical water assisted gasification. 
3.5. Photoreforming
Photoreforming, a technology that utilizes sunlight, water, and a photocatalyst to break down plastic waste into H2 or other chemicals like acetic acid (CH3COOH), is another potential recycling technology.59,60 The activated photocatalyst converts the substrate, which serves as an electron donor, to other organic compounds.61,62 After being transmitted from the photocatalyst to a co-catalyst, the photogenerated electrons convert water to H2 and this is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Photoreforming process. 
Considering the great demand for it, hydrogen (a highly useful resource) has been used in chemical, medicinal, agricultural, and renewable energy applications. The low selectivity and product yield under mild conditions are often the result of photoreforming plastic waste. However, a new research study has started to solve this problem; the photoreforming of PET was successfully carried out to generate H2 and other compounds at room temperature over the accessible and nontoxic catalyst NiMo-assisted CN-CNT as a nanomaterial.63 Despite being a straightforward and low-energy method, ambient-temperature photoreforming has only ever been used on extremely modest scales.64 Although the procedure can be scaled up from 2 to 120 mL, it cannot generate higher yields. Another study used a vanadium photocatalyst to create fuels and chemicals by oxygenating the C–C bonds of PE (a non-biodegradable material) under the influence of visible light.65 This process could also be utilized to recycle a wider variety of polymers. PE is completely photodegraded into CO2 through C–C cleavage and photo-reduced to C2 fuels like acetic acid by C–C coupling using Nb2O5 photocatalysts under conditions similar to those of natural environments, such as room temperature, atmospheric pressure, air, and water. This technique may selectively transform PE, PVC, and PP into C2 fuels as per the above-proposed photoconversion mechanism. However, at 0.1 mg g cat−1, the current acetic acid production of the process is quite low (g cat refers to grams of the catalyst). Two-component photocatalysts might improve the yield for C–C cleavage and C–C coupling design.66 Other cutting-edge technologies were also used to create customized photocatalysts to boost the effectiveness of reducing CO2. For the photoreforming system to be a practical conversion method for the world's plastic waste, it must be scaled up much further (for example, much greater than 120 mL). A type of computer aided manufacturing known as 3D printing technology makes it possible to produce objects with complex shapes. To remove CO2 from a confined environment, the researcher uses 3D-printed zeolite monolith catalysts with an outer diameter of 8 mm.67
More than 50 million tonnes of H2 is produced each year for use in the chemical, pharmaceutical, and agricultural industries. The reformation of fossil fuels produces 96% of the world's supply of H2. However, when plastic waste is pyrolyzed into hydrogen, a lot of energy is needed, and a lot of greenhouse gases are released (around 12 g CO2 for every 1 g H2). As a result, photoreforming has emerged as a viable substitute for the industrial conversion of plastic waste to H2.68 In one study, three widely used polymers, PET, PUR, and PLA, were processed to create H2 over PUR by photoreforming using affordable CdS/CdOx quantum dots as catalysts carried out at room temperature and pressure. Other polymers also get photo-reformed to yield H2, including PVC, polyethylene glycol, PS, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, PE, PC and polymethyl methacrylate. Additionally, H2 was produced by photo-reforming PET water bottles. Although plastic garbage is readily accessible to a substrate, photoreforming presents difficulties due to its complicated structure, non-biodegradability, and poor water solubility.63
3.6. Combined chemical and biological conversion
Plastic waste must typically undergo a time-consuming sorting process because it is made up of a variety of materials. Combining the power of biology and chemistry, this process can turn mixtures of mixed waste plastics into single products, potentially overcoming a significant barrier to recycling.69 In this process, comingled polymers (mixed plastics) are first depolymerized by metal-catalyzed autoxidation into a mixture of oxygenated small molecules that are useful substrates for biological conversion. After this chemical oxidation, a potent soil bacterium called Pseudomonas putida biologically converts the oxygenated compounds into one ideal chemical product, either to adipate or polyhydroxyalkanoates with a yield of 57%.70 A strategy for the selective conversion of mixed plastic waste into useful chemical products is established by this hybrid process. Regarding plastic conversion, this tandem chemical–biological process is innovative and exceptional.
4. A circular economy for a sustainable plastic future
Achieving a circular economy requires cooperation and group effort.71 It also demands a shift away from waste generation and depleting the available resources, which have an influence on the national capital, toward circular and minimal waste for sustainable growth.39 Due to faults in the current management strategies, plastic is disposed of carelessly and dumped irresponsibly. To concentrate on the crucial zones for carrying out the mitigation plans, it is crucial to understand the source of litter.18,72,73 So, to reduce the environmental effect of plastic waste, the circular economy for plastic materials must be accelerated. To establish the circular economy for plastics, a lot of work must be put into closing the plastic loop. The following recommendations can be considered for efficient plastic waste management to attain a circular economy:74,75
• Strategies should be created to enhance the current plastic waste value chain.
• In order to increase the gross domestic product, prevent ecological damage, and lower the greenhouse gas effect, a noteworthy asset in the management of plastic waste is required.
• Businesses and technologists need to offer a sensible solution to deal with various plastic wastes.
• It is essential to promote new infrastructure and technology. Numerous people would be given possibilities as a result.
• The government needs to take action to educate the populace about the importance of the circular economy from both global and local standpoints.
• The secondary school curricula should include general awareness of recycling and waste management. The importance of recycling plastic, the risks of improper disposal, and environmental degradation should be covered in the classroom.
• Encourage students to participate in cleanup efforts; even though many schools already do this, it should be required.
• Municipalities should give out awards to staff members who work hard to keep the streets clean and improve segregation. Similarly, the government can offer incentives to towns that handle plastic garbage effectively.
• Every citizen must adopt a proactive mindset for the economy to grow and the country to become waste-free.
• Claim proper policies to educate people about personal and societal issues to improve the possibility of the development of sustainable plastic management.
5. Plastics economy: capturing the opportunity
The New Plastics Economy aims to ensure plastics are not wasted and instead recycled into useful technical or biological resources. The ideas of the circular economy serve as the foundation for and guide the New Plastics Economy.76 This economic goal aims to improve the establishment of successful after-use plastic industries with potential systems producing wide economic and environmental results substantially cutting back on plastic leakage into the environment. Hence, further harmful externalities and dependence on fossil feedstocks must be eliminated. These goals can already be achieved partly with today's designs, technology, and systems. For instance, a recent research study indicated that 53% of plastic packaging could be recycled profitably and sustainably in Europe.16 Hence, it is clear that there are pockets of opportunities to be captured today, but it is not entirely feasible right now.77 The economy of New Plastics proposes an interesting goal for collaboration between the global value chain and governments towards innovation. The precise number is disputed and depends, among other things, on oil price.
Establish a successful after-use plastics economic system
The Foundation of the New Plastics Industry aims to develop an efficient after-use plastics economy. It is essential to boost resource productivity, capture more material value, and offer economic incentives directly to prevent leakage into the natural system.78 This will support the shift to renewable sources to minimise the shifting scale.
• Drastically improve viability, effectiveness, and adoption of recycling.
• Increase the use of recyclable packaging.
• Increase the use of commercially biodegradable plastic packaging for certain purposes.
Reduce strong plastic leakage into natural systems and other harmful externalities
Enhancing post-use facilities in countries that experience significant plastic leakage, making it more profitable to keep supplies onsite, and minimising the long term damage caused by plastic wrapping that fails to fall into collection and recycling systems. Explanation of the after-use structure in countries with high plastic leakage is necessary to reduce the leakage significantly. Additionally, initiatives pertaining to drugs of concern could be accelerated and scaled up.
• Enhance the infrastructure for the collection of after-use plastics, warehousing, and processing in countries with high leakage.
• Boost the system's ability to retain materials economically.
• Encourage the development of materials and forms that lessen the damaging effects of plastic packaging leakage into the environment.
Decouple fossil feedstocks containing plastics
By separating polymers from fossil feedstocks, the plastic packaging industry could effectively contribute to the low-carbon future that is inexorably approaching while enhancing the productivity of resources in use. Decoupling requires good after-use economy development since it would decrease the need for virgin feedstock and dematerialization levers. In addition to increased recycling and reuse, a key component of this effort is that the creation of materials from renewable sources for supplying virgin feedstock is still needed to make up for cycle losses.
6. Conclusions
This review thoroughly investigated the recent advancements in waste conversion technologies, upscaling processes, the resulting product types/value, and efficiency. Plastic waste has a tremendous deal of potential to be transformed into high-value goods including monomers, H2, carbon nanotubes, and liquid fuel. There are particular waste types of plastic that each conversion technique currently in use can use to its fullest potential. Various technologies need to be integrated and scaled up to deal with the massive volume of plastic garbage produced worldwide. The main obstacles to the large-scale implementation of plastic waste upscaling are its high cost, time requirements, the wide variability in plastic composition, and the existence of toxins and non-polymer species in most wastes. These obstacles encompass a high energy consumption and the requirement for presorting plastics.
Author contributions
Both authors have written part of this review.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
H. Alhazmi, F. H. Almansour and Z. Aldhafeeri, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 5340 CrossRef .
N. Evode, S. A. Qamar, M. Bilal, D. Barceló and H. M. N. Iqbal, Case Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng., 2021, 4, 100142 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Chen, T. K. Nath, S. Chong, V. Foo, C. Gibbins and A. M. Lechner, SN Appl. Sci., 2021, 3, 437 CrossRef .
I. Fahim, O. Mohsen and D. ElKayaly, Polymer, 2021, 13, 915 CAS .
K. Lee, Y. Jing, Y. Wang and N. Yan, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 635–652 CrossRef PubMed .
K. R. Vanpalli, H. B. Sharma, V. P. Ranjan, B. Samal, J. Bhattacharya, B. K. Dubey and S. Goel, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 750, 141514 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Q. Tan, Q. Song and J. Li, Waste Manage., 2021, 119, 242–253 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Klemeš, Y. Van Fan, R. R. Tan and P. Jiang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 127, 109883 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Melchor-Martínez, R. Macías-Garbett, L. Alvarado-Ramírez, R. G. Araújo, J. E. Sosa-Hernández, D. Ramírez-Gamboa, L. Parra-Arroyo, A. G. Alvarez, R. P. B. Monteverde, K. A. S. Cazares, A. Reyes-Mayer, M. Yáñez Lino, H. M. N. Iqbal and R. Parra-Saldívar, Polymer, 2022, 14, 1203 Search PubMed .
S. Andreasi Bassi, A. Boldrin, G. Faraca and T. F. Astrup, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 162, 105030 CrossRef .
T. Thiounn and R. C. Smith, J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 58, 1347–1364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Munir, M. F. Irfan and M. R. Usman, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 90, 490–515 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Korey, K. Li, K. Copenhaver, H. Tekinalp, S. Celik, K. Kalaitzidou, R. Ruan, A. J. Ragauskas and S. Ozcan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jing, Y. Wang, S. Furukawa, J. Xia, C. Sun, M. J. Hülsey, H. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Liu and N. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5527–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hongkailers, Y. Jing, Y. Wang, N. Hinchiranan and N. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4330–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, M. Zeng, R. D. Yappert, J. Sun, Y.-H. Lee, A. M. LaPointe, B. Peters, M. M. Abu-Omar and S. L. Scott, Science, 2020, 370, 437–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Narancic and K. E. O'Connor, Microbiology, 2019, 165, 129–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Han, Y. Wu and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 458, 214422 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Gin, H. Hassan, M. A. Ahmad, B. H. Hameed and A. T. Mohd Din, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103035 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prajapati, K. Kohli, S. K. Maity and B. K. Sharma, Molecules, 2021, 26, 3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Anuar Sharuddin, F. Abnisa, W. M. A. Wan Daud and M. K. Aroua, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 115, 308–326 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakthipriya, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 809, 151160 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hou, M. Zhen, H. Qian, Y. Nie, X. Bai, T. Xia, M. L. U. Rehman, Q. Li and M. Ju, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100514 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Burange, M. B. Gawande, F. L. Y. Lam, R. V. Jayaram and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 146–156 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, M. Yan, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Ding, L. Chen and C. Chen, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 282, 124523 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Awoyera and A. Adesina, Case Stud. Constr. Mater., 2020, 12, e00330 Search PubMed .
I.-H. Choi, H.-J. Lee, G.-B. Rhim, D.-H. Chun, K.-H. Lee and K.-R. Hwang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2022, 161, 105424 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kohli, R. Prajapati, S. K. Maity and B. K. Sharma, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2019, 140, 179–187 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Blank, T. Narancic, J. Mampel, T. Tiso and K. O'Connor, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2020, 62, 212–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, E. E. Kwon, S. S. Lam, W. H. Chen, J. Rinklebe and Y. K. Park, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 321, 128989 CrossRef CAS .
R. Voss, R. P. Lee and M. Fröhling, Circ. Econ. Environ., 2022, 1369–1398 Search PubMed .
K. Ghosal and C. Nayak, J. Adv. Mater., 2022, 3, 1974–1992 RSC .
Y. Kratish and T. J. Marks, Angew. Chem., 2022, 61, e202112576 CAS .
L. Dai, N. Zhou, Y. Lv, K. Cobb, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Chen, R. Zou, H. Lei and R. Ruan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 245, 114578 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bora, MRS Energy Sustain., 2020, 7, E2 CrossRef .
M. Koller, Fermentation, 2018, 4, 30 CrossRef .
B. Zhu, D. Wang and N. Wei, Trends Biotechnol., 2022, 40, 22–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, M. Liu, H. Du and Y. Gong, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 3662 CrossRef .
K. O. Babaremu, S. A. Okoya, E. Hughes, B. Tijani, D. Teidi, A. Akpan, J. Igwe, S. Karera, M. Oyinlola and E. T. Akinlabi, Heliyon, 2022, 8, e09984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suresh, A. Alagusundaram, P. S. Kumar, D.-V. N. Vo, F. C. Christopher, B. Balaji, V. Viswanathan and S. Sankar, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 3609–3629 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Zhao, D. Fan, Q. Qi, T. Zeng and Y. Bi, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 344, 126279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hopewell, R. Dvorak and E. Kosior, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2009, 364, 2115–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Vollmer, M. J. F. Jenks, M. C. P. Roelands, R. J. White, T. van Harmelen, P. de Wild, G. P. van der Laan, F. Meirer, J. T. F. Keurentjes and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15402–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sebestyén, E. Barta-Rajnai, J. Bozi, M. Blazsó, E. Jakab, N. Miskolczi, J. Sója and Z. Czégény, Appl. Energy, 2017, 207, 114–122 CrossRef .
E. Sanjaya and A. Abbas, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2023, 189, 106730 CrossRef .
M. Shamsuyeva and H.-J. Endres, Compos., Part C: Open Access, 2021, 6, 100168 CAS .
B. Joseph, J. James, N. Kalarikkal and S. Thomas, Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res., 2021, 4, 199–208 CAS .
D. Cudjoe and H. Wang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2022, 237, 107470 CrossRef .
S. Chawla, B. S. Varghese, C. A. C. G. Hussain, R. Keçili and C. M. Hussain, Chemosphere, 2022, 308, 135867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yayalık, A. Koyun and M. Akgün, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2020, 40, 1401–1416 CrossRef .
D. Cudjoe and H. Wang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2022, 237, 107470 CrossRef .
C. Morin, A. Loppiner-Serani, F. Cansell and C. Aymonier, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2012, 66, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Queiroz, G. B. Pedroso, S. N. Kuriyama and A. A. Fidalgo-Neto, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2020, 25, 100364 CrossRef .
H. Jeswani, C. Krüger, M. Russ, M. Horlacher, F. Antony, S. Hann and A. Azapagic, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 769, 144483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bai, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, J. Zou, H. Zhang, H. Jin and X. Li, Renewable Energy, 2019, 135, 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bai, H. Jin, C. Fan, C. Cao, W. Wei and W. Cao, Waste Manage., 2019, 89, 247–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bian, R. Zhang, L. Dong, B. Bai, W. Li, H. Jin and C. Cao, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 11165–11174 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uekert, H. Kasap and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15201–15210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Issifu, E. W. Deffor and U. R. Sumaila, Recycling, 2021, 6, 64 CrossRef .
L. Miller, K. Soulliere, S. Sawyer-Beaulieu, S. Tseng and E. Tam, Materials, 2014, 7, 5883–5902 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nagakawa and M. Nagata, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 47511–47519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, F. Tong, F. Ma, Y. Zhang, P. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Wang, H. Cheng, Y. Dai, Z. Zheng and B. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uekert, M. A. Bajada, T. Schubert, C. M. Pichler and E. Reisner, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4190–4197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Milios, L. Holm Christensen, D. McKinnon, C. Christensen, M. K. Rasch and M. Hallstrøm Eriksen, Waste Manage., 2018, 76, 180–189 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gogoi, A. Singh, V. Moutam, L. Sharma, K. Sharma, A. Halder and P. F. Siril, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 106649 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uekert, H. Kasap and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15201–15210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, S. Yang, Y. Su, Y. Xiong and S. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Payne, P. McKeown and M. D. Jones, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2019, 165, 170–181 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Sullivan, A. Z. Werner, K. J. Ramirez, L. D. Ellis, J. R. Bussard, B. A. Black, D. G. Brandner, F. Bratti, B. L. Buss, X. Dong, S. J. Haugen, M. A. Ingraham, M. O. Konev, W. E. Michener, J. Miscall, I. Pardo, S. P. Woodworth, A. M. Guss, Y. Román-Leshkov, S. S. Stahl and G. T. Beckham, Science, 2022, 378, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan, Science, 2022, 378, 132–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Robaina, K. Murillo, E. Rocha and J. Villar, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 730, 139038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Samarasinghe, S. Pawan Kumar and C. Visvanathan, Environ. Qual. Manag., 2021, 31, 99–107 CrossRef .
C. Joshi, J. Seay and N. Banadda, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2019, 38, 3–11 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Bucknall, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2020, 378, 20190268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, K. L. Yao and Z. L. Liu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 21, 095001 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Meys, F. Frick, S. Westhues, A. Sternberg, J. Klankermayer and A. Bardow, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 162, 105010 CrossRef .
P. Pazienza and C. De Lucia, Bus. Strategy Environ., 2020, 29, 779–788 CrossRef .
N. M. P. Bocken, I. de Pauw, C. Bakker and B. van der Grinten, J. Ind. Prod. Eng., 2016, 33, 308–320 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Rajesh Banu J	Rajesh Banu J is presently working as an Associate Professor at the Department of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu (CUTN), India. He is also a visiting professor at the Center for Excellence in Environmental Studies, King Abdul Aziz University, Saudi Arabia. He is the author of 290 publications in SCI and SCIE journals with a cumulative impact factor of 1852. His publications have achieved more than 10500 citations, giving him an h-index of 56. His name is included among the top 2% of scientists worldwide by independent researchers of Stanford University. He was awarded the Think of Ecology Award by Hiyoshi, Japan, for the year 2018. His research interests are waste to energy, value-added product recovery from waste, biological wastewater treatment, nutrient removal, membrane bioreactors, and microbial fuel cells.
Godvin Sharmila V	Godvin Sharmila V obtained her Ph.D. from Anna University Chennai, India in 2019 under the supervision of Associate Professor Rajesh Banu J. She is the author of 26 publications in SCI and SCIE journals with a cumulative impact factor of 203. She also worked as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Civil Engineering, Rohini College of Engineering and Technology, Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India. Her research interests are biomass conversion to bioenergy, algal biorefinery, wastewater remediation, photocatalytic immobilization, sludge management, and advanced oxidation processes.

 	Fig. 1  Various types of plastic waste and their source of generation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Various countries involved in plastic waste generation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Various depolymerization approaches for PET.	 

10 g PET	0.07 g ZnO	160 °C/—/0.5 h	Teflon-lined, stainless-steel autoclave	80.7%	DMT 73%	
30

60 mg Co Np	4.0 g PET	180 °C/1 atm/3 h	—	96%	BHET 77%	
11

ZnMn2O4	0.3 g PET (4 mm × 2.8 mm × 3.2 mm)	260 °C/5 atm/1 h	Stainless steel batch-type autoclave reactor	—	BHET 92.2%	
31

GO–Mn3O4	0.3 g PET (3 mm × 3 mm)	300 °C/1.1 MPa/80 min−1	Stainless steel batch-type autoclave	—	BHET 90%	
11

MnO2/HGO	0.3 g PET	200 °C/—/10 min	Three-neck flask reactor	100%	BHET 100%	
31

ϒ-Fe2O3/Nitrogen doped graphene	0.3 g PET	195 °C/1 atm/3 h	Around-bottom flask	100%	BHET 100%	
32

Fe2O4/h-BNNS	0.3 g PET	200 °C/—/5 h	Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave	100%	BHET 100%	
11

Fe2O3@MoS2	2 g PET (<200 ml, 56.780 g mol−1)	200 °C/—/5 h	Teflon reactor	94%	BHET 100%	
33, 34
Pd/h BN	PET (10 g, <80 mesh, 2 2 mm2)	200 °C/—/5 h	T–C reactor	98.4%	BHET 92.1%	
33

Fe3O4/MWCNT	2 g PET (4 mm, 2.8 mm, 3.2 mm)	190 °C/1 atm/2 h	Two-necked round bottom flask	100%	BHET 100%	
35


 	Fig. 4  Biotechnological upscaling approach for the PET polymer.	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimental setup and reaction process of microwave-assisted pyrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental setup of supercritical water assisted gasification.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoreforming process.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
