A modular device for large area integrated photoelectrochemical water-splitting as a versatile tool to evaluate photoabsorbers and catalysts   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA10688A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10688A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4818-4826A modular device for large area integrated photoelectrochemical water-splitting as a versatile tool to evaluate photoabsorbers and catalysts†

        
          
            J.-P. 
            Becker
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            B. 
            Turan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Smirnov
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Welter
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Urbain
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Wolff
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Haas
          
        
       and 

        
          
            F. 
            Finger
          
        
      
IEK-5 Photovoltaik, Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany. E-mail: j.becker@fz-juelich.de
Received 
      12th December 2016
    , Accepted 15th January 2017First published on 16th January 2017AbstractWe present a stand-alone integrated solar water-splitting module with an active area of 64 cm2 and a long-term stable operation. As a photocathode we employ multijunction thin film silicon solar cells that were optimized to deliver a suitable output voltage for spontaneous water-splitting. Two approaches for the design of a suitable front contact are presented to reduce series resistance losses related to the upscale of the photoelectrodes. The photoelectrode is protected from the electrolyte by a sheet metal which connects the rear contact of the solar cell with the hydrogen evolving catalyst. Thereby, the sheet metal ensures long-term stability while the electrical and thermal coupling of the solar cell and the electrolysis cell is maintained. Due to the modular setup, which allows us to vary and optimize the device components (i.e. the solar cell, catalysts, membrane, and electrolyte) individually, the presented water-splitting device provides a convenient toolbox for the optimization of such systems.
1. Introduction
The conversion of electrical energy into chemical energy, or more specifically, the utilization of renewable power sources for the production of fuels by electrochemical processes, is a research topic that has recently gained substantial interest.1,2
One of the many possible systems investigated3 is the integrated combination of a photovoltaic (PV) cell and an electrochemical (EC) cell. This system may be referred to as a photovoltaic-biased electrosynthetic cell (PV-EC).4 In such a system, a solar cell illuminated by sunlight serves as a power source with an appropriate output voltage to drive an electrochemical reaction such as the splitting of H2O into molecular H2 and O2. In order to supply a sufficient output voltage at a reasonable solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, the solar cell has to comprise multiple junctions. In this case, the voltages of the sub cells, connected in series, add up to the required total voltage which is typically above 1.6 V for optimized, state-of-the-art electrochemical water splitting systems.5,6 Here, a multijunction cell is understood as a vertical integration of sub cells, each has different optical and electrical properties (e.g. different band gaps), and the light passes one sub cell after another. An obvious advantage of this approach is an improved utilization of the solar spectrum and reduced thermalization losses compared to single junction devices.7 An alternative approach, which will not be considered in the present work, is the lateral interconnection of identical sub cells (side-by-side) analogous to the design of large area thin film photovoltaic modules.8–10 We recently reported a fully scalable concept which employs this lateral interconnection of sub cells.11 Side-by-side series connections of single junction cells using wires12–14 are also feasible, but will not be considered here.
A particularly interesting setup of a combination of a vertically integrated multijunction solar cell and an electrochemical cell has both components in direct contact such that the electrical rear contact of the solar cell is simultaneously one of the electrodes of the electrolyzer.15–17 This setup allows for a compact system design of a solar-to-hydrogen module similar to a classical PV module and an individual optimization of the PV and EC components. Furthermore, absorption of the incident light by the electrolyte or a semi-transparent catalyst is avoided.18 However, the intimate contact of the light absorbing semiconductor material and the electrolyte creates challenges in the chemical stability of the device.
In recent years, we have studied PV-EC devices with a focus on the development of multijunction solar cells on the basis of thin film silicon.19–21 In addition, we have investigated the application of different catalyst materials and have optimized the cells with respect to their chemical stability and overall solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies.22–25
Besides the development of appropriate multijunction solar cells, extensive research activities focus on the development and integration of catalyst materials,5 the choice of electrolytes, the corrosion protection of the light absorber26 and the optimization of the overall device geometry.27
Demonstrations of practical solar water splitting devices are typically performed on a device area of ≤1 cm2.28 On this device area, multijunction solar cells have been optimized in our laboratory to a very high degree which, when remaining with the thin film silicon approach, is already close to the possible maximum performance value. Further optimization of the integrated PV-EC module, however, is still possible by improvements of the catalyst materials and module geometries such as the electrode distance or an increased active surface area e.g. by nanostructuring.29,30
Obviously, for any commercial realization of the technology, the module area has to be upscaled considerably. However, studies regarding the upscaling of PV-EC devices are often based on theoretical considerations,31 or focus on technoeconomic aspects only.32–34
Two prominent scientific-technological challenges become significantly more important when solar water-splitting modules are scaled to practical areas ≫1 cm2. First, the current collection of a large area solar cell through the front electrode of the solar cell with a non-negligible sheet resistance results in substantial ohmic losses. And second, the protection of the solar cell against corrosion using protective coatings becomes increasingly challenging because a small pinhole in the coating can cause a fatal failure of the whole device. Thus, the solar cell needs to be either inherently stable in the electrolyte used, self-healing, or physically detached from the electrolyte.
In the present report, we want to promote an approach for a scalable integrated PV-EC module on the basis of multijunction thin film silicon solar cells with the following prominent features:
(i) Large area (64 cm2) multijunction thin film silicon based solar cells with appropriate front contact grid arrangements and cell geometry for low loss current collection,
(ii) Compact PV-EC module design employing a sheet metal contact to ensure long time stable performance and large versatility for the development and investigation of catalyst materials.
Thereby, the approach displays a successful realization of an upscaled, vertically integrated PV-EC device for spontaneous solar water-splitting based on thin film silicon multijunction solar cells. Furthermore, it provides a long term stable tool to investigate and optimize all components on the electrolyzer side of the PV-EC module by circumventing chemical stability issues at the interface between the semiconductor (solar cell) and the electrolyte. The modular design allows for the exchange of each component (solar cell, catalysts, electrolyte, and membrane) individually and is compatible with electrolysis in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes. We will present two approaches for the fabrication of front contact grids to improve the current collection and discuss the photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical performance as well as the design of the integrated module.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Upscaling of the solar cells
In the case of large area applications beyond laboratory scale (≫1 cm2) one of the first issues that arises is resistive losses which limit the transport of the currents over larger distances. The transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) such as indium tin oxide (ITO, In2O3:Sn), fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, SnO2:F), or aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO, ZnO:Al), which are regularly used as transparent front contacts in thin film photovoltaics, generally exhibit a trade-off between electrical and optical properties (conductivity and transmittance).35 As a consequence, the TCO does not usually provide sufficient conductivity to transport the photo-generated charge carriers over distances ≫1 cm without severe losses. Thus, losses related to the TCO resistance become an issue, which eventually results in a substantial reduction of the fill factor.36 This trend can be observed in Fig. 1a which plots the j–V curves of four triple junction solar cells based on hydrogenated amorphous and microcrystalline silicon (a-Si:H and μc-Si:H) of different sizes. The active area of the solar cells was 1 × 1 cm2, 2 × 2 cm2, 3 × 3 cm2, and 7.3 × 7.3 cm2.
 Fig. 1  (a) j–V curves of a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction solar cells with active areas of 1 × 1 cm2, 2 × 2 cm2, 3 × 3 cm2, and 7.3 × 7.3 cm2 measured under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum. The inset illustrates the geometric area of the solar cells A = L2. (b) Fill factors of a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple solar cells with different active areas. The solid line serves as a guide to the eye. 
Accordingly, the maximum path length that the charge carriers had to travel was increased considerably. The sheet resistance of the ZnO:Al front contact was 4.9 Ω. Hence, the fill factor of the solar cells decreased drastically from 71.2% (1 × 1 cm2) to 56.1% (7.3 × 7.3 cm2). This can be seen in Fig. 1b which plots the fill factors of the solar cells versus the edge length. The open-circuit potential and the short-circuit current density did not change significantly with increasing edge length. All characteristic parameters of the solar cells can be found in Fig. S1 in the ESI.†
In order to maintain a high fill factor for large solar cells we introduce a supporting metal grid similar to the approach that is used in classic wafer-based crystalline silicon solar cells. Such a grid can be deposited e.g. by physical vapour deposition (evaporation or sputtering) through a shadow mask, by screen printing, inkjet printing, or plating.37 In addition to this classical metal grid we present a second approach which is particularly suitable for thin film technologies and employs laser materials processing. This novel approach allows us to effectively use parts of the silver rear contact as a front contact grid. Details of the fabrication processes and the contact geometry are schematically depicted in Fig. 2 and will be discussed along with the specific advantages of the two approaches in the next two subsections.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the process steps for the fabrication of a Si thin-film solar cell with (a) an evaporated metal front contact grid and (b) a laser scribed front contact grid. (c) and (d) depict the corresponding top views of the resulting solar cell structures with front contact grids. 

2.1.1 Evaporated front contact grid. 
Wafer-based silicon heterojunction solar cells and thin-film silicon solar cells prepared in the substrate (n–i–p) configuration typically use a metal grid in order to support lateral conduction of the front TCO layer.38,39 Here, we utilized a similar approach with a silver (Ag) grid. The fabrication process of the solar cells is schematically depicted in Fig. 2a.
A 10 nm thick transparent SiO2 layer was deposited by means of e-beam evaporation (step i) to serve as an adhesion promoter for the Ag grid. The Ag fingers were thermally evaporated through a stainless steel shadow mask (step ii). Each finger had a width of approximately 200 μm and a height of approximately 250 nm.
The distance between two fingers was 2 mm. The fingers were connected by two 3 mm wide and 700 nm thick Ag bus bars evaporated close to the edges of the substrate. Fig. 2c shows a top view of the solar cell with the evaporated front contact grid. Overall, this grid configuration accounts for shading losses of 10%. Following the Ag grid, a front TCO bi-layer was deposited: (step iii) an 80 nm thick ZnO:Al layer with a 1 wt% aluminium concentration was deposited at room temperature by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering in order to reduce thermal stress in the Ag fingers, and (step iv) the bulk ZnO:Al layer (800 nm) was deposited at a substrate temperature of 350 °C. The latter serves as a transparent front contact and as a light scattering layer after chemical texturing which was performed by wet chemical etching in diluted hydrochloric acid (0.5% HCl) at room temperature for 40 s.40 An a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction solar cell was deposited in superstrate (p–i–n) configuration (step v). Subsequently, a double layer of 80 nm ZnO:Al (sputter deposited at room temperature) and 700 nm thermally evaporated Ag was deposited through a stainless steel shadow mask as a back reflecting rear contact (step vi).

Fig. 3 plots the j–V characteristic of a 3.5 × 3.5 cm2 triple junction a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H solar cell deposited on the introduced ZnO:Al/Ag grid front electrode as a blue dotted curve. Furthermore, the j–V curves of two reference solar cells without the Ag grid (1 × 1 cm2 and 3.5 × 3.5 cm2) are shown for comparison. The j–V curves were weighted with the active area. Thus, the short-circuit current density is very similar for the cells with and without a metal grid. Relative to the total area of the solar cell (3.5 × 3.5 cm2) the losses due to shading by the front contact grid account for 10% relative. The corresponding cell parameters (active area efficiency ηPV, short circuit current density jSC, open circuit voltage VOC and fill factor FF) are listed in the inset in Fig. 3. The large solar cell with the Ag front contact grid exhibits a higher FF than the large solar cell without a grid. This indicates an improved current collection with the Ag grid.
 Fig. 3  
j–V curves of solar cells with areas of 1 × 1 cm2 and 3.5 × 3.5 cm2 measured under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum. 
However, compared with the 1 × 1 cm2 solar cell, there is still room for improvement e.g. by optimization of the grid geometry. This will be addressed in future studies. Also, the aspect ratio of the metal fingers was not optimized here. In the evaluated superstrate configuration, the deposition of the thin film solar cell on a metal grid with edges of approx. 200 nm in height is not trivial. The typical thickness of the first sub cell (a-Si:H top cell) is in the same range and pinholes in the absorber layers may drastically deteriorate the performance of the solar cell. Thus, the concept is particularly suited for solar cells in substrate geometry because in this case the grid can be deposited after solar cell preparation and the aspect ratio of the fingers can be very high. Thereby, the trade-off between shadowing and resistive losses is more relaxed. However, also in the superstrate configuration metal fingers have been applied successfully.41


2.1.2 Laser scribed front contact grid. 
An alternative route to fabricate a metal grid front contact is the utilization of parts of the ZnO:Al/Ag rear contact. Therefore, stripes of 200 μm width were scribed by means of laser materials processing. The fabrication process for the corresponding solar cells is schematically depicted in Fig. 2b.
Commercial FTO on glass (type VU, Asahi Glass Co.) was used as a superstrate for a triple junction a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H solar cell (step i). The solar cell was then scribed locally by means of laser processing such that 64 individual solar cells with an area of 1 × 1 cm2 were defined (step ii, LP1). Subsequently, a double layer back reflecting rear contact consisting of 80 nm ZnO:Al and 200 nm Ag was sputter deposited at room temperature (step iii). The resulting shunts between front TCO and rear contact were then insulated by a second laser processing step (step iv, LP2). A polyimide film (Kapton, DuPont) was used to insulate front and back contact areas on the rear side of the solar cell (step v). Finally, the 64 individual solar cells were connected in parallel employing a conductive tape (3M). Photographs of the rear side of the solar cell after steps iv, v, and vi are depicted in Fig. S2 in the ESI.†
The resulting front contact metal grid geometry is schematically depicted in Fig. 2d. The front contact fingers were approx. 200 μm wide which corresponds to an active area loss of 3.5%. Please note that 400 μm and 800 μm wide front contact fingers were also evaluated. However, the slightly decreased resistance did not compensate for the additional area loss. Micrographs of the laser patterned contact grids are depicted in Fig. S3 in the ESI† and electrical data of the contact fingers can be found in Fig. S4 in the ESI.†
The j–V characteristics of the 64 cells were measured individually (after step iv) and the expected j–V curve of the whole device (8 × 8 cm2) was calculated as the parallel connection of the individual curves viaeqn (1). (1)
The result is depicted in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the j–V characteristics of the individual 64 solar cells (grey lines) show good homogeneity over the substrate area, and the measured efficiency of the solar cells was between 9.8% and 10.3% (standard deviation 0.33%). The calculated j–V characteristic of the whole device (red line) shows an efficiency of 9.8%. After the parallel connection of the solar cells, the fill factor was slightly reduced (from 68.0% to 62.9%), which is most likely a result of the contact resistance between the Ag rear contact of the solar cells and the adhesive tape used for the interconnection. Consequently, the efficiency was slightly decreased to 9.3%.
 Fig. 4  
j–V curves of 64 individual solar cells with an area of 1 × 1 cm2 each (thin grey lines). The red curve represents the expected behaviour of the total 8 × 8 cm2 solar cell (calculated as the mean of 64 cells) and the dashed blue curve is the measured behaviour of the latter. 
In the case of the parallel connection, the open circuit voltage of the large area cell was similar to the highest open circuit voltage of the individual cells (VOC = 2.19 V) and the short-circuit current density jSC was slightly lower than the calculated average jSC of 6.8 mA cm−2. This is likely due to the area loss by the front contact grid. Overall, the laser patterned grid allowed for a successful 64-fold upscaling of the triple junction solar cell with minimal losses. The concept is particularly suited for large area thin film technologies that are deposited in the superstrate configuration. Further upscaling is certainly feasible. However, broader front contact stripes, similar to the bus bars used in conventional wafer-based solar cells, may have to be implemented.

2.2 Electrolysis cell
The electrochemical part of the integrated solar water splitting device consisted of two sheet metal electrodes (anode and cathode) which were mounted on a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) cell body. The geometrical area of the electrodes in contact with the electrolyte was defined by O-rings with a diameter of 8 cm (area A = 50.27 cm2). Please note that the active areas of the PV and the EC parts are in the same order of magnitude. Thus, the current density at the EC electrodes is in the order of 10 mA cm−2. This is very low compared to typical current densities in a conventional electrolyzer system. Thereby, mass transport limitations are less critical in the integrated PV-EC system. Nonetheless, local current density distributions are critical for the scale-up of photoelectrochemical reactors.42

Fig. 5a depicts linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) of two electrochemical cells featuring low cost Ni electrodes for both the anode and cathode in a 1 M KOH solution. The two cells were identical except for the distance del between the anode and cathode, which was 7 mm and 11 mm, respectively. A sweep rate of 1 mV s−1 was used for both voltammograms in a two-electrode setup. Additionally, the iR drop due to the ionic resistance of the electrolyte was determined by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements and the LSV corrected for the iR drop is also plotted in Fig. 5a. The current onset for both cell geometries is located at a potential of approximately 1.6 V. The different slopes of the curves correspond to the additional ionic resistance in the electrolyte. At a current of 500 mA, the iR corrected curve exhibits a potential of approximately E = 1.91 V (η = 0.68 V). For electrode distances del of 7 mm and 11 mm, potentials of E = 2.01 V (η = 0.78 V) and 2.14 V (η = 0.91 V) were necessary to sustain 500 mA. The same trend is apparent in Fig. 5b which plots galvanostatic (chronopotentiometric) measurements of the same electrolysis cells for 10 h at a current density of 500 mA. Initially, the voltage changes slightly before it saturates at a relatively constant value of 2.0 V and 2.1 V for an electrode distance of 7 mm and 11 mm, respectively. The initial behaviour is likely due to chemical changes at the electrode surfaces (reduction or oxidation, respectively) and the formation of the electrochemical double layers. In order to reduce the iR-drop, i.e. resistive losses across the electrolyte, the electrode distance should be minimized. Ideally, the electrochemical cell is designed in zero gap geometry which could be realized using porous electrodes or flow field plates as used in conventional alkaline electrolyzers pressed on the membrane from both sides.43 This case corresponds to the iR corrected curves in Fig. 5. A more detailed discussion on mass transport aspects can be found in a recent review.44
 Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the employed electrochemical cells in a two-electrode setup featuring Ni electrodes with a geometric surface area of 50.27 cm2 for both the anode and cathode in a 1 molar aqueous KOH solution. The distance between the anode and cathode was either 7 mm or 11 mm. The voltammograms were recorded with a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (b) Chronopotentiometric measurements at a current of 500 mA of the same two electrochemical cells used in (a). 
To determine the faradaic efficiency of the used EC setup galvanostatic measurements at 100 mA, 200 mA, and 500 mA were conducted and the gas was collected in an eudiometer which was initially filled with water and the water level was monitored over time. Thereby, an experimental gas rate was extracted which was divided by the gas rate that is expected from the current via Faraday's law of electrolysis. We found a faradaic efficiency of unity for the given setup (see Fig. S5, ESI†).
For gas separation in the alkaline KOH solution an anion exchange membrane was employed (fumasep FAA-3-PK-130, FuMa-Tech GmbH). The membrane was glued between two rings made of polyether ether ketone (PEEK) using a two component epoxy resin (Hysol 9483, Henkel). The PEEK rings were then mounted in the electrolyte compartment of the EC cell utilizing two O-rings. Thereby, the anodic and the cathodic half spaces were separated by the anion exchange membrane. Cyclic voltammograms of the EC cell with and without the membrane did not show significant deviations (see Fig. S6, ESI†). Thus, we conclude that the additional series resistance due to the membrane is negligible. Furthermore, the gas separation was confirmed by another galvanostatic measurement at 500 mA with the membrane included. The evolved hydrogen and oxygen gases were collected separately in two eudiometers. The measured rates of hydrogen and oxygen evolution matched the gas rates expected from the current. The hydrogen to oxygen ratio was approx. two and the faradaic efficiency was approx. unity (see Fig. S7, ESI†).
2.3 Integrated PV-EC module
The upscaled multijunction solar cells and the electrochemical reactor were finally combined in a closely packed modular PV-EC device. The assembly is schematically sketched in Fig. 6a. Furthermore, Fig. 6b depicts a photograph of the device. Additional photographs of the module assembly may be found in Fig. S8 in the ESI.† Each component of the integrated module can be exchanged individually. Thus, the reactor represents a variable toolbox to test different combinations of photoelectrodes and catalysts under various conditions. The sheet metal electrodes that serve as the interface between the solar cell and the electrocatalyst provide protection for the solar cell against corrosion while maintaining electrical and thermal coupling between the PV and the EC part of the module.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic cross-section of the developed large area integrated PV-EC water splitting device. The setup is modular in the sense that each component, i.e. the solar cell, the catalysts for the HER and the OER, the membrane, and the electrolyte, can be exchanged easily. Furthermore, the electronic properties of the solar cell (PV), the electrochemical cell (EC), and the combined PV-EC module are accessible via the three contacts (1–3). (b) Photograph of the integrated PV-EC module under illumination from the front side. 

Fig. 7 shows the performance of a module that uses the developed 64 cm2 a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction solar cell with a laser patterned front contact grid (see Section 2.1.2) in combination with two sets of catalysts. The first set features Ni electrodes for both the HER and OER in an alkaline 1 M KOH solution which was discussed above. The second set comprises a Pt catalyst for the HER and an IrOx catalyst for the OER in an acidic 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Both catalysts were deposited on Ti sheet metals. The latter pair of catalysts represents very active, however less abundant, precious metal catalysts. In the H2SO4 solution a Nafion membrane was employed to separate the gases. Fig. 7a plots the individual I–V characteristics of the PV and the EC cells. The PV curve was recorded between contacts 1 and 2 (see Fig. 6) while the EC curves were recorded between contacts 2 and 3. For the sake of clarity, the EC voltammograms were mirrored at the y-axis in order to find the point of intersection of the PV and the EC curves which represents the working point for the integrated water splitting module. It is obvious that the intersection point is located at a higher current in the case of the precious metal catalysts, which exhibit less overpotential losses. This also becomes clear from the I–V curves of the total PV-EC module, which were recorded between contacts 1 and 3 (see Fig. 6a). The corresponding curves are plotted in Fig. 7b. Here, the current at zero bias (V = 0) represents the point of operation of the module. In agreement with the findings from Fig. 7a the curves suggest a higher operation current for the Pt/IrOx catalyst pair as compared to the Ni/Ni pair. Under constant operation under bias free conditions (contacts 1 and 3 short-circuited) for 80 minutes, an operation current of approx. 110 mA and 250 mA was established for the Ni/Ni catalysts and the Pt/IrOx catalysts, respectively (see Fig. 7c). Based on the solar cell area of 64 cm2 this corresponds to solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies of ηSTH = 2.1% and ηSTH = 4.8%. During the spontaneous water splitting, the gases were collected separately. Fig. 7d shows the evolution of hydrogen and oxygen gas volumes over time for the configuration using Ni electrodes in KOH. Furthermore, the expected gas volumes calculated via Faraday's law of electrolysis and the ideal gas law are plotted as dashed lines. The sum of both gas volumes closely matches the expected values. This indicates a faradaic efficiency of unity. However, the ratio between the two collected gas volumes deviates clearly from two. Apparently, a fraction of the evolved hydrogen was collected in the anodic compartment of the EC cell during the measurement. This may be due to a non-ideal selectivity of the anion exchange membrane and a possible leakage at the O-ring mounts of the membrane. Further optimizations of the reactor will address these issues.
 Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristic of a 64 cm2 large a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction photovoltaic (PV) cell (green) and linear sweep voltammograms of the electrochemical (EC) cell in a two-electrode configuration featuring Pt and IrOx catalysts on Ti sheet metal in 1 M H2SO4 (red) or two Ni metal sheets in 1 M KOH (blue). The intersection point of the EC curves with the PV curve represents the expected point of operation for spontaneous (bias-free) water-splitting. (b) I–V characteristics of the total integrated large area water-splitting modules featuring Pt and IrOx catalysts on Ti sheet metal in 1 M H2SO4 (red) or to Ni metal sheets in 1 M KOH (blue). Here, the current at V = 0 represents the point of operation for spontaneous water splitting. (c) Chronoamperometric measurement under bias-free conditions of the integrated large area PV-EC modules using the same setup as described in (b). (d) Gas volume of evolved hydrogen and oxygen during spontaneous water-splitting over time. The measured volumes are plotted as solid lines and the volumes expected for a faradaic efficiency of 100% are plotted as dashed lines. 
Overall, the presented solar water-splitting module is a variable device that allows for easy testing of different combinations of solar cells, electrocatalysts, membranes and electrolytes on practical device areas.
3. Conclusions
In this work, we presented the development of a large area integrated photovoltaic-electrochemical module for water splitting. The upscaling of the photoelectrode based on a multijunction thin film silicon solar cell involved the design of appropriate grid contact patterns to reduce resistive losses. Two successful approaches were demonstrated: (i) the implementation of evaporated Ag grids and (ii) a novel approach utilizing a laser scribing process. As a proof-of-concept, the latter approach was used in an integrated photovoltaic-electrochemical module with an active area of 64 cm2. Long term stability of the module was ensured by the utilization of sheet metal electrodes to protect the solar cell from corrosion. Two sets of catalysts were employed in either alkaline or acidic electrolytes to demonstrate the flexibility of the module. Furthermore, membranes were used to separate the half spaces and prevent mixing of hydrogen and oxygen gases. In summary, the presented approach represents a flexible tool to test and optimize upscaled photoelectrodes, catalysts and reactor geometries and is a demonstration of spontaneous water-splitting devices with an active area ≫1 cm2 and a long-term stable solar-to-hydrogen efficiency close to 5%.
4. Experimental
4.1 Solar cell fabrication
Triple junction solar cells (a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H) were prepared on 10 × 10 cm2 glass substrates with either surface textured ZnO:Al or SnO2:F as light scattering transparent front contacts. The silicon deposition was performed by means of plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) at deposition temperatures of 185 °C or below. Additional details on the preparation of solar cells can be found elsewhere.21 A ZnO:Al/Ag back reflecting contact was deposited by means of magnetron sputtering and thermal evaporation on the solar cell rear side.
4.2 Evaporation of metal grid
The Ag metal grid was deposited on a 10 nm thick SiO2 layer on a glass substrate by means of thermal evaporation through a 0.2 mm thick stainless steel shadow mask. The substrate temperature was not controlled during the deposition. Further details about the fabrication of the evaporated metal front contact grid are described in Section 2.1.1.
4.3 Laser scribing
Laser material processing was performed using a 1064 nm Nd:YVO4 Q-switched diode-pumped solid state laser source from ROFIN (type PowerLine E) which exhibits a pulse duration between 7 and 12 ns (FWHM). A laser source with the second harmonic and a wavelength of 532 nm was used for the removal of the absorber (LP1 in Fig. 2b) as well as for the back contact removal process (LP2 in Fig. 2b). The pulse frequencies were 17 kHz and 11.5 kHz, respectively. For LP1, the average power was 430 mW while 290 mW was used for LP2. In both cases, the feed rate or translation velocity of the laser beam was 800 mm s−1. For both processes, a lens system with a focal length of f = 300 mm was used to focus the laser beam which led to a beam spot radius of 60 μm. All processing was done through the glass substrate side.
4.4 Characterization of the solar cells
The performance of the solar cells was evaluated by current–voltage (j–V) measurements under AM1.5G illumination (intensity of 1000 W m−2, class A spectrum) and quantum efficiency measurements.
4.5 Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical experiments were performed employing a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat/galvanostat. The in-house designed photoelectrochemical cell consisted of a PMMA cell body with an optionally mountable ion exchange membrane (fumasep FAA-3-PK-130 by Fumatec or Nafion-115 by Chemours). Nickel or titanium sheet metal electrodes (2 mm thick) coated with HER and OER catalysts, respectively, were mounted on both sides with an O-ring seal of 80 mm in diameter. Thus, the geometrical surface area of both the anode and the cathode was approx. 50 cm2 which is slightly smaller than the active area of the solar cells (64 cm2). The measurements were conducted in aqueous potassium hydroxide (KOH) or sulphuric acid (H2SO4) solutions which were prepared from analytical grade chemicals (Merck) and deionized water (Millipore). The photoelectrochemical evaluation of the integrated PV-EC module was performed under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum (1000 W m−2, class A spectrum).
The evolved gases (oxygen and hydrogen) were collected in eudiometers which were initially filled with water and the water level was monitored over time either manually or using a capacitive liquid level sensor (CLC, First Sensor).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the German Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) in the network project Sustainable Hydrogen (FKZ 03X3581B) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the Priority Program 1613: Regeneratively Produced Fuels by Light Driven Water Splitting: Investigation of Involved Elementary Processes and Perspectives of Technologic Implementation. The authors would like to thank U. Rau, W. Jaegermann, and B. Kaiser for helpful discussions, S. Moll, H. Siekmann, A. Bauer, G. Schöpe, and U. Gerhards for their support with solar cell fabrication, and C. Zahren for his support in solar cell characterization.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 32–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Nielander, M. R. Shaner, K. M. Papadantonakis, S. A. Francis and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 16–25 CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. D. Ng, M. García-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nature Energy, 2016, 1, 16053 CrossRef CAS .
A. de Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839–846 CrossRef .
J. J. Hanak, Sol. Energy, 1979, 23, 145–147 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakano, T. Matsuoka, S. Kiyama, H. Kawata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakashima, S. Tsuda, H. Nishiwaki, M. Ohnishi, I. Nagaoka and Y. Kuwano, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1986, 25, 1936–1943 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haas, A. Gordijn and H. Stiebig, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2008, 16, 195–203 CrossRef .
B. Turan, J.-P. Becker, F. Urbain, F. Finger, U. Rau and S. Haas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12681 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Cox, J. Z. Lee, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14057–14061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Appleby, A. Delahoy, S. Gau, O. Murphy, M. Kapur and J. O. Bockris, Energy, 1985, 10, 871–876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, N. Matsuki, T. Ohmori, H. Mametsuka, M. Kondo, A. Matsuda and E. Suzuki, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 1167–1169 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. May, H.-J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951 Search PubMed .
F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, J.-P. Becker, U. Rau, F. Finger, J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser and W. Jaegermann, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 2605–2614 CrossRef CAS .
F. Urbain, K. Wilken, V. Smirnov, O. Astakhov, A. Lambertz, J.-P. Becker, U. Rau, J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann and F. Finger, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2014, 2014, 249317 CrossRef .
F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, J.-P. Becker, A. Lambertz, F. Yang, J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann, U. Rau and F. Finger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 145–154 CAS .
F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, J.-P. Becker, U. Rau, J. Ziegler, F. Yang, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann, S. Hoch, M. Blug and F. Finger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 638, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Becker, F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, U. Rau, J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann and F. Finger, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2016, 213, 1738–1746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann, F. Urbain, J.-P. Becker, V. Smirnov and F. Finger, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 4026–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, J.-P. Becker and F. Finger, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 832–836 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 2504–2517 CAS .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922 CAS .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirner, P. Bogdanoff, B. Stannowski, R. van de Krol, B. Rech and R. Schlatmann, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41(45), 20823–20831 CrossRef CAS .

          B. D. James, G. N. Baum, J. Perez, and K. N. Baum, Technoeconomic Analysis of Photoelectrochemical (PEC) Hydrogen Production,  2009 Search PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(7), 2354–2371 CAS .
D. S. Ginley and C. Bright, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 15–18 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Koishiyev and J. R. Sites, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 350–354 CrossRef CAS .
G. Beaucarne, G. Schubert and J. Hoornstra, Energy Procedia, 2015, 67, 2–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geissbuhler, S. De Wolf, A. Faes, N. Badel, Q. Jeangros, A. Tomasi, L. Barraud, A. Descoeudres, M. Despeisse and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1055–1062 CrossRef .
W. Böttler, V. Smirnov, J. Hüpkes and F. Finger, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209, 1144–1149 CrossRef .
M. Berginski, J. Hüpkes, M. Schulte, G. Schöpe, H. Stiebig, B. Rech and M. Wuttig, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 74903 CrossRef .
E. Moulin, T. C. M. Müller, M. Warzecha, A. Hoffmann, U. W. Paetzold and U. Aeberhard, EPJ Photovoltaics, 2015, 6, 60501 CrossRef .
A. Hankin, F. E. Bedoya-Lora, C. K. Ong, J. C. Alexander, F. Petter and G. H. Kelsall, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(1), 346–360 CAS .
J. R. Hudkins, D. G. Wheeler, B. Peña and C. P. Berlinguette, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(11), 3417–3423 CAS .
M. A. Modestino, S. M. H. Hashemi and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1533–1551 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10688aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) j–V curves of a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction solar cells with active areas of 1 × 1 cm2, 2 × 2 cm2, 3 × 3 cm2, and 7.3 × 7.3 cm2 measured under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum. The inset illustrates the geometric area of the solar cells A = L2. (b) Fill factors of a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple solar cells with different active areas. The solid line serves as a guide to the eye.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the process steps for the fabrication of a Si thin-film solar cell with (a) an evaporated metal front contact grid and (b) a laser scribed front contact grid. (c) and (d) depict the corresponding top views of the resulting solar cell structures with front contact grids.	 

 	Fig. 3  
j–V curves of solar cells with areas of 1 × 1 cm2 and 3.5 × 3.5 cm2 measured under a simulated AM1.5G spectrum.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  
j–V curves of 64 individual solar cells with an area of 1 × 1 cm2 each (thin grey lines). The red curve represents the expected behaviour of the total 8 × 8 cm2 solar cell (calculated as the mean of 64 cells) and the dashed blue curve is the measured behaviour of the latter.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms of the employed electrochemical cells in a two-electrode setup featuring Ni electrodes with a geometric surface area of 50.27 cm2 for both the anode and cathode in a 1 molar aqueous KOH solution. The distance between the anode and cathode was either 7 mm or 11 mm. The voltammograms were recorded with a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (b) Chronopotentiometric measurements at a current of 500 mA of the same two electrochemical cells used in (a).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic cross-section of the developed large area integrated PV-EC water splitting device. The setup is modular in the sense that each component, i.e. the solar cell, the catalysts for the HER and the OER, the membrane, and the electrolyte, can be exchanged easily. Furthermore, the electronic properties of the solar cell (PV), the electrochemical cell (EC), and the combined PV-EC module are accessible via the three contacts (1–3). (b) Photograph of the integrated PV-EC module under illumination from the front side.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristic of a 64 cm2 large a-Si:H/a-Si:H/μc-Si:H triple junction photovoltaic (PV) cell (green) and linear sweep voltammograms of the electrochemical (EC) cell in a two-electrode configuration featuring Pt and IrOx catalysts on Ti sheet metal in 1 M H2SO4 (red) or two Ni metal sheets in 1 M KOH (blue). The intersection point of the EC curves with the PV curve represents the expected point of operation for spontaneous (bias-free) water-splitting. (b) I–V characteristics of the total integrated large area water-splitting modules featuring Pt and IrOx catalysts on Ti sheet metal in 1 M H2SO4 (red) or to Ni metal sheets in 1 M KOH (blue). Here, the current at V = 0 represents the point of operation for spontaneous water splitting. (c) Chronoamperometric measurement under bias-free conditions of the integrated large area PV-EC modules using the same setup as described in (b). (d) Gas volume of evolved hydrogen and oxygen during spontaneous water-splitting over time. The measured volumes are plotted as solid lines and the volumes expected for a faradaic efficiency of 100% are plotted as dashed lines.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10688a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
