Materials for selective photo-oxygenation vs. photocatalysis: preparation, properties and applications in environmental and health fields  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CY01929J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CY01929J
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1571-1592Materials for selective photo-oxygenation vs. photocatalysis: preparation, properties and applications in environmental and health fields

        
          
            S. 
            Lacombe
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            T. 
            Pigot
          
          
        
      
IPREM UMR CNRS 5254, Université de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour, Hélioparc, 2 Rue du Président Angot, 64053 Pau Cedex, France. E-mail: sylvie.lacombe@univ-pau.fr;   Tel: +33 559 407 579
Received 
      10th November 2015
    , Accepted 16th December 2015First published on 21st December 2015AbstractThis perspective paper compares the properties and applications in the environmental and health fields of organic photosensitizers (embedded in solid organic or inorganic inert supports) and TiO2-based photocatalysts. The basic principles of photosensitization and photocatalysis are recalled and the properties of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced under irradiation in both cases are reviewed. Various families of organic photosensitizers (PSs) and their immobilization on different supports are then described. The properties of these materials are summarized. A section is dedicated to their applications in fine chemistry, disinfection, photodynamic therapy (PDT), degradation of persistent pollutants in water and solvent-free oxygenation of selected chemicals. After a short reminder of the latest reviews on TiO2-based photocatalysis, some selected applications of supported TiO2 materials are reported in the fields of water treatment, active photocatalytic indoor air remediation/disinfection and passive materials designed not only for self-cleaning but also for removal of air pollutants and microorganisms. Both types of materials are quite complementary and their advantages/drawbacks are highlighted. The selectivity and extended lifetime of singlet oxygen (1O2) produced under visible light by PS-containing materials make them highly attractive for the selective oxygenation of persistent pollutants in wastewater containing complex matrices or for PDT. On the other hand, TiO2-based photocatalysts have been devoted to the complete mineralization of pollutants. However, their use in a large field under visible irradiation is still to be developed.
Sylvie Lacombe
Sylvie Lacombe, a senior CNRS researcher, has been working on photochemistry for 25 years. She is mainly interested in different types of photo-oxidation reactions: ground state oxygen addition to radicals produced by photolysis, singlet oxygen formation by photosensitization and photocatalysis. She was interested in the development of various photosensitizing or photocatalytic materials and in the understanding of the formation of reactive oxygen species. She has been the vice-president of the European Photocatalysis Federation (EPF) since 2009 and she participates at the European level to normalization actions in photocatalysis (CEN TC386).
Thierry Pigot
Thierry Pigot is a professor of chemistry at the University of Pau and Pays de l'Adour. His research area first concerns the preparation and characterization of silica based supported organic photosensitizers. He is also involved in the study of oxidation and photo-oxidation (by photosensitizer or photocatalyst) mechanisms of organic compounds and in the characterization of Reactive Oxygen Species involved in the oxidation processes (singlet oxygen, superoxide anion or hydroxyl radical). Finally, he is also working on the applications of such materials in the fields of water and air treatment.
1. Introduction
Photo-oxidation in the presence of a catalyst under room temperature and pressure conditions, which makes use of oxygen from air and water as the only chemical species and either UVA (315–400 nm) or visible (400–760 nm) radiation as energy, is considered as a green process. The most often used photocatalysts are semi-conductors, mainly titanium dioxide (TiO2), which when irradiated under UVA gives rise to redox reactions of various species (water, oxygen, organic or mineral pollutants) adsorbed on its surface both in solution and in the gas phase.1–5 Alternatively, organic photosensitizers or dyes may be included, adsorbed or grafted on various inorganic or organic supports, giving rise to photosensitizing materials also able to induce the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon irradiation mainly in the visible range and leading most often to photo-oxygenation reactions.6,7 In the following, the distinction between photocatalysts and photosensitizing materials will be made and their different reactivity will be explained.
Photocatalysis has been extensively investigated and used as an advanced oxidation process (AOP) with several well-known environmental applications, such as self-cleaning and defogging surfaces,8 water purification,9 air purification10–12 and disinfection.13 Other applications deal with energy concerns such as hydrogen generation14–16 or carbon dioxide reduction.17–20 The number of papers on these topics is steadily increasing. As an AOP, photocatalysis is aimed at oxidizing pollutants up to their mineralization (transformation into carbon dioxide, water and eventually mineral acids), avoiding as far as possible the formation in significant amount of incompletely oxidized side-products, which have to be carefully controlled for any application.
Alternatively, photosensitizing materials involving an organic photosensitizer included in a supporting inert material are very useful in some selected cases: mild and selective oxygenation of high-added value products in fine chemicals synthesis,21–24 treatment of special waste containing sulfur compounds,25,26 or bactericidal photodynamic inactivation (PDI),27–29 besides better known applications in wastewater treatment30 and photodynamic therapy (PDT).31,32
This perspective paper will describe the mechanisms of photocatalysis vs. photosensitization and the main reactive oxygen species (ROS) expected in both cases. This will give some general information on various photosensitizing materials and their possible applications. Due to the huge amount of papers on photocatalytic materials, only review papers on TiO2-derived materials will be recalled here with selected applications for the purpose of comparison with PS-containing materials. Self-cleaning or superhydrophilic surfaces as well as sensitized TiO2 will be excluded from the discussion.
2. Photocatalysis vs. photo-oxygenation: basic mechanisms
2.1. Unselective reactions of photo-produced radicals by photocatalysis
Photocatalysis is based on the excitation of narrow band-gap semi-conductors (usually TiO2) to generate electrons and holes under UV radiation (Fig. 1). When a photocatalyst absorbs a photon of energy equal to or greater than its band-gap (Eg), an electron–hole pair is generated. Subsequently, the pair is separated into a free electron and a free hole (h+, e−). The electron and hole walk randomly to the surface where they are trapped (h+tr, e−tr, path (a), Fig. 1). The trapped holes h+tr react with adsorbed donor molecules (oxidation step, path (c)) while the trapped electrons e−tr react with an acceptor (reduction step (d)). However, one of the most significant deactivation pathways is recombination of the electron–hole pair at surface trapping sites with the release of heat (path (b), Fig. 1).33 When the photogenerated holes react with surface-adsorbed water, they give the highly reactive hydroxyl radical (HO˙) as the main ROS, while in the presence of oxygen, superoxide radical anions (O2˙−) and alternatively singlet oxygen (1O2)34 are the other produced ROS.33 Hole trapping by adsorbed molecules also gives rise to radical cations RH˙+ further giving radical species R˙, which are able to readily react with ground state oxygen. This oversimplified picture is generally agreed on but does not take into account some features derived from fundamental studies that were extensively reviewed recently.5 For instance, the formation of hydroxyl radicals HO˙ by direct hole trapping of adsorbed water is discussed and alternative routes for their formation are proposed. Hole trapping by adsorbed molecules (alcohols, benzene) is thoroughly analyzed. The so-called “antenna effect”, resulting from the formation of aggregates regarded as arrays of nanowires that should allow the transport of charge carriers, is also emphasized.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of TiO2 photocatalytic mechanism: (a) trapping of the electrons and holes photogenerated by the surface to give surface-trapped holes (htr) and electrons (etr); (b) charge recombination; (c) oxidation of H2O or RH (and alternatively of O2˙−) by trapped holes; (d) reduction of O2 by trapped electrons. Adapted from ref. 33. 
The high reactivity of radicals, especially hydroxyl radicals HO˙, makes heterogeneous photocatalysis an efficient, albeit unselective, method for photo-oxidation, ultimately leading to mineralization (transformation into carbon dioxide, water and eventually mineral acids), avoiding as far as possible the formation in significant amount of incompletely oxidized side-products, which have to be carefully controlled for any application. Since TiO2 mainly absorbs UVA light, great interest emerged these past 15 years in the development of modified TiO2, extending its absorption spectrum in the visible range in order to take more advantage of solar or even indoor lighting.35 The main strategies towards obtaining visible light-absorbing TiO2 are metal (transition metals or noble metals) or non-metal (nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, fluorine) doping, dye sensitization, coupling of semi-conductors and defect introduction.36
Although the number of wide-field applications of photocatalysis to water treatment remains rather low, the number of papers devoted to this topic is still quite high. Recent reviews aimed at rationalizing the influent parameters of this process13,37,38 or gathering the latest technological achievements,9,39 while a lot of papers and patents were also recently devoted to solid–gas photocatalysis for the mineralization of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) in air.10 For indoor air, decontamination or deodorization,3,12,40–42 as well as its disinfection,12 is sought. In the case of outdoor air, nitrogen oxide (NOx) degradation is mainly studied.43–45 The less investigated use of photocatalytic reactions for fine chemicals synthesis in the presence (oxidation) or absence of oxygen was also reviewed.46–48
2.2. Photosensitization: singlet oxygen formation and photo-oxygenation
Photosensitized reactions are defined as the absorption of radiation by a molecular species, called photosensitizer (PS), which induces the modification of another molecular species, either by electron transfer (type I mechanism) or by energy transfer (type II mechanism), with regeneration of the PS to its ground state without chemical alteration. The structures of the more often used PSs are recalled in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of various organic photosensitizers (PSs). 
Starting from ground state oxygen O2(X3Σg−), the type II photo-oxidation mechanism involves the formation of singlet oxygen in its highly reactive O2(a1Δg) state (referred to as 1O2 here and in the following sections).49 The production of singlet oxygen 1O2, a powerful electrophile, by energy transfer from the triplet state of the PS (T1, Fig. 3a) to O2(X3Σg−) is an important process enabling photo-oxygenation (i.e. selective oxidation by oxygen uptake) of various electron-rich substrates (activated double bonds, sulphides, amines, phenols, anions, etc.) in several kinds of media. Singlet oxygen is very useful as a versatile synthetic reagent for fine chemicals synthesis or wastewater treatment (insecticide and pesticide degradation).30,50 It is also known for its cytotoxicity51,52 and is the active oxidizing agent in photodynamic processes, i.e. damage of living tissue by the combination of a photosensitizer, visible light and oxygen, including blood sterilization, photodynamic therapy (PDT) or photodynamic inactivation (PDI). For efficient singlet oxygen production by energy transfer, the following conditions have to be fulfilled by the PS: high absorption coefficient in the spectral region of the excitation light, high ISC (intersystem crossing) quantum yield, long triplet lifetimes and triplet energy higher than the energy gap between the ground and a1Δg states of O2 (94.2 kJ mol−1). The singlet oxygen-generating ability of a photosensitizer is measured by its quantum yield ΦΔ. Some of these data on well-known PSs are gathered in Table 1.
 Fig. 3  General schemes of photosensitized reactions: (a) singlet oxygen production by energy transfer (type II reactions), ISC: intersystem crossing; (b) oxygenation reactions by electron transfer (type I reactions). 
Table 1 Triplet energy, triplet lifetimes, broad absorption range of the PS family and singlet oxygen production quantum yield in various solvents of selected PSs from Fig. 2 (ND: not determined; n: non-polar solvent; p: polar solvent; * upper limit at infinite oxygen concentration)




Sensitizer

E
T (kJ mol−1)

τ
t (μs)

λ
abs (nm)

Φ
Δ

Solvent (for ΦΔ)
Ref.




Benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile (DBTP)
ND (>94.2)
7.1
340–430
0.91
CH3CN

53



Phthalocyanine Zn(II)
109
270, p
500–750
0.53
CH3CN

54–56



Methylene Blue
138
450
630–660
0.51
MeOH

54, 56



Tetraphenylporphyrin
140
1500
300–700
0.78
C6H6

54, 57



C60 fullerene
151
205, n
340–510
0.98
C6H6

54, 58, 59



Rose Bengal
164
130
490–570
0.76
MeOH

54, 60



9,10-Dicyanoanthracene
175
100, n
340–430
2.06*
CH3CN

54, 61



Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II), [Ru(bpy)3]2+
197
0.72, p
180–450
0.73
MeOH

62



Triphenylpyrylium tetrafluoroborate
221
10
300–450
—
—

63



4-Phenylbenzophenone (PBP)
254
40, n
250–380
0.75
EtOH

54, 64



9,10-Anthraquinone
261
0.11, n
300–430
0.62–0.70
CH3CN

54, 65



I-BODIPY
ND
ND
450–600
0.83
CH3CN

66





In some cases, if the excited singlet or triplet state of the PS is a strong enough oxidant (i.e. a good electron acceptor), it may react with an electron donor RH to yield a radical cation RH˙+ (Fig. 3b). Then, depending on the redox potential of the ground state PS, the type I mechanism may lead to the formation of superoxide radical anions, O2˙−, by reduction of ground state molecular oxygen. The thermodynamic feasibility of the first electron transfer reaction is evaluated using the well-known Rehm–Weller equation (Fig. 4). It is thus easily recognized that under these conditions the same reactive species (RH˙+, O2˙−) as with TiO2 might be produced.67 Typical reduction potentials and excitation energies of several PSs, together with values for the free enthalpy of ground state oxygen reduction to superoxide radical anion O2˙−, are given in Table 2. From this table, it is concluded that almost all the excited PSs, except triphenylpyrylium salts, are able to reduce ground state oxygen to superoxide radical anion O2˙−. As stated by Silva et al., energy transfer and electron transfer are “exquisitely entangled in PSs such as porphyrins and bacteriochlorins”. For instance, bacteriochlorin triplet quenching involves charge transfer species (singlet oxygen, superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical), while the quenching of porphyrin triplets by molecular oxygen leads essentially to the formation of singlet oxygen.68 The photophysical basis of these results in this series,68 in the cyanoanthracene family,53 and in several other PSs has been extensively discussed.69–72
 Fig. 4  Rehm–Weller equation, E0(D˙+/D): standard redox potential of the electron donor D (V), E0(A/A˙−) = E0(PS/PS˙−): standard redox potential of the electron acceptor A (V), ΔE00 (kJ mol−1): excitation energy of the PS, ε: dielectric constant of the solvent, d: distance between the two radical ions A˙− and D˙+ (m)). 
Table 2 Excitation energy ΔE00, redox potential of the ground (Ered = EPS/PS˙−) and excited (E*red = EPS*/PS˙−) states of several electron accepting PSs (vs. SCE) and values for the free enthalpy of the reduction of ground state oxygen to superoxide radical anion O2˙−. ΔG0 (kJ mol−1) = 96.48 (EPS/PS˙− − EO2/O2˙−) with EO2/O2˙− = −0.58 V vs. Saturated Calomel Electrode (SCE) in CH3CN.76 See text for definitions




Photosensitizer
ΔE00/eV (nm)

E
red (V)

E
*red (V)
ΔG0 (kJ mol−1)
Ref.




Triphenylpyrylium tetrafluoroborate
2.82
−0.29
2.53
28.0

73



9,10-Dicyanoanthracene
2.89
−0.83
1.91
−24.1

74, 75



Benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile (DBTP)
2.99
−0.92
2.07
−32.8

74, 75



Zn(II) tetraphenylporphyrin
2.05
−1.35
0.70
−74.3

73



Ru(bpy)32+
2.12
−1.35
0.77
−74.3

73



9,10-Anthraquinone
2.73
−0.86
1.87
−27.0

73



Benzophenone
2.98
−1.83
1.17
−120.6

73





As an introductory example, the versatility of triphenylpyrylium salts is representative of the two previously mentioned type I and type II mechanisms. Actually, triphenylpyrylium salts (TP+) were known to be unable to generate either singlet oxygen or superoxide radical anions in solution, but to be strong oxidants in their excited singlet (S1) or triplet (T1) states (ETP*(S1)/TP˙− = 2.5 and ETP*(T1)/TP˙− = 2.0 V vs. SCE).63 They were thus proposed as clean-electron transfer photosensitizers (type I reactions). The incorporation of the dye inside NaY zeolite strongly increases its resistance against hydrolysis in neutral water at room temperature and thus its stability. Upon photoexcitation, TP@NaY can generate hydroxyl radicals HO˙, making it suitable for the degradation of organic pollutants in water, and TP@NaY was shown to be more active than TiO2 for the solar degradation of 4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid.77,78
On the other hand, although singlet oxygen phosphorescence at 1270 nm could not be detected from a CH3CN solution of TP+ and BF4−, singlet oxygen phosphorescence was clearly observed in D2O or in decafluoropentane when TP+ was incorporated into NaY zeolite or MCM-41, indicating that the molecular photochemistry of TP+ salts is modified by encapsulation inside the confined space of the zeolite cavity.79 This enhanced singlet oxygen formation (type II mechanism) was attributed to the much longer lifetimes of the TPT triplet state in the solid matrix (ms range) than those in solution (μs range). Accordingly, the sulfide-containing chemical warfare agent yperite was successfully oxidized with TP@NaY in dichloromethane solutions. The type II mechanism could account for the obtained products (sulfoxide, sulfone, disulfide), although no detailed data on the product composition were given.80
In other words, depending on the conditions (water, deuterated water, fluorinated solvent or aerated dichloromethane) and the substrate, either type I reactions with hydroxyl radicals or type II reactions with singlet oxygen may occur using these zeolite materials.
2.3. Properties of the different ROS
Singlet oxygen in its first excited state O2(a1Δg) is a powerful oxidant, with a variable lifetime (τΔ) depending on the solvent/medium (3.1 μs in water, 9.5 μs in methanol, 59 μs in C10F18, 50 μs in silicone rubber, 38–28 μs in poly(methyl methacrylate) and polystyrene (PS), respectively, at T > Tg (glass temperature)). In the gas phase, τΔ is calculated to be 86 or 54 ms for air at 0% or 100% relative humidity, respectively, at 1 bar and 298 K.69
Since the average value of the square of distance d, which an O2 molecule travels during time t, depends on its diffusion coefficient D0 according to d2 = 6D0t, the diffusion length d of 1O2 is estimated to be 2.7 mm in air of 100% relative humidity (D0 = 0.232 cm2 s−1 for O2 gas at 298 K and τΔ = 54 ms). This means that singlet oxygen is able to diffuse and react with suitable reactants in the gas phase. For instance, Majima et al. demonstrated that it was possible to detect a single 1O2 molecule at a distance >1 mm from the place of its creation (TiO2 surface) in ambient air.81 Likewise in water, with D0 = 2 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 for O2 and τΔ = 3.1 μs, the diffusion length of 1O2 is estimated to be 193 nm, which reduces to 155 nm inside cells.51,69 According to Ogilby, this means that the initial effects of singlet oxygen will be spatially confined in cells (typical diameter of eukaryotic cells ∼10–30 μm) and that it will be able to cross over the cell membrane into the extracellular environment making singlet oxygen “a selective not a reactive intermediate”. Several papers dealt with the study of singlet oxygen diffusion at the air–solid interface82 or at the liquid–solid interface.79,83,84
These considerations are to be compared with the time scales of various photocatalytic processes and to the very short lifetimes of radical species and specifically hydroxyl radicals (ns range85) formed in the photocatalytic process limiting their diffusion from the source (Fig. 5); in this latter case, the radical species have to react quickly with molecules pre-adsorbed on the surface of the photocatalyst (distance of photocatalysis efficiency <10 nm from ref. 86).
 Fig. 5  Time scales in photocatalysis. From ref. 33 with permission of the copyright owner. 
On the other hand, the superoxide radical anion, formed by reduction of ground state oxygen, is a Brönsted base that reacts via formation of HO2˙ in solvents containing water (eqn (7)) and a strong nucleophile in non-aqueous solvents. It is thus prone to hydrogen abstraction to hydroperoxyl radicals HO2˙ and fast disproportionation reactions leading to the formation of hydrogen peroxide68,87 (eqn (8) & (9)). O2˙− + H3O+ → HO2˙ + H2O pKa = 4.75 − 4.88(7) (8) (9)
It should also be recalled that the superoxide radical anion reacts through the so-called Haber–Weiss reaction with H2O2, leading to the formation of hydroxyl radicals with much lower rate constants (eqn (10) & (11)).68,88 (10) (11)
3. Design of materials for selective photo-oxygenation
The development of stable “photosensitizing materials” is an active research field, with numerous applications including oxidation reactions of high-added value products under mild conditions for fine chemicals synthesis, wastewater treatment, bactericidal treatments and photodynamic therapy (PDT). For all these applications, the photosensitizer has to be deposited, embedded or grafted on different supports (silica, alumina, polymers, zeolites, Layered Double Hydroxides (LDHs), cellulose, dendrimers, carbon nanotubes, etc.) with different macroscopic forms (films, powders, beads, glasses, fibers) and various specific surface areas, surface properties and transparency. For optimized stability, grafting of the PS on the support is obviously preferred if reactions are to be carried out in suspensions (liquid–solid). Other advantages of these supported PSs are the control of aggregation and self-quenching of the dye, the increase of their photostability, their easy separation from the other reactants and products, the possible use of solvents where PSs are poorly soluble and their use in solvent-free reactions (gas–solid interface).6,7 This strategy allows tuning of the absorption range and the oxidation properties by appropriate choice of the sensitizer. Moreover, as with triphenylpyrylium salts for instance, the nature (organic, inorganic) and structuration (micro- or meso-structuration) of the support may further influence the properties of the dye.
This short review does not aim at an extensive list of the numerous photosensitizing materials that have been prepared and studied. Only selected recent examples will be given with the purpose of making a parallel with TiO2-based photocatalytic materials.
3.1. Rose Bengal (RB)
Rose Bengal is a well-known PS, which is soluble in polar solvents including water, easily graftable through its carboxylate functionality and active in the visible range (λmax = 490–570 nm, Fig. 6) with a high singlet oxygen quantum yield. Since the earlier work of Nilsson and Kearns, and of Schaap et al. in 1975, a lot of papers have dealt with the immobilization of Rose Bengal onto polymers (polyamides, polymethacrylate, polyethylene glycol, N-isopropylacrylamide-co-vinylbenzene, chloromethylated poly(styrene-co-vinylbenzene), which led to the development of commercial Merrifield beads known as Sensitox®), silica gels, bromomethylated glass, cotton, cyclo- and poly-phosphazenes, etc. All these materials are cited in the review of Wahlen et al.7 More recent papers focused on the immobilization of RB onto various fabrics: dyed nylon89 or wool,90 water-soluble chitosan,91 silanized cellulose,92 hydrophilic and various polymers,93–95 or polymers bonded to micro- and nano-structured nylon fabrics.96 A polymer consisting of N-isopropylacrylamide and RB units demonstrated a temperature-controlled changeable selectivity of oxidation by singlet oxygen in water.97
 Fig. 6  Normalized (a) absorption spectra and (b) fluorescence spectra (λexc = 550 nm) of solid polymers P1–P3 and RB dianion in MeOH (10 μM). From ref. 93 with permission of the copyright owner. 
Most of these studies emphasize the role of the amount of PS loaded on the support and the drop of efficiency related to aggregation phenomena, for instance, when RB is adsorbed on silica nanoparticles.51 From the comparison between the photophysical properties of Rose Bengal adsorbed or grafted on different kinds of silica or adsorbed on cellulose, it was concluded that singlet oxygen production was correlated to RB concentration and the type of bonding to the support.52,53 One of the main issues with these materials is their stability, since RB is readily prone to photobleaching.
3.2. Triphenylpyrylium salts
Triphenylpyrylium salts (TP+) absorb photons in the 300–450 nm range (Fig. 7) and are highly oxidizing in their excited state (Table 2), but they are not able to produce either singlet oxygen or superoxide anions in the presence of oxygen, at least under usual homogeneous solution photo-oxygenation conditions. They are prone to hydrolysis although they are more stable in acidic media than in neutral water.63
 Fig. 7  Normalized diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) TiO2, (b) TP+ prepared within the voids of Y zeolite (TPY) and (c) malachite green (MG+) prepared within the voids of Y zeolite (MGY). From ref. 78 with permission of the copyright owner. 
However, when TP+ is entrapped inside zeolite micropores, its properties are significantly modified: it generates singlet oxygen with quantum yields of the same order of magnitude as metal phthalocyanines, due to the increase of TP+ triplet state lifetime inside the confined space of the zeolite cavity.79 It also led to the formation, upon irradiation, of an aqueous slurry containing the reactive HO˙ radical together with the pyrylium radical, which was exploited for the photochemical hydroxylation of benzene.98 Triphenylpyrylium salts were also synthesized inside zeolite cavities (ship in the bottle),77 adsorbed on silica99 or grafted on a Merrifield resin (chloromethylated polystyrene).100
These results emphasize the role of TPT+ entrapment inside zeolite or mesoporous silica cavities leading to significant improvement in their stability, efficiency and reactivity.
3.3. Ruthenium salts
Ru(II) coordination complexes with polyazaheteroaromatic ligands display a broad absorption band in the 180–550 nm range, ISC quantum yields close to unity, long excited state lifetimes, significant 1O2 production quantum yield and good thermal and photochemical stability. Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) dichloride ([Ru(bpy)3]Cl2) belongs to this family of stable sensitizers able to react by both energy transfer and electron transfer.101 The preparation, photochemical characterization and evaluation of the photodisinfection power of singlet oxygen photosensitizing materials prepared from Ru(II) complexes immobilized on porous silicone polymers were reported by Orellana's group (Fig. 8).50,102 High 1O2 production in water was achieved due to efficient quenching of the long-lived triplet state of the Ru(II) sensitizer by dissolved O2. Longer 1O2 emission lifetimes than in water were measured (25–32 μs), depending on the ionic or neutral nature of the supporting silicone. The stability and re-use of these disinfection materials were carefully investigated.103 Alternatively, Ru(bipy)32+ and other complexes were grafted on a hydrophilic polymer104 or encapsulated in biocompatible poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles,105 while Ru, Ir and Re complexes with dicarboxylic functionalities were incorporated into metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)106 or mesoporous silica.107
 Fig. 8  Normalized absorption A (____), reflectance R (⋯⋯) and emission L (-----) spectra of the RDP2+/pSil photosensitizing material (RDP2+: [tris(4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(II)] dichloride. From ref. 50 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Cyanoaromatics
Cyano derivatives of anthracenes and other cyanoaromatics are often used for sensitized photo-oxygenation reactions and photo-induced electron transfer (PET) reactions.108–110 9,10-Dicyanoanthracene (DCA), which absorbs light at wavelengths longer than 400 nm, has been extensively studied (Fig. 9).61 The reaction mechanisms may proceed through energy transfer leading to the formation of singlet oxygen O2(a1Δg) with high quantum yields.61,111 Alternatively, depending on the reactants, photo-induced electron transfer is possible, giving rise to redox reactions. In the presence of ground state oxygen, the superoxide radical anion is easily produced (Table 1).112,113 Dicyanoanthracene, dicyanonaphthalene, di- and tetra-cyanobenzene, grafted on styrenic polymers, were successfully used for photo-induced electron transfer oxygenation reactions of cyclopropane.114 A dicyanoanthracene derivative with a carboxylic functionality (DBTP-COOH, Fig. 2) was also grafted on silica and used for photo-oxidation of benzylic ethers and sulfides in acetonitrile solution; although evidence for electron transfer mechanisms was obtained,115,116 high singlet oxygen quantum yields were also achieved (solid–gas117 or solid–liquid53 interface).
 Fig. 9  Fluorescence excitation (λem = 470 nm) and emission (λexc = 385 nm) of DBTP-based silica monoliths (DBTP: benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile). Grey: encapsulated DBTP; black: grafted DBTP-COOH. From ref. 117 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
3.5. Porphyrins
Porphyrin derivatives (either free bases or their metal complexes, soluble in either non-polar or polar solvents) are able to produce singlet oxygen or superoxide radical anions under visible light irradiation (400 to 700 nm, Fig. 10), but they undergo fast photobleaching. A huge number of papers (see Wahlen's review7 for selected examples before 2004; the following list is still far from exhaustive) deal with their adsorption, deposition, impregnation or grafting on silica,118 Vycor glass,84 silicon,119 polydimethylsiloxane,120 polyethylene glycol121 and various polymers (polystyrene,122–125 polypropylene,126 nylon fibers,127 chitosan,128 cellulose129–131). Singlet oxygen emission at 1270 nm recorded on bactericidal nanofabrics based on tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) deposited on polyurethane was assigned to the long lifetimes of the TPP triplet state in this environment.132 The material's stability under irradiation conditions is sometimes (but not always) addressed by recycling experiments and should be more carefully considered for the application of these materials under real conditions.124,133,134
 Fig. 10  (A) Absorption and (B) normalized fluorescence spectra (λexc = 430 nm) of sulfonato-polystyrene nanofibers with a cationic porphyrin derivative (5,10,15,20-tetrakis(1-methylpyridinium-4-yl)porphyrin or TMPyP) at low (a), medium (b) and high (c) TMPyP loading. From ref. 125 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
3.6. Phthalocyanines
Under visible light irradiation (Q band around 700 nm, Fig. 11) and in the presence of oxygen, some metal complexes of phthalocyanines, where the metal has a closed p or d configuration (Mg(II), Al(III), Si(IV) or Zn(II)), are able to produce singlet oxygen and hydrogen peroxide though the formation of superoxide radical anion, O2˙−.135–138 In aqueous solution, the formation of the reactive hydroxyl radicals HO˙ derived from O2˙− was also reported with octakis(pyridiniomethyl)phthalocyaninotitanyl octachloride.139 As in the porphyrin series, a lot of papers were recently published on oxidation materials based on phthalocyanines and only selected examples will be given here. Metallophthalocyanines were mainly grafted on polymers140–146 or silica,147–150 or embedded in zeolites151–153 or clay minerals.154–156 All these materials were successfully used for photo-oxidation of various compounds and the involvement of singlet oxygen was demonstrated. Provided that aggregation is controlled, phthalocyanines are excellent for the development of phototherapeutic agents due to their low toxicity, high stability, efficient 1O2 generation and intense light absorption in the therapeutic window.
 Fig. 11  Absorption spectra of metallophthalocyanine (MPc)-conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) compared with their monomers. a) CoPc-CMPs and CoPc(NH2)4; b) NiPc-CMPs and NiPc(NH2)4; c) CuPc-CMPs and CuPc(NH2)4; d) ZnPc-CMPs and ZnPc(NH2)4. K/M is the Kubelka–Munk absorption. From ref. 146 with permission of the copyright owner. 
3.7. Boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) complexes
Halogenated BODIPY derivatives were more recently studied for singlet oxygen production under visible light and their possible use in PDT, Fig. 12.157,158 A non-halogenated derivative could be integrated into a high internal phase emulsion (HIPE) polymerisation process yielding a porous polymer with high efficiency and recyclability for sulfide oxidation although no evidence for singlet oxygen formation was given.159 More recently, iodinated BODIPY derivatives grafted on silica nanoparticles or mesoporous silica were successfully used respectively for singlet oxygen-induced cytotoxicity against cancer cells160 and for the tandem photoredox [3 + 2] cycloaddition of tetrahydroisoquinoline with N-phenylmaleidimides.161
 Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of the triethoxysilyl derivative of the BODIPY (curve 5) and the grafted silica (KIT-1-B); (b and c) pictures of the initial (KIT-1) and grafted (KIT-1-B) silica powders; (d and e) suspension of KIT-1-B in acetonitrile before and after deposition of the material in the cuvette. From ref. 161 with permission of the copyright owner. 
3.8. Methylene blue and derivatives of thionine
Thionine and derivatives like Methylene Blue (MB) are good singlet oxygen photosensitizers with maximum absorption in the 600–700 nm range (Fig. 13). A lot of papers reviewed by Wahlen7 were devoted to the ability of zeolites containing Methylene Blue to drastically influence the regioselectivities of singlet oxygen oxygenation of olefins and the selectivity of sulfide oxidation to sulfoxides, sulfones and other products arising from C–S bond cleavage. Methylene Blue was embedded in silica162 or bentonite163 for the selective oxidation of phenol, naphthol and anthracene derivatives. A cross-linked poly-N-isopropylacrylamide nanocapsule containing thionine or benzophenone promoted 1O2 oxygenation controlled by temperature:164,165 at low temperature, the capsule exists as a swollen single capsule, allowing 1O2 diffusion towards bulk water and resulting in the high oxygenation activity of phenol. A rise in temperature leads to contraction of the capsule and suppresses 1O2 diffusion leading to a decreased activity. A very useful application was devoted to the development of a well-defined solid system based on Methylene Blue supported on Nafion films as a convenient reference material for singlet oxygen production with a quantum yield of 0.24 in the air-equilibrated solid phase.83
 Fig. 13  Normalized absorption spectra of Methylene Blue in an air-equilibrated Nafion®-Na film after preparation (___) and a week later (-----). The inset shows the absorption profile at the absorption maximum (642 nm) of MB-dyed and non-dyed films. From ref. 83 with permission of the copyright owner. 
3.9. Fullerenes
Fullerenes (C60 and C70) owe their photochemical activity to their strong absorbance throughout the UV spectrum and their conjugated structure (Fig. 14). They are able to produce singlet oxygen in non-polar solvents (type II mechanism) and peroxide radicals derived from O2˙− in polar solvents such as water (type I mechanism) in the presence of UV or visible light.166,167 However, they are poorly soluble in usual solvents and a lot of efforts are devoted to the grafting of their functionalized derivatives on various supports such as polymers,168,169 siloxane170 and silica,171–174 enabling their use in water. A high concentration of fullerene in water was achieved (7.8 mM) with a water-soluble polymer consisting of C60 incorporated into a polyvinylpyrrolidone (NVP) copolymer. The biological activity was confirmed by the formation of O2˙− and DNA cleavage.175
 Fig. 14  Diffuse reflectance UV/vis spectra of NH2-containing polymer S–NH2 (carbohydrate hydrophilic polymeric matrix functionalized with amino moieties) and fullerene-C60-containing polymers 1, 2 and 3 (different fullerene concentrations in the range 3.61–6.66 × 10−3 mol g−1). From ref. 168 with permission of the copyright owner. 
3.10. Miscellaneous aromatics
In addition to the reference sensitizer 1H-phenalen-1-one (or phenalenone) with a high singlet oxygen quantum yield under UV excitation independent of the solvent polarity,176 other aromatic ketones like 2-acetonaphthone, 4-phenylbenzophenone (PBP in Fig. 2), 4-benzanthrone, 9H-fluoren-9-one or anthraquinone and their derivatives may also act as excellent sensitizers for photo-oxygenation reactions (Tables 1 and 2). Anthraquinone, able to produce singlet oxygen, is also a good oxidant in its excited state, making the type I reaction possible.24 Benzophenone in its excited state is a weaker oxidant but can readily produce superoxide anions (type I reaction) and singlet oxygen (type II reaction). The main drawback of these aromatic ketones is related to their absorption in the UVA or near visible range: benzophenone and its derivatives display a weak n–π* absorption band in the 325–400 nm range (Fig. 15A), while this band lies in the 400–425 nm range for anthraquinone derivatives (Fig. 15B). Benzophenone derivatives are easily grafted on polymer backbones165,177 and mineral supports.178 The lifetimes and quantum yields of singlet oxygen production were determined in the absence of solvent inside silica monoliths containing anthraquinone and benzophenone.179
 Fig. 15  (A) Diffuse reflectance spectra of 4-benzoylbenzoate sodium salt (R = COO−Na+) (a) adsorbed on a double layered hydroxide, (b) intercalated in a double layered hydroxide, (c) in mechanical mixture with a double layered hydroxide and (d) pure. Insert: DRUV spectra normalized at 325 nm. From ref. 180 with permission of the copyright owner. (B) DRUV spectra of commercial silica gel beads grafted with anthraquinone-2-carboxylic acid (R = COOH) (a) before irradiation, (b) after irradiation at 420 nm under a continuous flow of gaseous dimethyl sulfide in air and (c) after regeneration by washing. From ref. 26 with permission of the copyright owner. 
3.11. Polyoxometalates
Polyoxometalates (POMs) or decatungstates (W10O324−) are able to photosensitize oxidation reactions according to radical processes derived from type I mechanisms. It is generally accepted that illumination of the W10O324− complex CT band (λmax = 324 nm) generates a charge transfer excited state W10O324−* which decays in about 30 ps to a longer-lived highly reactive species (WO) which does not react with oxygen, but enables hydrogen abstraction from organic substrates (RH) or electron transfer to give radicals (type I′ mechanism).181 Due to their acidic nature, POMs are very soluble in water and difficult to extract from the reaction medium. Immobilization of POMs onto solids to create hybrid catalysts is necessary to improve their specific surface area, recovery and recyclability. In addition to classical Keggin-type POMs (H3PW12O40 and H4SiW12O40), a wide variety of more stable transition metal-substituted POMs with a weak absorption band in the visible range may also be grafted on different kinds of silica (Fig. 16)182–185 and zirconia,186 or impregnated on polystyrene187 or fluoropolymeric films.188 All these materials were claimed to be more stable than crude POMs and efficient for oxidation of various hydrocarbons under UV irradiation in aqueous solutions or under solvent-free conditions.
 Fig. 16  UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of PW11Co and PW11Ni (with PW11M = K5[M(H2O)PW11O39]) and their corresponding hybrid catalysts obtained by coordination of the metal center on amino-modified MCM-48. From ref. 182 with permission of the copyright owner. 
4. Applications of photosensitizing materials
Despite being less numerous than the papers dealing with photocatalytic materials, a great number of studies are nowadays focused on photosensitizing polymer films and fibers and on nanoparticles for PDT applications, both of which could be used in aqueous medium. Special attention is also currently given to easy particle recovery by various methods (filtration, magnetic separation or electrocoagulation).
4.1. Fine chemistry
Selective and efficient oxidation of sulfides, often used as simulants of warfare agents like yperite, to sulfoxides with minor or negligible sulfone formation can be achieved with a large variety of materials suspended in organic solvents:
• RB-dyed Nylon fabrics.89
• TP+ encapsulated inside zeolites or mesoporous channels of MCM-41, or supported on silica or titania–silica (with a cooperative effect in which the host intervenes by adsorbing yperite, favoring the contact between the photoactivated species and the substrate).189,190 Under identical conditions (emission of the light source not defined), the conversion only reached 37% after 3.5 hours with TiO2 Degussa P25 (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Photocatalytic activity of the photosensitizing materials for dipropyl sulfide decomposition under UV light irradiation (dark grey: 60 min, light grey: 120 min); (b) selectivity to dipropyl disulfide; (c) selectivity to dipropyl sulfoxide. From ref. 190 with permission of the copyright owner. 
• Porphyrin-containing MOF (through singlet oxygen generation and porosity of the material favoring adsorption of the chemical).191
• Benzophenone derivative intercalated in the channels of a layered double hydroxide (more selective than that in homogeneous solution and recyclable).180
Other selected examples concern the oxidation of various chemicals under visible irradiation:
• Oxidation of olefins to ketones by TP+ encapsulated in zeolites.192
• Oxidation of furans to butenolides with Rose Bengal (RB) immobilized on wool,93 and of furoic acid to 5-hydroxy-5H-furan-2-one with RB in hydrophilic polystyrene polymers.90
• Oxidation of thioanisole and aerobic amine coupling reactions with Ru and Ir MOFs.106
• Oxidation of α-pinene and sulfides in solution with an anthraquinone derivative, RB or DBTP-COOH grafted on silica.24 Different mechanisms with evidence for electron transfer and involvement of radicals for the anthraquinone-based material were observed.
• Oxidation of various olefinic compounds by porphyrin-functionalized pyrimidine dendrimers, claimed to be synthetically useful PSs that could be recycled after nanofiltration, even if they were prone to photodegradation.193
• Photo-oxygenation of various organic compounds in either solvent-free or chloroform solutions with polystyrene beads doped or grafted with several porphyrin derivatives.133,194 The performance, recyclability and efficiency of these materials were commented on.
• Selective oxidation of diols185 and alcohols186 with silica-bound W10O324−.
• Oxidation of α-terpinene and methionine using C60 fullerene covalently linked to Tentagel® and silica gel matrices in microstructured continuous flow reactors.21
Lastly, a smart singlet oxygen-generating photochromic MOF including a Zn-porphyrin was recently designed and allowed the reversible control of singlet oxygen generation demonstrated by oxidation of selected probes.195 Rhenium complexes embedded in a flexible self-standing polymeric silsesquioxane film yielded high singlet oxygen emission under irradiation at 467 nm.196
4.2. Disinfection
A lot of papers have been devoted to the bactericidal or antimicrobial activity of photosensitizing materials under visible light irradiation:
• Antifungal or bactericidal activities of nanostructured fabrics and cellulose membranes grafted with RB.96
• Inactivation of Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis by Ru(II) complexes immobilized on porous silicone polymers in compound parabolic collector (CPC) solar reactors.50,102,103
• Strong dual antibacterial effect under day light of anion exchange polystyrene nanofibers bearing sulfonatoporphyrin derivatives upon co-adsorption of iodine ions on the fibers.28
• Antibacterial nanofibers from various polymers including TPP displaying bactericidal activity depending on the oxygen permeability/diffusion coefficient and on the fiber diameter.197
• Significant increase in the photo-oxidation of polar substrates and in the bactericidal efficiency by increasing the surface wettability of polystyrene nanofibers encapsulating tetraphenylporphyrin.29,125
• Inactivation of Gram-positive and -negative bacteria, as well as fungi, and suppression of biofilms with TPP embedded in silicon polymers.198
• Inactivation of Gram-positive pathogens with a hydrophobic Si(IV) phthalocyanine in a layered nanoclay155 or of S. aureus and E. coli with phthalocyanines embedded in polymer nanofibers.28,29,125,145
• Grafting of a silicon phthalocyanine in zeolites for designing a new nano-architecture containing fluorescence labelling, photosensitizing and cellular adhesion properties.199
• Photosensitizing polymer,200 siloxane201 and keratin,202 which contain the phenothiazinium chromophore, exhibiting measurable levels of singlet oxygen. The corresponding films were photobactericidal against Staphylococcus epidermidis or Escherichia coli.131 Polysiloxane polymers containing embedded MB and gold nanoparticles were also shown to have a significant activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, and the presence of gold nanoparticles enhanced the bactericidal effect.201
• Silicon polymer doped with Methylene Blue for inactivation of Staphylococcus epidermidis via type I and type II mechanisms.203
• Inactivation of MS2 bacteriophage in water with C60 immobilized on polystyrene or silica.172
• Photodynamic action of a photoactive polymer comprising covalently bound anthraquinone used for immobilizing microorganisms on the surface and for producing singlet oxygen inactivating a broad spectrum of microbes on the substrate surface.204
• Anthraquinone cotton fabrics successfully used for selective oxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides and deactivation of Pseudomonas fluorescens.205,206
4.3. Photodynamic therapy
PDT involves the systemic administration of a photosensitizer, its accumulation in the tumor and irradiation of the tumor with light well absorbed by the PS. The photo-produced ROS (mainly 1O2 and O2˙−) are capable of oxidizing biomolecules and ultimately induce tumor cell death. Three main issues are currently relevant: optimization of the spectral and photophysical properties of the PS in the therapeutic window, targeting of the PS (often lipophilic) by incorporation into nanoparticulate drug delivery systems to ensure compatibility with plasma and facilitate selective targeting, and co-encapsulation of adjuvant therapeutics or diagnostic/imaging agents into the drug delivery system.207–209 Accordingly, numerous papers were recently devoted to the grafting or encapsulation of various PSs inside nanoparticles for potential applications to PDT.
Once again, only selected examples will be given here:
• RB in porous monolithic polymers210 or mesostructured silica nanoparticles.211
• Ru complexes encapsulated in biocompatible poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles studied in vitro on C6 glioma cells.105
• Mesochlorin e6, a derivative of porphyrin, grafted on an N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide copolymer through a disulfide bond demonstrating a time-dependent increase in singlet oxygen generation and photodynamic efficiency upon exposure to the reductive agent, dithiothreitol.212
• Phthalocyanines loaded in adamantane-modified nanochannels of mesoporous silica nanoparticles,150 in layered double hydroxides.156
• Nanoparticles containing MB (silica-coated magnetic particles,213 silica,214 aptamer–silica,215 phosphonate-terminated silica,216 calcium phosphate coated with polymer,217 gold-containing polymers,218etc.) demonstrating efficient singlet oxygen production. Photodynamic damage against various cancer cell lines was observed in vitro with all these materials. Noteworthy, the singlet oxygen production of MB in silica nanoparticles could be controlled by the aggregation state of the dye in the host.214
4.4. Persistent or emerging pollutants in water
For real water containing natural organic matter and phosphates or for wastewater treatment, it should be emphasized that HO˙ radicals are much more susceptible to hindrance by background matrices, while singlet oxygen is only slightly inhibited.219 This is confirmed by the numerous data on the degradation of organic pollutants in water by photosensitizing materials.
Significant degradation of pharmaceuticals under visible light (λ > 400 nm) by tin porphyrin on silica and amino-C60 on silica was compared with that by a conventional TiO2 photocatalyst in real wastewater effluents. It was shown that photosensitized singlet oxygenation was efficiently achieved in the presence of background organic matter, while significant interference was observed for photocatalyzed oxidation involving non-selective HO˙ radicals.220
4-Chlorophenoxyacetic acid was more efficiently oxidized by TP+ in zeolites than by TiO2 under visible light due to the appropriate absorption spectrum of TP+, favorable thermodynamics of the electron transfer pathway and cooperative contribution of the zeolite host.78 Similarly, oxidation of cinnamic acid derivatives was achieved under solar light with TP+ in zeolite Y.221
Phototransformation of model micropollutants (ibuprofen, bisphenol A, paracetamol) in water samples was achieved with tris(4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(II) chloride or RDP2+, immobilized in a porous poly(dimethylsiloxane) inert support.30
Silica gel beads covalently modified with metal-free mono-pyridyltriphenylporphyrin (PyTPP) were introduced into polymer microchannel chips and were successfully used for phenol oxidation under continuous flow conditions.123
Paraben photodegradation occurred under visible light with polyurethane nanofibers incorporating TPP via singlet oxygen formation, even if the multiple use of the fibers still needed improvements.134
Phenol oxidation in water was achieved under solution-flow conditions with PyTPP–SiO2 particles (metal-free mono-pyridyltriphenylporphyrin, PyTPP) accommodated into polymer microchannel chips with better conversion than that with bare PyTPP–SiO2 suspension. The evolution of the material after use was assessed by UV spectroscopy.123
Degradation by selective oxidation of pesticides (fenamiphos to sulfoxide/sulfone and pentachlorophenol to tetrachlorohydroquinone) was described with three Zn-phthalocyanines incorporated into an ordered mesoporous oxide Al-MCM-41.222
Photo-oxidation of trimethylamine was observed under sunlight in a one-pass flow reactor containing 24 layers of Nafion films containing metal-free phthalocyanine and perylene bisbenzimidazole as PSs. The turnover frequency of the catalyst was determined.223
Photosensitized degradation of pharmaceuticals under visible light was described using magnetic C60-functionalized mesoporous silica encapsulating magnetite nanoparticles for convenient separation from water174 or C60-derivatized silica.171,173
A novel application of core–shell polymethyl methacrylate nanoparticles as inert, polymeric nano-supports for the immobilization of charged ionic sulfonato-porphyrins disclosed a mild, inexpensive and sustainable procedure for the recovery of the resulting nanocatalyst from aqueous colloids. The NP separation technique, named membrane-mediated electrocoagulation (EC), was based on a new variant of electrocoagulation, which was achieved through water electrolysis and mediated by an ion-permeable membrane. The formation of singlet oxygen in aqueous media was demonstrated by continuous flow sulfoxidation of a model sulfide.224
4.5. Solvent-free oxygenation
Due to the extended lifetimes of singlet oxygen in air69 and at the solid–air interface,179 the solvent-free photo-oxygenation of electron-rich reactants like sulfide is easily carried out. This is an actual green process, using only visible (or solar) light and air as reactants. For instance, when DCA or DBTP were adsorbed on silica beads115,225 or included or grafted in silica monoliths prepared by the sol–gel method,117,226 solvent-free photo-induced oxygenation of gaseous dimethylsulfide to sulfoxides (and sulfone in minor amounts) could be easily performed. Since the oxygenated products are efficiently adsorbed on silica, the outlet gas phase in a one-pass reactor may be totally free of any sulfide for prolonged periods of time. The adsorbed polar products may be removed by washing in suitable solvents.
Similarly, surface decontamination of chemical-warfare agent simulants (demeton-S, malathion, aryl chloroalkyl sulfides) by polymer (hydrothane and polycarbonate) films and fibers containing Zn-octaphenoxyphthalocyanine (ZnOPPc) occurred in solution as well as within polymer matrices.227 Anthraquinone-2-carboxylic acid, grafted on commercial silica beads or nanostructured mesoporous silica thin films, led to solvent-free photosensitized oxygenation of dimethylsulfide in a one-pass flow reactor.26,228 Evidence for the type I reaction with radical formation was obtained by comparison with other singlet oxygen-producing materials.
Polystyrene beads loaded with TPP or grafted TPP, swollen in an appropriate organic solvent, successfully oxidized various substrates directly in Petri dishes where they were introduced.229 Solvent-free photo-oxygenation of ethylbenzene mainly to acetophenone and hydroperoxide by Hyflon membranes embedding a fluorous-tagged decatungstate also proceeded through radical mechanisms. Determination of the turnover number (TON) as well as the PS released in hydrocarbon media after irradiation was carried out.188
5. Supported photocatalysts based on TiO2
Photocatalytic semi-conductor materials are often commercialized in the form of powders or colloidal suspensions, with well-defined particle size (nanoparticles or aggregates), surface area, crystallinity and surface properties. They can also be lab-prepared via a sol–gel process and may thus be obtained as thin films and coatings on various types of surfaces. A comprehensive review of the numerous contributions to the field of photocatalytic materials is not aimed at in this short review. Some reference papers on these topics may be found, dealing for instance with the broadening of the absorption spectrum of TiO2 towards the visible,35,36,230,231 or with the general properties of TiO2.5,232–234 Among the thousands of papers dealing with visible light-absorbing TiO2, Asahi et al.231 highlighted the significance of N-doped or co-doped TiO2, which, depending on its preparation method, had sufficient power for mineralization of acetaldehyde in air despite the lower oxidative power of visible light-induced holes. In air, the important role of the conduction band electrons and the possible formation of HO˙ radicals mediated by superoxide and H2O2 (see eqn (10) and (11)) are assumed although the detailed origin of photocatalysis over visible-light-activated N-doped-TiO2 is still under debate. Likewise, the bactericidal and hydrophilic properties as well as practical applications (textiles, indoor passive materials, tooth bleaching, air purification systems and water treatment systems) of visible light-absorbing TiO2 are extensively discussed in this review231 and will not be recalled here.
For easy handling of photocatalysts and their cost-effective separation from systems, the immobilization of TiO2 nanoparticles on solid supports has been investigated since the late 1980s. Various solid supports such as non-woven fabrics, ceramic foams and porous metallic Ni or Ti meshes are now available.1 The supported photocatalyst has to minimize the intrinsic drawbacks originating from the immobilization of TiO2 on a macroscopic support, namely (i) low exposed surface area-to-volume ratio, (ii) possible mass transfer limitations, (iii) increase of pressure drop inside the photocatalytic reactor, (iv) complexity in providing light to the photocatalyst and (v) possible catalyst washout or fouling due to poor photocatalyst adhesion.235
5.1. Applications of TiO2 materials
Among the already cited review papers on TiO2 photocatalysis,1,5,35,36,230–234 the perspective paper of Teoh et al.236 provides contemporary views on heterogeneous photochemical conversion, encompassing charge transport characteristics, radical chemistry and organic degradation mechanisms, photocatalyst design and photoreactor engineering. In the following, after the section devoted to water treatment, solid–gas oxidation will be treated according to its application. For active air-purifying devices and HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning) systems used for indoor air remediation, the photocatalytic media are permeable (monoliths, foams, meshes, non-woven fabrics, fiber mats, etc.). On the other hand, gas-impermeable passive materials (such as films, coatings, paints, glasses, cements, concretes, pavements, ceramics, etc.) mainly used for self-cleaning and sometimes for air purification (mainly oxidation of Volatile Organic Compounds or VOCs indoor and of nitrogen oxides or NOx outdoor) will be dealt with in section 5.1.3 (Photocatalytic passive materials). The self-cleaning and superhydrophilic properties of TiO2-based photocatalytic glasses and surfaces will not be considered here.

5.1.1. Water treatment. 
Chong et al.9 summarized several key scientific and technical requirements for effective photocatalytic water purification: (i) catalyst improvement for high photo-efficiency that can utilize wider solar spectra; (ii) catalyst immobilization strategy to provide cost-effective solid–liquid separation; (iii) improvement in the photocatalytic operation for a wider pH range and to minimize the addition of oxidant additives; (iv) new integrated or coupling system for enhanced photomineralization or photo-disinfection kinetics; (v) effective design of the photocatalytic reactor system or parabolic solar collector for higher utilization of solar energy to reduce the electricity costs. Since slurry-type catalysts require an additional separation process, the most suitable immobilization strategy is the use of membranes such as TiO2/Al2O3 composites, TiO2 supported or embedded in polymer and metallic membranes, and ceramic membranes. The main issues remaining are membrane structure deterioration, low photocatalytic activity and loss of TiO2 over time.9 β-SiC foams are also promising supports with low pressure drop, induced static mixer effect and good light penetration.237
Malato et al. extensively discussed the use of sunlight to produce HO˙ radicals by photocatalysis and the photo-Fenton process,13 and the treatment of pharmaceutical waste in water by heterogeneous photocatalysis was recently reviewed.37,39 Tutorial reviews reported on the different numeration methods for evaluating the efficiency of the photocatalytic action on microorganisms.238,239
The application of metal oxide/graphene composites in water treatment and their role as photocatalysts, adsorbents and disinfectants in water remediation has been highlighted (Fig. 18):240 other than limiting the electron–hole recombination, graphene oxide derivatives also prevent the corrosion and leaching of the metal oxide nanoparticles into water, thereby enhancing the longevity of the photocatalyst. Moreover, the formation of π–π stacking between the aromatic rings of graphene and organic pollutants also facilitates their adsorption on the photocatalyst, thereby enhancing their quenching. Solar photocatalytic disinfection of water using TiO2/graphene oxide composites was very fast under UV, but also under visible light, evidencing possible singlet oxygen formation.241
 Fig. 18  Roles of graphene in improving the photocatalytic activity, adsorptivity and antimicrobial activity of the metal oxide/graphene composite and its possible benefits. From ref. 240 with permission of the copyright owners. 


5.1.2. Active photocatalytic air treatment. 
Photocatalytic treatment of VOCs in indoor air has been extensively investigated. Mo et al. reviewed the various photocatalysts used for this purpose, their preparation, their use as coatings and deactivation, as well as the kinetic models and VOCs successfully oxidized.3 Based on patent analysis, Paz identified several challenges associated with using photocatalysis for indoor air treatment:10 (i) mass transport on the photocatalytic surface; (ii) adsorption of pollutants; (iii) contact time; (iv) degradation of VOCs with minimum emission of by-products; (v) deactivation of the catalyst; (vi) optimization of the utilization of photons; (vii) adhesion of photocatalysts to substrates. According to Hay et al., both the catalyst lifetime and by-product formation are still barriers for implementing this technology.42 Some efforts towards the photocatalytic elimination of biological air pollutants were also described.12,242,243
Non-woven photocatalytic fabrics are light, flexible and inexpensive, and some of them were or are commercial (media 1048 from Ahlstrom®, Quartzel® from Saint-Gobain Quartz, etc.). However, they are often not mechanically stable and may release TiO2 nanoparticles when handled. An annular plug-flow reactor coated with such media was used for ammonia and butyric acid degradation.244 A prototype air cleaner provided with flat or pleated photocatalytic Quartzel® media was operated in a 20 m3 recirculated environmental chamber. The use of pleated media was shown to increase significantly the system performance by increasing the dwelling time of pollutants on the irradiated photocatalytic surface.245 Pure TiO2 microfibers, prepared by a sol–gel process followed by wet spinning, injection and coagulation of the fiber material dispersed in a liquid, were used in specially designed recirculation batch reactors for the mineralization of several VOCs.246,247 With the thinner fibers (17 × 40 μm) arranged as a loose mat, the kinetics of mineralization of acetone, heptane and toluene were compared with those obtained using a Quartzel® mat under strictly similar conditions, specially regarding light absorption. The lab-made pure TiO2 fibers proved to be less efficient than the commercial materials for acetone and heptane mineralization at 20% relative humidity (RH), but performed as well at 60% RH. However, the pure TiO2 fibers were more efficient for toluene mineralization, probably due to their improved micro/mesoporosity.248 A TiO2-coated polyester photocatalyst was also used for the gas-phase degradation of gaseous methanol in a single-pass reactor.249 In addition to the previous supports, polymer-supported TiO2, which has the ability to maximize the utilization of sunlight, might also be useful.250
Porous or multichannel support materials such as honeycomb-like or square monoliths combine the good contact between the photocatalyst and air and may withstand high flow rates with low pressure drop. However, they suffer from poor irradiation distribution and limited penetration of light inside the monolith,251 except for organic polymers with high transmittance in the UVA range.252
TiO2-immobilized porous ceramic foams are one of the most useful photocatalytic filters for commercial air purifiers designed for indoor air remediation.253 They present high heat resistivity for TiO2 immobilization via sintering of a titania-based xerogel. Their highly open porous structure with large surface area provides excellent properties for optimizing gas flow with low pressure drop and good surface contact.1 Besides the most often used metallic (mainly made of nickel or aluminium) and ceramic foams (mainly made of alumina or cordierite), polymeric and carbon foams are less used.235 Alternatively, β-SiC foams with medium specific surface area and large mean cell size recently demonstrated very interesting properties for methyl ethyl ketone oxidation at low flow rates and concentrations in both single-pass or recirculation modes.254 A new miniaturized LED/β-SiC foam reactor was designed, which showed improved performance with 392 nm LEDs using visible light-responsive Pt chloride-modified rutile TiO2 (MPT623 from Ishihara Sangyo Kaisha) for coating the β-SiC foams. Another approach based on a titanium mesh-impregnated photocatalyst TMiP™ was developed by Ochiai et al. and successfully used for acetaldehyde decomposition in batch mode.255


5.1.3. Photocatalytic passive materials. 
Surface-photocatalysed reactions on pollutant-removing building products are often claimed by companies' homepage. The basic concept is to use large area objects (walls, roofs, tiles, pavements, buildings, bridges, etc.) as platforms for air decontamination and improvement of the quality of ambient air. The photocatalyst can be applied in various forms including cementitious blocks, concrete objects or over-coated thin layers, often referred to as “self-cleaning” coatings. Once again, the main issues to overcome are mass transport, adsorption of contaminants, deactivation of the catalyst, optimization of the utilization of photons and adhesion of the photocatalysts to the substrates.10
For indoor air, the efficiency of several coatings and paints under artificial lighting or UV light for pollutant removal and by-product formation,256,257 or antimicrobial effects258 was addressed in various papers. For instance, the ability of four samples of tiles, including photocatalytic ones, in removing formaldehyde and several VOCs was investigated in chamber experiments according to standard ISO 16000-9 under artificial light. Secondary emissions, including formaldehyde, were identified and were generated by cleavage, hydrolysis, rearrangement or radical reactions.256 The ability to decompose formaldehyde and a mixture of 5 VOCs of six photocatalytic indoor paints with TiO2 embedded in different binder systems such as lime, polyorganic siloxane, silica sol–gel and organic binders was studied in an environmental 27 L test chamber in a static batch mode with either office or UVA light. Binders and additives decomposed to aldehydes (including formaldehyde) and ketones, while formaldehyde removal was not detected and the amount of side-products was higher under UVA light than under normal light. The VOCs introduced into the chamber were not decomposed.257 Conversely, photocatalytic paints were shown to quickly oxidize NO and NO2 mainly to nitric acid/nitrates with near to unity yield in a single-pass flow tube reactor.45 Photocatalytic mortars containing TiO2, initially prepared for self-cleaning applications, successfully oxidized gaseous formaldehyde in a specially designed single-pass reactor.259 The significance of adsorption of molecules to be oxidized to the kinetics of the photoreaction was modeled.260
For outdoor air under solar irradiation, the main purpose of these passive photocatalytic materials, besides self-cleaning, is the oxidation of nitrogen oxides.43,44 Even if numerous laboratory experiments actually demonstrated the efficiency of these materials,45 real-life studies (tunnel under artificial UV) are more balanced due to severe deactivation of the catalyst and strong influence of relative humidity and wind speed.261,262
Other applications include the use of photocatalytic polymer films for miscellaneous pollutant oxidation. Polymer films containing embedded TiO2 were successfully used for the gas-phase oxidation of ethanol in a single-pass annular reactor where the walls were coated with the polymer. Even if the films appeared stable on the experimental timescale, polymer degradation occurred to some extent.263 Industrial photocatalytic virtually impermeable films (VIF), made of polyethylene embedding TiO2 and polyamide layers, were prepared on an industrial scale for degrading dimethyl disulfide (DMDS) used as a fumigant, in order to decrease the DMDS concentration in the air space between the treated soil and the film. Large chamber batch reactors designed to reproduce the large-field solar experiments led to the determination of the optimum composition of the films (number of layers, thickness and TiO2 concentration) by studying the degradation kinetics of acetone and DMDS.264
It should be mentioned that mesoporous TiO2 and mixed SiO2/TiO2, despite being intensely investigated, were only scarcely used for gas-phase environmental applications, but rather for energy applications (water splitting, solar cells, lithium-ion batteries, etc.).265 The high photocatalytic efficiency of mesoporous films of TiO2 prepared via a template-assisted procedure and used for nitrogen oxide oxidation was assigned to a local increase of NO pressure in the nanopores of the mesoporous film close to the photocatalytic sites.266 Likewise, macrostructured mesoporous TiO2 materials prepared using a micelle-templated method and containing anatase TiO2 presented a much higher efficiency for ethylene oxidation than commercial anatase–rutile TiO2 due to their sponge-like structure favoring ethylene intradiffusion and photoabsorption.267 Mesoporous titanosilicates with worm-like 3D-mesoporosity were highly efficient for propylene photo-oxidation due to their three-dimensional mesoporosity, large mesopores and enhanced hydrophobicity arising from silylation of the material.268

6. Conclusion
This perspective paper intends to give a general view of the compared properties, for environmental and health applications only, of inert materials containing photosensitizers (PSs) through comparison with TiO2-based photocatalytic materials. As far as possible, review papers on these highly investigated topics are recalled and selected non-exhaustive references are presented.
The main interest in PS-containing materials is their activation mostly under visible light with possible tuning of the absorption wavelength, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, porosity, adsorptive ability and aggregation state of the PS for optimized performance. A particular feature is the possible modulation of the PS properties with its confinement inside porous micro- or meso-structured materials. Singlet oxygen is generally the main produced ROS with only scarce PS examples evidencing type I mechanisms (TP+, anthraquinone, Ru(II) salts).
These PS-containing materials are complementary to TiO2-based materials: no mineralization of organic pollutants is expected as with TiO2. However, a better selectivity towards electron-rich substrates in complex matrices makes them highly attractive for the oxidation of emerging organic pollutants in wastewater. Solvent-free oxygenation of electron-rich substrates is also easily achieved. Their efficiency against microbes, viruses and fungi is quite significant due to the production and enhanced lifetime of singlet oxygen, which is able to diffuse through cellular membranes. Another potential application is photodynamic therapy, for which recent efforts are devoted to the selective targeting of tumor cells and the optimization of the photophysical properties of the PS in the therapeutic window.
The main drawback of these PS-containing materials is the possible leaching of the organic content to the solution (if used as suspensions in a liquid phase), which has to be addressed in the dark and under irradiation. According to the review on numerous papers in the field, the material's photostability is sometimes (but not so often) addressed by recycling experiments and should be more carefully considered for the application of these materials under real conditions, with for example a systematic determination of the turnover number (TON).
TiO2-based materials are much more extensively studied and their applications in the environmental domain are completely different. Visible light-responsive photocatalytic materials appear very appealing, but they have not yet found large market applications. This is possibly due to the fact that the photocatalytic reaction rates and quantum yields are still low under visible light and that the exact reaction mechanisms are not completely understood.
A comparison of the advantages–drawbacks, especially from a mechanistic and economic point of view, of visible light-absorbing TiO2 relative to PS-containing materials could be valuable. However, for a useful comparison, in both cases, an accurate description of the irradiance of the light source is necessary, and if possible, the determination of the quantum efficiency of the material, since the determination of quantum yields in these highly diffusing media remains a challenge.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank ADEME for funding the SafePHOTOCAT project (2013–2015) and ANR (10-BLANC-0803) for funding the MEPHISTO project (2010–2014).
References
T. Ochiai and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 247–262 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
J. Mo, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. J. Lamson and R. Zhao, Atmos. Environ., 2009, 43, 2229–2246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Lacombe and T. Pigot, in Specialist Periodical Reports: Photochemistry, ed. A. Albini, RSC Publishing, Cambridge,  2010, vol. 38, pp. 307–329 Search PubMed .
J. Wahlen, D. E. De Vos, P. A. Jacobs and P. L. Alsters, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2004, 346, 152–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 396–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. K. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Paz, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 448–460 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sánchez, J. M. Coronado, R. Candal, R. Portela, I. Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, D. Tompkins and T. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 295–301 CrossRef .
B. Sánchez, M. Sánchez-Muñoz, M. Muñoz-Vicente, G. Cobas, R. Portela, S. Suárez, A. E. González, N. Rodríguez and R. Amils, Chemosphere, 2012, 87, 625–630 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Malato, P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Maldonado, J. Blanco and W. Gernjak, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 1–59 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rongé, T. Bosserez, D. Martel, C. Nervi, L. Boarino, F. Taulelle, G. Decher, S. Bordiga and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7963–7981 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217–9233 CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745–758 CAS .
T. Carofiglio, P. Donnola, M. Maggini, M. Rossetto and E. Rossi, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 2815–2822 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maggini, G. Scorrano, M. Prato, G. Brusatin, P. Innocenzi, M. Guglielmi, A. Renier, R. Signorini, M. Meneghetti and R. Bozio, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 404–406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonchio, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano and A. Bagno, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2004, 346, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ronzani, N. Costarramone, S. Blanc, A. K. Benabbou, M. L. Bechec, T. Pigot, M. Oelgemöller and S. Lacombe, J. Catal., 2013, 303, 164–174 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cantau, T. Pigot, R. Brown, P. Mocho, M. T. Maurette, E. Benoit-Marque and S. Lacombe, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 65, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cantau, S. Larribau, T. Pigot, M. Simon, M. T. Maurette and S. Lacombe, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 27–38 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bartusik, D. Aebisher, B. Ghafari, A. M. Lyons and A. Greer, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3053–3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Plíštil, P. Henke, P. Kubát and J. Mosinger, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2014, 13, 1321–1329 Search PubMed .
P. Henke, H. Kozak, A. Artemenko, P. Kubát, J. Forstová and J. Mosinger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13007–13014 CAS .
E. Díez-Mato, F. C. Cortezón-Tamarit, S. Bogialli, D. García-Fresnadillo and M. D. Marazuela, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 445–455 CrossRef .
P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 1543–1560 CAS .
D. Bartusik, D. Aebisher, A. Ghogare, G. Ghosh, I. Abramova, T. Hasan and A. Greer, Photochem. Photobiol., 2013, 89, 936–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daimon, T. Hirakawa, M. Kitazawa, J. Suetake and Y. Nosaka, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 340, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, S. C. Pillai, P. Falaras, K. E. O'Shea, J. A. Byrne and D. D. Dionysiou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2543–2554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, R. Das, H. Choi and C. Bhattacharjee, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57250–57266 RSC .
D. A. Keane, K. G. McGuigan, P. F. Ibáñez, M. I. Polo-López, J. A. Byrne, P. S. M. Dunlop, K. O'Shea, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1211–1226 CAS .
D. Kanakaraju, B. D. Glass and M. Oelgemöller, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2013, 12, 27–47 CrossRef .
M. Lim, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, V. Rudolph and G. Q. Lu, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2009, 4, 387–402 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chin, L. P. Yang and D. F. Ollis, J. Catal., 2006, 237, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Hay, T. Obee, Z. Luo, T. Jiang, Y. Meng, J. He, S. C. Murphy and S. Suib, Molecules, 2015, 20, 1319–1356 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lasek, Y.-H. Yu and J. C. S. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 14, 29–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ângelo, L. Andrade, L. M. Madeira and A. Mendes, J. Environ. Manage., 2013, 129, 522–539 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Laufs, G. Burgeth, W. Duttlinger, R. Kurtenbach, M. Maban, C. Thomas, P. Wiesen and J. Kleffmann, Atmos. Environ., 2010, 44, 2341–2349 CrossRef CAS .
G. Palmisano, V. Augugliaro, M. Pagliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3425–3437 RSC .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 43, 473–486 RSC .
M. C. DeRosa and R. J. Crutchley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 233, 351–371 CrossRef .
F. Manjon, L. Villen, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo and G. Orellana, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 301–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Ogilby, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3181 RSC .
M. Magaraggia, F. Faccenda, A. Gandolfi and G. Jori, J. Environ. Monit., 2006, 8, 923 RSC .
F. Ronzani, E. Arzoumanian, S. Blanc, P. Bordat, T. Pigot, C. Cugnet, E. Oliveros, M. Sarakha, C. Richard and S. Lacombe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17219–17232 RSC .
F. Wilkinson, W. P. Helman and A. B. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1993, 22, 113–262 CrossRef CAS .
W. Spiller, H. Kliesch, D. Wöhrle, S. Hackbarth, B. Röder and G. Schnurpfeil, J. Porphyr. Phthalocyanines, 1998, 2, 145–158 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Montalti, A. Credi, L. Prodi and M. T. Gandolfi, Handbook of Photochemistry, Third Edition, CRC Press,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. Schmidt and C. Tanielian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 3177–3180 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Hung and J. J. Grabowski, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 6073–6075 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terazima, N. Hirota, H. Shinohara and Y. Saito, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 9080–9085 CrossRef CAS .
P. Murasecco-Suardi, E. Gassmann, A. M. Braun and E. Oliveros, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1987, 70, 1760–1773 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Scurlock and P. R. Ogilby, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 72, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
D. Garcìa-Fresnadillo, Y. Georgiadou, G. Orellana, A. M. Braun and E. Oliveros, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1996, 79, 1222–1238 CrossRef .
M. A. Miranda and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 1063–1089 CrossRef CAS .
C. Martí, O. Jürgens, O. Cuenca, M. Casals and S. Nonell, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 97, 11–18 CrossRef .
I. Gutierrez, S. G. Bertolotti, M. A. Biasutti, A. T. Soltermann and N. A. Garcia, Can. J. Chem., 1997, 75, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ortiz, A. R. Agarrabeitia, G. Duran-Sampedro, J. Bañuelos Prieto, T. A. Lopez, W. A. Massad, H. A. Montejano, N. A. García and I. Lopez Arbeloa, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 1153–1162 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Marin, L. Santos-Juanes, A. Arques, A. M. Amat and M. A. Miranda, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1710–1750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. F. F. Silva, C. Serpa, J. M. Dąbrowski, C. J. P. Monteiro, S. J. Formosinho, G. Stochel, K. Urbanska, S. Simões, M. M. Pereira and L. G. Arnaut, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 9273–9286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wilkinson and A. A. Abdel-Shafi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5509–5516 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Abdel-Shafi and F. Wilkinson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 248–254 RSC .
A. A. Abdel-Shafi and F. Wilkinson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5747–5757 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Chanon and L. Eberson, Photochemistry of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical gears involving electron transfer catalysis: chains, catalysts and sensitization. Relation to electrochemistry, synthetic applications and mechanistic basis for selectivity, ed. M. Fox and M. Chanon, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1988 Search PubMed .
S. Blanc, T. Pigot, C. Cugnet, R. Brown and S. Lacombe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11280–11290 RSC .
S. Lacombe, J.-P. Soumillion, A. El Kadib, T. Pigot, S. Blanc, R. Brown, E. Oliveros, C. Cantau and P. Saint-Cricq, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11168–11179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Oppenländer, Photochemical Purification of water and air, Advanced oxidation Processes: principles, reaction mechanisms, reactor concepts, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. Sanjuan, M. Alvaro, G. Aguirre, H. Garcia and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 7351–7352 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sanjuan, G. Aguirre, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 15, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cojocaru, M. Laferriere, E. Carbonell, V. Parvulescu, H. Garcia and J. C. Scaiano, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4478–4481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cojocaru, V. I. Parvulescu, E. Preda, G. Iepure, V. Somoghi, E. Carbonell, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4908–4913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, S. C. Cui, A. Sugimoto, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16430–16431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fudickar and T. Linker, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9797–9803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Wetzler, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo and G. Orellana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 2249–2256 RSC .
D. Aebisher, N. S. Azar, M. Zamadar, N. Gandra, H. D. Gafney, R. Gao and A. Greer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 1913–1917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tresp, M. U. Hammer, J. Winter, K.-D. Weltmann and S. Reuter, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 435401 CrossRef .
A. Carretero-Genevrier, C. Boissiere, L. Nicole and D. Grosso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10761–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Sawyer and J. S. Valentine, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
M.-T. Maurette, E. Oliveros, P. P. Infelta, K. Ramsteiner and A. M. Braun, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1983, 66, 722–733 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Brewer, C. P. Artiles, J. A. Taylor and M. Dennis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 1908–1912 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Wang and S. Li, Asian J. Chem., 2015, 27, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Moczek and M. Nowakowska, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 433–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hettegger, M. Gorfer, S. Sortino, A. Fraix, D. Bandian, C. Rohrer, W. Harreither, A. Potthast and T. Rosenau, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 3291–3304 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fabregat, M. I. Burguete, F. Galindo and S. V. Luis, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2014, 21, 11884–11892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Burguete, F. Galindo, R. Gavara, S. V. Luis, M. Moreno, P. Thomas and D. A. Russell, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 37–44 CAS .
L. Pessoni, S. Lacombe, L. Billon, R. Brown and M. Save, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 10264–10271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Kim and S. Michielsen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42114–42123 Search PubMed .
H. Koizumi, Y. Kimata, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1846–1848 RSC .
A. Sanjuan, M. Alvaro, G. Aguirre, H. Garcia and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 7351–7352 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Miranda, A. M. Amat and A. Arques, Catal. Today, 2002, 76, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mattay, M. Vondenhof and R. Denig, Chem. Ber., 1989, 122, 951–958 CrossRef CAS .
D. Garcia-Fresnadillo, Y. Georgiadou, G. Orellana, A. M. Braun and E. Oliveros, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1996, 79, 1222–1238 CrossRef CAS .
F. Manjon, D. Garcia-Fresnadillo and G. Orellana, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 926–932 CAS .
F. Manjón, M. Santana-Magaña, D. García-Fresnadillo and G. Orellana, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 838–845 Search PubMed .
J. L. Bourdelande, J. Font, G. Marques, A. A. Abdel-Shafi, F. Wilkinson and D. R. Worrall, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 138, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bœuf, G. V. Roullin, J. Moreau, L. Van Gulick, N. Zambrano Pineda, C. Terryn, D. Ploton, M. C. Andry, F. Chuburu, S. Dukic, M. Molinari and G. Lemercier, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 171–180 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. DeKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mori, M. Tottori, K. Watanabe, M. Che and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21358–21362 CAS .
A. Albini and S. Spreti, Z. Naturforsch., B: J. Chem. Sci., 1986, 41, 1286–1292 Search PubMed .
W. Ando, T. Nagashima, K. Saito and S. Kohmoto, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1979, 154–156 RSC .
L. T. Spada and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 391–393 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmidt, K. Seikel and H. D. Brauer, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 4507–4511 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Foote, Tetrahedron, 1985, 41, 2221–2227 CrossRef CAS .
E. Baciocchi, T. Del Giacco, F. Elisei, M. F. Gerini, M. Guerra, A. Lapi and P. Liberali, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16444–16454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mizuno, K. Nakanishi, T. Kobata, Y. Sawada and Y. Otsuji, Chem. Lett., 1993, 1349–1352 CrossRef CAS .
I. Leray, M. Ayadim, C. Ottermans, J. L. H. Jiwan and J. P. Soumillion, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 132, 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
N. Soggiu, H. Cardy, J. L. H. Jiwan, I. Leray, J. P. Soumillion and S. Lacombe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1999, 124, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arzoumanian, F. Ronzani, A. Trivella, E. Oliveros, M. Sarakha, C. Richard, S. Blanc, T. Pigot and S. Lacombe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 275–288 CAS .
J. Mosinger, K. Losinska, T. Abrhamova, S. Veiserova, Z. Micka, I. Nemcova and B. Mosinger, Anal. Lett., 2000, 33, 1091–1104 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chirvony, V. Bolotin, E. Matveeva and V. Parkhutik, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
F. van Laar, F. Holsteyns, I. F. J. Vankelecom, S. Smeets, W. Dehaen and P. A. Jacobs, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 144, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Benaglia, T. Danelli, F. Fabris, D. Sperandio and G. Pozzi, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 4229–4232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Inbaraj, M. V. Vinodu, R. Gandhidasan, R. Murugesan and M. Padmanabhan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 89, 3925–3930 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitamura, K. Yamada, K. Ueno and S. Iwata, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 184, 170–176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ribeiro, A. C. Serra and A. M. d'A. Rocha Gonsalves, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 134–137 CrossRef CAS .
P. Henke, K. Lang, P. Kubát, J. Sýkora, M. Šlouf and J. Mosinger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3776–3783 CAS .
V. A. Titov, E. S. Krivykh, T. A. Ageeva, T. G. Shikova, A. B. Solov'eva, V. A. Timofeeva, I. A. Vershinina, V. V. Rybkin and H. S. Choi, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2008, 50, 841–847 CrossRef .
J. Bozja, J. Sherrill, S. Michielsen and I. Stojiljkovic, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2003, 41, 2297–2303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bonnett, M. A. Krysteva, I. G. Lalov and S. V. Artarsky, Water Res., 2006, 40, 1269–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zeug, J. Zimmermann, B. Roder, M. G. Lagorio and E. San Roman, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 198–203 CAS .
M. Krouit, R. Granet, P. Branland, B. Verneuil and P. Krausz, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2006, 16, 1651–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krouit, R. Granet and P. Krausz, Eur. Polym. J., 2009, 45, 1250–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mosinger, O. Jirsak, P. Kubat, K. Lang and B. Mosinger, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 164–166 RSC .
A. G. Griesbeck and T. T. El-Idreesy, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 205–209 CAS .
M. Gmurek, M. Bizukojć, J. Mosinger and S. Ledakowicz, Catal. Today, 2015, 240, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Maree, N. Kuznetsova and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 140, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Maree and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 142, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gerdes, O. Bartels, G. Schneider, D. Wohrle and G. Schulz-Ekloff, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2001, 12, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
E. SanRoman, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 102, 109–112 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Pykhtina, L. A. Ulanova, M. A. Kovaleva, V. M. Negrimovskii, N. A. Kuznetsova, O. L. Kaliya and E. A. Luk'yanets, Russ. J. Phys. Chem., 2000, 74, 2043–2050 Search PubMed .
J. L. Bourdelande, M. Karzazi, L. E. Dicelio, M. I. Litter, G. M. Tura, E. SanRoman and V. Vinent, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 273–282 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuki, Y. Ohta, H. Nagae, T. Ichinohe, M. Kimura, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and D. Wohrle, Chem. Commun., 2000, 213–214 RSC .
A. Goethals, T. Mugadza, Y. Arslanoglu, R. Zugle, E. Antunes, S. W. H. Van Hulle, T. Nyokong and K. De Clerck, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40486 CrossRef .
M. E. Rodriguez, V. E. Diz, J. Awruch and L. E. Dicelio, Photochem. Photobiol., 2010, 86, 513–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Li, W. Zhang, G. Chen, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2872–2879 RSC .
N. Masilela, P. Kleyi, Z. Tshentu, G. Priniotakis, P. Westbroek and T. Nyokong, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 96, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding and B.-H. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6536–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wohrle, N. Baziakina, O. Suvorova, S. Makarov, V. Kutureva, E. Schupak and G. Schnurpfeil, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1390–1401 CrossRef .
K. Kasuga, M. Imai, H. Irie, H. Tanaka, T. Ikeue, M. Handa, S. Wada and T. Sugimori, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fashina, E. Antunes and T. Nyokong, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2014, 18, 396–405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, S. Sreejith and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12860–12868 CAS .
M. Alvaro, E. Carbonell, M. Espla and H. Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 57, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Iriel, G. Lagorio, L. E. Dicelio and E. San Roman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 224–231 RSC .
M. Grüner, V. Siozios, B. Hagenhoff, D. Breitenstein and C. A. Strassert, Photochem. Photobiol., 2013, 89, 1406–1412 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Iliev, L. Prahov, L. Bilyarska, H. Fischer, G. Schulz-Ekloff, D. Wohrle and L. Petrov, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 151, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grüner, L. Tuchscherr, B. Löffler, D. Gonnissen, K. Riehemann, M. C. Staniford, U. Kynast and C. A. Strassert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20965–20971 Search PubMed .
R. Liang, R. Tian, L. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Wang, M. Wei, D. Yan, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3144–3151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kamkaew, S. H. Lim, H. B. Lee, L. V. Kiew, L. Y. Chung and K. Burgess, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 42, 77–88 RSC .
S. G. Awuah and Y. You, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11169–11183 RSC .
W. Li, W. Zhang, X. Dong, L. Yan, R. Qi, W. Wang, Z. Xie and X. Jing, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17445–17448 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Hong, S. Zong, C. Tang, Y. Cui and Q. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, H. Zhang, L. Huang, Z. Guo, G. Xiong and J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8689–8691 RSC .
E. Albiter, S. Alfaro and M. A. Valenzuela, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. Madhavan and K. Pitchumani, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 153, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kimata, H. Koizumi and T. Hirai, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9832–9836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koizumi, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 13238–13244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamakoshi, N. Umezawa, A. Ryu, K. Arakane, N. Miyata, Y. Goda, T. Masumizu and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12803–12809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 695–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Bourdelande, J. Font and R. Gonzalez-Moreno, J. Phys. Helv. Chim. Acta, 2001, 84, 3488–3494 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jensen and C. Daniels, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 207–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Latassa, O. Enger, C. Thilgen, T. Habicher, H. Offermanns and F. Diederich, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1993–1995 RSC .
J. Lee, Y. Mackeyev, M. Cho, L. J. Wilson, J. H. Kim and P. J. Alvarez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 69–96 Search PubMed .
K. J. Moor and J.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 2785–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Hong, Y. Mackeyev, C. Lee, E. Chung, L. J. Wilson, J.-H. Kim and P. J. J. Alvarez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10598–10604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, Y. Ye, Y. Mackeyev, M. Cho, S. Lee, L. J. Wilson, J. Lee, P. J. J. Alvarez, W. Choi and J. Lee, Carbon, 2014, 69, 92–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Iwamoto and Y. Yamakoshi, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4805–4807 RSC .
E. Oliveros, P. Suardi-Murasecco, T. Aminian-Saghafi, A. M. Braun and H.-J. Hansen, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1991, 74, 79–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bourdelande, J. Font and F. Sanchezferrando, Can. J. Chem., 1983, 61, 1007–1016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lacombe, H. Cardy, M. Simon, A. Khoukh, J. P. Soumillion and M. Ayadim, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 347–354 CAS .
C. Cantau, T. Pigot, N. Manoj, E. Oliveros and S. Lacombe, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 2344–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pigot, J. C. Dupin, H. Martinez, C. Cantau, M. Simon and S. Lacombe, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 84, 343–352 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tanielian, C. Schweitzer, R. Seghrouchni, M. Esch and R. Mechin, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 297–305 CAS .
L. Li, C. M. Liu, A. F. Geng, C. J. Jiang, Y. H. Guo and C. W. Hu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 319–332 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Ni, J. Ni, Y. Lv, P. Yang and Y. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2171–2173 RSC .
Y. H. Guo, C. W. Hu, C. J. Jiang, Y. Yang, S. C. Jiang, X. L. Li and E. B. Wang, J. Catal., 2003, 217, 141–151 CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari and F. Bigi, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi and M. Zaidi, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 354, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. H. Guo, C. W. Hu and E. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 252, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carraro, M. Gardan, G. Scorrano, E. Drioli, E. Fontananova and M. Bonchio, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4533–4535 RSC .
B. Cojocaru, V. I. Parvulescu, E. Preda, G. Iepure, V. Somoghi, E. Carbonell, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4908–4913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cojocaru, S. Neatu, V. I. Parvulescu, K. Dumbuya, H. P. Steinruck, J. M. Gottfried, C. Aprile, H. Garcia and J. C. Scaiano, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 5569–5577 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. J. Howarth, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9001–9005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, N. Saito and T. Hirai, Chem. Commun., 2006, 773–775 RSC .
S. A. Chavan, W. Maes, L. E. M. Gevers, J. Wahlen, I. F. J. Vankelecom, P. A. Jacobs, W. Dehaen and D. E. De Vos, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 6754–6762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Ribeiro, A. C. Serra and A. M. D. Rocha Gonsalves, J. Catal., 2008, 256, 331–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, D. Feng, S. Yuan and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 430–435 CAS .
R. M. Spada, M. Cepeda-Plaza, M. L. Gómez, G. Günther, P. Jaque, N. Pizarro, R. E. Palacios and A. Vega, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10148–10159 CAS .
S. Jesenska, L. Plistil, P. Kubat, K. Lang, L. Brozova, S. Popelka, L. Szatmary and J. Mosinger, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2011, 99A, 676–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Wang, S.-J. Jung, J.-W. Hwang, B.-J. Kim, D.-H. Kim, I.-K. Bae, S. H. Jeong and Y.-R. Kim, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2015, 315, 52–58 CrossRef .
C. A. Strassert, M. Otter, R. Q. Albuquerque, A. Höne, Y. Vida, B. Maier and L. De Cola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7928–7931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wainwright, M. N. Byrne and M. A. Gattrell, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2006, 84, 227–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Perni, C. Piccirillo, J. Pratten, P. Prokopovich, W. Chrzanowski, I. P. Parkin and M. Wilson, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 89–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aluigi, G. Sotgiu, A. Torreggiani, A. Guerrini, V. T. Orlandi, F. Corticelli and G. Varchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17416–17424 CAS .
M. J. Bovis, S. Noimark, J. H. Woodhams, C. W. M. Kay, J. Weiner, W. J. Peveler, A. Correia, M. Wilson, E. Allan, I. P. Parkin and A. J. MacRobert, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54830–54842 RSC .
K. Zerdin and A. D. Scully, Photochem. Photobiol., 2010, 86, 1109–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rahal, T. Pigot, D. Foix and S. Lacombe, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 361–372 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rahal, M. Le Bechec, R. Guyoneaud, T. Pigot, H. Paolacci and S. Lacombe, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 134–139 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weijer, M. Broekgaarden, M. Kos, R. van Vught, E. A. J. Rauws, E. Breukink, T. M. van Gulik, G. Storm and M. Heger, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 23, 103–131 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mehraban and H. S. Freeman, Materials, 2015, 8, 4421–4456 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, C. Wang, L. Feng, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10869–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Burguete, F. Galindo, R. Gavara, S. V. Luis, M. Moreno, P. Thomas and D. A. Russell, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 37 CAS .
B. M. Estevão, F. Cucinotta, N. Hioka, M. Cossi, M. Argeri, G. Paul, L. Marchese and E. Gianotti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26804–26812 RSC .
V. Cuchelkar, P. Kopeckova and J. Kopecek, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8, 375–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Tada, L. L. R. Vono, E. L. Duarte, R. Itri, P. K. Kiyohara, M. S. Baptista and L. M. Rossi, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8194–8199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Tada, L. M. Rossi, C. A. P. Leite, R. Itri and M. S. Baptista, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 3100–3108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-S. Ding, X.-C. Huang, Y.-L. Luo and H.-Y. Hsu, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 135, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, X. Wu, K. Wang, B. Shi and L. Hai, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5601–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schwiertz, A. Wiehe, S. Grafe, B. Gitter and M. Epple, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 3324–3331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, C.-H. Hsu, C.-C. Huang and P.-Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 7, 432–441 Search PubMed .
J. Brame, M. Long, Q. Li and P. Alvarez, Water Res., 2014, 60, 259–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, W. Kim, Y. Mackeyev, G.-S. Lee, H.-J. Kim, T. Tachikawa, S. Hong, S. Lee, J. Kim, L. J. Wilson, T. Majima, P. J. J. Alvarez, W. Choi and J. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 9606–9613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Amat, A. Arques, S. H. Bossmann, A. M. Braun, M. A. Miranda and R. F. Vercher, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 383–388 CrossRef CAS .
M. Silva, M. J. F. Calvete, N. P. F. Gonçalves, H. D. Burrows, M. Sarakha, A. Fernandes, M. F. Ribeiro, M. E. Azenha and M. M. Pereira, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 233–234, 79–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nagai, Y. Yasuda, T. Iyoda and T. Abe, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 1033–1039 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dambruoso, M. Ballestri, C. Ferroni, A. Guerrini, G. Sotgiu, G. Varchi and A. Massi, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1907–1917 RSC .
V. Latour, T. Pigot, P. Mocho, S. Blanc and S. Lacombe, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ronzani, P. Saint-Cricq, E. Arzoumanian, T. Pigot, S. Blanc, M. Oelgemöller, E. Oliveros, C. Richard and S. Lacombe, Photochem. Photobiol., 2014, 90, 358–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Gephart, P. N. Coneski and J. H. Wynne, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10191–10200 CAS .
P. Saint-Cricq, T. Pigot, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and S. Lacombe, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5281 RSC .
A. G. Griesbeck, T. T. El-Idreesy and A. Bartoschek, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2004, 346, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ohtani, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 157–178 CrossRef CAS .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS .
R. Masson, V. Keller and N. Keller, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170–171, 301–311 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Teoh, J. A. Scott and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 629–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Kouamé, R. Masson, D. Robert, N. Keller and V. Keller, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 13–20 CrossRef .
S. Josset, N. Keller, M.-C. Lett, M. J. Ledoux and V. Keller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 744–755 RSC .
U. Žvab, U. L. Štangar and M. B. Marušič, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 1925–1936 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Upadhyay, N. Soin and S. S. Roy, RSC Adv., 2013, 4, 3823–3851 RSC .
P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Polo-López, S. Malato, S. Wadhwa, J. W. J. Hamilton, P. S. M. Dunlop, R. D'Sa, E. Magee, K. O'Shea, D. D. Dionysiou and J. A. Byrne, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 261, 36–44 CrossRef .
S. Pigeot-Remy, J. C. Lazzaroni, F. Simonet, P. Petinga, C. Vallet, P. Petit, P. J. Vialle and C. Guillard, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 654–664 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Foster, I. B. Ditta, S. Varghese and A. Steele, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 90, 1847–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Boulinguiez, A. Bouzaza, S. Merabet and D. Wolbert, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 200, 254–261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Destaillats, M. Sleiman, D. P. Sullivan, C. Jacquiod, J. Sablayrolles and L. Molins, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 128, 159–170 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kinadjian, M. Le Bechec, T. Pigot, F. Dufour, O. Durupthy, A. Bentaleb, E. Prouzet, S. Lacombe and R. Backov, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 5350–5359 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kinadjian, M. Le Bechec, C. Henrist, E. Prouzet, S. Lacombe and R. Backov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11211–11218 CAS .
M. Le Bechec, N. Kinadjian, D. Ollis, R. Backov and S. Lacombe, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Mejia, J. M. Marin, G. Restrepo, L. A. Rios, C. Pulgarin and J. Kiwi, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, H. Mahalingam and P. K. Singh, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 462–463, 178–195 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avila, A. Bahamonde, J. Blanco, B. Sánchez, A. I. Cardona and M. Romero, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 17, 75–88 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sánchez, J. M. Coronado, R. Candal, R. Portela, I. Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, D. Tompkins and T. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 295–301 CrossRef .
J. Taranto, D. Frochot and P. Pichat, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 67, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
N. Doss, P. Bernhardt, T. Romero, R. Masson, V. Keller and N. Keller, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154–155, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ochiai, T. Hoshi, H. Slimen, K. Nakata, T. Murakami, H. Tatejima, Y. Koide, A. Houas, T. Horie, Y. Morito and A. Fujishima, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1324–1327 CAS .
J. Gunschera, J. R. Andersen, N. Schulz and T. Salthammer, Chemosphere, 2009, 75, 476–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Auvinen and L. Wirtanen, Atmos. Environ., 2008, 42, 4101–4112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hochmannova and J. Vytrasova, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 67, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Aïssa, E. Puzenat, A. Plassais, J.-M. Herrmann, C. Haehnel and C. Guillard, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. Ollis, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 478–484 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boonen, V. Akylas, F. Barmpas, A. Boréave, L. Bottalico, M. Cazaunau, H. Chen, V. Daële, T. De Marco, J. F. Doussin, C. Gaimoz, M. Gallus, C. George, N. Grand, B. Grosselin, G. L. Guerrini, H. Herrmann, S. Ifang, J. Kleffmann, R. Kurtenbach, M. Maille, G. Manganelli, A. Mellouki, K. Miet, F. Mothes, N. Moussiopoulos, L. Poulain, R. Rabe, P. Zapf and A. Beeldens, J. Environ. Manage., 2015, 155, 136–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gallus, V. Akylas, F. Barmpas, A. Beeldens, E. Boonen, A. Boréave, M. Cazaunau, H. Chen, V. Daële, J. F. Doussin, Y. Dupart, C. Gaimoz, C. George, B. Grosselin, H. Herrmann, S. Ifang, R. Kurtenbach, M. Maille, A. Mellouki, K. Miet, F. Mothes, N. Moussiopoulos, L. Poulain, R. Rabe, P. Zapf and J. Kleffmann, Build. Environ., 2015, 84, 125–133 CrossRef .
M. P. Paschoalino, J. Kiwi and W. F. Jardim, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 68, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. Le Bechec, N. Costarramone, T. Fouillet, P. Charles, T. Pigot, D. Bégué and S. Lacombe, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 178, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, S. S. Al-Deyab and D. Zhao, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 344–366 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kalousek, J. Tschirch, D. Bahnemann and J. Rathouský, Superlattices Microstruct., 2008, 44, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. C. Yu, C. Ho, Y. Hou and X. Fu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2552–2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sinha, S. Seelan, M. Okumura, T. Akita, S. Tsubota and M. Haruta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3956–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Sylvie Lacombe
	Sylvie Lacombe, a senior CNRS researcher, has been working on photochemistry for 25 years. She is mainly interested in different types of photo-oxidation reactions: ground state oxygen addition to radicals produced by photolysis, singlet oxygen formation by photosensitization and photocatalysis. She was interested in the development of various photosensitizing or photocatalytic materials and in the understanding of the formation of reactive oxygen species. She has been the vice-president of the European Photocatalysis Federation (EPF) since 2009 and she participates at the European level to normalization actions in photocatalysis (CEN TC386).

Thierry Pigot
	Thierry Pigot is a professor of chemistry at the University of Pau and Pays de l'Adour. His research area first concerns the preparation and characterization of silica based supported organic photosensitizers. He is also involved in the study of oxidation and photo-oxidation (by photosensitizer or photocatalyst) mechanisms of organic compounds and in the characterization of Reactive Oxygen Species involved in the oxidation processes (singlet oxygen, superoxide anion or hydroxyl radical). Finally, he is also working on the applications of such materials in the fields of water and air treatment.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of TiO2 photocatalytic mechanism: (a) trapping of the electrons and holes photogenerated by the surface to give surface-trapped holes (htr) and electrons (etr); (b) charge recombination; (c) oxidation of H2O or RH (and alternatively of O2˙−) by trapped holes; (d) reduction of O2 by trapped electrons. Adapted from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of various organic photosensitizers (PSs).	 

 	Fig. 3  General schemes of photosensitized reactions: (a) singlet oxygen production by energy transfer (type II reactions), ISC: intersystem crossing; (b) oxygenation reactions by electron transfer (type I reactions).	 

Benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile (DBTP)	ND (>94.2)	7.1	340–430	0.91	CH3CN	
53

Phthalocyanine Zn(II)	109	270, p	500–750	0.53	CH3CN	
54–56

Methylene Blue	138	450	630–660	0.51	MeOH	
54, 56

Tetraphenylporphyrin	140	1500	300–700	0.78	C6H6	
54, 57

C60 fullerene	151	205, n	340–510	0.98	C6H6	
54, 58, 59

Rose Bengal	164	130	490–570	0.76	MeOH	
54, 60

9,10-Dicyanoanthracene	175	100, n	340–430	2.06*	CH3CN	
54, 61

Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II), [Ru(bpy)3]2+	197	0.72, p	180–450	0.73	MeOH	
62

Triphenylpyrylium tetrafluoroborate	221	10	300–450	—	—	
63

4-Phenylbenzophenone (PBP)	254	40, n	250–380	0.75	EtOH	
54, 64

9,10-Anthraquinone	261	0.11, n	300–430	0.62–0.70	CH3CN	
54, 65

I-BODIPY	ND	ND	450–600	0.83	CH3CN	
66


 	Fig. 4  Rehm–Weller equation, E0(D˙+/D): standard redox potential of the electron donor D (V), E0(A/A˙−) = E0(PS/PS˙−): standard redox potential of the electron acceptor A (V), ΔE00 (kJ mol−1): excitation energy of the PS, ε: dielectric constant of the solvent, d: distance between the two radical ions A˙− and D˙+ (m)).	 

Triphenylpyrylium tetrafluoroborate	2.82	−0.29	2.53	28.0	
73

9,10-Dicyanoanthracene	2.89	−0.83	1.91	−24.1	
74, 75

Benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile (DBTP)	2.99	−0.92	2.07	−32.8	
74, 75

Zn(II) tetraphenylporphyrin	2.05	−1.35	0.70	−74.3	
73

Ru(bpy)32+	2.12	−1.35	0.77	−74.3	
73

9,10-Anthraquinone	2.73	−0.86	1.87	−27.0	
73

Benzophenone	2.98	−1.83	1.17	−120.6	
73


 	Fig. 5  Time scales in photocatalysis. From ref. 33 with permission of the copyright owner.	 
O2˙− + H3O+ → HO2˙ + H2O pKa = 4.75 − 4.88	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Normalized (a) absorption spectra and (b) fluorescence spectra (λexc = 550 nm) of solid polymers P1–P3 and RB dianion in MeOH (10 μM). From ref. 93 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 7  Normalized diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) TiO2, (b) TP+ prepared within the voids of Y zeolite (TPY) and (c) malachite green (MG+) prepared within the voids of Y zeolite (MGY). From ref. 78 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 8  Normalized absorption A (____), reflectance R (⋯⋯) and emission L (-----) spectra of the RDP2+/pSil photosensitizing material (RDP2+: [tris(4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline)ruthenium(II)] dichloride. From ref. 50 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Fluorescence excitation (λem = 470 nm) and emission (λexc = 385 nm) of DBTP-based silica monoliths (DBTP: benzo[b]triphenylene-9,14-dicarbonitrile). Grey: encapsulated DBTP; black: grafted DBTP-COOH. From ref. 117 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Absorption and (B) normalized fluorescence spectra (λexc = 430 nm) of sulfonato-polystyrene nanofibers with a cationic porphyrin derivative (5,10,15,20-tetrakis(1-methylpyridinium-4-yl)porphyrin or TMPyP) at low (a), medium (b) and high (c) TMPyP loading. From ref. 125 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Absorption spectra of metallophthalocyanine (MPc)-conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) compared with their monomers. a) CoPc-CMPs and CoPc(NH2)4; b) NiPc-CMPs and NiPc(NH2)4; c) CuPc-CMPs and CuPc(NH2)4; d) ZnPc-CMPs and ZnPc(NH2)4. K/M is the Kubelka–Munk absorption. From ref. 146 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of the triethoxysilyl derivative of the BODIPY (curve 5) and the grafted silica (KIT-1-B); (b and c) pictures of the initial (KIT-1) and grafted (KIT-1-B) silica powders; (d and e) suspension of KIT-1-B in acetonitrile before and after deposition of the material in the cuvette. From ref. 161 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 13  Normalized absorption spectra of Methylene Blue in an air-equilibrated Nafion®-Na film after preparation (___) and a week later (-----). The inset shows the absorption profile at the absorption maximum (642 nm) of MB-dyed and non-dyed films. From ref. 83 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 14  Diffuse reflectance UV/vis spectra of NH2-containing polymer S–NH2 (carbohydrate hydrophilic polymeric matrix functionalized with amino moieties) and fullerene-C60-containing polymers 1, 2 and 3 (different fullerene concentrations in the range 3.61–6.66 × 10−3 mol g−1). From ref. 168 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Diffuse reflectance spectra of 4-benzoylbenzoate sodium salt (R = COO−Na+) (a) adsorbed on a double layered hydroxide, (b) intercalated in a double layered hydroxide, (c) in mechanical mixture with a double layered hydroxide and (d) pure. Insert: DRUV spectra normalized at 325 nm. From ref. 180 with permission of the copyright owner. (B) DRUV spectra of commercial silica gel beads grafted with anthraquinone-2-carboxylic acid (R = COOH) (a) before irradiation, (b) after irradiation at 420 nm under a continuous flow of gaseous dimethyl sulfide in air and (c) after regeneration by washing. From ref. 26 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 16  UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of PW11Co and PW11Ni (with PW11M = K5[M(H2O)PW11O39]) and their corresponding hybrid catalysts obtained by coordination of the metal center on amino-modified MCM-48. From ref. 182 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photocatalytic activity of the photosensitizing materials for dipropyl sulfide decomposition under UV light irradiation (dark grey: 60 min, light grey: 120 min); (b) selectivity to dipropyl disulfide; (c) selectivity to dipropyl sulfoxide. From ref. 190 with permission of the copyright owner.	 

 	Fig. 18  Roles of graphene in improving the photocatalytic activity, adsorptivity and antimicrobial activity of the metal oxide/graphene composite and its possible benefits. From ref. 240 with permission of the copyright owners.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
