Plasma synthesis of stoichiometric Cu 2 S nanocrystals stabilized by oleylamine   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC00998C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC00998C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8346-8349Plasma synthesis of stoichiometric Cu2S nanocrystals stabilized by oleylamine†

        
          
            Elijah 
            Thimsen
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Uwe R. 
            Kortshagen
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Eray S. 
            Aydil
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. E-mail: elijah.thimsen@gmail.com;   Tel: +1 612 625 8590
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
Received 
      6th February 2014
    , Accepted 11th June 2014First published on 18th June 2014AbstractNonthermal plasmas can produce high quality nanocrystals in a continuous process without requiring solvents. A nonthermal plasma process is demonstrated to synthesize stoichiometric Cu2S nanocrystals, which show no signs of oxidation by spectrophotometry after 2 months in the ambient when stabilized with oleylamine and dispersed in toluene.
There has been a resurgence of interest in copper(I) sulfide (Cu2S) as a potential photovoltaic absorber because its constituent elements are earth-abundant, and solar cells based on Cu2S are well suited for sustainable large scale electricity production.1 The indirect band gap of Cu2S is 1.2 eV, which places its theoretical maximum power conversion efficiency at ∼32%, close to that of silicon. The hole mobility in polycrystalline Cu2S thin films is relatively high, typically in the range from 1 to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1. To realize widespread deployment of solar cells based on Cu2S, high-throughput large-scale thin film synthesis methods are needed. One potentially low cost and high throughput method is coating thin films from colloidal nanocrystal dispersions or inks. However, a major challenge with Cu2S nanocrystals is their stability with respect to Cu vacancy formation by facile diffusion of Cu+ into neighboring phases. The copper vacancy introduces holes to maintain charge neutrality, eventually causing the semiconductor to become degenerately doped.2,3 When a semiconductor is degenerately doped, minority carrier recombination is very rapid, and solar cell performance suffers severely. While several methods for copper sulfide colloidal nanocrystal synthesis have been reported, stable nondegenerately doped material has been elusive. For instance Luther et al.,4 Kriegel et al.,5 and Liu et al.,6 have observed that colloidal Cu2S, even when well-passivated with surface ligands, becomes degenerately doped upon exposure to air. The high hole concentration in these materials is characterized by the emergence of a plasmon absorption band in the near-infrared (NIR) which also blue shifts with increasing time in air, consistent with increasing hole concentration.4 Herein, we report high throughput gas phase plasma synthesis of stoichiometric and stable Cu2S nanocrystals and their dispersions in organic solvents.
Gas-phase nonthermal plasma synthesis is an alternative to solution-phase synthesis that provides the option to eliminate solvents and surface ligands from the processing while producing semiconductors that have very low defect density.7 For instance, nonthermal plasma synthesis has been used to produce very high quality silicon nanocrystals with exciton lifetimes on the order of 20 μs,8 photoluminescence quantum yields exceeding 60%,9 and high quantum efficiency for multiple exciton generation.10 This is even more remarkable because silicon is an indirect band gap semiconductor and remains indirect even when quantum confined.11 To our knowledge, there has been no report of metal-sulfide nanocrystal synthesis using nonthermal plasmas.
Stable Cu2S nanocrystal dispersions were synthesized in a two-step procedure. The first step is the synthesis of Cu2S nanocrystals from metalorganic vapor and elemental sulfur in the gas-phase using a nonthermal plasma. The second step is a simple capping procedure that consists of sonicating the nanocrystal powder that comes out of the plasma reactor in a toluene–oleylamine solution for 30 minutes at room temperature. More, specifically, the Cu2S nanocrystals were synthesized by reacting hexafluoroacetylacetonate Cu(I) vinyltrimethyl silane ((HFAC)Cu(VTMS)) and sulfur vapor in a nonthermal plasma maintained using radio frequency electric field (see ESI† for experimental details) at a pressure of 266 Pa (2 Torr, Fig. 1). In a nonthermal plasma, the temperature of the gas is very close to room temperature, approximately 50 °C, whereas the electrons are heated by the electric field and can reach tens of thousands of K (1–5 eV). Cu2S nanocrystals nucleate and grow through reactions of molecular fragments created by dissociation of the metalorganic precursor and sulfur molecules via interactions with energetic electrons, ions and metastable excited species in the plasma. The Cu2S nanocrystals are heated through electron–ion recombination reactions and can reach hundreds of K, a significant fraction of the melting point of Cu2S.7,12,13 This nonequilibrium environment, in which nanocrystals are selectively heated to temperatures significantly above the gas temperature, enables the synthesis of high melting point sulfide crystals even when the reactor is near room temperature.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the plasma process used to synthesize and collect Cu2S nanocrystals. 
The nanocrystals were collected on a filter placed downstream of the plasma. After several minutes, the filter clogged to the point where the reactor pressure could no longer be maintained at 266 Pa by adjusting the throttle position of the vacuum pump. If the precursors were fed into the tube under identical conditions in the absence of the plasma, an insignificant amount of particles were collected on the filter for the same time as it took to saturate the filter when the plasma was turned on. We therefore conclude that reaction of the precursors with energetic electrons, ions and metastable excited states in the plasma is responsible for the formation of the Cu2S nanocrystals and thermal reactions are insignificant.
Ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-VIS-NIR) emission from the Ar–S–(HFAC)Cu(VTMS) plasma in conjunction with actinometry was used to estimate relative concentrations of various molecules.14 Actinometry is a method used to quantify the changes in gas phase species concentrations by normalizing the excited state emission intensity from a species of interest (e.g., S2) with the emission intensity from a species of known volumetric concentration (i.e. Ar). The ratio of these emission intensities is proportional to the volumetric concentration of the species of interest and can be used to compare the species concentrations under different plasma conditions. At 120 °C, the temperature that sulfur vapor is fed into the plasma, the sulfur vapor feed consists predominately of S8 with lesser amounts of S7 and S6.15 These sulfur rings are dissociated into S atoms and smaller fragments such as S2 in the plasma. When the feed gas contains only sulfur and argon, these S rings and molecular fragments give rise to a visible and ultraviolet broadband emission, from 250 nm to 700 nm (Fig. S1, ESI†). In particular, the emission feature at 256 nm, assigned to S2.16 Interestingly, when (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) is added to the plasma at the same sulfur feed rate, the normalized intensity of the S2 emission increases by a factor of 4 which means that the concentration of S2 in the plasma also increases by approximately the same factor (Fig. S1, ESI†). Thus there is a high concentration of S2 in the plasma to react with the copper precursor to form Cu2S nanocrystals.
The relationship between the final nanocrystal stoichiometry and the relative feed rates of (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) and sulfur is nontrivial. Here we assume that the sulfur vapor fed into the plasma is composed entirely of S8. The feed rates of S8 and (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) were calculated using the measured total bubbler pressure, known saturation pressure of the vapor at the measured bubbler temperature, volumetric flow rate of argon through the bubbler, and the ideal gas law assuming constant total bubbler pressure. At constant (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) flow rate, the Cu-to-S ratio in the nanocrystals, as measured by X-ray energy dispersion spectroscopy (X-EDS), was insensitive to the sulfur vapor flow rate, provided that the latter was above a threshold value. We surmise that the plasma creates excess concentration of reactive sulfur species such as S2, and the rest of the sulfur remains undissociated and does not participate in the reaction. However, the Cu-to-S ratio in the nanocrystal does depend on the (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) flow rate. At constant sulfur vapor flow rate, a higher (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) flow rate results in higher Cu-to-S ratio in the nanocrystals. For the Cu2S nanocrystals discussed herein, FCu/(FCu + 8FS8) = 0.61, where FCu and FS8 are the molar feed rate of (HFAC)Cu(VTMS) and S8 into the plasma. This ratio yields stoichiometric Cu2S nanocrystals.
A blackish brown powder was collected on the white SiO2 fiber filter. This powder was comprised of nanocrystals that had a copper atomic fraction of 0.63 ± 0.06 in excellent agreement with the target stoichiometry and the molar precursor flow rates fed into the plasma. The powder also contained some impurities from the (HFAC)Cu(VTMS), namely Si, F and C. X-EDS was used to quantify the Si content, which was several atom % based on copper (Fig. S2, ESI†). The nanocrystals could be readily dispersed in toluene containing oleylamine (0.09 M) and sonication at room temperature to form 3–4 mg ml−1 colloidal dispersions. The nanocrystal dispersion was stable and appeared clear and brownish. Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows the XRD from dry powder placed on a silicon substrate. The XRD pattern could be indexed to either cubic α-Cu2S, or cubic Cu1.8S: the diffractions from these two structures are too close to be distinguished due to broadening common for nanocrystals. The crystallite size measured from the peak width using the Scherrer equation was 3.5 nm. To clearly differentiate between the two possible phases, it is necessary to use additional information. Since Cu1.8S is a degenerate semiconductor due to copper vacancies, there should be an absorption feature in the NIR consistent with free carrier absorption (i.e. a plasmon absorption peak). Fig. 2 shows the UV-VIS-NIR absorption of nanocrystals capped with oleylamine (OAm) recorded immediately after synthesis. The absorption spectrum does not show any plasmon features, and we conclude that the nanocrystals are Cu2S as-synthesized, not Cu1.8S (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  UV-VIS-NIR spectra of as Cu2S nanocrystals that were immediately dispersed in 0.09 OAm in toluene as-produced (green) and after 2 months stored on the bench (blue); and crystals from the same batch that were stored dry in air for 2 months before dispersing in 0.09 M OAm in toluene and measuring. 
Cu2S nanocrystals that were immediately capped with OAm and dispersed in toluene showed no signs of oxidation when stored in air on a bench top, as evidenced by the absence of plasmon absorption peak in the NIR, even after 2 months (Fig. 2), the longest time period we have made observations. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) also revealed that there was no visible oxide shell on the OAm-capped particles (Fig. 3a). The absorption spectrum did slightly redshift after 2 months, which could indicate that the nanocrystals grew slightly in size or agglomerated to some extent. In contrast, Liu et al. observed the plasmon absorption immediately after synthesis indicating an oxidized product,6 Luther et al.4 observed the plasmon absorption emerge over the course of 6 hours due to air oxidation, and Kriegel et al. observed it over the course of 6 days.5 As a control, we took approximately the same mass of Cu2S nanocrystal powder, from the same batch, and stored it dry without dispersing it in toluene (i.e. no OAm capping immediately after plasma synthesis) in air for 2 months. After 2 months, this dry sample, stored in air, was dispersed in 0.09 M OAm in toluene for UV-VIS-NIR measurement. The nanocrystals that were stored dry in air oxidized, as evidenced by a large increase in absorption in the NIR (Fig. 2). In addition, TEM analysis revealed the presence of a thick (∼4 nm) oxide shell on particles that had not been capped with OAm (Fig. 3b). The core size of the oxidized particles was also smaller than the OAm-capped particles (Fig. 3c), consistent with Cu+ diffusing out to form the oxide shell. Both the UV-VIS-NIR absorption and TEM results clearly demonstrate that the OAm capping is necessary to stabilize the Cu2S nanocrystals against oxidation and to prevent them from becoming degenerately doped. At present, the possibility of a small amount of oxidation for the OAm-capped particles cannot be excluded, but if there is any, we estimate that it contributes less than 10 carriers per nanocrystal.4 In the context of previous work, our results suggest that the plasma synthesis itself is important for achieving stability. One possibility is that the plasma process produces nanocrystals that have a cleaner surface as-synthesized, and so it is possible to achieve more complete coverage by the surface ligands and therefore slow down oxidation.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of Cu2S nanocrystals synthesized under same conditions and have been exposed to air for 1 hour at room temperature: (a) with, and (b) without, OAm capping immediately after plasma synthesis. The size distributions (c) were determined by measuring the diameters of approximately 150 particles from multiple images. HRTEM is in Fig. S4 (ESI†). 
Previous work by others on colloidal dispersions of Cu2S nanocrystals produced through solution phase routes show oxidation of the nanocrystals upon exposure of the solution to air that results in the semiconductor becoming degenerately doped. These studies used similar surface ligands to ours, and in the case of Liu et al.,6 oleylamine specifically was used. In the studies of Luther et al.4 and Kriegel et al.,5 air was clearly excluded from the synthesis, as evidenced by the lack of an initial plasmon absorption in the NIR. In our procedure, the crystals were exposed to air for approximately 30 seconds as they were transferred from the reactor to the capping solution, and still we saw no evidence of oxidation in the UV-VIS-NIR spectrum or TEM (Fig. 2 and 3). Our data suggest that the Cu2S nanocrystals produced by the nonthermal plasma process may be more stable as-synthesized, even though organic capping is still necessary to prevent oxidation over long time periods.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
This work was supported primarily by the MRSEC Program of the NSF (NSF DMR-0819885). Parts of this work were carried out in the Characterization Facility, University of Minnesota, which receives partial support from NSF through the MRSEC program.
Notes and references
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, S. C. Riha, E. Thimsen, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1868–1878 CAS .
S. C. Riha, S. Jin, S. V. Baryshev, E. Thimsen, G. P. Wiederrecht and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10302–10309 CAS .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, C. Jiang, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin, E. da Como and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1583–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Wang, B. Zhou, W.-C. Law, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 1256–1264 CrossRef .
L. Mangolini, E. Thimsen and U. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 655–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Miller, A. R. Van Sickle, R. J. Anthony, D. M. Kroll, U. R. Kortshagen and E. K. Hobbie, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7389–7396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jurbergs, E. Rogojina, L. Mangolini and U. Kortshagen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233116 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Beard, K. P. Knutsen, P. R. Yu, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, W. K. Metzger, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2506–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, P. Podsiadlo, M. K. Y. Chan, A. Demortiere, D. J. Gosztola, V. B. Prakapenka, G. C. Schatz, U. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4200–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mangolini and U. Kortshagen, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 79, 026405 Search PubMed .
N. J. Kramer, R. J. Anthony, M. Mamunuru, E. S. Aydil and U. R. Kortshagen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 075202 CrossRef .
J. W. Coburn and M. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 3134–3136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 1976, 76, 367–388 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nelson, S. P. Frigo and R. Rosenberg, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1993, 11, 1022–1027 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI). See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc00998cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the plasma process used to synthesize and collect Cu2S nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 2  UV-VIS-NIR spectra of as Cu2S nanocrystals that were immediately dispersed in 0.09 OAm in toluene as-produced (green) and after 2 months stored on the bench (blue); and crystals from the same batch that were stored dry in air for 2 months before dispersing in 0.09 M OAm in toluene and measuring.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of Cu2S nanocrystals synthesized under same conditions and have been exposed to air for 1 hour at room temperature: (a) with, and (b) without, OAm capping immediately after plasma synthesis. The size distributions (c) were determined by measuring the diameters of approximately 150 particles from multiple images. HRTEM is in Fig. S4 (ESI†).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI). See DOI: 10.1039/c4cc00998c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
