Photocatalytic activity of TiO 2 nanoparticles: a theoretical aspect  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA03385H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA03385H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13833-13859Photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles: a theoretical aspect

        
          
            Yeonsig 
            Nam†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jong Hyeon 
            Lim†
a, 
      
        
          
            Kyoung Chul 
            Ko
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jin Yong 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. E-mail: jinylee@skku.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Korea. E-mail: kcko1982@chonnam.ac.kr
Received 
      30th March 2019
    , Accepted 15th May 2019First published on 15th May 2019AbstractTiO2 photocatalysts have been widely used in the field of renewable energy and environmental clean-up. However, the large band gap of TiO2, along with the fast recombination of charge carriers, significantly lowers the photocatalytic performance. Many strategies have been developed to address this issue, including nanostructuring, introducing oxygen defects, chemical doping, surface sensitization, and employing nanocomposites. Studies of light absorption and especially charge recombination of modified TiO2 particles by experimental approaches are limited by the entangled parameters introduced by experimental conditions. Theoretical approaches have provided useful insight due to the systematic modelling of TiO2 particles. This review encompasses the theoretical approach to investigate the photocatalytic activity of modified TiO2 nanoparticles. The density functional theory (DFT) methods used to describe the properties of TiO2 systems and modelling of the geometric and electronic structure to properly describe the actual nanoparticles used in experiments are discussed. The chemical modification strategies are discussed in terms of band engineering, and charge carrier separation and diffusion in comparison with experimental results. The surface redox reactions are discussed with regard to thermodynamics and kinetics.Yeonsig NamYeonsig Nam is a Ph.D candidate in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University, working in the group of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. His main research interests include charge carrier dynamics in TiO2 nanoparticles using nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation, and the design of strong ferromagnetic organic magnetic materials. He was a Global Ph.D Fellow in 2016 and is currently a fellow of the POSCO TJ Park Science Fellowship.Jong Hyeon LimJong Hyeon Lim is a Ph.D candidate in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University, studying in the group of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. His research interests include the understanding of the vibrational Stark effects in water molecules, proton transfer driven by an electric field, electrode materials for Li ion batteries, magnetic properties of inorganic complexes, and TiO2 nanoparticles.Kyoung Chul KoDr Kyoung Chul Ko obtained a Ph.D degree in Chemistry from Sungkyunkwan University, Korea in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. As a postdoc, he worked with Prof. Francesc Illas at the University of Barcelona, Spain, from 2014 to 2015. Currently, he is working as an Assistant Professor at Chonnam National University. His research interests include the rational design of functional materials, more specifically organic magnetic materials for spintronics and TiO2 materials for photo-catalysts by using DFT methods.Jin Yong LeeProf. Jin Yong Lee has been a professor in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University since 2005. He graduated and obtained his Ph.D. (Chemistry) from POSTECH (Korea) in 1997. He worked with David Chandler at Berkeley as a postdoc. He was appointed as an Assistant Professor at Chonnam National University in 2002, and then moved to Sungkyunkwan University in 2005. He was awarded the 2012 Pople Medal by the Asia-Pacific Association of Theoretical & Computational Chemists. His research interests include protein interactions and dynamics, photocatalytic processes of nanoparticles, chemical processes in lithium batteries, organic radicals, graphynes, and 1D and 2D solid materials.
1. Introduction
TiO2 nanoparticles have been an important semiconductor in the field of solar cells,1,2 environmental clean-up,3,4 and photocatalysis.5–8 Since the first observation of photocatalytic water splitting by Fujishima and Honda,9 numerous studies have focused on the development of efficient photocatalysts. The photocatalytic process consists of the following steps (Fig. 1): (1) photoexcitation: an electron–hole pair is generated by the absorption of light equal to or greater than the band gap of the photocatalyst. (2) The electron–hole pair dissociates into a free electron and a free hole and then migrates to the reactive surface. (3) The free electron/hole is transferred to an adsorbed molecule and further undergoes photoreduction/photooxidation. Moreover, by utilizing such photocatalytic reaction processes, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulphur oxides (SOx) categorized as air pollutants can be removed. Thus, TiO2 photocatalysts have received extensive and rigorous attention with regard to human health and energy-related sciences.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic process. 
In particular, TiO2 has attracted interest due to its advantages such as low cost, stability, nontoxicity, recyclability, etc. However, the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles is significantly reduced due to its large band gap (rutile: 3.0 eV, anatase: 3.2 eV), which hinders the efficient absorption of visible light. Many strategies such as introducing point defects, chemical doping, noble metal deposition, and dye sensitization have been developed during the past few decades to enhance the absorption of visible light. Nevertheless, the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles remains low (around 6%). This is due to the possibility that electrons and holes could recombine during the photocatalytic process and the chemical modification may even accelerate the electron–hole recombination. Enhancement of photocatalytic activity could be attained with comprehensive studies on band engineering, charge carrier dynamics, and surface reaction. Experimental approaches provided useful insight into the change of light absorption and charge carrier dynamics upon chemical modifications. However, many factors introduced by experimental conditions such as impurities, size and shape distribution, and grain boundaries are entangled, making it difficult to investigate a single factor independently from others. In this context, the systematic modelling of the TiO2 system with first-principles calculations can provide valuable insight into the change of geometric and electronic properties originating from chemical modification.
The growing computing power extended the applicability of modern computational methods from small molecules to macromolecules and condensed phases. In addition, the development of computational methods combining ab initio electronic structure theory with non-adiabatic molecular dynamics enabled the investigation of time-dependent charge carrier dynamics. Numerous computational studies on TiO2 photocatalysts have been performed during recent decades. Many theoretical studies have been reviewed to support the experimental findings.10–16 However, most of the theoretical reviews on TiO2 photovoltaics and photocatalysts were confined to the elucidation of individual processes without covering the entire photocatalytic process.
On the other hand, bulks, surfaces, clusters, and nanoparticles have been developed to investigate the photocatalytic properties of TiO2. Also, many efforts have been made to accurately describe the electronic structure of TiO2 nanoparticles due to the intrinsic self-interaction error in DFT functionals. However, an extensive review on the modelling of geometric and electronic structures is still lacking.
This review focuses on the comprehensive understanding of the entire photocatalytic process from photoexcitation to the redox reaction at the surface with respect to theoretical aspects. Particularly, we focus on the different geometric and electronic structures of bulk, cluster, and nanoparticle models, and then clarify the relationships between them which have been ambiguously used in many computational papers. Also, we review the DFT methods for TiO2 and other metal oxides which are not covered in the other reviews. This work provides an extensive and systematic overview of the photocatalytic activity of modified TiO2 nanoparticles, in terms of band engineering and charge carrier dynamics. We also compare the results obtained by modern theoretical approaches with experimental ones.
Although we wish to discuss a wide range of other computational and experimental results, we suggest that the readers refer to other reviews on wide-ranging theoretical descriptions of photocatalytic processes,17,18 visible light activation strategies,19–21 and charge transfer mechanism between metal oxide nanoparticles and adsorbed molecules.22–26
This review is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the merits of TiO2 as photocatalysts among various metal oxide candidates. Then we discuss DFT functional modelling to accurately describe the electronic structure of TiO2 systems and review recent computational studies on the reduced bulk and some part of surface models. In Section 3, we discuss the modelling of small TiO2 clusters which do not have a specific shape. In Section 4, we review the modelling of nanoparticles. In Section 5, we discuss the chemical modification effects on band engineering. In Section 6, we consider the chemical modification effects on charge separation and diffusion dynamics. In Section 7, we discuss the surface reaction mechanism in terms of thermodynamics and kinetics. Finally, in Section 8, we summarize the key points and outline the future research direction.
2. TiO2 bulk
2.1. TiO2 photocatalysts
The levels of the valence band and conduction band play key roles in promoting the desired photocatalytic reactions. For example, the relationship between the band levels of semiconductor photocatalytic materials and redox potentials of water splitting is crucial for catalytic activity. Regarding the H2 evolution reaction, the bottom of the conduction band must be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V) on the basis of the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) potential. On the other hand, the O2 evolution reaction would proceed when the top of the valence band is more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V). Despite the ability for band levels to be shifted by the pH conditions, ZrO2, KTaO3, SrTiO3 and TiO2 could be promising oxide materials for photocatalytic water splitting.27 For the WO3 case, the H2 evolution reaction might not be sufficient due to its relatively low conduction band level, while the O2 evolution reaction may occur considering the band structure. It is worth noting that for ZnO, one of the most widely used oxides, the photo-generated holes simultaneously lead to the elution of Zn2+, which is known as photocorrosion, reducing photocatalytic activity.28 In this case, a suitable hole scavenger must be used to remedy the photocorrosion problem.
Among the various metal oxides, TiO2 is certainly an attractive system because it is chemically inert, abundant, nontoxic, and recyclable as well as highly stable towards photocorrosion. From the aspect of energy harvesting efficiency, by considering that the percentage of visible light energy (45%) is much higher than that of UV light (4%) over the entire solar irradiance spectrum, visible light absorbing photocatalysts would be better than those of the ultraviolet (UV) type. For this reason, the development of visible light active TiO2 materials has attracted widespread interest in the field of photocatalytic metal oxides to overcome poor optical performance. Different strategies such as doping with cationic/anionic impurities and controlling TiO2 nanocomposites to tune the band structures were suggested. Recently, highly hydrogenated TiO2 which is known as black TiO2 showed its superior photocatalytic activity by harvesting visible and infrared light.29–31
In addition to artificial modification to improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO2, intrinsic defects can make the reduced TiO2 behave as an n-type semiconductor. Generally, two types of defects, oxygen vacancy (Ov) and Ti interstitial (Tiint), can remain with an excess of two and four electrons in the TiO2 systems, respectively. It is known that the concentration (number density) of Ovs is around 3 × 1020 cm−3 in TiO2 samples, even after the annealing process at 1000 °C.32,33 To induce Ov defects, thermal annealing at a high temperature in various reducing atmospheres (vacuum, Ar, pure H2, H2/Ar), UV-irradiation and electron bombardment were often used.34–36 Also, Tiints are found in slightly reduced TiO2−x (0.0001 < x < 0.0004) as a main defect after the sputtering and annealing processes.37–39 The excess electrons originating from Ovs and Tiints create new defect states below the conduction bands. According to the concentration of excess electrons, the colour of reduced TiO2 samples gradually varies from white to dark. Additionally, these excess electrons can change the oxidation number of a Ti atom from Ti4+ to Ti3+ detected by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), photoelectron spectroscopy and a shift of core-level binding energies.40–42 Recently it was reported that the proportion of Ti3+ to Ti4+ has a close correlation with the photocatalytic efficiency of the self-doped TiO2 nanocrystal.43
2.2. DFT methods for developing TiO2 materials
To develop high-performance photocatalytic TiO2 materials, accurate prediction of the physical properties of TiO2 materials is a prerequisite. As mentioned previously, the energy-levels of valence and conduction bands are important for meeting the thermodynamic requirements of specific photocatalytic reactions such as water splitting. In addition, the minimum band gap estimated from the energy difference between valence and conduction bands would be a crucial criterion for absorbing light in the visible range. Up to now, theoretical and experimental studies have indicated that excess electrons which originate from Ovs and Tiints significantly affect the light absorption in the visible region and photocatalytic activity of TiO2.43 In this context, properly describing the electronic structures for the excess electrons generated from intrinsic defects is also very important to estimate the photocatalytic activity from the theoretical aspect. Furthermore, photo-induced electrons are similar to excess electrons. Thus, in the final stage, the appropriate description of the behaviour of photo-induced electrons and holes must be carried out with caution.
After Hohenberg and Kohn proved that electron density can determine the ground-state molecular energy, wave function, and diverse molecular properties,44 density functional theory (DFT) methods have been the most popular variational method to investigate electronic structures for systems ranging from a molecule to a solid. Compared with n-electron wave function methods, DFT methods are computationally more affordable with reliable accuracy. However, there are no exact mathematical descriptions for electronic kinetic-energy terms and electron–electron repulsion terms with electron density. Approximately unknown terms (including kinetic correlation energy, exchange energy, coulomb correlation energy and self-interaction correction) are inevitably intended to be provided by the concept of the so-called exchange–correlation potential. Hence, depending on exchange–correlation potentials, the DFT calculations can give different solutions for a system. In this section, several DFT functionals used for describing TiO2 materials will be briefly introduced by focusing on their merits and deficiencies.
Historically, local density approximation (LDA) and general gradient approximation (GGA) functionals were developed in the early stages of DFT. LDA and GGA were successfully used to calculate many structural and energetic properties for bulks, surfaces and interfaces including defects. However, LDA and GGA tend to highly underestimate the band gaps of metal oxides including TiO2.45 In general, this tendency is termed as the band gap problem in the DFT method. The band gap problems stem from the usage of an approximated exchange–correlation functional, which possibly brings about the self-interaction error (SIE).46 Because a DFT method uses electron density to describe the coulombic interaction between electrons, erroneous repulsive coulombic self-interaction is unavoidably included. For this reason, when spin polarized LDA and GGA functionals are applied for TiO2 systems containing Ov and Tiint defects, the excess electrons possibly recognized by spin distribution tend to spread out over all Ti atoms in TiO2 systems.47 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments showed the existence of Ti3+ atoms in the reduced TiO2 samples.42 Consequently, LDA and GGA functionals would give an incorrect description for TiO2 systems on the band gap problem as well as electron/spin delocalization error, as mentioned in this section and reviewed by Sauer et al.48 To resolve the band gap problem as well as the electron/spin delocalization problem, two main approaches were suggested and utilized. The first approach is to use onsite Coulomb (U) parameters to introduce extra coulomb interaction to the specific atomic orbitals (p, d and f), which is called DFT+U or LDA+U and GGA+U specifying the exchange–correlation functional. For TiO2 systems, such orbital adjusted potentials seem to give a better description for the excess electrons localized in specific Ti atoms. GGA+U with U = 3–5 eV can properly represent the features of a Ti3+ atom confirmed by EPR. However, to obtain the reliable band gap values from LDA+U and GGA+U, very high U values need to be incorporated to d orbitals of Ti and p orbitals of O atoms.40,41 In experiments, the defect states of Ovs were often observed at about 0.7–1.0 eV below the conduction band for rutile TiO2.49 However, in GGA+U calculations, due to the calculated smaller band gap, it is difficult to predict the correct positions of Ov defect states. Moreover, choosing the best U parameter is an ambiguous task. Though the U parameterized LDA or GGA was successfully utilized to describe the localized characteristics of electrons and holes with low computational cost, LDA+U or GGA+U is not a good choice to obtain reliable band gaps and energies of defect states for TiO2.
The second approach is to use hybrid functionals in the DFT framework. Because the SIE can be exactly cancelled out in Hartree–Fock (HF) formalism, mixing of LDA/GGA exchange potentials and HF non-local exact exchange terms could be incorporated to reduce SIE. Within the hybrid exchange–correlation functional, a certain percentage of HF exact exchange (normally ranging from 10 to 50%) replaces the semi-local exchange, while the pure semi-local correlation potential is retained. It is known that the most widely used hybrid functionals (B3LYP and PBE0) produce overestimated band gaps for a TiO2 bulk system by around 1 eV. Based on PBE0 formalism, Ko et al. found that 10% of HF exact exchange might give an approximately 1 eV band gap difference for stoichiometric anatase and rutile TiO2 bulks, as shown in Fig. 2.50 Herein, the notation of % Fock is used to represent the percentages of HF exact exchange. Based on the linear relationship between % Fock and the calculated band gaps, they suggested the modified PBE functional with 12.5% of HF exact exchange terms (PBEx functional) to obtain a reliable band gap of TiO2 systems.50 The PBEx functional was further successfully applied to obtain reliable optical gaps for large size anatase nanoparticles of about 3 nm and 6 nm.51 With a consideration of widely used hybrid functionals B3LYP and PBE0 containing 20% and 25% for HF exact exchange, respectively, the drawback of using a relatively small % Fock parameter is a poor description for the localized characteristics of unpaired electrons. For this reason, using % Fock over 20% is suggested for a reduced TiO2 system.52
 Fig. 2  The calculated band gaps of rutile (○) and anatase (●) TiO2 as a function of % Fock. The linear fitting equations were obtained as Eg = 0.098 × % Fock + 1.762 and Eg = 0.098 × % Fock + 2.009 for rutile and anatase, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similar to the U parameter, selecting a suitable % Fock parameter is also an ambiguous task. For different metal oxides, different % Fock parameters can reproduce each reliable band gap.53 Regarding this issue, a dielectric dependent hybrid functional was recently proposed.54 A dielectric dependent hybrid functional uses the inverse proportional relation between % Fock parameters and the calculated static dielectric constant to perform the self-consistent field (SCF) procedure for eventually finding the optimal % Fock parameter only within theoretical grounds. The dielectric dependent hybrid functional provides good performance for the description of band gap and defect state energy for various metal oxides.55,56 The drawback of using a hybrid functional is that it has much higher computational cost than LDA+U and GGA+U calculations. Thus, it is still difficult to use hybrid functionals for very large size unit cells and large nanoparticles, even through the use of high-performance supercomputers. Actually, in solids, the non-local nature of the coulomb operator in the HF exchange of hybrid functionals leads to a slow convergence as well as expensive computational cost.57 To remedy these problems, a screen exchange hybrid functional with an exchange term divided into short range and long range parts was proposed. Li et al. studied the reduced TiO2 systems by tuning the screen parameters (ω) in the HSE functional to represent the appropriate band gaps of TiO2, known as sX-HSE.49,58
2.3. Bulks with intrinsic defects
In this section, we will introduce some theoretical studies regarding bulks and surfaces. As mentioned in previous sections, the calculated results for TiO2 systems, especially in reduced systems, would be affected by DFT methods. Herein, we mainly focus on the properties of reduced TiO2 systems due to the significance with regard to photoadsorption and photocatalytic activity. In experimental synthesis, intrinsic defects (Ov and Tiint) can be naturally generated in TiO2 materials. Excesses of two and four electron densities can be distributed into the reduced TiO2, and new defect states appear for Ov and Tiint. Also, those excess electrons are strongly related to the transport properties of metal oxides. For the TiO2 bulk system, excess electrons can be trapped by local lattice distortion termed as a polaron. As mentioned, many experiments indicate that Ti3+ ions exist on the TiO2 surface with formation of localization of excess electrons.
To describe these polaron behaviours, DFT calculations with plus U parameters and hybrid functionals have been extensively performed. The choice of DFT methods is one factor of difference in the calculated results. For the calculation of bulk systems, the periodic boundary condition (PBC) is generally used to present the electronic structure of a solid. In this case, excess electrons in the PBC can self-interact. Practically, a large supercell including intrinsic defects is required. However, in some cases, the computational cost is too expensive to perform those calculations. Thus, the restriction of supercell size may result in inaccurate electronic and optical properties.
For bulk rutile without an intrinsic defect, several theoretical studies reported that the excess electron can be captured by the polaron. The hybrid functional calculations performed by Janotti et al. presented that the small polaron state might be more stable than a delocalized electron by around 0.15 eV.59 This indicates that the excess electron can be stabilized at a certain Ti3+ atom in the absence of defects. For the bulk anatase case, B3LYP hybrid functional calculations carried out by Valentin et al. indicated that excess electrons can be trapped at a Ti atom and stabilized by 0.23 eV.60 However, the screened exchange hybrid functional, that is the HSE06 functional, did not show such a self-trapping behavior.33 Regarding this issue, random phase approximation (RPA) calculations showed that the calculated trapping energies of excess electrons are 0.7 eV and 0.1–0.2 eV for rutile and anatase, respectively.61 GGA+U calculations with high U values also supported the higher values of trapping energy for rutile than anatase. The smaller trapping energy of anatase is related to the weakly localized polaron, namely, a large polaron. The large size polaron is experimentally confirmed by angle resolved photoemission62 and optical phonon experiments63 on the reduced anatase single crystals.
For the bulk with intrinsic defects, Ov and Tiint can remain with two and four excess electrons in the reduced TiO2, respectively. Furthermore, a neutral Ov can be ionized to singly positively charged Ov or doubly charged Ov under thermal treatment or UV-vis light.64 The relative stabilities between different charged states of the Ov defect have been an interesting subject in connection with the properties of TiO2. The formation energy of a defect in oxides can represent their relative stabilities. Based on the PBC, the method of calculating the formation energy was suggested by Van de Walle et al.65  where Etot(Oqv) is the total energy of a supercell containing an Ov in a charged state q. Etot(TiO2) is the total energy of a perfect TiO2 crystal in the same supercell. The Fermi level Ef can be set to the valence band maximum (VBM). The O atom removed from the crystal is placed in a reservoir of energy μ0 referenced to the energy of an O2 molecule. The chemical potential μ0 must meet the requirements for the stability condition of TiO2 with the chemical potential of titanium (μTi), that is μTi + 2μO = ΔHf(TiO2).
The charge transition level between different charge states can be estimated as the Fermi levels for each charge state. The vertical and adiabatic charge transition levels can be considered. The difference between vertical and adiabatic charge transition levels originates from the ionic relaxation effect.
For bulk rutile with an Ov defect, from DFT calculations with the HSE functional, it was predicted that Ov and  are relatively unstable because  has the lowest formation energy over all Fermi levels in the band gap, as depicted in Fig. 3.64 Another theoretical result was obtained by the many-body perturbation theory GW method which can directly calculate electron removal and electron addition energies.66 Using GW, it was found that the +2 charge state was the most stable within 0 < Ef < 2.8 eV. At Fermi energies above 2.8 eV, neutral state  can be the most stable. Regarding the Tiint case, sX-HSE functional calculations predicted that, under O-poor conditions represented by different μ0 values, the neutral Tiint might be more stable than the neutral Ov state. However, it is also shown that these stabilities might be reversed under O-rich conditions.
 Fig. 3  The calculated Ov formation energies for rutile TiO2 as a function of Fermi level for (a) O-poor and (b) O-rich conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society. 
Another interesting point for rutile bulk with intrinsic defects would be the location of defect states and excess electron distributions. From the GGA+U method, it is predicted that the defect states of Ov and Tiint might be located at around 1 eV below the conduction band.67 The modified hybrid functional PBEx50 (with 12.5% Fock) and sX-HSE49 predicted that the defect state of Ov appears 0.89 eV and 0.70 eV below the conduction band, respectively. In these calculations, the excess electron distribution can be simply expected by the spin density. DFT+U (U = 2.5 eV on a d electron of Ti) showed that one excess electron is localized on a Ti atom adjacent to the Ov site, while the other is on a more distant Ti atom.68 Using the sX-HSE functional, it is predicted that for the neutral state Ov, two excess electrons are located at the three Ti atoms adjacent to the Ov. For the  case, one excess electron is localized at two Ti atoms along the direction of the c-axis.49 In contrast, the PBEx functional showed that the two excess electrons are localized at Ti atoms more distant from the Ov site.50 Consequently, depending on the DFT functionals used, the localization of excess electrons which originate from Ov would be changed. However, in the case of Tiint, many theoretical studies predicted that one electron tends to be localized at Tiint and the other three electrons at Ti lattice atoms, as comprehensively summarized by Yin et al.52 For bulk anatase with defects, GGA+U calculations predicted that Ov formation of anatase might be energetically more favourable than that of rutile regardless of O-rich and O-poor conditions. On the other hand, for Tiint cases, rutile seems to have lower formation energy than anatase.69 Regarding the charged states, the HSE functional showed that  is the most stable state over all the Fermi levels.70 DFT+U results also presented a similar conclusion to HSE results.69 In the defect states, the DFT+U (U = 3.3 eV) functional showed that the defect state of Ov might be 0.9 and 0.1 eV below the conduction band.71 From this paper, interestingly one excess electron at the 0.9 eV level can be localized at the Ti atom adjacent to Ov, while the other at the 0.1 eV level is fully delocalized over all Ti atoms. DFT+U (U = 4.2 eV) calculations predicted that the defect state of neutral Ov might be 1.48 eV and 1.15 eV below the conduction band. For neutral Tiint, it was predicted that the level of the defect state for an electron localized at Tiint might be 1.74 eV below the conduction band. For the other three electrons, the defect levels appear at 1.30 eV, 0.98 eV and 0.74 eV below the conduction band.72
Regarding bulk anatase with defects, one of the seminal studies was done by Di Valentin et al.73 They comprehensively investigated the effect of DFT functionals (DFT+U with U = 3–4 eV and B3LYP with 20% Fock) on polaron features and corresponding defect states. From different U values, different solutions may be obtained for anatase with Ov defects. Using higher U values, the solutions of more localized characteristics for excess elections can be obtained. Analogously using the PBEx functional, in total three solutions with different polaron features can be optimized for the neutral Ov in anatase, as shown in Fig. 4.50 In addition, if the B3LYP functional was applied, we can obtain the other solution where two electrons are localized at Ti atoms adjacent to the Ov and at more distant Ti atoms. As a result, the choice of DFT methods is a critical issue for describing TiO2 systems with intrinsic defects and, by extension, those with doping that should be described by spin polarized calculations.
 Fig. 4  The spin density plots for three solutions for Ov in anatase. (a) Two excess electrons are fully delocalized; (b) one electron is localized and the other one is delocalized; (c) two electrons are localized on three Ti atoms next to the Ov site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Considering TiO2 surfaces, the lowest surface formation energies were found at (101) for anatase and (110) for rutile, respectively.74 Hence, most of the theoretical studies have focused on those two surfaces. One important topic concerns the location of the excess electrons on the reduced TiO2 surfaces. For the rutile (110) surface, DFT+U calculations predicted that the excess electrons might be located in the subsurface rather than on the surface.75 However, the B3LYP functional predicted that the preferred location for excess electrons is on the surface Ti atoms.76 It was also found that the size of the supercell can influence the conclusions, as noted by Kowalski et al.77 To obtain a more reliable conclusion, the ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations with GGA+U (U = 4.2 eV) were performed at various temperatures ranging from 700 to 1000 K.77 It was found that dynamic polaron hopping with a preference for the sites in the second subsurface layer (70%) was observed. The populations of the surface and the third surface layer are expected to be 20% and 10%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5.77 This tendency is consistent with resonance photoelectron diffraction experimental results reporting the mobility of excess electrons over several surfaces.78 For the reduced anatase (101) surface, combined experimental and theoretical studies reported that the Ov defects prefer to migrate to the subsurface.79 With the sX-HSE functional, it was shown that the formation energy of Ov for the subsurface is lower than that of the subsurface by 0.30 eV.58 However, the HSE06 functional predicted a contradictory conclusion compared with sX-HSE.80 AIMD simulation with GGA+U (U = 4.1 eV) revealed that the excess electrons trapped near the Ov site show rather low mobility compared with the rutile case.81 In the future, AIMD simulations will give more detailed information about dynamic behaviour of excess electrons depending on temperatures and simulation time under realistic conditions.
 Fig. 5  The distribution function calculated from AIMD simulation for the excess electrons from Ov on the reduced rutile TiO2 according to surface layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2010, The American Physical Society. 
From the photocatalytic activity aspect, the levels of valence band and conduction band play a key role in promoting the desired photocatalytic reactions, as mentioned previously. For this reason, it is necessary to obtain reliable band gaps, which should be very important for designing novel photocatalysts. However, with PBC calculations for bulks or surfaces, depending on the designed supercell, the vacuum levels would be changed. Actually, difficulty is encountered in predicting the band levels for the bulk system, because there is no vacuum in the infinitely large solid or surface supercells.
As the last paragraph in this section, we will introduce the interesting work with respect to band level alignment of TiO2 reported by Ko et al.82 To avoid the biased vacuum levels for PBC, they utilized the nanoparticle models to predict the reliable band levels for TiO2 bulks. Ko et al. designed TiO2 anatase and rutile nanoparticles with different sizes by the Wulff-construction method,83 as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). Then, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels were calculated with the PBEx functional. The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels as a function of n−1.35/3 (n is the number of TiO2 units) are plotted in Fig. 6(c). Normally a size dependent energy level fitting for a certain nanoparticle has been performed using the n−α/3 basis, where 1 < α < 2. It should be noted that the n−1.35/3 variable was adopted from a similar theoretical study of the energy level plot for InP nanoparticles.84 Consequently, the linear fit equations were obtained for anatase and rutile according to the size of the nanoparticles. The point of n−1.35/3 = 0 indicates the bulk TiO2 (n = ∞). From the linear fit equations, the conduction band levels were expected to be −5.02 eV and −4.97 eV for anatase and rutile bulks, respectively. The predicted conduction band levels are in good agreement with XPS experimental values of −5.1 eV for anatase and −4.9 eV for rutile.85 Finally, the size dependent level alignment between anatase and rutile nanoparticles was proposed, as depicted in Fig. 7. It is predicted that the band alignment can be changed from type II (anatase) to type I when at least one nanoparticle is smaller than ∼15 nm. The transformation of band alignment from type I to type II (rutile) can occur when at least one nanoparticle has a diameter less than ∼2.5 nm. From the photocatalytic activity aspect, normally type II (anatase) and type II (rutile) are better than type I, because type I has a preference for electron and hole recombination. This theoretical work provides new insight into predicting the reliable band levels for bulk systems based on the bottom-up process with an extrapolation fitting.
 Fig. 6  Wulff-type (a) anatase and (b) rutile TiO2 nanoparticles. (c) The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels as a function of n−1.35/3 for anatase (right) and rutile (left) nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  Two-dimensional plotted map for band alignment as a function of nanoparticle sizes (left) and the schematic diagram for types of band alignment (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In Section 2, we briefly introduced the merits of TiO2 materials as photocatalysts. Based on the DFT method, to adequately describe the photo-physical properties of TiO2 bulks/surfaces, accurate prediction for the position of band levels and correct description for localized characteristics of electrons/holes is very important. On the other hand, for realistic TiO2 simulations, dynamic behaviours for TiO2 systems including solvent molecules need to be considered. However, such kind of dynamics simulation incurs massive computational cost, which is a significant obstacle. Thus, a seminal step for future studies regarding realistic TiO2 material simulations is to develop well-balanced theoretical methods between accuracy and computational cost.
3. TiO2 clusters
Despite the numerous studies on bulk TiO2 polymorphs, a number of research efforts have been focused on small clusters because smaller TiO2 particles exhibit higher catalytic performance. This was attributed to the larger reactive surface area along with quantum confinement effects which derives anomalous optical properties at 1–10 nm size comparable to the de Broglie wavelength of charge carriers.17 Although, the expressions of clusters and nanoparticles (NPs) are ambiguously used for small TiO2 particles in general, we define the cluster as smaller particles which do not have specific reactive surfaces such as (101) and (110) observed in experiments. Because small clusters comprising several units exhibit intrinsically different geometric and electronic structures compared with bulk models, clusters have been considered as an appropriate model for providing additional insight into the performance of a TiO2 photocatalyst, which is not observed in the bulk models.
However, it is somewhat difficult to investigate the properties of small nanoclusters with experimental approaches. As an example, the size distribution of particles is determined based on the extent of light scattering which is determined by the refractive index function (RIF). However, the irregular shape of small TiO2 clusters exhibits highly anisotropic RIF values as described by Hosaka et al.86 In another experiment, Wu and Wang87 used anion photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) to investigate the electronic structure of TiO2 particles synthesized with 1 to 4 units. The energy difference between the HOMO and LUMO showed an unexpectedly smaller value (ca. 2 eV) compared to the bulk rutile (ca. 3.1 eV). Zhai and Wang also supported the conclusion that the smaller band gap of a TiO2 cluster converges to the band gap of bulk TiO2 at 7 units. It is generally expected that the band gap of TiO2 increases by decreasing the size due to the quantum confinement effect.
To explain and further investigate the geometric and electronic structure of clusters, many theoretical studies have been performed. Particularly, most studies were focused on finding an appropriate model of clusters among isomers having the most stable electronic energy. However, the results of the DFT calculation combined with the basin hopping approach indicate that clusters can exist as isomers or metastable structures due to the small energy difference between the most stable structure and other metastable states due to the increasing size of clusters.88,89 These isomers are mixed as an ensemble during the experimental measurement, hence it is difficult to accurately investigate the properties of small clusters. In this regard, the sophisticated investigation of each isomer can provide a detailed understanding of the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles.
Qu et al.90,91 designed (TiO2)n clusters with n = 1–16 and investigated their electronic structure. Interestingly, the odd and even number clusters exhibited significantly different geometric and electronic structures. The vertical excitation energy of odd unit clusters was smaller compared to that of even unit clusters. This was supported by Zwijnenburg's group92,93 showing the oscillating formation energy between odd and even units. Moreover, theoretical studies on small clusters provided further insight into the photooxidation reaction on the surface. Qu et al.90,91 demonstrated the distinct photooxidation mechanism on TiO2 clusters compared with the conventional mechanism proposed based on bulk models. It originated from the existence of singly or doubly coordinated oxygen atoms which were not found in previous bulk or surface studies. The excited electron and hole were localized at the least coordinated Ti and O atoms, respectively, in contrast to three-coordinated oxygen atoms in bulk polymorphs. Considering that the distinct localization of the electron and hole could be the origin of the higher photocatalytic activity of smaller clusters than larger particles, the systematic studies on clusters can support the perception of photocatalytic activity of small particles.
However, the geometric and electronic structure of TiO2 clusters is highly influenced by the shape of the clusters. The electronic structure change of TiO2 clusters with different shapes and isomers has been studied by Zwijnenburg's group.92 They compared the stability of isomers by calculating their electronic energies. The geometric structure of TiO2 clusters did not exhibit any particular regularity as shown in Fig. 8. Furthermore, the excitation energy, the HOMO and LUMO energy and the subsequent band gap were significantly affected by the irregular shape of the clusters. Cho et al.94 supported that the relative energies of isomers of 4, 8, and 16 unit were smaller than 0.15 eV. The exciton binding energy, an indicator of bulk-like character, was highly dependent on the structure of clusters rather than their size.
 Fig. 8  Tentative global minimum energy geometry for (TiO2)n with n = 1–10 obtained from DFT calculation by Berardo et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. DOI: 10.1021/2Fct500787x. Further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the American Chemical Society. 
In Section 3, we discussed that clusters have distinct geometric and electronic structures compared with bulks and surfaces, which may lead to higher photocatalytic activity. Further non-adiabatic excited state dynamics calculation for clusters can provide useful insight into the charge localization and transfer mechanism between TiO2 substrates and adsorbates. However, the small clusters cannot reflect the actual structure of nanoparticles because of their instability; in other words, the facets in small clusters will be destroyed during the process of energy minimization. TiO2 nanoparticles have specific phases (anatase, rutile, or brookite) and reactive facets such as (101), (110), etc. But clusters with insufficient size cannot provide an accurate description of the different reactivities of nanoparticles composed of different phases and facets. Therefore, most of the cluster studies done on smaller size cannot provide a consensus on the photocatalytic performance of small TiO2 nanoparticles. In addition, a significant shape dependence of nanoclusters makes it difficult to study the clusters in a systematic way. Therefore, new suitable models are required to accurately describe the geometric and electronic structure of nanoparticles.
4. Nanoparticles
To date, a number of efforts have been made to enhance the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 catalysts. Many modification strategies such as nanostructuring, chemical doping, and sensitization have been suggested and developed in order to reduce the band gap into the visible region. Nevertheless, the current efficiency of TiO2 photocatalysts is still low. Theoretical approaches provided a valuable understanding of the performance of modified TiO2 nanoparticles. In particular, it is possible to disentangle the contribution of an affecting factor from the other factors introduced by synthetic conditions in experiments, such as impurities, grain boundaries, etc., using first-principles calculations. In this regard, many computational studies on bulk polymorphs33,47,64,67–69,71,95,96 and periodic surface models97–99 provided useful information on modified TiO2. However, bulk and surface studies cannot elucidate the size and shape dependence and quantum confinement effect which is regarded as the origin of the higher performance of smaller particles. The small clusters which do not have a regular shape cannot describe the geometric and electronic structure of actual TiO2 nanoparticles as discussed in the previous section. In this context, an appropriate modelling of TiO2 nanoparticles which possess reactive facets observed in experiments can provide further insight into the performance of modified TiO2 particles.
The objective of nanoparticle modelling is to find an appropriate structure which can accurately describe the geometric and electronic structure of actual particles. The scalable change of properties from the smallest nanoparticle to the largest bulk-like nanoparticles can provide an understanding of the quantum confinement effect on the catalytic performance. However, it is generally known that TiO2 nanoparticles can exhibit several phases such as rutile, brookite, anatase, etc. The photocatalytic activity is influenced by the phase of the nanoparticles,100 indicating that the geometric and electronic structure of TiO2 nanoparticles are different for each phase. An extensive study on phase stability and phase transformation was performed by Zhang et al.101 They compared the surface energy and stress for anatase and rutile phases and revealed that the anatase phase is more stable than rutile at a size less than 14 nm. This implies that the particle size is a practically crucial factor determining the stability of the three phases of TiO2 nanoparticles. The phase transition between anatase and rutile is highly affected by the pH of solutions as reported by Barnard et al.102 By comparing the surface energy of anatase and rutile nanoparticles, they found that the phase transition occurred at 22.7, 18.4, 15.1, 13.2, and 6.9 nm for hydrogenated (acidic), hydrogen-rich, hydrated (neutral), hydrogen-poor, and oxygenated (basic) surfaces, respectively (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Free energy variation against size in terms of the number of TiO2 units for anatase and rutile with (a) hydrogenated, (b) hydrogen-rich, (c) hydrated, (d) hydrogen-poor, and (e) oxygenated surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the higher photocatalytic activity of the anatase phase along with its stability at small sizes, modelling of anatase nanoparticles has been intensively studied. Barnard et al.103 firstly proposed a bipyramidal TiO2 structure composed of eight (101) facets and a truncated bipyramidal structures composed of both (001) and (101) facets based on Wulff construction104 (Fig. 10). Oxygen atoms with lower coordination were found on the apex of the crystal similar to the case of clusters showing different geometric structures of the nanoparticles compared with bulks or surfaces. The self-consistent tight-binding (SCTB) calculation was applied to investigate the electronic properties of TiO2 nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 2 nm (33 units) to 6 nm (455 units). The central Ti atoms exhibited more positive charge compared with bulk Ti atoms despite the environmental similarity indicating the distinct properties of nanoparticles. Therefore, the positive charge of Ti atoms located inside the particles was used as an indicator of the bulk-like properties. It was found that this displacement of charge on central Ti atoms diminished at 455 units of TiO2 implying that the quantum confinement effect arises under 455 units.
 Fig. 10  SCTB relaxed structures of (TiO2)n with n = 33, 35, 139, 151, 165, and 455. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. 
This was further supported by Cho et al.94 and Lamiel-Garcia et al.51 with more accurate DFT calculation for the same bipyramidal particles. The results showed that 35 units is the smallest nanoparticle size for anatase which retains its (101) reactive facets after geometric relaxation. By extrapolating the exciton binding energies of particles from the smallest 35 units to the largest 455 units, they concluded that the exciton binding energy converges to the corresponding bulk values at around 20 nm (15000 units) size.
In Section 4, we reviewed computational modelling of TiO2 nanoparticles for a reasonable description of geometric and electronic features. We highlighted that anatase TiO2 35 units, obtained by Wulff cut, is the minimum sized cluster that could keep the facets stable. Hence, TiO2 35 units could be valuable for investigating the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles and to compare it with experimental observations with lower computational cost. However, the nanoparticles can exist in different geometric and electronic structures depending on other factors such as temperature, adsorbates, and pH, as well as the size. For example, the (001) facets are stabilized and then become dominant facets over (101) facets by the adsorption of F atoms. Therefore, it will be worth investigating the different shapes of TiO2 nanoparticles in various environments.
5. Photoexcitation – band engineering
TiO2 nanoparticles have widely been used as a photocatalyst due to their advantages such as stability, low cost, nontoxicity, and recyclability. However, TiO2 nanoparticles exhibit low performance under sunlight because their visible light absorption is significantly limited due to the large band gap (3.2 eV for anatase and brookite, and 3.0 eV for rutile). The band gap even increases as the particle size decreases due to the quantum confinement effect. Hence, many modification strategies including oxygen defects, chemical doping, and sensitization have been suggested to reduce the band gap of TiO2 nanoparticles. In this section, we introduce modification strategies to enhance the visible light absorption in terms of band engineering. The subsequent charge separation and diffusion will be discussed in the next section.
5.1. Oxygen vacancy defects
Oxygen vacancy defects can be used to reduce the band gap of TiO2 into the visible range. The excess electrons reduce Ti4+ to Ti3+ and subsequently the new defect states appear 0.8–1.0 eV below the conduction band minimum. Many experimental and theoretical studies have been performed to investigate the defect energy level originating from oxygen vacancies. Valentin et al.60 reported that the removal of an oxygen atom on the surface induces a deeper Ti3+ level compared with the removal of an oxygen atom in the bulk region. Therefore, the removal of a surface oxygen atom could be a key factor for efficient absorption of visible light. However, it has been experimentally reported that the oxygen defect site is favourable in the three-coordinated domains located in the subsurface region.34,79 The first-principles calculations of formation energy using a hybrid DFT functional with an all-electron basis set supported this result.105 The systematic investigation of oxygen defects of TiO2 nanoparticles based on a bipyramidal structure (35 units, 2 nm) was performed by Kim et al.105 A total of 25 non-imposable defect sites according to position, coordination number, and distance from the central atom were examined. They found that the formation energy, magnetic ground state, and defect energy levels are significantly affected by the location of the removed oxygen atom. Specifically, the defect energy level was located 0.47–2.06 eV below the CBM showing that the visible light absorption efficiency could be considerably different from each site. This result provided an explanation of the non-consensus on the results of reduced TiO2 nanoparticles in the experiments. Considering that the smallest bipyramidal structure used in this study can reflect the actual nanoparticles used in experiments, the extensive investigation of the properties of the TiO2 nanoparticles reduced by the defect site could provide useful insight into the performance of TiO2 photocatalysts.
5.2. Chemical doping
Chemical doping is another approach to reduce the band gap of TiO2 nanoparticles. Generally, a dopant is substituted into Ti or O atom sites, or it is inserted into interstitial sites.106 The insertion of a dopant results in two effects: (i) reducing the band gap of TiO2, and (ii) provoking electron–hole recombination after excitation. Depending on the excess or deficient number of electrons of a dopant compared with lattice atoms, an extra electronic state appears above the VBM or below the CBM. The subsequent decrease in band gap enables the efficient absorption of visible light.107 The difference in atomic radii between the dopant and O atom further induces the oxygen vacancy in the TiO2 lattice.14 The presence of an oxygen vacancy provokes the fast recombination of the electron and hole pair. This effect will be reviewed in Section 6.
Transition metals are prevalently used as metal dopants due to their similarity of d electron configuration to the Ti atom.108,109 A wide range of transition metals including Fe, Mn, Ru, Os, V, Ni, Zn, Mo, Cr, and Th doped TiO2 (ref. 108–113) have been synthesized and analysed in terms of the band gap. The metal dopants introduced a localized electronic state between the VB and CB of pristine TiO2, hence reducing the band gap. The locations of introduced states were highly affected by the d electron configuration and distribution of dopants in TiO2 nanoparticles. This result implies that each metal dopant provides a different effect on the photocatalytic activity. Devi et al.108,110,111 revealed that the shift of the band gap is also related to the electronegativity of metal dopants. The band gap of metal-doped TiO2 with Mn2+, Fe3+, Ru3+, Os3+, V5+, Ni2+, and Zn2+ as a function of inverse electronegativity clearly shows a substantial linear relationship (Fig. 11). However, it is difficult to control the oxidation state of metal dopants because they can exist in different d electron configurations due to environmental changes. Many experimental results demonstrate that metal dopants accelerate electron–hole recombination. Therefore, charge carrier dynamics studies should be accompanied by band gap engineering to reveal the dopant effect on the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 11  Plot of inverse electronegativity of dopants as a function of band gap absorption in the corresponding doped catalysts at optimum dopant concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. 
Non-metal dopants can substitute the lattice oxygen atoms to enhance the photocatalytic activity of TiO2. Numerous studies have been performed by substituting the O atom with C, N, and S dopants. Chen et al.114–116 revealed that C 2p, N 2p, and S 3p introduce extra electronic states above the VBM, narrowing the band gap of TiO2. However, the lower number of electrons for C and N dopants results in the subsequent removal of lattice O atoms to maintain the neutral charge balance of the TiO2 lattice. The presence of the Ti3+ state below the CBM, along with the introduced 2p state, provides a more efficient band gap reduction compared with S doped TiO2 nanoparticles.114
The metal–nonmetal co-doping approach has been highlighted due to the complementary effect of dopants. The band gap of co-doped TiO2 nanoparticles is smaller than that of TiO2 nanoparticles doped with either a metal or a nonmetal dopant. For example, Niu et al.117 investigated the band structure of a TiO2 system co-doped with an S atom and other metal dopants such as Mg, Al, Ca, and Ga atoms. The results showed that both dopants form a donor and acceptor pair, where the electrons in the 3p orbital of S atoms are transferred to occupy the states introduced by metal dopants. Subsequently, the lone pair electrons of the O atom form a covalent bond with the S atom and produce the π* bond which has an electronically higher energy than the 3p state of the S atom. Hence, the band gap of TiO2 could be more effectively reduced to the visible range by co-doping compared with singly doped TiO2 nanoparticles.
5.3. Sensitization
Developing a composite structure by coupling the TiO2 nanoparticle with another semiconductor or sensitizer is another way of enhancing the photocatalytic performance. Many approaches such as using a co-catalyst, dye sensitization, and noble metal deposition have been suggested. These approaches provide efficient electron and hole separation, hence preventing charge recombination between them. At the same time, they provide efficient exciton generation of an electron–hole pair due to the smaller band gap of sensitizers.
Semiconductors with an optimal band structure can be coupled to the TiO2 nanoparticle to enhance the visible light absorption. To extend the absorption range of the coupled material into the visible range, coupler semiconductors should meet the two following conditions:14 (i) the band gap of a coupler must be narrow enough to absorb the visible light, (ii) the energy level of the CB (VB) of a coupler should be higher (lower) than that of TiO2. The semiconductors satisfying these conditions can be used as an efficient cocatalyst to drive a photooxidation or photoreduction, although they are not appropriate for driving both reactions due to their instability.118,119 For example, CdS120 which absorbs visible light can be used to drive oxidation reactions with excited holes after transferring excited electrons to the CB of TiO2 as shown in Fig. 12. MoS2 and WS2 are regarded as suitable coupling semiconductors because these band structures can be manipulated by the number of layers and the size of the particle.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the nanocomposite photocatalytic mechanism. 
Coupling of TiO2 rutile nanoparticles to anatase nanoparticles is another strategy of enhancing the performance. Degussa P25, which is a commercial photocatalyst consisting of anatase and rutile phases (∼85 nm for anatase and ∼25 nm for rutile), exhibits higher photocatalytic activity compared with single phase anatase or rutile nanoparticles. Hence, a number of studies have been performed to investigate and enhance the photocatalytic activity of Degussa P25. Among them, Ko et al.82 investigated the band alignment of rutile and anatase nanoparticles by increasing the size of the nanoparticles. The anatase–rutile composite can exhibit three types of level alignment as shown in Fig. 7. These results revealed that type II (anatase) alignment is dominant for Degussa P25 considering the size of the synthesized anatase and rutile particles. The other alignments were only possible at smaller sizes, where type I is formed when the size of one particle is less than 15 nm, and type II when the size of one particle is less than 2.5 nm. The results provided insight into the level alignment of a composite material by tuning the size of the particle. Hence, a systematic investigation of the level alignment of various composite materials would be helpful to understand and enhance the photocatalytic activity.
Many other approaches have been suggested and developed to enhance the light absorption including deposition of noble metals, coupling with organic dyes or inorganic quantum dots, etc. Especially, absorption of visible light intensity can be considerably enhanced by using the surface plasmon resonance of noble metals. The injection of the excited electron from the sensitizer to the TiO2 CB can largely increase the photocatalytic activity by separating the electron and hole. However, the current photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles is still low in spite of many efforts to enhance light absorption because most charge carriers are lost during charge separation or during interfacial charge transfer. The importance of charge carrier dynamics is implied in the modified TiO2 system to improve the catalytic performance.
In Section 5, we reviewed chemical modification strategies such as vacancies, doping, and sensitization. Other modification strategies such as band bending and surface functionalization are not covered in this review. Many strategies have aimed at enhancing the visible light absorption by reducing the large band gap of TiO2. To date, most chemical modifications have been studied on bulk and surface models. In this context, the extensive computational studies on modified TiO2 nanoparticles can provide better understanding of the experimental observations. However, the still low photocatalytic performance of current TiO2 nanoparticles indicates that the dynamic behaviour of charge carriers, such as charge localization and interfacial charge transfer, must be considered, which will be introduced in the next section.
6. Charge separation and diffusion dynamics
Efficient photoexcitation is a prerequisite for high photocatalytic activity as discussed in the previous sections. The absorption of visible light was greatly enhanced by developing materials with an optimal band gap and band edge. Furthermore, several band engineering techniques were introduced involving nanostructuring, chemical doping, point defects, sensitization, metal deposition, co-catalysts, and so on. However, it was reported that increasing the light absorption does not necessarily lead to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity.95,121 This is due to the ability of the photogenerated electron and hole pair (exciton) to recombine in the middle of the photocatalytic process, hence reducing the photocatalytic activity. This indicates that other factors, for example, charge separation and diffusion to the surface, can be crucial to the photocatalytic efficiency.
Once an exciton is formed in the semiconductor, it undergoes one of the following pathways: (a) the electron and hole pair recombine and become depleted. (b) The excitons diffuse away from each other and dissociate into free charge carriers, and then relax to the edges of the CB and VB. (c) Electrons and holes are captured by trap states at the defects or grain boundaries. (d) Trapped electrons and holes recombine with each other or with the VB holes and CB electrons. The rapid recombination between electron–hole pairs deteriorates the photocatalytic activity because an electron or a hole cannot participate in the subsequent surface chemical reactions with adsorbed molecules. Domen et al.122–125 mentioned that most charge carriers are lost due to faster recombination. Therefore, it is important to enhance the charge separation and diffusion while suppressing charge carrier recombination. In this section, we introduce theoretical approaches to investigate the charge separation and diffusion process, and then we report the experimental and computational findings with regard to the enhancement of charge separation and diffusion.
6.1. Time domain theoretical study on charge carrier dynamics
To date, a number of theoretical and computational studies have been performed to investigate the geometric and electronic structure of TiO2 photocatalysts and to support the experimental findings. For the investigation of the electronic structure, first-principles density functional theory calculations have revealed the electronic structure change of TiO2 and the effects on morphology, oxygen defect, chemical doping, etc. Recently, computational studies were extended to find the optimal candidate materials combined with high-throughput DFT calculations.126,127
Several static density functional theory calculations have been applied to anticipate the charge carrier dynamics of TiO2 and other metal oxides. For example, the exciton binding energy and the energy of dissociation of the exciton to the free electron and free hole can provide a glimpse of the interaction between the excited electron and hole pair. Exciton binding energy is defined as Egap − Ogap, where Egap is the electronic gap defined as the energy difference between the vertical ionization potential and the vertical electron affinity and Ogap is obtained from the S0 ground to S1 excited state vertical excitation. Ogap is often approximated as E(LUMO) − E(HOMO) without excited state calculation due to its high computational cost. In other aspects, charge carrier mobility derived by Frohlich together with the diffusion coefficient128 have successfully described charge carrier mobility in semiconductors. A kinetic model of charge creation, diffusion and recombination dynamics has been developed by Hisatomi et al.123 These approaches provided a clue to the behaviours of excited electrons and holes but cannot give the detailed charge carrier dynamics in the time domain.
The development of modern computational theory with computing power provided a number of nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation approaches to investigate the time-dependent charge carrier dynamics of systems. For example, the multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree method129–131 and ab initio multiple spawning dynamics132,133 based on wave function propagation successfully described photochemical processes such as charge carrier transfer, recombination, photoisomerization, multiple exciton generation, optical responses, etc. However, these approaches are only appropriate for relatively small systems because they require advanced electronic structure calculation for accurate description of excitation properties including the quantum mechanical effect of nuclei. These would not be appropriate for larger condensed matter systems due to the high computational costs.
On the other hand, surface hopping or the Ehrenfest134,135 method has been extensively used to investigate the charge carrier dynamics of photocatalysts. However, they do not provide an accurate description of the excited state properties. In the original surface hopping scheme, the nuclear motions are treated classically, excluding quantum effects such as decoherence which is a key factor of stochastic quantum transitions and physical mechanisms in a condensed matter system. In the Ehrenfest approach, a mean field theory, the nuclei move on the average electronic potential energy surface of states. It is only accurate in the vicinity of the conical intersection where the two adiabatic states evolve in close proximity. This method fails to describe the pure adiabatic state because the wavefunction exists as a mixture of pure states even when the coupling between them is very small. Many other approaches136 have been developed as alternatives such as the fewest-switches surface hopping137 (FSSH) approach to more accurately describe the nonadiabatic dynamics of a system. As an example, the Furche group138 has recently applied time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) combined with FSSH to investigate the photochemical reactions of cyclohexadiene, vitamin D derivatives, and a bicyclic cyclobutene. They successfully reproduced the radiative relaxation rate of excited electrons and quantum yield of experimental findings. They discussed the feasibility that this approach can be applied to systems with 50 atoms using a hybrid DFT functional with a Gaussian type polarized double-zeta basis set up to 0.5 ns total simulation time. However, the standard FSSH algorithm determines the fate of the system on-the-fly, hence the computational expenses are linearly increased with the length and the number of trajectory ensembles. Considering that the smallest size of the anatase (101) TiO2 nanoparticle mimicking the morphology of synthesized nanoparticles is at least 35 units (total 105 atoms),105 it would be difficult to employ this method to accurately investigate the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles.
Recently, the Prezhdo group has developed a quantum-semi-classical approximation which is applicable to condensed matter systems. In the scheme, the nuclear dynamics of the system is assumed to be unaffected by the electron dynamics because the excitation has little effect on the structural change in a large condensed matter system which may be even smaller than the thermal fluctuation of atoms. Due to a negligible effect of photoexcitation on the total density, orbitals, and atomic structure of a condensed matter system, the excited state potential energy surfaces are approximated as ground state potential energy surfaces. In this framework of time-dependent Kohn–Sham (TD-KS) theory, the excitation energies are approximated to the energy difference of KS orbitals and the nonadiabatic coupling is determined from the dependence of the adiabatic KS orbitals on the nuclear trajectory. Then, a large number of stochastic realizations of the FSSH algorithm can be computed along the same trajectory in contrast to the standard FSSH algorithm. In addition, velocity rescaling is neglected, hence it provides additional savings on computational cost. It was reported that this methodology can be applied to systems with hundreds of atoms involving thousands of electronic states. The methodology has been applied successfully to describe the non-radiative relaxation and electron transfer dynamics of a broad range of materials such as perovskites,139 quantum dots,140 graphene,141 carbon nanotubes,142 2D materials,143,144etc. However, this approach cannot be applied to systems where the photoexcitation induces significant changes in the nuclear geometry such as strong back-reaction, bond breaking and where spin–orbit coupling must be included. Also, it can only describe the non-radiative charge transfer or relaxation induced by electron–phonon coupling. Therefore, it cannot fully describe the overall photocatalytic process, hence it is necessary to develop methodology which can accurately describe the charge carrier dynamics involving those factors.
6.2. Charge carrier diffusion and separation in TiO2 nanoparticles
In this section, we report strategies to enhance the charge separation and diffusion efficiency. We review experimental and computational findings and discuss the results with respect to charge relaxation, separation, diffusion and recombination dynamics.

6.2.1. Nanostructuring: size and shape effect. 
Nanostructuring strategies have been widely studied to enhance the photocatalytic activity via increasing the reactive surface area. However, it has been found that the charge carrier dynamics are highly influenced by the size of nanoparticles. Previous experimental results have reported contrasting results of the size effect on the exciton lifetime of TiO2 nanoparticles. Du et al.145 reported that larger particles showed a slower charge recombination rate due to the longer diffusion length of electrons. Meanwhile, Nakade et al.146 reported that the charge recombination rate was reduced with the increasing particle size because of the presence of charge trap sites and grain boundaries. The intertwined factors such as size distribution, the presence of impurities and oxygen defects make it difficult to investigate the size effect on the charge carrier dynamics without influence from other factors. From the theoretical aspect, a slower charge recombination rate was expected for larger nanoparticles. Cho et al.94 performed DFT calculations to investigate the exciton binding energy of TiO2 nanoparticles whose diameter ranges from 0.5 nm to 3.2 nm. The exciton binding energy decreased by increasing the size indicating that the larger particles have a longer exciton lifetime. The stronger interaction between the electron and hole pair in smaller nanoparticles was also supported by Choi et al.147 They explained that for small nanoparticles with a 3 nm diameter, a small potential drop of around 0.01 V across the space-charge layer is not sufficient to drive the charge separation; hence charge recombination is rather accelerated. Nam et al.148 supported their findings by performing nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation with real-time time-dependent DFT. The calculated lifetimes of excited states were hundreds of picoseconds (Fig. 13(b)), which was in agreement with previous experimental results.149–151 However, the nanoparticles used in this study have sizes ranging from 1.0 to 3.2 nm, making them much smaller than the nanoparticles synthesized with sizes of ten to hundreds of nm (Fig. 13(a)). Considering that the quantum confinement effect is dominant for particles smaller than 20 nm as reported by Lamiel-Garcia et al.,51 further NAMD studies on larger particles are necessary.
 Fig. 13  (a) Optimized structures of octahedral (top) and cuboctahedral (bottom) TiO2 nanoparticles. (b) Electron–hole recombination dynamics: the sums of the population of all excited states originating from promoting an electron from the VB into the CB. The solid lines refer to octahedral clusters, while dotted lines refer to cuboctahedral clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The charge carrier dynamic properties were also affected by the shape of the nanoparticles. It has been a long debate whether anatase or rutile is the better photocatalyst. There could be many factors determining the photocatalytic efficiency, but typically, TiO2 anatase nanoparticles exhibit a longer electron–hole lifetime than rutile. Xu et al.152 reported in their experiment that anatase TiO2 nanoparticles exhibited a longer electron–hole lifetime, longer than 10 ns, which was an order of magnitude longer than that of rutile nanoparticles, which was shorter than 1 ns. This difference in behaviour shown by anatase and rutile was attributed to the presence of the indirect band gap of anatase because the excited electrons cannot recombine with holes directly on-site.153 Yamada et al.154 found that rutile nanoparticles showed single exponential decay with negligible Auger recombination or other complicated processes, while anatase nanoparticles showed a non-exponential decay profile indicating the presence of multiple carrier trapping.
Exposing the most reactive facet of TiO2 has been another issue of the shape effect on photocatalytic activity. For anatase TiO2, the average surface energy of (101), (100) and (001) is 0.44, 0.53, and 0.93 J m−2, respectively, indicating that (001) surfaces are more reactive than (101) surfaces.155,156 In another aspect, it indicates that TiO2 anatase nanoparticles are mostly composed of (101) facets. The first-principles DFT calculations of Yang et al. demonstrated that the surface free energy of (001) can be significantly reduced by the fluoride ions.155 However, it further introduces Ti3+ states, which makes it difficult to investigate the origin of the resulting change of activity whether it is from the intrinsic properties of the (001) surface or the presence of fluorine atoms. Nam et al.148 compared the exciton binding energy of octahedral nanoparticles, composed of only (101) facets with cuboctahedral nanoparticles, composed of both (101) and (001) facets (Fig. 13(a)). They found that cuboctahedral nanoparticles exhibited a smaller exciton binding energy indicating that the excitons are likely to be separated into free charge carriers more easily with less probability of charge recombination compared with the case of octahedral nanoparticles. The results of nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation also support the findings that cuboctahedral nanoparticles showed weaker electronic coupling between the excited electron and hole states compared to that of octahedral nanoparticles. However, a recent study157 on the photocatalytic activity of different clean facets for the hydrogen evolution reaction showed the order of (010) > (101) > (001), in contrast to the expectation. These results imply that extensive studies on the shape effect of nanoparticles from low to high index are required to investigate the origin of photocatalytic activity.


6.2.2. Oxygen vacancy defects. 
Oxygen vacancy defects naturally exist in most TiO2 nanoparticles synthesized or sometimes they are artificially introduced to reduce the band gap into the visible region. The removal of a neutral oxygen atom provides two excess electrons. Subsequently defect states appear around 0.8–1.0 eV below the conduction band minimum due to the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+. The reduction of band gap contributes to the enhancement of the absorption of visible light. The presence of the introduced Ti3+ state has been observed in experimental studies by photoelectron spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance, as well as in theoretical studies.50,105 However, Elbanna et al.158 reported that enhancement of light absorption by surface defects does not always lead to enhanced activity. They showed that the black TiO2 with the highest concentration of oxygen vacancies showed the strongest absorption in the visible range but the lowest photocatalytic activity, indicating that enhanced optical absorption is not the key factor for H2 production in those systems. Generally, it is known that oxygen vacancy defects act as a charge recombination centre hindering further reactions, as supported by many experimental studies with time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and photoluminescence.152,159,160 In contrast, other studies156,161,162 reported that an increase in the number of surface trapped states, resulting from oxygen defects, improves charge separation; consequently, it contributes to a lower charge recombination rate.
The charge carrier recombination rates are highly affected by the presence of the trap states such as the Ti3+ state. Time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and time-resolved photoluminescence results suggest that the excited state lifetime of charge carriers ranges from several picoseconds to nanoseconds. Zhou et al.163 investigated the recombination rate of trapped electrons in hematite and reported that a shallow trap state leads to fast recombination while a deep trap state leads to relatively slow recombination. Yamanaka et al.164 explained using time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopy that the deeper trap state requires a much longer diffusion time of 300 ps than the shallow trap state, which requires 1 ps. This implies that the slower recombination rate might originate from a longer diffusion time of the deep trap state. However, the slower diffusion time can be rather detrimental to photocatalytic activity as discussed by Elbanna et al.158 They found that charge separation efficiency was enhanced by a deep trap state, but photocatalytic activity was rather reduced because deeply trapped electrons cannot participate in the photocatalytic reaction. The results suggest that charge carrier dynamics are significantly affected by the presence of charge trap states induced by oxygen defects.
Several studies have been performed to investigate the location of charge trapping in TiO2 nanoparticles. Valentin et al.60 reported that undercoordinated 5-coordinated Ti atoms and two-coordinated O atoms are the most probable traps for photoexcited charge carriers. Carey et al.165 supported this work by investigating the electron and hole trapping at low and high index surfaces of anatase TiO2. They found that electrons were trapped at higher index planes (103, 105, and 107) while they were relatively delocalized across multiple sites similar to the result of bulk anatase TiO2. Holes showed strong affinity at the surfaces for high index planes such as 105 and 107 planes, and the 001-type facet, while at subsurface layers, they showed strong affinity for the other index planes, 101, 110, 112, and 103 facets. The results of both Valentin and Carey showed the affinity of the electron and hole at low coordinated atoms. It is particularly important considering that oxygen defects reduce the coordination number of neighbouring Ti atoms, and the electron could be highly localized when close to defect sites.
Kim et al.105 investigated the energy levels of defect (trapping) sites induced by an oxygen defect. They investigated the defect energy levels of 25 different oxygen defect sites which can exist in a bipyramidal (TiO2)35 nanoparticle. The result showed that the magnetic ground state, Ti3+ defect energy level, and formation energy was highly dependent on the defect sites, especially on the coordination number. Defect energy levels were located 0.47 to 1.87 eV below the CBM and the ground state multiplicity exhibited either an open-shell triplet or closed shell singlet which can further affect the charge carrier dynamics in reduced TiO2 systems (Fig. 14). The same result was reported by Morales-Garcia et al.166 with the (TiO2)84 nanoparticle. On the other hand, Sinhamahapatra et al.167 and Yamanaka et al.164 showed that photocatalytic activity is also affected by the concentration of oxygen defects, indicating that an optimal concentration of defects may exist. Therefore, sophisticated investigation on both defect site and concentration is required to enhance the charge separation and diffusion dynamics while suppressing charge recombination.
 Fig. 14  Kohn–Sham energy level diagram of pristine TiO2 nanoparticles and reduced (Ti35O69) TiO2 nanoparticles. The triplet state energy levels are for spin-up eigenvalues. The dotted lines indicate the standard redox potential for the hydrogen evolution reaction at pH = 0. The singly occupied and doubly occupied defect states are denoted as blue and green for triplet and singlet states, respectively. Other orbitals are shown in black. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


6.2.3. Chemical doping. 
To extend the absorption of light into the visible range, chemical doping has been widely used. Many experimental and theoretical studies have reported various doping strategies from cationic metal doping to anionic non-metal doping. In this section, we discuss the chemical doping effect on the photocatalytic activity in terms of charge separation and recombination dynamics.
Metal doping. 
The photo-reactivities of metal doped TiO2 nanoparticles have been extensively studied by Choi et al.147 They reported that the efficiency of metal doping depended on whether it serves as a mediator for enhanced interfacial charge transfer or as a recombination centre. The introduction of metal dopant creates strongly localized d states between the VB and CB.168 Therefore, an excited electron or hole is strongly trapped at the introduced d states. When the metal dopants are preferentially located in the surface region, the charge transfer to the interface is relatively easily achieved and enhances the interfacial charge transfer, while charge carrier mobility is significantly decreased, and charge carrier recombination occurs when the metal dopants are located deep inside the TiO2 nanoparticles. Liu et al.169 reported a significant increase of photo-reactivities for Fe(III)-doped TiO2 under visible light due to the optimal electronic level matching. The density of states calculated by Liu et al.170 supported the presence of the mid gap states introduced by Fe and V dopants. Although those states contribute to the larger absorption of visible light, the electron excitation from the VB to empty mid-gap states can suppress the transfer to the adsorbed molecule and accelerate the charge recombination. Lu et al.171 supported the finding that the cationic dopant created a deep trap state which accelerates charge recombination. The electron trap state introduced by p-type dopants such as Ga3+, Cr3+, and Al3+ and hole trap state introduced by n-type dopants such as Nb5+, Sb5+, and Ta5+ promoted the recombination. However, the metal doping effect was significantly influenced by dopant concentration, the energy level of dopants, the d electron configuration, the distribution of dopants, light intensity etc. (Table 1), as pointed out by Choi et al. It seems that the role as a recombination centre or as an efficient mediator for interfacial charge transfer is still under debate. Therefore, a careful engineering of mid gap states accompanied by studies on time-domain charge transfer is required.
Table 1 The effect of dopant content on photocatalytic activity of photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V




Degraded pollutant and hydrogen production
Light source
Photocatalyst
Range of doping (%)
Optimum doping (%)




Acid orange 7
UV
Pt–TiO2
0–2.0
2.0


Orange II
Sunset lamp
ZnSO4–TiO2
0–6.0
2.0


Methyl orange
UV
(Pt–TiO2 pillared clay)
0–2.0
0.5


Hydrogen production


Be–TiO2
0–4.5
1.25


Mg–TiO2
0–4.5
1.25


Ba–TiO2
0–4.5
2.25


Ca–TiO2
0–4.5
2.25


Sr–TiO2
0–4.5
2.25


Methyl orange
UV
ZnO–TiO2
0–0.5
0.25


Bisphenol A
UV
Ag–TiO2
0–2.0
1.0


Nitride
Visible
Sm3+–TiO2
0–2.0
0.5


Rhodamine B
UV
Zn–TiO2
0–2.0
0.5


Rhodamine B
UV
Cu–TiO2
0–3.0
0.06




Anion doping. 
As an alternative, anion dopants such as carbon, nitrogen, sulphur, and fluorine atoms have been used to minimize the charge recombination while enhancing light absorption. The dopant impurity states appear near the valence band edge, reducing the band gap to the visible region while they do not act as a recombination centre. Yamanaka et al.164 employed femtosecond time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopy to clarify the charge trapping dynamics. They revealed that N doping created a deep hole trap state above the VBM with the subsequent electron trap state below the CBM. They explained that three O atoms can be substituted by two N atoms generating an oxygen defect site. Guo et al.172 further supported the finding that the ionic radius of N (1.71 A) is larger than that of O (1.40 A), and hence the reorganization of lattice geometry induces the oxygen defect. Yamanaka et al. found that surface trapping of electrons occurs in the ultrafast time scale of less than 1 ps. But the rate of charge trapping increased with the amount of nitrogen doping. The N-doped TiO2 exhibited high activity for photocatalytic oxidation under visible light along with its slower recombination due to the low intensity of light and the presence of the deep trap state. The second order electron–hole recombination was highly suppressed when the number of exciton pairs is less than unity, where excitation occurs with a light source below 20 μJ cm−2 at 360 nm as discussed by previous studies.173,174 The deep hole trap state also lowered the possibility of electron and hole recombination compared with the shallow trap state.
Carbon and sulphur doping have been studied by Tachikawa et al.175 They compared one-electron photo-oxidation of methanol and 4-(methylthio)phenyl methanol using TDR. They revealed that the photocatalytic activity increased in the order of pure > S-doped > C-doped TiO2. The adsorbed photon number and initial absorption percentage increased for the S-doped and C-doped systems. The lifetime of an exciton was also increased for both S-doped and C-doped TiO2. They discussed that this is probably due to the presence of the deep trap state where charge carriers are too strongly bound. They explained that the higher photocatalytic activity of S-doped TiO2 than C-doped TiO2 originated from the presence of the introduced deeper mid gap state of C-doped TiO2 than S-doped TiO2. The 3p states of S were somewhat delocalized with the O 2p orbital contributing to the formation of the VB, while the mid gap state of C 2p was deeper and more isolated without contributing to the formation of the VB. This result indicates the importance of the charge trap state for charge carrier dynamics, similar to the result of oxygen defect systems.
In contrast to other dopants, the F atom can easily substitute for the O atom due to the similar radius without inducing oxygen vacancies.176 Fluoride can either be adsorbed on the surface or doped into TiO2 to enhance visible light absorption. Yu et al.177 reported that systems with a low dopant concentration reduce the electron and hole recombination rate, thus enhancing photocatalytic activity due to the presence of the Ti3+ state. However, systems with a high dopant concentration increase the recombination rate because the distance between trapping sites in a particle decreases. The results of anion doping showed that the dopant itself does not contribute to the charge recombination; however, the induced deep trap state hinders the activation of trapped charge carriers that have diffused onto the surface. Also, the induced oxygen vacancy or Ti3+ state acted as a recombination centre accelerating the depletion of charge carriers.
Recent studies indicate that introducing metal ions into non-metal doped TiO2 can reduce the band gap to the visible region and suppress charge carrier recombination. Then the introduced metal ions act as efficient mediators for interfacial charge transfer. For example, the unoccupied N 2p state was created above the VBM by N doping into TiO2 which acted as a recombination centre. Furthermore, Mo doping changes the unoccupied character of the N 2p state to the occupied state leading to the prevention of electron–hole recombination.178 Ytterbium179 and Fe180 doping increases the dipole moment in TiO2 and helps to separate photoexcited electron–hole pairs. The result of Yan et al.181 showed that N and Ta co-doping upshifted the CBM of TiO2 nanoparticles by 0.24 eV, hence enhancing the electron mobility of excited electrons while decreasing the band gap into the visible range. The same results have been reported for S + Zr-codoped (0.15 eV) and S + Hf-codoped (0.24 eV) TiO2. The enhancement of electron mobility with the increased driving force could be beneficial to photoreduction catalysed by a TiO2 system.


6.2.4. Sensitization. 
Chemical doping significantly distorts the lattice structure of TiO2 due to the difference in radius (C, N, and S atoms) and generates unwanted oxygen defects. The electronic and geometric change induced by chemical doping can accelerate charge recombination as discussed. The introduced Ti3+ electron trapping state notably lowers the driving force for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Coupling of TiO2 to different materials with an optimal electronic structure has received enormous attention during the past few decades. It includes Z-schemes, nanocomposites, dye sensitization, noble metal loading, etc. In this section, we discuss the strategies to enhance the charge carrier separation by coupling a composite material.
In the Z-scheme (Fig. 15), two different photocatalysts are combined directly or using redox mediators. Constructing heterostructures by coupling different photocatalysts provides efficient separation of the excited electron and hole as well as efficient visible light absorption. Upon light absorption, an excited electron in the CB of a photocatalyst is transferred to the VB of another by a built-in electric field or by a shuttle mediator; then one of the half-reactions is driven at each material. Therefore, two different photocatalysts, which can drive either the reduction or oxidation reaction, can be combined to drive a redox reaction together at the different sites, separately. Of particular importance, this scheme suggests a way of overcoming the low driving force of TiO2 for water reduction. As an example, the calculated band gap of the direct Z-scheme g-C3N4/TiO2 was 1.76 eV, although that of TiO2 and g-C3N4 was 3.2 eV and 2.7 eV, respectively.182 Besides, the excited electrons were transferred to g-C3N4 to drive the hydrogen evolution reaction, while the excited holes were transferred to TiO2 to drive the oxygen evolution reaction. The efficient charge separation can be achieved by a built-in electric field in the direct contact Z-scheme, or by a shuttle redox pair mediator in the other Z-scheme. Liu et al.182 demonstrated that the accumulation of negative charge on the TiO2 surface and positive charge on g-C3N4 leads to the formation of the internal electric field from the g-C3N4 surface to the TiO2 surface, leading to the separation of charge carriers. In the mediator regime, the charge separation occurs by consecutive interfacial charge transfer between substrate surfaces and the mediators which have electronic energy in between the VBM of a material and the CBM as follow:1832H+ + 2e− → H2 (photoreduction of H+ to H2)M + nh+ → Mn+ (photooxidation of the mediator)Mn+ + ne− → M (photoreduction of the mediator)2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+ (photooxidation of H2O to O2)Here, M denotes a redox mediator. The oxidation and reduction cycle of a mediator circulates the overall water splitting on the Z-scheme, providing efficient charge separation between substrates. However, the apparent quantum yield (AQY) of Z-scheme water splitting remains below 10% as reported by Maeda.183 It is theoretically expected that 7.9, 16.2 and 20.6% solar-energy conversion efficiency can be achieved with 500, 600, and 650 nm assuming that the AQY of water splitting is unity.184 This indicates that the majority of charge carriers are lost in the middle of charge transfer to the mediator or vice versa. The backward reaction involving the mediator can cause depletion of the charge carriers. The reduction of the acceptor mediator and the oxidation of the donor mediator are thermodynamically more favourable than water reduction and oxidation, respectively. Therefore, it is important to improve the charge transfer to the target molecule participating in the surface reaction, by repelling the mediator to prevent the backward reaction.
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for (a) the direct Z-scheme and (b) indirect (mediator) Z-scheme. 
In the nanocomposite regime (Fig. 12), electrons in one semiconductor with a higher CB are injected into another semiconductor with a lower CB energy while holes are injected in the opposite way. Both approaches effectively suppress the charge recombination in individual semiconductors, hence enhancing the charge carrier lifetime. Therefore, the appropriate matching of the CB and VB of the two semiconductors is an important factor for efficient interfacial charge carrier transfer between them. Several types of semiconductors such as CdS, MoS2, WS2, CdSe, WO3, SnO2, and Cu2O have been used as a coupler. The use of a coupling semiconductor successfully enhanced the photocatalytic activity by increasing the light absorption in the visible range while suppressing charge carrier recombination. Semiconductors with a tuneable band gap, such as graphene,185–187 graphene oxide,188 and graphyne derivatives189–192 were reported to be especially effective composite materials. However, experimental findings clearly show that the efficiency is highly dependent on the concentration of coupling semiconductors. It was reported that excessive loading of WO3 can instead accelerate charge recombination.193 The results of Tristão et al.194 support the findings that lowering the amounts of CdS enhances the degradation of organic dye.
Noble metal deposition can be used as a coupler as well. Wang et al.160 investigated the charge separation and recombination dynamics of a single TiO2 crystal coated with Pt nanoparticles. The efficient electron–hole separation by Pt nanoparticles was observed due to efficient electron trapping by Pt nanoparticles; thus the quantum yield of photoreduction was increased. In this case, the size of the Pt particle played an important role in improving charge separation efficiency due to the band alignment, similar to the result of the Au nanoparticle.195 However, Pt can be partially oxidized to Pt(II) during low deposition and serves as a recombination centre. These results indicate that sophisticated studies on the interfacial charge transfer between TiO2 and the coupler are required because most of the charge carriers are lost in the middle of the interfacial electron transfer in these systems.
To overcome the low efficiency interfacial electron transfer between semiconductors due to charge recombination at the boundary, plasmonic charge injection from a noble metal to TiO2 has recently received considerable attention. Long et al.196 carried out a detailed time-domain atomistic study of a plasmon-driven electron transfer, relaxation, and recombination process at the Au20–TiO2 interface. They firstly found a novel charge separation mechanism where the charge separation state, an electron in TiO2 and a hole in Au, is instantaneously generated upon excitation by plasmon resonance with a high probability (∼50%), while other charge carriers followed the traditional mechanism where plasmon band excitation generates an electron–hole pair in the gold nanoparticle, and the electron is then transferred to the TiO2 surface on a sub-100 fs time scale. In this case, the electron–hole recombination occurred on a 1 ps time scale when the electron was trapped near the gold nanoparticle due to the structural defect in the TiO2 surface, while it was much longer when electrons diffused into bulk TiO2. This rapid charge separation at the Au–TiO2 interface significantly lowered the electron–hole recombination and exhibited the enhancement of photocatalytic activity. The plasmonic charge injection from metal to TiO2 was further studied by Ranasingha et al.197 who suggested the detailed mechanism of electron transfer from Au55 to the TiO2 substrate. They found the presence of a long-lived intermediate state in Au, existing for about ∼6.8 ps, which aligns with the conduction band of TiO2. This intermediate state was highly delocalized over both Au and TiO2 systems and thus increased the probability of electron transfer from Au to TiO2 and facilitated the instantaneous separation of charge carriers. The novel mechanism found by Long et al.196 was experimentally proved by Wu et al.198 using cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanorods bearing gold nanoparticles. They reported that the novel plasmon-induced metal to semiconductor interfacial charge transfer transition pathway (Fig. 16(c)) is an efficient charge separation pathway which yields a quantum efficiency higher than 24%. They explained that the metal plasmon serves as a light absorber, but strong coupling and mixing of metal and semiconductor electronic levels lead to a new plasmon decay pathway, generating an electron in the semiconductor and a hole in the metal directly. They reported that this mechanism is much more efficient than the conventional plasmon-induced hot-electron transfer mechanism (Fig. 16(a)) where hot-electron transfer competes with electron relaxation through rapid electron–electron scattering in the metal's CB199–201 or the direct metal-to-semiconductor interfacial charge-transfer transition (Fig. 16(b)) where an electron is directly excited from the metal to the semiconductor CB without plasmonic transition, producing weak excitation.202,203 The longer relaxation time of plasmon excitation was also reported in the results of silver quantum dots by Neukirch.204 They found that plasmons are coupled only to a narrow range of low-frequency phonons. Higher energy plasmon excitation relaxes slower than a lower energy plasmon due to its weaker coupling to phonons. Also, they found that the relaxation of plasmon excitation occurred on a picosecond time scale, which is slower than that of the charge carriers in semiconductor materials. Considering the slow recombination of an electron and a hole together with high excitation intensity of plasmon resonance, this could be an efficient way of enhancing photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of metal-to-semiconductor charge-separation pathways. (A) Conventional PHET mechanism, (B) DICTT pathway, and (C) the newly demonstrated PICTT pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Dye sensitization of TiO2 with organic or metallo-organic dye molecules can be another approach for enhancing photocatalytic activity. In this case, photoexcited electrons are transferred from an excited dye molecule to the conduction band of TiO2. Then electron donors such as an electrolyte recover the oxidized dye molecule by injecting electrons. Interfacial transfer of electrons between dyes and TiO2 is the key factor that ensures the photocatalytic activity.
Charge injection between TiO2 and the adsorbed molecule has been extensively studied by the Batista group. Ab initio molecular dynamics simulation by Rego and Batista205 investigated the interfacial electron transfer in a catechol/TiO2 anatase system. They found that interfacial electron transfer from LUMO/LUMO+1 of catechol to the CB of TiO2 occurred in two steps. In a short time, an electron in catechol was directly injected to TiO2 in the ultrafast time scale of 5–10 fs. At longer times, the injection of the remaining electrons was dominated by anisotropic charge delocalization, e.g. charge diffusion along the crystallographic directions [−101], [010], and [101]. The interfacial electron transfer mechanism was very sensitive to the symmetry of the electronic state of catechol because it was driven by electronic coupling between the initially populated electronic state of catechol and those of the conduction band of TiO2. Both the initial electron injection and the subsequent delocalization process from LUMO+1 were faster than that from LUMO. They also found that this process can be accelerated by nuclear fluctuation at room temperature, providing additional nonadiabatic relaxation pathways in the following study.206
On the other hand, electron loss to the electrolyte is one of the main causes of low catalytic efficiency in a dye sensitized TiO2 system. As an example, charge recombination dynamics between a dye sensitized TiO2 surface and the I−/I3− electrolyte has been simulated using nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation by Duncan et al.139 They compared the relaxation dynamics of the injected electron in the TiO2 CB. They found that the injected electron from the dye to the CB of TiO2 is finally relaxed to the I2− species in the 100 fs scale due to the lower LUMO energy of the electrolyte than the CB of TiO2. This electron transfer to the electrolyte was somewhat faster than back electron transfer from TiO2 to the alizarin dye molecule. The results suggest that the photoreduction efficiency such as the hydrogen evolution reaction by water splitting could be lowered due to the electron scavenging by the electrolyte, hindering electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to the target molecule, while it can enhance the photooxidation efficiency by increasing the lifetime of the excited hole.
In Section 6, we discussed the effect of chemical modification on the charge carrier separation, diffusion, and transfer in photocatalytic TiO2 nanoparticles. We discussed that an appropriate level of trap states should not strongly hold the charge carriers and should prevent electron–hole recombination. Considering that charge carriers are preferentially localized at the lower coordinated sites, we need to study the influence of chemical modification on charge localization for nanoparticle models that have a lower coordination number. Additionally, the physical separation of an electron and hole is possible by sensitizing TiO2 nanoparticles with other materials such as dyes, noble metals, and other substrates, to suppress the charge recombination. In this case, the ultrafast interfacial charge transfer should be fast enough to transfer the charge carriers and the charge transfer is thermodynamically favoured to prevent quenching by the electrolyte.

7. Photochemical reactions on the surface
Photocatalytic reactions can be used in a wide range of reactions such as CO2 reduction, CO oxidation, photodegradation of organic molecules, reduction and oxidation of water molecules, etc. Of particular importance is water splitting, which has been widely studied to solve the impending energy and environmental problems. It is generally known that electrolysis of water occurs by the following mechanism:2H2O → 2H2 + O2where two half-reactions, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) take place on the different electrodes as follows:
Anode:2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H
Cathode:2H+ + 2e− → H2
However, it has been extensively studied by the Nørskov group207,208 that the actual OER occurs by the following four elementary proton-coupled electron transfer reactions: H2O + S → S–HO + H+ + e−(A) S–OH → S–O + H+ + e−(B) H2O + S–O → S–OOH + H+ + e−(C) S–OOH → O2 + S + H+ + e−(D)Here, S represents a coordinatively unsaturated site on the substrate surface. It has been generally accepted that step (A) is the rate determining step, where the reaction of H2O with a hole forms an adsorbed hydroxyl group. Valdés et al.207 investigated the underlying photooxidation mechanism in terms of thermodynamics by comparing the free energy change of each elementary reaction. Interestingly, they revealed that the rate limiting reaction would be step (B), when the peroxo species exist on the surface although the free energy change of step (B) was quite similar to that of step (A). They further reported that the rate determining reaction is step (A) in other cases, regardless of the pH of electrolyte or applied bias. This result suggests that the rate-determining steps would vary depending on the circumstances, calculation method, etc.
They also revealed that both the HER and OER require additional external energy, known as overpotential. This indicates that a certain amount of energy should be supplied to drive each reaction. The results showed that an overpotential of 0.78 V is needed to make every elementary step downhill. Therefore, spontaneous photooxidation upon light absorption is expected considering that the large band gap of TiO2 nanoparticles is much larger than the 1.23 V difference of the redox potential. Another study by Valdés et al.208 further supports the spontaneous photooxidation on the TiO2 surface. They compared the free energy change of each elementary reaction using a (TiO2)26 cluster which resembles bulk rutile exhibiting a (110)-like surface. They assumed that the reactant state containing the positively charged cluster proceeds to a product state containing a neutral cluster plus a proton mimicking the situation where the electron is removed by the scavenger. The result showed that every reaction step was downhill, in contrast to the result of the previous periodic system calculated with the methodology developed by the Norskov group where only neutral surface states are used.
Several nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulations have been performed to investigate the time-dependent charge transfer mechanism between the reactive surface and adsorbed molecules. Akimov et al.209 provided two valuable insights into the importance of time-domain theoretical studies to characterize the surface reaction mechanism: (1) the long-lasting localization of hole densities at the adsorbed hydroxyl groups and water molecules; (2) the ultrafast nuclear rearrangements for rendering photooxidation. This indicates the importance of both thermodynamic and kinetic studies to investigate the detailed surface reaction mechanism.
Considering that the localization of hole density on oxygen species is the key factor for photooxidation of water, the result of Valentin et al.60 shows the possibility of a spontaneous photooxidation reaction on the TiO2/water interface, in contrast to the GaN study of Akimov et al. They investigated electron and hole trapping at the hydroxylated anatase (101) surface where the water molecule was dissociatively adsorbed on the surface. They firstly found that the hole can be localized at the O atom of the hydroxyl group if there are no neighbouring hydroxyl groups. However, Jin et al.210 showed the opposite results on the localization of hole densities. They investigated the behaviours of free holes and coupled electron–hole pairs at three types of terminations at the TiO2/water interface: free H2O, free OH−, and Ti–OH, where OH– is adsorbed on the five-coordinated Ti atom at the surface (Fig. 17(a)). They applied the first-principles many-body Green's function theory to enhance the accuracy of their results. The results revealed that all oxygen species, H2O, OH− and Ti–OH, showed lower electronic energy levels around 1.0, 0.86, and 0.85 eV below the VBM of the TiO2 substrate (Fig. 17(b)). This indicates that hole trapping at the oxygen species under low-energy light irradiation is very difficult. The BSE calculation for optical absorption spectra showed that most of the excited hole densities were spread over lattice O atoms rather than adsorbed O species such as H2O, OH−, and Ti–OH, while the densities of excited electrons were spread over Ti atoms (Fig. 18). At weak excitation energy, there was extremely low hole density on H2O and OH− species. The localization of hole densities at the O species was pronounced at 3.9, 5.0, and 3.30 eV for H2O, OH−, and Ti–OH, respectively, showing that Ti–OH has a higher capability of capturing holes. Therefore, UV irradiation with an energy comparable to the band gap of rutile TiO2 (∼3.0 eV) is not enough to drive the photooxidation, in contrast to the discussion of Valdés et al. The results suggest that the photooxidation could be highly influenced by the termination at the surface. The results of Jin et al. clearly indicate that the hydroxylated TiO2 surface could provide optimal conditions to enhance the oxidation reaction at the surface. However, the surface termination of TiO2 is still under debate. Valdés et al.207 investigated the relative stability of surface termination of rutile TiO2 as a function of applied bias and pH of the electrolyte. They found that TiO2 (110) surfaces are partially covered with oxygen at bridging sites when the applied potential is below 1.85/1.00 V for pH = 0/14 while the surface is totally covered with oxygen atoms in the other cases. On the other hand, Lindan et al.211 suggested that the surface is alternatively adsorbed with protonated and deprotonated water. Diebold et al.37 supported the observation that H2O only dissociates at surface defects.
 Fig. 17  (a) Structures of TiO2/water interfaces. From left, TiO2/H2O, TiO2/OH−, and TiO2/Ti–OH. Light blue, red, and gray balls represent Ti, O, and H atoms, respectively. (b) Total (orange) and projected DOS (PDOS) calculated from G0W0 for TiO2/H2O, TiO2/OH−, and TiO2/Ti–OH (from top to bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 18  Optical absorption spectra for interfaces (a) TiO2/H2O, (b) TiO2/OH−, and (c) TiO2/Ti–OH calculated using the BSE. A–F are some representative excited states at 3.15, 3.79, 3.16, 3.82, 3.30, and 3.84 eV. (d–h) Illustration of the exciton distribution for the states A, B, D, E, and F, respectively, where electrons and holes are represented in blue and green isosurfaces, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Alternatively, Fischer et al.212 investigated the interfacial electron transfer mechanism of a partially hydroxylated TiO2 (110) surface with a monolayer of water coverage. They found that the wet-electron state was initially delocalized over both water and TiO2. The electrons were transferred from the wet-electron to the TiO2 surface and then to the bulk in less than 10 fs due to strong coupling between the TiO2 surface and water. The ultrafast electron injection was also adiabatically driven by thermal motion due to fluctuation of the wet-electron state energy and frequent crossing between donor and acceptor states. The efficient hydrogen evolution reaction requires the electron population near the surface, particularly on the adsorbed proton. Hence, the ultrafast electron injection from the hydroxyl group to TiO2 bulk might lower the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of TiO2 nanoparticles. The result of Long et al.213 provided an approach to enhance electron transfer from the substrate to the adsorbed molecule. They investigated the electron transfer from a PbS quantum dot to a rhodamine molecule using a time-domain computational approach. The result showed that a sulphur defect created unsaturated chemical bonds on Pb atoms and lowered the LUMO energy of the QD, enhancing the LUMO delocalization onto the adsorbed rhodamine molecule and increasing the donor–acceptor interaction.
In Section 7, we discussed the photochemical reaction at TiO2 surfaces in terms of thermodynamics and kinetics. The charge transfer from the TiO2 substrate to adsorbed molecules is important to enhance the photocatalytic activity. This could be facilitated by matching the HOMO/LUMO energy of the adsorbed molecule with the VB/CB of the TiO2 substrate and delocalizing the charge densities onto the adsorbed molecule. Further sophisticated investigation into the surface reaction mechanism and electron–hole dynamics on various morphologies would be helpful to find the optimal conditions for improved photocatalytic performance of TiO2 nanoparticles.
8. Conclusion and outlook
The development of photocatalysts activated under visible light has received considerable attention for decades because of their significance in the field of renewable energy and environmental clean-up. The photocatalytic activity of the most widely used TiO2 is still low, under 6% due to the low visible light absorption and fast charge recombination. Many modifications have been suggested and developed, including nanostructuring, introducing oxygen defects, chemical doping, sensitization and so on, to reduce the band gap while suppressing the charge recombination between the electron and hole. However, the experimental results of chemical modification did not provide a consensus change on the photocatalytic activity and even contrasting results were reported for the same modification method. This is due to the photocatalytic activity of modified TiO2 nanoparticles attributed to many entangled factors due to the experimental conditions. This review attempted to provide a comprehensive understanding of the photocatalytic process from photoexcitation to redox reactions at the surface from the theoretical aspect. We introduced various semiconductors which have an optimal band structure for visible light absorption and oxygen/hydrogen evolution reactions. We also highlighted the DFT functional modelling to accurately describe the electronic structure of metal oxides by focusing on band gap and oxygen defect levels. We discussed that bulk and surface models provided a useful understanding of the photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 photocatalyst. However, we showed that those models cannot describe the size and shape dependency as well as the quantum confinement effect, which is regarded as the origin of higher performance of smaller particles. We reviewed the cases where small clusters, which do not have a specific phase and specific reactive facet, cannot describe the synthesized nanoparticles observed in experiments. Notably, we clarified the concept between small clusters and nanoparticles which have been ambiguously used in many other papers. We suggested bipyramidal TiO2 anatase nanoparticles as a suitable model which can accurately describe the actual nanoparticles. We summarized the difference of electronic properties for bulks, surfaces, clusters, and nanoparticles, and the results are presented in Table 2. We then highlighted the change of light absorption and charge carrier dynamics of TiO2 nanoparticles by various chemical modification methods. Theoretical approaches to accurately describe the time-dependent charge carrier dynamics in the time domain were introduced. The surface redox reaction was reviewed in terms of thermodynamics and kinetics. Although many experimental and computational studies have been extensively performed to enhance the photocatalytic performance, those studies have elucidated each of the individual processes focusing either on photoexcitation, charge separation, or surface reaction. Therefore, a complete time-domain investigation on the entire photocatalytic process (Fig. 19) starting from exciton generation, charge separation, and surface reaction, including other competitive process will be required in future research to reveal the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles.
Table 2 Summary of selected studies discussed in this paper, including systems, methodologies, and calculated properties




TiO2 bulk/surfaces (Section 2)
Methodology
Parameter
Reference


Rutile band gap (eV)
Anatase band gap (eV)




(110) surface
PW91+U (3 eV)
2.3 eV



Ref. 41



PW91+U (6 eV)
2.8 eV


Bulk
PBE (% Fock = 0)
1.88
2.14

Ref. 50



PBE (% Fock = 20)
2.97
3.22


PBEx (% Fock = 12.5)
3.65
3.90


PBE0(% Fock = 25)
4.13
4.37


PBE (% Fock = 40)
5.62
5.86


PBE (% Fock = 60)
7.75
8.01


Bulk
PBE0αPBE (α = 14.8, ε∞ = 6.76)
2.76
3.42

Ref. 55 and 56



Bulk
sX-LDA
3.02
3.17

Ref. 49 and 58



(101) surface


3.11


(001) surface


2.76


(110) surface
2.90








(TiO2)n clusters (Section 3)
Methodology
Parameter
Reference


Vertical excitation energy (eV)
Exciton binding energy (eV)



Ref. 90 and 91


Ref. 92 and 93


Ref. 94


Ref. 90 and 91


Ref. 94






n = 1
B3LYP/LANL2DZ


2.64







Ref. 90 and 91




n = 2
4.89
3.72


3.81







n = 3
(TD)-DFT (CAM)B3LYP/def2-TZVP
3.69
2.94


3.58



Ref. 92 and 93




n = 4
3.15
3.92
5.08
3.31
4.79





n = 5
4.54
3.82


3.34







n = 6
(CAM)-B3LYP/6-31G(d)
4.53
3.91


3.04



Ref. 94




n = 7
3.96
4.10


2.88







n = 8
3.58
4.08
4.88
2.88
3.69





n = 9
3.84
3.98


2.99







n = 10
3.58
3.51











n = 11
3.37













n = 12
3.74













n = 13
2.82













n = 14
3.70













n = 15
2.37













n = 16
3.76


4.18


3.14








(TiO2)n nanoparticles (Section 4)
Methodology
Parameter
Reference


Vertical excitation energy (eV)
Exciton binding energy (eV)





n = 10
PBEx/NAO light-tier1
∼3.70
∼3.00

Ref. 51




n = 35
B3LYP/def2-TZVP
3.67
2.46

Ref. 94




n = 84 (3 nm)
B3LYP/def2-TZVP
3.40
1.91

Ref. 94




n = 455 (6 nm)
PBEx/NAO light-tier1
3.34
<1.00

Ref. 51





 Fig. 19  Excitation and deexcitation process in a system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 1995, American Chemical Society. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) grants funded by the Korean government (2016R1A2B4012337). The authors would like to acknowledge the support from KISTI supercomputing center through the strategic support program for supercomputing application research [No. KSC-2018-CHA-0025]. Y. Nam acknowledges support of the POSCO Science Fellowship from the POSCO TJ Park Foundation.
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, R. H. Davies and D. Worsley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 417–425 RSC .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, P. Reunchan, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642–12661 RSC .
H. Kazuhito, I. Hiroshi and F. Akira, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 8269 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernández-García and G. Colón, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Henrich, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1995, 50, 77–90 CrossRef CAS .
R. Daghrir, P. Drogui and D. Robert, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 3581–3599 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 15, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211–13241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shwetharani, M. Sakar, C. A. N. Fernando, V. Binas and R. G. Balakrishna, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 12–46 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217–9233 RSC .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Akimov, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4496–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, C. Di Valentin, J. Schneider, D. Bahnemann and S. C. Pillai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 25, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, E. Finazzi, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi, M. C. Paganini and E. Giamello, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 44–56 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rahimi, R. A. Pax and E. M. Gray, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2016, 44, 86–105 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 56, 491–519 CrossRef PubMed .
O. V. Prezhdo, W. R. Duncan and V. V. Prezhdo, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 30–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Kavarnos and N. J. Turro, Chem. Rev., 1986, 86, 401–449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115–164 RSC .

          D. Ollis, E. Pelizzetti and N. Serpone, Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Applications, ed. N. Serpone and E. Pelizzetti, Wiley, New York, USA,  1989, pp. 603–637 Search PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Liu and F. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1861–1885 RSC .
T. Fotiou, T. Triantis, T. Kaloudis and A. Hiskia, Chemosphere, 2015, 119, S89–S94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Wan, F. Xu, F. Huang, J. Lin and X. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5444–5450 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny and M. Nowotny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21560–21567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deák, B. Aradi and T. Frauenheim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 195206 CrossRef .
P. Scheiber, M. Fidler, O. Dulub, M. Schmid, U. Diebold, W. Hou, U. Aschauer and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 136103 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, L. Halliburton, A. Manivannan, P. Bunton, D. Baker, M. Klemm, S. Horn and A. Fujishima, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 162114 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, K. Cao and J. T. Yates Jr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 674–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS .
B. Santara, P. K. Giri, K. Imakita and M. Fujii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23402–23411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nerlov, S. V. Christensen, S. Weichel, E. H. Pedersen and P. J. Møller, Surf. Sci., 1997, 371, 321–336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nolan, S. D. Elliott, J. S. Mulley, R. A. Bennett, M. Basham and P. Mulheran, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235424 CrossRef .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC .
M. Qiu, Y. Tian, Z. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Li, K. Wang, L. Wang, K. Wang and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 74376–74383 RSC .
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, B864 CrossRef .
C. Sousa, S. Tosoni and F. Illas, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4456–4495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 289–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Finazzi, C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 154113 CrossRef PubMed .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219–270 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Lee, S. J. Clark and J. Robertson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075209 CrossRef .
K. C. Ko, O. Lamiel-García, J. Y. Lee and F. Illas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12357–12367 RSC .
O. Lamiel-Garcia, K. C. Ko, J. Y. Lee, S. T. Bromley and F. Illas, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 1785–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, B. Wen, C. Zhou, A. Selloni and L.-M. Liu, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2018, 73, 58–82 CrossRef CAS .
F. Viñes, O. Lamiel-García, K. Chul Ko, J. Yong Lee and F. Illas, J. Comput. Chem., 2017, 38, 781–789 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Skone, M. Govoni and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 195112 CrossRef .
M. Gerosa, C. E. Bottani, L. Caramella, G. Onida, C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 155201 CrossRef .
M. Gerosa, C. E. Bottani, L. Caramella, G. Onida, C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 134702 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Levchenko, X. Ren, J. Wieferink, R. Johanni, P. Rinke, V. Blum and M. Scheffler, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2015, 192, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Guo and J. Robertson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18160–18166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Janotti, C. Franchini, J. B. Varley, G. Kresse and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2223–2228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Spreafico and J. VandeVondele, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 26144–26152 RSC .
J. Jaćimović, C. Vaju, A. Magrez, H. Berger, L. Forró, R. Gaál, V. Cerovski and R. Žikić, Europhys. Lett., 2012, 99, 57005 CrossRef .
S. Moser, L. Moreschini, J. Jaćimović, O. S. Barišić, H. Berger, A. Magrez, Y. J. Chang, K. S. Kim, A. Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, L. Forró and M. Grioni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 196403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Janotti, J. B. Varley, P. Rinke, N. Umezawa, G. Kresse and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085212 CrossRef .

          B. G. Svensson, S. J. Pearton and C. Jagadish, Semiconductors and Semimetals: Oxide Semiconductors, Academic Press,  2013, vol. 88, ch. 1, pp. 10–11 Search PubMed .
A. Malashevich, M. Jain and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 075205 CrossRef .
G. Mattioli, P. Alippi, F. Filippone, R. Caminiti and A. Amore Bonapasta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21694–21704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stausholm-Møller, H. H. Kristoffersen, B. Hinnemann, G. K. H. Madsen and B. Hammer, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144708 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2321–2328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto and T. Ohno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 589–598 RSC .
G. Mattioli, F. Filippone, P. Alippi and A. Amore Bonapasta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 241201 CrossRef .
B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 233102 CrossRef .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20543–20552 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Wallace and K. P. McKenna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1913–1920 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Calzado, N. C. Hernández and J. F. Sanz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 045118 CrossRef .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 166803 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Kowalski, M. F. Camellone, N. N. Nair, B. Meyer and D. Marx, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 146405 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Krüger, S. Bourgeois, B. Domenichini, H. Magnan, D. Chandesris, P. Le Fèvre, A. M. Flank, J. Jupille, L. Floreano, A. Cossaro, A. Verdini and A. Morgante, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 055501 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, O. Dulub, H. Cheng, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 106105 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Deák, J. Kullgren and T. Frauenheim, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 583–586 CrossRef .
M. Setvin, C. Franchini, X. Hao, M. Schmid, A. Janotti, M. Kaltak, C. G. Van de Walle, G. Kresse and U. Diebold, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 086402 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Ko, S. T. Bromley, J. Y. Lee and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5593–5598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wulff, Z. Kristallogr., 1901, 34, 449 CAS .
H. Fu and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 1496–1508 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiong, R. Shao, T. C. Droubay, A. G. Joly, K. M. Beck, S. A. Chambers and W. P. Hess, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2133–2138 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hosaka, T. Sekiya, C. Satoko and S. Kurita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 66, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and L. S. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 8221–8228 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gehrke and K. Reuter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 085412 CrossRef .
N. Marom, M. Kim and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 106801 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-w. Qu and G.-J. Kroes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8998–9007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-w. Qu and G.-J. Kroes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16808–16817 CrossRef CAS .
E. Berardo, H.-S. Hu, S. A. Shevlin, S. M. Woodley, K. Kowalski and M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 1189–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Berardo, H.-S. Hu, H. J. J. van Dam, S. A. Shevlin, S. M. Woodley, K. Kowalski and M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 5538–5548 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cho, K. C. Ko, O. Lamiel-García, S. T. Bromley, J. Y. Lee and F. Illas, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2016, 12, 3751–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3233–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Islam, T. Bredow and A. Gerson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 045217 CrossRef .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 155409 CrossRef .
X.-Q. Gong and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19560–19562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 5034–5041 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. Zhou, J. Liu and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20382–20386 RSC .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2073–2076 RSC .
A. S. Barnard and L. A. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Barnard, S. Erdin, Y. Lin, P. Zapol and J. W. Halley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205405 CrossRef .
G. Wulff, Z. Krystallogr. Mineral, 1901, 34, 449 CAS .
S. Kim, K. C. Ko, J. Y. Lee and F. Illas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23755–23762 RSC .
J. Yu, Q. Xiang and M. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Chen, N. Wang, Y. Li and H. Ding, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6116–6124 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gomathi Devi, B. Narasimha Murhty and S. Girish Kumar, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130, 496–503 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Devi and S. G. Kumar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2779–2790 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Devi, B. N. Murthy and S. G. Kumar, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 166, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Devi, S. G. Kumar, B. N. Murthy and N. Kottam, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 794–798 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. R. Inturi, T. Boningari, M. Suidan and P. G. Smirniotis, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 333–342 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, C. Li and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 191, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, A. Orlov, R. M. Lambert and M. C. Payne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20948–20952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. Liu, Y. Mao, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 352–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1251–1257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, J. C. Yu and X. Fu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 244, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Calatayud, T. Jardiel, M. Peiteado, F. Illas, E. Giamello, F. J. Palomares, D. Fernández-Hevia and A. C. Caballero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21243–21250 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, K. Miyazaki, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, J. Kubota, Y. Sakata and K. Domen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 486, 144–146 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21458–21466 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 647–655 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Y. Wu, P. Lazic, G. Hautier, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 157–168 RSC .
A. A. Emery and C. Wolverton, Sci. Data, 2017, 4, 170153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Enright and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1027–1035 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Beck, A. Jäckle, G. A. Worth and H. D. Meyer, Phys. Rep., 2000, 324, 1–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Meyer, U. Manthe and L. S. Cederbaum, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 165, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
U. Manthe, H. D. Meyer and L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 97, 3199–3213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ben-Nun, J. Quenneville and T. J. Martínez, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5161–5175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ben-Nun and T. J. Martínez, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 7244–7257 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ehrenfest, Z. Phys., 1927, 45, 455–457 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. C. Tully, H. B. Schlegel and M. J. Frisch, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 084106 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, A. Akimov and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2100–2112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tapavicza, G. D. Bellchambers, J. C. Vincent and F. Furche, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18336–18348 RSC .
W. R. Duncan, C. F. Craig and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8528–8543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19240–19249 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, N. J. English and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14238–14248 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Habenicht and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15648–15651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, R. Long, T. Bertolini and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7962–7967 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4008–4014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, A. Furube, K. Yamamoto, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6454–6462 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakade, Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8607–8611 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669–13679 CrossRef .
Y. Nam, L. Li, J. Y. Lee and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5201–5208 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Dillon, J.-B. Joo, F. Zaera, Y. Yin and C. J. Bardeen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1488–1496 RSC .
K. Fujihara, S. Izumi, T. Ohno and M. Matsumura, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 132, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Shi, G. Jia, S. Shen, J. Zhou and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7083–7090 RSC .
M. Xu, Y. Gao, E. M. Moreno, M. Kunst, M. Muhler, Y. Wang, H. Idriss and C. Wöll, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 138302 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Labat, P. Baranek, C. Domain, C. Minot and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 154703 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 133907 CrossRef .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Dozzi, C. D'Andrea, B. Ohtani, G. Valentini and E. Selli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25586–25595 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Elbanna, M. Fujitsuka, S. Kim and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15163–15170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, T. Asahi, H. Masuhara, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3120–3127 CrossRef CAS .
W.-N. Wang, W.-J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414–16417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, B. Kim and Y. K. Kim, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2479–2486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, J. Liu, R. Long, L. Li, L. Guo and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6707–6717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-i. Yamanaka and T. Morikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1286–1292 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Carey and K. P. McKenna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27540–27553 CrossRef CAS .
Á. Morales-García, O. Lamiel-García, R. Valero and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 2413–2421 CrossRef .
A. Sinhamahapatra, H.-Y. Lee, S. Shen, S. S. Mao and J.-S. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mu, J.-M. Herrmann and P. Pichat, Catal. Lett., 1989, 3, 73–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Qiu, M. Miyauchi and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10064–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and X. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 399, 654–662 CrossRef CAS .
L. C.-K. Lu Yang-Ming and H. Chao-Ming, ECS Trans., 2007, 2, 101–107 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, X.-w. Zhang, W.-H. Weng and G.-r. Han, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 7117–7121 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshihara, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Tamaki, M. Murai, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamaki, A. Furube, M. Murai, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1453–1460 RSC .
T. Tachikawa, S. Tojo, K. Kawai, M. Endo, M. Fujitsuka, T. Ohno, K. Nishijima, Z. Miyamoto and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19299–19306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rehman, R. Ullah, A. M. Butt and N. D. Gohar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 170, 560–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, J. Yu, W. Ho, Z. Jiang and L. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3808–3816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khan, J. Xu, N. Chen and W. Cao, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 513, 539–545 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pan, Z. Xuejun, Z. Wenfang, W. Jing and L. Qingju, J. Semicond., 2010, 31, 032001 CrossRef .
L. Jia, C. Wu, S. Han, N. Yao, Y. Li, Z. Li, B. Chi, J. Pu and L. Jian, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 6067–6071 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, X. Wang, M. Yao and X. Yao, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2013, 23, 402–407 CrossRef .
J. Liu, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31175–31183 RSC .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Martins, C. G. Ferreira, A. R. Silva, B. Magalhães, M. M. Alves, L. Pereira, P. A. A. P. Marques, M. Melle-Franco and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Composites, Part B, 2018, 145, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fitri, M. Ota, Y. Hirota, Y. Uchida, K. Hara, D. Ino and N. Nishiyama, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 198, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wen, Z. Tang, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1504–1512 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, X. Jiang, J. Zhao and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 488–515 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Xie, Y. Xiong, Z. Li, Q. Huang, S. Zhang, J. Zhou, R. Liu, X. Gao, C. Chen, L. Tong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700421 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Feng, M. Zhu, C. Ju, B. Zhang, H. Liu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 8921–8932 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Q. Li, C. Yang, X. Ma, Z. Zhang and X. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20947–20955 RSC .
H. Zhang, G. Chen and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5089–5121 RSC .
J. C. Tristão, F. Magalhães, P. Corio and M. T. C. Sansiviero, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 152–157 CrossRef .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4343–4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ranasingha, H. Wang, V. Zobač, P. Jelínek, G. Panapitiya, A. J. Neukirch, O. V. Prezhdo and J. P. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1563–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Fann, R. Storz, H. W. K. Tom and J. Bokor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 13592–13595 CrossRef CAS .
C. Voisin, N. Del Fatti, D. Christofilos and F. Vallée, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2264–2280 CrossRef CAS .
H. Petek, M. J. Weida, H. Nagano and S. Ogawa, Science, 2000, 288, 1402 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Chou, S. Westerberg, Y. R. Shen, P. N. Ross and G. A. Somorjai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 153413 CrossRef .
A. J. Neukirch, Z. Guo and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15034–15040 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. C. Rego and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7989–7997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Abuabara, L. G. C. Rego and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 18234–18242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Á. Valdés, Z. W. Qu, G. J. Kroes, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9872–9879 CrossRef .
Á. Valdés and G. J. Kroes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1701–1708 CrossRef .
A. V. Akimov, J. T. Muckerman and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8682–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jin, M. Wei, T. Chen, H. Ma, G. Liu and Y. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22930–22938 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. D. Lindan, N. M. Harrison and M. J. Gillan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 762–765 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Fischer, W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15483–15491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long, N. J. English and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18892–18900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Yeonsig Nam	Yeonsig Nam is a Ph.D candidate in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University, working in the group of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. His main research interests include charge carrier dynamics in TiO2 nanoparticles using nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulation, and the design of strong ferromagnetic organic magnetic materials. He was a Global Ph.D Fellow in 2016 and is currently a fellow of the POSCO TJ Park Science Fellowship.
Jong Hyeon Lim	Jong Hyeon Lim is a Ph.D candidate in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University, studying in the group of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. His research interests include the understanding of the vibrational Stark effects in water molecules, proton transfer driven by an electric field, electrode materials for Li ion batteries, magnetic properties of inorganic complexes, and TiO2 nanoparticles.
Kyoung Chul Ko	Dr Kyoung Chul Ko obtained a Ph.D degree in Chemistry from Sungkyunkwan University, Korea in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Jin Yong Lee. As a postdoc, he worked with Prof. Francesc Illas at the University of Barcelona, Spain, from 2014 to 2015. Currently, he is working as an Assistant Professor at Chonnam National University. His research interests include the rational design of functional materials, more specifically organic magnetic materials for spintronics and TiO2 materials for photo-catalysts by using DFT methods.
Jin Yong Lee	Prof. Jin Yong Lee has been a professor in Chemistry at Sungkyunkwan University since 2005. He graduated and obtained his Ph.D. (Chemistry) from POSTECH (Korea) in 1997. He worked with David Chandler at Berkeley as a postdoc. He was appointed as an Assistant Professor at Chonnam National University in 2002, and then moved to Sungkyunkwan University in 2005. He was awarded the 2012 Pople Medal by the Asia-Pacific Association of Theoretical & Computational Chemists. His research interests include protein interactions and dynamics, photocatalytic processes of nanoparticles, chemical processes in lithium batteries, organic radicals, graphynes, and 1D and 2D solid materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic process.	 

 	Fig. 2  The calculated band gaps of rutile (○) and anatase (●) TiO2 as a function of % Fock. The linear fitting equations were obtained as Eg = 0.098 × % Fock + 1.762 and Eg = 0.098 × % Fock + 2.009 for rutile and anatase, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  The calculated Ov formation energies for rutile TiO2 as a function of Fermi level for (a) O-poor and (b) O-rich conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2010, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The spin density plots for three solutions for Ov in anatase. (a) Two excess electrons are fully delocalized; (b) one electron is localized and the other one is delocalized; (c) two electrons are localized on three Ti atoms next to the Ov site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  The distribution function calculated from AIMD simulation for the excess electrons from Ov on the reduced rutile TiO2 according to surface layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2010, The American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Wulff-type (a) anatase and (b) rutile TiO2 nanoparticles. (c) The calculated HOMO and LUMO energy levels as a function of n−1.35/3 for anatase (right) and rutile (left) nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Two-dimensional plotted map for band alignment as a function of nanoparticle sizes (left) and the schematic diagram for types of band alignment (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Tentative global minimum energy geometry for (TiO2)n with n = 1–10 obtained from DFT calculation by Berardo et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. DOI: 10.1021/2Fct500787x. Further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Free energy variation against size in terms of the number of TiO2 units for anatase and rutile with (a) hydrogenated, (b) hydrogen-rich, (c) hydrated, (d) hydrogen-poor, and (e) oxygenated surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  SCTB relaxed structures of (TiO2)n with n = 33, 35, 139, 151, 165, and 455. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Plot of inverse electronegativity of dopants as a function of band gap absorption in the corresponding doped catalysts at optimum dopant concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the nanocomposite photocatalytic mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Optimized structures of octahedral (top) and cuboctahedral (bottom) TiO2 nanoparticles. (b) Electron–hole recombination dynamics: the sums of the population of all excited states originating from promoting an electron from the VB into the CB. The solid lines refer to octahedral clusters, while dotted lines refer to cuboctahedral clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Kohn–Sham energy level diagram of pristine TiO2 nanoparticles and reduced (Ti35O69) TiO2 nanoparticles. The triplet state energy levels are for spin-up eigenvalues. The dotted lines indicate the standard redox potential for the hydrogen evolution reaction at pH = 0. The singly occupied and doubly occupied defect states are denoted as blue and green for triplet and singlet states, respectively. Other orbitals are shown in black. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Acid orange 7	UV	Pt–TiO2	0–2.0	2.0
Orange II	Sunset lamp	ZnSO4–TiO2	0–6.0	2.0
Methyl orange	UV	(Pt–TiO2 pillared clay)	0–2.0	0.5
Hydrogen production	
	Be–TiO2	0–4.5	1.25
Mg–TiO2	0–4.5	1.25
Ba–TiO2	0–4.5	2.25
Ca–TiO2	0–4.5	2.25
Sr–TiO2	0–4.5	2.25
Methyl orange	UV	ZnO–TiO2	0–0.5	0.25
Bisphenol A	UV	Ag–TiO2	0–2.0	1.0
Nitride	Visible	Sm3+–TiO2	0–2.0	0.5
Rhodamine B	UV	Zn–TiO2	0–2.0	0.5
Rhodamine B	UV	Cu–TiO2	0–3.0	0.06
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (photoreduction of H+ to H2)
M + nh+ → Mn+ (photooxidation of the mediator)
Mn+ + ne− → M (photoreduction of the mediator)
2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+ (photooxidation of H2O to O2)

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for (a) the direct Z-scheme and (b) indirect (mediator) Z-scheme.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of metal-to-semiconductor charge-separation pathways. (A) Conventional PHET mechanism, (B) DICTT pathway, and (C) the newly demonstrated PICTT pathway. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
2H2O → 2H2 + O2
2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H
2H+ + 2e− → H2
H2O + S → S–HO + H+ + e−	(A)
S–OH → S–O + H+ + e−	(B)
H2O + S–O → S–OOH + H+ + e−	(C)
S–OOH → O2 + S + H+ + e−	(D)

 	Fig. 17  (a) Structures of TiO2/water interfaces. From left, TiO2/H2O, TiO2/OH−, and TiO2/Ti–OH. Light blue, red, and gray balls represent Ti, O, and H atoms, respectively. (b) Total (orange) and projected DOS (PDOS) calculated from G0W0 for TiO2/H2O, TiO2/OH−, and TiO2/Ti–OH (from top to bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Optical absorption spectra for interfaces (a) TiO2/H2O, (b) TiO2/OH−, and (c) TiO2/Ti–OH calculated using the BSE. A–F are some representative excited states at 3.15, 3.79, 3.16, 3.82, 3.30, and 3.84 eV. (d–h) Illustration of the exciton distribution for the states A, B, D, E, and F, respectively, where electrons and holes are represented in blue and green isosurfaces, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 


(110) surface	PW91+U (3 eV)	2.3 eV	
	
Ref. 41

PW91+U (6 eV)	2.8 eV
Bulk	PBE (% Fock = 0)	1.88	2.14	
Ref. 50

PBE (% Fock = 20)	2.97	3.22
PBEx (% Fock = 12.5)	3.65	3.90
PBE0(% Fock = 25)	4.13	4.37
PBE (% Fock = 40)	5.62	5.86
PBE (% Fock = 60)	7.75	8.01
Bulk	PBE0αPBE (α = 14.8, ε∞ = 6.76)	2.76	3.42	
Ref. 55 and 56

Bulk	sX-LDA	3.02	3.17	
Ref. 49 and 58

(101) surface	
	3.11
(001) surface	
	2.76
(110) surface	2.90	





n = 1	B3LYP/LANL2DZ	
	2.64	
	
	
	
Ref. 90 and 91


n = 2	4.89	3.72	
	3.81	
	


n = 3	(TD)-DFT (CAM)B3LYP/def2-TZVP	3.69	2.94	
	3.58	
	
Ref. 92 and 93


n = 4	3.15	3.92	5.08	3.31	4.79	


n = 5	4.54	3.82	
	3.34	
	


n = 6	(CAM)-B3LYP/6-31G(d)	4.53	3.91	
	3.04	
	
Ref. 94


n = 7	3.96	4.10	
	2.88	
	


n = 8	3.58	4.08	4.88	2.88	3.69	


n = 9	3.84	3.98	
	2.99	
	


n = 10	3.58	3.51	
	
	
	


n = 11	3.37	
	
	
	
	


n = 12	3.74	
	
	
	
	


n = 13	2.82	
	
	
	
	


n = 14	3.70	
	
	
	
	


n = 15	2.37	
	
	
	
	


n = 16	3.76	
	4.18	
	3.14	




n = 10	PBEx/NAO light-tier1	∼3.70	∼3.00	
Ref. 51


n = 35	B3LYP/def2-TZVP	3.67	2.46	
Ref. 94


n = 84 (3 nm)	B3LYP/def2-TZVP	3.40	1.91	
Ref. 94


n = 455 (6 nm)	PBEx/NAO light-tier1	3.34	<1.00	
Ref. 51


 	Fig. 19  Excitation and deexcitation process in a system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 1995, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
