Hydroelectric power plant on a paper strip   - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7LC01350G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7LC01350G
(Paper)
Lab Chip, 2018, 18, 1560-1568Hydroelectric power plant on a paper strip†

        
          
            Sankha Shuvra 
            Das
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shantimoy 
            Kar‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Tarique 
            Anwar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Partha 
            Saha
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Suman 
            Chakraborty
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India. E-mail: suman@mech.iitkgp.ernet.in
bAdvanced Technology Development Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721032, India
Received 
      17th December 2017
    , Accepted 17th April 2018First published on 23rd April 2018AbstractWe exploit the combinatorial advantage of electrokinetics and tortuosity of a cellulose-based paper network on laboratory grade filter paper for the development of a simple, inexpensive, yet extremely robust (shows constant performance for 12 days) ‘paper-and-pencil’-based device for energy harvesting applications. We successfully achieve harvesting of a maximum output power of ∼640 pW in a single channel, while the same is significantly improved (by ∼100 times) with the use of a multichannel microfluidic array (maximum of up to 20 channels). Furthermore, we also provide theoretical insights into the observed phenomenon and show that the experimentally predicted trends agree well with our theoretical calculations. Thus, we envisage that such ultra-low cost devices may turn out to be extremely useful in energizing analytical microdevices in resource limited settings, for instance, in extreme point of care diagnostic applications.
Introduction
Throughout the last decade, paper-based microfluidics have caught significant attention for a myriad of applications,1–3 ranging from disease diagnostics,4–6 blood-plasma separation,7 water quality control,8 and food quality monitoring9 to heavy metal ion detection.10 Recent studies show that paper-based microfluidic devices may also be used for probing fundamental phenomena like micro-mixing,11 electro-wetting,12 digital microfluidics13etc. In most of the scenarios, paper-based devices have been utilized for qualitative/semi-quantitative purposes and have been preferred because of their frugality, disposability, and easy manufacturing.14 In recent years, paper-based devices have also been found suitable for energy storage applications e.g. flexible electronics, development of fuel cells etc.15–19
Miniaturization of various bio-electronics and microfluidic-based lab-on-chip devices essentially demands an integrated power source for powering these micro-chips. Towards this end, realizing an alternative source of green energy generation for these microfluidic chips is certainly one of the key concerns. To achieve this feat, many different mechanisms like solar cells,20 dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),21 bio-mass conversion,22 microbial energy harvesting23etc. are extensively explored. Despite the inherent advantages of the aforesaid processes, all the underlying principles have certain limitations like a low conversion efficiency of ∼9–13%, moderate to high fabrication cost, and explicit dependence on substrate specificity (polymeric solar cells, ITO electrodes, porphyrin dyes, biomass, biocatalysts etc.). Moreover, such devices are not intrinsically designed to integrate other functionalities such as point of care medical diagnostics for on-field operations in the same platform. In parallel, electrokinetic energy conversion mechanisms, mediated by the establishment of a streaming potential (i.e. the potential generated due to the continuous transport of electrolytes), has of late emerged to be an effective alternative.24 Recent studies have successfully demonstrated the application of this paradigm, albeit in a sophisticated controllable laboratory environment that cannot possibly be replicated, to cater for the functionalities of point of care devices in resource-limited settings.25–30 In addition, the reported devices on electrokinetic energy conversion necessitate elaborate device fabrication, expensive consumables and trained personnel. Furthermore, these devices not only demand a very intricate operational module, but also do not inherently integrate with low cost analytical platforms (such as paper strips), which eventually makes the entire paradigm expensive.31 In the recent past, nano-porous membranes were utilized to generate streaming potential by applying a pressure gradient across them.32,33 On such nano-porous membranes, it is seen that the conversion efficiency has improved significantly at the cost of consuming a considerable amount of input energy. Furthermore, there have been attempts to exploit the combinatorial effect of capillarity and the associated evaporation towards exploiting electrokinetic energy generation in nano-porous membranes.34,35 However, the sophisticated fabrication and surface treatment of such nano-porous membranes restrict their applications for empowering portable devices in inexpensive settings.
A comprehensive literature review shows that recent endeavors have been directed towards facilitating on-chip power generation. Meng et al. illustrated the concept of an electrochemically induced CO2 bubble driven liquid fuel cell which seems to be useful for continuous fluid flow.36 However, the associated fabrication difficulties and poor performance of the electrode restricts its utilitarian scope for continuous power generation. Arun et al. have demonstrated the use of ‘paper-and-pencil’ based fuel cells for a sustained period of power generation.37 In such a system, graphite electrodes trap atmospheric oxygen and thus act as an internal source of oxygen. However, the process uses formic acid as the fuel and sulfuric acid as the oxidant which confine the scope of the device. Furthermore, performance enhancement of such devices (like microfluidic batteries and triboelectric nanogenerators) requires a coating of different materials, hence the efficiency is often constrained by the thickness of the adsorbed material.38–42
In this work, we explore electrokinetics on a simple ‘paper-and-pencil’ based platform (shown in Fig. 1) as a greener alternative for on-chip energy harvesting. The primary advantages of such a platform are the self-propelling nature of the input flow through exploitation of the intrinsic capillary transport in paper pores (to this end, no syringe pump or equivalent actuation is necessary) and an explicit integrability with paper-based diagnostic platforms for point of care applications. These features empower the device with a favourable functionality in extremely challenging and resource limited settings in an ultra-low cost paradigm. As a consequence, the intrinsic porous capillaries in the paper structure drive a surface tension driven flow that induces ionic advection necessary for the establishment of an electrical potential across the device, resulting in favourable direct exploitation and conversion of surface energy into electrical power.
 Fig. 1  The ‘paper-and-pencil’-based device used for streaming potential measurements. The device dimensions are 1 mm wide and 5 mm long with square inlet and outlet reservoir pads with dimensions of 6 mm × 6 mm. 
We used standard laboratory grade filter paper (Whatman grade 1). We achieved successful harvest of a power of ∼640 pW from a single channel; which is further improved by O (∼) 102 by connecting multiple channels (maximum of up to 20 channels) through a series connection. Our approach delineates a frugal, efficient and yet extremely robust platform for energy harvesting for a sustained duration (up to 12 days) without requiring any sophisticated laboratory environment.
Experimental details
Chemicals
Potassium chloride (Merck Life Science Private Ltd.) and Whatman grade 1 cellulose filter paper (GE Healthcare, UK) are used for the experimentation. Electrolyte solutions are prepared by mixing KCl in Milli Q deionized water (18 MΩ cm).
Device fabrication
Paper channels are fabricated using a photolithography technique similar to the process demonstrated by Mandal et al.43 (schematically delineated in Fig. S1; see ESI†). The hydrophobic coating of the paper leads to blockage (evident from Fig. S2; see ESI†) of the paper pores and therefore the fabricated hydrophobic barrier guides the fluid transportation in a definite direction. To fabricate the graphite electrodes, reservoir pads are sketched using an HB pencil (Fig. S2 in the ESI†). Silver wires (Sigma Aldrich: ≥99.99% trace metal basis, 1.59 μΩ cm at 20 °C) of ∼250 μm diameter are attached to the pencil sketched electrodes using conductive silver paste (Alfa Aesar) for the measurement of the potential. To measure the streaming potential, a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter is connected in parallel with the electrodes. Following the analogy of electrokinetics (i.e. the migration of counter ions in a downstream direction), the higher end of the nanovoltmeter probe is connected to the downstream electrode (outlet reservoir pad) and the lower end is connected to the upstream electrode (inlet reservoir pad). In order to acquire the data continuously from the nanovoltmeter, we used an in-house lab-view code. The details of the experimental and data measurement setup are schematically delineated in Fig. 2. We used a 1 mM KCl solution as the electrolyte throughout the entire course of the investigation (for more details please see Fig. S3 in the ESI,† where the effect of concentration on the induced potential is shown). To eradicate the effect of evaporation, uniform experimental conditions (relative humidity, RH: 50%, temperature: 22–24 °C) are maintained throughout the course of the study.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the experimental setup for measuring the streaming potential on the ‘paper-and-pencil’ platform. The inset shows the inside view of the Faraday box with manual dispensing of the KCl solution on the loading pad of the channel. 
Equivalent electrical circuit
We exploit an analogy of equivalent electrical connections (shown in Fig. 3) for the continuous measurement of streaming potential and output power. The paper channel (i.e. the hydrophilic part of the device) consists of a number of micropores which can be assumed as an array of microchannels. We connect a nanovoltmeter in parallel with the electrodes to measure the open circuit potential. Further, an external resistance (RL) is connected in parallel to the circuit to measure the respective close circuit potential. The inherent presence of the capillary force drives the electrolyte solution to the downstream direction through the micropores with a resistance Rmicropore. Istr is the streaming current that is being generated due to the advection of ions which develops an electrical field due to ion transportation which is known as the streaming potential. This, in turn, induces the conduction current, Ic, acting opposite to Istr. Thus, the open circuit streaming potential for such a system can be calculated as:44 ΔVstro = Z(Istr − Ic)Rmicropore(1)where Z is the number of micropores within the channel area. However, in the case of close circuit conditions it can be calculated as, ΔVstrc = IextRL(2)and Iext = Z(Istr − Ic)(3)
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the equivalent electrical circuit used for the streaming potential and output power measurements. 
Now, the output power (Poutput) can be calculated using the following formula: (4)
Results and discussions
The temporal variation of the induced open circuit potential is shown in Fig. 4. Initial fluctuations can be ascribed to the fact that it is an incomplete circuit (i.e. the fluid is yet to reach the outlet reservoir pad). Once the fluid makes contact with the outlet reservoir electrode, there is a sharp rise in the measured potential, and thereafter it gradually decreases before it reaches a plateau.
 Fig. 4  Temporal measurement of the induced open circuit streaming potential for (a) a 1 mM KCl solution, DI water is used in the control study; and (b) the same channel for six consecutive runs (the inset shows the maximum open circuit potential in each run). 
A fundamental understanding of the microscopic structures of the paper and the subsequent flow characteristics through such a tortuous network is essential to explain the observed behavior of the streaming potential. The overall flow mechanism through paper-based microfluidic devices is fundamentally different from other conventional microfluidic platforms (glass, silicon, and PDMS-based platforms). Due to the presence of inherent capillary action, fluid imbibes through the porous network of the paper matrix, not flowing on top of the surface. Paper is composed of an enormous number of cellulose fibres which are randomly distributed over the entire surface. Due to the presence of free carboxylic acid and hydroxyl groups, cellulose fibres are known to have free negative charges on their surfaces in contact with the KCl solution, which is confirmed by the measured zeta potential (−8.76 ± 0.7813 mV).45
Therefore, due to the generation of an electrical double layer (EDL) on cellulose fabrics (effect of the electrolyte's concentration is illustrated in Fig. S3, please see the ESI†), there will be a surplus of the counter ions in the downstream part of the channel (i.e. towards the direction of flow) which essentially leads to the generation of streaming potential across the two ends of the device (schematically shown in Fig. 5). Interestingly, this occurs at virtually no expense, since the intrinsic porous capillaries in the paper structure essentially drive the surface tension driven flow that induces the advective transport of the ionic species for the establishment of the streaming potential, and no external pumping mechanism such as the syringe pump becomes necessary. Furthermore, the induced potential is certain to be highest at the very initial phase, i.e. when the circuit completes the connection for the first time, and thereafter, the potential is gradually decreasing. From Fig. 4, it is clearly seen that at the very initial phase, the highest potential is measured which is continuously decreasing with time and finally becomes stable for more than 2 hours, which indicates the fact that there is no more significant transportation of ions on the macroscopic scale (i.e. on the microscopic scale, the ions are migrating at an equivalent rate in almost all possible directions).
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the streaming potential generation on cellulose fibres (zoomed view: cellulose threads have –OH and –COOH functionalities). The arrows indicate the direction of flow. 
The temporal variation of the induced potential for the 1 mM KCl solution is illustrated in Fig. 4a (where DI water is used in the control experiment). From Fig. S4 (in the ESI†), it can be inferred that the reproducibility of the measured results differs in different channels which can be accounted from the random distribution of the cellulose fabrics on the paper matrix. Further, in Fig. 4b, experimental reproducibility on the same channel is presented. Initial priming with the KCl solution certainly decreases (as the micropores have already developed an EDL) the initial fluctuation, whilst a similar trend is observed for a sustained period of measurement.
Following the results illustrated in Fig. 4, it is clearly evident that the random distribution of the cellulose network imparts some degree of fluctuation in the measurements (particularly for longer periods of the experiments). In this context, one obvious concern arises: what is the life span of the device? To address this particular concern, we pay attention to understand the life cycle of the device. We perform a cyclic test which consists of 12 hours of continuous measurement followed by ∼10–12 hours of drying the channel prior to the next cycle. The KCl solution (∼50 μl) is dispensed on the loading pad at intervals of one hour.
From Fig. 6, three distinct regimes are observed. Regime 1 (R1) indicates the constant increase of the performance rate of the device for ∼60 hours, whereas R2 indicates almost a constant performance rate for ∼100–110 hours; R3 delineates the attenuation of the performance rate after 110 hours. The highest ΔVstro (measured open circuit potential) obtained was ∼−190 mV at ∼90 hours. So, it is important to note here that the device performance remains the same even after ∼140 hours of continuous operation, which is certainly an additional benefit for long term applications. Furthermore, if we connect the nano-voltmeter probes in the reverse connection mode (depicted in Fig. S5, see ESI†), the polarity of the induced potential changes, which further confirms the effect of the EDL on the observed phenomenon.
 Fig. 6  Cyclic test to investigate the performance of the paper channel with time. 
It is important to mention that Fig. 6 indicates an augmentation in the device performance with the number of usages, followed by a decrement beyond the critical usage. The possible reason for the observed trend in the device performance may be owing to the deposition of KCl on the cellulose fibres, particularly due to the drying out of the electrolyte solution. Due to the crystallization of KCl on the cellulose matrix (in case of repeated usage of the device), the effective pore size gets reduced. This, in turn, enhances the driving pressure gradient induced due to surface tension, which scales inversely with the pore radius. This can be realized from the increment of flow rate (Q) compared to the initial runs (Q varies from 1–2.04 μl min−1 in the initial runs). An increase in flow velocity leads to the enhancement of the advection current and hence a higher induced streaming potential is seen. However, a further increase of usage of the same device results in attenuation of the device performance. This can be explained by the fact that usage beyond a certain number leads to such an extent of KCl deposition which results in physical blockage of the pore to a considerable extent.
In an effort to measure the closed circuit potential, an external load (RL) is connected in parallel to the circuit. The variation of calculated output power against different load resistances is delineated in Fig. 7. The maximum output power for a single channel is measured to be ∼640 pW for an external resistance of 10 MΩ.
 Fig. 7  Variation of output power with respect to different load resistances (connected parallel to the circuit). 
To realize the robustness of the device, it is very essential to perceive the roles of relative humidity (RH) and temperature which influence the evaporation rate and hence the pumping power. To see the effect of temperature at a constant RH of ∼50%, we systematically increase the temperature and observe that the streaming potential increases as we increase the temperature (shown in Fig. 8). Under such a scenario, the device induces a maximum potential of ∼180 mV at 60 °C. An increase in temperature increases the evaporation rate, and hence, enhances the pumping rate to replenish the evaporative loss. This, in turn, leads to a higher induced potential. Hence, this may be exploited favourably when using the device in hot ambient (such as hot summer days) that intrinsically improves the device performance. Such hot ambient conditions are common in field trials of point of care diagnostic devices implemented in rural scenarios of the developing world. On the other hand, to investigate the effect of humidity, experiments are performed under a confinement where the humidity is maintained during the measurements. From Fig. 9, it is evident that the streaming potential decreases as the humidity of the surrounding environment increases. An increase in humidity reduces the evaporation rate which further decreases the induced streaming potential. We obtain a maximum streaming potential of ∼102 mV at 50% RH (the corresponding temperature is 24 °C) and a minimum streaming potential of ∼6.6 mV at 100% RH (the corresponding temperature is 30 °C). Therefore, the device can be very effective at hot and dry locations, which is a typical situation during the summer days in a vast part of the geographical world.
 Fig. 8  Induced open circuit streaming potential with respect to the different temperature conditions. The relative humidity of the ambient atmosphere is constant at ∼47–50%. 
 Fig. 9  Induced open circuit streaming potential with respect to different humidity and their corresponding temperature conditions. 
To further improve the output power, we connect multiple channels (maximum of up to 20 channels) through a series connection (Fig. S6 in the ESI† shows 5 channels; while the supplementary video shows a detailed measurement setup). Fig. 10a shows that the maximum ΔVstro observed is ∼100 mV for a single channel, ∼482 mV for 5 channels, ∼862 mV for 10 channels and ∼2.1 V while 20 channels are in the series connection.
 Fig. 10  Variation of (a) the number of channels in the multichannel array shows the increase of the open circuit potential as the number of channels in the array increases from 1 to 5 to 10 to 20, (the inset shows how the output power differs against the different external loads for 20 channels); and (b) temporal evolution of output power with respect to optimum external load resistance for multichannel array. Inset indicates that at initial time points measured output power is higher while at later phase (∼after 1 hour) it stabilizes to a constant potential value. 
In order to understand the device performance, the output power for a single channel as well as for different channel combinations against different external loads is measured (depicted in Fig. S7, see ESI†). From this device optimization study, it is seen that for the single channel, maximum POutput is seen against 10 MΩ, whereas it is against 20 MΩ, 40 MΩ and 80 MΩ for the 5, 10, and 20 channel combinations respectively. The temporal evolution of the output power for a single channel and multiple channels (measured against the specific external load for which it shows maximum power) appears to be almost constant as seen in Fig. 10(b) for a period of 4 hours. Moreover, the device performance seemed to be excellent for 12 days of measurements (see ESI,† Fig. S8), which indicates the robustness of the device.
Furthermore, to develop a comprehensive understanding of the effect of the relevant geometrical parameters, we investigate the effect of channel dimensions (width and length) on the induced voltage. For a particular channel length (in our case 5 mm), an increase in channel width (W) leads to enhancement of the generated potential (illustrated in Fig. 11). The maximum streaming potential obtained for 3 mm, 2 mm and 1 mm width channels are ∼170 mV, ∼150 mV and ∼100 mV, respectively. An increment in the width leads to the enhancement of capillary density which can be approximately estimated as ∼WΦ1/3/D, where W is the width of the paper channel, D is the pore diameter, Φ is the porosity of the paper.46 A higher channel width (such as 3 mm) corresponds to a higher number of pores which resemble an array of micro-capillaries and thus induce higher streaming potential. Moreover, as the hydrophilic channel is surrounded by a hydrophobic barrier, a channel with a lower width (such as 1 mm) offers a low flow rate due to flow retardation at the channel walls. However, in case of a higher channel width the retardation effect from the hydrophobic barrier is no longer significant and thus the flow rate increases and hence a higher potential.
 Fig. 11  Variation of induced streaming potential with respect to the width of the channel. The length of the channel is 5 mm. 
On the other hand, the effect of the channel length (L) in Fig. 12 illustrates that the streaming potential increases as L increases till 10 mm and then reduces with a further increase in channel length. The highest average streaming potential obtained is ∼175 mV for the L ∼ 10 mm channel. It is observed that for a higher channel length, the rate of capillary filling decreases which subsequently leads to a decrease of the potential value, while the capillary filling time does not get significantly affected between channel lengths 5–10 mm (capillary filling times for 5 mm, 10 mm, 20 mm and 30 mm length channels are ∼15–30 s, ∼45–60 s, ∼250–300 s, and ∼540–585 s, respectively).
 Fig. 12  Variation of induced streaming potential with respect to the length of the channel. The width of the channel is 1 mm. 
To build a theoretical perspective for electrokinetic flows through a porous geometrical structure, such as a paper-based channel, we make some assumptions to simplify the theoretical formalism without sacrificing the underlying physical principle. We assume that the porous structure of the paper is constructed of numerous micro-capillaries which are cylindrical in shape having a radius R (does not vary temporally), and assumed to be arranged in parallel.
Due to the generation of the EDL at the walls of these capillaries, the ζ-potential of ψ0 is developed. To obtain a potential distribution (ψ) across such a single channel, one can employ the Poisson–Boltzmann equation:47 (5)
Here, e is the protonic charge, z is the ionic valence (we consider a z:z symmetry electrolyte for the analysis), n± is the number densities of cations and anions. Now, the electrolyte is transported through the micro-capillary due to a pressure gradient induced by the capillary action. Due to this transport, the total ionic current through a single capillary is given as: (6)where, u± is the velocity of cations and anions. For such a flow in the absence of any externally applied electric field, the total ionic current must vanish (Iionic = 0)48 which leads us to a form of the induced streaming potential given as: (7)(see ESI:† section 9, for the complete derivation of eqn (7)).
From Fig. 13, it is evident that the theoretical predictions considering eqn (7) are quite well in agreement with our experimental findings. The observed minor deviations are attributable to the tortuous structure of the fiber matrix and the alteration of the capillary diameter due to swelling etc., which are not trivial to consider from the perspective of mathematical modelling.
 Fig. 13  Variation of streaming potential with respect to electrolyte concentration (comparison between theoretical and experimental outcomes). 
Prior to conclusion, it is important to summarize the key advantages of the present device as compared to the earlier reported works. A previously reported membrane based electrokinetic generator (which uses external energy for driving the flow through a polymer membrane) provides an open circuit potential of ∼3 mV at 300 kPa, a power density of ∼3.67 W m−2 and a conversion efficiency of ∼46%.32 This induced potential is in the expense of input energy (i.e. significant electrical power is required for pumping the liquid) while the output power is less as compared to its energy consumption. However, the present ‘paper-and-pencil’–based energy harvesting device does not necessitate any external pumping power to drive the flow and entirely relies on capillarity coupled with natural evaporation for driving the liquid. Thus, the output electrical energy is harvested at the expense of the intrinsic surface properties of the device. It generates a maximum open circuit potential of ∼2.1 V (for 20 array channels) as well as an output power of ∼50 nW (for 20 array channels) which overweigh the corresponding values obtained from recently reported evaporation-based electrokinetic energy generation devices (open circuit potential ∼7 mV and output power ∼35 nW).34 Moreover, the reported methods demand sophisticated fabrication techniques for fabrication of capillaries as well as for electrode implantation,34,35 whereas the present technique uses commonly available cellulose paper without necessitating any further surface treatment and a simple pencil-sketched graphite electrode for harvesting the electricity. The striking feature of the proposed technique is that a volume of 50 μl KCl solution can generate power consistently for more than ∼1 hour. To further economize the device, a photolithography technique for fabrication of the paper channels can be substituted with a simple printing-based technique as reported by Dey et al.45
Conclusions
In summary, a simple and frugal ‘paper-and-pencil’ based microfluidic array (on normal laboratory grade filter paper) has been demonstrated to be an efficient energy harvesting platform, having an inherent integrability with a corresponding analytical component (such as point of care diagnostics) of the same platform in an ultra-low cost paradigm. This virtually necessitates no input power that makes it potentially effective in challenging environments for point of care applications as hallmarked by resource-limited settings. The device essentially demonstrates a conceptualization of electrokinetics (streaming potential) in a paper-based microfluidic platform, aided by an intrinsic surface tension driven connective transport of the ionic species through the porous network of the paper matrix. The device with a single channel can develop a maximum output power of ∼640 pW against an external load of 10 MΩ, whilst the maximum open circuit potential is observed as ∼190 mV. Multi-channel microfluidic arrays implemented on the same platform show substantial improvement in the measured output power (enhanced up to ∼50 nW by connecting 20 channels in series, for demonstration). Moreover, we perform a comprehensive study to understand the optimized performance and robustness of the device. A cyclic test using the device revealed that ΔVstro as well as the efficiency increases with the number of uses of the device and shows an almost constant efficiency up to 12 days.
We envisage that these simple power generation platforms will find their application in the development of green batteries and can further be an integrated power source for MEMS-based low powering devices and for self-powering paper-based medical diagnostic platforms that hold the potential of revolutionizing the implementation of point of care diagnostics in resource limited settings.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Sponsored Research and Industrial Consultancy (SRIC) Cell, IIT Kharagpur for the financial support of the ‘Plant on-a-Chip’ project provided through the SGDRI grant. They also gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the IMPRINT Projects coded ‘GDD’ and ‘ENC’, funded by the MHRD, Govt. of India and ICMR, New Delhi. SSD and SK would like to thank Dr. Jayabrata Dhar (postdoctoral fellow, Microfluidics Lab, IIT Kharagpur) for his assistance in developing the theoretical model.
Notes and references
X. Wang, J. A. Hagen, I. Papautsky, X. Wang, J. A. Hagen and I. Papautsky, Biomicrofluidics, 2013, 7, 014107 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Nie, C. A. Nijhuis, J. Gong, X. Chen, A. Kumachev, A. W. Martinez, M. Narovlyansky and G. M. Whitesides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 477–483 RSC .
H. Hwang, S. Kim, T. Kim, J. Park and Y. Cho, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3404–3406 RSC .
J. Hu, S. Q. Wang, L. Wang, F. Li, B. Pingguan-Murphy, T. J. Lu and F. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 54, 585–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Noiphung, T. Songjaroen, W. Dungchai, C. S. Henry, O. Chailapakul and W. Laiwattanapaisal, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 788, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, M. J. Butte and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 1318–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kar, T. K. Maiti and S. Chakraborty, Analyst, 2015, 140, 6473–6476 RSC .
L. J. Loh, G. C. Bandara, G. L. Weber and V. T. Remcho, Analyst, 2015, 140, 5501–5507 RSC .
J. C. Jokerst, J. A. Adkins, B. Bisha, M. M. Mentele, L. D. Goodridge and C. S. Henry, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2900–2907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Ge, S. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yu, J. Huang and S. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 544–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rezk, A. Qi, J. R. Friend, W. H. Li and L. Y. Yeo, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 773–779 RSC .
D. Y. Kim and A. J. Steckl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3318–3323 CAS .
A. A. S. Jafarabadi-ashtiani, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2014, 16, 989–995 CrossRef .
S. Kar, T. Kumar and S. Chakraborty, INAE Letters, 2016, 1, 59–64 CrossRef .
S. Hu, R. Rajamani and X. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 104103, 1–5 Search PubMed .
A. C. Siegel, S. T. Phillips, M. D. Dickey, N. Lu, Z. Suo and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Russo, B. Y. Ahn, J. J. Adams, E. B. Duoss, J. T. Bernhard and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3426–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safdar, J. Jänis and S. Sánchez, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2754–2758 RSC .
J. P. Esquivel, J. R. Buser, C. W. Lim, C. Domínguez, S. Rojas, P. Yager and N. Sabaté, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 442–451 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 CrossRef .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lim, Z. Abdul Manan, S. R. Wan Alwi and H. Hashim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3084–3094 CrossRef CAS .
R. Veerubhotla, A. Bandopadhyay, D. Das and S. Chakraborty, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 2580–2583 RSC .
F. H. J. Van Der Heyden, D. J. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nguyen, Y. Xie, L. J. de Vreede, A. van den Berg and J. C. T. Eijkel, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 3210 RSC .
A. Bandopadhyay and S. Chakraborty, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 043905 CrossRef .
C. Bakli and S. Chakraborty, Electrophoresis, 2015, 36, 675–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gillespie, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1410–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, X. Wang, J. Xue, K. Jin, L. Chen and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 8–11 Search PubMed .
W. Guo, L. Cao, J. Xia, F. Q. Nie, M. Wen, J. Xue, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1339–1344 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. J. Van Der Heyden, D. Stein and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 9–12 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Haldrup, J. Catalano, M. R. Hansen, M. Wagner, G. V. Jensen, J. S. Pedersen and A. Bentien, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1158–1165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bentien, T. Okada and S. Kjelstrup, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1582–1588 CAS .
C. Li, K. Liu, H. Liu, B. Yang and X. Hu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 90, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Meng and C. C. J. Kim, Lab Chip, 2008, 8, 958–968 RSC .
R. K. Arun, S. Halder, N. Chanda and S. Chakraborty, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 1661–1664 RSC .
N. K. Thom, K. Yeung, M. B. Pillion and S. T. Phillips, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 1768–1770 RSC .
H. Guo, M. H. Yeh, Y. Zi, Z. Wen, J. Chen, G. Liu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4475–4482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Dai, Z. Zhao, A. Wang, T. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mao, N. Zhang, Y. Tang, M. Wang, M. Chao and E. Liang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14499–14505 RSC .
S. Jang, H. Kim and J. H. Oh, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13034–13041 RSC .
P. Mandal, R. Dey and S. Chakraborty, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 4026 RSC .
K. Morikawa, K. Mawatari, M. Kato, T. Tsukahara and T. Kitamori, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 871 RSC .
R. Dey, S. Kar, S. Joshi, T. K. Maiti and S. Chakraborty, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2015, 19, 375–383 CrossRef .
S. Hong and W. Kim, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2015, 19, 845–853 CrossRef .
S. Das, S. Chanda, J. C. T. Eijkel, N. R. Tas, S. Chakraborty and S. K. Mitra, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2014, 90, 043011 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mansouri, C. Scheuerman, S. Bhattacharjee, D. Y. Kwok and L. W. Kostiuk, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 292, 567–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7lc01350g‡ Currently working as a postdoctoral research associate in Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The ‘paper-and-pencil’-based device used for streaming potential measurements. The device dimensions are 1 mm wide and 5 mm long with square inlet and outlet reservoir pads with dimensions of 6 mm × 6 mm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the experimental setup for measuring the streaming potential on the ‘paper-and-pencil’ platform. The inset shows the inside view of the Faraday box with manual dispensing of the KCl solution on the loading pad of the channel.	 
ΔVstro = Z(Istr − Ic)Rmicropore	(1)
ΔVstrc = IextRL	(2)
Iext = Z(Istr − Ic)	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the equivalent electrical circuit used for the streaming potential and output power measurements.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Temporal measurement of the induced open circuit streaming potential for (a) a 1 mM KCl solution, DI water is used in the control study; and (b) the same channel for six consecutive runs (the inset shows the maximum open circuit potential in each run).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the streaming potential generation on cellulose fibres (zoomed view: cellulose threads have –OH and –COOH functionalities). The arrows indicate the direction of flow.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cyclic test to investigate the performance of the paper channel with time.	 

 	Fig. 7  Variation of output power with respect to different load resistances (connected parallel to the circuit).	 

 	Fig. 8  Induced open circuit streaming potential with respect to the different temperature conditions. The relative humidity of the ambient atmosphere is constant at ∼47–50%.	 

 	Fig. 9  Induced open circuit streaming potential with respect to different humidity and their corresponding temperature conditions.	 

 	Fig. 10  Variation of (a) the number of channels in the multichannel array shows the increase of the open circuit potential as the number of channels in the array increases from 1 to 5 to 10 to 20, (the inset shows how the output power differs against the different external loads for 20 channels); and (b) temporal evolution of output power with respect to optimum external load resistance for multichannel array. Inset indicates that at initial time points measured output power is higher while at later phase (∼after 1 hour) it stabilizes to a constant potential value.	 

 	Fig. 11  Variation of induced streaming potential with respect to the width of the channel. The length of the channel is 5 mm.	 

 	Fig. 12  Variation of induced streaming potential with respect to the length of the channel. The width of the channel is 1 mm.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 13  Variation of streaming potential with respect to electrolyte concentration (comparison between theoretical and experimental outcomes).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7lc01350g
‡ Currently working as a postdoctoral research associate in Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
