Resolving buried optoelectronic features in metal halide perovskites via modulation spectroscopy studies  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA06484C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06484C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23746-23764Resolving buried optoelectronic features in metal halide perovskites via modulation spectroscopy studies

        
          
            Eric 
            Amerling†
, 
      
        
          
            Kameron R. 
            Hansen†
 and 

        
          
            Luisa 
            Whittaker-Brooks
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. E-mail: luisa.whittaker@utah.edu
Received 
      1st August 2021
    , Accepted 9th October 2021First published on 11th October 2021AbstractAs research on both bulk and low dimensional metal halide perovskites (MHPs) continues to grow, the tools necessary to gain insights into their exotic and highly convoluted optoelectronic features must also expand. Electroabsorption (EA) is a modulation spectroscopy technique that is exceptionally valuable at deconvoluting overlapping spectral features as well as discerning between different electronic environments in semiconductors. This review outlines the critical shortcomings of traditional optical spectroscopy in determining essential properties such as the bandgap and exciton binding energy. We provide a brief overview of the working principles of EA, focusing on the differences between bound and unbound charge carriers that result in unique behavior when interacting with an applied electric field. We discuss key studies highlighting the unique characterization available when coupling EA spectroscopy with traditional steady-state optical tools to investigate interesting and complex optical features in MHPs. We conclude that EA is a crucial tool for pushing the boundaries of our understanding of the optoelectronic properties of MHP thin films. When other optical characterization methods fall short in the richness of data provided, EA can bridge the knowledge gap to provide a complete optoelectronic characterization of novel MHPs and deepen the understanding of current structures and compositions as a function of their structural and morphological dimensionality.Eric AmerlingEric Amerling obtained his PhD from the Chemistry Department at the University of Utah. From 2019 to 2020, he was working at NREL as a DOE SCGSR fellow. His research interests include the structural and optoelectronic properties of low-dimensional materials.Kameron R. HansenKameron R. Hansen is an NSF Graduate Research Fellow in the Chemistry Department at the University of Utah. His research interests are centered on investigating the optical properties of two-dimensional perovskites and transition metal dichalcogenides.Luisa Whittaker-BrooksLuisa Whittaker-Brooks is an Associate Professor of Chemistry at the University of Utah. Her research centers on the design of well-defined hybrid materials with controlled morphology and interfaces that serve as conduits for deterministic and coherent energy and charge transfer for applications in energy conversion, storage, and electronics. She received her B.S. in Chemistry from The University of Panama. Under a Fulbright Fellowship, she received her PhD in Chemistry from the University at Buffalo. She was a postdoctoral researcher at Princeton University under a L'Oréal for Women in Science Fellowship.
Introduction
A feature of metal halide perovskites (MHPs) that is vital to their performance success is their tunable optoelectronic properties.1 However, this flexibility comes at the cost of complexity, both structurally and optically. From an optical perspective, distinguishing between different charge carrier types, continuum vs. excitonic features, or precisely identifying a critical state's energy can be very challenging due to the complex absorption broadening mechanisms which result from the dynamic activity of the MHP lattice.2–4 To properly investigate some of the optical features in MHPs, traditional optical characterization tools such as absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopies must be complemented with more comprehensive optical techniques that can provide fingerprint signatures pertaining to convoluted exciton and bandgap features. Modulation spectroscopy, specifically electroabsorption (EA), yields derivative-like spectral features that provide much richer information on the nature of the absorbing states within semiconducting materials. As such, EA is a powerful tool for the investigation of many different properties in MHP thin film and crystals, including ion migration,5–7 degradation mechanisms,8 charge carrier interactions,9 exciton reduced mass measurements,10 dielectric confinement effects,11 and most commonly, fundamental electronic properties such as exciton binding and bandgap energies.12–22 EA spectroscopy is routinely left out of the toolbox of characterization techniques used to understand materials properties, and we believe it is underutilized within the MHP community.23 This review highlights some of the challenges faced when using traditional optical spectroscopy characterization in the study of MHP materials. We also briefly review the fundamental mechanism of EA spectroscopy and present applications where this tool has been critical for understanding the optoelectronic features of MHPs.
Challenges associated with traditional spectroscopic characterization tools
The accurate determination of the optical properties of MHPs is of paramount importance for their future optoelectronic device applications. Unfortunately, there is considerable variability in the optical properties of MHPs reported in the literature. Tian et al. investigated the effects that the optical technique (ordinary spectrometer, integrating sphere, and a microscopy-based approach), film thickness, surface coverage, and surface scattering have on elucidating the absorption characteristics of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite thin films.24 When comparing the optical technique, the team found that using an ordinary spectrometer to characterize the absorption of MAPbI3 thin films yield significant differences that are highly susceptible to variations in film coverage (Fig. 1A). To circumvent this issue, the authors proposed the standardization of an ordinary spectrometer coupled with an integrating sphere. Such modification significantly increases the band-edge's sharpness by better accounting for scattering effects but grossly flattens the spectra in the UV region of the spectrum. Moreover, it is found that the classic featureless, flat, step-like absorption spectrum of MAPbI3 is strongly dependent on the film quality (coverage, scattering coefficient, and thickness) as opposed to being dependent on the optoelectronic properties of the absorber. For example, as depicted in Fig. 1B, by merely changing the thin film coverage, defined as the ratio of area covered by MAPbI3versus the substrate's total area, it is possible to artificially alter the optical density below 500 nm by almost an order of magnitude. This change in optical density is also found to be heavily dependent on light scattering. Given the likelihood of over/underestimating the absorption properties of MAPbI3 thin films when using traditional absorption spectroscopy, extreme care needs to be taken to account for artifacts that can radically change the shape and location of key optoelectronic features. Therefore, a consistent probe of the optoelectronic features of MHPs is necessary to avoid irreproducibility in photovoltaic device design and efficiency.
 Fig. 1  (A) Absorption spectrum for a MAPbI3 thin film acquired using an ordinary spectrometer, an integrating sphere, and a microscope. Inset: micrographs showing the crystal under investigation. (B) Change in optical density due to coverage ratio (β) of MAPbI3. Reproduced with permissions from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 17, 3466–3470 (ref. 24). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.24 
Given that EA is a modulation-based spectroscopy technique, physical artifacts, such as surface states or reflections, that can adversely affect the extracted optical properties do not impact the measurements acquired using this technique. The misrepresentation of surface states that lead to exotic optical features in MHPs can play a critical role in photovoltaic device design and could lead to device efficiency miscalculations. In the next section, we will highlight challenges in determining specific optoelectronic properties (e.g., bandgap and exciton resonance energy) as they also play an important role in the future of MHP applications.

Determining the bandgap of MHPs. 
The bandgap of a semiconductor (Eg) can be experimentally determined through absorption spectroscopy in a method developed by Tauc in 1966,25 which was further developed by Davis and Mott.26 The Tauc method is based on the relationship:27 (αhν)n = B(hν − Eg)(1)where α is the energy-dependent absorption coefficient, h is the Planck constant, ν is the photon's frequency, B is a constant, and Eg is the bandgap. n accounts for the type of electron transition; for direct bandgaps, n = 2, and for indirect bandgaps, . By plotting a linear fit of the steep bandgap onset of α in a “(αhv)nvs. hv” plot, the bandgap is extrapolated from the x-axis intercept.28,29 However, a few fundamental assumptions are often made that add significant uncertainty to the Eg value extracted for direct bandgap materials. First, electron–hole Coulomb interactions are not taken into account, which, at lower temperatures, can cause an enhancement of α, therefore modifying the steepness of the Eg and the resulting x-axis intercept. Second, defect states and impurities that absorb below the Eg are often neglected. Third, the Tauc method assumes a parabolic-like band structure shape that is valid only at minimum energy,  ≈ 0, which is not applicable at high excitation energies (hv ≫ Eg) or in certain types of crystal structures.29,30 Lastly, MHPs often exhibit above-gap absorption peaks which arise from the exciton's continuum of states overlapping with secondary VB/CB band minima.31 When present, these peaks obfuscate the band-to-band transition and render the Tauc method ineffective. Thus, when selecting and justifying the region for linear fit analysis for constructing a Tauc plot from the absorption spectra, one must assign the area of the spectrum that will most accurately represent the absorption onset, which is often non-trivial. This can be seen in the Tauc plot constructed from the absorption of butylammonium lead iodide [(CH3(CH2)3NH3)2PbI4; also known as (BA)2PbI4] thin films displayed in Fig. 2. This spectrum contains two dominant features i.e., the exciton peak at 2.43 eV and the absorption edge onset beginning at ∼2.60 eV. The dotted linear regression lines represent the fits of three different regions. The red line fits well (R2 = 0.99) to the upper portion of the absorption onset, while the green line fits well (R2 = 0.99) to the lower portion of the absorption onset. The blue line has the poorest fit (R2 = 0.92) along the middle part of the absorption onset. The labelled energies are the X-intercepts, representing the predicted bandgap from the Tauc plot. By selecting different linear regions based on the absorption onset, the extrapolated Eg value varies by 0.22 eV. This is an issue that does not have a robust fundamental solution and the choice of the linear region is commonly placed on the individual researcher.
 Fig. 2  Tauc plot for (BA)2PbI4 thin films with three distinct regions chosen for linear fit analysis. 
Another source of error in analyzing the absorption features using a Tauc plot is the lack of “sharpness” in the absorption edge. In thin film samples, low energy sub-gap states cause large, exponential tails in the absorption, known as Urbach tails.32,33 Urbach tails are indicative of structurally disordered, amorphous, or poorly crystalline phases within a thin film and are common in MHPs.34 Similarly, surface roughness can cause significant scattering errors in the absorption edge onset location and, therefore, adversely affect how the resulting plot is analyzed. Finally, Tauc plots do not account for the overlap of excitonic features and band-to-band transitions.12,28 In polycrystalline MHP thin films, exciton absorption resonances can be strongly broadened, especially at room temperature, and are often merged with the continuum states in the absorption due to surface artifacts and phonon scattering.35 This significantly complicates the accurate determination of Eg in MHPs.12,36 While the Eg of an MHP determines the range of light that can be utilized in a photovoltaic device, the exciton binding energy determines whether excited charges exist as bound excitons or free carriers at room temperature. This exciton binding energy factor has considerable implications on the function of solar cell devices. The following section will discuss how the exciton binding energy value is determined with traditional optical spectroscopy and how it could be miscalculated.


Determining the exciton binding energy of MHPs. 
When a photon with energy equal to or higher than the bandgap is absorbed in a semiconductor, an electron–hole pair, or exciton, is typically formed. This quasiparticle is held together by attractive Coulomb interactions determined by the dielectric environment surrounding the exciton and is known as the exciton binding energy (Eb).37,38 The Wannier–Mott exciton model, which is generally the model accepted for explaining charge carrier interactions in 3D MHPs, is described by the nth excitonic resonance (En) in terms of the hydrogen model: (2)where Eg is the bandgap, Ry is the Rydberg energy constant, and n* is the excitonic level. Ideally, Eb can be experimentally measured by resolving the energy separation of the Rydberg series (n = 1, 2, etc.) in the absorption spectrum.36 However, even for high quality MHP single crystals at cryogenic temperatures, the exciton absorption resonances are significantly broadened and cannot be accurately resolved. Thus, Eb is often determined by: Eb = Eg − Eres(3)where Eres is the 1 s exciton resonance energy. In traditional optical spectroscopy experiments, surface artifacts, photo reabsorption, and microstructure in MHP thin films contribute to spectral broadening and the appearance of several peak shoulders that further complicate the determination of the Eg and Eres energies.37 Given the challenges associated with determining Eg and Eres, Eb is often wrongfully assigned in MHPs. A case in point is the significant disparity in the experimental Eb value reported in the literature for MAPbI3, which has sparked a heated debate in the photovoltaics community as to whether charge carriers in MHP are primarily bound electron–hole pairs or free electrons (or holes) at room temperature.4,10,12,39–42 Many researchers have explored this open-ended uncertainty using traditional steady-state absorption spectroscopy and have determined that the Eb values range from 5–30 meV at room temperature.18,43 The optical methods used to determine Eb values rely on gathering indirect results obtained from inadequate fitting procedures which assume homogenous linewidth broadening of a Gaussian exciton peak in the absorption spectra.44 An alternative method, such as magneto-absorption, provides consistent and reproducible results only at cryogenic temperatures. This is because magneto-absorption does not have the resolution needed to distinguish between band-to-band transitions and exciton interactions at room temperature.36,37,45 Furthermore, magneto-absorption relies on a hydrogenic model (eqn (2)) which should be treated as an approximation for MHPs. In contrast, EA spectroscopy can provide sensitive and sharp spectral features at critical points in the density of states that allow for model-independent determination of Eg and Eres.46 For example, in MAPbI3, the sensitivity of the EA line shape to the curvature of the dielectric function allowed for a measurement of Eb = 7.4 meV at room temperature.10 Given that the separation between Eg and Eres is less than the thermal energy kBT ∼25 meV at room temperature, it is understandable that traditional spectroscopies would fail to obtain an accurate measurement. This small binding energy is one of the fundamental attributes of MAPbI3 that allows it to perform so well when incorporated into photovoltaic devices compared to other solution-processed semiconductors such as organic semiconductors or inorganic quantum dots.

EA spectroscopy: working principles
In an EA experiment, the absorber layer within a thin film device is subjected to an externally applied AC voltage. The voltage can be applied in a lateral or perpendicular orientation with respect to the substrate. Because the applied voltage per unit area required to modulate the dielectric function (ε) can be tens of kilovolts per square centimeter, factors such as Joule heating must be taken into account to avoid sample degradation. To minimize thermal effects due to Joule heating, various EA studies have resorted to the use of patterned interdigitated electrodes where the distance between electrodes can be modified on the order of tens of microns.19,47,48
EA spectroscopy measures the change in absorption (ΔA) in the presence of an applied external field as per the following equation: ΔA(E) = Afield(E) − Ano field(E)(4)where E is the photon energy and A(E) is defined as: A(E) = −log10(T(E))(5)where T(E) is the transmittance. From a physical point of view, when an electric field is applied to a material, the charge densities and dipoles within the material shift and reorient, hence modifying the nuclear configuration and ultimately the electronic structure. Solving for the field-induced energy shifts of the absorbing states is clearly outside the scope of analytical solutions, and therefore, the analysis of the EA spectra is divided into two broad categories of approximations based on the type of absorbing state that is being modulated, i.e., bound or unbound states, as discussed below.

Bound states. 
When an electronic state's binding energy is much greater than the perturbation of the applied field, as is the case for tightly-bound excitons or molecular orbitals, a perturbation theory approach is valid. In such cases, the small change in energy (ΔE) caused by the applied electric field is determined by the relative change in polarizability (Δα) and dipole moment (Δμ) for an electronic transition from the ground state to an excited state. Modulation of a tightly-bound state results in linear and quadratic Stark shifts proportional to Δμ and Δα, respectively, as described by Stark theory: (6)where F is the applied electric field.49–51 The change in transition dipole moment (Δμ) can be thought of as the amount of charge-transfer associated with an optical transition, whereas the polarizability represents the transition's sensitivity to an applied field. Assuming the states are tightly bound, the applied field can be treated as a small perturbation and the EA signal (ΔA) can be approximated by a Taylor-series expansion around a small ΔE:14,52 (7)
In an isotropic material, the transition dipole moments are randomly oriented and therefore the first term, which is dependent on the field direction, averages to zero. Thus, the experimentally observed EA spectrum scale in amplitude according to the applied field square (F2) and resemble first and second derivatives of the absorption spectrum.
Analysis of the EA line shape allows one to interpret the fundamental characteristics of the bound electronic states that are being modulated by the electric field. Bublitz and Boxer described the relationships between the first and second derivatives of the absorption and EA spectra for tightly bound charges through the Stark effect as illustrated in Fig. 3.49 These relationships were initially derived for molecular systems, such as donor/acceptor π-conjugated systems, but can be applied to any system with discrete absorption bands.14,53,54 In a system with randomly oriented electric dipole moments (μ) with respect to the applied electric field (F), the absorption of that transition is broadened. For example, if a sample contains two different orientational subpopulations, the electronic transitions will be shifted differently depending on their dipole direction (Fig. 3A). In the presence of an electric field, the subpopulations will shift to higher or lower energies. An ensemble of randomly distributed transition dipole moments will therefore broaden the absorption (Fig. 3B) and the EA spectrum correspondingly resembles the second derivate of absorption (Fig. 3C). Examples of absorption features with large Δμ values are molecular states with large dipole moments, charge-transfer excitons, and excitons with asymmetric charge density due to morphological disorder such as defects or amorphous grains.55 Conversely, a field-induced dipole due to a state's polarizability (Δα) is always aligned with the applied field, as shown in Fig. 3D. Therefore, rather than broadening the absorption, the difference in polarizability between the two states, Δα, uniformly redshifts the absorption to a lower energy according to the quadratic Stark effect (Fig. 3E) resulting in a first derivative line shape, as shown in Fig. 3F. Examples of systems that experience a quadratic Stark effect are polarizable molecules and Wannier excitons. A Stark shift of the latter is formally analogous to the hydrogen atom's Stark shift and is one of the few systems for which EA spectrum has been solved theoretically.56
 Fig. 3  (A) Interaction of an applied electric field with two different orientations aligned with and against the field. (B) Corresponding band broadening and (C) resulting change in absorption. (D) Interaction of an applied electric field on a transition that has a change in polarizability. (E) Peak with (red) and without (black) an applied electric field. (F) Resulting EA spectrum due to a change in polarizability. 
The EA response of a bound state includes another phenomenon worthy of mention that is not accounted for by eqn (7), that is field ionization. When an applied field ionizes a bound state, the state's lifetime decreases and its spectra correspondingly broadens according to the time-energy uncertainty principle. Fortunately, a second derivative line shape due to field-ionization can usually be distinguished from one caused by a large Δμ with careful consideration of the absorption band in question. First, broadening due to field ionization of a bound state below a continuum (such as an exciton) will be asymmetric, as the state will favor ionization into the conduction band.57 Second, the likelihood of observing field ionization can be readily determined by comparing the applied field strength to the binding energy of the state in question. In the case of an exciton, this is most aptly done by calculating the ionization field (FI), or the field required to create a potential drop of 1 EB across the exciton's radius (aB): FI = EB/|e|aB(8)
The value of FI is on the order of ∼106 V cm−1 for 3D MHPs,10 but is on the order ∼108 V cm−1 for 2D MHPs. Since experimental fields are typically on the order of 106 V cm−1, a contribution of spectral broadening due to field ionization is expected in 3D MHPs, but far less likely in 2D MHPs.
Lastly, when considering low-dimensional systems such as multiple quantum wells or quantum dots, there is another relevant effect that must be considered when the field is applied in the direction of quantum confinement, namely, the quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE). Similar to the quadratic stark effect, the shift in energy due to the QCSE is negative and scales with the field strength squared. As a result, the exciton resonance redshifts and the EA line shape has a first derivative shape that scales quadratically with field strength.
At the conduction band-edge, however, the continuum states are not bounded and a fundamentally different approach is needed to understand these spectral features.


Unbound states. 
For unbound states, the EA signal response is described by the Franz Keldysh (FK) effect.15,17,19,58 In brief, due to the fact that unbound continuum states are free to accelerate along field lines, the Bloch states turn to Airy states. The EA spectrum oscillates according to an Airy function with an argument that is the electron's kinetic energy E − Eg normalized by an electro-optic energy, ℏθ, as follows: (9) (10)where E is the photon energy, Eg is the bandgap, μ is the reduced mass at the band-edge.10,59–61 While the EA spectrum should resemble a derivative-like line shape in the exciton region, the spectrum oscillates according to the form of the Airy function above the band edge where electrons are excited into the conduction band continuum, as depicted in Fig. 4A and B. Exactly at the band-edge the Airy state leaks into the forbidden gap, creating a unique interband oscillatory period that smoothly transitions into the FK oscillations. These above-gap FK oscillations broaden proportional to ℏθ ∝ F2/3 and increase in amplitude proportional to . This field-dependent behavior makes such features easily discernible from the Stark-shifted exciton states below the bandgap, which exhibit field-invariant line shapes and amplitudes that scale quadratically with ∝F2. Herein lies the effectiveness and the scientific beauty of EA spectroscopy. By a simple determination of the power-relation between EA amplitude and applied field strength, EA spectroscopy can be easily used to distinguish between bound and unbound states.
 Fig. 4  (A) Cartoon representation of the effect an applied field has on bound states, such as excitons below the bandgap which are governed by the Stark effect, or unbound continuum states above the bandgap, governed by FK oscillations. Exactly at the band edge, the continuum wavefunction leaks into the gap, creating an interband feature in the EA spectrum. (B) The resulting difference (EA) spectrum. When overlapping exciton states and continuum states are present, it can be useful to plot the amplitude of the EA signal vs. Fγ to help differentiate mixed optoelectronic states. As discussed, excitons scale linearly to γ = 2, whereas continuum states scale linearly to γ = 1/3. 
In traditional low defect semiconductors, such as GaAs, clear FK oscillations have been resolved for multiple oscillatory periods spanning a wide spectral range of ∼0.5 eV.62 However, observing FK oscillations in MHPs has been proven to be challenging.10,12,63 Various factors affect FK oscillations, such as energy-dependent broadening effects, surface effects, non-uniform modulation, non-flatband modulation, photovoltage effect, and Coulomb effects.59 Heesel et al. demonstrated that electron–hole Coulomb interactions in GaAs, even at fields as high as 30 kV cm−1, can decrease the amplitude of FK oscillations by a factor of 2.64 Therefore, it is not surprising that FK features are weak in the highly ionic MHPs lattice wherein electron–phonon scattering events frequently occur.65,66 These scattering events disrupt the wavefunction coherence required to distinguish multiple FK oscillations; hence, experimentally, only the first oscillation is typically observed.67–71 The contribution of the FK effect to the EA signals remains a topic of open debate. We believe the debate could be easily addressed if there were more efforts devoted to developing theoretical models that could help describe convoluted FK oscillation features in MHPs.
The EA response above the bandgap has a different behavior when the perturbation of the applied field is much smaller than the material's homogenous broadening function, Γ. In the low-field limit, when , the EA signal relates to changes in the complex dielectric function (Δε) through a proportionality constant called the Seraphin coefficient (a), as follows: ΔA ≈ aΔε(11)
Furthermore, in such a low-field regime, Δε(E) (and therefore the EA signal) simplifies to a third-derivative line shape of the complex dielectric function ε(E) as follows:59,72,73 (12)where E is the photon energy and F is the applied field. Combining (11) and (12), it becomes clear that EA and ellipsometry are powerful complimentary techniques for the low-field regime. Ellipsometry provides the complex dielectric function ε(E) which can then be fit to the EA signal to obtain ℏθ. Further modelling can yield accurate measurements of the exciton binding energy that would otherwise be inaccessible due to the material's large broadening function and overlapping spectral features.10
In summary, a quick visual inspection of the line shape of the EA spectra, when compared to the numerical derivative, can provide insight into the optoelectronic characteristics of the carriers affected by the electric field. There are usually two observed features for MHPs possessing excitons with high binding energy and continuum states in quantum well-like crystal lattices: a Stark shift of the exciton below the bandgap and an FK-type oscillation at the band-edge.74 In confined, low dimensional MHPs, the first derivative-like line shape is often typical of 1 s excitons with large binding energies whose ionization fields are much larger than the applied electric field.15,17,19,58 Changes in polarizability (Δα) can be interpreted as an electron distribution response to an externally applied electric field.75 When charge carriers or excitons are polarizable Wannier excitons, as they are in 2D layered MHPs, the Δα is large and a first derivative EA line shape is expected. Second derivative line shapes corresponding to a large transition dipole moment (Δμ) are expected if the bound state is a charge-transfer exciton, has a disorder-induce dipole moment, or is significantly ionized. Finally, third derivative line shapes and coherent oscillations are both descriptors that the excited state is a delocalized continuum.17,47,76 Critical points in the absorption spectrum (such as exciton or bandgap transitions) can be difficult to deconvolute when they overlap. In EA spectroscopy, these features cause unique derivative-like curves in the modulated EA spectrum, therefore allowing for their separation and characterization.


Critical points. 
EA spectroscopy has the advantage of providing extremely sharp spectral signatures related to localized and delocalized states due to the elimination of optical scattering and background absorption from broad neighboring critical points.10,36,46 Critical points (also known as Van Hove singularities) are singularities in the density of states. They are observed physically in the absorption spectrum as features such as exciton or bandgap transitions.77 Analyzing MHPs using optical techniques such as ellipsometry or reflection spectroscopy are known to be detrimentally affected by scattering and background absorption; therefore, they require complex surface state analysis to accurately interpret the data.78–81 For example, given that in MAPbI3, the exciton binding energy is reported to be less than thermal energy; therefore, the exciton and bandgap will have considerable spectral overlap. This means that a discrete excitonic peak cannot be resolved, even at low temperatures.82 In EA spectroscopy, the exciton peak's discrete location is either at the zero crossings, for the first and second derivative features, or at the peak, for the third derivative features. The relationship of localized carriers (i.e., excitons) vs. delocalized carriers (i.e., free carriers in the continuum) behave differently when subjected to an electric field. Even when the bandgap and exciton features spectrally overlap closely in steady-state absorption spectroscopy, they can be easily distinguished using EA spectroscopy. This makes EA spectroscopy a superior technique for determining the near-edge optical properties of semiconductors.83,84

Case studies
The following sections discuss key studies chosen to highlight the breadth of unique characterization available when coupling EA spectroscopy with traditional steady-state optical tools to investigate complex optical features in MHPs.

Comprehensive optical characterization of 2D layered MHPs. 
Low dimensional MHPs consist of naturally forming quantum wells that have alternating organic and inorganic sheets. Given the strong quantum confinement of charge carries arising from the dielectric constant mismatch between the alternating organic and inorganic layers, MHP quantum well heterostructures exhibit unique optoelectronic properties such as large exciton binding energies (>100 meV), tunable bandgaps, strong spin–orbit coupling, and giant Rashba splitting close to the extrema in the valence and conduction bands.47,85–88 Through a combination of photoinduced absorption, EA spectroscopy, and theoretical studies, Zhai et al., were able to extract delicate absorption features from a broad absorption background using the modulated EA spectrum for phenethylammonium lead iodide [(C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4; also known as PEPI] thin films. Fig. 5A depicts the crystal structure for PEPI. Here, the organic (C6H5C2H4NH3+) and inorganic [PbI6]4− layers naturally arrange to form a 2D layered structure comprising multiple quantum wells with a thickness of ≈1 nm (organic layer, also known as the barrier) and ≈0.6 nm (inorganic layer, also known as the well), respectively. Fig. 5B shows that the photoluminescence (PL) and absorption features in PEPI are dominated by a strong exciton peak around 2.4 eV. The absorption spectrum has an additional broad onset feature that slowly rises, starting around 2.6 eV, which appears to be related to the bandgap. However, it is challenging to precisely identify the bandgap energy and assign the origin of buried features from this absorption plot. There is no sharp absorption onset that a Tauc plot can be applied to, and again, the results would vary significantly depending on the region chosen in the linear regression.
 Fig. 5  (A) Crystal structure, (B) room temperature optical absorption (red) and photoluminescence emission spectra (black) for PEPI thin films. Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19 
As validated by the studies performed by Zhai et al., EA spectroscopy studies were proven to be a viable route for elucidating the precise nature of the optical properties of PEPI.19 The temperature-dependent absorption and low-temperature (10 K) electroabsorption spectra are presented in Fig. 6A and B. Even at low temperatures, where absorption features often sharpen, there is insufficient information in the absorption spectra to confidently assign the different exciton absorption transitions (Fig. 6A). When comparing the absorption data to the EA data, the forte of the latter technique is easily realized. As depicted in Fig. 6B, the EA spectrum is divided into two distinct regions, i.e., excitonic features behaving in accordance with the Stark effect and band-edge features following the FK effect.47,74,89 The 1 s exciton is strongly perturbed within the electric field, showing a first derivative-like curve that crosses zero at 2.38 eV. This is consistent with a Stark shift of a highly localized state, resulting in a redshift in the presence of an applied electric field. From the absorption studies, the broad step-like feature near 2.6 eV may be assigned as the Eg for PEPI. However, this may be improperly assigned given that differentiating between the 2 s exciton and the Eg is nearly impossible when using conventional absorption characterization tools. In the EA spectrum, the 2 s and Eg are differentiated critical points, but separating exciton vs. continuum states requires the electric-field dependence to be properly established. Furthermore, as stated previously, the Stark effect scales quadratically with the applied electric field in the form of voltage (V). By comparing the EA amplitude to V2, Zhai et al. were able to differentiate excitonic and continuum features (Fig. 6C–E). The EA amplitudes at 2.36 eV, 2.40 eV, and 2.48 eV were all plotted against V2. Here, a linear relationship is shown, indicating the modulation of localized states that can be assigned to excitons.
 Fig. 6  (A) Temperature-dependent absorption for PEPI thin films. (B) EA spectra measured at 45 K at field strengths ranging from 50 to 325 V. (C–E) V2 dependence of EA amplitude of features below the interband transition edge. Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19 
Evidence of FK oscillations in MHPs is not common because these oscillations are dampened by crystal defects, grain boundaries, and other non-uniformities.59 However, some 2D MHPs self-assemble into highly-oriented quantum well structures that, due to their anisotropic nature, their EA profile shows clear evidence for the existence of FK oscillations with a sufficiently high applied electric field. As previously discussed, FK oscillations are observed experimentally in EA spectroscopy when the −ΔT/T vs. photon energy spectra as a function of increasing applied voltage do not converge at zero. Instead, the EA features broaden with increasing voltage and the zero-crossing points split apart in energy, highlighted in Fig. 7A near the labeled point “c”. This is in stark contrast to the 1 s exciton derivative feature where all voltages share a common zero-crossing. In Fig. 7B, the labeled point “c” represents the multiple zero crossings and “d” the blueshift that increases with the applied electric field. Zhai et al. confirmed that these features are not derived from the Stark effect by plotting the amplitude vs. V2, shown in the inset, where there is an apparent deviation from the linear relationship at high applied field strengths.
 Fig. 7  (A) EA spectra for PEPI thin films highlighting the Franz Keldysh (FK) oscillations. “c” represents the zero crossing; “d” denotes the blueshift caused by the oscillations. (B) Highlighted regions centered around 2.65 eV. “a”, “b”, “c” and “d” represent the zero-crossing energies and peak positions, respectively. Inset shows V2 dependence of exciton features that saturate at high voltage. (C) Energy differences showing V2/3 dependence. (D) Energy levels of the excitons (E1s and E2s), bandgap (Eg), interband transition, and binding energy (Eb). Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19 
To test if the features around 2.7 eV are from the bandgap modulation, both zero crossings (ΔEac) and peak location (ΔEbd) were plotted against F2/3 (Fig. 7C). The resulting linear relationship confirms that this feature lies above the band edge; therefore, the oscillatory period which precedes it was assigned as an interband feature associated with the continuum wave-function leaking into the forbidden gap. Pinpointing the exact bandgap energy within this interband oscillatory period requires careful consideration of the system in question and often requires modelling. In accordance with FK theory on 3D direct-gap semiconductors, Zhai et al. decided to assign the first peak of the IB feature as Eg.19 Thus, from the EA spectrum for PEPI at 50 K, Zhai et al. were able to assign Eg, 1 s, and 2 s excitons and their respective binding energies, resulting in the schematic depiction of a full electronic energy level diagram (Fig. 7D). A recent study by Hansen et al. analyzed the EA spectrum of the same material, but complemented the measurement with sophisticated modelling of a 2D Wannier exciton in a uniform electric field (or the high-field Franz–Keldysh effect).90 By doing so, the authors were able to pinpoint the bandgap energy with high confidence within the IB feature and improve upon Zhai et al.'s measurement, resulting in an extremely precise exciton binding energy measurement of 223 ± 3 meV for PEPI.90 Thus, it is clear that the interpretation of some EA features, such as exciton Stark shifts in this case, are more straightforward than others such as the IB feature. In some instances, modelling the EA signal according to low- or high-field Franz–Keldysh effects is necessary for quantitative analysis of the EA spectrum as the IB feature could be mistaken as the ionization of the 2 s exciton state.


Derivative line shape analysis. 
Tanaka et al. investigated the optical features of a similar 2D MHP material, namely hexylammonium lead iodide ((C6H13NH3)2PbI4) via EA spectroscopy. The authors used derivative line shape analysis to show the multiple discrete peaks below the band edge arise from a quadratic Stark shift of the 1 s exciton and its corresponding phonon sidebands. Fig. 8 depicts the absorption and EA spectra acquired at 5 K. By analyzing the absorption data in Fig. 8A, the 1 s exciton resonance can be clearly assigned at 2.34 eV with associated phonon sidebands around 2.40 eV. However, from this data, it is not clear where the band gap energy is within the broad step-like feature. From the EA spectra provided in Fig. 8B, Tanaka et al. acquire considerably more information about the optical features for the 2D MHP system, particularly at higher energies. In the EA spectrum, a large interband feature appears around 2.60 eV, associated with wavefunction leaking into the forbidden gap. By plotting the EA features' amplitude at 2.34 eV and 2.60 eV, they observe both the exciton and the interband features have quadratic dependence with applied field (Fig. 8C).
 Fig. 8  (A) Absorption spectrum of (C6H13NH3)2PbI4 thin films. (B) Electroabsorption spectrum under applied fields ranging from 14.2 kV cm−1 to 36.4 kV cm−1. (C) Linear relationship between the amplitude of EA peaks and the applied field squared. Reproduced with permission from Solid State Commun., 2002, 122, 249–252 (ref. 15). Copyright 2002 Elsevier.15 
By performing the line shape analysis, Tanaka et al. show a near-identical match between the EA spectrum and the first derivative of the absorption spectrum in the excitonic region as shown in Fig. 9A. Provided instrumental corrections are accounted for, the scalar relationship between these two spectra can used to measure the exciton's polarizability according to eqn (7). Indeed, it was this strong first derivative response that first alerted researchers to the highly polarizable Wannier-exciton nature of excited states in 2D MHPs. In another complimentary study, Tanaka et al. compared this in-plane EA spectrum to its out-of-plane counterpart, i.e., with an applied field perpendicular to the quantum well layers.17 The anisotropy between the two directions was the first clear demonstration of the excited state's two-dimensional character, highlighting the historical importance of EA in elucidating the fundamental nature of excited states in 2D MHPs and other multiple-quantum well systems.91,92 As shown in Fig. 9B, the second derivative of the bandgap's step-like absorption is coincidentally the same line shape as the interband feature. However, to evaluate this portion of the spectrum according to eqn (7) for bound states would be incorrect since the absorbing state is an unbound continuum in the conduction band. This example highlights the importance of using absorption and EA as complementary techniques. Knowing that the step-like absorption feature corresponds to an unbound band-to-band transition helps one avoid an incorrect assignment of the second derivative feature to a broadened bound state.
 Fig. 9  (A) EA spectrum (solid line) and first derivative of absorption (dashed line) of the 1 s exciton and its phonon sidebands. (B) EA spectrum (solid line) and second derivative of bandgap's step-like absorption (dashed line) which coincidentally has the same functional form as the interband EA feature. Reproduced with permission from Solid State Commun., 2002, 122, 249–252 (ref. 15). Copyright 2002 Elsevier.15 


Investigating ion migration in MHPs upon perturbation of the internal electric field. 
EA experiments are conducted by applying an AC voltage to an MHP thin film. If there is an internal field due to a change in charged ion distribution in a sample, this will be seen as a reduction in the EA amplitude. This is because the quadratic Stark shift relates the local electrostatic field in the MPH layer to the quadratic field dependence (F2).93 Therefore, the square root of the EA signal can provide a direct measurement of the electrostatic field and be used to monitor any buried optical changes. Kim et al. cleverly leveraged this relationship to understand the ion migration properties of MAPbI3:BAI (BAI = butylammonium iodide) thin films as potential active layers for LED applications.7
Investigating ion migration effects in their samples was spurred by their findings that at low current densities (>10 A cm−2), the external quantum efficiency (EQE) had a strong dependence on the time of the pulsed optical bias; however, in DC (non-pulsed) operation, their EQE was significantly lower. They proposed that this behavior was linked to ion migration within the MHP layer because I− drift occurs on time scales of milliseconds to seconds.94,95 If ion migration occurs, then the internal electric field would change due to charge redistribution. When the authors increased the optical pulse duration, the EQE ideality factor (η) dropped from η ≈ 2.2 to η ≈ 1.6. The η value provides insight into the type of recombination that is occurring within the diode architecture. This difference suggests that the diode shifts from being dominated by trap-mediated recombination to a more radiative bimolecular recombination, which would be linked to ion migration.
To determine if there were an internal electric field change due to ion migration, Kim et al. performed static and time-dependent EA studies on MAPbI3:BAI thin films. As depicted in Fig. 10A, the EA signal of the MAPbI3:BAI diode is used as an indicator of the external electric field. In Fig. 10B, the time-dependent EA signal (at 730 nm) in response to a 10 ms voltage pulse mirrors the applied voltage, concluding that ion migration is not occurring on that time scale. However, the response changes drastically when the applied voltage time is increased to 2 s (Fig. 10C). The EA signal decays strongly, indicating that the applied field is internally screened on a 0.5 s time scale due to ion movement within the MAPbI3 layer. Ion migration in MHPs has been both detrimental, causing large hysteresis effects in photovoltaic devices,96 and advantageous, opening the possibility for memory devices based on ion motion.97,98
 Fig. 10  (A) EA of a device based on a MAPbI3:BAI thin film in a reverse bias of −2 V with a 0.8 V dither at 389 Hz. (B) Transient EA response resulting from a 10 ms period square wave signal oscillating between +2 V and −2 V. (C) Transient EA response resulting from a 2 s period square wave signal oscillating between +2 V and −2 V. Reproduced with permissions from Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4893 (ref. 7). Copyright Springer Nature 2018.7 


Quantifying phase heterogeneities in low dimensional MHPs. 
EA spectroscopy can be used to deconvolute intra-material optical properties, such as phase heterogeneities of MHP quantum wells. Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase metal halide quantum wells have the generic formula , where A′ is a bulky spacer cation that serves as the barrier layer, A is an organic cation that serves as the well layer, B is a metal center, and X is a halide. By increasing or decreasing the quantum well thickness (n), the optical properties of the material can be tuned from a wide bandgap (n = 1, Eg ≈ 2.3 eV) to a low bandgap (n = 5+, Eg ≈ 1.7 eV) material, respectively. RP MHPs form a distribution of quantum well thicknesses (n) when cast into thin films, rather than creating pure-phase materials dictated by the stoichiometric ratios of the precursor solution.99–102 The quantum well thickness only differs by a few angstroms; therefore, their respective optical properties, such as exciton resonance energy, are only separated by a few hundred meV. This results in a very complex and convoluted absorption profile that makes it difficult to pinpoint the optical properties of each n. The convolution of exciton resonance is observed in the absorption spectra depicted in Fig. 11. For example, (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (blue line) has absorption peaks from both the n = 2 and n = 3 exciton resonances. Still, due to the close energy spacing of these features, it is challenging to accurately determine the energy just from the absorption data.
 Fig. 11  Optical absorption of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 for different quantum layer thicknesses (n = 1–4). Dashed lines indicate the exciton absorption resonances. Reproduced with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47, 52538–52548 (ref. 86). Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.86 
To elucidate the phase heterogeneity, Amerling et al. performed low-temperature EA studies on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 quantum wells (n = 1–4) and MAPbI3 thin films, as shown in Fig. 12A.88 It is clear from the observed EA features that the samples are comprised of multiple excitons related to different quantum well thicknesses present within the thin film. The authors quantified the phase heterogeneity by investigating changes to the localized exciton absorption states as a function of quantum well thicknesses. The EA data were fit using a linear combination of the zeroth, first, and second derivative of the unmodulated absorption spectrum (eqn (7)). In brief, they determined the precise exciton resonance energies through the EA spectra utilizing the derivative-like shapes that result from this experiment. Using the precise exciton resonance energies, a Gaussian function was used to model the exciton peaks with an additional polynomial function to account for band-to-band absorption. Finally, they scaled the Gaussian amplitudes by the relative oscillator strengths of the different types of excitons present; this is particularly important when dealing with MHPs because of the well-known strong absorption cross-sections; therefore, the oscillator strengths play a crucial role in the absorption intensities.103 The heterogeneity of the quantum well distribution was then determined by analyzing the relative amplitudes of the exciton Gaussians that were used to fit the EA and absorption data. The fitting routine is visualized in Fig. 12B.
 Fig. 12  (A) EA spectra of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) and 3D MAPbI3 measured at 50 K. (B) Example of fitting routine used for investigating exciton compositions in (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 quantum wells. Here the raw absorption data (i), the linear combination of the zeroth, first, and second derivatives of Gaussians to represent the EA curves (ii), the agreement of fits with experimental EA data (iii), and the resulting absorption exciton fits used to determine the quantum well heterogeneity (iv) are presented. (C) Pure phase quantum well distribution determined by the EA fitting parameters. Reproduced with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47, 52538–52548 (ref. 86). Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.86 
The final quantification of the phase heterogeneity is shown in Fig. 12C. We can see that the intended phase pure quantum well distribution varies significantly from the resulting distribution determined post-synthesis. This was attributed to an interplay between kinetic and thermodynamic stabilities inherent to the stoichiometry of the quantum well for the MHPs. As such, EA is a technique that is sensitive to small changes in the absorption spectra of heterogeneously dispersed quantum wells within a single thin film. The analytical approach developed by Amerling et al. uses a combination of EA and absorption spectroscopies as a way to precisely determine the exciton resonance energies and uses those energies to build a model that fits the absorption spectra to quantify the quantum well thickness distribution throughout a given thin film. The enhanced understanding of these MHP thin films allows for tailored heterostructures that rely on precise control over the phase distribution. This work is also an example of how researchers can identify and quantify the exciton heterogeneity (and hence structural heterogeneities) of many different heterogeneous materials, such as core–shell quantum dots or bulk heterojunction organic semiconductor materials.


Distinguishing excitonic and band-to-band transitions in 3D MHPs. 
In low dimensional lattice and molecular systems, such as 2D layered MHPs, their EA spectra exhibit first or second derivative-like line shapes, which are attributed to the presence of bound excitons within the sample.9,13,15,17 However, as described by the seminal work by Aspnes, the EA spectra for 3D MHPs such as MAPbI3 resemble a third derivative-like line shape that is indicative of the presence of unbound electrons and holes in the crystalline lattice.9,10,46 Nevertheless, there are still conflicting results in the literature when it comes to the expected line shape of the EA spectra for 3D MHPs. These conflicting results stem from whether charge carriers are bound or unbound in 3D MHPs and how that influences the first, second, or third derivative EA line shape.8,104 The common ground between these conflicting results is that researchers struggle to consider the excitonic effects, no matter how small, when analyzing the EA spectra. To study excitonic effects in MAPbI3, Ruf et al. performed temperature-dependent EA studies and measured the fundamental bandgap and exciton binding energy of MAPbI3.12 The absorption spectrum (black line, Fig. 13A) shows the band-edge onset near 1.6 eV for a 3D MAPbI3 thin film. The numerical first, second, and third derivatives were calculated to determine which line shape fit showed the strongest qualitative agreement with the EA signal. Since a phase shift in lock-in detection can reverse the sign of the EA signal, the first and third derivatives are qualitatively similar, and both resemble the EA signal. Moreover, the third derivative should model the EA signal most closely with the assumption that MAPbI3 is a free carrier system. In contrast, an excitonic system would be expected to have a strong first derivative signal. Previous studies have analyzed the signal from opposing perspectives and have arrived at different measured Eb values.10,12,16 As illustrated in Fig. 13A, Ruf et al. focused on analyzing the EA signal for a MAPbI3 thin film from the perspective of a first-derivative response. At 190 K, an exciton resonance is observed at the band-edge absorption. As evident from the EA spectra for 2D MHPs, the exciton and continuum responses differ significantly in nature. In 3D MHPs, the energetic separation between exciton and continuum states is far less, and the EA spectral features overlap. There is a compelling level of qualitative agreement in the line shapes of the EA and first derivative spectra, treating the combined exciton-bandgap features collectively as a first derivative shift, expected from the exciton's polarizability. However, it fails to account for spectral contributions from field-ionization and any portion of electrons that are excited into the continuum states.
 Fig. 13  (A) Absorption spectrum and calculated first, second, and third derivative plots compared to the EA spectrum for MAPbI3 thin films investigated by Ruf et al. (B) EA (red line) and third derivative fit (dashed line) for MAPbI3 thin films studied by Ziffer et al. (A) Reprinted with permissions from Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 083902 (ref. 12). Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing. (B) Reproduced with permissions from ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1060–1068 (ref. 10). Copyright American Chemical Society.10,12 
In 2016, a study by Ziffer et al. modeled the EA spectrum of MAPbI3 according to low-field Franz–Keyldsh theory, where the unperturbed complex deflection function was obtained via ellipsometry (Fig. 13B).10 First-principles calculations of a Wannier exciton in an electric field were also carried out to study the contribution of field-ionization. This field-ionization, or the ionization of a bound state, may result in a decrease in the carrier lifetime, which broadens the absorption and results in a second derivative line shape.57 The validity of their approach was confirmed by accurate measurements of known values for Eb and Eg in GaAs. The careful analysis led to the precise determination of an Eb = 7.4 ± 1.2 meV for MAPbI3 thin films.


Electroabsorption modulators based on quantum confined-Stark effects. 
In addition to elucidating the character of excited states, EA studies also have technological relevance in that each device functions as an electro-optic modulator (EOM). The merit of the device is readily determined from the EA signal, without any further characterization, by calculating the overall change in the absorption coefficient given a certain applied field strength. This was recently pointed out in a study by Walters et al. wherein EOM device stacks were fabricated by casting MHP nanoplatelets onto an architecture that consisted of a reflective electrode, a MHP layer, a transparent electrode, as well as insulating layers to prevent charge injection from the electrodes into the MHP. The authors found that the absorption change at the peak wavelength was remarkably high at 70 cm−1 for a field strength of 56 kV cm−1, representing the largest reported change in absorption coefficient for a solution-processed material at room temperature. Given that the device stack generates field lines perpendicular to the MHP layer, the authors attributed the large changes in the exciton's absorption coefficient to the quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE) rather than the quadratic Stark effect, i.e., the expected response when fields are applied parallel to the quantum well layers.92 The quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE) occurs when a spatially confined system is subjected to an externally applied field along the axis of confinement.91,92,105–107 The applied field both reduces the bandgap energy and the exciton binding energy resulting in a redshift of the exciton resonance energy that scales quadratically with the applied field strength. Thus, the QCSE is phenomenologically similar to the quadratic Stark effect despite being fundamentally different in physical origin. Inorganic quantum well EOM devices have achieved their highest extinction ratios by exploiting the QCSE.107
In addition to characterizing the EOM devices' merit, the EA signals collected by Walters et al. also furthered our fundamental understanding of the MHP layer. An anomalous trend was observed in the EA signals of the (C6H13NH3)2(A)n−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets when the A-site cation was changed from a Cs+ atom to the dipolar CH3NH3+ molecule, given that the exciton's EA response was inverted (Fig. 14A). In the case of (C6H13NH3)2(A)n−1PbnBr3n+1 with A = Cs+, the exciton absorption peak responded with a redshift expected for the QCSE. However, when A = CH3NH3+, the exciton absorption peak is instead blueshifted. The quadratic energy shift in opposite directions is summarized in Fig. 14B where the (C6H13NH3)2(A)n−1PbnBr3n+1 with CH3NH3+ or Cs+ display opposing EA amplitude changes at their extrema, representing blue and redshifts, respectively. The authors complement their EA studies with first-principles DFT calculations to propose a new ‘dipole mediated’ QCSE. The rotational alignment of the CH3NH3+ molecule's dipole parallel with the applied field decreases the exciton binding energy sufficiently to overcome the redshift of the QCSE and even reverse its direction. Overall, this study proves that tunable modulation via cation tailoring is obtainable in MHP nanoplatelet thin films. From a combination of EA and optical absorption spectroscopies, the authors were able to identify blue and redshifts of the excitonic features and identify future materials for electro-optical modulators that possess a unique set of tunable properties.
 Fig. 14  (A) Optical investigations for (C6H13NH3)2(Cs)Pb2Br7 and (C6H13NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 thin films. (i) Optical spectra, (ii) first derivative of absorption, (iii) second derivative of absorption, and (iv) EA spectra at indicated applied electric field where the solid lines are fits from transfer matrix modeling of changes to the complex dielectric function of the exciton absorption bands. (B) Nonlinear dependence of the QCSE for (C6H13NH3)2(Cs)Pb2Br7 and (C6H13NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 thin films. Reproduced with permission from Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4214 (ref. 14). Copyright 2018 Nature.14 


Experimental challenges of EA spectroscopy. 
While modulation spectroscopies such as EA produce normalized difference signals (i.e. ΔT/T) that have many inherent advantages and are generally free of any instrument response function, there are still experimental artifacts, challenges, and limitations in EA spectroscopy that interested researchers should be cognizant of. We herein provide a brief summary of common challenges that should be considered when applying EA spectroscopy to MHP systems.
The first category of challenges deals with optical effects that result from differences in sample thickness and measurement geometry, (i.e. reflectance ΔR/R vs. transmission ΔT/T as well as the angle of the incident radiation). In their EA analysis of the well-known MAPbI3, Ziffer et al. found that in the reflection geometry, the line shape of the ΔR/R signal was sensitive to sample thickness as well as the angle of incident radiation and in some cases, resembled changes in the sample's refractive index Δn more closely than changes in the absorption coefficient Δα.10 In contrast, the ΔT/T signal in a normal-incidence geometry produced consistent, thickness-invariant EA line shapes which closely matched the Δα line shape that the authors expected from computational modelling. However, it is still possible for changes in refractive index to influence ΔT/T signals at normal incidence. Similarly, it is possible for thermal effects, i.e. Joule heating via the electrodes, to influence the EA signal. Therefore, it is recommended that such effects be considered before straightforwardly interpreting EA signals as arising solely from the modulation of the absorption coefficient. For a guide on how to calculate the contribution Δn and Joule heating to the EA signal, we refer readers to the work by Jeglinski and Liess et al.48,53 In a similar vein, large electric fields can cause dielectric breakdown of the MHP layer and therefore care should be taken to monitor the modulating voltage across the sample with an oscilloscope.
As a second category of challenges, we address the demodulation of the EA signal via lock-in detection. Interested researchers should be aware that a phase shift of π in the input signal will invert the sign of the EA signal, and therefore, the absolute phase of the experimental set up must be rigorously established before assigning meaning to the sign (±) of the EA signal. Alternatively, the sign can be assigned if the system's EA response is known beforehand. It should also be noted that lock-in amplifiers detect the RMS amplitude of a single frequency component (i.e. ω or 2ω) within the input signal. Therefore, if the amplitude of the EA spectrum is needed, then it is necessary to multiply the lock-in detected signal by an instrumental correction factor that accounts for the Fourier coefficient of the waveform of the modulating voltage.90,108 For example, in the case for derivative analysis wherein the ratio between the EA and absorption amplitudes is used to qualitatively determine the excited state's properties, this is a necessary step. Qualitative analysis of the EA signal wherein the field strength F is required can also prove challenging for MHPs. This is because the field strength experienced by excited states will depend on the material's dielectric constant at the frequency of the modulating voltage. Given that MHPs have highly frequency-dependent dielectric functions and experience ion migration effects that depend heavily on sample morphology,109 obtaining an accurate measurement of the dielectric constant is an additional step that may be challenging for those interested in quantitatively analyzing the EA response of MHPs.

Conclusions and outlook
This review discusses how traditional absorption spectroscopy falls short of characterizing the optoelectronic features of MHPs due to surface artifacts, thin-film coverage, or even spectrometer setup. EA spectroscopy provides a depth of knowledge about charge carrier type and the electric field environment felt by that carrier through simple line shape analysis—information that is often unobtainable by other optical methods. In a similar vein, EA spectroscopy can differentiate between randomly dispersed and well-oriented excitonic features providing a complementary technique to structural characterization. Through changes in the internal electric field, EA spectroscopy can be used to characterize ion migration in MHPs, a crucial hurdle for photovoltaic devices. EA spectroscopy can also be used to deconvolute phase heterogeneities within a thin film, providing critical insight into fundamental material properties to tailor MHPs for highly specific device applications. Overall, EA spectroscopy is a crucial tool for pushing the boundaries of understanding the optoelectronic properties of MHP thin films. When other optical characterization methods fall short in the richness of data provided, often times EA spectroscopy can bridge the knowledge gap to afford a complete optoelectronic description of MHPs. The reviewed studies herein have leveraged EA spectroscopy to deepen the fundamental understanding of current complex materials in the form of heterostructures, quantum wells, and/or quantum-confined MHP structures.
As we look into the future of EA spectroscopy, we believe a few crucial areas of interest will be best utilized with this technique. First, there is considerable interest in the field for integrating exotic and optically active π-conjugated organic cations into low dimensional MHP structures.110–117 These cations have a HOMO/LUMO level near the bandgap of the metal halide lattice, often forming a charge transfer complex at the heterojunction.112 EA spectroscopy has been used extensively to investigate the optoelectronic properties of charge-transfer complexes in organic semiconductor donor–acceptor systems, such as their large dipole moments or binding energies.89,118–121 We see EA spectroscopy as a critical tool to fully elucidate the novel charge transfer optoelectronic properties in MHPs as well as for their low dimensional analogs.112 Second, a promising future application for MHP materials is phase-change memory devices.122 This requires precise knowledge about the optoelectronic properties at a range of critical temperatures when these phase changes are induced. EA spectroscopy can provide the precision necessary over a range of temperatures while also showing the evolution of new phases.77 Lastly, there is still considerable work to be done on providing comprehensive models to fit and predict EA features such as FK oscillations, as well as ongoing debates about expected line shapes in the EA spectra of 2D and 3D MHPs. Although the groundwork has been laid, there needs to be a further exploration into these challenges in order to provide a theoretical basis for many complex physical phenomena in MHPs.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under award no. DE-SC0019041. We would like to thank Prof. Z. Valy Vardeny (ZVV) for valuable discussions on electroabsorption. ZVV would like to acknowledge the support by the DOE under grant no. DE-SC0014579. EA gratefully acknowledges support from the Office of Science Graduate Student Research (SCGSR) fellowship. KRH would like to acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation thru Graduate Research Fellowship (Grant No. 1747505). LWB would also like to acknowledge the Sloan Foundation through an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship in Chemistry.
References
S. Adjokatse, H.-H. Fang and M. A. Loi, Broadly tunable metal halide perovskites for solid-state light-emission applications, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 413–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ni, U. Huynh, A. Cheminal, T. H. Thomas, R. Shivanna, T. F. Hinrichsen, S. Ahmad, A. Sadhanala and A. Rao, Real-time observation of exciton–phonon coupling dynamics in self-assembled hybrid perovskite quantum wells, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Panzer, C. Li, T. Meier, A. Köhler and S. Huettner, Impact of structural dynamics on the optical properties of methylammonium lead iodide perovskites, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700286 CrossRef .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Paraecattil, J. De Jonghe-Risse, V. Pranculis, J. Teuscher and J.-E. Moser, Dynamics of photocarrier separation in MAPbI3 perovskite multigrain films under a quasistatic electric field, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19595–19602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, H.-W. Li, J. Zhang, Q.-D. Yang, T. Liu, Z. Guan, J. Qing, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, Spectroscopic study on the impact of methylammonium iodide loading time on the electronic properties in perovskite thin films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 561–567 RSC .
H. Kim, L. Zhao, J. S. Price, A. J. Grede, K. Roh, A. N. Brigeman, M. Lopez, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Hybrid perovskite light emitting diodes under intense electrical excitation, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4893 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Jia, N. Li, M. Chen, S. Hu, C. Liu and N. Zhao, Degradation mechanism of perovskite light-emitting diodes: an in situ investigation via electroabsorption spectroscopy and device modelling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910464 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. F. Bouduban, A. Burgos-Caminal, J. Teuscher and J.-E. Moser, Unveiling the nature of charge carrier interactions by electroabsorption spectroscopy: an illustration with lead-halide perovskites, Chimia, 2017, 71, 231–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Ziffer, J. C. Mohammed and D. S. Ginger, Electroabsorption spectroscopy measurements of the exciton binding energy, electron–hole reduced effective mass, and band gap in the perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1060–1068 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Dielectric confinement effect on excitons in PbI4-based layered semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ruf, A. Magin, M. Schultes, E. Ahlswede, H. Kalt and M. Hetterich, Excitonic nature of optical transitions in electroabsorption spectra of perovskite solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 083902 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka and T. Kondo, Bandgap and exciton binding energies in lead-iodide-based natural quantum-well crystals, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2003, 4, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
G. Walters, M. Wei, O. Voznyy, R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Kiani, D. M. Smilgies, R. Munir, A. Amassian, S. Hoogland and E. Sargent, The quantum-confined Stark effect in layered hybrid perovskites mediated by orientational polarizability of confined dipoles, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, F. Sano, T. Takahashi, T. Kondo, R. Ito and K. Ema, Two-dimensional Wannier excitons in a layered-perovskite-type crystal (C6H13NH3)2PbI4, Solid State Commun., 2002, 122, 249–252 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awasthi, K.-B. Du, C.-Y. Wang, C.-L. Tsai, M. Hamada, S. Narra, E. W.-G. Diau and N. Ohta, Electroabsorption studies of multicolored lead halide perovskite nanocrystalline solid films, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2408–2417 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Kondo, K. Umeda, K. Ema, T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Electronic and excitonic structures of inorganic–organic perovskite-type quantum-well crystal (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 5923–5932 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Koutselas, L. Ducasse and G. C. Papavassiliou, Electronic properties of three- and low-dimensional semiconducting materials with Pb halide and Sn halide units, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1996, 8, 1217–1227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, S. Baniya, C. Zhang, J. Li, P. Haney, C.-X. Sheng, E. Ehrenfreund and Z. V. Vardeny, Giant Rashba splitting in 2D organic–inorganic halide perovskites measured by transient spectroscopies, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700704 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Takagi, H. Kunugita and K. Ema, Influence of the image charge effect on excitonic energy structure in organic–inorganic multiple quantum well crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 125421 CrossRef .
V. Kattoor, K. Awasthi, E. Jokar, E. W.-G. Diau and N. Ohta, Integral method analysis of electroabsorption spectra and electrophotoluminescence study of (C4H9NH3)2Pbl4 organic–inorganic quantum well, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26623–26634 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rana, K. Awasthi, S. S. Bhosale, E. W.-G. Diau and N. Ohta, Temperature-dependent electroabsorption and electrophotoluminescence and exciton binding eEnergy in MAPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 19927–19937 CrossRef CAS .
M.-c. Kim, S.-Y. Ham, D. Cheng, T. A. Wynn, H. S. Jung and Y. S. Meng, Advanced characterization techniques for overcoming challenges of perovskite solar cell materials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2001753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and I. G. Scheblykin, Artifacts in absorption measurements of organometal halide perovskite materials: what are the real spectra?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3466–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tauc, R. Grigorovici and A. Vancu, Optical properties and electronic structure of amorphous germanium, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1966, 15, 627–637 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Davis and N. F. Mott, Conduction in non-crystalline systems V. Conduction in non-crystalline systems V. Conductivity, optical absorption and photoconductivity in amorphous semiconductors, Philos. Mag., 1970, 22, 0903–0922 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Pankove and D. A. Kiewit, Optical processes in semiconductors, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1972, 119, 156C CrossRef .
J. Tauc, Optical properties and electronic structure of amorphous Ge and Si, Mater. Res. Bull., 1968, 3, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Zanatta, Revisiting the optical bandgap of semiconductors and the proposal of a unified methodology to its determination, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 11225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fox, Optical properties of solids, Am. J. Phys., 2002, 70, 1269–1270 CrossRef .
J. C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe, J. Kono, S. Tretiak, S. A. Crooker, C. Katan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. J. Crochet, J. Even and A. D. Mohite, Scaling law for excitons in 2D perovskite quantum wells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mehdizadeh-Rad and J. Singh, Influence of
urbach energy, temperature, and longitudinal position in the active layer on carrier diffusion length in perovskite solar cells, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2712–2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Viezbicke, S. Patel, B. E. Davis and D. P. Birnie III, Evaluation of the Tauc method for optical absorption edge determination: ZnO thin films as a model system, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2015, 252, 1700–1710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ledinsky, T. Schönfeldová, J. Holovský, E. Aydin, Z. Hájková, L. Landová, N. Neyková, A. Fejfar and S. De Wolf, Temperature dependence of the Urbach energy in lead iodide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1368–1373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Lu, Y. Yang and M. C. Beard, Excitonic effects in methylammonium lead halide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2595–2603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baranowski and P. Plochocka, Excitons in metal-halide perovskites, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903659 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahboubi Soufiani, Z. Yang, T. Young, A. Miyata, A. Surrente, A. Pascoe, K. Galkowski, M. Abdi-Jalebi, R. Brenes, J. Urban, N. Zhang, V. Bulović, O. Portugall, Y.-B. Cheng, R. J. Nicholas, A. Ho-Baillie, M. A. Green, P. Plochocka and S. D. Stranks, Impact of microstructure on the electron–hole interaction in lead halide perovskites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1358–1366 RSC .
D. D. Sell, Resolved free-exciton transitions in the optical-absorption spectrum of GaAs, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 3750–3753 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Phuong, Y. Yamada, M. Nagai, N. Maruyama, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Free carriers versus excitons in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films at low temperatures: charge transfer from the orthorhombic phase to the tetragonal phase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2316–2321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Properties of excitons and photogenerated charge carriers in metal halide perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Band filling with free charge carriers in organometal halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, High photoluminescence efficiency and optically pumped lasing in solution-processed mixed halide perovskite semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, Analysis of multivalley and multibandgap absorption and enhancement of free carriers related to exciton screening in hybrid perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11566–11572 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Elliott, Intensity of optical absorption by excitons, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 1384–1389 CrossRef CAS .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T.-W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Determination of the exciton binding energy and effective masses for methylammonium and formamidinium lead tri-halide perovskite semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
D. E. Aspnes, Third-derivative modulation spectroscopy with low-field electroreflectance, Surf. Sci., 1973, 37, 418–442 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amerling, S. Baniya, E. Lafalce, C. Zhang, Z. V. Vardeny and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Electroabsorption spectroscopy studies of (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite multiple
quantum wells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4557–4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liess, S. Jeglinski, Z. V. Vardeny, M. Ozaki, K. Yoshino, Y. Ding and T. Barton, Electroabsorption spectroscopy of luminescent and nonluminescent pi-conjugated polymers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 15712–15724 CrossRef CAS .
G. U. Bublitz and S. G. Boxer, Stark spectroscopy: applications in chemistry, biology, and materials science, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1997, 48, 213–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. de Sa Pereira, C. Menelaou, A. Danos, C. Marian and A. P. Monkman, Electroabsorption spectroscopy as a tool for probing charge transfer and state mixing in thermally activated delayed fluorescence emitters, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3205–3211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sebastian, G. Weiser and H. Bässler, Charge transfer transitions in solid tetracene and pentacene studied by electroabsorption, Chem. Phys., 1981, 61, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Liptay, Dipole moments and polarizabilities of molecules in excited electronic states, in Excited States, ed. E. C. Lim, Elsevier,  1974; vol. 1, pp. 129–229 Search PubMed .
S. A. Jeglinski, Z. V. Vardeny, Y. Ding and T. Barton, Electroabsorption and charged-excitation spectroscopy of pi-conjugated polymers, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1994, 256, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liptay, Electrochromism and Solvatochromism, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1969, 8, 177–188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Horvath, G. Weiser, G. L. Baker and S. Etemad, Influence of disorder on the field-modulated spectra of polydiacetylene films, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 2751–2758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Dow and D. Redfield, Electroabsorption in semiconductors: the excitonic absorption edge, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 3358–3371 CrossRef .
M. Kneissl, N. Linder, P. Kiesel, S. Quassowski, K. Schmidt, G. H. Döhler, H. Grothe and J. S. Smith, Two-dimensional Franz–Keldysh effect in MQW structures with lateral electric fields, Superlattices Microstruct., 1994, 16, 109 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Shanabrook, O. J. Glembocki and W. T. Beard, Photoreflectance modulation mechanisms in GaAs/AlxGa1−xAs multiple quantum wells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 35, 2540–2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen and M. Dutta, Franz–Keldysh oscillations in modulation spectroscopy, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 2151–2176 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gerhard, A. Horvath and H. J. Kolbe, Franz–Keldysh effect of band states in polydiacetylene, Proc. SPIE, 1997 DOI:10.1117/12.279276 .
F. H. Pollak, Modulation spectroscopy of semiconductor microstructures, Superlattices Microstruct., 1991, 10, 333–346 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaeger and G. Weiser, Excitonic electroabsorption spectra and Franz–Keldysh effect of In0.53Ga0.47As/InP studied by small modulation of static fields, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 10674–10682 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Cardona, Modulation spectroscopy of semiconductors, in Festkörperprobleme 10: Plenary Lectures of the Professional Groups “Semiconductor Physics”, “Low Temperature Physics”, “Thermodynamics”, “Metal Physics” of the German Physical Society Freudenstadt, April 6–11, 1970, ed. O. Madelung, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1970, pp. 125–173 Search PubMed .
H. Heesel, S. Hunsche, H. Mikkelsen, T. Dekorsy, K. Leo and H. Kurz, Dynamics of electric field screening in a bulk GaAs modulator, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 16000–16003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Thouin, D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. Quarti, D. Cortecchia, I. Bargigia, D. Beljonne, A. Petrozza, C. Silva and A. R. Srimath Kandada, Phonon coherences reveal the polaronic character of excitons in two-dimensional lead halide perovskites, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Electron–phonon coupling in hybrid lead halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, S. Bai, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and F. Gao, Defects engineering for high-performance perovskite solar cells, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 22 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, M. E. Turiansky and C. G. Van de Walle, Correctly assessing defect tolerance in halide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 6022–6027 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko and A. L. Rogach, Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals in the research spotlight: stability and defect tolerance, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Iodine chemistry determines the defect tolerance of lead-halide perovskites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702–713 RSC .
J. C. Blancon, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, C. M. M. Soe, K. Appavoo, M. Y. Sfeir, S. Tretiak, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even, J. J. Crochet and A. D. Mohite, Extremely efficient internal exciton dissociation through edge states in layered 2D perovskites, Science, 2017, 355, 1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Aspnes, Electric field effects on the dielectric constant of solids, Phys. Rev., 1967, 153, 972–982 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Aspnes and J. E. Rowe, Resonant nonlinear optical susceptibility: Electroreflectance in the low-field limit, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 5, 4022–4030 CrossRef .
L. Sebastian and G. Weiser, One-dimensional wide energy bands in a polydiacetylene revealed by electroreflectance, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 1156–1159 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fraschini, L. Bonati and D. Pitea, Molecular polarizability as a tool for understanding the binding properties of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins:definition of a reliable computational procedure, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 10564–10569 CrossRef CAS .
C.-q. Xu, S. y. Fukuta, H. Sakakura, T. Kondo, R. Ito, Y. Takahashi and K. Kumata, Anomalous electro-absorption in the low-temperature phase of (C10H21NH3)2PbI4, Solid State Commun., 1991, 77, 923–926 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Effect of quantum confinement on electrons and phonons in semiconductors, in Fundamentals of Semiconductors: Physics and Materials Properties, ed. P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2010, pp. 469–551 Search PubMed .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Accounting for interference, scattering, and electrode absorption to make accurate internal quantum efficiency measurements in organic and other thin solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3293–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Leng, S. Wang, J. Zhang and S. Jin, Artifacts in transient absorption measurements of perovskite films induced by transient reflection from morphological microstructures, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 97–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzoor, J. Häusele, K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, J. Carpenter, Z. J. Yu, S. F. Bent, M. D. McGehee and Z. C. Holman, Optical modeling of wide-bandgap perovskite and perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells using complex refractive indices for arbitrary-bandgap perovskite absorbers, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 27441–27460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, P. I. Rovira, I. An and R. W. Collins, Rotating-compensator multichannel ellipsometry: applications for real time
Stokes vector spectroscopy of thin film growth, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 1800–1810 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Diroll, Temperature-dependent intraband relaxation of hybrid perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5623–5628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Blossey, Wannier exciton in an electric field. II. Electroabsorption in direct-band-gap solids, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 3, 1382–1391 CrossRef .
J. D. Dow, B. Y. Lao and S. A. Newman, Differential electroabsorption, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 3, 2571–2581 CrossRef .
M. T. Pham, E. Amerling, H. M. Luong, H. T. Pham, G. K. Larsen, L. Whittaker-Brooks and T. D. Nguyen, Origin of Rashba spin-orbit coupling in 2D and 3D lead iodide perovskites, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 4964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Amerling, S. Baniya, E. Lafalce, S. Blair, Z. V. Vardeny and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Quantifying exciton heterogeneities in mixed-phase organometal halide multiple quantum wells via Stark spectroscopy studies, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 52538–52548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, H. Li, D. Cortecchia, C. Soci and J.-L. Brédas, Excitonic and polaronic properties of 2D hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Perovskite materials for light-emitting diodes and lasers, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Weiser, Stark effect of one-dimensional Wannier excitons in polydiacetylene single crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 14076–14085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. R. Hansen, C. E. McClure, J. S. Colton and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Franz–Keldysh and Stark effects in two-dimensional metal halide perovskites,  2021, arXiv:2109.09021v1.
D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood and C. A. Burrus, Band-edge electroabsorption in quantum well structures: The quantum-confined Stark effect, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 2173–2176 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood and C. A. Burrus, Electric field dependence of optical absorption near the band gap of quantum-well structures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 1043–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Campbell, J. P. Ferraris, T. W. Hagler, M. D. Joswick, I. D. Parker and D. L. Smith, Measuring internal electric fields in organic light-emitting diodes using electroabsorption spectroscopy, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1997, 8, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Futscher, J. M. Lee, L. McGovern, L. A. Muscarella, T. Wang, M. I. Haider, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende and B. Ehrler, Quantification of ion migration in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells by transient capacitance measurements, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1497–1503 RSC .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and P. R. F. Barnes, Evidence for ion migration in hybrid perovskite solar cells with minimal hysteresis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara, C.-S. Jiang, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. Zhu, Extrinsic ion migration in perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
S.-Y. Kim, J.-M. Yang, E.-S. Choi and N.-G. Park, Layered (C6H5CH2NH3)2CuBr4 perovskite for multilevel storage resistive switching memory, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002653 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Han, Q. V. Le, J. Choi, H. Kim, S. G. Kim, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, T. L. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Lead-free all-inorganic cesium tin iodide perovskite for filamentary and interface-type resistive switching toward environment-friendly and temperature-tolerant nonvolatile memories, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8155–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Chen, P. Chábera, R. Schaller, M. J. Al-Marri, S. E. Canton, Z. Liang and T. Pullerits, Inter-phase charge and energy transfer in Ruddlesden–Popper 2D perovskites: critical role of the spacing cations, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6244–6250 RSC .
O. F. Williams, Z. Guo, J. Hu, L. Yan, W. You and A. M. Moran, Energy transfer mechanisms in layered 2D perovskites, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 134706 CrossRef PubMed .
L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Sabatini, G. Walters, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, Y. Li, J. Z. Fan, H. Tan, J. Pan, M. Yuan, O. M. Bakr, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Tailoring the energy landscape in quasi-2D halide perovskites enables efficient green-light emission, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3701–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, Y. Mi, L. Qin, Y. Zhao, X. Qiu, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Unveiling structurally engineered carrier dynamics in hybrid quasi-two-dimensional perovskite thin films toward controllable emission, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4431–4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. L. Efros, Colloidal nanoplatelets with two-dimensional electronic structure, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, H. Yu, L. Li, F. Wang, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Composition-dependent light-induced dipole moment change in organometal halide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1253–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Weiner, D. A. B. Miller and D. S. Chemla, Quadratic electro-optic effect due to the quantum-confined Stark effect in quantum wells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 50, 842–844 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lever, Z. Ikonić, A. Valavanis, J. D. Cooper and R. W. Kelsall, Design of Ge–SiGe quantum-confined Stark effect electroabsorption heterostructures for CMOS compatible photonics, J. Lightwave Technol., 2010, 28, 3273–3281 CAS .
M. S. Rouifed, P. Chaisakul, D. Marris-Morini, J. Frigerio, G. Isella, D. Chrastina, S. Edmond, X. L. Roux, J.-R. Coudevylle and L. Vivien, Quantum-confined Stark effect at 1.3 μm in Ge/Si0.35Ge0.65 quantum-well structure, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 3960–3962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. A. Jeglinski, Electroabsorption spectroscopy of conjugated polymers and carbon fullerenes and conjugated-polymer light-emitting devices, PhD thesis, University of Utah,  1996 .
L. Flannery, J. Ogle, D. Powell, C. Tassone and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Voltage bias stress effects in metal halide perovskites are strongly dependent on morphology and ion migration pathways, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25109–25119 RSC .
J.-J. Liu, Y.-F. Guan, C. Jiao, M.-J. Lin, C.-C. Huang and W.-X. Dai, A panchromatic hybrid crystal of iodoplumbate nanowires and J-aggregated
naphthalene diimides with long-lived charge-separated states, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 5957–5960 RSC .
A. H. Proppe, M.-H. Tremblay, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and E. H. Sargent, Naphthalenediimide cations inhibit 2D perovskite formation and facilitate subpicosecond electron transfer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 24379–24390 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amerling, Y. Zhai, B. W. Larson, Y. Yao, B. Fluegel, Z. Owczarczyk, H. Lu, L. Whittaker-Brooks, V. Blum and J. L. Blackburn, Charge transfer states and carrier generation in 1D organolead iodide semiconductors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14977–14990 RSC .
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, M. B. Fridriksson, R. K. Dubey, W. F. Jager, W. van der Stam and F. C. Grozema, Overcoming the exciton binding energy in two-dimensional perovskite nanoplatelets by attachment of conjugated organic chromophores, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. V. Passarelli, C. M. Mauck, S. W. Winslow, C. F. Perkinson, J. C. Bard, H. Sai, K. W. Williams, A. Narayanan, D. J. Fairfield, M. P. Hendricks, W. A. Tisdale and S. I. Stupp, Tunable exciton binding energy in 2D hybrid layered perovskites through donor–acceptor interactions within the organic layer, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 672–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. M. Van Gompel, R. Herckens, K. Van Hecke, B. Ruttens, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen and D. Vanderzande, Towards 2D layered hybrid perovskites with enhanced functionality: introducing charge-transfer complexes via self-assembly, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2481–2484 RSC .
M. K. Jana, C. Liu, S. Lidin, D. J. Dirkes, W. You, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, Resolving rotational stacking disorder and electronic level alignment in a 2D oligothiophene-based lead iodide perovskite, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8523–8532 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, E. T. Barraza, A. Barrette, S. Dovletgeldi, G. Findik, D. J. Dirkes, C. Liu, M. K. Jana, V. Blum, W. You, K. Gundogdu, A. D. Stiff-Roberts and D. B. Mitzi, Tunable internal quantum well alignment in rationally designed oligomer-based perovskite films deposited by resonant infrared matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1707–1716 RSC .
A. Devižis, J. De Jonghe-Risse, R. Hany, F. Nüesch, S. Jenatsch, V. Gulbinas and J.-E. Moser, Dissociation of charge transfer states and carrier separation in bilayer organic solar cells: a time-resolved electroabsorption spectroscopy study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8192–8198 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, Y. Tanabe, H. J. Byrne, A. Eilmes and P. Petelenz, Comprehensive analysis of intermolecular charge-transfer excited states in C60 and C70 films, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 7689–7700 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Rohwer, M. Akbarimoosavi, S. E. Meckel, X. Liu, Y. Geng, L. M. Lawson Daku, A. Hauser, A. Cannizzo, S. Decurtins, R. J. Stanley, S.-X. Liu and T. Feurer, Dipole moment and polarizability of tunable intramolecular charge transfer states in heterocyclic π-conjugated molecular dyads determined by computational and Stark spectroscopic study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 9346–9355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Ultrafast long-range charge separation in organic semiconductor photovoltaic diodes, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zou, J. Zheng, C. Chang, A. Majumdar and L. Y. Lin, Nonvolatile rewritable photomemory arrays based on reversible phase-change perovskite for optical information storage, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900558 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Eric Amerling	Eric Amerling obtained his PhD from the Chemistry Department at the University of Utah. From 2019 to 2020, he was working at NREL as a DOE SCGSR fellow. His research interests include the structural and optoelectronic properties of low-dimensional materials.
Kameron R. Hansen	Kameron R. Hansen is an NSF Graduate Research Fellow in the Chemistry Department at the University of Utah. His research interests are centered on investigating the optical properties of two-dimensional perovskites and transition metal dichalcogenides.
Luisa Whittaker-Brooks	Luisa Whittaker-Brooks is an Associate Professor of Chemistry at the University of Utah. Her research centers on the design of well-defined hybrid materials with controlled morphology and interfaces that serve as conduits for deterministic and coherent energy and charge transfer for applications in energy conversion, storage, and electronics. She received her B.S. in Chemistry from The University of Panama. Under a Fulbright Fellowship, she received her PhD in Chemistry from the University at Buffalo. She was a postdoctoral researcher at Princeton University under a L'Oréal for Women in Science Fellowship.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Absorption spectrum for a MAPbI3 thin film acquired using an ordinary spectrometer, an integrating sphere, and a microscope. Inset: micrographs showing the crystal under investigation. (B) Change in optical density due to coverage ratio (β) of MAPbI3. Reproduced with permissions from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 17, 3466–3470 (ref. 24). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.24	 
(αhν)n = B(hν − Eg)	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Tauc plot for (BA)2PbI4 thin films with three distinct regions chosen for linear fit analysis.	 
	(2)
Eb = Eg − Eres	(3)
ΔA(E) = Afield(E) − Ano field(E)	(4)
A(E) = −log10(T(E))	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Interaction of an applied electric field with two different orientations aligned with and against the field. (B) Corresponding band broadening and (C) resulting change in absorption. (D) Interaction of an applied electric field on a transition that has a change in polarizability. (E) Peak with (red) and without (black) an applied electric field. (F) Resulting EA spectrum due to a change in polarizability.	 
FI = EB/|e|aB	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 4  (A) Cartoon representation of the effect an applied field has on bound states, such as excitons below the bandgap which are governed by the Stark effect, or unbound continuum states above the bandgap, governed by FK oscillations. Exactly at the band edge, the continuum wavefunction leaks into the gap, creating an interband feature in the EA spectrum. (B) The resulting difference (EA) spectrum. When overlapping exciton states and continuum states are present, it can be useful to plot the amplitude of the EA signal vs. Fγ to help differentiate mixed optoelectronic states. As discussed, excitons scale linearly to γ = 2, whereas continuum states scale linearly to γ = 1/3.	 
ΔA ≈ aΔε	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 5  (A) Crystal structure, (B) room temperature optical absorption (red) and photoluminescence emission spectra (black) for PEPI thin films. Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Temperature-dependent absorption for PEPI thin films. (B) EA spectra measured at 45 K at field strengths ranging from 50 to 325 V. (C–E) V2 dependence of EA amplitude of features below the interband transition edge. Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) EA spectra for PEPI thin films highlighting the Franz Keldysh (FK) oscillations. “c” represents the zero crossing; “d” denotes the blueshift caused by the oscillations. (B) Highlighted regions centered around 2.65 eV. “a”, “b”, “c” and “d” represent the zero-crossing energies and peak positions, respectively. Inset shows V2 dependence of exciton features that saturate at high voltage. (C) Energy differences showing V2/3 dependence. (D) Energy levels of the excitons (E1s and E2s), bandgap (Eg), interband transition, and binding energy (Eb). Reproduced with permission from Sci. Adv., 2017, 3 (7), e1700704 (ref. 19). Copyright 2017 Science Advances.19	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Absorption spectrum of (C6H13NH3)2PbI4 thin films. (B) Electroabsorption spectrum under applied fields ranging from 14.2 kV cm−1 to 36.4 kV cm−1. (C) Linear relationship between the amplitude of EA peaks and the applied field squared. Reproduced with permission from Solid State Commun., 2002, 122, 249–252 (ref. 15). Copyright 2002 Elsevier.15	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) EA spectrum (solid line) and first derivative of absorption (dashed line) of the 1 s exciton and its phonon sidebands. (B) EA spectrum (solid line) and second derivative of bandgap's step-like absorption (dashed line) which coincidentally has the same functional form as the interband EA feature. Reproduced with permission from Solid State Commun., 2002, 122, 249–252 (ref. 15). Copyright 2002 Elsevier.15	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) EA of a device based on a MAPbI3:BAI thin film in a reverse bias of −2 V with a 0.8 V dither at 389 Hz. (B) Transient EA response resulting from a 10 ms period square wave signal oscillating between +2 V and −2 V. (C) Transient EA response resulting from a 2 s period square wave signal oscillating between +2 V and −2 V. Reproduced with permissions from Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4893 (ref. 7). Copyright Springer Nature 2018.7	 

 	Fig. 11  Optical absorption of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 for different quantum layer thicknesses (n = 1–4). Dashed lines indicate the exciton absorption resonances. Reproduced with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47, 52538–52548 (ref. 86). Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.86	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) EA spectra of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) and 3D MAPbI3 measured at 50 K. (B) Example of fitting routine used for investigating exciton compositions in (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 quantum wells. Here the raw absorption data (i), the linear combination of the zeroth, first, and second derivatives of Gaussians to represent the EA curves (ii), the agreement of fits with experimental EA data (iii), and the resulting absorption exciton fits used to determine the quantum well heterogeneity (iv) are presented. (C) Pure phase quantum well distribution determined by the EA fitting parameters. Reproduced with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47, 52538–52548 (ref. 86). Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.86	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Absorption spectrum and calculated first, second, and third derivative plots compared to the EA spectrum for MAPbI3 thin films investigated by Ruf et al. (B) EA (red line) and third derivative fit (dashed line) for MAPbI3 thin films studied by Ziffer et al. (A) Reprinted with permissions from Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 083902 (ref. 12). Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing. (B) Reproduced with permissions from ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1060–1068 (ref. 10). Copyright American Chemical Society.10,12	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Optical investigations for (C6H13NH3)2(Cs)Pb2Br7 and (C6H13NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 thin films. (i) Optical spectra, (ii) first derivative of absorption, (iii) second derivative of absorption, and (iv) EA spectra at indicated applied electric field where the solid lines are fits from transfer matrix modeling of changes to the complex dielectric function of the exciton absorption bands. (B) Nonlinear dependence of the QCSE for (C6H13NH3)2(Cs)Pb2Br7 and (C6H13NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 thin films. Reproduced with permission from Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4214 (ref. 14). Copyright 2018 Nature.14	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
