Atomic-scale engineering of chemical-vapor-deposition-grown 2D transition metal dichalcogenides for electrocatalysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE00450B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE00450B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1593-1616Atomic-scale engineering of chemical-vapor-deposition-grown 2D transition metal dichalcogenides for electrocatalysis

        
          
            Qichen 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongpeng 
            Lei
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yuchao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chengye 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Zeng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yaohao 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xidong 
            Duan
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Dingsheng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yadong 
            Li
          
        
      c
aState Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy & Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sources, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: lypkd@163.com
bState Key Laboratory for Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics & College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: xidongduan@hnu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: wangdingsheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      11th February 2020
    , Accepted 18th March 2020First published on 19th March 2020AbstractChemical vapor deposition (CVD) is recognized as a powerful tool to synthesize atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials with the merits of high quality and uniform thickness with high efficiency, controllability, and scalability. Benefitting from the intriguing electronic and chemical characteristics, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted increasing attention with regard to energy-related electrocatalysis, including H2 evolution, CO2 reduction, O2 reduction/evolution, I3− reduction, etc. Atomic-scale tailoring of the surface and interface of CVD-grown TMDs is critical to not only improve the electronic structure and conductivity but also understand the intrinsic nature of the active sites. Therefore, a comprehensive and deeper understanding of CVD-grown 2D TMDs for use in electrocatalysis is urgently needed. In this review, the very recent advances in surface and interface engineering strategies, such as geometric dimensional control, defect engineering, doping modification, phase transition, strain tuning, and heterostructure construction, have been highlighted. Finally, the current challenges and perspectives are discussed. This review aims to provide the profound understanding and design of atomic-scale active sites in 2D TMDs for use in energy electrocatalysis.
Qichen Wang
Qichen Wang received his Master's degree from the Central South University of Forestry and Technology in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Acad. Yadong Li and Prof. Yongpeng Lei in Central South University.
Yongpeng Lei
Yongpeng Lei received his BS (2003) and MS (2006) from the National University of Defense Technology and his PhD (2011) from the National University of Defense Technology under Prof. Yingde Wang. He started the study of functional nanomaterials in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2011 under the guidance of Acad. Yadong Li. He joined the faculty of the State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, in 2017 as a Full Professor.
Xidong Duan
Xidong Duan is a Professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. His current research interests include two-dimensional materials, heterostructures, and their applications. He received his BS in Chemistry from Hunan University in 1993, his MS in Materials from Hunan University in 1996, and his PhD in Chemistry from Hunan University in 2016. Earlier, he was a Senior Engineer at the Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy before joining Hunan University.
Dingsheng Wang
Dingsheng Wang received his BS from the Department of Chemistry and Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, in 2004 and his PhD from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2009, with Acad. Yadong Li. He conducted his postdoctoral research at the Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, with Acad. Shoushan Fan. He joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2012.

Broader context
Activation of energy-related small molecules (H2O, CO2, O2, etc.) is essential for various electrochemical energy conversion systems. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit distinguished physical and chemical properties, which have been widely used as electrocatalysts with excellent performance. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been recognized as a powerful method to synthesize atomically thin 2D TMDs, yielding advantages such as high quality, controllability, scalability, etc. 2D TMDs provide an ideal platform to investigate the structure–performance relationship at the atomic level. Therefore, atomic-scale tailoring of the surface and interface of CVD-grown TMDs is critical for improving the activity, selectivity, and stability. Herein, we rationally propose and systematically discuss six atomic-scale engineering strategies (such as geometric dimensional control, defect engineering, doping modification, phase transition, strain tuning, and heterostructure construction) together with some representative examples. In addition, existing challenges and perspectives of the related field are also highlighted. We believe that such a comprehensive summary not only facilitates a profound understanding of the atomic-scale active sites in 2D TMDs for energy electrocatalysis but also opens up promising opportunities for catalytic materials design.

1. Introduction
It is urgent to explore clean and renewable energy technologies to resolve energy and environmental pollution problems. Electrochemical energy conversion systems provide a reliable solution to achieve the activation and transformation of energy-related small molecules (H2O, CO2, O2, etc.) under ambient conditions.1–3 For example, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and I3− reduction reaction (I3−RR) are significant for determining the performance of clean energy devices. However, the complex multistep electron transfer, high reaction barrier, and selectivity are key issues that cause high overpotential and sluggish kinetics.4–8 Currently, noble metals have been widely reported as electrocatalysts, but high cost and poor durability have hindered further applications.9–13 Therefore, exploring affordable and highly efficient electrocatalysts should be the primary focus. In particular, controllable fabrication and mechanism investigation with regard to nonprecious electrocatalysts deserve increased attention.
Owing to quantum confinement effects, two-dimensional (2D) ultrathin nanomaterials, particularly transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), exhibit intriguing electronic and chemical properties in comparison to their bulk counterparts and have received considerable attention in energy conversion/storage applications.14,15 Group 4–7 TMDs (Fig. 1a) are mainly layered, whereas some group 8–10 TMDs are nonlayered structures.16 TMDs form layered structures with the configuration of X–M–X (MX2), where chalcogen atoms in two hexagonal planes are separated by a plane of metal atoms (Fig. 1b). Transition metal atoms are connected to chalcogen atoms by strong ionic–covalent bonds, but the adjacent layers are linked via van der Waals (vdW) interactions. The valence of the intermediate transition metal atom is generally +4 and that of the chalcogen elements is −2. These 2D MX2 compounds have diverse electrical band structures, including insulators (e.g., HfS2), semiconductors (e.g., MoS2 and WS2), semimetals (e.g., WTe2 and TiSe2), true metals (e.g., NbS2 and VSe2), and low-temperature superconductors (e.g., NbSe2 and TaS2), exhibiting versatile and fascinating chemical and physical properties.17–21
 Fig. 1  (a) Overview of metals (highlighted in purple, green, red, and blue) and chalcogens (highlighted in orange) that can form layered sulfides, selenides, and tellurides. Reprinted with permission.29 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of 2D MX2. M denotes a transition metal and X denotes a chalcogen. Reprinted with permission.17 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Two routes for MX2 synthesis. Reprinted with permission.18 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To date, several well-established strategies have been formulated for synthesizing 2D nanomaterials, such as mechanical exfoliation,22 plasma-assisted synthesis,23 ion intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation,24 wet chemical synthesis,25 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD).26 Typically, CVD is a process in which gaseous or vaporous materials react at a certain temperature in the gas or gas–solid interfaces to form solid products with fewer structural defects.27 Impressively, the morphology, number of layers, lateral size, orientation, and defect degree in CVD-grown nanosheets can be effectively controlled due to the broad tunability of their growth parameters (e.g., precursor, temperature, pressure, flow rate, time, precursor–substrate distance, etc.) and the choice of substrates.28–30 Kwon et al.19 and Pan et al.20 provided worthwhile summaries on a comprehensive understanding of the thermodynamic and kinetic-dominated factors. Obviously, as a typical bottom-up method, CVD offers a compromise between high quality, high efficiency, controllability, and scalability. More importantly, the CVD method exhibits prominent advantages in the synthesis of 2D materials at the atomic level, which are favorable for the fundamental and comprehensive understanding of the actual structure–performance relationship of electrocatalysts.
Undoubtedly, atomic-scale tailoring of the surface and interface of CVD-grown TMDs is critical to not only improve the electronic structure and conductivity but also understand the intrinsic nature of the active sites. The number of studies in relation to CVD-grown TMDs for use in electrocatalysis has been gradually increasing. However, certain important studies have investigated CVD-grown TMDs for use in energy electrocatalysis.31–33 However, as far as we know, a comprehensive and systematic summary toward rationalizing the electrocatalytic properties is absent. In this review, we initially suggest a research toolbox for CVD-grown 2D TMDs (Fig. 2). Then, the CVD growth of single crystals, heterostructures, and transfer strategies are discussed. Next, with regard to the electronic structural engineering and conductivity improvement, we summarize the very recent advances made in the design and structure–performance relationship of CVD-grown 2D TMDs in reference to HER, CO2RR, ORR, OER, I3−RR, etc. In particular, six surface and interface engineering strategies, namely, geometric dimensional control, defect engineering, doping modification, phase transition, strain tuning, and heterostructure construction, are discussed. Finally, existing challenges are proposed in a reasonable manner. We hope that this overview can be utilized for the atomic-scale design of 2D TMDs having excellent electrocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 2  Research toolbox for CVD-grown 2D TMD electrocatalysts. 
2. CVD growth of 2D TMDs
CVD-grown 2D MX2 possesses high crystal quality, crystal orientation, large domain size, and thickness uniformity and continuity, which could be selectively engineered for energy electrocatalysis applications. Because of rapid progress, a variety of 2D TMD nanosheets have been successfully synthesized.34–38
2.1 Single-crystal 2D TMDs
Currently, the synthesis routes for TMDs are divided into two categories (Fig. 1c): (i) the first is sulfurization, selenization, or tellurization of predeposited metals-based precursors (e.g., metal thin films or metal oxides), which can be considered as a two-step growth route (route 1). CVD-grown few-layer 2D MoS2 nanosheets were reported for the first time in 2012, where a Mo metal film was sulfurized by S vapor and then atomic-layered MoS2 was formed on the SiO2/Si substrate.39 This work formulates a new route to rationally design 2D TMDs by means of CVD. (ii) In the second route, gaseous feedstock with metal and chalcogen elements are simultaneously introduced into a multi-temperature-zone furnace, which mutually react to form MX2 on the growth substrate (route 2). For example, a MoO3 precursor powder and suitable growth substrate were placed in the upstream and downstream zones, respectively, in a quartz tube furnace. MoO3 was partially reduced to form MoO3−x species by S vapor. Then, it was subsequently conveyed downstream for further reaction with S vapor to produce monolayer MoS2 with high crystal quality.40 Generally, the latter route preferably forms monolayer TMDs. Different from the fabrication of sulfides (e.g., MoS2 and WS2), H2 may be required to facilitate the reduction of Se species during selenization due to the latter's difficult reduction. Zhang et al.41,42 synthesized metallic VSe2 and TaSe2 nanosheets under mixed Ar/H2 flow. More significantly, 2D VSe2 shows extra-high electrical conductivity (106 S m−1), which is 1–4 orders of magnitude higher than that of other conductive 2D TMDs; it might even be comparable to those obtained from conventional metals. However, restricted by the high melting points of some metal and metal oxide precursors, these precursors are difficult to vaporize and react with gaseous chalcogen precursors in the CVD process, posing a challenging task to grow the corresponding TMDs. Liu et al.43,44 proposed that salt could decrease the melting point of the reactants and facilitate the formation of intermediate products (metal oxychlorides), increase the overall reaction rate, and promote growth. Cao and colleagues45 employed density functional theory (DFT) to affirm the remarkable conductivity of bulk CoTe and NiTe. Recently, we46–49 developed a series of transition metal tellurides, including CoTe2, NiTe2 single-crystal nanosheets, ultrathin metallic MTe2 (M = V, Nb, or Ta) nanoplates, and ultrathin PtTe2 single crystals. The thickness and morphology of PtTe2 nanosheets could be systematically tuned by adjusting the temperature as well as the flow rate of the carrier gas, suggesting the kinetics-dominated growth process. The electrical conductivity of PtTe2 is reflected by the thickness-tunable electronic properties and temperature-dependent conductivity (Fig. 3a and b), indicating its outstanding metallic nature. These results confirmed that TMDs composed of Te have better intrinsic conductivity than those of TMDs composed of chalcogenides (e.g., S and Se) and metal elements. Subsequently, we synthesized 2D ultrathin NiTe2 with variable layer numbers (from monolayer to multilayers) using the atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD) process. The critical role of annealing temperature on the obtained nucleation density, lateral dimension, representative morphologies, and thickness was carefully discussed (Fig. 3c). NiTe2 growth is largely kinetics-dependent at lower substrate temperatures and highly thermodynamic-controlled at higher substrate temperatures. The resultant 2D NiTe2 nanosheets show a high-quality octahedral (1T) phase and excellent conductivity (7.8 × 105 S m−1), which not only broadens the family of TMD members but also holds promising prospect for use in electrocatalysis. Ganin and colleagues50 proved that the catalytic HER activity of metallic dimerized (1T′) MoTe2 improved dramatically, which could be attributed to the subtle changes in its electronic structure. However, a generalized synthesis method for the growth of TMDs is still lacking. Recently, Liu et al.51 utilized a molten-salt-assisted CVD route to broadly synthesize a wide variety of atomically thin 47 TMD compounds (32 binary compounds, 13 alloys, and 2 heterostructured compounds), revealing the universality of the synthesis method and further exploring their potential applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) Conductivity of PtTe2 nanosheets as a function of thickness. (b) Temperature-dependent conductivity of PtTe2 with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Evolution of nucleation density, lateral dimension, representative morphologies, and thickness (inset) of NiTe2 single crystals grown at various annealing temperatures. Scale bars: 5 μm. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 2D TMDs-based heterostructures
CVD-grown heterostructures have recently attracted increasing attention. It should be noted that CVD-grown WS2–WSe2 and MoS2–MoSe2 lateral heterostructures were reported in 2014 for the first time,52 subsequently driving the related research on the growth of well-designed 2D heterostructures with atomic interfaces. Generally speaking, heterostructures include lateral and vertical profiles, whose differences originate from distinguished nucleation and growth kinetics conditions. Early works mainly focused on a simplistic model with two distinct material blocks. For example, Lee and colleagues53 fabricated Mo2C–MoS2 heterojunction structures via the partial conversion of semiconducting MoS2 under the presence of CH4 and H2, displaying low contact resistance and low Schottky barrier. First, the edge of MoS2 was initiated to the epitaxial growth of Mo2C, which offered a reliable route to synthesize the heterojunction. Lateral MoS2–VS2 heterostructures were also fabricated by a two-step CVD method.54 However, numerous structural defects, interlayer diffusion/alloying, uncontrollable layers, and unsatisfactory heterojunction interfaces were inevitably introduced during synthesis, which impaired the crystal quality. To realize robust epitaxial growth of diverse 2D crystals with controlled spatial modulation, we55 creatively introduced reverse flow (cold Ar gas from the substrate to the source during temperature swings) (Fig. 4a) and possibly minimized thermal degradation at higher temperatures and strictly inhibited unintended supply. Universally, a variety of 2D crystals could be fabricated (Fig. 4b), including heterostructures (e.g., WS2–WSe2 and WS2–MoSe2), multi-heterostructures (WS2–WSe2–MoS2 and WS2–MoSe2–WSe2), and superlattices (WS2–WSe2–WS2–WSe2–WS2). In contrast, the rational synthesis of vertical heterostructures is still more challenging owing to the uncontrolled nucleation of the new atomic layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of a modified CVD system for the robust epitaxial growth of lateral heterostructures. (b) Optical images of a variety of 2D crystal materials. Reprinted with permission.55 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) Schematic view of the controllable growth process of lateral/vertical MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures with the adsorption of various active clusters, i.e., W1Sex. (d) Left portion shows the Z-contrast STEM image taken from the vertical WS2/WSe2 heterostructure. Yellow dashed line indicates the step edge. Inset shows the electron diffraction pattern taken from the WS2/WSe2 bilayer. Right portion shows the enlarged HAADF-STEM image and corresponding atomic model of the red rectangular region in (d), as shown by the dotted line. (e) HAADF-STEM images of a series of heterostructures. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, Pan et al.56 comprehensively investigated the growth of 2D vertical heterostructures with respect to nucleation and kinetics based on experimental observations and theoretical calculations. The W/Se (WO3 and Se powders) ratio of the sources had a substantial influence on the MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures. An increase in W/Se led to the gradual transition from lateral growth to vertical growth. Accordingly, nucleation and growth mechanism were extensively analyzed by kinetics analysis to obtain an essential understanding. They proposed that a higher metal/chalcogenide ratio led to the formation of active clusters with a high diffusion barrier, which facilitated the growth of vertical TMD heterostructures (Fig. 4c). In Fig. 4d, the atomically sharp interfaces of vertical WS2/WSe2 heterostructures without atomic defects and alloying could be clearly distinguished. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern shows large lattice mismatch between WS2 and WSe2 owing to lattice constant differences. More importantly, the authors extended this method to fabricate a series of high-quality vertical heterostructures (Fig. 4e).
2.3 Transfer strategy of 2D TMDs
In particular, an appropriate substrate is essential for the growth of high-quality MX2 nanosheets and the corresponding electrochemical investigation. Initially, amorphous SiO2 was utilized as the growth substrate considering their perfect compatibility. With the substantial development of CVD-grown TMDs, it was found that insulating single crystals (e.g., quartz, mica, SrTiO3, and sapphire) were excellent substrates. The substrate effect also influences the crystal quality, domain size, and domain shape of CVD-grown TMDs.57 For example, Fu et al.58 initiated a new type of liquid–metal growth substrate to achieve the controllable growth of various 2D TMD heterostructures.
The transfer of as-grown TMDs onto arbitrary substrates is critical for studying the material properties. Electrochemical delamination can be used to transfer CVD-grown graphene (Gr) onto another substrate,59 but it is not suitable for the transfer of MX2 materials. Zhang and co-workers60 proposed a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)-assisted transfer method (Fig. 5a) to enable the effective transfer of monolayer MoS2 on Au foil. This transfer method comprises an etching process that detaches the as-grown MX2 (supported by a polymer membrane) from the growth substrates. The metastatic dendritic MoS2 flakes maintain their morphology with the perfect preservation of crystal quality. In addition, a polymer-free transfer method was also invented, which avoided the need for the wet chemical etching process (Fig. 5b). Ji and colleagues61 fabricated transferred VS2 nanosheets, which exhibited clean adlayer–substrate interfaces and excellent electrical conductivity (∼3 × 103 S cm−1). Meanwhile, the conductive substrate (e.g., graphite, glassy carbon (GC), highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), carbon cloth (CC), Au foil, etc.) is the key factor to achieve high performance in electrochemical applications.62 The weak interface interactions of graphite, GC, and CC may restrict electron transfer from the electrode to the active sites. In contrast, Au foil is the perfect substrate platform with the following advantages: (i) its compatibility with CVD-grown TMDs and direct application in electrochemical measurements; (ii) its outstanding conductive features; and (iii) strong interfacial coupling between MX2 and Au. Shi et al.63 reported that the growth of thickness-tunable and metallic 2D TaS2 flakes on Au foil by using low-pressure CVD (LPCVD) synthesis (Fig. 5c) directly served as an outstanding working electrode for determining the catalytic properties.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the transfer process in the PMMA-assisted method. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the polymer-free transfer method for VS2 crystals. Reprinted with permission.61 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the APCVD growth process of 2H TaS2 hexagonal flakes. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
3. Surface and interface engineering
Based on the electrochemical reaction principle, electrical conductivity, reaction energy barrier, and number and ability of active sites are important factors for high-efficiency electrocatalytic performance.64,65 These factors are closely related to the intrinsic electronic structure of the catalysts, which determines the adsorption and activation of the reactant molecules. On one hand, electron transport in TMDs is a fundamental process that regulates the surface chemistry properties. Some semiconductor-based TMD catalysts need to tailor the bandgap to increase the intrinsic electrical conductivity. On the other hand, the electronic structure directly determines the intrinsic catalytic reactivity of an individual active site. The reaction energy barrier is strongly correlated with the electronic configuration. Therefore, the effective modulation of the surface electronic state of TMDs is essential to improve the catalytic behavior.
To this end, atomic-scale engineering provides promising opportunities toward tailoring the physicochemical properties of TMDs (Fig. 6). According to theoretical and experimental studies, six atomic-scale engineering strategies have been rationally proposed and systematically discussed together with some representative examples. In detail, geometric dimensional control enables 2D CVD-grown TMDs to have the desired ultrathin morphology, allowing for the facile and controllable regulation of the local atomic and electronic structures. As a well-defined model system, ultrathin TMDs with a specific shape are conducive toward the study of the structure–catalytic activity relationship at the atomic level. The introduction of structural defects (e.g., anion vacancies, cation vacancies, lattice distortions, and phase boundaries), specific doping, phase change, and tuning the surface strain have been widely regarded as powerful methods to alter the electronic properties, thereby optimizing the electrocatalytic reaction process and yield enhanced activity.67–70 On the other hand, the energy band structure, carrier concentration, and mobility are the internal determinants of electrical conductivity. The electrical conductivity of TMDs can be optimized by coupling with conductive substrates (e.g., Gr, Au, etc.), low-dimension confinement, phase, and contact engineering,71 which not only resolves the problem of poor conductivity but also boosts the catalytic activities. In addition, the rational construction of heterojunctions could create an atomic interface, leading to the interfacial polarization effect. This induced effect substantially improves the adsorption behavior of the reactants and effectively lowers the activation energy barrier. Meanwhile, heterostructure construction combines the merits of each component. Surely, these abovementioned strategies are interrelated and mutually reinforced. Overall, these protocols ultimately provide a rational guideline toward catalyst design in the future.
 Fig. 6  (a) Six atomic-scale engineering strategies. (b) Factors that influence electrocatalysis. (c) Solid-surface catalytic reaction process. 
For the first time, Chorkendorff and co-workers66 corroborated a direct correlation between the metallic edge density of triangular monolayer MoS2 and the HER activity (Fig. 7a and b), revealing that the metallic Mo edges act as active sites. For trigonal prismatic (2H) MoS2, the catalytic activity mainly originated from the edges, while the basal planes were catalytically inert. However, any excess increase in the size of the edges represents a decrease in the lateral domain size, which, in turn, degrades the continuous electron transport properties. With regard to large-area 2D crystals with low edge-to-surface ratios, the effective regulation of the electronic structure enables the conversion of the basal plane from being catalytically inert to becoming catalytically active. It is widely accepted that reactions occur on the surface of solid catalysts. Only certain surface atoms (such as those at the edges, defects, and interface) could participate in the reaction, whereas the interior atoms do not. As the thickness of CVD-grown 2D TMDs goes down to the atomic scale, surface atoms become comparable to overall atoms. As such, the customization of the local atomic and electronic structure tailored by atomic-scale engineering is essential to optimize the adsorption of the reactant and/or intermediates, thereby accelerating the reaction rate. Meanwhile, atomic-level insights into the structure–performance relationship offers a fundamental understanding on the underlying reaction mechanism, which can introduce additional possibilities for catalytic materials design.
 Fig. 7  (a) STM image of monolayer MoS2 nanocrystals on Au(111). (b) Plot of the exchange current density versus MoS2 edge length. Inset shows the STM image of monolayer MoS2. Reprinted with permission.66 Copyright 2007, AAAS. (c) SEM image of monolayer MoS2 flakes on Au foil. Inset shows a schematic view of monolayer MoS2 edges for HER. Reprinted with permission.73 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of MoS2 nanobelts. Inset shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a MoS2 nanobelt. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM images. Inset shows the structure of edge-terminated MoX2 films. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) Hopping of electrons in a direction vertical to MoS2 layers. Reprinted with permission.83 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.1 Geometric dimensional control
It is well known that specific microstructures (e.g., edge, domain size, etc.) can be exposed via geometric dimensional control to achieve controllable regulation of the surface energy. TMD edges exhibit better metallic properties and lower coordination characteristics than those exhibited by basal planes. The exposed edges with high surface energy are believed to be metastable; they act as active sites for various catalytic reactions. Geometric dimensional control is a well-studied method that can be used to manipulate the atomic structural diversity and tailor their surface properties, inducing performance enhancement in many energy-related applications.72 Zhang et al.73 developed LPCVD routes to study the preparation of triangular monolayer MoS2 (Fig. 7c) using Au foil as the growth substrate. Regulating the domain size of monolayer MoS2 from the nanometer to micrometer scales was realized by controlling the temperature of the growth substrate. Tuning the carrier gas composition could increase the size of MoS2 domain, as well as achieve triangular MoS2 with an edge length of 81 μm. The coverage of MoS2 could be adjusted by changing the substrate–precursor distance. Here, MoS2/Au with 80% coverage yielded a Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1 and exchange current density of 38.1 μA cm−2. Abundant active edges and strong electron interaction between monolayer MoS2 and Au foil could explain the HER properties. Moreover, the linear relationship between exchange current density and edge length confirmed that the active sites were located on the MoS2 edges.
In addition, the ratio of precursors has a profound impact on the growth kinetics of atomic edges, resulting in shape evolution from triangular to hexagonal geometries.74 Surely, the carrier gas also affects the morphology of CVD-grown MX2. Shi and colleagues75 revealed that the addition of trace H2 into the carrier gas rendered the shape evolution of monolayer WS2 flakes from jagged to straight-edge triangles, while still remaining single crystalline. They explained that the growth of WS2 with H2 was associated to be mediated by the kinetic effect, rendering thermodynamically stable geometry with a regular triangular shape. The addition of O2 not only prevented the poisoning of precursors but also eliminated the formation of defects during the growth process.76
Subsequently, Zhang et al.60,77 developed dendritic monolayer MoS2 flakes with abundant atomic edges on SrTiO3 substrate and monolayer WS2 nanosheets on Au foil. The morphological evolution—varying from fractal to nearly compact—was largely related to the growth temperature and source–substrate distance. After the intact transfer onto Au foil, fractal monolayer MoS2 flakes showed high reactivity and stability toward HER. In addition, single-crystal MoS2 nanobelts with the top surface fully covered by edge sites are also highly efficient in HER (Fig. 7d).78 Further, 1D ditelluride nanobelts with high purity, well-defined geometry, compositional tunability, and remarkable electrical performance were also successfully developed.79 It is reported that vertically aligned nanosheets maximally exposed the edges, thereby optimizing the overall catalytic activity of TMDs.80 Cui and colleagues81 fabricated MoX2 (e.g., MoSe2 and MoS2) films with vertically aligned layers by the selenization (sulfurization) of electron-beam-evaporated ultrathin Mo films (Fig. 7e). Since the formation of layer orientation was dominated by S/Se diffusion during the chemical conversion process at higher temperatures, the reactants could be easily transported along the layers through the vdW gaps as compared to that when crossing the layers in MoS2/MoSe2. Hence, the layers are inclined to be perpendicular to the substrate. Edge-terminated films—maximally exposing the edges of the layer—prove to be stable HER catalysts with exchange current densities of 2 μA cm−2. Dravid et al.82 discovered the “seeding effect” of Au nanoparticles to synthesize vertically aligned few-layer MoS2 wings, creating abundant edge-terminated active sites and ensuring intimate contact. This unique structure enabled the efficient charge transport and drove the formation of H2.
Moreover, layer-dependent behavior is a crucial factor to determine the catalytic properties. The atomic-edge-rich MoS2 pyramid platelets grown on GC substrates exhibited interesting layer-dependent catalysis.83 The exchange current density of MoS2 decreased as the number of layers increased. In particular, the catalytic activity can be strongly ascribed to the efficiency of electron hopping in a direction vertical with respect to the MoS2 layers (Fig. 7f). This means that basal planes and edges are believed to serve as catalytic sites in this system. In contrast, Jiao and co-workers84 fabricated atomically thin 1T PtSe2 flakes with controlled number of layers ranging from one layer (1L) to >20L. Theoretical studies revealed that increasing the number of layers (<3L) not only decreased the energy barrier for efficient electron transfer but also increased the conductivity, leading to a semiconducting-to-metallic transition. Further, the design of thicker flakes increases the proportion of unsaturated atoms at the edges. Notably, experimental results validated that 20L PtSe2 exhibited outstanding HER activity, approaching that of Pt/C. Moreover, Wang and colleagues14 predicted that monolayer PtTe was metallic with considerable electronic states at the Fermi level, which displayed excellent activity toward ORR with a high halfwave potential up to 0.90 V (vs. RHE).
The electroreduction of CO2 into valuable chemicals (CO, CH4, CH3OH, and C2+ products) is highly desirable but challenging owing to the high dissociation energy of CO bonds and the competing reaction of HER. Benefitting from unique structural and electrical features, TMDs have experienced increasing attention for electrocatalytic CO2RR applications. Liu and co-workers85 synthesized ultrathin MoTe2 layers via a facile CVD process followed by an ultrasonic exfoliation strategy. The good electrical conductivity ensured the rapid electron transfer capability of MoTe2. Further, the ultrathin structure increased the ion diffusion ability and exposed the accessible active sites. As a result, MoTe2 displayed a high current density of 25.6 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V (vs. RHE) for the CO2-to-CH4 conversion in an ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte system accompanied by the maximum faradaic efficiency (FE) (83 ± 3%) and robust durability over 45 h. IL not only efficiently carries the CO2 molecules to the active sites but also significantly lowers the energy of the CO2˙− intermediates. Meanwhile, IL could suppress the side reactions of HER. When compared with its bulk counterpart, the catalytic reactivity of an ultrathin nanostructure exhibited a 137-fold increment, comparable to that of state-of-the-art Cu catalysts. Undoubtedly, these exciting results demonstrate the attractive potential of CVD-grown TMDs in electrocatalysis.
3.2 Defect engineering
Defect-induced electrocatalysis deserves significant attention, representing newer opportunities to tailor the surface atomic arrangement and electronic structure of 2D TMDs.86–88 Zhou and colleagues89 directly visualized various structural defects at the atomic level, including point defects (vacancy), dislocations, grain boundaries (GBs), and edges in monolayer MoS2 (Fig. 8a). To engineer more structural defects, we90 firstly developed a simple and straightforward plasma (Ar or O2) treatment method (Fig. 8b). By adjusting the plasma treatment time, the particle sizes of MoS2 could be gradually reduced and even some sheet structure appeared, indicating an increase in the exposed edges. The formation of atomic defects demonstrated that plasma engineering altered the surface properties. The efficiency of O2 plasma was superior to that of Ar plasma, which was evidenced by better conductivity and affinity. As expected, O2-plasma-treated MoS2 films possessed higher active site density and turnover frequency (TOF) than Ar-plasma-treated MoS2 films and pristine MoS2 films. Plasma treatment was also used to engineer structural defects in WSe2 monolayers.91 Similarly, Ye et al.92 applied O2 plasma and H2 annealing to induce the formation of cracks with certain angles and irregular triangular holes. The defect density could be effectively regulated by changing the reaction parameters. Both the defects-engineered MoS2 samples showed noticeable performance enhancement as compared to their pristine counterparts.
 Fig. 8  (a) Atomic-resolution STEM-ADF images of monolayer MoS2 with various intrinsic structural defects, including vacancies, GBs, and edges. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the plasma treatment of MoS2 thin films. Reprinted with permission.90 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) STEM image with an inset of FFT patterns of monolayer VRe-ReS2. (d) Optimized defect structure of VRe-ReS2. Reprinted with permission.104 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) STM topography of MoS2. Inset shows the atomic model of zigzag-type 2H–1T phase boundaries. (f) Polarization curves of MoS2. Reprinted with permission.109 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Li and colleagues93 provide a more comprehensive understanding of active sites. The TOF values of edge sites, S vacancies, and GBs were quantitatively determined to be 7.5, 3.2, and 0.1 s−1, respectively. The concentration of S vacancies plays a crucial role in regulating the activity. Hence, tailoring S vacancies is a convincing method to modify the atomic and electronic structures. S vacancy engineering induces the formation of uncoordinated Mo atoms, which creates gap states around the Fermi level and facilitates favorable hydrogen binding to the exposed Mo atoms. Theoretical calculations confirmed that S vacancies in the basal planes of 2H MoS2 were thermodynamically favored.94–96 H2 plasma was adopted to create atomic S vacancies on the basal plane of monolayer MoS2, activating the catalytically inert basal plane. A scalable route to induce atomic S vacancies via electrochemical desulfurization was reported.94 The possible mechanism for producing S vacancies is that S atoms are firstly hydrogenated and subsequently electrochemically removed. The concentration of S vacancies as well as activity could be rationally optimized by fine-tuning the applied desulfurization potential and duration. Other methods such as heat treatment, electron-beam exposure, and strain exertion have been reported to generate S vacancies.96–98 On the contrary, both Tapasztóet et al.99 and Zhang et al.100 found that S vacancies could be fully and reversibly reduced to the pure phase with the assistance of external conditions. In addition to S vacancies, Se vacancies in MoSe2 and Te vacancies in WTe2 could be engineered to significantly tailor their properties.101,102 For example, with an increase in the annealing temperature, more Se vacancies on the basal planes of WSe2 could be produced.103 Theoretical and experimental results suggest that Se vacancies (9.38%) obviously activate and optimize the basal planes of WSe2 to deliver superior activity.
Apart from anion vacancies, cation vacancies can also considerably affect the surface properties via charge engineering. Liu and co-workers104 synthesized monolayer ReS2 with Re vacancies (VRe-ReS2) via the KI-aided CVD process. Re evaporation induced by ReS2 decomposition resulted in the formation of atomic VRe. Evidently, the STEM image (Fig. 8c) shows the discontinuity of Re chains as well as the abundant existence of VRe (highlighted by dashed circles). The simulated model (Fig. 8d) indicates that the missing Re atoms could activate S and Re–Re bonds via the newly formed dangling bonds. Re vacancies confined in the ReS2 monolayer enable intrinsic charge compensation from S to Re–Re bonds and regulate the active electronic states, allowing the more favorable adsorption behavior of the S sites. As a consequence, Re-deficient ReS2 exhibited an auto-optimizing effect as compared to ReS2 without Re vacancy, yielding satisfactory HER performance. Further, metal vacancies would exert a more important influence on the intrinsic properties of TMDs than those by chalcogen vacancies. Lee et al.105 confirmed the coexistence of S and W vacancies in hexagonal WS2 flakes. Evidently, the negative effect of W vacancies on electron mobility was an order of magnitude higher than that of S vacancies. Moreover, single K decoration upon W vacancy in monolayer WSe2 alters the energy states and modifies the local electronic structure.106
Lattice defect, distortion, and dislocation are generally rich in phase boundaries, which are long-range disordered and thermodynamically unstable, exerting a significant impact on the electrochemical properties.107,108 Recently, Zhu et al.109 activated the monolayer MoS2 basal plane toward HER catalysis by introducing numerous 2H–1T phase boundaries via Ar plasma. In Fig. 8e, the STM image of heterophase MoS2 shows bright and dark regions corresponding to the 2H and 1T phases, respectively.
Impressively, the introduced 2H–1T phase boundaries exhibited low Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) of −0.13 eV, close to that of the Mo edge of 2H MoS2 and Pt(111) surfaces, suggesting that the highly active centers reduced the barriers and optimized the overall kinetics. The percentage of 2H–1T phase boundaries could be efficiently controlled. Electrochemical measurements illustrated the remarkable electrocatalytic HER ability in both acid and alkaline electrolytes, with overpotential values of 100 and 176 mV, respectively (Fig. 8f). The overpotential value at 10 mA cm−2 linearly decreased as the 2H–1T phase boundary density increased, confirming the pivotal effect of phase boundaries. Moreover, GBs are regarded as sites for the nucleation growth of other crystals. Ho et al.110 utilized the GBs of CVD-produced monolayer WS2 films to grow CdS nanoparticles in a random manner, affording WS2–CdS heterojunctions that exhibited improved carrier separation ability; they exhibited promising potential in electrocatalysis.
3.3 Doping modification
Doping strategy is a well-accepted fundamental method to modify TMDs and tune their compositions, electronic properties, and catalytic performance. The similarity between doping atoms (e.g., Mn, Ta, Nb, Cr, V, Au, Re, etc.) and displaced atoms (e.g., Mo and W) enables the feasibility and diversity of doping.111–114 To validate this, Khojin et al.115 selected Nb as the dopant to study the influence of doping on the atomic-scale edge structure of MoS2 toward CO2RR. Further, 5% Nb-doped vertically aligned MoS2 (VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2) was synthesized using CVD. The atomic-resolution characterization (Fig. 9a) image revealed that VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2 exhibited a highly crystalline structure similar to the original hexagonal structure of MoS2, suggesting that Nb doping did not destroy the crystalline structure of MoS2 without microstructural modification and/or defect creation. A volcano-like relationship between current density and Nb doping concentrations was determined at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) in an IL electrolyte: VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2 achieved the highest current density of 237 mA cm−2. Importantly, the TOF of CO formation for VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2 was also better than those of pristine VA-MoS2 and Ag catalyst (Fig. 9b). Theoretical calculations showed that suitable Nb atoms near the Mo edge decreased the binding energies of intermediates, facilitating CO desorption. This exciting result confirmed that atomic Nb doping resulted in an enhancing effect on CO2RR. Based on practical measurements, further results showed that Ta dopants had a detrimental effect on CO2RR. Therefore, it is particularly critical to choose appropriate dopants to boost the targeted reaction on the basis of the integration of theoretical and experimental analyses.
 Fig. 9  (a) HRTEM image of VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2. Inset shows the corresponding FFT pattern. (b) TOF for CO formation at different overpotentials for VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2, pristine VA-MoS2, and Ag catalyst. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Enlarged HRTEM image shows strong contrast from a single Pt atom located at the 6S lattice site. (d) DFT-relaxed atomic model showing a Pt atom in the 2S vacancy site. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Relationship between currents (log(i0)) and ΔGH* exhibits a volcano curve. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Polarization curves. Reprinted with permission.69 Copyright 2015, Springer. (g) Photoluminescence spectra of a series of composition tunable WS2xSe2(1−x) monolayer nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.130 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
TMDs act as excellent supports due to their flexible structural and electronic controls. Stabilizing a single atom into the lattice of TMDs is a good choice to significantly promote the catalytic properties. Atomic-scale doping enables the viability of triggering the catalytic activity of inert CVD-grown TMDs. The capture of a single atom on atomic S vacancies is a reliable way to enhance the catalytic reactivity.116,117 Wang et al.97 created abundant S vacancies in 2D MoS2 by using an electron beam, which acted as stable binding sites for Pt atoms. Further, the enlarged atomic resolution image (Fig. 9c) revealed that a single Pt atom was located at the S lattice site, confirming the strong interaction between Pt and S vacancy sites. DFT calculations showed that individual Pt atoms could be tightly stabilized when they were bound to either 1S or 2S vacancies (Fig. 9d). The possibility of a Pt/MoS2 system for HER was also proposed. Pt dopant and S vacancy both acted as active centers. Similarly, single Cr- or V-substitutional dopants were also successfully incorporated into monolayer MoS2 under the assistance of line defects.118 In experiments, Deng and colleagues119 trigged the electrocatalytic HER of inert MoS2via isolated Pt doping. After Pt decoration, Pt–MoS2 distinctly reduced the overpotential and enhanced the catalytic stability. DFT calculations indicated that doped Pt atoms could modulate the adsorption behavior of H atoms near the neighboring S sites on the MoS2 surface, thereby creating novel electronic states of Pt–MoS2 and thereby increasing surface reactivity. More importantly, they also screened the difference in the modulated ability of different metal atoms. A typical volcano plot for HER, correlating the currents (log(i0)) and ΔGH*, is shown in Fig. 9e. On the basis of this, atomic Ni and Co-doped MoS2 were subsequently fabricated, which exhibited improved activities as compared to pure MoS2. Interestingly, Luo et al.120 smartly fabricated unsaturated single Mo atoms on monolayer MoS2 and single W atom on monolayer WS2 using the universal cold H2 plasma reduction method. It should be noted that Mo SAs/MoS2 shows low overpotential of ∼260 mV at a high current density of 400 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 36.4 mV dec−1 for HER. Importantly, their work offers a novel and general method to synthesize single atoms on 2D monolayers.
In MoS2, Mo edges were demonstrated to be more active than S edges with respect to HER. Wang et al.69 incorporated transition metal dopants (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) into the atomic S edge sites of vertically standing MoS2 nanofilms to activate the S edges, leading to an obvious increase in the exchange current densities as compared to pristine nanofilms (Fig. 9f). Theoretical simulations revealed that S edge sites with metal doping exhibited reactivity similar to that of Mo edges for HER.121,122 Further, isolated Co atoms can be filled into the S vacancies on the basal plane of monolayer MoS2via strong covalent attachments, exhibiting outstanding performance owing to the formation of Co–S–Mo interfacial sites.123 Moreover, anion doping (e.g., O, Se, P, C, N) into the inert basal plane of MoS2 or WS2 layers may induce a polarized electric field or orientated charge redistribution, facilitating the adsorption of reactants and improving the catalytic reactivity.124–126 The basal plane of monolayer MoS2 is prone to undergo O-substitution reactions during ambient exposure. The atomic-level O doping replaced the individual S atoms, yielding the formation of 2D MoS2−xOx crystals.124 The strong acceptor-type behavior of the O sites was revealed by Bader analysis. The center of O substitution localized the negative charges, facilitating the adsorption of positively charged H species in an acid electrolyte and therefore substantially improving the overall HER activity. Wang's group126 reported that in situ C doping could modulate the electronic and coordination structures of MoS2, achieving unprecedented overpotential of 45 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for HER in alkaline media. DFT simulations showed that C doping created empty 2p orbitals perpendicular to the basal plane of MoS2, yielding thermodynamically favorable water activation. The above research provides a promising avenue for engineering 2D TMD electrocatalysts in atomic-scale design. Hence, controllable and appropriate doping is essential to significantly boost the activity of host TMDs.
On the other hand, 2D ternary TMDs have become the research frontier due to their tunable electrical properties attributable to controllable stoichiometric variations. The addition of the third element could efficiently increase the freedom of the electronic structure, leading to more appealing prospects. Recent studies demonstrated that partially replacing S or Mo in MoS2 with other heteroatoms to produce alloyed TMD nanosheets (e.g., Mo(1−x)WxS2 and MoS2(1−x)Se2x) could not only tailor their compositions and bandgaps but also significantly improve their catalytic performance.127–129 We130 systematically explored the composition-tunable electronic properties of WS2xSe2(1−x) alloy nanosheets. The continuous shift in the photoluminescence peak position ranged from 626.6 nm (nearly pure WS2) to 751.9 nm (nearly pure WSe2), as shown in Fig. 9g, suggesting the effective bandgap modulation by tuning the chemical compositions of the alloy. The electrical properties gradually transformed from the p-type behavior of Se-rich alloys to n-doped semiconductors of S-rich alloys, which were clearly evident. The tunable bandgap depended on the composition variation, representing a facile route to rationally design 2D TMD ternary materials. Xiang and colleagues131 corroborated the possibility of monolayer WS2(1−x)Se2x toward electrocatalytic HER. As compared to WS2 and WSe2, WS2(1−x)Se2x exhibits better HER performance and favorable stability over 22 h. Moreover, Zhang and co-workers132 confirmed that monolayer ternary WS2(1−x)Se2x flakes showed enhanced HER performance as compared to that of pristine WS2. These results highlight the fact that alloys are better than pure materials. Therefore, focusing on ternary-type 2D TMDs is a significant direction toward obtaining enhanced electrocatalytic performance. In addition, Sang et al.133 directly visualized the atomic-edge evolution of pores within monolayer Mo1−xWxSe2via in situ STEM characterization. They revealed that these edges could be structurally converted into metastable atomic configurations via thermal and chemical driving forces.
Currently, most works focus on the doping of sulfides and selenides. Ternary tellurides have many interesting properties, but their controllable preparation is still a challenging task. Recently, Liu et al.134 successfully synthesized high-quality monolayer ternary WTe2xS2(1−x) alloys (x = 0–1) by a single-step CVD method. The local displacement of Te atoms from the original lattice provided a novel insight into the structure formation of the alloy. The flexible tunability of the atomic and electronic properties of ternary TMDs provides formidable possibilities to optimize the catalytic activity.
3.4 Phase transition
The physicochemical properties of 2D TMDs are largely dependent on their phase owing to the different atomic configurations. In particular, phase transition is the transformation from the stable to the metastable phase. The phase of TMDs can be categorized based on the structure of the unit cell, namely, trigonal prismatic (2H and 3R) and 1T. According to the classical energy band theory, the diverse filling of the d orbitals of transition metals could induce different atomic and electronic structures of different phases, exhibiting distinctly different properties.135 For example, 2H MoS2 are semiconductors, while the 1T ones are metallic. However, the 1T phase is vulnerable to ambient conditions, and its direct synthesis is fairly difficult.136 Recent progresses have suggested that engineering the crystal phase could trigger improvements in conductivity and surface reactivity.137,138 Therefore, it is imperative to directly synthesize 2D TMDs with the targeted phases.
The regulation of phase mainly lies in synthesis control and posttreatment. Zhou et al.139 studied the influence of Mo precursors on the phase of MoTe2 films using CVD. They concluded that Mo and MoOx (x < 3) precursors easily reacted with Te to form 1T′ MoTe2, while the MoO3 precursor was favorable to synthesize 2H MoTe2. Further, controlled tellurization affected the phase of MoTe2 grown from MoO3.140 1T′ MoTe2 was obtained under an insufficient Te supply, whereas a sufficient Te source led to the formation of 2H MoTe2. This investigation highlights the role of Mo precursors and the amount of Te toward the controllable phase engineering of MoTe2. Moreover, several strategies have been accordingly proposed to engender structural phase transitions, such as alkaline metal insertion,141 laser irradiation,142 Ar plasma,143 resonant excitation of plasmon,144 impurities doping,145etc. Zhu and co-workers143 achieved the local phase transition of MoS2 from 2H to 1T using weak Ar plasma treatment. The 1T phase was stabilized by point defects (single S vacancy). Ajayan et al.146 demonstrated the composition-dependent phase transition in Re-doped MoSe2. Interestingly, Mo1−xRexSe2 showed the structural phase transformation from the 2H to 1T′ phase as a function of Re doping. The 2H phase was the preferred phase at low Re dopant concentrations below 40%, while 1T′ phases were fairly stable when Re concentration reached 40%. Alternatively, MoS2 alloying with Re beyond 50% could yield stable distorted tetragonal (DT) RexMo1−xS2 alloys (Fig. 10a). The doped Re concentration had a profound effect on the atomic arrangement and crystal structure with a transition from the 1H to DT phase (Fig. 10b). Re efficiently stabilized the DT structure, which could be attributed to the strong metal–sulfur bonding. DFT calculations revealed that the Mo-rich sites had low hydrogen adsorption energies, signifying the fact that the basal plane of the DT-structured alloy was active for HER. DT-structured RexMo1−xS2 alloy exhibited improved HER activity as compared to those for 2H MoS2 and lithium-intercalated 1T MoS2. Conclusively, atomic-doping-induced phase transition enables better electrocatalytic performance. Moreover, the proportion of two distinct phases (1H semiconducting and 1T′ metallic) in WTe2xS2(1−x) alloys was tuned by changing the ratio of the chalcogen precursors and H2 flow rate during the preparation process, yielding the continuous bandgap regulation and fulfilling the regulation of semiconductor 1H- and metallic 1T′-phase ternary tellurides.134
 Fig. 10  (a) STEM-ADF image of Re0.55Mo0.45S2 alloy. (b) Calculated mixing energy in the 1H and DT phases of the RexMo1−xS2 alloy at different Re concentrations. Reprinted with permission.146 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of monolayer MoS2@NPG hybrid materials by using the CVD approach. (d) STEM image of monolayer MoS2@NPG. Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) Structure models. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Polarization curves. Reprinted with permission.138 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Phase transitions in TMDs may induce more novel properties.147–149 For 1T MoS2 and WS2, computational studies have revealed that the catalytic properties seem to depend on the concentration of the metallic phase. The basal planes of the metallic 1T phase of TMDs, like their edges, are also active. Cui et al.141 realized the phase transition of vertically aligned MoS2 nanofilms from the 2H to 1T phase via lithium intercalation, revealing different rate-determining steps and catalytic mechanisms. Tan and colleagues98 confirmed the crucial importance of strain on the phase transformation for TMDs. For example, they prepared continuous monolayer MoS2 films grown on 3D nanoporous gold (NPG) (Fig. 10c). A STEM image (Fig. 10d) revealed the curved lattice and obvious lattice distortions at the atomic level. The bent lattices with large out-of-plane strains modified the bandgap of monolayer MoS2, partly converting the semiconducting phase into metallic phase when the S–Mo–S bonding angle was larger than 140°. By controlling the precursor–substrate distance, MoS2 with different layers exhibited optimal HER activity with overpotential of 226 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1.
Very recently, we150 reported ultrathin 2D layered tetragonal CoSe nanoplates and nonlayered hexagonal CoSe nanoplates (Fig. 10e) by tailoring the growth temperature. Both these nanoplates exhibited strong thickness-tunable electrical properties. In particular, outstanding conductivity up to 6.6 × 105 S m−1 could be achieved for 2D hexagonal CoSe nanoplates, exhibiting metallic behavior. It is well known that VS2 is a typical metallic member of the TMD family without a bandgap. Lou et al.151 directly synthesized 1T VS2 nanosheets with a hexagonal structure and single-crystalline nature by a facile CVD route. The metallic nature considerably contributed toward the remarkable HER activity by accelerating the electron transfer kinetics (Tafel slope: 34 mV dec−1). Interestingly, 1T VS2 exhibited self-optimization behavior during 12000 cycles, which indicated its potential for HER. Active-site self-optimization by the irreversible phase transition of 1T MoS2 was also discovered in photocatalytic HER.152 Relying on calculations, the ΔGH* value of Ta edge, S edge, and basal planes of 2H TaS2 could be determined to be −0.04, −0.10, and 0.15 eV, respectively.63 Experimentally, the thickness-tunable TaS2 flakes on Au foil were also fabricated via the APCVD route. 2H TaS2 with different thicknesses showed excellent HER performance with low overpotential, markedly enhanced kinetics, and low charge transfer resistance. Recently, Chhowalla and co-workers138 prepared metallic niobium disulfide with additional niobium (Nb1+xS2) by using CVD. The composition and phase of Nb1+xS2 were efficiently controlled by adjusting the growth parameters and changing the thickness. Here, 2H Nb1+xS2 with a thickness of less than 20 nm was predominantly determined, and the 3R phase was fairly stable for thicker samples. Surprisingly, the metallic 2H phase of Nb1.35S2 exhibited ultrahigh current density (over 5000mAcm−2 at ∼420mV), as shown in Fig. 10f, which is suitable for industrial electrolysis. The TOF at 0 V was ∼0.2s−1, indicating its outstanding catalytic activity. The DFT results revealed that the hydrogen adsorption free energy of the Nb-terminated surface was close to thermoneutral. Moreover, Zhou et al.153 investigated the semiconductor–metal transition of ultrathin troilite FeS nanosheets, enhancing carrier transfers and HER reactivity. The optimized activity is about 8 times higher than the semiconductor-phase FeS.
3.5 Strain tuning
Recently, strain-controlled electrocatalysis has become a hot spot for fundamental scientific research. Tuning the surface strain of nanomaterials has proven to be an effective and powerful strategy to modulate the surface atomic arrangement, electronic structure, and adsorption behavior of the reaction intermediates. This concept of “strain tuning” for metal systems has been systematically summarized,154,155 which was used to guide catalyst synthesis and performance optimization. A marginal amount of strain could have a significant contribution on improving the catalytic reactivity.156 Further, the origin of surface strain can be derived from inherent modulation (e.g., morphology, composition, and architecture) and external force. A representative example for this is exfoliated WS2 nanosheets for HER, as reported by Chhowalla and colleagues.31 The existence of strain in 1T WS2 increases the density of states near the Fermi level and therefore reduces the hydrogen adsorption energy, indicating the profound impact of the strain effect. In general, surface strain mainly includes tensile strain and compressive strain. Surface strain often appears in the system of epitaxially grown TMD heterostructures and alloying materials. Fig. 11a shows several common strain conditions. The interface spontaneously produces compressive stress and tensile stress for each crystalline component with different lattice parameters. A gradient stress field may be generated, and the lattice strain effect can be gradually decreased from the interface to the surface. Notably, strain regulation influences the lattice vacancy, phase transformation, lattice mismatch, geometry effect, etc.
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of tensile or compressive strain and the strain field influenced by lattice mismatch. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Theoretical model of the strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 core–shell nanostructure. Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Mapping of isotropic strain. Cyan and red colors denote tension and compression, respectively. (d) Mapping of shear strain. Indigo and chartreuse colors denote counterclockwise and clockwise shear strains, respectively. Reprinted with permission.163 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Theoretically, Johari and co-workers157 found that the bandgap of semiconducting MX2 (M = Mo and W; X = S, Se, and Te) could be efficiently regulated by both tensile and shear strains using DFT calculations, causing a direct-to-indirect bandgap and a semiconductor-to-metal transition. Duerloo et al.158 reported that the structural phase deformation for all group 6 TMDs could be driven by applying mechanical strain, particularly for MoTe2. Chen and colleagues159 calculated the influence of compressive and tensile strains on the catalytic HER behavior of monolayer MS2 (M = Mo or Nb). They found that biaxial tensile strain exhibited a more beneficial effect than uniaxial tensile strain, whereas compressive strain had a negative effect on HER activity. A further analysis of the electronic structure suggested that tensile strain activated the relatively inert inner valence electrons and enlarged d-band exchange splitting, both of which destabilized the system and enhanced the catalytic activity. Among the various model catalysts, both 1T MoS2 and 1H NbS2 exhibited excellent strain tunability for HER activities because of the presence of more active sites induced by the increasing strain in certain regions. Moreover, Putungan and co-workers160 proposed the concept of “tensile-strain-based tuning of the HER activity” to boost the catalytic performance of the conducting monolayer 1T′ MX2 (M = Mo and W; X = S, Se, and Te). These studies provide a theoretical guideline for manipulating TMD electrocatalysts via strain regulation.
Experimentally, Chen et al.98 tailored the inherent strain of monolayer MoS2 by exploiting the lattice mismatch between the MoS2 films and Au substrate, regulating the charge density distribution and further activating the “edge-free” MoS2. Zheng and colleagues161 proved that strained S vacancies on the basal plane of MoS2 monolayers possessed a rapid electron transfer rate, which was four times higher than that of unstrained S vacancies. Importantly, constructing a core–shell structure is a representative way to introduce and control the surface strain. Du et al.162 precisely designed Co9S8/MoS2 core–shell nanocrystals by controlling the number of shells (from 1L to 5L) to illustrate the strain–activity relationship. Lattice strain was induced by the heteroepitaxial growth of the atomic lattice-mismatched structures. Tensile strain gradually decreased with an increase in the outer MoS2 shell. A large tensile surface strain value of 3.5% could be achieved in Co9S8/1L MoS2. The analysis of band structures suggested that the larger strain in MoS2 enabled a shift in the band to the Fermi level, which strengthened the hydrogen binding ability. In other words, the tensile surface strain optimized the bandgap, making it more suitable for HER (Fig. 11b). As expected, the strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 exhibited overpotential of 97 mV at 10 mA cm−2. This work corroborates the connection between strain and reactivity with regard to electrocatalysis.
Further, strain engineering could cause the formation of atomic S vacancies due to lattice distortions.163 Based on experimental and computational results, the combination of strain and S vacancies on the basal plane of MoS2 increased the density of active sites and therefore enhanced the HER activity.164 Meanwhile, strain analyses of WS2/WO2.9/C hybrids provided clear evidence of isotropic and shear strains in the corresponding mapping results (Fig. 11c and d). Moreover, Shih et al.165 smartly utilized the Moiré pattern to visualize strain distributions at high spatial resolution, amplifying the minor atomic distortion of laterally strained WSe2–MoS2 heterojunctions. The difference in the electronic structures at the interface induced by strain distributions was thoroughly investigated by scanning tunneling microscopy/scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STM/STS) characterizations. Tuning the strain offers an opportunity to boost the catalytic activity. To the best of our knowledge, correlating the surface strain with activity is scarcely based on experimental breakthroughs on CVD-grown MX2 owing to the limitation imposed by the complexity, precision, and quantification of regulation. Therefore, further and deeper research is necessary to accurately acquire the fundamental dependence among surface strain, adsorption behavior, and catalytic properties.
3.6 Heterostructure construction
The emergence of vdW heterostructures arouses newer possibilities to achieve the full potential of each material by combining components with different properties and functionalities, leading to a positive synergistic effect and enhanced catalytic efficiency. The rational design of heterostructures based on CVD enriches the family of 2D TMDs and provides smarter routes for creating high-energy interfacial structures for use in advanced electrocatalysis. Until now, various heterostructures have been reported, such as MX2/Gr vertical heterostructures,166 MX2/MX2 vertical/lateral heterostructures, and so on. By considering the excellent conductivity of Gr, the excellent reactivity of select MoS2/Gr vertical heterostructures grown on Au foil acted as an ideal system to investigate their interface/edge properties and electrocatalytic activities. In this design, MoS2/Gr/Au was synthesized by a two-step CVD strategy. The in-between Gr weakened the atomic interface interaction between MoS2 and Au foil.168 The Mo-terminated zigzag-edge bandgap of MoS2/Gr/Au foil (∼0.30 eV) was half that of MoS2/Au foil. The reduced bandgap was favorable for promoting electron transfer from Au to the edge of MoS2 (Fig. 12a), thereby facilitating HER. Similarly, Tang et al.169 directly constructed 3D mesoporous vdW heterostructures comprising epitaxial Gr and N-doped MoS2 nanosheets by the sequential CVD method. The interfacial charge redistribution in the vdW heterostructure not only modulates the adsorption energies of the intermediates but also strengthens the coupling effect between each component. Such a nanostructure affords efficient trifunctional electrocatalytic reactivity (ORR, OER, and HER) via the collaborative optimizations of morphology, edge, defect, interface, and electronic structure. The concept of heterostructures with a smart design opens up a new avenue to boost the inherent activities by compensating for individual weaknesses.170 For example, coupling active 1T WS2 and metallic WO3−x reduced the transfer resistance and provided additional active sites. Due to the synergetic effect of S vacancies, remarkable conductivity of WO2.9, and fast transport of electrons in the carbon substrates, the WS2/WO2.9/C heterostructure exhibited superior HER performance.163 Therefore, a combination of the electronic properties of diverse components in the heterostructure offers the possibility to achieve higher performance.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustrations of HER for MoS2 on Gr/Au and Au foil. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) LSV curves of WS2/MoS2/Au and MoS2/WS2/Au measured in the darkness and under solar-light irradiation. (c) Schematic illustrations of the electron transfer mechanisms in MoS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures under irradiation. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) HRTEM image of CoZn–Se. (e) Computed differential charge densities between CoSe2 and ZnSe at the phase boundaries; the red and yellow bubbles represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the manipulation of the atomic interface by constructing heterojunctions provides an attractive platform to explore the mechanism behind such superior performance. Several MX2/MX2 vertical heterojunctions have been fabricated, exhibiting enhanced catalytic capability in contrast to a single counterpart. To affirm this issue, Shi et al.171 prepared MoS2/WS2 and WS2/MoS2 on Au foil by a growth-temperature-mediated two-step CVD method, revealing the correlation between the electronic properties (induced by the stacking sequence) and catalytic activity. Intriguingly, the MoS2/WS2/Au stack exhibits higher activity than that of WS2/MoS2/Au with or without solar-light irradiation (Fig. 12b). Taking into consideration the difference in Fermi levels, a built-in electric field is constructed, leading to interfacial charge redistribution. The authors explained that the disparity in catalytic behavior resulted from the effective electron–hole separation and faster electron transfer kinetics from MoS2 to WS2 (Fig. 12c). In dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), the electrocatalytic rate of I3−RR is strongly associated with the counter electrode in the I3−/I− redox reaction of DSSCs, which eventually determines the photoelectric conversion efficiency. Liu and co-workers172 disclosed that the rate of electron transport from fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) to the MoS2 surface of FTO/WS2/MoS2 was higher than the rate from the FTO to WS2 surface of FTO/MoS2/WS2. The electrocatalytic activity of I3−RR of FTO/WS2/MoS2 is better than that of FTO/MoS2/WS2. In addition, we107 recently reported a novel bimetallic selenide nanoflakes heterostructure (CoSe2/ZnSe) obtained by selenization (Fig. 12d). Due to the metallic property of CoSe2 and the direct-gap semiconductor characteristic of ZnSe, the latter's surface would accumulate the electrons transferred from the CoSe2 side (Fig. 12e), thereby increasing the positive charges on the CoSe2 region, which facilitated the adsorption of OH−. The phase boundaries are long-range disordered and thermodynamically unstable, lowering the reaction activation barrier and quickening the kinetics process. CoSe2/ZnSe showed excellent OER activity with small overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2, superior to those of CoSe2 (424 mV) and ZnSe (408 mV). This work reveals that the rational design of the heterojunction structure is significant. With regard to electrocatalytic HER, Hu et al.173 devised vertically aligned MoO2/MoSe2 nanosheet arrays with core–shell architecture on SiO2/Si wafer or CC substrates by means of a facile two-step CVD route. On one hand, owing to the large crystalline mismatch at the interface between the MoO2 core and MoSe2 shell, rich structural defects were generated and recognized as the active sites for proton reduction. On the other hand, the metallic MoO2 core facilitated charge transport, while the vertical nanosheet arrays promoted the exposure of active sites at the atomic level.
4. Conclusions
In this review, we systematically summarized the recent progresses made in CVD-grown 2D TMDs for use in energy electrocatalysis (Table 1). Aiming at tailoring the physical and chemical properties (such as conductivity, electronic structure, and catalytic properties), six atomic-scale engineering strategies have been discussed (Fig. 13). Geometric dimensional control ensures the induction of 2D ultrathin characteristics, which increases the density of states near the Fermi level and exposes more low-coordinated sites. The interfacial charge transfer and catalytic reactivity could be remarkably improved by dimensional confinement. Further, 2D TMDs provide an ideal platform to investigate the correlation between the electrochemical activities and surface-related parameters at the atomic level. Defect is common in inorganic solid materials. Defect engineering is an important strategy to modulate the surface electronic structure of the electrocatalysts, which optimizes the adsorption energy. Engineering defects with high precision on well-defined 2D TMDs facilitates the formulation of an essential defect catalytic mechanism. The dynamic structural evolution of the defects during catalytic reactions is extremely important to guide the further design of defect electrocatalysts. These defects also act as “traps” to capture metal precursors and stabilize metal atoms to form single-site catalysts. Due to the diversity of dopants and doped locations, heteroatom doping modification is the generally accepted strategy to tailor the local surface structure. Further, doping not only induces the enhancement of the catalytic capability of each active site but also creates an atomic interface.174 Currently, it is still a challenge to achieve precise doping. Phase transition is the effective conversion from the stable to the metastable phase. Structural phase transition offers unique physical/chemical properties (such as metallic property), which are distinct from pristine materials, which has attracted intense attention. It enables the inert basal plane to be electrocatalytically active (such as 2H MoS2). Strain tuning stems from the lattice mismatch between the different components and specific morphologies (such as a core–shell structure). Variation in strain (tensile/compressive strain) may induce different catalytic behaviors. Lattice strain could break the linear scaling relationship of the corresponding electrochemical reactions, thereby optimizing the activity, selectivity, and stability. Heterostructure constructions (lateral/vertical heterostructures) have demonstrated an appropriate way to enhance the catalytic performance owing to the synergistic effect. The formed heterointerface leads to enhanced electron transfer capability and numerous low-coordinated sites. Therefore, the reaction energy barrier could be optimized by the elaborate tailoring of the heterostructures.
Table 1 Summary of engineering strategy, structural feature, and performance of various TMD electrocatalysts obtained using CVD




TMDs
Engineering strategy
Substrates
Structural feature
Application
Performance
Ref.




Noted: without special marking, HER is generally tested in 0.5 M H2SO4. OER is generally tested in 1 M KOH solution. ORR is generally measured in 0.1 M KOH solution. CO2RR is generally tested in IL electrolyte. In addition, all the potential values are converted to RHE for easy comparison.




MoS2 nanoplatelet
Geometric dimensional control
Graphite, SiO2/Si, GC
Edge-exposed high-porosity network structure; a surface area to geometric area ratio of up to ∼340
HER
Overpotential of 640 mV at 60 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 90 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 23 μA cm−2.

8



Cu2Se
Geometric dimensional control
Cu coated Si wafer
Granular with size distribution of nanometer to few micrometers; high crystallinity
OER
Overpotential of 300 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.

10



MoS2 film
Defect engineering
SiO2/Si
Nanograin film; ultra-high-density of GBs
HER
−44 mV and 55 mV dec−1 for the onset potential and the Tafel slope.

31



ReS2
Geometric dimensional control
SiO2/Si and Au foil
Vertically oriented arrays of nanosheets; the abundant sharp edges/corners of the ReS2 sheets
HER
Overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1; stability over 60 days.

36



MoS2
Geometric dimensional control
GC, Au foil, Ti foil and Pt foil
Crumpled monolayer films; increased surface roughness
HER
Overpotential of 7 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.

62



2H TaS2
Phase transition
Au foil
Metallic flakes thickness of ∼20 nm domain sizes range from ∼0.5 to ∼20 μm
HER
Overpotential of 65 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 33 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 179.47 μA cm−2.

63



Co-Doped MoS2
Defect engineering
GC
Nanofilm with densely packed, stripe-like grains
HER
Exchange current density of 5.65 μA cm−2; Tafel slope of 110 mV dec−1; TOF of ∼0.069 s−1.

69



MoS2
Geometric dimensional control
Au foil
Monolayer; nanosized triangular flakes; domain size tunable (edge length from ∼200 nm to 50 μm)
HER
Overpotential of 65 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 38.1 μA cm−2.

73



WS2
Geometric dimensional control
Au foil and SiO2/Si
Triangular nanosheets with tunable thickness range from ∼100 to ∼1000 nm; single-crystal nature
HER
Overpotential of 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 100 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 30.2 μA cm−2.

77



MoS2 nanobelts
Geometric dimensional control
n-Type Si
Top surface fully covered by edge sites; stacked atomic layers with the basal plane vertical to the substrate
HER
Overpotential of 170 mV at 20 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1; stability over 20 h.

78



MoSe2
Geometric dimensional control
GC, quartz, SiO2/Si
Edge-terminated thin films with vertically aligned layers
HER
Exchange current density of 2.0 × 10−6 μA cm−2; TOF of ∼0.014s−1 at 0 V.

81



Au@MoS2
Geometric dimensional control
Si and HOPG
Winged heterostructures; vertically-aligned few-layer MoS2 wings; sufficient edge active sites
HER
Overpotential of 120 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52.9 mV dec−1; stability over 10 h.

82



PtSe2
Geometric dimensional control
Tluorophl-ogopite-mica
Single-crystalline; controlled number of flake layers
HER
Overpotential of 152 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1; TOF of ∼648s−1 at 0 V.

84



MoTe2
Geometric dimensional control
None
Ultrathin flakes thickness of ∼2.1 nm with a size of several square micrometers; three layers
CO2RR
FE of CH4 of 83 ± 3%; stability over 45 h; high current density of 25.6 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V.

85



Ar plasma-treated MoS2
Defect engineering
Ti foil
Thin film with relatively smaller particle size with some sheet structure
HER
Overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 108 mV dec−1; TOF of 1.32s−1 at −0.35 V.

90



MoS2
Defect engineering
SiO2/Si
Monolayer; high density of exposed edges
HER
Overpotential of 620 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 171 mV dec−1.

92



H2-treated MoS2
Defect engineering
Graphite, Au foil, Ti foil
Monolayer flakes S-vacancies height of these flakes ranges from 0.7 to 0.9 nm
HER
Overpotential of 173 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 77.6 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.

95



MoS2@NPG
Strain tuning
NPG
Continuous monolayer film; undercoordinated surface steps and lattice defects (dislocations and vacancies)
HER
Onset potential of 118 mV; high current density of 0.52 mA cm−2 at 250 mV; Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1.

98



VRe-ReS2
Defect engineering
SiO2/Si
Continuous film tens to one hundred micrometers in size; abundant Re vacancies
HER
Overpotential of 147 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.

104



CoSe2/ZnSe
Heterostructure construction
None
Heterostructure; nanoflakes; high-active phase boundaries with lattice distortion
OER
Overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 66 mV dec−1; stability over 2000 cycles.

107



2H–1T MoS2
Phase transition
SiO2(300 nm)/P + Si and HOPG
Continuous film with randomly orientated domains of a few hundred nanometers
HER
Overpotential of 100 and 176 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in both acid and alkaline; Tafel slope of 73 mV dec−1; stability over 200 h.

109



VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2
Doping modification
GC
Single crystalline nanosheets with a hexagonal structure
CO2RR
Highest current density of 237 mA cm−2; CO TOF is approximately 1 and 2 orders of magnitude higher than pristine MoS2 and Ag.

115



Co-Doped MoS2
Doping modification
Graphite foil
The film with sizes around 50–150 nm; hexagonal crystalline
HER
Overpotential of 180 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 65 mV dec−1; stability over 11 h.

117



Mo SAs/ML-MoS2
Doping modification
SiO2/Si
Single Mo atoms sitting on 2D monolayers
HER
Overpotential of ∼260 mV at 400 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 36.4 mV dec−1.

120



C-MoS2
Doping modification
CC
Crystallinity; ultrathin layered nanosheets
HER
Overpotential of 45 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH; Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.

126



MoS2(1−x)Se2x
Doping modification
SiO2/Si
The hundreds of microns monolayer; defect-free single crystalline
HER
Overpotential of 280 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 106 mV dec−1; stability over 22 h.

128



WS2(1−x)Se2x
Doping modification
SrTiO3
Dendritic flakes with abundantly exposed curving edges; monolayer
HER
Overpotential of 156 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1; higher exchange current density of ∼50.1 μA cm−2.

131



2H Nb1.35S2
Phase transition
SiO2/Si and GC
Thin film thicknesses ranging from 2 nm to 50 nm with lateral dimensions of ∼0.5–1 μm
HER
Overpotential of ∼370 and ∼420 mV at 1000 and 5000 mA cm−2; TOF of ∼0.2s−1 at 0 V.

138



Re0.55Mo0.45S2
Phase transition
SiO2/Si
Stable distorted tetragonal structure; 2D monolayer flakes
HER
Onset potential of 90 mV; Tafel slope of 56 mV dec−1, stability over 3000 cycles.

146



1T VS2
Phase transition
SiO2/Si
Singe crystal nanosheets; hexagon shapes
HER
Overpotential of 68 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 34 mV dec−1; stability over 12000 cycles.

151



WS2/WO2.9/C
Heterostructure construction
Graphite paper
Hybrid membranes with a ridge-like morphology
HER
Overpotential of ∼120 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1; stability over 10000 cycles.

163



MoS2/Gr
Heterostructure construction
Au foil
Vertical heterostructures; the domain edge within a lateral distance of ∼6 nm
HER
Overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 24.8 μA cm−2.

168



G@N-MoS2
Heterostructure construction
MgO
Hexagonal structure; mesoporous framework; the characteristic layer-by-layer stacking
HER/OER/ORR
Overpotential of 243 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 82.5 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles; potential gap of ∼0.90 V for ORR/OER.

169



MoS2/WS2
Heterostructure construction
Au foil
The commensurate crystallographic alignment of the stacked structures; single-crystal characteristics
HER
Overpotential of 190 mV at 4.5 mA cm−2; stability over 6 h.

171



WS2–MoS2 films
Heterostructure construction
FTO glass
Polycrystalline; stack double-layer structure; orderly and well-interfaced composite thin films
I3−RR
Short-circuit photocurrent density of FTO/WS2/MoS2 is 14.16 mA cm−2.

172



MoO2/MoSe2
Heterostructure construction
SiO2/Si and CC
Vertical 2D core–shell nanosheet arrays; high density structural defects and disorders
HER
Overpotential of 181 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 49.1 mV dec−1; stability over 2000 cycles.

173





 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the relationship among atomic-scale engineering, surface interaction, and catalytic performance. 
Overall, CVD definitely provides a well-defined platform to achieve a fundamental understanding of the active sites. It is worth noting, however, that some challenges still need to be overcome:
(i) Large-scale fabrication, fundamental investigation, and stability of CVD-grown TMDs deserve more attention. Despite the numerous advantages of the CVD technique, the equipment and operation involved are highly specialized. The reported synthesis routes are relatively difficult to conform to high-throughput production because of complex manipulations, growth parameters, and low yield. Moreover, mass production should not be ignored. Furthermore, under the transfer process, the pollution of TMDs can easily occur. Therefore, efforts on exploring a practical and straightforward strategy for the synthesis of TMDs on suitable substrates for direct investigation are necessary.
(ii) Generally, dangling-bond-free or defect-free CVD-grown TMDs are difficult to fabricate. Surface structural defects (even at extremely trace concentrations) have proven to play a crucial role in boosting the electrocatalytic reactivity owing to the effective modulation of the electronic properties. Controllable synthesis of atomic-scale defects is an attractive but challenging task.
(iii) Structural reconstruction of CVD-synthesized TMD electrocatalysts during long-term operation is ineluctable. Until now, an in-depth understanding into the correlation among reconstruction, intrinsic structure, and catalytic reactivity has been rarely discussed.175 Surface reconstruction induced by external conditions could change the atomic arrangement and optimize the electronic structure of the catalyst surfaces. It is well known that reconstructed TMDs are distinct from pristine TMDs, which further complicates the identification of true active sites. Therefore, tracking structural evolution and reconstruction during reactions is essential. Further, in situ or operando spectroscopic characterization tools (e.g., EXAFS) are indeed required, which help to attain the real reaction mechanism.
(iv) Currently, research into CVD-grown TMDs as electrocatalysts has mainly focused on HER. DFT calculations revealed that the positively charged Mo edges of MoS2 and W-terminated edges of WSe2 can further polarize and activate inert small molecules (e.g., CO2 and N2).176–178 Therefore, attempts could be made to explore the potential applications in CO2RR and N2 reduction reaction, which will help us to exactly formulate the catalytic mechanism at the atomic scale.179
(v) The emergence of an integrated electrode optimizes the electrode–electrolyte interface and the associated kinetics under operating conditions, realizing the advantage of intrinsic high reactivity of nanostructured CVD-grown TMD electrode materials.180 Furthermore, the activity assessment of CVD-synthesized TMD nanocatalysts mainly lies in the simplified apparatus. There are very few studies regarding integrated electrodes. The integrated electrode undoubtedly promotes the development of device-based technology, which requires the special focus of researchers.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support from the Changsha Science and Technology Plan (kq1801065), Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (no. 2017TP1001), the State Key Laboratory Fund, and the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0704100). Q. Wang thanks the project (2019zzts845) supported by the Exploration and Innovation Funds for Graduate Students of Central South University.
References
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, D. Chao, E. Liu, M. Jaroniec, N. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020 10.1039/C9EE03549D .
J. Liang, F. Ma, S. Hwang, X. Wang, J. Sokolowski, Q. Li, G. Wu and D. Su, Joule, 2019, 3, 956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Ji, Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Li and S. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1183 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, Z. Chen, N. Wu, Y. Wang, B. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 516 RSC .
S. Li, S. Wang, M. M. Salamone, A. W. Robertson, S. Nayak, H. Kim, S. C. E. Tsang, M. Pasta and J. H. Warner, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 877 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. Dong, Z.-Q. Huang, P. Xin, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jin, W. Xing, Z. Zhuang, J. Ye, X. Wei, R. Cao, L. Gu, S. Sun, L. Zhuang, X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C.-R. Chang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020 DOI:10.1038/s41565-020-0665-x .
J. Masud, W. P. R. Liyanage, X. Cao, A. Saxena and M. Nath, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4075 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, K. Ye, L. Xu, W. Hu, Y. Lei, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, K. Zhou, J. Jiang, J. Basset, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14801 RSC .
C. Zhu, D. Gao, J. Ding, D. Chao and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4332 RSC .
X. Zheng, J. Deng, N. Wang, D. Deng, W. Zhang, X. Bao and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623 RSC .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Yuan, S. S. Hong, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664 RSC .
Q. Yu, Y. Luo, S. Qiu, Q. Li, Z. Cai, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Sun and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Kim, J. Kwak, C. V. Ciobanu and S. Y. Kwon, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804939 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, X. Wang, X. Zhu, X. Duan and A. Pan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7504 RSC .
Y. He, P. Tang, Z. Hu, Q. He, C. Zhu, L. Wang, Q. Zeng, P. Golani, G. Gao, W. Fu, Z. Huang, C. Gao, J. Xia, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhu, Q. M. Ramasse, A. Zhang, B. An, Y. Zhang, S. M. Sánchez, J. R. Morante, L. Wang, B. K. Tay, B. I. Yakobson, A. Trampert, H. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. J. Wang, J. Arbiol and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. Lu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, C. Cong, Q. He, L. Wang, F. Ding, T. Yu and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701546 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sun, D. Huang, H. Wang, G. L. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, D. A. E. Hady, W. Alshitari, A. S. A. Bogami, K. Amined and M. Shao, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 361 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, Q. Tao, W. Dang, Y. Liu, B. Li, J. Li, B. Zhao, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, G. Sun, X. Duan and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806611 CrossRef .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hao, B. Yang and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 153105 CrossRef .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Ma, W. Dang, Z. Wei, K. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Yan, M. Sun, B. Li, X. Pan, J. Luo, G. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Nature, 2020 DOI:10.1038/s41586-020-2098-y .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Masurkar, N. K. Thangavel and L. M. R. Arava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, K. Liu, Z. Cheng, K. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, C. Jiang and J. He, Small, 2017, 13, 1603706 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhou, R. Wang, J. Han, D. Wang, H. Li, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805880 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, G. Gou, X. Wang, Y. Chen, Q. Wan, J. Sun, S. Xiao, H. Huang, J. Yang and G. Dai, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2017, 123, 299 CrossRef .
H. Song, B. Yang and Y. Gao, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 549 CrossRef .
W. Di, S. Jiao, X. Zheng, J. Liu, W. Dou, Y. Gao, X. Yuan, F. Ouyang and H. Huang, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 19000 Search PubMed .
X. Lu, M. I. B. Utama, J. Lin, X. Gong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. T. Pantelides, J. Wang, Z. Dong, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang, L. J. Li and T. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Niu, P. Yang, Y. Gong, Q. Ji, J. Shi, Q. Fang, S. Jiang, H. Li, X. Zhou, L. Gu, X. Wu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702359 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Chen, L. Zhao, Y. Gong, M. Hong, Y. Huan, Z. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, H. Chen, J. Wang, S. Deng, N. Xu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804616 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Huang, J. Lin, J. Cui, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, F. Liu, Q. Zeng, J. Zhou, P. Yu, X. Wang, H. He, S. H. Tsang, W. Gao, K. Suenaga, F. Ma, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, E. H. T. Teo, G. Liu and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 394 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Duchamp, Q. Zeng, X. Wang, S. H. Tsang, H. Li, L. Jing, T. Yu, E. Hang, T. Teo and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704382 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Xu, H. Liu, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900113 CrossRef .
H. Ma, W. Dang, X. Yang, B. Li, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Wan, Q. Qian, J. Luo, K. Zang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8891 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, W. Dang, Y. Liu, B. Li, J. Li, J. Luo, Z. Zhang, R. Wu, H. Ma, G. Sun, Yu Huang, X. Duan and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, B. Zhao, P. Chen, R. Wu, B. Li, Q. Xia, G. Guo, J. Luo, K. Zang, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, G. Sun, X. Duan and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801043 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ma, P. Chen, B. Li, J. Li, R. Ai, Z. Zhang, G. Sun, K. Yao, Z. Lin, B. Zhao, R. Wu, X. Tang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. McGlynn, T. Dankwort, L. Kienle, N. A. G. Bandeira, J. P. Fraser, E. K. Gibson, I. C. Matías, K. Kamarás, M. D. Symes, H. N. Miras and A. Y. Ganin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4916 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Xia, H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Lei, D. Wu, F. Liu, Q. Fu, Q. Zeng, C. H. Hsu, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Liu, K. Suenaga, G. Liu and Z. Liu, Nature, 2018, 556, 355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeon, Y. Park, S. Choi, J. Lee, S. S. Lim, B. H. Lee, Y. J. Song, J. H. Cho, Y. H. Jang and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Leong, Q. Ji, N. Mao, Y. Han, H. Wang, A. J. Goodman, A. Vignon, C. Su, Y. Guo, P. C. Shen, Z. Gao, D. A. Muller, W. A. Tisdale and J. Kong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Feng, Z. Li, C. Ma, J. Qu, X. Wu, D. Li, X. Zhang, T. Yang, Y. He, H. Li, X. Hu, P. Fan, Y. Chen, B. Zheng, X. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Duan and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901351 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, J. Shi, Z. Chen, X. Zhou, Q. Fang and Y. Zhang, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035001 CrossRef .
C. Wang, J. Zuo, L. Tan, M. Zeng, Q. Zhang, H. Xia, W. Zhang, Y. Fu and L. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, W. Ren, H. Xu, L. Jin, Z. Wang, T. Ma, L. P. Ma, Z. Zhang, Q. Fu, L. Peng, X. Bao and H. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 699 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, G. F. Han, J. Ju, J. Shi, D. Ma, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, M. Li, X. Y. Lang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ji, C. Li, J. Wang, J. Niu, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Q. Fang, Y. Zhang, J. Shi, L. Liao, X. Wu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Li, D. Zhang, W. Yang, Y. Liu and L. Cao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Huan, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, M. Hong, Q. Fang, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 958 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Rong, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020 DOI:10.1007/s12274-020-2755-3 .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Song and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Wang, M. M. Salamone, A. W. Robertson, S. Nayak, H. Kim, S. C. E. Tsang, M. Pasta and J. H. Warner, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 877 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang and D. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4953 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Tsai, D. Kong, K. Chan, F. A. Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, J. Shi, Y. Huan, Q. Xie and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, R. Fullon, J. Yang, C. C. C. Silva, R. Kappera, I. Bozkurt, D. Kaplan, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite, L. Dong, D. Er, V. B. Shenoy, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, Y. Bai and Y. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802091 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, D. Ma, G. F. Han, Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, T. Gao, J. Sun, X. Song, C. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Y. Lang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Rong, Y. Fan, M. Pacios, H. Bhaskaran, K. He and J. H. Warner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, J. Ju, H. Yuan, J. Shi, T. Gao, D. Ma, M. Liu, Y. Chen, X. Song, H. Y. Hwang, Y. Cui and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, L. Gu, Z. Yang, X. Li, H. Yu, X. Zhu, R. Yang, D. Shi, X. Lin, J. Guo, X. Bai and G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Shi, G. Han, M. Li, Q. Ji, D. Ma, Y. Zhang, C. Li, X. Lang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2881 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Hong, Q. Fu, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, X. Cui, Z. Fan, K. Liu and B. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, Y. Jo, S. Song, J. H. Kim, S. Y. Kim, J. U. Lee, S. Lee, J. Park, K. Kim, G. D. Lee, J. W. Yoo, S. Y. Kim, Y. M. Kong, G. H. Lee, W. G. Lee, J. Park, X. Xu, H. Cheong, E. Yoon, Z. Lee and S. Y. Kwon, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707260 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Kra, J. Abiade and A. S. Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. B. Majewski, S. M. Islam, S. Hao, A. A. Murthy, J. G. DiStefano, E. D. Hanson, Y. Xu, C. Wolverton, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. R. Wasielewski, X. Chen and V. P. Dravid, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, S. Y. Huang, S. N. Steinmann, W. Yang and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hu, T. Zhao, X. Ping, H. Zheng, L. Xing, X. Liu, J. Zheng, L. Sun, L. Gu, C. Tao, D. Wang and L. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 7051 CrossRef .
X. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. Liu, L. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1704049 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Lei, W. Hu, Y. Luo and Y. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 548 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730 RSC .
J. Hong, Z. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. Lv, X. Yang, L. Gu, N. Mao, Q. Feng, L. Xie, J. Zhang, D. Wu, Z. Zhang, C. Jin, W. Ji, X. Zhang, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6293 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J. C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, X. Duan, C. Wang, X. Duan and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7470 RSC .
Z. Wu, W. Zhao, J. Jiang, T. Zheng, Y. You, J. Lu and Z. Ni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12294 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, D. Zhang, Q. Qiao, Y. Yu, D. Peterson, A. Zafar, R. Kumar, S. Curtarolo, F. Hunte, S. Shannon, Y. Zhu, W. Yang and L. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, H. Li, S. Park, J. Park, H. S. Han, J. K. Nørskov, X. Zheng and F. A. Pedersen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15113 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Cheng, A. Y. Lu, C. C. Tseng, X. Yang, M. N. Hedhili, M. C. Chen, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 846 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, J. Shi, Y. Li, D. Ma, Y. Qi, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602967 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, S. Wang, H. Sawada, G. G. D. Han, T. Samuels, C. S. Allen, A. I. Kirkland, J. C. Grossman and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, P. Liu, L. Chen, W. Cong, Y. Ito, J. Han, X. Guo, Z. Tang, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pető, T. Ollár, P. Vancsó, Z. I. Popov, G. Z. Magda, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, P. B. Sorokin and L. Tapasztó, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1246 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Liao, S. Liu, Z. Kang, Z. Zhang, J. Du, F. Li, S. Zhang, J. Xiao, B. Liu, Y. Ou, X. Liu, L. Gu and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. O. Nuñez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. D. R. Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703212 CrossRef .
J. Seok, J. H. Lee, S. Cho, B. Ji, H. W. Kim, M. Kwon, D. Kim, Y. M. Kim, S. H. Oh, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee, Y. W. Son and H. Yang, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025061 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, X. Zhang, B. Mao and M. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14266 RSC .
Y. Zhou, E. Song, J. Zhou, J. Lin, R. Ma, Y. Wang, W. Qiu, R. Shen, K. Suenaga, Q. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Liu and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jeong, Y. Jin, S. J. Yun, J. Zhao, J. Baik, D. H. Keum, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605043 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Wang, F. Yang, J. K. Huang, L. J. Li, W. Yao, W. Ji and C. K. Shih, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1595 CAS .
G. Fang, Q. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Pan and S. Liang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I. Yakobson, J. C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. C. Wang, H. Dai, Q. Wang, R. Yang, H. Yu, M. Liao, J. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Wei, N. Li, L. Du, D. Shi, W. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1348 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lan, D. Li, Z. Zhou, S. Yip, H. Zhang, L. Shu, R. Wei, R. Dong and J. C. Ho, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800245 CrossRef .
J. Gao, Y. D. Kim, L. Liang, J. C. Idrobo, P. Chow, J. Tan, B. Li, L. Li, B. G. Sumpter, T. M. Lu, V. Meunier, J. Hone and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh and U. Schwingenschlögl, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1600970 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, H. P. Komsa, Y. Niimi, A. V. Krasheninnikov, Y. S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Feng, J. Wang, A. Azcatl, N. Lu, R. Addou, N. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Lerach, V. Bojan, M. J. Kim, L. Q. Chen, R. M. Wallace, M. Terrones, J. Zhu and J. A. Robinson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Abbasi, M. Asadi, C. Liu, S. S. Asl, B. Sayahpour, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. S. Yassar, L. A. Curtiss and A. S. Khojin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Lau, X. Lu, J. Kulhavý, S. Wu, L. Lu, T. S. Wu, R. Kato, J. S. Foord, Y. L. Soo, K. Suenaga and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4769 RSC .
N. Huang, R. Peng, Y. Ding, S. Yan, G. Li, P. Sun, X. Sun, X. Liu and H. Yu, J. Catal., 2019, 373, 250 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Robertson, Y. C. Lin, S. Wang, H. Sawada, C. S. Allen, Q. Chen, S. Lee, G. D. Lee, J. Lee, S. Han, E. Yoon, A. I. Kirkland, H. Kim, K. Suenaga and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594 RSC .
Y. Luo, S. Zhang, H. Pan, S. Xiao, Z. Guo, L. Tang, U. Khan, B. F. Ding, M. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Zhao, W. Lv, Q. Feng, X. Zou, J. Lin, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, C. Niu, C. Wei, Y. Jia, C. Li and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 2051 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D. R. Yang, W. X. Xu, C. Wang, F. B. Wang, J. J. Xu, X. H. Xia and H. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M. J. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y. C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pető, T. Ollár, P. Vancsó, Z. I. Popov, G. Z. Magda, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, P. B. Sorokin and L. Tapasztó, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1246 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, K. Tao, D. Gao and D. Xue, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Ju, T. Yao, C. Wang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Q. Fu, W. Wang, J. Huang, J. Huang, J. Zhang and B. Xiang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10490 RSC .
Z. Lai, A. Chaturvedi, Y. Wang, T. H. Tran, X. Liu, C. Tan, Z. Luo, B. Chen, Y. Huang, G. H. Nam, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Hu, B. Li, S. Xi, Q. Zhang, Y. Zong, L. Gu, C. Kloc, Y. Du and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, Z. Fan, G. Hao, L. Kou, U. Halim, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Jiang, A. Pan, Y. Huang, R. Yu and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Liu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Y. Wen, F. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Wang, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5641 RSC .
Q. Fu, L. Yang, W. Wang, A. Han, J. Huang, P. Du, Z. Fan, J. Zhang and B. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, X. Li, W. Zhao, J. Dong, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan, F. Ding, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2051 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tang, J. Zhou, P. Sun, X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Dan, J. Yang, K. Zhou, X. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900862 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, X. Jia, Q. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702 RSC .
J. Yang, A. R. Mohmad, Y. Wang, R. Fullon, X. Song, F. Zhao, I. Bozkurt, M. Augustin, E. J. G. Santos, H. S. Shin, W. Zhang, D. Voiry, H. Y. Jeong and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, K. Xu, A. Zubair, A. D. Liao, W. Fang, F. Ouyang, Y. H. Lee, K. Ueno, R. Saito, T. Palacios, J. Kong and M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, A. Zubair, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Ouyang, K. Xu, W. Fang, K. Ueno, J. Li, T. Palacios, J. Kong and M. S. Dresselhaus, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D. H. Choe, K. J. Chang, K. Suenaga, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee and H. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Yu, N. Li, J. Zhang, J. Meng, M. Liao, J. Zhao, X. Lu, L. Du, R. Yang, D. Shi, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kang, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Bao, Y. Wang, X. Zhu, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and Z. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta, R. Kalia, A. Nakano, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, P. Manchanda, Y. Zhang, G. Ye, S. Chen, L. Song, S. T. Pantelides, P. M. Ajayan, M. F. Chisholm and W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803477 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, G. H. Nam, Q. He, X. J. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, F. Ran, X. Wang, H. Li, X. Huang, B. Li, Q. Xiong, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Gu, Y. Du, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. A. Pedersen, Surf. Sci., 2015, 640, 133 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ding, B. Song, P. Xu and S. Jin, Chem, 2016, 1, 699 CAS .
H. Ma, Z. Wan, J. Li, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Li, B. Zhao, Q. Qian, Y. Liu, Q. Xia, G. Guo, X. Duan and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, J. Wu, W. J. Hardy, P. Loya, M. Lou, Y. Yang, S. Najmaei, M. Jiang, F. Qin, K. Keyshar, H. Ji, W. Gao, J. Bao, J. Kono, D. Natelson, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Liu, J. Luo, X. Duan, J. Crittenden, C. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Pei, Y. Zeng and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, Y. Shan, L. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Guo, F. Hu, J. Shen, Y. Gu, J. Cui, L. Liu and X. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xia and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3265 RSC .
R. P. Jansonius, L. M. Reid, C. N. Virca and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 980 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Zeng, W. Gao, T. Maxson, D. Raciti, M. Giroux, X. Pan and C. Wan, Science, 2019, 363, 870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Johari and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and G. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9388 RSC .
D. B. Putungan, S. H. Lin and J. L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21702 RSC .
H. Li, M. Du, M. J. Mleczko, A. L. Koh, Y. Nishi, E. Pop, A. J. Bard and X. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5123 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, G. Gao, M. Du, J. Zhou, K. Wang, W. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Li, P. Ma, W. Dong, F. Duan, M. Chen, G. Wu, J. Wu, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707301 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Gan, T. Hu, K. Fujisawa, Y. Lei, Z. Lin, B. Xu, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang, M. Terrones and R. Lv, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603617 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. A. Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Li, J. Tersoff, Y. Han, Y. Su, L. Li, D. A. Muller and C. Shih, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, S. Jiang, X. Zou, Y. Sun, L. Zhao, M. Hong, S. Chen, Y. Huan, J. Shi, X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Shi, P. Liu, Q. Zhang, P. Gao and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, M. Liu, J. Wen, X. Ren, X. Zhou, Q. Ji, D. Ma, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, H. Chen, S. Deng, N. Xu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Zhou, G. F. Han, M. Liu, D. Ma, J. Sun, C. Li, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, X. Song, X. Y. Lang, Q. Jiang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600332 CrossRef .
C. Tang, L. Zhong, B. Zhang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1705110 CrossRef .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, R. Tong, X. Zhou, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, Q. Fang, L. Gu, X. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Yin, Y. Zhou, L. Sun, W. Yue, Y. Sun and Y. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2737 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. Cao, W. Hu and P. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, W. Sun, Y. Lei, Q. Wang, A. Li, W. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Han, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1295 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, S. Sun, J. Song, S. Xi, Y. Du, B. Chen, W. A. Sasangka, H. Liao, C. L. Gan, G. G. Scherer, L. Zeng, H. Wang, H. Li, A. Grimaud and Z. J. Xu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 763 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. S. Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 6298 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lv, C. Teng, M. Shi, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Kong, X. Lu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802339 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. J. Xu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Mater. Today, 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2019.12.003 .
B. Liu, H. Li, B. Cao, J. Jiang, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801527 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Qichen Wang
	Qichen Wang received his Master's degree from the Central South University of Forestry and Technology in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Acad. Yadong Li and Prof. Yongpeng Lei in Central South University.

Yongpeng Lei
	Yongpeng Lei received his BS (2003) and MS (2006) from the National University of Defense Technology and his PhD (2011) from the National University of Defense Technology under Prof. Yingde Wang. He started the study of functional nanomaterials in the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2011 under the guidance of Acad. Yadong Li. He joined the faculty of the State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, in 2017 as a Full Professor.

Xidong Duan
	Xidong Duan is a Professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. His current research interests include two-dimensional materials, heterostructures, and their applications. He received his BS in Chemistry from Hunan University in 1993, his MS in Materials from Hunan University in 1996, and his PhD in Chemistry from Hunan University in 2016. Earlier, he was a Senior Engineer at the Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy before joining Hunan University.

Dingsheng Wang
	Dingsheng Wang received his BS from the Department of Chemistry and Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, in 2004 and his PhD from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2009, with Acad. Yadong Li. He conducted his postdoctoral research at the Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, with Acad. Shoushan Fan. He joined the faculty of the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2012.

Broader context
Activation of energy-related small molecules (H2O, CO2, O2, etc.) is essential for various electrochemical energy conversion systems. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit distinguished physical and chemical properties, which have been widely used as electrocatalysts with excellent performance. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been recognized as a powerful method to synthesize atomically thin 2D TMDs, yielding advantages such as high quality, controllability, scalability, etc. 2D TMDs provide an ideal platform to investigate the structure–performance relationship at the atomic level. Therefore, atomic-scale tailoring of the surface and interface of CVD-grown TMDs is critical for improving the activity, selectivity, and stability. Herein, we rationally propose and systematically discuss six atomic-scale engineering strategies (such as geometric dimensional control, defect engineering, doping modification, phase transition, strain tuning, and heterostructure construction) together with some representative examples. In addition, existing challenges and perspectives of the related field are also highlighted. We believe that such a comprehensive summary not only facilitates a profound understanding of the atomic-scale active sites in 2D TMDs for energy electrocatalysis but also opens up promising opportunities for catalytic materials design.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Overview of metals (highlighted in purple, green, red, and blue) and chalcogens (highlighted in orange) that can form layered sulfides, selenides, and tellurides. Reprinted with permission.29 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of 2D MX2. M denotes a transition metal and X denotes a chalcogen. Reprinted with permission.17 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Two routes for MX2 synthesis. Reprinted with permission.18 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Research toolbox for CVD-grown 2D TMD electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Conductivity of PtTe2 nanosheets as a function of thickness. (b) Temperature-dependent conductivity of PtTe2 with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Evolution of nucleation density, lateral dimension, representative morphologies, and thickness (inset) of NiTe2 single crystals grown at various annealing temperatures. Scale bars: 5 μm. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of a modified CVD system for the robust epitaxial growth of lateral heterostructures. (b) Optical images of a variety of 2D crystal materials. Reprinted with permission.55 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) Schematic view of the controllable growth process of lateral/vertical MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures with the adsorption of various active clusters, i.e., W1Sex. (d) Left portion shows the Z-contrast STEM image taken from the vertical WS2/WSe2 heterostructure. Yellow dashed line indicates the step edge. Inset shows the electron diffraction pattern taken from the WS2/WSe2 bilayer. Right portion shows the enlarged HAADF-STEM image and corresponding atomic model of the red rectangular region in (d), as shown by the dotted line. (e) HAADF-STEM images of a series of heterostructures. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the transfer process in the PMMA-assisted method. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the polymer-free transfer method for VS2 crystals. Reprinted with permission.61 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the APCVD growth process of 2H TaS2 hexagonal flakes. Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Six atomic-scale engineering strategies. (b) Factors that influence electrocatalysis. (c) Solid-surface catalytic reaction process.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) STM image of monolayer MoS2 nanocrystals on Au(111). (b) Plot of the exchange current density versus MoS2 edge length. Inset shows the STM image of monolayer MoS2. Reprinted with permission.66 Copyright 2007, AAAS. (c) SEM image of monolayer MoS2 flakes on Au foil. Inset shows a schematic view of monolayer MoS2 edges for HER. Reprinted with permission.73 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of MoS2 nanobelts. Inset shows the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a MoS2 nanobelt. Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM images. Inset shows the structure of edge-terminated MoX2 films. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (f) Hopping of electrons in a direction vertical to MoS2 layers. Reprinted with permission.83 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Atomic-resolution STEM-ADF images of monolayer MoS2 with various intrinsic structural defects, including vacancies, GBs, and edges. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the plasma treatment of MoS2 thin films. Reprinted with permission.90 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) STEM image with an inset of FFT patterns of monolayer VRe-ReS2. (d) Optimized defect structure of VRe-ReS2. Reprinted with permission.104 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) STM topography of MoS2. Inset shows the atomic model of zigzag-type 2H–1T phase boundaries. (f) Polarization curves of MoS2. Reprinted with permission.109 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HRTEM image of VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2. Inset shows the corresponding FFT pattern. (b) TOF for CO formation at different overpotentials for VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2, pristine VA-MoS2, and Ag catalyst. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Enlarged HRTEM image shows strong contrast from a single Pt atom located at the 6S lattice site. (d) DFT-relaxed atomic model showing a Pt atom in the 2S vacancy site. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Relationship between currents (log(i0)) and ΔGH* exhibits a volcano curve. Reprinted with permission.119 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Polarization curves. Reprinted with permission.69 Copyright 2015, Springer. (g) Photoluminescence spectra of a series of composition tunable WS2xSe2(1−x) monolayer nanosheets. Reprinted with permission.130 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) STEM-ADF image of Re0.55Mo0.45S2 alloy. (b) Calculated mixing energy in the 1H and DT phases of the RexMo1−xS2 alloy at different Re concentrations. Reprinted with permission.146 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of monolayer MoS2@NPG hybrid materials by using the CVD approach. (d) STEM image of monolayer MoS2@NPG. Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) Structure models. Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Polarization curves. Reprinted with permission.138 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of tensile or compressive strain and the strain field influenced by lattice mismatch. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Theoretical model of the strained Co9S8/1L MoS2 core–shell nanostructure. Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Mapping of isotropic strain. Cyan and red colors denote tension and compression, respectively. (d) Mapping of shear strain. Indigo and chartreuse colors denote counterclockwise and clockwise shear strains, respectively. Reprinted with permission.163 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustrations of HER for MoS2 on Gr/Au and Au foil. Reprinted with permission.167 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) LSV curves of WS2/MoS2/Au and MoS2/WS2/Au measured in the darkness and under solar-light irradiation. (c) Schematic illustrations of the electron transfer mechanisms in MoS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures under irradiation. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) HRTEM image of CoZn–Se. (e) Computed differential charge densities between CoSe2 and ZnSe at the phase boundaries; the red and yellow bubbles represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. Reprinted with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 


MoS2 nanoplatelet	Geometric dimensional control	Graphite, SiO2/Si, GC	Edge-exposed high-porosity network structure; a surface area to geometric area ratio of up to ∼340	HER	Overpotential of 640 mV at 60 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 90 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 23 μA cm−2.	
8

Cu2Se	Geometric dimensional control	Cu coated Si wafer	Granular with size distribution of nanometer to few micrometers; high crystallinity	OER	Overpotential of 300 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.	
10

MoS2 film	Defect engineering	SiO2/Si	Nanograin film; ultra-high-density of GBs	HER	−44 mV and 55 mV dec−1 for the onset potential and the Tafel slope.	
31

ReS2	Geometric dimensional control	SiO2/Si and Au foil	Vertically oriented arrays of nanosheets; the abundant sharp edges/corners of the ReS2 sheets	HER	Overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1; stability over 60 days.	
36

MoS2	Geometric dimensional control	GC, Au foil, Ti foil and Pt foil	Crumpled monolayer films; increased surface roughness	HER	Overpotential of 7 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 84 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.	
62

2H TaS2	Phase transition	Au foil	Metallic flakes thickness of ∼20 nm domain sizes range from ∼0.5 to ∼20 μm	HER	Overpotential of 65 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 33 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 179.47 μA cm−2.	
63

Co-Doped MoS2	Defect engineering	GC	Nanofilm with densely packed, stripe-like grains	HER	Exchange current density of 5.65 μA cm−2; Tafel slope of 110 mV dec−1; TOF of ∼0.069 s−1.	
69

MoS2	Geometric dimensional control	Au foil	Monolayer; nanosized triangular flakes; domain size tunable (edge length from ∼200 nm to 50 μm)	HER	Overpotential of 65 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 38.1 μA cm−2.	
73

WS2	Geometric dimensional control	Au foil and SiO2/Si	Triangular nanosheets with tunable thickness range from ∼100 to ∼1000 nm; single-crystal nature	HER	Overpotential of 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 100 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 30.2 μA cm−2.	
77

MoS2 nanobelts	Geometric dimensional control	n-Type Si	Top surface fully covered by edge sites; stacked atomic layers with the basal plane vertical to the substrate	HER	Overpotential of 170 mV at 20 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1; stability over 20 h.	
78

MoSe2	Geometric dimensional control	GC, quartz, SiO2/Si	Edge-terminated thin films with vertically aligned layers	HER	Exchange current density of 2.0 × 10−6 μA cm−2; TOF of ∼0.014s−1 at 0 V.	
81

Au@MoS2	Geometric dimensional control	Si and HOPG	Winged heterostructures; vertically-aligned few-layer MoS2 wings; sufficient edge active sites	HER	Overpotential of 120 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52.9 mV dec−1; stability over 10 h.	
82

PtSe2	Geometric dimensional control	Tluorophl-ogopite-mica	Single-crystalline; controlled number of flake layers	HER	Overpotential of 152 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 41 mV dec−1; TOF of ∼648s−1 at 0 V.	
84

MoTe2	Geometric dimensional control	None	Ultrathin flakes thickness of ∼2.1 nm with a size of several square micrometers; three layers	CO2RR	FE of CH4 of 83 ± 3%; stability over 45 h; high current density of 25.6 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V.	
85

Ar plasma-treated MoS2	Defect engineering	Ti foil	Thin film with relatively smaller particle size with some sheet structure	HER	Overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 108 mV dec−1; TOF of 1.32s−1 at −0.35 V.	
90

MoS2	Defect engineering	SiO2/Si	Monolayer; high density of exposed edges	HER	Overpotential of 620 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 171 mV dec−1.	
92

H2-treated MoS2	Defect engineering	Graphite, Au foil, Ti foil	Monolayer flakes S-vacancies height of these flakes ranges from 0.7 to 0.9 nm	HER	Overpotential of 173 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 77.6 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.	
95

MoS2@NPG	Strain tuning	NPG	Continuous monolayer film; undercoordinated surface steps and lattice defects (dislocations and vacancies)	HER	Onset potential of 118 mV; high current density of 0.52 mA cm−2 at 250 mV; Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1.	
98

VRe-ReS2	Defect engineering	SiO2/Si	Continuous film tens to one hundred micrometers in size; abundant Re vacancies	HER	Overpotential of 147 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.	
104

CoSe2/ZnSe	Heterostructure construction	None	Heterostructure; nanoflakes; high-active phase boundaries with lattice distortion	OER	Overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 66 mV dec−1; stability over 2000 cycles.	
107

2H–1T MoS2	Phase transition	SiO2(300 nm)/P + Si and HOPG	Continuous film with randomly orientated domains of a few hundred nanometers	HER	Overpotential of 100 and 176 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in both acid and alkaline; Tafel slope of 73 mV dec−1; stability over 200 h.	
109

VA-Mo0.95Nb0.05S2	Doping modification	GC	Single crystalline nanosheets with a hexagonal structure	CO2RR	Highest current density of 237 mA cm−2; CO TOF is approximately 1 and 2 orders of magnitude higher than pristine MoS2 and Ag.	
115

Co-Doped MoS2	Doping modification	Graphite foil	The film with sizes around 50–150 nm; hexagonal crystalline	HER	Overpotential of 180 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 65 mV dec−1; stability over 11 h.	
117

Mo SAs/ML-MoS2	Doping modification	SiO2/Si	Single Mo atoms sitting on 2D monolayers	HER	Overpotential of ∼260 mV at 400 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 36.4 mV dec−1.	
120

C-MoS2	Doping modification	CC	Crystallinity; ultrathin layered nanosheets	HER	Overpotential of 45 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH; Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles.	
126

MoS2(1−x)Se2x	Doping modification	SiO2/Si	The hundreds of microns monolayer; defect-free single crystalline	HER	Overpotential of 280 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 106 mV dec−1; stability over 22 h.	
128

WS2(1−x)Se2x	Doping modification	SrTiO3	Dendritic flakes with abundantly exposed curving edges; monolayer	HER	Overpotential of 156 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 69 mV dec−1; higher exchange current density of ∼50.1 μA cm−2.	
131

2H Nb1.35S2	Phase transition	SiO2/Si and GC	Thin film thicknesses ranging from 2 nm to 50 nm with lateral dimensions of ∼0.5–1 μm	HER	Overpotential of ∼370 and ∼420 mV at 1000 and 5000 mA cm−2; TOF of ∼0.2s−1 at 0 V.	
138

Re0.55Mo0.45S2	Phase transition	SiO2/Si	Stable distorted tetragonal structure; 2D monolayer flakes	HER	Onset potential of 90 mV; Tafel slope of 56 mV dec−1, stability over 3000 cycles.	
146

1T VS2	Phase transition	SiO2/Si	Singe crystal nanosheets; hexagon shapes	HER	Overpotential of 68 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 34 mV dec−1; stability over 12000 cycles.	
151

WS2/WO2.9/C	Heterostructure construction	Graphite paper	Hybrid membranes with a ridge-like morphology	HER	Overpotential of ∼120 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 36 mV dec−1; stability over 10000 cycles.	
163

MoS2/Gr	Heterostructure construction	Au foil	Vertical heterostructures; the domain edge within a lateral distance of ∼6 nm	HER	Overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1; exchange current density of 24.8 μA cm−2.	
168

G@N-MoS2	Heterostructure construction	MgO	Hexagonal structure; mesoporous framework; the characteristic layer-by-layer stacking	HER/OER/ORR	Overpotential of 243 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 82.5 mV dec−1; stability over 1000 cycles; potential gap of ∼0.90 V for ORR/OER.	
169

MoS2/WS2	Heterostructure construction	Au foil	The commensurate crystallographic alignment of the stacked structures; single-crystal characteristics	HER	Overpotential of 190 mV at 4.5 mA cm−2; stability over 6 h.	
171

WS2–MoS2 films	Heterostructure construction	FTO glass	Polycrystalline; stack double-layer structure; orderly and well-interfaced composite thin films	I3−RR	Short-circuit photocurrent density of FTO/WS2/MoS2 is 14.16 mA cm−2.	
172

MoO2/MoSe2	Heterostructure construction	SiO2/Si and CC	Vertical 2D core–shell nanosheet arrays; high density structural defects and disorders	HER	Overpotential of 181 mV at 10 mA cm−2; Tafel slope of 49.1 mV dec−1; stability over 2000 cycles.	
173


 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the relationship among atomic-scale engineering, surface interaction, and catalytic performance.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
