Single-molecule, single-particle fluorescence imaging of TiO 2 -based photocatalytic reactions   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B919698F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B919698F
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4802-4819Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSingle-molecule, single-particle fluorescence imaging of TiO2-based photocatalytic reactions†

        
          
            Takashi 
            Tachikawa
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tetsuro 
            Majima
          
          
        
      *
      The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (SANKEN), Osaka University, Mihogaoka 8-1, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan. E-mail: majima@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp;  Fax: +81 6-6879-8495;   Tel: +81 6-6879-8499
Received 
      27th May 2010
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      7th September 2010
    AbstractNanostructured metal oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2 and ZnO, have attracted great attention as the promising material for photovoltaic devices, photocatalysts for water splitting and environmental purification, sensors, batteries, etc. In this critical review, we have focused on the on-site observation of interfacial chemical reactions involving charge carriers and reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as singlet oxygen and the hydroxyl radical, generated by the photoexcitation of TiO2 nanoparticles using single-molecule, single-particle fluorescence spectroscopy. Advanced fluorescence imaging techniques enable us to determine the location of the photocatalytically active sites that are closely related to the defects heterogeneously distributed on the surface. Consequently, this review provides a great opportunity to understand the temporal and spatial heterogeneities within an individual catalyst particle, allowing for the potential use of single-molecule, single-particle approaches in the analysis of photocatalytic reactions (189 references).
Takashi Tachikawa
Takashi Tachikawa received his BS and MS in Education from Fukushima University in 1998 and 2000, respectively. He received PhD in Chemistry from Tohoku University in 2003. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (SANKEN), Osaka University, until 2006 and now he is working as an assistant professor.
Tetsuro Majima
Tetsuro Majima received his BS, MS, and PhD in 1975, 1977, and 1980, respectively. He worked as a research associate in the University of Texas at Dallas for two years (1980–1982), and worked as a scientist in the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN, Japan) for 12 years (1982–1994). In 1994 he became an associate professor in the Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (SANKEN), Osaka University. He was promoted to full professor in 1997.
1. Introduction
Metal oxide photocatalysts, mostly TiO2 nanoparticles, have been extensively studied for practical use in the water-splitting reaction that produces hydrogen, the degradation of organic pollutants, the surface wettability conversion, etc.1–5 The photocatalytic reactions are basically initiated by band gap excitation of semiconductor metal oxides. The proposed photocatalytic reaction schemes are summarized in Fig. 1. In the case of anatase TiO2, ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation (λ < 390 nm) corresponding to its band gap of 3.2 eV generates the valence band (VB) holes (h+) and conduction band (CB) electrons (e–), which are immediately captured within a picosecond time scale at various trap sites in the bulk or on the surface.6 In the TiO2-assisted oxidation processes of organic compounds, there are two main processes, that is, the direct oxidation/reduction on the TiO2 surface by free or trapped h+/e– and the indirect oxidation/reduction by reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as superoxide (O2˙–), singlet oxygen (1O2), the hydroxyl radical (˙OH), the hydroperoxyl radical (HO2˙), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The direct oxidation/reduction processes of substrates (S) have been extensively characterized by the transient absorption measurements of their radical cations/anions (S˙+/˙–), which are formed by the one-electron redox reactions between the substrates adsorbed on TiO2 and h+/e–.7 On the other hand, in the ROS-mediated reaction processes, the involvement of a variety of ROS during the TiO2 photocatalytic reactions has been investigated using various methods, such as electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy,8–11 near-infrared spectroscopy,12,13 laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy,14,15 and by the use of fluorescent probes.16–21 The oxidation of S by free ROS in the bulk solution should be the dominant degradation process at a site distant from the TiO2 surface, where the photogenerated charge carriers are not involved. An additional oxidation pathway of substrates, particularly organic dyes, is the photoinduced electron transfer (ET) from the excited state of substrates to the CB of TiO2 to generate their radical cations, as described in Section 5. This interfacial ET reaction is a key process in photovoltaic devices aimed at electricity production as well as photocatalytic water splitting systems.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of TiO2 photocatalytic reactions for the generation of ROS. 
To design an efficient photocatalyst for the above-mentioned applications, it is important to reveal and understand the mechanism of the photocatalytic reactions, in particular, the oxidation and reduction processes of organic compounds. ROS present some characteristics that make them difficult to be detected and identified due to the wide ranges of lifetimes and reactivities under various conditions. Therefore, it is essential to develop methodologies capable of overcoming these types of obstacles. The fluorescence methodology, associated with the use of suitable probes, is an excellent approach to detect ROS because of its high sensitivity, simplicity in data collection, and high spatial resolution in microscopic imaging techniques. However, in order to elucidate the influence of the structural disorders, such as defects and size and shape non-uniformities, on the spatial distribution of (photo)catalytically active sites, further techniques for examining a single piece of material are strongly required for elucidating the details of the reaction mechanisms.
Single-molecule or single-particle fluorescence spectroscopy is emerging as an important tool for studying the photophysical and photochemical processes of all types of molecular systems from simple dye molecules to luminescent quantum dots (QDs).22–24 Until now, the requirements for observing very weak emissions from a single fluorophore have prompted the development of advanced detection methods, e.g., total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) and confocal fluorescence microscopy.23,25 The former technique is advantageous in visualizing the fluorescence from single molecules immobilized or located at a glass/solution interface with a very low background noise using an evanescent field, and thus has been applied to the investigation of the structural dynamics of biomolecules, such as DNA, proteins, and enzymes, labeled with dyes, which provides information that is useful for revealing various biological functions at the molecular level.26 The confocal microscopy is widely used for the detection of not only an immobilized molecule but also a molecule freely diffusing in solution. The latter is often referred to as fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS), which enables us to investigate the molecular interactions, such as protein–ligand binding and DNA hybridization, by measuring the correlation time of diffusion of molecules into the focal volume.27 In addition, fluorescence lifetime experiments using pulsed lasers and a time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) system are possible.28,29 By measuring the delay between the arrival time of the excitation pulse and the detection of the emitted photon, it is able to reconstruct a fluorescence decay curve for a single dye molecule in the excited state. These techniques for single-molecule fluorescence detection have advantages superior to the conventional ones that rely on the bulk sample, providing us with opportunities, such as the ultimate high sensitivity, the possible observations of the properties hidden in ensemble measurements (e.g., subpopulation existing in the sample, temporal fluctuation of the activity), and eliminating the need for synchronization. Therefore, the single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy with the aid of advanced microscope techniques has been used to explore the inherent features of heterogeneous catalyses, such as the dynamics of reagent molecules in mesoporous silica30–35 and the mechanism of hydrolysis, proton transfer, and redox reactions occurring on the surface of layered double hydroxide (LDH),36,37 zeolite,38 potassium acid phthalate (KAP),39–41 metal–organic framework (MOF),42 TiO2,43–45 titanosilicates,46,47 carbon nanotubes,48–50 and gold nanoparticles.51,52 Interested readers are referred to a recent comprehensive review which includes more in-depth discussion of these topics.53
In this review, we focus on the single-molecule, single particle analysis of TiO2 photocatalytic reactions by using advanced fluorescence microscope techniques. In Section 2, we demonstrate the methodology of the single-molecule detection of ROS generated by the photoexcitation of TiO2 nanoparticles with specific fluorescent probes to reveal their temporal and spatial distributions. The application of the redox-responsive dyes for the identification of active sites on individual TiO2 nanoparticles is also introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, we highlight recent studies on the dynamics of photoluminescence (PL) of individual TiO2 nanoparticles. In Section 5, in order to further discuss the inherent heterogeneity in chemical reactions on TiO2, we overview the single-molecule studies on the photoinduced ET between the excited dye molecules or QDs and TiO2. Finally, we summarize our contribution together with some future research directions in each aspect.
2. Detection of reactive oxygen species with fluorescent probes
The scientific research in the field of ROS associated with biological and non-biological functions is continuously requiring new sensitive and specific tools that may enable a deeper insight on their action mechanisms.54–56 However, ROS present some characteristics that make them difficult to be detected, namely their very short lifetime and high reactivity, and the variety of antioxidants existing in vivo, capable of capturing these species.
In particular, the metastable and reactive ROS, such as 1O2 and ˙OH, have a finite lifetime in any system in which they are produced. The magnitude of this lifetime can vary over a large range and is governed by the constituents of the medium in which ROS exist. Thus, much would be gained if tenuous ROS in air, solution, polymer, and biological systems could be directly monitored with appropriate temporal and spatial resolutions. For instance, Ogilby and co-workers have developed several spectroscopic techniques to quantify the diffusion coefficients of O2 molecules in solution, polymer films, and biological cell.57,58 In their approach, the O2 sorption into the polymer is monitored using the near-infrared phosphorescence around 1270 nm of 1O2 produced via photosensitizaion. They could detect the phosphorescence of 1O2 using fluorescence microscopy equipped with a cooled photomultiplier tube operated in a photon counting mode. Of course, this technique has its limitations, the most significant of which reflects the fact that weak emission is generally difficult to monitor at the single-molecule level.
The main goal of this section is to present the fluorescence methodology that has been used for detecting ROS, especially, 1O2 and ˙OH, with specific probes at the single-molecule level.
2.1 Selective detection of singlet oxygen (1O2)
Majima and colleagues have initially applied the single-molecule fluorescence technique with TIRFM to detect ROS diffused from the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles with single organic dye molecules (Alexa Fluor 532, Invitrogen) in ambient air, although the selective detection and quantification of ROS were not achieved.59 As a next step, they tried to selectively detect an airborne 1O2 molecule that diffused from the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles at the single-molecule level.60
In the TiO2 photocatalytic reactions, 1O2 generated on the TiO2 surface is considered to barely diffuse into the gas phase forming airborne 1O2,13 but there is no direct experimental evidence. A schematic representation of the sample for the detection of ROS diffusing from the TiO2 surface into air is shown in Fig. 2. The cover glass coated with the fluorescent probes was attached to the TiO2 nanoparticles-coated slide glass with an intervening gap (12.5–2000 μm). The intervening gap between the fluorescent probe-coated cover glass and the TiO2 film was controlled using polyimide films.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the detection of airborne ROS generated during TiO2 photocatalytic reactions. 
Their strategy to detect single 1O2 molecules is summarized in Fig. 3. The terrylenediimide (TDI) derivative was used as the fluorescent probe. According to a pioneering work by Basché et al.,61 a single TDI molecule should be oxidized by a single 1O2 molecule to form a less fluorescent endoperoxide and successively a strongly fluorescent diepoxide with a spectral blue shift that is easily detected upon 532 nm laser excitation.
 Fig. 3  Single-molecule detection of 1O2 with TDI. 

Fig. 4A depicts the single-molecule fluorescence images observed before and after the UV irradiation of the TiO2 film for 5 min. Before the UV irradiation, only a few fluorescent spots were observed due to the weak fluorescence of the TDI excited at 532 nm. Due to the lack of sensitivity against the weak fluorescence, most of the TDIs cannot be recognized in image A. Interestingly, after UV irradiation, bright fluorescent spots emerged around the UV-irradiated region as described by the white circles.
 Fig. 4  (A) Fluorescence images of single TDIs spin-coated on the PMMA-coated cover glass before (left) and after (right) UV irradiation for 5 min. The intervening gap is 12.5 μm. The bright spots correspond to the blue-shifted TDI diepoxide. The UV irradiation area is inside the white circle in the images. The absence of dyes at the center of the image after UV irradiation is due to the bleaching of TDI caused by the direct UV irradiation of 1O2 with TDI. (B) The spatial and temporal distributions of 1O2 molecules diffused from the surface of TiO2 film. These results are reported in ref. 60. 
Compared to that before the UV irradiation, it was found that the single-molecule fluorescence spectrum is blue-shifted by approximately 70 nm after UV irradiation and has a strong fluorescence intensity, thus suggesting that the bright fluorescent spots are attributed to the TDI diepoxide. This peak shift was qualitatively supported by quantum calculations of the optical transitions. Therefore, the fact that the TDI diepoxide shows a strong fluorescence intensity, when compared with that of the TDI, is briefly explained as the increase in the absorbed photon due to the blue shift of the absorption band. Under this experimental condition, 40% of the TDI molecules showed complete switching.
Using this 1O2 nanosensor, the spatial and temporal distributions of the airborne 1O2 molecules diffused from the TiO2 film have been investigated. Surprisingly, as shown in Fig. 4B, several dozen 1O2 molecules are detected even at the intervening gap of 2 mm, which is consistent with the expected diffusion length (∼3 mm) calculated from its diffusion coefficient (0.18 cm2 s–1)62 and lifetime (70 ms)63 in air. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of the single-molecule detection of molecules traveling such a long distance in ambient air. Also, the quantitative analysis enables us to estimate the generation efficiency of the airborne 1O2 molecules during the TiO2 photocatalytic reactions. Using the detected number of 1O2 molecules and the number of photons absorbed by the TiO2 film, the generation efficiency of the airborne 1O2 molecules diffused from the TiO2 film was determined to be about 10–8. This value is much lower than the quantum yield (0.12–0.38) for the 1O2 generation measured for the TiO2 photocatalysis using near-infrared phosphorescence spectroscopy.13 This prominent discrepancy indicates that only a small number of generated 1O2 molecules can be desorbed from the surface and diffuse into air, although almost all molecules should be deactivated without their release from the surface.
2.2 Selective detection of hydroxyl radical (˙OH)
The methodology for the selective single-molecule detection of the airborne ROS diffused from the TiO2 nanoparticles has been developed. Here, we introduce a research work for the spatial and temporal distribution of the airborne ˙OH molecules diffused from the photoirradiated TiO2 surface.64 The real-time single-molecule fluorescence imaging also revealed the heterogeneous diffusion of ˙OH molecules at the solid–air interfaces including glass substrate, surface-adsorbed water, and air.
For the selective single-molecule detection of ˙OH, Majima et al. used 3′-(p-hydroxyphenyl) fluorescein (HPF). HPF is a fluorescent probe for the selective detection of ˙OH or hypohalites that was developed by Nagano et al.65 As summarized in Fig. 5, the HPF molecule selectively reacts with ˙OH to form a strongly emissive fluorescein molecule, but not with other ROS, such as O2˙−, 1O2, and H2O2, generated during the TiO2 photocatalytic reactions.
 Fig. 5  Single-molecule detection of ˙OH with HPF. 
The simultaneous excitation of the probe molecules on the cover glass and the TiO2 film requires that the bimolecular reaction between the excited probe molecules and the ROS is negligible. Note that both the HPF and TDI in the ground state do not react with H2O2, while the excited TDI reacts with H2O2 to form the fluorescent species. Thus, the contribution of the excited-state of probe molecules should be considered for the real-time detection of ROS.
A typical example of the real-time single-molecule detection of ˙OH diffused from the TiO2 film under UV irradiation at the intervening gap of 12.5 μm is shown in Fig. 6. The vertical axis is the number of the detected fluorescein (Fl) molecules per 33 ms. Thus, this corresponds to the count rate of the ˙OH molecules. The inset clearly indicates that the integrated fluorescein molecules increased with the increasing UV irradiation time, in which the saturated value depends on the number of HPF molecules coated on the cover glass. It is worth emphasizing here that the rate constant derived from the evolution of the integrated fluorescein molecules is important for estimating the concentration of airborne ˙OH molecules. Assuming that the bimolecular reaction between ˙OH and HPF obeys pseudo-first order kinetics, the reaction rate constant (kOH) was estimated to be 0.16 s–1 by a single exponential function.
 Fig. 6  Real-time single-molecule detection of the airborne ˙OH diffused from the surface of pure TiO2 with the simultaneous 365 nm irradiation. The intervening gap is 12.5 μm. The vertical axis is the number of fluorescein molecules that emerged per bin time (33 ms), which corresponds to the count rate of the ˙OH molecules. The 365 nm excitation of the TiO2 film was started at t = 14 s. The airborne ˙OH molecules were detected immediately after the 365 nm excitation. Integrated ˙OH molecules increased with the increasing UV-irradiation time (red line). The saturated value of the integrated ˙OH molecules (ca. 2700 molecules) is limited by the number of HPF coated on the cover glass. The blue line indicates the single-exponential fit (t > 14 s) of which the decay rate corresponds to the pseudo-first order rate constant (kOH) between the HPF and ˙OH molecules. Inset shows the semilog plot of the dependence of the intervening gap. 
The dependence of log kOH on the intervening gap under UV irradiation is shown in the inset of Fig. 6. As expected, the kOH decreased with the intervening gap. From the data regarding the influence of the intervening gap, the spatial distribution was examined by postulating the Gaussian distribution, kOH = Aexp(−(kq/2DOH)d2)(1)which was applied by Midden and Wang to describe the concentration of the airborne 1O2 molecules generated from the photoirradiated sensitizers coated on silica gels.66 In this equation, kOH is the pseudo-first order rate constant of the reaction between the HPF and ˙OH molecules at the intervening gap of d, A is the rate constant at the TiO2 surface, kq is the decay rate of ˙OH in ambient air, and DOH is the diffusion coefficient of the ˙OH molecule in ambient air (2.2 × 10−5 m2 s–1).63
Using kq, which can be estimated from the slope of the straight line, the lifetime of ˙OH in ambient air was estimated to be 170 μs. This is relatively lower than that of ˙OH in ambient air previously reported (ca. 20 ms).67 The significant difference in lifetimes would be explained by the escape of the airborne ˙OH molecules from the detection region by the spatial diffusion and the scavenging of ˙OH by H2O2 or other airborne species in the gas phase, which are accompanied by the formation of ˙OH during the TiO2 photocatalytic reactions (see Fig. 1).
Furthermore, the single-molecule fluorescence imaging of the diffusing ˙OH molecules at the glass–air interface was performed. Fig. 7A shows the fluorescence image of the HPF-coated cover glass captured during the UV irradiation. The pure TiO2 film was placed on the edge of a cover glass, and irradiated with UV light to form ˙OH molecules. Interestingly, the single-molecule fluorescence spots emerged from the edge of the cover glass irradiated with UV light and spread on the glass surface within a couple of seconds.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic representation of the observation of the lateral diffusion of ˙OH molecules from the UV-irradiated pure TiO2 film. The fluorescence image of the HPF-coated cover glass captured during the UV irradiation is shown. Immediately after the UV irradiation, ˙OH molecules spread on the cover glass within a couple of seconds. (B) Plot of the mean-square displacement 〈r2〉 versus the arrival time of the ˙OH molecules. Fitting lines using the mean-square displacement in one dimension, 〈r2〉 = 2DOHsurf × tα, are shown by the solid line (Brownian motion model, α = 1) and dotted line (superdiffusive model, α = 1.5). The diffusion coefficients of the ˙OH molecules on the cover glass (DOHsurf) calculated from the fitting lines are 7.5 × 10–10 and 7.0 × 10–10 m2 s–1 for α = 1.0 and 1.5, respectively. For additional results including movies, see ref. 64. 
They have determined the DOH on the cover glass (DOHsurf) from the apparent lateral diffusion of the generated fluorescein molecules that are produced by the reaction with ˙OH molecules. Because of the non-uniform illumination and the simplification of the analysis, the one-dimensional diffusion of ˙OH molecules on the cover glass was assumed. To roughly estimate DOHsurf, the mean-square displacement 〈r2〉 versus the arrival time of ˙OH molecules was plotted, as shown in Fig. 7B. By fitting the data using the mean-square displacement in one dimension, 〈r2〉 = 2DOHsurf × t, DOHsurf was calculated to be 7.5 × 10−10 m2 s–1 (black line). The estimated DOHsurf is somewhat consistent with the diffusion coefficient of water adsorbed in the near-monolayer films on a silica surface (3–6 × 10–10 m2 s−1 at 298 K).68,69 This fact presumably suggests that the ˙OH molecules are spread over the cover glass through the adsorbed water layer, because the relative humidity in this measurement was maintained at about 20–30%, which corresponds to that in the formation of the near-monolayer water.70 Therefore, they hypothesized that the airborne ˙OH molecules generated from the TiO2 film might laterally diffuse on the cover glass across a number of air–water interfaces of the domains or networks, accompanied by diffusion into the air phase (air-mediated effective surface diffusion).
If the hypothesis of this mechanism is correct, the diffusion behavior of ˙OH molecules at the interface no longer obeys the standard Brownian motion characterized by a mean-squared displacement that linearly increases with time, 〈r2〉 = 2DOHsurf × tα, where α = 1.0. On the other hand, such an air-mediated effective surface diffusion through the adsorbed water domains is considered to obey the superdiffusive behavior (the so-called Lévy walk), in which α = 1.5.71–73 The fitting line using the superdiffusive model is shown in Fig. 7B (red line). The observed data can be well fitted by the superdiffusive model compared to the standard Brownian motion (black line). The DOHsurf calculated from the fitting line of this model is 7.0 × 10–10 m2 s–1. These results indicate that the anomalous diffusion behavior of ˙OH molecules on the cover glass should involve the heterogeneous diffusion processes between the adsorbed water domains or networks and the air phase. This is the first real-time observation of the diffusion of ˙OH molecules at the heterogeneous interface under a fluorescence microscope. Although the reliable evidence to fully explain the mechanism has not yet been obtained, these findings provide new insights into the generation, diffusion, and reaction processes of the airborne ROS at the heterogeneous interfaces.
2.3 
          In situ detection of ˙OH in a TiO2 nanotube
Mesoporous TiO2 structures, such as nanotubes, hollow spheres, and opals, have been synthesized with the objective of designing an efficient photocatalyst having a high specific surface area and high molecular selectivity.74–77 In these applications, the performance of reagent molecules is likely to be influenced by their accessibility to the active sites for adsorption onto and reaction with the surfaces of the materials. However, the structural disorders and agglomerates present in bulk samples often hinder efficient molecular transport. Since conventional measurement methods cannot be used to observe and distinguish between photocatalytic reactions occurring on active sites distributed over the catalyst, the inherent properties can only be obtained as the ensemble mean of the heterogeneities.
In this section, we describe the methodology for evaluating the photocatalytic activity of individual porous TiO2 nanotubes,44 which have a porous structure containing a straight macropore (pore size: 100–150 nm) and mesopores between the anatase nanoparticles (pore size: 5–10 nm), by the single-molecule counting of ˙OH using a specific fluorescent probe, 3′-(p-aminophenyl) fluorescein (APF) (Fig. 8). The time- and space-resolved observation of fluorescein products (Fl) generated by the photocatalytic reaction revealed the importance of the transport behavior of reagents through the porous structures on the photocatalytic activity and the existence of the spatial heterogeneity of reactive sites even in an isolated TiO2 nanotube.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of photocatalytic reaction occurring on a single nanotube. The porous TiO2 nanotube on the cover glass is simultaneously irradiated with UV light (wavelength: 365 nm) and evanescent light produced by a CW Ar+ laser (wavelength: 488 nm) to excite the nanotube and fluorescein, respectively. 

Fig. 9A and B represent TiO2 nanotubes that exhibit a diffusion behavior inherent in the macropore and mesopore, respectively. The figures show the optical transmission (left) and fluorescence images (right) captured at the same position, and the trajectories of the displacement of the spots are indicated by the arrows (inset, blue). The fluorescent spot in image A (right) is much broader than the size of the diffraction-limited spot of ∼200 nm (upper panel of Fig. 9C). This result infers that the fluorescein molecule generated in the straight macropore and rapidly diffused out of the nanotube into the bulk solution. In the presence of DMSO as an ˙OH quencher, the appearance of fluorescence spots was completely suppressed, confirming that fluorescein molecules were produced by ˙OH and not by the auto-oxidation of APF caused by UV irradiation. On the other hand, the fluorescent spot shown in image B represents contrasting results as follows: (i) the trajectory due to slow diffusion, (ii) the line profile seen as the diffraction-limited spot, and (iii) maintenance of the fluorescence intensity for a duration longer than the time resolution of the data acquisition. It is also noteworthy that the diffusing molecule mainly exists in a region within an area of ca. 40 × 40 nm2, which is of the same order as the wall thickness of the nanotube. The possible adsorption of fluorescein on a TiO2 particle can be ruled out because of the following reasons: movement of the molecule, fluorescence quenching due to electron transfer, and electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged fluorescein and the TiO2 particle in the phosphate buffer solution.78 Thus, the fluorescein molecule shown in image B must be present in the mesopores between the nanoparticles. The counting rates of single fluorescein molecules measured at the macropore and mesopore are 0.85 and 0.065 molecules μm–1 s–1, respectively, thus indicating the effect of the kinetics of the transport of reagents on the photocatalytic activity, which is not evident in the bulk measurement.
 Fig. 9  Optical transmission image (left) and fluorescence image (right) obtained for single TiO2 nanotubes (A and B). Insets show the peak trajectories of single-molecule fluorescence generated in the macropore (A) and mesopore (B) of the TiO2 nanotube. Line profiles (upper panels of C and D) and time trajectories (lower panels of C and D) of the fluorescence intensity at the spots indicated by the arrows are shown in panels A and B, respectively. The red lines in both panels correspond to each other. The line profiles are well fitted by Gaussian distribution (blue). These results are reported in ref. 44. 
Furthermore, they have attempted to study the spatial heterogeneity of active sites on individual TiO2 nanotubes as illustrated in Fig. 10. To avoid any potential artifacts due to the enhanced light scattering arising from the existence of cracks or branches on the nanotube, the histogram of the number of fluorescein molecules counted along the dotted line in the image shown in the inset was carefully examined (red). In this case, the precise position at which a fluorescent product is generated is determined from the Gaussian fits to the fluorescence intensity profiles of the product that immediately disappeared by fast diffusion. For the sake of comparison, the line profile of the integrated fluorescence intensity is also shown (blue). The fact that the peaks in both profiles approximately correspond to each other reveals the heterogeneous distribution of the active sites even in the isolated nanotube. They considered that surface defects, such as oxygen vacancies, heterogeneously distributed in the respective nanotubes would mediate the electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to O2, leading to the generation of H2O2 as the precursor of ˙OH (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 10  Histogram of the number of fluorescein molecules generated at that position, which is determined from the peak of the Gaussian distribution (red), and line profile of the integrated fluorescence intensity along the long axis shown by the dotted line in the inset (blue). The fluorescence intensity should be directly correlated with the photocatalytically active sites. Inset shows the integrated fluorescence intensity of the TiO2 nanotube over 120 s during the photocatalytic reaction. 
In this section, we have introduced the methodology for the selective single-molecule detection of ROS generated from TiO2 nanoparticles using specific fluorescent probes. It is noteworthy that the spatial heterogeneity of reactive sites in an isolated TiO2 nanotube was discovered for the first time. Experiments on a single particle provide information that is useful for elucidating the mechanism of heterogeneous chemical reactions and for designing advanced catalyst materials.
3. Redox-responsive fluorescent dyes
There is a significant current interest in the development of new fluorescent molecular probes for the characterization of redox processes in a nanoscale environment.79–82 Synthetic fluorescent single-molecule probes, which reversibly or irreversibly respond to changes of redox potential, are potentially applicable to nanoscopic imaging of the redox status of analytes, such as proteins and living cells. Another interesting application of such probes is the exploration of redox reactions of individual molecules on the heterogeneous catalysts at high spatial and temporal resolution by the rapidly developing technology of single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy. In this section, we introduce the application of the redox-responsive dyes for the identification of active sites on individual TiO2 nanoparticles.
3.1 Fluorescent sensors based on photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer
In 2002, Adams and co-workers reported a new class of highly sensitive fluorescent single-molecule sensors to probe local environment on the basis of photoinduced intramolecular ET.83 They introduced a p-aminophenyl group to a perylene bisimide chromophore that possesses large extinction coefficient, high fluorescence quantum yield, and high photochemical stability.84,85 Since the amino group greatly increases the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of the benzene moiety due to its strong electron-donating nature, the fluorescence from the perylene bisimide chromophore is efficiently quenched via an intramolecular ET process from the amine-substituted benzene moiety to the excited chromophore. Reversible chemical reactions and interfacial ET processes of the p-aminophenyl group with protons, metal atoms, or organic electrophiles lower the energy of its electron pair below the HOMO level of the chromophore, turning off ET and turning on fluorescence (Fig. 11). To investigate whether this sensor system can be used to locally probe nanoscale surface structure, the perylene bisimide derivative NDAPP (N-(1-nonyldecyl)-N′-(p-aminophenyl)perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxyl bisimide) was synthesized and spin-coated onto glass and quartz coverslips. As demonstrated in Fig. 12, confocal fluorescence images show bright fluorescent spots of individual NDAPP molecules on glass (image A). This result demonstrates that the amino group of NDAPP binds to metal or metal oxide impurities, such as TiO2, ZnO, or Al2O3, in the glass. No significant fluorescence signal was observed for NDAPP molecules dispersed on freshly cleaned quartz, because there are no such binding sites available (image B).
 Fig. 11  Structure and molecule orbital diagrams of single-molecule probe NDAPP in the unbound (left) and bound states (right). The fluorescence from the perylene bisimide chromophore is quenched by intramolecular ET from the p-aminophenyl group. 
 Fig. 12  Single-molecule fluorescence confocal images of NDAPP spin-coated onto glass (A) and quartz (B) coverslips. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Reactive sites on a titanosilicate zeolite
Microporous titanosilicates, such as ETS-4 and ETS-10, are an attractive material for applications such as adsorption, ion exchange, and (photo)catalysis because of the inherent quantum nature of one-dimensional titania wires in the framework and its high adsorption selectivity owing to its inherent pore size (0.8 nm × 0.5 nm).86–91 In a defect-free crystal, charge carriers, i.e., electrons and holes, are generated by the irradiation of photons with a bandgap energy of about 4 eV and these carriers can migrate in the crystal through the wires. However, the wires are broken at random points in the crystal because of inherent defects. Although these defects form active centers for molecular adsorption and redox reactions, the influence of structural defects present in titanosilicates on the adsorption and reaction dynamics of organic compounds has not been well characterized.
Recently, the in situ fluorescence imaging of photocatalytic oxidation on single ETS-10 crystals was performed using a redox-responsive fluorescent dye, 3′-(p-aminophenyl) fluorescein (APF, Fig. 13).46 APF, which was originally developed as a fluorescent probe for selective detection of ˙OH (see Sections 2.2 and 2.3) or hypohalites, was employed to identify the surface-active sites distributed over the material.
 Fig. 13  Reaction scheme for the one-electron oxidation of p-aminophenyl group, which induces fluorescence in APF. 
According to the literature,65 the fluorescence of APF in aqueous solution is almost completely quenched by electron transfer from an electron-rich p-aminophenyl group (Φfl = 0.008). However, the fluorescence intensity of the APF phosphate buffer solution was greatly enhanced by applying a positive potential of about +0.62 V vs. NHE. This potential is very similar to the oxidation potential (Eox) of aniline (+0.62 V vs. NHE),92 which is much lower than that of fluorescein (+1.1 V vs. NHE),93 thereby supporting the reaction scheme depicted in Fig. 13.

Fig. 14 shows time traces of the fluorescence intensity acquired at a crack-like defect (position 1) and at a point near the edge (position 2). The increase in fluorescence intensity observed at the defect upon UV irradiation is considerably higher than the increase observed at position 2 and other areas. This finding obviously reflects the fact that crystal defects in ETS-10, where considerable titanols and supermicropores are present, yield highly active sites for adsorption and oxidation of organic compounds. Furthermore, it was revealed that surface treatment of ETS-10 with diluted aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution significantly increased not only the adsorption and reaction efficiencies but also the heterogeneity of photocatalytic activity among the crystals. In the presence of aniline as a co-adsorbate, the increase in fluorescence intensity upon UV irradiation was completely suppressed, thus implying that the p-aminophenyl group of APF plays an important role in the adsorption on the surface of ETS-10.83 These findings clearly suggest that crystal defects serve as active sites during the photocatalytic reaction in an aqueous solution.
 Fig. 14  (A) Optical transmission image (left) and fluorescence image under UV irradiation (right), where the imaging focal plane was located at the central position of the crystal. The arrow in panel C denotes the time when the fluorescence image was acquired. (B) Spatial configuration of the crystal (see the axes). (C) Time traces of the fluorescence intensity acquired at the defect (position 1) and near the edge of the ETS-10 crystal (position 2). These results are reported in ref. 46. 
4. Photoluminescence of single nanoparticles
Semiconductor nanoparticles including dots, rods, wires, and tubes have received much attention because of their applications, such as sensors, detectors, light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells, and photocatalysis.94–97 Photoluminescence (PL) is a particularly useful tool for the identification of crystal structures, particle size, and defect states, since the positions of PL peaks are strongly dependent on these structural characteristics.98–102 In addition, temporal changes of PL intensity and spectrum give us useful information about the underlying reaction chemistry. In this section, we would like to outline the spectral and kinetic characteristics of PL from single TiO2 nanoparticles. The PL bands originating from defects in the bulk and/or on the surface of TiO2 were observed in the visible region with numerous “photon bursts” under 405 nm laser irradiation in an inert gas atmosphere. From the single-molecule kinetic analysis of the bursts, it was found that the quenching reaction of trapped electrons by molecular oxygen follows a Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism. In addition, a novel spectroscopic method, i.e., single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry, was utilized to explore the nature of the defect states inherent in TiO2. The spatially-resolved PL imaging techniques thus enable us to ascertain the location of the luminescent active sites that are related to the heterogeneously distributed defects.
4.1 Defect emission of single TiO2 nanoparticles
Generally, TiO2 nanoparticles show a very weak emission in the UV and visible regions in ambient air at room temperature. Therefore, despite instrumental developments, there have been only a few reports in the literature on the direct observation of the emission from individual TiO2 nanoparticles by fluorescence microscopy.45,103,104 Recently, Tachikawa et al. discovered a dramatic increase in the emission intensity of TiO2 nanoparticles by changing the atmosphere from air to an inert gas during the photoirradiation with a 405 nm laser (Fig. 15A).103 The spectral measurements of individual nanoparticles show the growth of a broad PL band in the visible region (500–750 nm), as depicted in Fig. 15B.
 Fig. 15  (A) Typical PL images observed during the 405 nm laser excitation for single TiO2 nanoparticles under air (left) and Ar (right) atmospheres. (B) Typical PL spectrum of a single TiO2 nanoparticle in Ar atmosphere. The solid lines indicate the Gaussian distributions fitted with the spectrum. These results are reported in ref. 45. 
The visible emission of TiO2 is historically considered to be ascribed to the self-trapped excitons localized on the TiO6 octahedra,105 oxygen vacancies,6etc. For instance, Sekiya et al. reported that the visible PL spectrum consists of three components centered at about 517, 577, and 636 nm, which are assigned to excitons bound to partially reduced Ti ions, self-trapped excitons through an exciton–lattice interaction, and oxygen vacancies, respectively.106,107 Recently, McHale et al. observed the PL spectra of nanocrystalline TiO2 in the anatase and rutile phases, and in mixed-phase samples at room temperature, and found that the total PL of anatase is shown to be a superposition of transitions involving spatially-separated trapped electrons and holes.108,109 They eventually concluded that the green PL with a peak around 525 nm is due to the transition between the mobile electrons (those in the conduction band or in shallow bulk traps) and trapped holes, and the red PL with a peak around 600 nm is due to that between the deeply-trapped electrons and valence band holes. According to their assignment, at least two different light-emitting species due to the trapped charges are involved in the visible PL bands from individual TiO2 nanoparticles, and their distribution gradually changes from green emission to red emission during the photoirradiation.
4.2 Photoactivation dynamics of color centers
Photoactivation of the TiO2 emission, i.e., an order of magnitude or more increase in intensity, seems to be similar to that frequently observed for luminescent nanocolloids, such as CdSe and CdTe QDs, but their mechanisms are quite different from each other.110–112 Light absorption in the spectral region of the intrinsic absorption (hν > 3.2 eV) and in the bands corresponding to the color centers (extrinsic absorption, hν < 3.2 eV) generates free carriers that induce the formation of trapped carriers and surface oxygen species, such as O2˙–, which oxidize the color centers.
According to the literature,113 the main feature of the kinetics during visible-light irradiation is the dependence of the absorbance of the sample on the number of color centers (N) as follows. TiO2 + hν405 → efree− + hfree+ (intrinsic abs.)(2) efree– → etr– (color centers)(3) hfree+ → htr+(4) etr– (color centers) + hν405 → efree− + hfree+ (extrinsic abs.)(5) efree− + hfree+ → PL (bandgap em.)(6) etr− (color centers) + hfree/tr+ → PL (defect em.)(7) efree− + O2 → O2˙−(8)
Visible color centers, most probably, trapped electrons (etr–) in the vacancy defect sites, are generated by the intrinsic and/or extrinsic excitations of TiO2 under the 405 nm laser irradiation. Both efree– and etr– can then recombine with the photogenerated holes (hfree/tr+) to produce the PL in the UV and visible regions, respectively. The quenching of efree– by O2 molecules consequently results in the decreased PL (see Section 4.4 for details). Based on the reaction equations, the main feature of the kinetics during visible-light irradiation is described as the dependence of the absorbance of the sample on the number of N. The differential equation for the formation (k+) and deactivation (k−) rates of the color centers is given by (9)
The k+ value significantly depends on the light intensity, the absorbance of the color centers, and the quantum yield of the photoreaction. On the other hand, k− depends on these same factors in addition to the oxygen content available in the gas-phase environment. Eqn (9) is of the form of the Bernoulli equation and is converted into a first-order linear differential equation as given by (10)where N0 is the number of color centers that exist prior to irradiation. Interestingly, the observed trajectories of the PL intensity were well reproduced by eqn (10) as shown in Fig. 16. Assuming that the absorption cross-section and PL quantum yield of color centers are constant, the N values increased by at least 10 times after the photoactivation, and the k+ value was determined to be 0.05 ± 0.01 s–1 for both processes, while the k– values were 0.5 ± 0.2 and 15 ± 5 s–1 for the photo-activation (Fig. 16A) and deactivation processes (Fig. 16B), respectively. The remarkable difference in k– should be due to the different oxygen concentration in the gas phase. The observed difference in N0 for each particle is possibly due to the heterogeneous distribution of defects inherent in the individual TiO2 nanoparticles. Similar PL activation and deactivation behaviors were observed for other nanosized TiO2 materials, such as TiO2 nanowires.45
 Fig. 16  Trajectories of PL intensity observed for a single TiO2 nanoparticle under Ar (A) and air (B) atmospheres (bin time is 33 ms). Solid lines indicate the kinetic traces calculated using eqn (10). 
4.3 Electric potential-induced photoluminescence
A novel spectroscopic method, i.e., single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry,114,115 was successfully utilized to explore the nature of the luminescent defects present in a single TiO2 nanowire.45 This method is a powerful new technique for studying electrochemical kinetics in highly heterogeneous systems and allows us to measure electrochemical kinetics of many individual materials at a time. In a typical experiment, the potential of the working electrode, i.e., an indium tin oxide (ITO) thin film fabricated on a cover glass, was linearly scanned at a scan rate of 0.1 V s–1 with simultaneous measuring of the PL images of many single wires.

Fig. 17A shows the PL images of single TiO2 nanowires acquired without (left) and with (right) the applied potential (E) of −0.8 V vs. silver wire quasi-reference electrode (QRE) (= −0.37 V vs. NHE). Upon the applied potential of −0.8 V, a noticeable increase in the PL intensity was observed (see yellow arrows), while no PL was detected at all without the 405 nm laser irradiation. Interestingly, the wire lying over another one on the ITO surface has a much lower response to the potential (see white arrows). This result emphasizes the importance of physical contact between the wire and ITO on the potential-induced PL, and moreover, the possibility that the electron transport between physically contacted wires is inefficient. Additionally, one can distinguish the wires that have less contact with the ITO, because no significant PL quenching due to the ET from the photoexcited TiO2 to the ITO was observed for these wires in the absence of the applied potential. This interpretation was further supported by the fact that a remarkable suppression of the photoactivation was observed for the TiO2 nanoparticles on the ITO surface.
 Fig. 17  (A) PL images of single TiO2 nanowires acquired without (left) and with (right) applied potential (E) of −0.8 V vs. silver wire QRE (= −0.37 V vs. NHE). Upon the applied potential of −0.8 V, a significant increase in the PL intensity was observed. The activated and unactivated wires are indicated by the yellow and white arrows, respectively. (B) PL spectra observed at different times. The solid lines indicate the Gaussian distributions fitted to the spectra. These results are reported in ref. 45. 
As shown in Fig. 17B, the spectra are roughly divided into two components, i.e., those with a peak at around 600 and 660 nm. These results infer that several sites for the electron trapping are included in the potential-induced PL process. The flat band potential of TiO2 has been estimated to be −1.2 to −1.1 V vs. QRE (= −0.76 to −0.66 V vs. NHE) in acetonitrile containing 0.1 M LiClO4.116,117 As is well-known, numerous electron trap sites lie just below the CB of TiO2. For a nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode consisting of sintered anatase particles, the dependence of the charge accumulation rate constant on the initially applied potential has been used to infer the existence of an intraband state about 0.7 eV below the CB edge.118 The subsequent spectroelectrochemical investigations of the nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes prepared from Degussa P25 (anatase (80%) and rutile (20%)) indicated the presence of traps at ca. 0.5 eV below the conduction band edge.119 Similar studies of electrode films composed of small anatase particles showed that traps are present at about 0.5 eV below the conduction band edge.120 For the TiO2 nanowire, therefore, the energy level of trapped electrons is considered to be −0.5 to −0.7 V vs. QRE (= −0.1 to −0.3 V vs. NHE), which is quite consistent with the potential that begins to activate the PL obtained by single-particle electrochemical spectral measurements. Since the ET from free or shallowly-trapped electrons to the ITO electrode (about 0 vs. NHE)121 is energetically possible, the significant PL quenching of TiO2 nanowires in contact with the ITO surface was observed in the absence of the applied potential. On the other hand, the application of a negative bias potential results in the accumulation of trapped electrons in TiO2. After the removal of the potential, the PL intensity gradually decreased. These results infer that deeply-trapped electrons are stable until exposure to the laser irradiation during which the photostimulated detrapping occurred to generate mobile electrons, followed by ET to the ITO.
4.4 Photoluminescence quenching by oxygen
As mentioned in Section 4.2, it appears that a large number of color centers formed in the bulk and/or on the surface are deactivated with a characteristic lifetime. In fact, the photoactivation of TiO2 emission was accompanied by numerous photon bursts and their frequency of appearance gradually increased until saturation of the PL intensity occurs.45,103 It is likely that the bursts originated from the radiative recombination of holes and electrons at the color centers, such as the oxygen vacancies (VO) with one or two trapped electrons, i.e., the F+ or F center.122,123
The most direct way to evaluate the burst behavior is to record the emission intensity as a function of time, to distinguish between the on times (τon) and background signals by means of a threshold chosen to be 3σ greater than the noise levels, and to measure the distribution of τon as a histogram. As shown in panel A of Fig. 18, most of the PL bursts disappeared within a few hundred milliseconds under an Ar atmosphere ([O2] = 0.2 vol%). The possible explanations for the limited lifetime of the bursts are as follows: (i) the charge recombination of the color centers with the photogenerated holes, (ii) the scavenging of the color centers by residual oxygen molecules or adventitious impurities, and (iii) photostimulated detrapping of the color centers to give mobile electrons.124 In order to elucidate the mechanism of the burst-like PL phenomenon, the oxygen concentration dependence was examined. The experimental and analytical results in Fig. 18B indeed demonstrate a significant decrease in τon from 85 ± 6 to 36 ± 2 ms, which are derived by a single-exponential fitting, by increasing the oxygen concentration up to 5 vol%. The frequency of the burst generation rapidly decreased with increasing oxygen concentration ([O2] > 5 vol%), and eventually only one or no counts during the course of the experiment was observed in an air atmosphere ([O2] = 21 vol%). These observations are indicative of a second-order reaction between electrons in TiO2 and oxygen molecules, and a saturation of available oxygen binding sites on the TiO2 surface.
 Fig. 18  (A) PL bursts observed for a single TiO2 nanowire under 405 nm laser irradiation in Ar. The blue line is the threshold level. (B) Histogram of on-time (τon) determined for the bursts under the oxygen concentrations of 0.2 and 5 vol%. The integration time per frame was 50 ms. The solid lines indicate the single-exponential fits. (C) Oxygen concentration dependence of average quenching rate constant (kq) which is calculated from 1/τon − 1/τon0, where τon and τon0 are the on-times of the bursts in the presence and absence of oxygen, respectively. The solid line is obtained from eqn (12), and the fitting parameters are as follows: Kad = 150 M–1 and [O2]bs = 68 M. These results are reported in ref. 45. 
They considered the quenching dynamics of the photon bursts in accordance with the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation which was used to explain the photocatalytic reduction of oxygen molecules adsorbed on the nanocrystalline TiO2 films.125
According to the model,125 the average quenching rate of the bursts by oxygen is described by (11)where k0q is the second-order reaction rate constant for ET, [O2]ad is the concentration of adsorbed oxygen molecules on the TiO2 surface, and τ0on is the on-time of the bursts in the absence of oxygen. The τ0on value was estimated to be 91 ± 6 ms from the intercept of the plots of τ–1onversus the concentration of oxygen in the gas phase. As shown in Fig. 18C, the plots of kq as a function of the oxygen concentration in the gas phase can be fitted by a simple Langmuir adsorption isotherm, (12)where Kad is the equilibrium adsorption constant for the oxygen binding, and [O2]bs is the concentration of the oxygen binding sites. Based on this equation, we obtained the Kad value of 150 ± 50 M–1 which is on the same order as those reported elsewhere.125,126 Moreover, the quenching yield of the bursts by oxygen, which is defined as Φq = 1 − (τon/τ0on), increased to ca. 60% as the oxygen concentration increased to 5 vol%. It should be noted here that the electron half-times in the nanocrystalline TiO2 film are reported to be about 60 and 550 ms in the presence (5 vol%) and absence of oxygen, respectively.125 A comparison with the single-molecule analysis data enables us to deduce that the τon is not only explained by the scavenging of the mobile electrons by oxygen molecules, but also by other factors.
5. Interfacial electron transfer on TiO2
To design efficient photovoltaic cells for generating energy from sunlight, molecular devices, and photocatalysts, the possible rate-limiting factors that influence charge transport across the heterogeneous interface between metal oxide nanoparticles and dye sensitizers must be addressed and suitably optimized. Therefore, understanding the dynamics of charge separation and recombination processes at the interface is an important matter.127

Fig. 19 schematizes the energetics and dynamics of processes that take place after electron injection from a molecular excited state to the CB of TiO2 nanoparticle. High efficiencies for converting absorbed light into electricity rely on a fast electron injection combined with a very slow back ET reaction.128,129 A deeper understanding of the photoinduced ET mechanism requires a fundamental investigation of the distinct photophysical phenomena that occur on a nanometre scale. Indeed, the inhomogenous interfacial ET processes are associated with nanoscopic heterogeneities in the systems that make it rather difficult for ensemble-averaged measurements to analyze the structural and dynamical characteristics of individual molecules on the particle surface.
 Fig. 19  Energetic scheme of interfacial ET processes following charge injection from the excited state of a dye sensitizer (S*) to the conduction band (CB) of a semiconductor TiO2. S*/S˙+ is the excited dye/radical cation couple, and SS is the surface states. The ket and kbet are the forward and back ET rates, respectively. 
The photoinduced ET on a single molecule has not received much attention, since the fluorescence of organic dye molecules is significantly quenched leaving no signal to be detected. However, over the past decade, following a pioneering work by Lu and Xie,130 the single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy became a powerful analytical technique for studying intramolecular131–135 and interfacial136–144 ET dynamics in various complex systems.
Investigation of interfacial ET dynamics of individual molecules on the heterogeneous surface with single-molecule spectroscopy can avoid undesired interferences: (i) molecular aggregation, (ii) charge separation or energy migration between dye molecules in the ground and excited states,145–147 (iii) multiple charge separation and recombination events on the surface of a single particle, and (iv) electron trapping by neighboring ground-state molecules.148
5.1 Electron transfer between organic dyes and TiO2
For studying interfacial ET dynamics on TiO2, Lu and co-workers have chosen Coumarin 343,137 cresyl violet (CV+),137 zinc-tetra (4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (ZnTCPP),139,140 and 9-phenyl-2,3,7-trihydroxy-6-fluorone (PF)141 as dye sensitizers.
Traces B and C in Fig. 20 show the typical single-molecule fluorescence trajectories obtained for single ZnTCPP molecules on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles coated on a cover glass.139 Comparing the continuous emission on the glass surface in Fig. 20A, both trajectories show strong intensity fluctuation between fluorescent “on” level and dark “off” level. They concluded that the single-molecule fluorescence intensity fluctuation (the so-called blinking phenomenon) is not due to the triplet state of the dye or single-molecule rotational or translational motions during the measurements, but due to the fluctuation or intermittency of the ET activity.
 Fig. 20  (A) A typical single-molecule fluorescence trajectory of ZnTCPP on a cover glass surface. (B and C) Typical single-molecule fluorescence trajectories of ZnTCPP on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles. Histograms of the emission intensity are given to determine the threshold for dark states and bright states. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
The statistical analysis on the stochastic durations of the dark states in which the high ET activity takes place was performed. As shown in Fig. 21, the calculated log–log plot of the single-molecule dark-time probability density distribution (P(tdark) = occurrence(t)/Δt) shows a typical power-law behavior: P(tdark) = Atdark–m, where A is the scaling coefficient and m is the power-law exponent.149 This analysis clearly suggests that the intrinsic physical mechanism is not originated from a single Poisson event under an exponential rate dynamics, which reflects that the interfacial ET involves complex rate process that cannot be defined by a static rate constant. Analogous power-law statistics for both the on and off periods have been extensively investigated in fluorescence blinking dynamics of organic dyes,40,41,150–152 semiconductor QDs,149,153 and other single emitters.154
 Fig. 21  Probability density of dark state for a single ZnTCPP molecule. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Electron transfer between quantum dots and TiO2
Nano-sized (spherical) particles, also referred to as QDs, represent a class of quantum-confined objects in which carrier motion is restricted in all three dimensions.94 This three-dimensional quantum confinement results in discrete size-dependent absorption and emission spectra, and redox properties. In particular, luminescent semiconductor QDs, such as CdS, CdSe, and CdTe QDs, can be easily modified with various functional groups during or after preparation, which make them multifunctional, and have been anticipated for many attractive device applications, such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and bioimaging and sensing applications.155–159 Recent reports of multiple exciton generation, or carrier multiplication, by one absorbed photon in some QDs offer an exciting possibility to dramatically improve the efficiency of QDs-based solar cells.160,161 Therefore, it is necessary to understand the dynamics of charge carriers generated in QDs for using them to design those devices. Recently, two research groups of Lian and Majima independently reported the interfacial ET dynamics in single luminescent QD–chromophore (molecular acceptor) conjugates and showed that the ET activity undergoes large fluctuation from time to time.162–164
Lian et al. have extended their work and showed how the interplay between QDs and TiO2 nanoparticles leads to a charge separation at the heterogeneous interface.165 From the comparison with ensemble-averaged fluorescence decay, it was suggested that the off-state lifetime was dominated by Auger relaxation process, and the on-state lifetime was mainly affected by the rate of ET from QDs to TiO2 nanoparticles.

Fig. 22 demonstrates the typical fluorescence intensity (black) and lifetime (red) trajectories of CdSe/ZnS QDs on a glass coverslip (a) and a TiO2 nanocrystalline thin film (b). Obviously, the luminescence of single QDs on TiO2 appeared less frequently than that of QDs on glass.
 Fig. 22  Typical fluorescence intensity (black) and lifetime (red) trajectories of CdSe/ZnS QDs on (a) a glass coverslip and (b) a TiO2 nanocrystalline thin film. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
The probability density, P(t), was analyzed by weighting each point in the on/off histograms by the average time (Δtav) between nearest neighbor event bins using the following equation: (13)
As shown in Fig. 23, both Pon(t) and Poff(t) of single QDs on glass and TiO2 exhibit a power law distribution at short time but deviate from this distribution at long time tails. These P(t) distributions can be fit by a truncated power law: Pi(t) = At−mi exp(−Γit) (i = on or off)(14)where A is the amplitude, m is the power law exponent, and Γ is the saturation rate. QDs on TiO2 have larger mon and Γon (1.61 and 0.056 s–1, respectively) as well as smaller moff and Γoff (1.50 and 0.011 s–1, respectively), as compared to those (mon = 1.45, Γon = 0.017 s−1, and moff = 1.64, Γoff = 0.021 s–1) for QDs on glass, thus meaning reduced probability densities of long on events and increased probability densities of long off events.
 Fig. 23  Probability density of (a) on states and (b) off states constructed from 49 single QDs on glass (blue squares) and 45 single QDs on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles (red circles). The solid lines are best fits to eqn (14). Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
A similar ET mechanism might be responsible for the QDs–molecular electron acceptor complexes, as reported elsewhere.162–164 According to the recently developed diffusion-controlled electron transfer (DCET) model,166–169 the power-law blinking behaviors of single QDs are presumably associated with temporal fluctuations in the energy differences between the ground and light-emitting states and between the light-emitting and dark states. Since a complete examination of the proposed models of the QD blinking phenomena is beyond the scope of this review, we refer the interested readers to several comprehensive reviews.154,170,171
5.3 Crucial factors influencing electron transfer dynamics
The interfacial ET processes are closely associated with the spatial heterogeneities of the nanoscale local environments and the rough surfaces of the semiconductors, and possibly with the temporal fluctuations in molecular interaction between the adsorbed molecules and semiconductors and conformations of adsorbed molecules.
An atomic force microscopy (AFM) and confocal Raman microscopy were combined to resolve the static and dynamic heterogeneities in the interfacial ET between alizarin dyes and TiO2 nanoparticles with the spatial resolution of about 250 nm (Fig. 24A).172Fig. 24B shows the distribution of the total vibrational reorganization energy (λtotal). The width of the distribution is beyond the measurement error bar (about 30 cm–1) and attributed to the inhomogeneity of the vibrational reorganization energy from site to site of the interfacial ET. The reorganization energy was inhomogeneous from site to site; specifically, mode-specific analyses indicated that energy distributions were inhomogeneous for bridging normal modes and less inhomogeneous or homogeneous for nonbridging normal modes, especially for modes far away from the alizarin–TiO2 coupling hydroxyl modes. Although further improvements are required to achieve single-molecule sensitivity,173–175 the results demonstrated a significant step forward in characterizing site-specific molecular interactions among system components and studying fundamental aspects of interfacial ET on semiconductor nanoparticles.
 Fig. 24  (A) Model of the surface adsorption of alizarin via the hydroxyl group bonding to the TiO2 nanoparticles. The TiO2 nanoparticles were coated on a silver film-coated cover glass, which provided an electromagnetic field enhancement for the Raman scattering. (B) Distribution of the vibrational reorganization energy for total modes at a number of individual microscopic sites. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Lian and co-workers characterized the static and dynamic heterogeneities within the interfacial ET processes in sulforhodamine B (SRhB)–aminosilane–SnO2 nanoparticle donor–bridge–acceptor complex systems from single-molecule fluorescence lifetime measurements (Fig. 25A).142 The fluorescence lifetime of individual SRhB–silane–SnO2 complex is described by a Gaussian distribution with a center of 2.6 ns and a width of 1.5 ns. When compared to those for SRhB modified on ZrO2 (a center of 3.2 ns and a width of 0.9 ns), both the shortened lifetime and the broadened distribution imply the occurrence of interfacial ET reaction. They also performed the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation to reveal a distribution of molecular conformation of SRhB anchored to the SnO2(110) surface and compare it to the experimental results. Fig. 25B presents a distribution of interfacial ET times obtained from an ensemble of 50000 configurations of the SRhB–silane–SnO2 system at room temperature. The very broad distribution is mostly attributable to the conformational flexibility of the aminosilane linker affecting the electronic couplings between SRhB and SnO2 responsible for ET. From these findings, they concluded that the conversion between multiple molecular conformations led to the fluctuation of single-molecule ET rate, which was probed by time-domain single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy.
 Fig. 25  (A) Structure of SRhB–silane–SnO2 complex. (B) Distribution of IET times obtained for an ensemble of 50000 configurations of the SRhB–silane(H2O)n–SnO2 supercell, sampled according to room temperature MD simulations. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
6. Concluding remarks
In this review, we featured the methodologies for evaluating the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles at the single-molecule, single-particle levels. In Section 2, the single-molecule detection of ROS with specific fluorescent probes can be successfully used to reveal their temporal and spatial contributions. Ongoing research efforts are directed toward developing and applying this method for studying various heterogeneous reaction systems including solid (photo)catalysts and living cells. For instance, the simultaneous detection of two different kinds of ROS will be helpful for understanding the formation mechanism of ROS during the photocatalytic reactions. Furthermore, the photocatalytic activity of individual porous TiO2 nanotubes was evaluated by the single-molecule counting of ROS with a specific probe molecule. The time- and space-resolved observation of fluorescent products generated during the photocatalytic reaction confirmed that the transport of reagents inherent in the porous structures is closely related to the photocatalytic activity. The characteristic time for which persistent emission is exhibited (the so-called “on time”) should be restricted by the dissociation of fluorescent products from the active sites into the bulk solution rather than their photobleaching or blinking (Fig. 9). Recent single-molecule kinetic studies revealed that every stochastic off–on event on the millisecond to second time scale corresponds to a catalytic cycle that involves substrate binding, formation of product, and its subsequent dissociation from a solid nanocatalyst.51,52 A detailed kinetic model has also been proposed for the quantitative evaluation of the heterogeneous reactivity of individual nanoparticles.176
In Section 3, we reviewed the studies on the nature of the active sites heterogeneously distributed on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles using redox-responsive fluorescent probes. There can be no doubt that adsorption and reaction dynamics of probe molecules or analytes in photocatalysis are significantly influenced by the structural disorders, such as the existence of agglomerates or cracks, and the distribution of the particle size and pore diameter, which cannot be fully addressed by traditional wide-field fluorescence microscopy. With recent developments of single-molecule spectroscopy, the visualization of those processes at the single-molecule, single-particle level will become possible. For instance, “nanoscopy”, such as stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy,177 photoactivation localization microscopy (PALM),178 and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM),179 can achieve optical imaging at high spatial resolution beyond the diffraction limit (below a few tens of nanometres). This feature should be highly advantageous when exploring the active sites heterogeneously distributed over the materials.47,180,181 To assess the structural features of particles at the nanometre scale, a combination of optical imaging and TEM or AFM analysis will be required.33,182,183 In addition, in situ scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) offers an excellent means for obtaining detailed chemical information of catalyst materials at the nanoscale.184–186
As reviewed in Section 4, the quantitative examination of the spectral and kinetic characteristics revealed that the PL bands originating from defects in the bulk and/or on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles appeared in the visible region with numerous photon bursts by the photoexcitation in an inert gas atmosphere. The spatially-resolved PL imaging techniques will enable us to ascertain the location of the active sites and to elucidate the reaction dynamics of charge carriers in the TiO2 nanostructures with various morphologies, e.g., nanotubes, nanowires, nanosheets, etc. Such information is useful not only for exploration, but also for the development of TiO2-based solar cells and photocatalysts, and provides us insights not available from other methods.
The interfacial ET dynamics between semiconductor nanoparticles and organic (inorganic) compounds have been investigated at the single-molecule, single-particle level. The interfacial ET processes are closely associated with the spatial heterogeneities of the nanoscale local environments, the temporal fluctuations in the conformation of adsorbates and the electronic coupling between adsorbates and surface states, and so on. Forthcoming studies will focus on the mechanistic details to resolve the above-mentioned issues. For example, tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) has been increasingly applied to various interfacial systems in biological and materials sciences because this technique allows the correlation of topographic and chemical information by providing the unique spectroscopic fingerprint characteristics of the sample with ∼10 nm spatial resolution.187–189 The efficient signal enhancement due to the high electromagnetic field would provide much faster acquisition times, possibly enabling real-time monitoring of spectral changes during molecular motion and reaction on the millisecond to second time scale.
In conclusion, single-molecule, single-particle fluorescence spectroscopy can provide novel information for elucidating the mechanism of heterogeneous chemical reactions on semiconductor nanoparticles and for designing or identifying new materials for applications in a variety of areas.
Acknowledgements
T.M. thanks the WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (R31-10035) for the support. This work has been partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (Projects 22245022, 21750145, and others) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of the Japanese Government.
References
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hashimoto, H. Irie and A. Fujishima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 8269–8285 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428–4453 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, D. Lawless, R. Khairutdinov and E. Pelizzetti, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16655–16661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5259–5275 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, T. Shima and Y. Kubokawa, Chem. Lett., 1985, 1799–1802 CAS .
R. F. Howe and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3906–3909 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micic, Y. Zhang, K. R. Cromack, A. D. Trifunac and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 13284–13288 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosaka, H. Natsui, M. Sasagawa and A. Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12993–12999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosaka, T. Daimon, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Murakami, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2917–2918 RSC .
T. Daimon and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4420–4424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murakami, E. Kenji, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16808–16811 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murakami, K. Endo, I. Ohta, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11339–11346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosaka, Y. Yamashita and H. Fukuyama, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5822–5827 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishibashi, Y. Nosaka, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2117–2120 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa, Y. Nakaoka, J. Nishino and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4399–4403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishibashi, A. Fujishima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4934–4938 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishibashi, A. Fujishima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 134, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and Y. Nosaka, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Moerner and M. Orrit, Science, 1999, 283, 1670–1676 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Moerner and D. P. Fromm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74, 3597–3619 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tinnefeld and M. Sauer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2642–2671 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Walter, C.-Y. Huang, A. J. Manzo and M. A. Sobhy, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 475–489 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Cornish and T. Ha, ACS Chem. Biol., 2007, 2, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bacia, S.
A. Kim and P. Schwille, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Li and L. M. Davis, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1993, 64, 1524–1529 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Macklin, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris and L. E. Brus, Science, 1996, 272, 255–258 CAS .
C. Jung, C. Hellriegel, B. Platschek, D. Wöhrle, T. Bein, J. Michaelis and C. Bräuchle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5570–5579 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jung, C. Hellriegel, J. Michaelis and C. Bräuchle, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 956–960 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kirstein, B. Platschek, C. Jung, R. Brown, T. Bein and C. Bräuchle, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zuerner, J. Kirstein, M. Doeblinger, C. Bräuchle and T. Bein, Nature, 2007, 450, 705–708 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jung, J. Kirstein, B. Platschek, T. Bein, M. Budde, I. Frank, K. Müllen, J. Michaelis and C. Bräuchle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1638–1648 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cohen, F. Sanchez and A. Douhal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5507–5514 CrossRef .
M. B. J. Roeffaers, B. F. Sels, D. Loos, C. Kohl, K. Müllen, P. A. Jacobs, J. Hofkens and D. E. De Vos, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2295–2299 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. J. Roeffaers, B. F. Sels, H. Uji-i, F. C. De Schryver, P. A. Jacobs, D. E. De Vos and J. Hofkens, Nature, 2006, 439, 572–575 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. J. Roeffaers, G. De Cremer, J. Libeert, R. Ameloot, P. Dedecker, A.-J. Bons, M. Bueckins, J. A. Martens, B. F. Sels, D. E. De Vos and J. Hofkens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9285–9289 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Wustholz, E. D. Bott, C. M. Isborn, X. Li, B. Kahr and P. J. Reid, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9146–9156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barbon, E. D. Bott, M. Brustolon, M. Fabris, B. Kahr, W. Kaminsky, P. J. Reid, S. M. Wong, K. L. Wustholz and R. Zanre, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11548–11557 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Bott, E. A. Riley, B. Kahr and P. J. Reid, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2403–2411 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Choi, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1101–1106 Search PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, Y. Asanoi, K. Kawai, S. Tojo, A. Sugimoto, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1492–1498 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 934–936 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8485–8495 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, S. Yamashita and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 432–435 CAS .
G. De Cremer, M. B. J. Roeffaers, E. Bartholomeeusen, K. Lin, P. Dedecker, P. P. Pescarmona, P. A. Jacobs, D. E. De Vos, J. Hofkens and B. F. Sels, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 908–911 CAS .
L. Cognet, D. A. Tsyboulski, J.-D. R. Rocha, C. D. Doyle, J. M. Tour and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2007, 316, 1465–1468 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Siitonen, D. A. Tsyboulski, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1595–1599 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, H. Shen, Y. J. Kim, X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Park and P. Chen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. S. Kong, Y.-T. E. Yeh and P. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 992–996 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, W. Xu, G. Liu, D. Panda and P. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4910–4943 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. de Silva, H. Q. N. Gunaratne, T. Gunnlaugsson, A. J. M. Huxley, C. P. McCoy, J. T. Rademacher and T. E. Rice, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1515–1566 CrossRef .
H. Kobayashi, M. Ogawa, R. Alford, P. L. Choyke and Y. Urano, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2620–2640 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Miller, O. Tulyanthan, E. Y. Isacoff and C. J. Chang, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 263–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, I. Zebger, Z. Gao, L. Poulsen, P. K. Frederiksen, E. Skovsen, S. P. McIlroy, M. Klinger, L. K. Andersen and P. R. Ogilby, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 894–901 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, E. Skovsen, J. D. C. Lambert, L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4280–4293 RSC .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 23138–23140 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, S.-C. Cui, A. Sugimoto, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16430–16431 CrossRef CAS .
T. Christ, F. Kulzer, P. Bordat and T. Basché, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4192–4195 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1757 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Massman, Atmos. Environ., 1998, 32, 1111–1127 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1048–1059 CrossRef CAS .
K. Setsukinai, Y. Urano, K. Kakinuma, H. J. Majima and T. Nagano, J. Biol. Chem., 2003, 278, 3170–3175 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Midden and S. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4129–4135 CrossRef .
Y. Sadanaga, A. Yoshino, K. Watanabe, A. Yoshioka, Y. Wakazono, Y. Kanaya and Y. Kajii, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 2648–2655 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Morariu and R. Mills, Z. Phys. Chem., 1972, 79, 1–9 CAS .
J. W. Clark, P. G. Hall, A. J. Pidduck and C. J. Wright, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1985, 81, 2067–2082 RSC .
L. Xu, A. Lio, J. Hu, D. F. Ogletree and M. Salmeron, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 540–548 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Bychuk and B. O'Shaughnessy, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 3260–3267 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Bychuk and B. O'Shaughnessy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 1795–1798 CrossRef CAS .
R. Valiullin, R. Kimmich and N. Fatkullin, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1997, 56, 4371–4375 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, P. K. Dorhout and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, N. Saito and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12820–12822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Bian, J. Zhu, D. Zhang, G. Li, Y. Huo, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef .
J. H. Pan, X. Zhang, A. J. Du, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11256–11257 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Chen and J. Zhao, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 4118–4122 CrossRef CAS .
J. O'Brien, I. Wilson, T. Orton and F. Pognan, Eur. J. Biochem., 2000, 267, 5421–5426 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Miller, S. X. Bian and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3458–3459 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ostergaard, A. Henriksen, F. G. Hansen and J. R. Winther, EMBO J., 2001, 20, 5853–5862 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, C. Schwarzer, E. Lally, S. Zhang, S. Ruzin, T. Machen, S. J. Remington and L. Feldman, Plant Physiol., 2006, 141, 397–403 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zang, R. Liu, M. W. Holman, K. T. Nguyen and D. M. Adams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10640–10641 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1564–1579 RSC .
F. C. De Schryver, T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, M. Van der Auweraer, K. Müllen and J. Hofkens, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 514–522 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Anderson, O. Terasaki, T. Ohsuna, A. Philippou, S. P. MacKay, A. Ferreira, J. Rocha and S. Lidin, Nature, 1994, 367, 347–351 CrossRef CAS .
E. Borello, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga, A. Zecchina and C. O. Arean, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2319–2321 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, P. Calza, C. Lamberti, C. Prestipino, A. Damin, S. Bordiga, E. Pelizzetti and A. Zecchina, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2264–2271 CrossRef CAS .
A. Damin, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, C. Lamberti, B. Civalleri, C. M. Zicovich-Wilson and A. Zecchina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1328–1336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Usseglio, P. Calza, A. Damin, C. Minero, S. Bordiga, C. Lamberti, E. Pelizzetti and A. Zecchina, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3412–3424 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Southon and R. F. Howe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4209–4218 CrossRef CAS .
P. Winget, E. J. Weber, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 1231–1239 RSC .
J. Suomi, T. Ylinen, M. Hakansson, M. Helin, Q. Jiang, T. Ala-Kleme and S. Kulmala, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 586, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. S. Gudiksen, X. Duan, Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1455–1457 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossetti, S. Nakahara and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 1086–1088 CrossRef .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566–5571 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossetti, J. L. Ellison, J. M. Gibson and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4464–4469 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossetti, R. Hull, J. M. Gibson and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, T. Ishigaki, J.-G. Li, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5348–5352 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Jeon, S.-D. Oh, Y. D. Suh, H. Yoshikawa, H. Masuhara and M. Yoon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 534–542 RSC .
H. Tang, H. Berger, P. E. Schmid, F. Levy and G. Burri, Solid State Commun., 1993, 87, 847–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekiya, S. Kamei and S. Kurita, J. Lumin., 2000, 87–89, 1140–1142 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekiya, M. Tasaki, K. Wakabayashi and S. Kurita, J. Lumin., 2004, 108, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Knorr, D. Zhang and J. L. McHale, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8686–8690 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Knorr, C. C. Mercado and J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12786–12794 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Cordero, P. J. Carson, R. A. Estabrook, G. F. Strouse and S. K. Buratto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12137–12142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, L. M. Liz-Marzan and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2830–2831 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javier and G. F. Strouse, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 391, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Kuznetsov and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15277–15288 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Palacios, F.-R. F. Fan, A. J. Bard and P. F. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9028–9029 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Palacios, F.-R. F. Fan, J. K. Grey, J. Suk, A. J. Bard and P. F. Barbara, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 680–685 CrossRef CAS .
G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1426–1430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Staniszewski, A. J. Morris, T. Ito and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6822–6828 CrossRef CAS .
G. Redmond, D. Fitzmaurice and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6951–6954 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Boschloo and A. Goossens, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 19489–19494 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2228–2231 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. Parker, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 1656–1666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, L. D. Zhang, G. W. Meng, G. H. Li, X. Y. Zhang, C. H. Liang, W. Chen and S. X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1125–1127 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24287–24293 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Shkrob and M. C. Sauer, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12497–12511 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Peiro, C. Colombo, G. Doyle, J. Nelson, A. Mills and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23255–23263 CrossRef .
M. Addamo, V. Augugliaro, S. Coluccia, M. G. Faga, E. García-López, V. Loddo, G. Marcì, G. Martra and L. Palmisano, J. Catal., 2005, 235, 209–220 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Adams, L. Brus, C. E. D. Chidsey, S. Creager, C. Creutz, C. R. Kagan, P. V. Kamat, M. Lieberman, S. Lindsay, R. A. Marcus, R. M. Metzger, M. E. Michel-Beyerle, J. R. Miller, M. D. Newton, D. R. Rolison, O. Sankey, K. S. Schanze, J. Yardley and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6668–6697 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Lu and X. S. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2753–2757 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, G. Luo, P. Karnchanaphanurach, T.-M. Louie, I. Rech, S. Cova, L. Xun and X. S. Xie, Science, 2003, 302, 262–266 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, M. W. Holman, L. Zang and D. M. Adams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6522–6526 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Holman, R. Liu, L. Zang, P. Yan, S. A. DiBenedetto, R. D. Bowers and D. M. Adams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16126–16133 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gronheid, A. Stefan, M. Cotlet, J. Hofkens, J. Qu, K. Müllen, M. Van der Auweraer, J. W. Verhoeven and F. C. De Schryver, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4209–4214 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. M. Bell, A. Stefan, S. Masuo, T. Vosch, M. Lor, M. Cotlet, J. Hofkens, S. Bernhardt, K. Müllen, M. van der Auweraer, J. W. Verhoeven and F. C. De Schryver, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 942–948 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Holman, R. Liu and D. M. Adams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12649–12654 CrossRef CAS .
V. Biju, M. Micic, D. Hu and H. P. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9374–9381 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa, S.-C. Cui, S. Tojo, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 443, 313–318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. K. Ghosh and H. P. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1479–1487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and H. P. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9020–9025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Wang and H. P. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1999–2004 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, R. C. Snoeberger, III, A. Issac, D. Stockwell, V. S. Batista and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010 DOI:10.1021/jp911662g  , ACS ASAP.
X. Wu, T. D. M. Bell and E. K. L. Yeow, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7379–7382 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chen, H.-Y. Tzeng, H.-F. Fan, M.-S. Chen, J.-S. Huang and K.-C. Lin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9050–9060 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, M. Sugino, H. Sugihara, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Lett., 1998, 753–754 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pelet, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3215–3224 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Higgins, B. V. Bergeron, G. M. Hasselmann, F. Farzad and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2598–2605 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Hoertz, D. W. Thompson, L. A. Friedman and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9690–9691 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuno, D. P. Fromm, H. F. Hamann, A. Gallagher and D. J. Nesbitt, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 1028–1040 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haase, C. G. Hübner, E. Reuther, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and T. Basché, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10445–10450 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. L. Yeow, S. M. Melnikov, T. D. M. Bell, F. C. De Schryver and J. Hofkens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 1726–1734 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Hoogenboom, E. M. H. P. van Dijk, J. Hernando, N. F. van Hulst and M. F. García-Parajó, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 097401–097401/097404 CrossRef .
S. A. Empedocles, R. Neuhauser, K. Shimizu and M. G. Bawendi, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1243–1256 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cichos, C. von Borczyskowski and M. Orrit, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 12, 272–284 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Allvisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Steckel, P. Snee, S. Coe-Sullivan, J. P. Zimmer, J. E. Halpert, P. Anikeeva, L.-A. Kim, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5796–5799 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25332–25338 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
A. Issac, S. Jin and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11280–11281 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Cui, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19625–19634 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Cui, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1217–1225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2448–2454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang and R. A. Marcus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 107401/107401–107401/107404 .
J. Tang and R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 054704/054701–054704/054712 .
J. Tang and R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 204511/204511–204511/204516 .
M. Pelton, G. Smith, N. F. Scherer and R. A. Marcus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 14249–14254 CrossRef .
D. E. Gomez, M. Califano and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4989–5011 RSC .
P. Frantsuzov, M. Kuno, B. Janko and R. A. Marcus, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 519–522 CrossRef .
D. Pan, D. Hu and H. P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16390–16395 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Bosnick, M. Maillard and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9964–9972 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742–1749 CrossRef CAS .
A. Musumeci, D. Gosztola, T. Schiller, N. M. Dimitrijevic, V. Mujica, D. Martin and T. Rajh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6040–6041 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. S. Kong and P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2393–2404 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Hell, Science, 2007, 316, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
E. Betzig, G. H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, O. W. Lindwasser, S. Olenych, J. S. Bonifacino, M. W. Davidson, J. Lippincott-Schwartz and H. F. Hess, Science, 2006, 313, 1642–1645 CAS .
M. J. Rust, M. Bates and X. Zhuang, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 793–796 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rittweger, K. Y. Han, S. E. Irvine, C. Eggeling and S. W. Hell, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 144–147 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Han, K. I. Willig, E. Rittweger, F. Jelezko, C. Eggeling and S. W. Hell, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3323–3329 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bradac, T. Gaebel, N. Naidoo, J. R. Rabeau and A. S. Barnard, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3555–3564 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bradac, T. Gaebel, N. Naidoo, M. J. Sellars, J. Twamley, L. J. Brown, A. S. Barnard, T. Plakhotnik, A. V. Zvyagin and J. R. Rabeau, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .
E. de Smit, I. Swart, J. F. Creemer, G. H. Hoveling, M. K. Gilles, T. Tyliszczak, P. J. Kooyman, H. W. Zandbergen, C. Morin, B. M. Weckhuysen and F. M. F. de Groot, Nature, 2008, 456, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
E. de Smit, I. Swart, J. F. Creemer, C. Karunakaran, D. Bertwistle, H. W. Zandbergen, F. M. F. de Groot and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3632–3636 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. F. de Groot, E. de Smit, M. M. van Schooneveld, L. R. Aramburo and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 951–962 CAS .
A. Hartschuh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8178–8191 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 921–930 RSC .
B.-S. Yeo, J. Stadler, T. Schmid, R. Zenobi and W. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 472, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the themed issue covering recent advances in the in-situ characterization of heterogeneous catalysts.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Takashi Tachikawa
	Takashi Tachikawa received his BS and MS in Education from Fukushima University in 1998 and 2000, respectively. He received PhD in Chemistry from Tohoku University in 2003. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (SANKEN), Osaka University, until 2006 and now he is working as an assistant professor.

Tetsuro Majima
	Tetsuro Majima received his BS, MS, and PhD in 1975, 1977, and 1980, respectively. He worked as a research associate in the University of Texas at Dallas for two years (1980–1982), and worked as a scientist in the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN, Japan) for 12 years (1982–1994). In 1994 he became an associate professor in the Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (SANKEN), Osaka University. He was promoted to full professor in 1997.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of TiO2 photocatalytic reactions for the generation of ROS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the detection of airborne ROS generated during TiO2 photocatalytic reactions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Single-molecule detection of 1O2 with TDI.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Fluorescence images of single TDIs spin-coated on the PMMA-coated cover glass before (left) and after (right) UV irradiation for 5 min. The intervening gap is 12.5 μm. The bright spots correspond to the blue-shifted TDI diepoxide. The UV irradiation area is inside the white circle in the images. The absence of dyes at the center of the image after UV irradiation is due to the bleaching of TDI caused by the direct UV irradiation of 1O2 with TDI. (B) The spatial and temporal distributions of 1O2 molecules diffused from the surface of TiO2 film. These results are reported in ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 5  Single-molecule detection of ˙OH with HPF.	 

 	Fig. 6  Real-time single-molecule detection of the airborne ˙OH diffused from the surface of pure TiO2 with the simultaneous 365 nm irradiation. The intervening gap is 12.5 μm. The vertical axis is the number of fluorescein molecules that emerged per bin time (33 ms), which corresponds to the count rate of the ˙OH molecules. The 365 nm excitation of the TiO2 film was started at t = 14 s. The airborne ˙OH molecules were detected immediately after the 365 nm excitation. Integrated ˙OH molecules increased with the increasing UV-irradiation time (red line). The saturated value of the integrated ˙OH molecules (ca. 2700 molecules) is limited by the number of HPF coated on the cover glass. The blue line indicates the single-exponential fit (t > 14 s) of which the decay rate corresponds to the pseudo-first order rate constant (kOH) between the HPF and ˙OH molecules. Inset shows the semilog plot of the dependence of the intervening gap.	 
kOH = Aexp(−(kq/2DOH)d2)	(1)

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic representation of the observation of the lateral diffusion of ˙OH molecules from the UV-irradiated pure TiO2 film. The fluorescence image of the HPF-coated cover glass captured during the UV irradiation is shown. Immediately after the UV irradiation, ˙OH molecules spread on the cover glass within a couple of seconds. (B) Plot of the mean-square displacement 〈r2〉 versus the arrival time of the ˙OH molecules. Fitting lines using the mean-square displacement in one dimension, 〈r2〉 = 2DOHsurf × tα, are shown by the solid line (Brownian motion model, α = 1) and dotted line (superdiffusive model, α = 1.5). The diffusion coefficients of the ˙OH molecules on the cover glass (DOHsurf) calculated from the fitting lines are 7.5 × 10–10 and 7.0 × 10–10 m2 s–1 for α = 1.0 and 1.5, respectively. For additional results including movies, see ref. 64.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of photocatalytic reaction occurring on a single nanotube. The porous TiO2 nanotube on the cover glass is simultaneously irradiated with UV light (wavelength: 365 nm) and evanescent light produced by a CW Ar+ laser (wavelength: 488 nm) to excite the nanotube and fluorescein, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  Optical transmission image (left) and fluorescence image (right) obtained for single TiO2 nanotubes (A and B). Insets show the peak trajectories of single-molecule fluorescence generated in the macropore (A) and mesopore (B) of the TiO2 nanotube. Line profiles (upper panels of C and D) and time trajectories (lower panels of C and D) of the fluorescence intensity at the spots indicated by the arrows are shown in panels A and B, respectively. The red lines in both panels correspond to each other. The line profiles are well fitted by Gaussian distribution (blue). These results are reported in ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 10  Histogram of the number of fluorescein molecules generated at that position, which is determined from the peak of the Gaussian distribution (red), and line profile of the integrated fluorescence intensity along the long axis shown by the dotted line in the inset (blue). The fluorescence intensity should be directly correlated with the photocatalytically active sites. Inset shows the integrated fluorescence intensity of the TiO2 nanotube over 120 s during the photocatalytic reaction.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure and molecule orbital diagrams of single-molecule probe NDAPP in the unbound (left) and bound states (right). The fluorescence from the perylene bisimide chromophore is quenched by intramolecular ET from the p-aminophenyl group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Single-molecule fluorescence confocal images of NDAPP spin-coated onto glass (A) and quartz (B) coverslips. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Reaction scheme for the one-electron oxidation of p-aminophenyl group, which induces fluorescence in APF.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Optical transmission image (left) and fluorescence image under UV irradiation (right), where the imaging focal plane was located at the central position of the crystal. The arrow in panel C denotes the time when the fluorescence image was acquired. (B) Spatial configuration of the crystal (see the axes). (C) Time traces of the fluorescence intensity acquired at the defect (position 1) and near the edge of the ETS-10 crystal (position 2). These results are reported in ref. 46.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Typical PL images observed during the 405 nm laser excitation for single TiO2 nanoparticles under air (left) and Ar (right) atmospheres. (B) Typical PL spectrum of a single TiO2 nanoparticle in Ar atmosphere. The solid lines indicate the Gaussian distributions fitted with the spectrum. These results are reported in ref. 45.	 
TiO2 + hν405 → efree− + hfree+ (intrinsic abs.)	(2)
efree– → etr– (color centers)	(3)
hfree+ → htr+	(4)
etr– (color centers) + hν405 → efree− + hfree+ (extrinsic abs.)	(5)
efree− + hfree+ → PL (bandgap em.)	(6)
etr− (color centers) + hfree/tr+ → PL (defect em.)	(7)
efree− + O2 → O2˙−	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 16  Trajectories of PL intensity observed for a single TiO2 nanoparticle under Ar (A) and air (B) atmospheres (bin time is 33 ms). Solid lines indicate the kinetic traces calculated using eqn (10).	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) PL images of single TiO2 nanowires acquired without (left) and with (right) applied potential (E) of −0.8 V vs. silver wire QRE (= −0.37 V vs. NHE). Upon the applied potential of −0.8 V, a significant increase in the PL intensity was observed. The activated and unactivated wires are indicated by the yellow and white arrows, respectively. (B) PL spectra observed at different times. The solid lines indicate the Gaussian distributions fitted to the spectra. These results are reported in ref. 45.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) PL bursts observed for a single TiO2 nanowire under 405 nm laser irradiation in Ar. The blue line is the threshold level. (B) Histogram of on-time (τon) determined for the bursts under the oxygen concentrations of 0.2 and 5 vol%. The integration time per frame was 50 ms. The solid lines indicate the single-exponential fits. (C) Oxygen concentration dependence of average quenching rate constant (kq) which is calculated from 1/τon − 1/τon0, where τon and τon0 are the on-times of the bursts in the presence and absence of oxygen, respectively. The solid line is obtained from eqn (12), and the fitting parameters are as follows: Kad = 150 M–1 and [O2]bs = 68 M. These results are reported in ref. 45.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 19  Energetic scheme of interfacial ET processes following charge injection from the excited state of a dye sensitizer (S*) to the conduction band (CB) of a semiconductor TiO2. S*/S˙+ is the excited dye/radical cation couple, and SS is the surface states. The ket and kbet are the forward and back ET rates, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) A typical single-molecule fluorescence trajectory of ZnTCPP on a cover glass surface. (B and C) Typical single-molecule fluorescence trajectories of ZnTCPP on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles. Histograms of the emission intensity are given to determine the threshold for dark states and bright states. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Probability density of dark state for a single ZnTCPP molecule. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Typical fluorescence intensity (black) and lifetime (red) trajectories of CdSe/ZnS QDs on (a) a glass coverslip and (b) a TiO2 nanocrystalline thin film. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
	(13)
Pi(t) = At−mi exp(−Γit) (i = on or off)	(14)

 	Fig. 23  Probability density of (a) on states and (b) off states constructed from 49 single QDs on glass (blue squares) and 45 single QDs on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles (red circles). The solid lines are best fits to eqn (14). Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Model of the surface adsorption of alizarin via the hydroxyl group bonding to the TiO2 nanoparticles. The TiO2 nanoparticles were coated on a silver film-coated cover glass, which provided an electromagnetic field enhancement for the Raman scattering. (B) Distribution of the vibrational reorganization energy for total modes at a number of individual microscopic sites. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Structure of SRhB–silane–SnO2 complex. (B) Distribution of IET times obtained for an ensemble of 50000 configurations of the SRhB–silane(H2O)n–SnO2 supercell, sampled according to room temperature MD simulations. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Part of the themed issue covering recent advances in the in-situ characterization of heterogeneous catalysts.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
