A paper-making transformation: from cellulose-based superwetting paper to biomimetic multifunctional inorganic paper  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07518C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07518C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20238-20259A paper-making transformation: from cellulose-based superwetting paper to biomimetic multifunctional inorganic paper

        
          
            Gang 
            Wen
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhiguang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab
aHubei Collaborative Innovation Centre for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, People's Republic of China
bState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zguo@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-8277088;   Tel: +86-931-4968105
Received 
      1st August 2020
    , Accepted 8th September 2020First published on 8th September 2020AbstractEven in the age of electronic information, paper has always played an important role in most fields. Conventional cellulose-based paper is highly porous, rough, hydrophilic and possesses a single function. In this review, the development and challenges of cellulose-based paper are illustrated. In this case, inorganic paper can be regarded as the candidate material for the paper-making field. This review aims to summarize the most recent progress on inorganic paper. Significantly, different kinds of inorganic raw materials for designing inorganic paper will be presented, followed by a summary of their emerging applications. The raw materials can be divided into four parts: hydroxyapatite-based, silicon-based, carbon-based, as well as metal–organic framework-based materials. The inorganic paper produced by these raw materials has many applications, such as fire-resistance, pollutant treatment, actuator, flexible electronics and energy storage. The development of inorganic paper may provide new inspiration for the paper-making field.Gang WenMr Gang Wen joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2016. He is focused on designing and fabricating multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces and studying their corresponding applications.Zhiguang GuoProfessor Zhiguang Guo received his Ph.D. from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. He subsequently joined Hubei University. From Oct 2007 to Aug 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctoral fellow. From Sep 2008 to Mar 2011, he worked at Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. From Feb 2009 to Feb 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. He is now a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. He has published more than 300 papers about the interfaces of materials.
1. Introduction
Paper has received rapidly increasing research interest due to its omnipresence, low cost, simple fabrication and process-facilitating structure.1–3 Paper is ubiquitously available for tremendous application potential in fields such as energy harvesting and storage, biomedicine and packing.4–6 The conventional paper-making techniques have paved way for the fabrication of paper. The paper-making technique dates from the Eastern Han dynasty of China, and was regarded as one of the four great inventions. However, the existing problems in the traditional paper-making industry have become the focus of concern, along with the development of science and the global circular economy chain. Improving the performance of paper is also a considerable challenge.
Conventional cellulose-based paper is highly porous, rough, hydrophilic and is easily destroyed by fire, and the consequences of fire are far more destructive with paper.7 In general, the raw materials for traditional paper-making can be divided into three categories: (1) sustainable forestry; (2) recovered paper; the fabrication process of recycled paper involves mixing used paper with water and breaking it down into strands of cellulose. The new recycled paper can be formed from pulp through de-inking, bleaching and other cleaning methods. (3) Non-wood fibers (e.g., reeds and cereal straw) are readily available candidates for papermaking. The abovementioned papers are all made from raw cellulose and are thus recyclable and renewable. However, the main challenge in dealing with cellulose fibers as raw materials is that the optimized raw materials should be more than just a source of renewable energy.
Over the past decades, cellulose-based paper has not been able to meet the many needs and requirements. Therefore, paper-based nanotechnology has recently attracted much attention, incorporating multiple complex functions.8 As a result of the urgent need for functional paper, research is currently being carried out to discover and develop new materials as alternatives to materials used for fabricating paper. To achieve degradable capabilities, new materials with non-toxic and biodegradable performances have been explored to fabricate paper. In this process, on the one hand, polymers, with their flexibility, good processing ability, and low cost, have become one of the most promising materials for constructing functional papers.9 Polymer-based paper is generally produced from polyethylene, polyester, polyamide, and so on, by the method of electrostatic spinning or melt spinning.10–13 However, most polymer-based papers are not easily degradable and flammable and for some, post-processing is also difficult. Despite polymer-based paper, the use of ultra-long nanowires made of inorganic materials as raw materials, and the construction of paper based on inorganic materials have attracted widespread attention in recent years.
Based on our previous studies, we had achieved long-term fire resistance by using hydroxyapatite nanowires as a raw material for paper construction. The inorganic paper constructed by researchers has realized antibacterial properties and the versatility for the purification of the polluted environment. Research on biomimetic inorganic paper is also developing. Herein, we will classify and summarize the developments and drawbacks of cellulose-based paper, highlight its shortcomings and the corresponding improvement measures, and conclude that traditional paper can no longer meet the increasing needs. A schematic overview is shown in Fig. 1. The exploration of new inorganic paper has become the focus of research and an overview of inorganic paper constructed from different raw inorganic materials is provided. Importantly, a brief overview of the new applications of related inorganic paper will be provided. These characteristics make the multifunctional inorganic paper a better candidate than commercial paper, which may be a breakthrough in the paper-making industries.
 Fig. 1  A schematic overview of this field, from cellulose-based superwetting paper to biomimetic multifunctional inorganic paper. 
2. Cellulose-based paper
Paper is one of the four great inventions of ancient China, providing the foundation for material technology for the prosperity of ancient Chinese culture. Even in the era of rapid changes in electronic information, paper still plays an important role in the writing, printing, painting, and packaging fields. The emergence of paper has ended the complicated history of ancient simple papers, and greatly promoted the spread and development of culture. Cellulose-based paper is a green and sustainable product that has become an indispensable part of our daily life due to its wide variety of applications in the fields of packing, storage and delivering information. The origin of papermaking dates back to 105 AD. Cai et al. used bark, hemp, and other materials to make paper and transformed the papermaking technologies. Since then, the bamboo fiber and silk have been replaced by plant fiber paper with excellent writable properties. Cellulose-based paper is an economical and environmentally friendly product that is made from wood, straw, reeds and waste paper, etc.
From the perspective of raw materials, numerous studies have been carried out to produce cellulose-based paper. Wen et al.14 reported the green fabrication of colourful superhydrophobic paper from native cotton cellulose. In their study, raw cotton was treated with zinc chloride (ZnCl2) solution to form a uniform slurry, and copper stearate (CuSA2), ferric stearate (FeSA3) and zinc stearate (ZnSA2) respectively produced three kinds of coloured paper. In the fabrication, non-toxic modifiers were used and the as-prepared paper showed superhydrophobicity both inside and outside. The as-prepared cellulose-based paper produced by cotton exhibited water repellency, self-cleaning properties and mechanical durability. Apart from cotton as a dominant paper-making raw material, wood pulp was widely used in the fabrication of paper. Koga et al.15 fabricated a renewable wood pulp paper reactor with hierarchical micro/nanopores. By assembling the wood pulp with tailored nanoscale pores in its wall, the paper reactor was prepared. The wood pulp and interlaced nanocellulose networks led to micro- and nanoscale pores. Besides, by de-inking, bleaching and other cleaning methods, waste-paper pulp can be made into new recycled paper. In this case, the energy consumption and environment pollution would be widely reduced. Si et al.16 designed and fabricated bio-inspired writable multifunctional recycled paper with outer and inner uniform superhydrophobic properties. They obtained an aqueous suspension of rough cellulose fiber (CF) pulp under heating and magnetic stirring. The addition of dopamine (PDA) endowed the micro-fibrillated cellulose with strong bonding, enhancing the mechanical strength of the paper.
Paper constructed from traditional plant fibers such as wood is easily wetted by water, due to the hydrophilic properties, or burned by fire. Cellulose-based paper, with a large number of hydroxyl groups on the surface results in the reduction of strength. Thus, fabricating modified paper with controllable surface wettability is one such interesting research direction. The hydrophilicity and moisture absorption of cellulose itself and the capillary action between the fibers give the paper strong hydrophilic properties that make the paper very easily wetted by water and affect its flexibility, finally causing the destruction of the paper. The preparation of superhydrophobic paper not only requires hydrophobic modification of the surface of the paper, it also requires the construction of a micro–nano layered structure on the surface of the paper. Based on the drawback of being easily wetted, and inspiration from the Lotus effect, superhydrophobic cellulose papers have been fabricated. In general, the superhydrophobic nano-coating sprayed on the surface of the paper can prevent water infiltration. Under such circumstances, there exist a large number of studies on modifying the properties of cellulose-based paper. Musikavanhu et al.17 presented a three-step method for the preparation of superhydrophobic cellulose filter paper with a water contact angle of 154.8°. The sol–gel process of SiO2 increased the surface roughness, and grafting of hexadecyl trimethoxysilane groups on the surface enhanced the hydrophobic properties. By means of the layer-by-layer (LBL) method, Li et al.18 deposited TiO2 nanoparticles/sodium alginate (ALG) multilayers on the paper surface, respectively, followed by an adsorption treatment of colloidal carnauba wax. The as-prepared paper exhibited moisture-proofing properties, and the existence of nanoparticles and wax-treatment contributed to the enhancement of the physical properties. Wang et al.19 reported that a superhydrophobic paper was fabricated by a silica sol, which was prepared using tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) as the precursor and trimethylethoxysilane (TMES) as the co-precursor. The as-prepared paper showed a transmittance above 92% in visible wavelength, and could be bent and deformed for multiple cycles without losing water repellency. The above-mentioned studies were mainly to fabricate hierarchical micro- and nanostructures on the surface of cellulose-based paper. Nie et al.20 created elastic superhydrophobic cellulose paper by spray-coating nanofumed silica dispersed in a thermoplastic elastomer solution, followed by treatment with triethoxy-1H,1H,2H,2H-tridecafluoro-n-octylsilane (PFOTES). The schematic illustration of the preparation process is shown in Fig. 2a. From the SEM images, a network structure and some micrometer-sized irregular pores between the fibers in the original filter paper can be easily observed (Fig. 2b). SiO2 particles adhered to the fiber surface by the epoxy resin (Fig. 2c), improving the hydrophobic properties. After PFOTES treatment, stable hydrogen bonds were formed between PFOTES and the fibers, and the superhydrophobic cellulose paper was obtained (Fig. 2d).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of superhydrophobic paper. SEM images of (b) filter paper, (c) silica/paper composite, and (d) PFOTES-silica/paper composite (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the WILEY-VCH). 
However, for a surface to achieve the repellency of oil with lower surface tension, a special structure with re-entrant angles and modifier should be taken into consideration. According to the theory of surface interface wetting, the main method for constructing a superamphiphobic surface is to use nanoparticles to construct micro–nano rough structures on different substrates, and then reduce the free energy of the surface by using modifiers. More importantly, except for the general micro–nano structure affecting the wettability, constructing chamfered aggregate structures, such as T-shaped, mushroom-shaped, matchsticks, will contribute to the stability of the superoleophobic structure and promote the development of superoleophobic surfaces.21 Li et al.22 presented an approach to the design and fabrication of a superamphiphobic cellulose-based paper with a heterogeneous fiber web. In their study, they thought that processed fibers were often not circular in shape, but ellipsoidal. By altering the average fiber size and optimizing the interfiber spacing, the formation of a special structure could be achieved. More importantly, the specific approach involved fiber refining, solvent exchange, as well as plasma treatment. Finally, by etching the paper with oxygen plasma, and then conducting a plasma-assisted fluoropolymer deposition, superoleophobicity was achieved. From Fig. 3a, a high-resolution SEM image of a sec-butanol-processed handsheet clearly indicated the separation of micrometer and submicrometer scale fibers. The as-prepared paper exhibited contact angles greater than 150° for water, ethylene glycol, motor oil and n-hexadecane (Fig. 3b). They raised concerns that the creation of superamphiphobic properties with a specific structure would inevitably lead to a loss of mechanical properties, which has been a challenge.
 Fig. 3  (a) High-resolution SEM images of a 10HW handsheet processed using sec-butanol before etching. (b) Droplets of four test fluids (water (dyed blue), ethylene glycol, motor oil and n-hexadecane (dyed red)) exhibited a spherical shape (reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
The rapid changes in technology have led to the regulation of the surface properties of paper not only focusing on the hydrophobic or oleophobic aspects. Endowing cellulose-based paper with versatility has great application prospects. For strength issues, Bergamonti et al.23 reported a new treatment based on nanocrystalline cellulose (CNC) for paper preservation and strengthening. They successfully fabricated nanocrystalline cellulose with high yield starting from waste paper obtained from paper towels (CNCWP). The introduction of CNCs coating increased the interactions between inter-fibers, allowing the transformation of stress and leading to higher tensile strain resistance. Therefore, the strength of the cellulose-based paper was greatly enhanced. Khan et al.24 reported the recent development of cellulose-based electro-active paper. They thought that cellulose-based hybrid paper had great potential for cheap, disposable and biocompatible devices, with recycling also being available after use. Cao et al.25 fabricated a cellulose-based hybrid film as a flexible paper-anode for lithium-ion batteries by a pressured extrusion papermaking method. The obtained paper demonstrated considerable transport of lithium ions. More importantly, a high reversible discharge capacity of 160 mA h g−1 was realized, even after 10 C, with coulombic efficiency nearly 100%. Li et al.26 used microfibrillated cellulose fibers to produce a transparent paper. The as-prepared paper had a hierarchical micro- and nanostructure, in which a micron-scale fiber skeleton was buried in a nanoscale fibril network. The paper constructed by such a composite network structure showed a light transmittance of 82.4% at 550 nm. To achieve an anti-bacterial effect, Tsai et al.27 illustrated the antibacterial activity of silver-coated gold nanoparticles (Au–Ag NPs) deposited on cellulose paper. Some studies are not satisfied with a single performance regulation. Once functionalized, paper modified with stimuli-responsive materials may have more valuable applications. Li et al.28 reviewed the development of stimuli-responsive cellulose paper materials. They illustrated that stimuli-responsive polymers, small molecules or inorganic matter could be used to functionalize cellulose papers, fabricating stimuli-responsive cellulose papers with various applications. The research progress from the construction of paper raw materials to their multifunctional treatment has been summarized; however, these problems still exist in the entire field. Firstly, most of the raw materials for paper come from trees, and trees play a vital role in the balance of the human ecology. Secondly, most of the papermaking process is relatively complicated and pollutes the environment. Thirdly, most of the versatility of paper is achieved through the deposition of functionalized materials or coating treatment on the surface of cellulose-based paper; thus, the three corresponding issues worth studying are as follows. First, through the bionic network structure, can we find new raw materials to build a network structure and then prepare paper? Second, can paper be constructed in a simple, low-energy, and relatively environmentally friendly way? Third, can all the raw materials found to be modified to obtain versatility? In the following narrative, in this review, we will answer these questions.
3. Biomimetic multifunctional inorganic paper
It may be a development trend in the papermaking field in the future to construct inorganic materials through new methods, and then use them as raw materials to design and fabricate inorganic paper. In recent years, there have been more and more studies on inorganic paper. In this section, we will focus on inorganic paper constructed with different inorganic raw materials, including hydroxyapatite (HAP)-based, silicon-based, carbon-based and metal–organic framework (MOF)-based materials, and introduce the design principles and new construction methods.
3.1 HAP-based
Hydroxyapatite (Ca10(OH)2(PO4)6, HAP), the main inorganic constituent of bone invertebrates, is an important biomaterial due to its properties of non-toxicity and excellent biocompatibility.29 With the advantages of being green and sustainable, HAP-based materials have been increasingly investigated by both basic research and industrial application. More importantly, researchers have made HAP into nanowires or even ultra-long nanowires as a network skeleton of paper.
Early research on HAP focused on how to use physical and chemical methods to make this material into nanowires. The crystal structure, size, aspect ratio and shape have great effects on the properties and application of HAP-based materials. Thus, the key to constructing inorganic paper is the state of the nanowires. Jiang et al.30 reported the solvothermal synthesis of submillimeter ultralong hydroxyapatite nanowires using a calcium oleate precursor and NaH2PO4 as the phosphorus source in a series of monohydroxy alcohols. The as-prepared HAP nanowires were ultralong with diameters of tens of nanometers and lengths from several hundred micrometers to nearly one millimeter. The construction of interleaved nanowires laid the foundation for fabricating HAP-based inorganic paper. Similarly, He et al.31 used the solvothermal method to produce ultralong HAP nanowires. From SEM images, the HAP nanowires were 40–60 μm in length and 40 to 100 nm in diameter. From TEM images, we see that each nanowire with 40–100 nm in diameter was not a single wire; each wire was made up of many thin wires of 10 nm in diameter. From the measurement of the BET surface area, the results showed that the value of the as-prepared HAP nanowires was 77.05 m2 g−1; this played an important role in the applications of separation and filtration. To achieve large-scale fabrication, Chen et al.32 fabricated highly ordered ultralong HAP nanowires with lengths >100 μm and aspect ratios >10000, achieving the scaled-up production of nanostructured materials. The prepared product and dispersion state in ethanol are shown in Fig. 4a and b. The SEM micrographs of randomly distributed ultralong HAP nanowires are shown in Fig. 4c–e. Based on the fabrication HAP nanowires, they proposed the possible formation mechanism as follows. Calcium oleate, as a precursor and calcium source, influenced the formation of HAP nanowires. Under the solvothermal conditions, the chemical reactions between calcium oleate, OH−, and PO43− ions would form HAP nuclei. Finally, the adsorption of oleic acid may contribute to the 1D crystal growth of HAP, forming ultralong HAP nanowires; the rapid automated production of the highly ordered ultralong HAP nanowires by simple injection was achieved. At the same time, a large number of highly ordered building blocks, including high-strength nano-ropes, highly flexible textiles, and 3D printed well-defined highly ordered patterns, had been successfully prepared. Therefore, it was precisely because of the construction of these as-prepared nanowires that the skeleton structure was provided for the fabrication of HAP-based inorganic paper.
 Fig. 4  (a) The stainless steel autoclave used in the large-scale synthesis of ultralong HAP nanowires, and the as-prepared solvothermal product slurry containing ultralong HAP nanowires. (b) Digital images of ultralong HAP nanowires separated from the solvothermal product slurry and dispersed in ethanol. (c–e) SEM micrographs of randomly distributed ultralong HAP nanowires (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
During the vacuum filtration, ultralong HAP nanowires could be used as raw skeleton materials to design and fabricate a flexible and nonflammable inorganic HAP paper.33 The as-prepared inorganic paper could be bent and rolled without visible damage and the oil/water separation was achieved. Chen et al.34 produced highly flexible superhydrophobic and fire-resistant inorganic paper with a layered structure. In their study, ultralong HAP nanowires were capable of assembling into self-roughened setalike microfibers. The as-prepared inorganic paper displayed superhydrophobic and fire-resistant properties. The water repellency without surface modification could be attributed to the hierarchical structure of the microfibers and the introduction of sodium oleate, which was analogous to the setae of a water strider's legs. Besides, the layered structure of the inorganic paper guaranteed the improvement of the mechanical performance, and the chemical components of the HAP-based paper led to the nonflammable properties. More importantly, to better improve its flexibility, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) was used in the process of inorganic paper-making. In the study by Wen et al., CMC was added to the HAP nanowires-based solution, while the as-prepared paper scattered easily without CMC.35 Therefore, a robust and repairable superhydrophobic paper was obtained by preparing HAP nanowires with ZnO, followed by modification with the low-surface-energy material 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane (PFDS) via a facile method. The whole fabrication process is shown in Fig. 5. The synergy effect between the layered structure and modifier played a significant role in the superhydrophobic properties. Compared with traditional paper, the properties of the as-prepared HAP-based paper are as follows: (1) remarkable self-cleaning and anti-fouling properties, (2) excellent fire-resistance, and (3) admirable mechanism durability. The inorganic paper after combustion treatment was also superhydrophilic in air and superoleophobic under water, being used for efficient surfactant-stabilized oil-in-water emulsion separation. In terms of paper-making technologies and applications, the HAP-based inorganic paper can cause less water pollution and reduce energy consumption, as well as achieve multiple functions. Thus, these studies provide new inspiration for the basic research and highlight the potential and diverse applications of HAP-based inorganic paper.
 Fig. 5  A schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of superhydrophobic PFDS-paper@ZnO from HAP nanowires. 
3.2 Silicon-based
In this section, we mainly illustrate and discuss the construction of silicon-based nanowires that could be used for the fabrication of silicon-based inorganic paper. In terms of raw materials, on the one hand, bulk Si is superior to other inorganic semiconductor materials due to the advantage of its compatibility.36 On the other hand, the successful preparation of single-crystalline SiC nanowires makes it possible to fabricate SiC inorganic paper.37
Due to their unique physical properties, silicon-based materials have attracted much attention in the past few years. Therefore, due to the ultra-large strain-ability of Si on the nanometer scale, once the nanoscale size was achieved, it was possible for the formation of silicon nanowires (SiNWs) in the presence of defect-free structures. Pang et al.38 successfully designed and fabricated flexible, transparent and self-standing silicon nanowires paper (FTS-SiNWsP). Due to a unique interlocking alignment with the controllable growth of the free-catalyst, achieving the FTS-SiNWsP was a tricky issue. In their study, under the action of the carrier gas flow, they proposed an appropriate fabrication strategy by simple thermal evaporation where a unique interlocking alignment of the Si nanowires (SiNWs) could be achieved. In the fabrication process, the synthesis of the FTS-SiNWsP was performed in a smart design vertical high-frequency induction furnace (Fig. 6a).39 The growth mechanisms of Si nanowires and FTS-SiNWsP under the action of carrier gas flow are shown in Fig. 6b and c. First, a SiO2 matrix was formed by depositing SiO2 vapor on the orifice of the graphite cylinder. In this case, the Si vapor would precipitate into the SiO2 matrix. Then, under the conditions of Ar gas flow, the Si nanowires were formed, which grew with the continued supply of Si vapor. The strength of the flow of the carrier gas promoted the growth of nanowires in the direction of the gas flow, resulting in their spontaneous interlocking with each other. Thus, the nanowires provided the skeleton structure for the fabrication of silicon-based paper. The schematic illustration of the synthesis of the FTS-SiNWsP@graphene electrode is provided in Fig. 6d. The as-prepared inorganic paper was made up of interlocked nanowires with a diameter of ∼10 nm, and possessed considerable optical transmittance. Besides, in terms of mechanism durability, the organic paper was capable of bending repeatedly without obvious cracking. David et al. reported a large area (approximately 15 cm × 2.5 cm) self-standing anode material consisting of molecular precursor-derived silicon oxycarbide glass particles embedded in a chemically-modified reduced graphene oxide matrix, which could be used for long-cycle lithium-ion batteries.40
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic diagram of the vertical high-frequency induction furnace. The direction of gas flow is marked by the yellow dashed lines. The location where Si nanowires grow is marked by a red circle. (b and c) Growth mechanism of Si nanowires and FTS-SiNWsP under the action of carrier gas flow. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the FTS-SiNWsP@graphene electrode (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Silicon-based paper is mainly made of silicon carbide (SiC) nanowires, and we will introduce the latest fabrication methods for inorganic paper with SiC nanowires as the raw material. Due to the one-dimensional structure, silicon carbide (SiC) nanowires are relatively easily produced. Yao et al.41 reported an interfacial structure by generating silver nanoparticle-deposited silicon carbide nanowire (SiCNW–Ag) nanohybrids. The SiCNW possessed high thermal conductivity, low coefficient of thermal expansion, and superior physical and chemical stabilities.42,43 The whole fabrication was a two-step process of ultrasonic dispersion and vacuum-assisted filtration. The SiC nanowires with surface modification by 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane were obtained and the SiCNW–Ag nanohybrids were prepared by the reduction of Ag+ on SiCNWs. After the vacuum-assisted filtration process, a silicon-based inorganic paper was formed. The as-prepared paper showed good mechanical flexibility in the presence of CMC, which could be easily bent. Chen et al.44 fabricated a free-standing SiC nanowire paper consisting of ultralong single-crystalline SiC nanowires via a facile vacuum filtration approach. In the SiC nanowires fabrication process, sol–gel and carbothermal reduction methods were involved, with carbonaceous silica xerogel as the raw material. The growth of ultralong SiC nanowires may be attributed to the high supersaturation of SiO and CO gases produced in the sealed corundum crucible. The ultralong SiC nanowires on the corundum plate could be compressed to form a silicon-based inorganic paper by a simple rolling process; therefore, the nanowires possessed a relatively high aspect ratio, which was capable of self-assembling into free-standing paper. The SiC nanowires were about 100 nm in diameter and up to several hundreds of micrometers in length, consistent with the high-aspect ratio we illustrated. From Fig. 7a and c, we see that the inorganic paper is white and is about 4 cm in diameter. The as-prepared inorganic paper showed considerable flexibility and excellent mechanical strength, and was able to be easily rolled (Fig. 7b) and stretched by a weight of 20 g without breaking (Fig. 7d). The nanowires possessed high purity and uniformity, interlacing to form a network structure. Meaningfully, the inorganic paper with high flexibility, nonflammability and high-thermal stability may be regarded as a candidate for high-temperature exhaust gas filtration and dust filter applications. Hu et al.45 prepared SiC nanowires on graphite paper with silicon powder via a novel and catalyst-free preparation method. In their study, the SiC nanowires were produced by keeping the graphite paper coated with silicon powder in a vacuum furnace at different temperatures. The growth process of SiC nanowires is as follows:462C(g) + O2(g) = 2CO(g)2Si(g) + O2(g) = 2SiO(g)SiO(g) + 2C(g) = SiC(s) + CO(g)SiO(g) + 3CO(g) = SiC(s) + 2CO2(g)
 Fig. 7  (a) A photograph of SiC nanowire paper of about 10 cm in diameter. (b) The SiC nanowire paper can be easily rolled, showing great flexibility. (c) SiC nanowire paper of about 4 cm in diameter. (d) A piece of as-prepared SiC nanowire paper (diameter of ∼4 cm, thickness of ∼0.3 mm) is able to withstand a weight of ∼20 g without breaking (reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Therefore, with the reaction of silicon particles, SiC nanowires are produced and are interlaced with each other to form network structure in space. On the one hand, the as-prepared SiC nanowires could be used for the fabrication of silicon-based inorganic paper. On the other hand, the introduction of carbon-based material can provide inspiration for further research.
3.3 Carbon-based
In recent years, regardless of the basic research in the laboratory or the high-tech transformations, there have been many studies on carbon materials due to their unique physicochemical performances and relatively high biosafety. In general, carbon-based materials mainly contain graphite, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. Graphene is a monoatomic monolayer of graphite and is considered as a structural monomer of carbon materials such as one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and zero-dimensional (0D) fullerenes. With nanotechnology, carbon-based materials can be used for the fabrication of inorganic paper with great potential for applications.
Since the discovery of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT)47 and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT),48 they have been regarded as potential materials for many applications. Carbon nanotubes with high modulus and mechanical strength, as typical 1D materials, have been used in important areas, especially in the field of sensors. Cross-linked papers with embedded nanoparticles have been explored for use in these applications. Gao et al. presented the development of piezoelectric enhanced cross-linked carbon nanotube paper.49 The electric charge can be realized by using zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles. The ZnO is difficult to attach to the surface of the CNTs so, in their study, high concentrations of ZnO nanoparticles were applied to reduce the possibility of the nanoparticles slipping off the surface of the CNTs into the cross-linked network (Fig. 8c). The as-prepared paper has potential applications in multidirectional pressure sensors, which may overcome the limitations of isolated ceramic-based piezoelectric devices. The SEM images of ZnO nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 8a. In Fig. 8b, the as-prepared CNTs-based inorganic paper exhibits excellent flexibility as it can be easily rolled. Li et al.50 reported the facile fabrication of layered Ti2C MXene/carbon nanotube composite paper with enhanced electrochemical properties. In their study, based on the difficulty of delamination and oxidation features of Ti2AlC, they fabricated a two-dimensional layered Ti2CTx/carbon nanotube (CNTs) nanocomposite paper. Due to the presence of MXene flakes with large specific area, the layer restacking between MXene and carbon nanotubes can be effectively avoided, and the structure provides a rapid charge transfer path during the electrochemical reaction. Therefore, their electrochemical response was significantly better as compared to their multilayered counterparts. The as-prepared paper could also be used as an electrode due to its high capacitance. In order to realize a light and flexible gas sensor, Zhang et al.51 fabricated a uniform carbon nanotube paper made by multi-walled carbon nanotubes, which was flexible and light. The junctions in the presence of numerous CNT played an important role in the detection mechanism.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the ZnO nanoparticles. (b) The photo of a synthesized flexible MWCNT-NH2/benzoquinone cross-linked paper with embedded ZnO nanoparticles. (c) A schematic of the surface of the piezoelectric paper (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Elsevier). 
Since Novoselov et al. successfully stripped graphene from graphite, graphene has become a hot topic in many research areas and has been used in various situations and equipment.52 Li et al. proposed a facile method to prepare porous graphene papers with a thickness of 0.5 mm by a thermal shock to the layer-structured graphene paper self-assembled on Cu foil under flowing nitrogen.53 In their experiment, the graphene oxide (GO) was prepared by using the modified Hummers method54 and exfoliated by using ultrasonic dispersion. The as-prepared porous GO paper showed a large specific capacitance of 100 F g−1 at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1 with high stability and purity without any residual chemical reagents, exhibiting promising potential for supercapacitor applications. Dong et al.55 reported a large-area, flexible and fire-resistant graphene paper. In their study, similar to the paper-making process, the as-prepared graphene paper was made up of GO and hexachlorocyclotriphosphazene (HCCP) aqueous pulp. In their study, the evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) method was conducted to produce the GO–HCCP paper, which could be regarded as a facile and time-saving method.56 More importantly, the modification of HCCP on GO paper led to thermal stability by introducing nitrogen and phosphorus atoms. In terms of the dispersion problem, Ding et al. used a simple ball-milling method to exfoliate few-layered aqueous dispersible graphene. Due to the strong π–π interactions, it was possible to decorate graphene nanosheets (GNSs) with the treatment of sodium lignosulfonate (LS), forming LS-decorated GNSs from natural graphite and improving GNSs dispersion in water.57 The electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of the as-prepared paper were 2385 S cm−1 and 1324 W m−1 K−1, respectively, which were superior as compared to most graphene films.
Similarly, also using the ball-milling exfoliated graphene method, Teng et al. reported that an effective route for constructing ultrahigh conductive graphene paper was proposed.58 In their experiment, a large-volume, high-concentration, plane-defect-free, few-layer graphene dispersion was quickly produced from graphite at high yield through the ball milling method. The treated graphene dispersion became graphene paper by some methods, including fast filtration, thermal treatment, and mechanical compression. The electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of the as-prepared paper were 2231 S cm−1 and 1529 W m−1 K−1, respectively. The ultrahigh conductivities could have resulted from the high quality of graphene sheets, their compact ordered stacking, and large graphitic crystalline domain size. Apart from the compact ordered stacking of graphene sheets, large-sized graphene sheets (LG) were also candidates for fabricating functional graphene paper. Wan et al. employed a doping strategy to fabricate lightweight and flexible graphene paper with exceptional electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding performance.59 Large-sized graphene sheets had fewer defects and higher charge carrier mobility, and were separated from the as-prepared graphene oxide (GO) solution by centrifugation, and then went through the reduction process. Besides, iodine (I2), as an important dopant, was used to upgrade the carrier concentration and improve the electrical conductivity of graphene paper. This study provided a facile strategy for designing and fabricating graphene-based paper with lightweight and flexible properties.
Unlike the above methods, Xu et al. reported that a novel strategy for the direct densification of reduced graphene oxide foam was applied to fabricate large-scale multifunctional graphene paper.60 The fabrication of the pressing process is shown in Fig. 9a. In their study, they prepared graphene paper (GP) made by GA and thermally annealed graphene paper (TAGP) made by TAGA. For GA, the three-dimensional network structure is shown in Fig. 9b. The porosity decreased under the pressing conditions (Fig. 9c). From Fig. 9d and e, the thermally annealed graphene paper (TAGP) could be folded into any shape, indicating its great flexibility. The microstructure of TAGP showed a new stacked structure (Fig. 9f and g), which would be beneficial for the properties of the graphene-based paper. Macroscopic graphene materials with different densities and porosities were obtained. The as-prepared graphene paper was as large as 230 mm, and the tensile stress was up to 50.4 MPa with a strain of 4%. Besides, the thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity were 103 W m−1 K−1 and 1.1 × 105 S m−1, respectively. Since graphene is easily wrinkled from the dispersed state to the assembled state of solid materials, the flexibility of graphene will reduce the crystallization order of graphene, influencing the mechanical strength and electrical/thermal conductivity. Gao et al.61 reported that a continuous plasticizing and stretching method was proposed to adjust the spontaneous wrinkling of the graphene film with a high Herman's order of 0.93 to a crystalline order. An obvious brittle–plastic transition in polar solvents was observed for graphene oxide paper (GOP). The ultimate tensile strain of GOP reached more than 10% in ethanol, which was 230% higher than that of directly obtained GOP (3%). With the transformation of plasticity, the distance between the layers of GOPs kept increasing. Ethanol molecules were inserted between the GO layers to reach saturation, and the interlayer spacing increased from 0.9 nm to 1.58 nm. By inserting a plasticizer and activating the sliding of the sheet, the van der Waals interactions were weakened, the energy was dissipated, and the plastic ultimate strain was significantly increased. This research has realized the transition of graphene paper from brittleness to plasticity, which plays a crucial role in the secondary processing of graphene assemblies.
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic illustration of the pressing process of the graphene paper. (b) SEM image of the GA with an inset that shows an optical photograph of the GA. (c) SEM image of the GA under 50% compression. (d) SEM image of a section of the TAGP; the three insets show the flexibility of the TAGP. (e) A bent section of the TAGP. (f) An in-plane view of the folded graphene sheets. (g) A cross-sectional view of the folded graphene sheets (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3.4 MOF-based
Due to their unique structures, dispersed active sites and ultrahigh surface area, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a new type of porous material that has been applied in many fields. For MOF-based paper, conventionally, we call it membrane or film. The preparation of polycrystalline film requires strict control of the crystal nucleation and growth processes; otherwise, crystal gaps and crystal defects are prone to occur. Choosing a method that is easy to control and can be prepared in a large area is still the focus and presents a challenge to research in this field. The polycrystalline nature of the membrane has always been a challenging issue for its manufacture and application.
The question has arisen as to whether the MOF material can be prepared by liquid-phase conversion like polymers and glass. Wang et al. developed a ZIF-62 MOF glass membrane for the first time and exploited its intrinsic gas separation properties.62 The MOF glass membrane was produced by the melt-quenching treatment of an in situ solvothermally synthesized polycrystalline ZIF-62 MOF membrane on a porous ceramic alumina support. Before membrane preparation, we first studied the melting process of this material. As the temperature increased, the solvent molecules were continuously removed from the pores of the material and melted at 434 °C. From the characterization results, no obvious changes were observed in the chemical composition of the crystal and the glass and the ratio of the ligands. After melting, the glass no longer had a long-range ordered topology, but it retained the short-range coordination of metal ions and ligands. It was precisely because of this network connection that the ZIF-62 glass retained part of the void porosity and could be used for gas purification. Zhou et al.63 proposed a method of electrochemically preparing ZIF-8 membranes. By applying a tiny current of milliamps, the rapid growth of ZIF-8 membranes on a porous substrate at room temperature was achieved for the first time, which took only 8.5 minutes to 20 minutes. For a better comparison, the solvothermal method and fast current-driven synthesis (FCDS) were respectively conducted for the fabrication of ZIF-8 (Fig. 10a). For the solvothermal method, the ZIF-8_I3m phase (the common cubic phase) was assembled by zinc ions and linkers. The local in situ electric field was formed around the support by the current, and inborn lattice distortion occurred and the stiff polymorph ZIF-8_Cm phase (a newly discovered polymorph of ZIF-8) was formed (Fig. 10b).64 This method is also applicable to other types of conductive substrates and possesses good versatility. The overall preparation process is extremely simple and highly efficient, with good application prospects. Due to the non-conductive properties of the ZIF-8 material, the ZIF-8 film played an in situ “insulating layer” role during the growth process, thereby blocking the contact between the current and the solution and achieving self-suppression. Finally, the as-prepared ZIF-8 exhibited excellent ability for C3H6/C3H8 separation. Cao et al. reported that the ultrathin conductive Ni/Cu-HAB (hexaaminobenzene) MOF was capable of efficiently rejecting ions while giving access to high water flux.65 Through molecular dynamics simulation, it was determined that the obtained MOF membrane was made up of at least two layers, which could successfully reject almost 100% of the ions. The ultra-thin MOF material had multiple adjacent pore structures that could reduce the frictional force of water molecules passing through the pores and accelerate the passing rate. The ion filtration rate was 3–6 orders of magnitude higher than that of the traditional polymer membranes. The extremely high structural integrity and high porosity of MOF materials could reduce the time and energy waste caused by subsequent drilling and other processes, providing new ideas for the design of water purification membranes. This is of great significance for improving the efficiency of seawater purification. Therefore, MOF-based paper can be a potential candidate for pollution purification.
 Fig. 10  (a) The electrochemical cell for membrane growth by FCDS. The substrate serves as a cathode in the electrochemical system. (b) Schematic illustration of the ZIF-8 membrane growth via FCDS in comparison with solvothermal growth. In the solvothermal route, zinc ions and linkers assemble into the normal ZIF-8_I3m phase. With the local in situ electric field that was formed around the support by the current, inborn lattice distortion occurs and the stiff polymorph ZIF-8_Cm is formed (reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
4. Emerging applications of inorganic papers
The versatility of inorganic paper is one of the necessary conditions to ensure its long-term existence and development. It is mainly used in the fields of anti-fouling, fire-resistant, flame-retardant, and pollutant purification treatment, and sensors. Therefore, the research on biomimetic inorganic paper has important significance and research value for human beings. Based on the development and research on inorganic paper applications in recent years, in this section, we focus on the multifunctional and novel applications of inorganic paper.
4.1 Fire-resistance and anti-bacterial properties
Every year, fires cause significant property losses and personal injuries all over the world. Therefore, the fire-resistant treatment of extremely combustible materials is of great significance to prevent the spread of flames and reduce fire hazards. In this case, the surface treatment of materials is a convenient way to endow flammable materials with fire-resistance. The most effective method is to use a fire-resistant coating on the surface of the composite material or use a protective film on the surface. In this case, the focus of research is to build raw nonflammable materials to achieve fire-resistant properties. The HAP nanowires were constructed by the hydrothermal method, and by adjusting the amount of ZnO particles, the superhydrophobic and fire-resistant inorganic paper was realized without any modifiers.66 When burning commercial paper, the fire spread across the entire paper and quickly turned to ashes. On the contrary, the as-prepared HAP inorganic paper hardly changed. Besides, in order to explore the variation in wettability at different temperatures, the WCAs of the superhydrophobic inorganic paper at different temperatures after cooling were recorded. The results indicated that the water repellency remained, even after treatment at 500 °C. More importantly, the inorganic paper exhibited good antibacterial performance toward to E. coli (Fig. 11a) and S. aureus (Fig. 10d). After treatment with bacteria for 24 h, no bacterial community was observed on the surface of the inorganic paper or the surface plate after the in vitro antibacterial assay (Fig. 11b, c, e and f). On the one hand, the superhydrophobic property can make it difficult for bacteria to adhere to its surface. On the other hand, the existence of ZnO particles played an important role in killing bacteria. The mechanism could be attributed to the release of zinc ions, causing the disruption of the cell membrane activity and the formation of intercellular reactive oxygen species, mostly H2O2.
 Fig. 11  (a) The surface plate of E. coli. (b) The residual amount of bacteria on the superhydrophobic paper. (c) The residual amount of bacteria on the surface plate after the in vitro antibacterial assay. (d) The surface plate of S. aureus. (e) The residual amount of bacteria on the raw paper. (f) The residual amount of bacteria on the surface plate after the in vitro antibacterial assay. 
The reasonable combination of multiple materials can also produce excellent fire-resistant properties. Dong et al.67 designed and fabricated a new kind of highly flexible fireproof inorganic nanocomposite paper made from glass fibers (GFs) coated with network-structured hydroxyapatite ultralong nanowires (NS-HANWs). The tensile strength of the as-prepared inorganic paper was 16 MPa, which was about 15 times that of the glass fiber paper. Besides, the inorganic paper showed high thermal stability at high temperatures up to 1000 °C, and exhibited a low thermal conductivity (0.10 W m−1 K−1 (25 °C) and 0.14 W m−1 K−1 (600 °C)) and excellent heat insulation performance. Chen et al. fabricated a novel HAP/silica aerogel inorganic nanocomposite paper with low thermal conductivity, flame retardancy and good mechanical properties by employing ultralong HAP nanowires as scaffolds for silica aerogels.68 The study aimed to fabricate three-dimensional structures for heat insulation using HAP nanowires. The interlaced HAP nanowires provided the skeleton structure and silica aerogels were employed as filling materials for the fabrication of inorganic paper. Finally, the as-prepared inorganic paper demonstrated outstanding fire-retardant properties and excellent thermal stability at temperatures up to 800 °C. On varying the amount of silica aerogel from 0 to 50 wt%, the thermal conductivity of inorganic paper decreased from 0.056 to 0.045 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature. The low thermal conductivity of the inorganic paper could have resulted from the network structure prepared by HAP nanowires and the original low thermal conductivity of the HAP nanowires and silica aerogels. Compared with the study by Wen et al.,66 this kind of paper showed thermal stability at temperatures up to 800 °C. Chen et al. reported a smart fire alarm wallpaper prepared using fire-resistant inorganic paper based on ultralong HAP nanowires and graphene oxide (GO) thermosensitive sensors.69 The as-prepared inorganic paper not only showed thermal stability but also acted as a fire alarm. As a thermosensitive sensor, it could raise the necessary alarms in case of fire. Under high-temperature conditions, the conductivity of the GO thermosensitive sensor would change from an insulating state to a conductive state, while the alarm lamp and alarm buzzer connected to the GO thermosensitive sensor would be stimulated and sound an alarm (Fig. 12a and b). During the process, the inorganic composite paper demonstrated a low thermal responsive temperature (126.9 °C), a rapid response time (within 2 s), and a long alarm time (>5 min) in the flame, which expand the application of inorganic paper with smart responsive behaviors. Chen et al.70 reported a functionalized graphene paper with a fuse and flame-triggered self-cutting performance for application as a fire-alarm sensor. In their study, the evaporation-assisted self-assembly of graphene oxide (GO) dispersion, and reduction by hydrazine hydrate vapor were conducted to fabricate a conductive reduced graphene oxide paper (RGOP) with a hierarchical structure. The RGOP containing sodium chloride (RGOP-NaCl) showed an extraordinary rapid flame-detection response and self-cutting performance. The mechanism was explained as follows. During the thermal decomposition of the RGOP containing Na+, more CO2 and CO tended to be released. Besides, Na+ was capable of accelerating the combustion of RGOP, and the rupturing of the RGOP strip would be promoted during flame attack. Furthermore, this RGOP-NaCl-based device could offer rapid flame detection and early warning signals through the change in the lamp lights from green to red, providing a signal for personnel evacuation and fire suppression. More importantly, the self-cutting performance of RGOP-NaCl in the event of a fire could effectively cut off the conductive circuit, ensuring safety. Chen et al. reported further research that graphene oxide paper functionalized with phosphoric acid (GO-PA) was fabricated by a facile and environmentally friendly water evaporation-induced self-assembly approach.71 As a fire-warning detector, the response time was within 0.5 s when GO-PA samples were subjected to fire, and the inorganic paper was more sensitive than previously reported. The introduction of PA can improve flame tolerance and the duration of GO strip under the conditions of fire, thus providing a more stable and continuous alarm signal.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the alarm lamp, alarm buzzer, and electrons in the electrical circuit after thermal treatment of the FAW with the GO thermosensitive sensor at different temperatures for 3 min (RT: room temperature). (b) Corresponding digital pictures (reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
The inorganic paper exhibits good fire-resistance and can be used in many extreme conditions, enhancing the environmental durability and universality of the material. The long-term fire resistance can provide effective technical support for fire alarms.
4.2 Pollutant treatment
Threats to both the environment and human health are caused by toxic spills and ever-increasing dye-containing industrial wastewater and air pollution, including dye-containing industrial wastewater and fine particulate matters (PMs). In terms of the abovementioned problems, researchers generally use adsorption or filtration methods to treat pollutants.
With the rapid development of modern industry, the problem of water pollution has become increasingly serious. The efficient use of solar energy to extract clean water from seawater or industrial water is an effective means of solving the shortage of water resources. Using the desalination effects of solar energy to obtain water vapor from the evaporation of seawater has become a hot research topic. In practical applications, photothermal materials should have good environmental resistance. In this regard, Zhang et al.72 synthesized vertically aligned graphene sheets (Vertically Aligned Graphene Sheets Membrane, VA-GSM) using a large-scale method. This kind of film can produce light and heat, and the vertically arranged channels can release water vapor. In the study, the surface of the film was hydrophilized with oxygen plasma. The VA-GSM with uniform and vertical graphene film provided a smooth channel for the transmission of water molecules and the release of water vapor. When the film was fully exposed to sunlight, the full absorption of the spectrum (250–2500 nm) resulted in highly efficient photothermal conversion. The conversion efficiency under one solar unit was as high as 86.5%, and the efficiency under four solar units was as high as 94.2%. VA-GSM could produce clean water from seawater and also worked well in common wastewater and acid/alkali solutions. More importantly, in order to enhance the production of solar steam, a “sandwich” thermal insulation layer was introduced. After the water was irradiated for 60 minutes, the temperature increased by only 3.2 °C, and the thermal conductivity of VA-GSM was 3.8 mW m−1 K−1, which was lower than that of most carbon materials. The thermal insulation layer reduced the heat transfer to the water and the low thermal conductivity prevented the transfer of heat to the atmosphere due to higher light-to-heat conversion efficiency. This research demonstrated that graphene with an assembled structure can be used to remove bacteria, oil or other organic matter in the water, and can effectively use solar energy to produce clean water.
As for seawater purification, Chen et al.73 proposed and realized the precise control of the interlayer spacing of the graphene membrane by the hydrate ion, demonstrating its excellent ion screening and seawater desalination performances. For potassium ions with the smallest hydration diameter, researchers used graphene membranes soaked in a K+ solution to prevent the entry of hydrated potassium ions, intercepting all ions in the salt solution, including K+, while keeping water molecules permeating quickly. Subsequently, salt ions and pure water were efficiently enriched on the feed side and permeate side of the graphene membrane, respectively. Zhu et al.74 used HAP-based ultra-long nanowire inorganic paper as a carrier, loaded with carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and successfully fabricated a new large-scale photothermal conversion inorganic paper. The new type of photothermal inorganic paper could effectively absorb sunlight and convert it into heat under sunlight, and was used to heat water on its surface to generate water vapor. The water vapor was then condensed in a condensing device to produce clean water. The experimental results showed that the surface temperature of the inorganic paper rapidly rose to about 80 °C under the condition of 1 kW m−2 simulated solar light for 1 minute, while the surface temperature of the HAP paper without CNTs was only about 35 °C. In the solar-driven water evaporation process, pollutants such as heavy metal ions, dyes and bacteria in the solution could be effectively blocked and retained in the aqueous solution, and the generated water vapor was condensed to produce clean water. As for dye-polluted water, Kalita et al.75 demonstrated that the graphene-based paper had the potential for application in removing cationic and anionic dyes from aqueous solution. The negatively charged graphene paper was fabricated from graphene oxide (GO−) solution. From Fig. 13a and b, the results showed the absorption spectra of MB and MO dye before and after filtration from the GO− and GO+; the dyes became transparent. The GO− exhibited a high adsorption capacity (99.8%) for methylene blue (MB). The adsorption mechanism was the electrostatic interaction between the GO− and the MB dye molecules. This study demonstrated that the graphene-based paper was effectively capable of removing pollutant dyes from water.
 Fig. 13  UV-vis spectra of the filtrate (a) on MB adsorption before and after the filtration through the GO− paper and (b) on MO adsorption before and after the filtration through the GO+ paper (reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Except for water pollution, air pollution, including automobile exhaust emissions and industrial gas emissions, has always been a major environmental issue of concern. Among the solid pollutants, fine particulate matter (PM) can be regarded as the most hazardous substance, influencing the air quality and human health. In general, porous membrane filters and fibrous filters are used to achieve air purification.76,77 However, under practical situations, such as fires, they are easily destroyed and are hard to use as air purification firewalls. Therefore, fire-resistant, efficient and cost-effective novel inorganic air filtration and adsorption materials are urgently desired. Inspired by the previous study,78 Wen et al.79 reported the simple fabrication of a multifunctional inorganic paper with high-efficiency separations for both liquids and particles. In our study, the multifunctional inorganic paper containing hydroxyapatite (HAP), carboxymethyl inorganic paper (CMC) and NH2-UiO-66 was prepared for both air and liquid contaminant filtration. On the one hand, the presence of NH2-UiO-66 particles allowed the HAP-based inorganic paper to achieve air filter medium and dye adsorption as it has chemical functional groups that ensure robust interaction with pollutant particles and dyes. In addition, the as-prepared inorganic paper exhibited stable superhydrophilicity in air, and underwater superoleophobic properties (θoil > 150°) without any further chemical modification, which could be applied for oil-in-water emulsion separation. The inorganic paper could easily capture PMs in a simulated air-polluted environment with high-efficiency (PM 2.5 with 96.0 ± 1.9% and PM 10 with 97.2 ± 1.7%). The removal mechanism can be illustrated as follows: (1) the three-dimensional network structure could effectively block PM particles; (2) the electrostatic interactions with the MOF crystals played an important role in capturing PMs. For water purification ability, the inorganic paper exhibited efficient oil-in-water separation with low chemical oxygen demand (COD) values towards different emulsions. The inorganic paper could remove cationic dyes from solution more effectively than anionic dyes, which may be attributed to the effects of the electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding between the adsorbents and cationic dyes.
4.3 Actuator
Smart responsive actuators can generate feedback through changes in external environmental factors such as humidity and temperature. Han et al.80 prepared a moisture-responsive graphene paper with bilayer structures by a novel focused sunlight-irradiation-induced photoreduction of graphene oxide (GO). The as-prepared inorganic paper showed moisture–responsive properties under humid conditions due to anisotropic water-molecule adsorption. With the increase in the relative humidity (RH) from 24% to 86%, the curvature of the GO/reduced GO (RGO) ribbon gradually increased from 0° to 168°. In their previous study, they had quantitatively investigated the interaction between water molecules and graphene/GO nanosheets by a first-principles study.81 In the case of graphene, due to the reduction of the van der Waals forces, the adsorption of water molecules would occur. In this case, water molecules would be adsorbed by GO layers, prior to RGO layers. A significant expansion/contraction effect was observed in the presence of the selective adsorption/desorption of water, contributing to a reversible bending and straightening performance in moist and dry conditions, respectively.82,83 The excellent performance made it possible to fabricate graphene-based smart actuators. In their study, a claw, an orientable transporter, and a crawler paper robot were fabricated. Taking a crawler paper robot, for example, this kind of actuator was prepared by using the GO/RGO bilayer paper as smart legs. Under moist conditions, the two GO/RGO “smart legs” would gather up, resulting in bending, whereas in a dry environment, the “smart legs” would be straight, and the reciprocating behavior could cause it to move forward.
Furthermore, Jiang et al. treated GO papers with unilateral two-beam laser interference (TBLI) to fabricate the moisture-responsive graphene-based actuator.84 In their study, the aim of using TBLI technology was to fabricate a hierarchical structure for GO. Finally, the inorganic paper with the anisotropic GO/RGO bilayer structure was fabricated in the presence of self-acting photoreduction. More importantly, based on the different water-absorbing capacities of the two sides of the bilayer structure, the GO/RGO paper could be used as a moisture-responsive actuator. Inspired by the behaviors of flowers, they designed and fabricated a flower-like robot (Fig. 14a and b). In their fabrication process, the GO/RGO bilayer paper was cut into six pieces to form the shape of the flower, and they were gathered together to assemble a branch. SEM images of the GO side and the RGO side, and the corresponding contact angles are shown in Fig. 14c and d. A cross-sectional-view SEM image of the TBLI treated GO paper is presented in Fig. 14e. A fluffy structure, with larger layer-gaps in the up-side and a dense structure in the bottom-side, was observed. To see the RGO surface more clearly, high-resolution SEM images of the RGO surface were obtained (Fig. 14f and g). Under humid conditions, the flower-like robot would be in a closing state, and the movement of the bottom petals of the flower-like robot would not occur due to the video recording angle. It just took 10 s for the “flower” to go from blooming to closing. Otherwise, under the dry air condition, the “flower” slowly opens again from the closed state. The whole recovery process without any external energy supports lasts 64 s. Thus, the changes in humidity could operate the GO/RGO bilayer structure, which also can be made into other forms of robots. The abovementioned mechanism could be explained as follows. On the one hand, the GO was hydrophilic due to the presence of oxygen-containing groups (OCGs) in the interlayer, which would lead to the formation of hydrogen bonding to adsorb water. However, abundant micro–nanostructures were formed during the process of photoreduction on the RGO surface. On the other hand, the special structure provided more space for water molecules to enter and adsorb due to fewer hydrophilic groups on the RGO layer. Therefore, under conditions of high humidity, due to the anisotropic water adsorption between the two sides, the larger layer spacing of the RGO side would lead to the GO/RGO ribbon bending to the GO side.
 Fig. 14  Photographs of the resultant GO/RGO bilayer structure viewed from the front (a) and the reverse side (b), respectively. SEM images of the (c) GO side and (d) RGO side. The insets show water droplet contact angles of both sides. (e) SEM image of the cross-sectional view of the GO/RGO bilayer structure. (f and g) High-resolution SEM images of the RGO side80 (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Inspired by arthropods, Han et al. reported the facile preparation of humidity/thermal/light multi-responsive graphene actuators by the sequential vacuum filtration of GO and RGO aqueous solutions.85 This study was not limited to single stimulus actuation, and a multi-responsive actuator was achieved. To demonstrate the application of responsive GO/RGO paper in biomimetic actuators, a humidity/thermal/light-responsive graphene “insect” was designed and fabricated by combining GO/RGO ribbons with different responsive properties. The concept map for the graphene “insect” responding to the humidity, thermal, and light changes in the surroundings is shown in Fig. 15a. In their study, When the light was on and humidity was off, the transformation from the curled state to the straight state of GO/RGO paper ribbons was quick (3.3 s), and the right GO/RGO legs moved forward, and the position of the paper became lower. When the light was off and humidity was on, GO/RGO ribbons changed from the straight state to the curled state, and the left GO/RGO legs moved forward and pushed the green tube forward (Fig. 15b). More importantly, since the thermal or photothermal effect was capable of accelerating the water desorption, the bilayer actuators were also responsive to heat and light. The horizontal displacement and the vertical displacement of test point 1 (Fig. 15b) versus time are shown in Fig. 15c and d, respectively. Fig. 15e shows the horizontal displacement of test point 2 versus time. After five cycles, the whole green tube moved about 3 cm in 24 s.
 Fig. 15  (a) Concept map for the graphene “insect” responding to the humidity, thermal, and light changes in the surroundings. Three ribbons curl differently under high humidity (97% RH, right images) and become straight under high light power (97% RH, left images). (b) The graphene “insect” was manipulated by the humidity and light changes in the surroundings. Each grid is 5 mm. (c) The horizontal displacement of test point 1 versus time in panel (b). (d) The vertical displacement of test point 1 versus time in panel (b). (e) The horizontal displacement of the tube (test point 2) versus time in panel (b) (reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from WILEY-VCH). 
4.4 Flexible electronics
Rapid development in flexible electronics has yielded an entirely new class of electronic devices with unique functionalities as compared to conventional devices.86 However, to our best knowledge, there is almost no research on pure inorganic paper as a flexible electronic device. Thus, in this section, we will briefly illustrate the recent research progress of inorganic paper, especially carbon-based inorganic paper combined with other materials.
Ba et al.87 used karaya glue as a bio-inspired exfoliant to produce a highly dispersed multilayer graphene solution via an environmentally friendly and cost-effective method. Due to the adhesive properties of the gum and the functional groups of the graphene sheet on the paper surface, the synthesized graphene aqueous solution can be applied on the paper sheet by dipping or brushing technology. The synthesized composite material showed high mechanical strength and high conductivity in many downstream applications. Electronic circuits could be produced on graphene–paper composites by controlling the graphene deposition or by post-etching with a laser with high lateral resolution. The designed smart graphene paper was experimentally tested in different electronic applications, such as light-weight conductive circuits and flexible keyboards that can be directly connected to computers, thus opening up a new pathway for the development of connected objects in daily life. Mundinamani et al.88 reported the synthesis of multilayer reduced graphene by chemical and thermal methods using oxide flakes as a substrate in the field of molecular electronic device manufacturing. The schematic representation of the preparation of multilayer graphene oxide sheets is shown in Fig. 16. In their research, 1-dodecanethiol (1-DT) molecules were used to covalently bond graphene oxide (GO) to the reduced surface atoms to form molecular electronic devices. The reduction of graphene oxide–metal junctions by metal–organic molecules exhibited a significant reduction in the current level, and weaker diode performance. This study demonstrated that the reduced multilayer GO could become a promising substrate in the field of future molecular electronics.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the preparation of multilayer graphene oxide sheets (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
The latest developments in nanomaterials and nanofabrication have made the development of flexible wearable electronic products possible. However, the existing manufacturing method still relies on a multi-step, complex process, as well as clean-room equipment. Kwon et al.89 reported that the manufacturing process could realize the wireless, multi-layer, seamless interconnection of all-printed, nanomembrane hybrid electronics (p-NHE). This work was the first demonstration of a fully printed nanofilm electronic device using a variety of nanomaterials to construct high-performance, wearable sensors and wireless circuits. The functionalized conductive graphene (FCG) nanomaterials with biocompatibility and high aspect ratio could provide excellent conformal fit on human skin, record electromyograms (EMG) with high fidelity, and provide reliable solderability by preventing Ag oxidation. A comprehensive set of experimental and computational studies verified the mechanical stretchability of the sensor and the flexibility of the circuit to withstand the dynamic multi-modal strain from wearable applications. The machine learning integration with wearable p-NHE demonstrated multiple cases of human–machine interface (HMI) use, including the optimal selection of three sensor channels from a larger electrode cluster. These methods showed the successful detection of all finger movements in seven categories, with an accuracy of about 99%. In their study, they used three p-NHEs and mounted them on three physiologically relevant muscles (Fig. 17a). Each finger motion would lead to the signal strength, forming an EMG heat map (Fig. 17b). The representative EMG signals from four gestures, including open hand, closed hand and index finger flexion and wrist flexion are provided in Fig. 17c. Therefore, in the design of polymer carbon-based composite systems, especially in applications of flexible sensors, asymmetric composites can contribute to the respective performance advantages of polymers and carbon-based materials. He et al. reported a mass-producible and all-solution processable, yet simple and environmentally friendly strategy for high-performance piezo-resistive pressure sensors based on highly conductive self-assembled graphene (ISG) film.90 The graphene film was used as a sensing layer to form an asymmetric composite structure with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer with a micro–nano structure. The conductivity and thickness of the sensing layer could be well controlled by adjusting the number of assembled layers. The as-prepared sensor exhibited excellent comprehensive performance, unprecedented high, yet tunable, sensitivity (1.04–1875.5 kPa−1) in a large linear detection range (1–40 kPa), good stability and ultra-high signal-to-noise ratio (78 db). Based on these excellent performances, a universal, high-precision, wearable wireless pulse monitoring system was constructed. Compared with commercial wearable pulse sensors, the sensor system has the advantages of high precision and resistance to body movement interference. It can also be used in daily exercise (during running or while riding a bicycle) for the real-time detection of the arterial pulse signal, which is expected to be used for personalized diagnosis.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration (top) showing target muscles on the forearm for recognizing multiple gestures and (bottom) a photo capturing three p-NHEs positioned on targeted muscles, including the palmaris longus, brachioradialis, and flexor carpi ulnaris. The enlarged image shows one of those systems with a circuit and electrodes. (b) EMG mapping data showing RMS signals from multiple channels that cover the entire forearm. (c) Representative EMG signals from four gestures, including open hand, closed hand (left graphs) and index finger flexion and wrist flexion (right graphs) (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Nature). 
4.5 Energy harvesting and storage
Supercapacitors store energy through electrostatic attraction and have the advantages of high-power density, fast charging and discharging, and long service life. They are widely used in backup energy storage equipment, portable equipment and hybrid electric vehicles. As a two-dimensional carbon-based material with high conductivity, stable chemical properties and large specific surface area, graphene is considered to be an ideal material for supercapacitors following carbon nanotubes. Conductivity and special surface area (SSA) are the most important factors for supercapacitor electrode materials and determine the possible active areas contributing to the energy storage.
Ferrero et al. reported the fabrication of free-standing, flexible graphene paper applied in high-performance flexible supercapacitors.91 The supercapacitor prepared by graphene paper showed a high areal capacitance (114 mF cm−2) at current densities as high as 1200 mA cm−2, an excellent rate performance (60% retention at 1200 mA cm−2), as well as a long cycling life (retention of 96% after 5000 cycles). More importantly, the transformation of a large amount of energy (15 μW h cm−2) at an ultra-high-power density of 500 mW cm−2 was realized for the graphene paper-based supercapacitor. To improve the electrochemical performance, nitrogen,92 boron93 and sulfur94 are usually used in the doping of graphene. Wen et al. fabricated a flexible free-standing nitrogen-doped graphene paper (N-GP) via a facile hydrothermal approach with the doping reaction occurring at the solid/gas interface of graphene oxide paper (GOP) and ammonia vapor.95 In their study, the concentrated ammonia water in the autoclave was regarded as the doping and reducing agent. When applied in lithium-ion batteries (LIB), the N-GP showed considerable reversible capacity, good rate performance and cycling stability. Even after 100 cycles, the reversible capacity of N-GP was 287.6 mA h g−1, which was also higher than the initial charge capacity of GP (254.1 mA h g−1). The corresponding mechanism of N-GP with electrochemical properties could be explained as follows. On the one hand, the introduction of nitrogen atoms produced more lone pair electrons, improving the electronic conductivity and electron mobility of graphene.96 On the other hand, the electronegativity of nitrogen could effectively improve the adsorption energy and decrease the energy barrier for Li+ intercalation.97
To pursue higher performance and strengthen the cycling stability of supercapacitors, Jiao et al. fabricated free-standing GP@NiO and GP@Ni hybrid GPs by encapsulating NiO nanoclusters and Ni nanoparticles into graphene sheets through electrostatic assembly and subsequent vacuum filtration.98 Compared with the GP electrode, the as-prepared GP@NiO and GP@Ni electrodes in this study showed higher specific capacitances (306.9 and 246.1 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) than the GP electrode (185.7 F g−1). It is worth noting that even after 1000 cycles, the two types of electrode still possessed capacitance retention of 98.7% and 95.6%, respectively, indicating the superior cycling stability. Tan et al. reported a facile and cost-effective approach to synthesizing carbon fiber paper (CFP)-based electrodes coated with reduced graphene oxide (RGO) by vacuum filtration and carbonization.99 In their study, the aim of treatment with H2SO4 was to produce oxygen-containing groups on carbon fiber paper, strengthening the hydrophilic properties. The as-prepared CFP/RGO paper used as a binder-free electrode possessed a high capacitance of 590 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 and the CFP/RGO electrode retained 97.9% of its initial capacitance, even after 3000 cycles. Ma et al. showed that a unique ordered graphene/CNT structure with CNTs directly deposited in the amplified space between the layers of graphene paper was established using a novel vacuum-assisted method.100 The layers of graphene were stretched and the CNTs were uniformly deposited between the reopened layers of the graphene paper, achieving the creation of a three-dimensional layered structure. In their study, the graphene dispersion was filtered and pressed to form graphene paper (GA). The addition of urea/Ni precursor and vacuum-assisted calcination facilitated the formation of MGCP. For better comparison, without the addition of urea, the GCP sample was prepared. From Fig. 18a, we see that the SSA values of the three samples were 3.2 m2 g−1, 152.4 m2 g−1 and 262.1 m2 g−1, respectively. The capacitance of MGCP was 170.8 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. The inorganic paper displayed cycle durability even after 10000 cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  (a) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms for GP, GCP and MGCP. (b) Average specific capacitance versus cycle number for GP, GCP and MGCP at the current density of 1 A g−1 (reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier). 
5. Conclusion and perspectives
In this review, we have made a brief discussion on the research progress of cellulose-based paper. Simultaneously, in terms of raw materials and preparation processes, we propose the shortcomings and challenges faced by the cellulose paper-making fields. Based on these problems, as a small branch of nano-paper, inorganic paper, has attracted widespread attention. Thus, we have summarized the recent progress in biomimetic inorganic paper in detail, especially in the past three years.
Paper constructed from traditional plant fibers such as wood, due to the hydrophilic properties, the constructed cellulose-based paper is easily wetted by water or burned by fire. Cellulose-based paper, due to a large number of hydroxyl groups on the surface, has reduced strength. In this case, researchers used surface spraying and other methods to modify the paper, giving the cellulose-based paper its superhydrophobic and even superoleophobic properties. However, there are still some problems in the entire field. Firstly, most of the raw materials for paper come from plants, and plants play a vital role in the balance of the human ecology. Secondly, most of the papermaking process is relatively complicated, and environmental pollution caused by the papermaking process is inevitable. Thirdly, most of the functionalization of paper is achieved by spraying on the surface, and such performance is difficult to guarantee both internally and externally.
It may be a development trend in the papermaking field in the future to construct inorganic materials through new methods. In this review, new fabrication methods and original concepts have been put forward in the field of biomimetic inorganic paper, which lay the foundation for the construction of multifunctional inorganic paper. The raw materials can be extended to hydroxyapatite (HAP)-based, silicon-based, carbon-based, as well as metal–organic framework (MOF)-based materials becoming promising candidates in the fabrication of inorganic paper. In terms of applications, the function of the as-prepared inorganic paper is no longer just being writable, but can be applied to many emerging fields, including fire-resistance and anti-bacterial properties, pollutant treatment, actuators, flexible electronics, as well as energy harvesting and storage. Finally, the raw materials of cellulose-based paper are mostly trees. Based on the perspective of sustainable development, we expect that more studies will be conducted in this field and the connection between paper-making technologies and chemistry will be enhanced.
Changes remain for the future development of inorganic paper. From the perspective of inorganic paper, construction costs and large-scale preparation need to be considered under realistic conditions. As for HAP-based inorganic paper, the construction of hydroxyapatite nanowires with a larger aspect ratio and the enhancement of the flexibility of HAP-based inorganic paper should be the focus of research. For silicon-based inorganic paper, its unique advantages, such as low weight, high permeability, high surface area, extraordinary robust flexibility, and large porosity need to be fully utilized. For carbon-based inorganic paper, most studies have focused on graphene. The new process and construction method to improve its crystalline state is of great significance to its industrial processing. For MOF-based inorganic paper, cost-effective design strategies and MOF-based paper with high porosity should be developed for promoting their industrial applications. Future efforts should focus on the development of inorganic paper, exploring new raw materials and also expanding their multifunctional applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51675513 and 51735013).
References
L. Peng, Y. Meng and H. Li, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 2073–2085 Search PubMed .
M. Agarwal, Y. Lvov and K. Varahramyan, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5319–5325 Search PubMed .
B. Balu, V. Breedveld and D. W. Hess, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4785–4790 Search PubMed .
J. W. Han, B. Kim, J. Li and M. Meyyappan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22094–22097 Search PubMed .
B. Fugetsu, E. Sano, M. Sunada, Y. Sambongi, T. Shibuya, X. Wang and T. Hiraki, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1256–1258 Search PubMed .
G. Kwon, J. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Ko, Y. Yamauchi and J. You, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 4935–4944 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Jing, Y. Shan, X. Ge, X. Mu, Y. Jiang, H. Li and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17483–17490 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Yang, K. Cui, L. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Liu and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19611–19620 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. O. Carlsson, P. Tammela, K. Hua, P. Zhang, L. Nyholm and M. Strømme, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7563–7571 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. K. Kim, E. Chalkova, F. Mark, S. N. Lvov and T. M. Chung, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5937–5946 Search PubMed .
S. T. Krauss, V. C. Holt and J. P. Landers, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 246, 740–747 Search PubMed .
A. Akbari, J. C. Remigy and P. Aptel, Chem. Eng. Process., 2002, 41, 601–609 Search PubMed .
C. P. Feng, L. B. Chen, G. L. Tian, L. Bai, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, K. Ke, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123784 Search PubMed .
Q. Wen, F. Guo, F. Yang and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 497, 284–289 Search PubMed .
H. Koga, N. Namba, T. Takahashi, M. Nogi and Y. Nishina, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2560–2565 Search PubMed .
Y. Si and Z. Guo, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30776–30784 Search PubMed .
B. Musikavanhu, Z. Hu, R. L. Dzapata, Y. Xu, P. Christie, D. Guo and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143648–143656 Search PubMed .
H. Li, J. Yang, P. Li, T. Q. Lan and L. C. Peng, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 160, 9–17 Search PubMed .
N. N. Wang, D. S. Xiong, S. Pan, Y. L. Deng, Y. Shi and K. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 354–360 Search PubMed .
S. Nie, H. Guo, Y. Lu, J. Zhou and J. Mo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 2000454–2000462 Search PubMed .
J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, J. Huo and X. Hou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4168–4217 Search PubMed .
L. Li, V. Breedveld and D. W. Hess, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5381–5386 Search PubMed .
L. Bergamonti, M. Potenza, A. H. Poshtiri, A. Lorenzi, A. M. Sanangelantoni, L. Lazzarini, P. P. Lottici and C. Graiff, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 231, 115773 Search PubMed .
A. Khan, Z. Abas, H. S. Kim and J. Kim, Sensors, 2016, 16, 1172 Search PubMed .
S. M. Cao, X. Feng, Y. Y. Song, H. J. Liu, M. Miao, J. H. Fang and L. Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1073–1079 Search PubMed .
Z. Z. Li, W. X. Liu, F. X. Guan, G. D. Li, Z. P. Song, D. H. Yu, H. L. Wang and H. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 214, 26–33 Search PubMed .
T. T. Tsai, T. H. Huang, C. J. Chang, N. Y. J. Ho, Y. T. Tseng and C. F. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Li, X. H. Yang, W. Li and H. B. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 210, 350–363 Search PubMed .
F. F. Chen, Y. J. Zhu, Z. C. Xiong, T. W. Sun and Y. Q. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34715–34724 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Jiang, Y. J. Zhu, F. Chen and J. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 6098–6102 Search PubMed .
J. Y. He, K. S. Zhang, S. B. Wu, X. G. Cai, K. Chen, Y. L. Li, B. Sun, Y. Jia, F. L. Meng, Z. Jin, L. T. Kong and J. H. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 303, 119–130 Search PubMed .
F. Chen and Y. J. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11483–11495 Search PubMed .
B. Q. Lu, Y. J. Zhu and F. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1242–1246 Search PubMed .
F. F. Chen, Y. J. Zhu, Z. C. Xiong, T. W. Sun and Y. Q. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34715–34724 Search PubMed .
G. Wen and Z. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7042–7052 Search PubMed .
S. L. Chou, Y. Zhao, J. Z. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Liu and S. Dou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15862–15867 Search PubMed .
G. Li, J. Ma, G. Peng, W. Chen, Z. Chu, Y. Li, T. Hu and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22673–22679 Search PubMed .
C. L. Pang, H. Cui, G. W. Yang and C. X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4708–4714 Search PubMed .
C. L. Pang, H. Cui and C. X. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4082–4085 Search PubMed .
L. David, R. Bhandavat, U. Barrera and G. Singh, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Yao, X. L. Zeng, G. R. Pan, J. J. Sun, J. T. Hu, Y. Huang, R. Sun, J. B. Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31248–31255 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Y. Huang, Z. W. Hu, P. K. Jiang, S. T. Li and T. Tanaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4396–4403 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, H. Ju and J. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 123, 99–105 Search PubMed .
J. J. Chen, X. Liao, M. M. Wang, Z. X. Liu, J. D. Zhang, L. J. Ding, L. Gao and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6374–6379 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, Y. Zou, C. H. Li, J. A. Liu and Y. S. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2020, 269, 127444 Search PubMed .
J. X. Dai, J. J. Sha, Z. F. Zhang, Y. C. Wang and W. Krenkel, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 9637–9641 Search PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 Search PubMed .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Gao, Q. J. Zhai, R. Barrett, N. S. Dalal, H. W. Kroto and S. F. A. Acquah, Carbon, 2013, 64, 544–547 Search PubMed .
L. F. Li, F. Wang, J. F. Zhu and W. L. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 14880–14887 Search PubMed .
M. L. Zhang, S. Inoue and Y. Matsumura, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 747, 137367 Search PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, X. L. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. J. Zhang, C. Ge, L. Zhao, X. J. Wang, H. Y. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. M. Wang and L. T. Sun, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 793–799 Search PubMed .
X. B. Cao, D. P. Qi, S. Y. Yin, J. Bu, F. J. Li, C. F. Goh, S. Zhang and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2957–2962 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Dong, C. G. Hu, L. Song, X. K. Huang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1470–1476 Search PubMed .
J. J. Shao, W. Lv and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5586–5612 Search PubMed .
J. H. Ding, H. R. Zhao, Q. L. Wang, H. M. Dou, H. Chen and H. B. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16871–16878 Search PubMed .
C. Teng, D. Xie, J. F. Wang, Z. Yang, G. Y. Ren and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700240 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Wan, P. L. Zhu, S. H. Yu, R. Sun, C. P. Wong and W. H. Liao, Carbon, 2017, 122, 74–81 Search PubMed .
F. Xu, R. F. Chen, Z. S. Lin, X. X. Sun, S. S. Wang, W. L. Yin, Q. Y. Peng, Y. B. Li and X. D. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12321–12328 Search PubMed .
P. Li, M. C. Yang, Y. J. Liu, H. S. Qin, J. G. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. L. Liu, F. X. Meng, J. H. Lin, F. Wang and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Wang, H. Fin, Q. Ma, K. Mo, H. Z. Mao, A. Feldhoff, X. Z. Cao, Y. S. Li, F. S. Pan and Z. Y. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4365–4369 Search PubMed .
S. Zhou, Y. Y. Wei, L. B. Li, Y. F. Duan, Q. Q. Hou, L. L. Zhang, L. X. Ding, J. Xue, H. H. Wang and J. Caro, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau1393 Search PubMed .
A. Knebel, B. Geppert, K. Volgmann, D. I. Kolokolov, A. G. Stepanov, J. Twiefel, P. Heitjans, D. Volkmer and J. Caro, Science, 2017, 358, 347–351 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Cao, V. Liu and A. B. Farimani, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8638–8643 Search PubMed .
G. Wen, X. Y. Gao, P. Tian, L. S. Zhong, Z. L. L. Wang and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 346, 94–103 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Dong and Y. J. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 4597–4604 Search PubMed .
F. Chen, J. X. Zhang, N. Li, C. Zhang, B. Ji, L. H. Hu, T. T. Zhao, Z. Y. Wang and S. D. Zhang, Mater. Des., 2018, 144, 281–289 Search PubMed .
F. F. Chen, Y. J. Zhu, F. Chen, L. Y. Dong, R. L. Yang and Z. C. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3159–3171 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, B. Yuan, Y. Zhan, H. Dai, S. He and X. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 252, 123292–123300 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, B. Yuan, Y. Wang, S. Shang, X. Chen, H. Tao and Y. Zhan, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 112111 Search PubMed .
P. P. Zhang, J. Li, L. X. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, G. S. Shi, J. Shen, B. Q. Peng, B. W. Zhang, Y. Z. Wang, F. G. Bian, J. J. Wang, D. Y. Li, Z. Qian, G. Xu, G. P. Liu, J. R. Zeng, L. J. Zhang, Y. Z. Yang, G. Q. Zhou, M. H. Wu, W. Q. Jin, J. Y. Li and H. P. Fang, Nature, 2017, 550, 415–418 Search PubMed .
Z. C. Xiong, Y. J. Zhu, D. D. Qin, F. F. Chen and R. L. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803387–1803398 Search PubMed .
H. Kalita, H. Tyagi and M. Aslam, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2020, 6, 963–975 Search PubMed .
S. Shi, Y. Bian, L. Zhang and C. Chen, Indoor air, 2017, 27, 1190–1200 Search PubMed .
R. Zhang, C. Liu, P. C. Hsu, C. Zhang, N. Liu, J. Zhang, H. R. Lee, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3642–3649 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, X. Feng, H. W. Li, J. W. Zhou and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5785–5788 Search PubMed .
G. Wen, X. Y. Gao and Z. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21524–21531 Search PubMed .
D. D. Han, Y. L. Zhang, H. B. Jiang, H. Xia, J. Feng, Q. D. Chen, H. L. Xu and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 332–338 Search PubMed .
L. Guo, H. B. Jiang, R. Q. Shao, Y. L. Zhang, S. Y. Xie, J. N. Wang, X. B. Li, F. Jiang, Q. D. Chen, T. Zhang and H. B. Sun, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1667–1673 Search PubMed .
H. H. Cheng, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10482–10486 Search PubMed .
R. R. Nair, H. A. Wu, P. N. Jayaram, I. V. Grigorieva and A. K. Geim, Science, 2012, 335, 442–444 Search PubMed .
H. B. Jiang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Y. Li, Y. Y. Song, D. D. Han and L. Q. Ran, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 464 Search PubMed .
D. D. Han, Y. Q. Liu, J. N. Ma, J. W. Mao, Z. D. Chen, Y. L. Zhang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800258 Search PubMed .
M. Ratner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 378–381 Search PubMed .
H. Ba, C. Sutter, V. Papaefthimiou, S. Zafeiratos, A. Bahouka, Y. Lafue, L. Nguyen-Dinh, T. Romero and C. Pham-Huu, Carbon, 2020, 167, 169–180 Search PubMed .
S. Mundinamani, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 17479–17485 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Kwon, Y. S. Kim, S. Kwon, M. Mahmood, H. R. Lim, S. W. Park, S. O. Kang, J. J. Choi, R. Herbert, Y. C. Jang, Y. H. Choa and W. H. Yeo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. He, P. Xiao, W. Lu, J. W. Shi, L. Zhang, Y. Liang, C. F. Pan, S. W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 422–433 Search PubMed .
G. A. Ferrero, M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 1055–1063 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Wang and X. J. Lv, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15473–15479 Search PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 Search PubMed .
W. Ai, Z. Luo, J. Jiang, J. Zhu, Z. Du, Z. Fan, L. Xie, H. Zhang, W. Huang and T. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6186–6192 Search PubMed .
H. Wen, B. B. Guo, W. B. Kang and C. H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14032–14039 Search PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Li, Z. Zhou and L. B. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 104703 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Jiao, Q. L. Hao, X. F. Xia, W. Lei, Y. Ouyang, H. T. Ye and D. Mandler, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 907–915 Search PubMed .
S. Tan, J. Li, L. Zhou, P. Chen and Z. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 233, 278–281 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, J. Yang, J. Zhang, G. Chen, C. Miao, L. Shi, L. Wang and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 982–989 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Gang Wen	Mr Gang Wen joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2016. He is focused on designing and fabricating multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces and studying their corresponding applications.
Zhiguang Guo	Professor Zhiguang Guo received his Ph.D. from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. He subsequently joined Hubei University. From Oct 2007 to Aug 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctoral fellow. From Sep 2008 to Mar 2011, he worked at Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. From Feb 2009 to Feb 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. He is now a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. He has published more than 300 papers about the interfaces of materials.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic overview of this field, from cellulose-based superwetting paper to biomimetic multifunctional inorganic paper.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of superhydrophobic paper. SEM images of (b) filter paper, (c) silica/paper composite, and (d) PFOTES-silica/paper composite (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the WILEY-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) High-resolution SEM images of a 10HW handsheet processed using sec-butanol before etching. (b) Droplets of four test fluids (water (dyed blue), ethylene glycol, motor oil and n-hexadecane (dyed red)) exhibited a spherical shape (reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The stainless steel autoclave used in the large-scale synthesis of ultralong HAP nanowires, and the as-prepared solvothermal product slurry containing ultralong HAP nanowires. (b) Digital images of ultralong HAP nanowires separated from the solvothermal product slurry and dispersed in ethanol. (c–e) SEM micrographs of randomly distributed ultralong HAP nanowires (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  A schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of superhydrophobic PFDS-paper@ZnO from HAP nanowires.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic diagram of the vertical high-frequency induction furnace. The direction of gas flow is marked by the yellow dashed lines. The location where Si nanowires grow is marked by a red circle. (b and c) Growth mechanism of Si nanowires and FTS-SiNWsP under the action of carrier gas flow. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the FTS-SiNWsP@graphene electrode (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 
2C(g) + O2(g) = 2CO(g)
2Si(g) + O2(g) = 2SiO(g)
SiO(g) + 2C(g) = SiC(s) + CO(g)
SiO(g) + 3CO(g) = SiC(s) + 2CO2(g)

 	Fig. 7  (a) A photograph of SiC nanowire paper of about 10 cm in diameter. (b) The SiC nanowire paper can be easily rolled, showing great flexibility. (c) SiC nanowire paper of about 4 cm in diameter. (d) A piece of as-prepared SiC nanowire paper (diameter of ∼4 cm, thickness of ∼0.3 mm) is able to withstand a weight of ∼20 g without breaking (reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the ZnO nanoparticles. (b) The photo of a synthesized flexible MWCNT-NH2/benzoquinone cross-linked paper with embedded ZnO nanoparticles. (c) A schematic of the surface of the piezoelectric paper (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic illustration of the pressing process of the graphene paper. (b) SEM image of the GA with an inset that shows an optical photograph of the GA. (c) SEM image of the GA under 50% compression. (d) SEM image of a section of the TAGP; the three insets show the flexibility of the TAGP. (e) A bent section of the TAGP. (f) An in-plane view of the folded graphene sheets. (g) A cross-sectional view of the folded graphene sheets (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The electrochemical cell for membrane growth by FCDS. The substrate serves as a cathode in the electrochemical system. (b) Schematic illustration of the ZIF-8 membrane growth via FCDS in comparison with solvothermal growth. In the solvothermal route, zinc ions and linkers assemble into the normal ZIF-8_I3m phase. With the local in situ electric field that was formed around the support by the current, inborn lattice distortion occurs and the stiff polymorph ZIF-8_Cm is formed (reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The surface plate of E. coli. (b) The residual amount of bacteria on the superhydrophobic paper. (c) The residual amount of bacteria on the surface plate after the in vitro antibacterial assay. (d) The surface plate of S. aureus. (e) The residual amount of bacteria on the raw paper. (f) The residual amount of bacteria on the surface plate after the in vitro antibacterial assay.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the alarm lamp, alarm buzzer, and electrons in the electrical circuit after thermal treatment of the FAW with the GO thermosensitive sensor at different temperatures for 3 min (RT: room temperature). (b) Corresponding digital pictures (reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  UV-vis spectra of the filtrate (a) on MB adsorption before and after the filtration through the GO− paper and (b) on MO adsorption before and after the filtration through the GO+ paper (reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  Photographs of the resultant GO/RGO bilayer structure viewed from the front (a) and the reverse side (b), respectively. SEM images of the (c) GO side and (d) RGO side. The insets show water droplet contact angles of both sides. (e) SEM image of the cross-sectional view of the GO/RGO bilayer structure. (f and g) High-resolution SEM images of the RGO side80 (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Concept map for the graphene “insect” responding to the humidity, thermal, and light changes in the surroundings. Three ribbons curl differently under high humidity (97% RH, right images) and become straight under high light power (97% RH, left images). (b) The graphene “insect” was manipulated by the humidity and light changes in the surroundings. Each grid is 5 mm. (c) The horizontal displacement of test point 1 versus time in panel (b). (d) The vertical displacement of test point 1 versus time in panel (b). (e) The horizontal displacement of the tube (test point 2) versus time in panel (b) (reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from WILEY-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the preparation of multilayer graphene oxide sheets (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration (top) showing target muscles on the forearm for recognizing multiple gestures and (bottom) a photo capturing three p-NHEs positioned on targeted muscles, including the palmaris longus, brachioradialis, and flexor carpi ulnaris. The enlarged image shows one of those systems with a circuit and electrodes. (b) EMG mapping data showing RMS signals from multiple channels that cover the entire forearm. (c) Representative EMG signals from four gestures, including open hand, closed hand (left graphs) and index finger flexion and wrist flexion (right graphs) (reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Nature).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms for GP, GCP and MGCP. (b) Average specific capacitance versus cycle number for GP, GCP and MGCP at the current density of 1 A g−1 (reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
