Progress in and application prospects of advanced and cost-effective iron (Fe)-based cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA10610K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA10610K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1938-1969Progress in and application prospects of advanced and cost-effective iron (Fe)-based cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries

        
          
            Xuan 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Swagata 
            Roy
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qinhao 
            Shi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yufeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. E-mail: yufengzhao@shu.edu.cn; jiujun.zhang@i.shu.edu.cn
bInstitute for Sustainable Energy & College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
Received 
      31st October 2020
    , Accepted 1st December 2020First published on 8th December 2020AbstractSodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have received extensive attention in recent years and are expected to become one of the alternatives to lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Among the various cathode materials for SIBs, iron-based materials have become the most suitable ones for grid-scale energy storage-conversion systems due to the rich natural abundance of sodium, low cost, high safety, and non-toxicity. To date, many studies have been conducted on iron-based cathode materials, and some progress has been made. To facilitate further research and development of such types of iron-based SIB cathode materials toward practical applications, we have prepared this comprehensive review to better understand the properties of various iron-based cathode materials and further improve their electrochemical performance. In this paper, the research progress in iron-based cathode materials for SIBs, including oxides, polyanionic compounds, Prussian blue compounds, and Na-free cathode materials, is systematically summarized in terms of their synthesis, characterization, functional mechanisms, and performance validation/optimization. Several technical challenges are analyzed with the proposed strategies for overcoming the challenges toward practical applications of iron-based cathode materials in SIBs.
1. Introduction
Energy and the environment are always the two most important subjects in the world. At present, the annual consumption of fossil fuel energy (coal, oil and natural gas) accounts for more than 85% of the total global energy consumption.1 However, the booming demand for energy and the uncontrolled exploitation of fossil fuels will inevitably lead to fast depletion of fossil fuels. At the same time, the overuse of fossil energy can be responsible for ecological problems such as environmental pollution, the greenhouse effect, smog, etc.2,3 Therefore, exploration of clean and sustainable energy sources such as solar, wind, waterfall, geothermal, etc. and their associated energy storage and conversion systems has turned out to be a crucial prerequisite for sustainable development of mankind.4,5 Among the various methods of energy storage and conversation, electrochemical energy technologies can be thought of as the most convenient, efficient and practical options. Among the different electrochemical energy technologies, including zinc–air batteries,6–9 lithium-ion batteries,10,11 sodium-ion batteries,12–14 potassium-ion batteries,15–17etc., lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been successfully applied in smartphones, digital cameras, power tools and other fields because of their excellent performances, such as high energy density, high operating voltage, long cycle life and environmental benignity.18–20 However, the lithium used in LIBs is limited in the earth's crust, with a mass abundance of only 0.006%. According to statistics, global lithium consumption has reached 0.35 million tons in 2019. Compared with the huge market demand, the existing lithium resources are relatively limited. LIBs are widely used in electric vehicles and large-scale power energy storage. The inevitable drawback of depletion of lithium resources in the near future on account of its massive consumption is on the cards. Therefore, it is necessary to search for a new energy storage system which can be effective enough to replace the lithium-ion batteries and this has led to the introduction of sodium-ion batteries.
In recent years, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have attracted extensive attention worldwide due to their abundant resources, low price, and environmental friendliness, thus providing newer possibilities in the electrochemical energy storage domains.21 SIBs are battery systems that were proposed back in the 1970s.22 In fact, research on SIBs started at almost the same time as that on LIBs. The scarcity of lithium resources has encouraged present-day researchers towards the development of SIBs, carving out a massive impact in the modern energy research fraternity. After several years of research, some promising high-performance cathode material systems have emerged, such as transition metal oxides21,23–25 and polyanion-type26–28 and Prussian blue compounds.29–32 However, due to the larger ionic radius and higher standard electrochemical potential of Na/Na+ (compared with Li/Li+), SIBs always exhibit lower energy density than LIBs. However, SIBs have certain advantages in large-scale energy storage. Fig. 1 shows the energy storage methods and applications of SIBs in our daily life when used as an energy storage device. SIBs are expected to utilize and store wind power, thermal power, solar power and hydroelectric power and can be a definite source to meet the electricity demands in our daily lives.
 Fig. 1  The mode of energy storage and energy output for sodium-ion batteries. 
Considering SIB applications in large energy storage sectors, their cost and environmental impact must be controlled reasonably. In this regard, some advanced research has been conducted in the quest for high-performance cathodes that can be procured from abundant and low-cost resources. Iron has many advantages in terms of natural abundance, refining production and price and would clearly be the most logical choice for a redox center of cathode materials of SIBs. Utilizing the valence redox reaction of iron, the potential of the iron-based cathode material can be as high as 3.5 V which can achieve high energy density.28,33 The valence distribution of iron is mainly from 0 to +6, of which 0, +2 and +3 valence states are more common and +4, +5 and +6 are rare. The 3d and 4s electrons of iron have relatively closer energy to the outer electron orbits of sodium ions. Thus, SIBs mainly use the redox reaction between ferrous and ferric ions (Fe2+/Fe3+). These superior chemical properties have gained widespread attention and propelled major research on iron-based cathodes. On account of the numerous advantages and amazing commercial prospects of iron-based cathodes, an elaborate guidance on the progress in selection of commercial iron-based cathode materials is an indispensable need for a comprehensive review of the recent progress in such materials for cathodes of SIBs.
In this review, we have mainly summarized the core research on various iron-based positive electrode materials for SIBs, such as layered NaFeO2 and its analogous oxides and polyanionic and Prussian blue compounds. Moreover, we have also discussed the development of some sodium-free cathodes. The crystal structures, synthetic methods, characterization, electrochemical properties, reaction mechanisms and performance optimization of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs will also be explored in this review. In addition, strategies for improving the electrochemical performance of some typical materials in each category have also been discussed. Most prominently, we have analyzed the main technical challenges hindering the further performance improvement of the materials and devices, proposed several possible research directions for overcoming the challenges, and predicted the commercialization prospects of different types of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs.
2. Cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries
When compared with anodes, the development of positive electrodes for LIBs/SIBs is always more critical. Different preparation methods and procedures can cause significant differences in the performances of the constructed cathodes of SIBs, that is, the quality of the cathodes directly determines the final performance of SIBs. On the other hand, the cathode materials account for around 40% of the whole battery cost. In this regard, reducing the cost of cathode materials is also necessary. Henceforth, improvements of cathode materials and their further exploration are very meaningful. The selection principles of sodium storage cathodes are based on several factors, such as34,35 (1) high specific capacity, (2) high redox potential, (3) suitable tunnel structures which are conducive for sodium ion insertion and extraction, (4) good structural stability, (5) good electronic and ionic conductivity, and (6) low price, abundant resources and an environmentally benign nature.36 Fortunately, iron-based cathodes can meet most of these aforesaid requirements. Therefore, some iron-based cathode materials have great commercial prospects and deserve more investigation. Fig. 2 exhibits the main iron-based cathode material crystal structure for SIBs. Due to the large-scale application in the arenas of new energy storage batteries, researchers have once again turned their focus on the investigation of cathode materials for SIBs. Iron-based cathodes have played a very important role in layered oxides, polyanionic compounds, Prussian blue and Na-free cathode materials. The main method of modifying the cathode materials in sodium-ion batteries is doping with transition metal elements such as nickel, cobalt, and manganese to increase the specific capacity of the materials. Moreover, doping with aluminum or magnesium to improve the cycle performance of the materials and coating of a surface carbon layer to improve the conductivity of the materials are also effective approaches. In addition, constructing materials with better electrochemical performance through the secondary self-assembly of material particles is also effective in improving the electrochemical performance of the materials. Considering that the cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries are mainly synthesized by the solid-phase method or the sol–gel method, there are multiple sintering processes needed throughout the whole synthesis process, during which the primary particles can keep growing and the final particle size of the primary particles has a large impact on the electrochemical performance. The primary particles with a smaller particle size have a larger specific surface area and can provide more active sites. Moreover, the smaller particle size can provide shorter sodium ion transmission paths which can improve the rate performance of cathode materials.37 The progress and application prospects of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs will be discussed in detail below.
 Fig. 2  Categories of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs. 
3. Mechanism and characterization of cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries
The working mechanism of sodium-ion batteries (SIB) and lithium-ion batteries (LIB) is basically the same, both of which can realize the mutual conversion of chemical energy and electrical energy through the insertion and extraction of alkali metal ions. Similar to LIBs, highly reversible cathode materials of SIBs function through the intercalation reaction. During charging, Na+ is deintercalated from the cathode material and intercalated into the anode material through the electrolyte, while electrons flow into the negative electrode through an external circuit to maintain charge balance. The discharge process is just the opposite.
In order to better monitor the physical and chemical changes of the electrodes and interfaces for a fundamental understanding, accurate physical characterization using sophisticated instruments is particularly important. With the advanced physical characterization, it will be more convenient to explain the phase transition process related to the crystal structure, local structure, and Na storage mechanism in iron-based cathode material for SIBs. In recent years, much effort has been made to characterize SIBs from different perspectives in various dimensions and scales during the electrochemical processes. Among these characterization methods, X-ray diffraction, the interaction of incident X-ray photons with the electrons of atoms in the sample, has been widely employed. The emitted diffraction can reflect the structural information of the material with an average statistical result. Through XRD characterization, information on the crystal structure, crystallinity, crystal orientation, and superstructure of the material can be obtained. At present, the XRD diffraction detector can achieve millisecond-level recording. For research on SIBs, this existing time resolution level has been suitable for completing most of the in situ XRD experiments. In situ XRD can better analyze the changes in the crystal structure of the cathode material during charge and discharge. However, XRD can only characterize the crystal structure, but is not effective in characterizing the amorphous structure. For amorphous materials, X-ray and neutron pair distribution function (PDF) analyses are powerful tools which can provide local structural information of the electrode materials.
In the process of deintercalating sodium ions in cathode materials, charge compensation can only be completed by the gain and loss of electrons through valence changes of the transition metals. The total number of electrons that can be transferred by transition metal ions and their atomic mass will directly determine the theoretical capacity of the cathode material. Therefore, determining the valence states of various elements in the pristine electrode and their electronic structural evolution during the electrochemical processes is crucial in investigating the charge storage mechanism of electrode materials. Special attention needs to be given to the multielement-oxide systems and materials with multielectron transfer of a single element atom. X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy (XANES) is a technique for calibrating elements and their valence states. The same element in the same valence state has different absorption of specific energy X-rays in different compounds. XANES can be divided into soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (s-XAS) and hard X-ray absorption spectroscopy (h-XAS), and the spatial resolution scale ranges from a few nanometers to millimeters. By comparing the position of the near edge spectrum of h-XAS, the valence state information of the element can be obtained by comparing with a reference compound. The data analysis of the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) can provide information about the local bond length, structural order, and changes in the coordination environment. The emergence of the X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectrum is a great help for studying the coordination environment of iron elements in iron-based cathode materials. Moreover, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometry, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, and Mössbauer spectroscopy (MS) are also used to determine the electronic structure, oxidation state, and local environment information of electrode materials. In addition, the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique is capable of determining the local structure and dynamics of the electrodes for SIBs. From the NMR spectrum of the cathode material, a wealth of information such as chemical information and local charge order and disorder can be obtained, and paramagnetic or metallic materials can also be detected. Moreover, the weak changes in the electronic structure caused by doping can also be detected to reflect the element's chemical state information. Using 23Na NMR, the sodium-ion distribution in the electrode and electrochemical reaction mechanism can be clearly explored. Direct observation of the structural and morphological distribution and evolution of the electrode materials for SIBs is of vital importance to understand their electrochemical behaviors. The morphology is generally characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM) and scanning probe microscopy (SPM). These advanced characterization techniques are quite valuable in providing direct visualization information about the structural/morphological changes caused by the electrochemical process, as well as the Na-ion distribution and diffusion in a wide range of length scales, from the atomic level to the particle level, and even the whole electrode level.
The surface and interface characterization, such as the growth of the solid electrolyte interphase, is also very important. Many in situ or in-operando characterization techniques have been designed and applied for battery research using specially designed cells or systems. These in situ or in-operando experiments are quite important, because they provide timely information about the changes of the materials or components under or close to the operating conditions.
4. Recent advances in iron-based cathode materials for SIBs
4.1 Layered iron-based oxides
When referring to transition metal oxides, the first material that comes to mind is the commercialized LiCoO2. The crystal structure of LiCoO2 belongs to the O3 type, in which the transition metals are stacked along the c axis, while the alkali ions occupy the interlayer octahedral position.38 However, when it comes to SIBs, the classification becomes a bit more complicated. The chemical formula of the layered transition metal oxide can be written as NaxMO2, where M can represent one or more transition metal cations with different valence states. Generally, the crystal structure and physical properties of an x ≤ 1 system are most commonly studied. In such transition metal oxides, the co-edge MO6 octahedra form an (MO2)n layered structure, while the alkali metal ions can be coordinated in the octahedron (O phase) or triangular prism (P phase) between the (MO2)n layers.39,40 Depending on the coordination type of sodium ions and the stacking method of oxygen, the layered transition metal oxides can be divided into different structures, which primarily include O3, P3, O2, and P2 types, out of which the P2 and O3 phases are the most common ones. The capital letters here represent the coordination polyhedron where Na ions are located (O: octahedron; P: triangular prism) and the numbers represent the stacking layers of the least repeating unit of oxygen. The stacking layers of the P2 phase are arranged according to the ABBA pattern and the O3 type denotes the stacking following the ABCABC sequence, as shown in Fig. 3a and b.41,42
 Fig. 3  Crystal structure of (a) O3-phase and (b) P2-phase layered oxides. 
The P2 phase is formed when the reaction temperature is higher than 700 °C while the synthesis temperature of the O3 phase is generally lower than 700 °C. When the synthesis temperature of the P2 phase is higher than 800 °C, the coexisting phase of P2/P3 will appear with gradually decreasing temperature.43–46 In addition, the phase structure also depends on the electronic structure of the transition metal layer and the sodium ion vacancies in the alkali metal layer. Under certain conditions, with the sliding of the (MO2)n layers, the mutual conversion of the P phase and the O phase at room temperature can be achieved. The inter-conversion of the P phase and the O phase (n≠++m) is generally accompanied by the rupture of the M–O bond, so this process can usually be performed at a high temperature.

4.1.1 α-NaFeO2. 
NaFeO2 has been explored as the cathode material of SIBs owing to the dearth of precious metals such as nickel and cobalt and its low cost. As shown in Fig. 4a, NaFeO2 can be classified into the trigonal system and the space group assigned is R3m, which is a typical O3 structure layered material. In the NaFeO2 crystal structure, the Na ions are coordinated in the octahedron between the (FeO2)n layers. As believed, LiFeO2 with a stable layered structure could not be synthesized by traditional methods due to the similar ion size of Fe3+ and Li+ which can lead to cation mixing. Fortunately, NaFeO2 used in SIBs can be synthesized by conventional solid-phase reactions.47 For example, Blesa et al.48 proposed the chemical de-intercalation of Na ions in α-NaFeO2, and the conductivity of this α-NaFeO2 was due to the shuttling of Na ions between octahedral positions of the (FeO2)n layers. The O3 structure was found to be preserved during the charge/discharge process, but under the electrochemical process, after some Na ions were de-intercalated, a new monoclinic Na0.5FeO2 phase was obtained from α-NaFeO2.49 Moreover, this α-NaFeO2 showed a higher conductivity than other sodium conductors such as NaInO or Na7Fe7Ti9O32.50,51
 Fig. 4  (a) Typical crystal structure of α-NaFeO2. (b) Charge/discharge curves of the α-NaFeO2 cathode material. (c) Ex situ Mössbauer spectra for the NaFeO2 cathode material in different states. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (d) Schematic illustration of irreversible Na insertion into Na1−xFeO2 after charging to 4.5 V. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Sodium ions can be reversibly de-intercalated in NaFeO2 and are considered to be electrochemically active. However, there are few reports regarding its application in SIBs. The sodium storage performance, charge–discharge capacity and cyclic voltammetry performance have also not been discussed in detail. Okada et al. studied the sodium storage performance of NaFeO2 when it was used as the cathode material for SIBs. If the charging voltage was maintained below 3.4 V, NaFeO2 exhibited a better cycle stability and the capacity could reach up to 80 mA h g−1. However, the main disadvantage was that when compared with its theoretical capacity, only 30% sodium ions in NaFeO2 could be extricated from the host cathode material. When the charging voltage was higher than 3.5 V, irreversible phase transition occurred with the movement of iron ions, which could be responsible for the drastic decay of its specific capacity. However, Zhao et al.52 found that when the charging voltage was 3.6 V, this NaFeO2 could still attain a high capacity. The cathode can demonstrate an initial charge capacity of 103 mA h g−1 when charged to 3.6 V, as shown in Fig. 4b. After the first charge, the reversible discharge capacity is 85 mA h g−1 and coulombic efficiency is maintained at 82%. The coulombic efficiency is increased to about 100% by the second cycle and it remains unchanged. Lee et al.53 studied the causes of the irreversible electrochemistry of α-NaFeO2 through ex situ Mössbauer spectroscopy at different states, as shown in Fig. 4c. It was concluded that α-NaFeO2 should be the first iron-based cathode material based on Fe3+/Fe4+ redox reaction. However, when α-NaFeO2 is fully charged and is under open circuit conditions, over 20% of Fe4+ is spontaneously reduced to Fe3+, resulting in the decomposition of the electrolyte, an increase in electrode impedance and a decrease in cycling efficiency. In situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction was employed to study the non-equilibrium phase transition behavior of the NaFeO2 electrode and it was found that a new O′′3 phase was formed during the sodium ion de-intercalation processes. Susanto et al.54 conducted in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy to find that charge compensation does not occur through the Fe3+/Fe4+ redox reaction during sodium extraction, which suggests that oxygen redox activity is responsible for charge compensation. Fig. 4d shows the schematic diagram that illustrates irreversible Na insertion into Na0.33FeO2 after the electrode is fully charged to 4.5 V. When the cathode material is charged to 4.5 V, oxygen will be released from the lattice and will react with iron to form Fe3O4 on the surface of the particles. Fe3O4 will block the transmission path of sodium ions which leads to the attenuation of cycle performance.


4.1.2 Strategies to enhance the electrochemical performance of α-NaFeO2. 
Although NaFeO2 is one of the most promising candidates for cathode materials having several advantages, the irreversible phase transition limits the development of O3-NaFeO2 to some extent. In addition, the disadvantages are that NaFeO2 can only release about 35% of the theoretical capacity and that it can easily react with the moisture in air to produce FeOOH and NaOH.55 To mitigate these, doping with other transition metals can effectively suppress the phase change of NaFeO2 during charging and discharging. For example, by partially replacing Fe elements in NaFeO2 with cobalt, nickel, manganese or other variable valence metals, the electrochemical performance of O3-NaFeO2 can be effectively improved.56 Amongst the different metals partially replacing Fe, non-toxic Mn has attracted widespread attention. For example, Mortemard et al.57 prepared a series of NaxMn1−yFeyO2 (0.5 < x < 1; y = 1/3, 1/2, 2/3) through a self assembly method. The O3 phase of Na0.8Mn1/3Fe2/3O2 exhibited a reversible discharge capacity of about 135 mA h g−1 at a low current density. The phase of NaxMn1−yFeyO2 depends on the overall Na content (x), and the lower initial Na amount and higher sintering temperature may lead to a new behavioral pattern of the O3 phase when compared with those reported previously.58,59 Mortemard et al.60 presented a more detailed study of the NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 system using O3-Na0.77Mn1/3Fe2/3O2 as the pristine material via a self-combustion synthesis. They conducted in situ X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) to explore the structural changes of O3-NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 occurring during the cycling process, as shown in Fig. 5a. Fig. 5b shows the schematic representation of the phase diagram of the NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 material upon Na de-intercalation deduced from the in situ XRPD experiment. The results indicate that during the reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions, the crystal structure keeps constantly changing.61 With the continuous insertion/extraction of sodium ions, the structure of NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 also experiences a constant alteration. When fully discharged, the chemical structure of the product is found to be Na0.96Mn1/3Fe2/3O2 when the insertion of sodium ions reaches its maximum state. At the same time, it has transitioned from the O3 phase to the O′3 phase which can be indexed to the monoclinic system. With the continuous release of sodium ions (0.85 < x < 0.96), the interlayer distance becomes slightly higher for the O3 phase (∼5.40 Å in average) than for the O′3 one (∼5.36 Å in average). With further de-intercalation of sodium ions (0.62 < x < 0.85), the crystal structure recovers to the O3 phase and the P3 structure type appears (x < 0.62). It should be noted that the O3 phase does not completely disappear but co-exists with the P3 phase. Moreover, the effect of different voltage intervals on the discharge capacity of O3 type Na0.77Mn1/3Fe2/3O2 is not significant. Three comparative electrochemical tests of different cut-off voltages are also performed.62 The wider voltage range will result in a relatively high reversible specific capacity in the initial cycles. However, after the 15th cycle, the differences in capacity caused by different voltage ranges are reduced, as shown in Fig. 5c.
 Fig. 5  (a) Operando XRPD patterns recorded during the charging of NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2. SEM image of O3-Na0.82Mn1/3Fe2/3O2. (b) Schematic representation of the phase diagram of the NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 material upon Na de-intercalation deduced from the in situ XRPD experiment. (c) Three comparative electrochemical tests at different cut-off voltages. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the significant improvement of the electrochemical properties after partial replacement of Fe. (e) Cycle stability for O3-NaFeO2, O3-NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2, and O3-NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 particles. (g) Intensity contour maps of the in situ XRD patterns of NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 in the 1st charge process. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from those discussed above, other types of O3-type layered iron-based oxides have also been studied. For example, Wang et al.63 demonstrated that the introduction of nickel into NaFeO2 could effectively improve the capacity and also the cycle stability. Their systematic study found that partial replacement of Fe in O3-NaFeO2 with Ni leads to a significant improvement of the electrochemical properties. When the doping ratio of nickel reached 0.7, the resulting O3-NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2 displayed higher capacity and efficiency, as seen in Fig. 5d. In addition, the NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2 cathode material demonstrated better cycle performance (Fig. 5e). Most of the capacity could be released in the voltage range of 2.5–3.8V. Moreover, the redox reaction of Ni3+/Ni4+ could restrain the Jahn–Teller effect of Fe4+, thereby reducing the charge–discharge polarization.64 In order to better understand the effect of Ni doping on α-NaFeO2, Vassilaras et al.65 synthesized NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2 with a rock-salt structure through the sol–gel method and studied the associated structural evolution during the charge process; Fig. 5e shows the morphology of the corresponding material. As seen in Fig. 5g, the in situ XRD patterns of NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 in the 1st charge process indicate that the phase transition in NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 is more simple than that in NaFeO2 doped with Mn which shows that the introduce of Ni can better restrict the complicated phase transition in O3-NaFeO2 than the introduction of Mn. Mu et al.66 introduced both copper and manganese into NaFeO2 to prepare O3-Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2, which exhibited excellent cycle life.
Overall, the introduction of other metals with variable valency into NaFeO2 can effectively improve its specific capacity and cycle stability. However, the phase change of the O3 type cathode material during charging and discharging cannot be completely inhibited. Therefore, more research is needed in the future to suppress the phase transition of the O3 type cathode material.


4.1.3 P2-NaxM1−yFeyO2. 
Iron-based oxides of the O3 phase always undergo uncontrollable phase transitions during the electrochemical reaction, causing degradation in their cycling performance. However, P2 phase structures (NaxM1−yFeyO2) have larger interlayer spacing, which makes the diffusion of Na ions easier. The large interlayer spacing can make Na ions migrate from a triangular prism vacancy to an adjacent triangular prism vacancy, showing higher ionic conductivity, which can induce better cycle stability and improve the rate performance as well.67 Therefore, P2 type iron-based layered oxides have also been extensively studied for cathode materials of SIBs. In order to maintain the stability of the P2 phase layered structure, the iron ratio in the P2 phase iron-based cathodes is always less than 0.5.
Kalluri et al.68 prepared Na2/3(Fe1/2Mn1/2)O2 with layered nanofiber morphology via the electrospinning method, as shown in Fig. 6a. This material shows a P2 phase. In the subsequent calcination process, the ordered stacking of nanocrystals forms a layered arrangement along the growth direction of the fiber. As shown in Fig. 6b, this cathode material exhibits good electrochemical properties when used in SIBs, giving an initial discharging capacity of 195 mA h g−1 (Fig. 6b black solid line). Xu et al.69 reported the incorporation of copper in the host structure. Two kinds of P2-type cathodes, Na0.7[Cu0.2Fe0.2Mn0.6]O2 and Na0.7[Cu0.15Fe0.3Mn0.55]O2, were successfully synthesized, both of which exhibited a specific capacity of about 95 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. However, a higher Cu (lower Fe) content could effectively suppress the voltage decay, indicating that the incorporation of more Cu can effectively enhance the voltage stability during cycling. Fig. 6c displays the in situ XRD results of Na0.7[Cu0.2Fe0.2Mn0.6]O2 (higher Cu content), which depict a continuous shift in the diffraction peaks. This specifies that during the reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions, only a solid solution reaction occurs without phase transition. During the first charge process, Fe ions migrate into the tetrahedral site between the interlayers; meanwhile, the crystal structure of the original P2 phase material changes into a new “Z” phase (Fig. 6d). Unfortunately, this phase transition is partially irreversible. It is probably this irreversible phase change that causes the subsequent capacity decay. The X-ray pair distribution function (PDF) technique was used to obtain the real-space local structural information of Na0.7[Cu0.15Fe0.3Mn0.55]O2 (Fig. 6e). The first neighbor interlayer TM–TM and the second neighbor interlayer TM–O distances in-plane are highlighted in pink and yellow, respectively, and the interlayer TM–TM distances are highlighted in light purple. The results compare the PDF data of the 2nd, 15th and 25th cycles. The peaks representing neighbor interlayer TM–TM and interlayer TM–O distances show an increase in intensity upon cycling and the peaks representing the interlayer TM–TM distance show a decrease in intensity. The peak intensity reduction represents the migration of iron ions during the charging and discharging of the P2 phase iron-based O3 material. In general, while studying the P2-type iron-based cathodes, it is necessary to maintain the stability of the P2 phase structure. The inhibition of iron ion migration is also very important.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the Na2/3(Fe1/2Mn1/2)O2 hierarchical nanofiber formation process. (b) Charge–discharge curves of Na2/3(Fe1/2Mn1/2)O2 at the initial and 80th cycles at A 0.1C current rate (solid line). Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) In situ XRD patterns of the Na0.7[Cu0.2Fe0.2Mn0.6]O2 cathode material. (d) Schematics of the corresponding P2 phase and “Z” phase with O2 stacking viewed along the100 direction. (e) The experimental PDF data of Na0.7[Cu0.15Fe0.3Mn0.55]O2 with different charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As observed, the P2 phase cathode materials cannot be stored for a long time in air, because they can react with water and carbon dioxide in air. Therefore, P2 type iron-based positive electrode materials must be protected by an inert atmosphere, otherwise serious polarization and lower reversible capacity can occur.70,71 In order to make P2-type iron-based materials performed better, much more effort is required to improve their air stability.

4.2 Iron-based polyanion compounds
From the perspective of material application, an energy storage device balances the power supply and demand of large-scale grid energy. Hence, it is necessary for sodium-ion batteries to quickly store and provide electrical energy, i.e., the cathode materials should quickly conduct ions and electrons. Polyanion cathode materials usually provide a sodium storage framework with abundant ion diffusion channels. The diffusion of ions in the polyanion compounds depends on the dimensions of the channels.27 The series of compounds containing tetrahedral anionic structural units (XOm)n− or their derived units (XmO3m+1)n− (X = P, S, As, Mo and W) combined with polyhedral units, MOx (M stands for transition metals), are all called polyanionic compounds.26,72 In polyanionic compounds, the structural unit (XOm)n− plays a role in supporting and stabilizing the crystal structure, in which the covalent bond of X–O is stronger than the bond in the transition metal oxide. In this regard, polyanionic compounds have strong structural stability and high safety.73 The strong covalent bond of X–O in the polyanionic compound can induce the M–O covalent bond to produce a stronger degree of ionization, generating a higher transition metal redox couple.74,75 In addition, the strong X–O covalent bond in (XOn)m− can improve the stability of O (oxygen) in the crystal lattice, which also enhances the safety of the material to a certain extent. Fig. 7 shows the relationship between the crystal structure and the energy of different iron-based polyanionic cathode materials. For SIB applications, the mixed polyanion cathodes tend to exhibit higher voltage. In polyanion compounds, the induction effect in strongly electronegative polyanion groups can lead to different potentials of the transition metal redox reaction. Taking iron-based polyanionic compounds as examples in Fig. 7, the effect of three types polyanions of (PO4)3−, (PO4)3−F−, and (PO4)3−(P2O7)4− on the Fermi level of Fe2+/Fe3+ redox reaction can be analyzed.76 The combination of different polyanions can adjust the redox voltage height through the structural diversity and varying degrees of induction effects to ensure robust electrochemical properties.
 Fig. 7  Schematic derivation of the energy diagram of iron-based mixed polyanion cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries. 
However, the intrinsic electronic conductivity of the polyanionic compound materials is low, limiting their practical application.77,78 Therefore, improvement of the electronic conductivity has become the key to increasing the rate performance of polyanionic cathode materials for SIBs.

4.2.1 Polyanionic orthophosphates. 
The successful commercialization of LiFePO4, one of the polyanionic compounds, in energy storage systems has led us to consider its analogue (NaFePO4), which is also an orthophosphate. While studying this compound for SIBs, it should be noted that NaFePO4 has two structures, one is the olivine phase and the other is the maricite phase.79–81 The different crystal structures of the olivine phase and maricite phase are exhibited in Fig. 8a. Both are orthorhombic in nature and have the Pnma space group, but the arrangement of atoms in them is different. In the olivine phase, the phosphorus atom and the four oxygen atoms form a PO4 tetrahedron while the iron atom and the six oxygen atoms form an FeO6 octahedron. The FeO6 octahedron in the olivine phase is connected in a common point form, establishing a layered structure parallel to the bc plane, and the layers are connected by a PO4 tetrahedron to form a one-dimensional sodium ion channel along the c axis, so it is regarded as electrochemically active. However, it is thermodynamically unstable and thus cannot be synthesized directly.82,83 It can only be obtained by electrochemical insertion of sodium into FePO4. In the maricite structure, the FeO6 octahedron is connected by a co-edge, forming a one-dimensional chain along the b axis. The PO4 tetrahedra are connected to form a three-dimensional frame structure, so that there is no channel for sodium ion transmission in this structure. Therefore, the maricite phase is generally considered to have no electrochemical activity.84
 Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of maricite NaFePO4 and olivine NaFePO4. (b) HRTEM images of the as-prepared maricite NaFePO4 obtained by ball milling for 5 hours and 15 hours. (c) The cycling performance at 1C. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for NaFePO4@C nanofibers. (e) Charge/discharge curves at a current density of 20 mA g−1. (f) Possible sodium-ion diffusive pathways and atomistic structure for amorphous NaFePO4. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
In general, it is not easy to synthesize NaFePO4 with an olivine structure using conventional methods. The study by Kang et al.83 using quantum mechanical calculations combined with experimental methods proved that sodium ions in the m-NaFePO4 (maricite NaFePO4) structure could be reversibly extracted and embedded. Based on the mechanism of ion de-intercalation in m-NaFePO4, it was found that all the Na ions in the maricite structure could be extracted. After the first extraction of sodium ions, m-NaFePO4 could be converted into amorphous α-FePO4, which then greatly reduced the transmission barrier of sodium ions. These results indicate that the presence of ion diffusion paths in the structure can determine the electrochemical performance of the m-NaFePO4 material.85 On the basis of this study, the adjustment of the disorder degree of the NaFePO4 cathode material through the mechano-chemical approach could also improve the electrochemical properties of this m-NaFePO4 for sodium-ion batteries.86 The experiment was carried out through high-energy ball milling to synthesize maricite NaFePO4 samples at different times for obtaining partial amorphousness in the internal structure of NaFePO4. As shown by the HRTEM image in Fig. 8b, with the increasing time of high-energy ball milling, the amorphous nature of the material can become more clear. When high energy ball milling is continued for 15 hours, only a small part of the crystalline area is left behind, and the obtained NaFePO4 shows a reversible capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at 1C with a capacity retention of 91.3% after 800 cycles (Fig. 8c). This seems to be contradictory to the previous observation that NaFePO4 with the maricite structure had no electrochemical activity.87 This can be attributed to the fact that part of NaFePO4 that has become amorphous after high energy ball milling can give the reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions. Meanwhile, the remaining maricite structure can confirm the stability of the NaFePO4.88 The main reason for the improved electrochemical performance was thought to be the change of the coordination environment around Fe. The local surroundings around Fe changed from the edge-sharing FeO6 octahedra to FeOn polyhedra in NaFePO4, which showed partial amorphousness. In addition, a higher voltage charging could also transform the maricite into an amorphous structure. Liu et al.89 reported a new method to prepare the electrochemically active NaFePO4 with a maricite phase. As shown in Fig. 8d, this NaFePO4, synthesized by electrospinning, shows a very small particle size of 1.6 nm. A high charging voltage (4.5 V) is applied during the first charging of maricite NaFePO4. During the first desodiation process of NaFePO4, the maricite NaFePO4 could be transformed into an amorphous structure. This NaFePO4 exhibited a superior specific capacity of 147.2 mA h g−1. As shown in Fig. 8e, after 300 cycles, the specific discharge capacity of the composite of NaFePO4 and carbon (NaFePO4@C)-based cathode shows almost no degradation. In general, the phase transition from maricite to amorphous structures can produce new channels for sodium ion transmission (Fig. 8f). It is these new sodium ion transmission channels that make the maricite-structured NaFePO4 electrochemically active.
Several studies have reported that an amorphous transformation of materials can often result in unexpected electrochemical performance.90–92 Therefore, the application of amorphous NaFePO4 is undoubtedly of great research value. After the transformation of NaFePO4 into an amorphous structure, the limitation of sodium-ion transmission by the maricite structure is mitigated, which makes the application of NaFePO4 feasible in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.


4.2.2 Strategies to enhance the electrochemical performance of NaFePO4. 
Because of the insufficient Na ion transmission channels, NaFePO4 with the maricite structure is generally considered to be not electrochemically active.88 Furthermore, due to the inherent shortcomings of phosphate, the maricite NaFePO4 has a poor conductivity. In addition, in the process of reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions in the maricite NaFePO4, the lattice volume can largely vary between NaFePO4 and the de-sodiated product FePO4. It is this huge change in lattice volume that leads to poor cycling stability.80 To mitigate this volume change, designing a three-dimensional (3D) self-supporting electrode is effective in maintaining nanostructures to endow the material with high active surface areas, which can effectively suppress the change of lattice volume of the electrode material. Ma et al.93 combined an acid-etched carbon cloth (eCC) with NaFePO4@C to form a composite which showed significantly improved electrochemical properties of the maricite NaFePO4. Due to the larger contact surface and acid-etched carbon cloth, the NaFePO4@C particles could tightly stick to the surface of the carbon fibers. This strategy greatly enhanced the conductivity of the material. The maricite NaFePO4@C exhibited a high discharge capacity of 142 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. Even when the discharge rate reached 100C, it could still maintain a capacity of 63 mA h g−1. In addition to this, reducing the sodium ratio in the initial material can also enhance the electrochemical properties. For example, Huang et al.94 designed and synthesized a novel monodisperse fluffy alluaudite Na0.67FePO4/CNT. Due to the three-dimensional open-frame structure of such a material formed by self-assembly of numerous nanorods and unique nano-cactus morphology, both the cycle and rate performances of the Na0.67FePO4/CNT-based cathode material were significantly improved.


4.2.3 Pyrophosphates. 
When studying sodium-ion batteries, pyrophosphates such as NaMP2O7 (M = Ti, V, Fe) and Na2MP2O7 (M = Fe, Mn, Cu, Co, Zn) have also attracted much attention for cathode materials.95–99 These compounds have different crystal structures, including the triclinic system (P1 space group), monoclinic system (P21/C space group) and tetragonal system (P42/mnm space group). As an analogue of LiFeP2O7, there are also many reports on the structure and chemical properties of NaFeP2O7.100–102 NaFeP2O7 has two different crystal structures. Both NaFeP2O7-I and NaFeP2O7-II can be categorized into the monoclinic P21/C space group. NaFeP2O7-I is composed of FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra with corner sharing. As shown in Fig. 9a-left, its structure has channels for sodium ion migration through the [001] direction. Moreover, NaFeP2O7-I can be easily transformed into a thermodynamically stable phase (NaFeP2O7-II) at higher temperatures (≥750 °C). The crystal structure of NaFeP2O7-II is cage-like, composed of FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra with angle sharing, in which the angle of P–O–P is 132.86°.95 However, there does not seem to be any previous literature on the sodium storage performance of NaFeP2O7.
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of NaFeP2O7 and olivine Na2FeP2O7. (b) Schematic illustration of the architecture for the NFP@C@RGO composite. (c) SEM images of NFP@C@RGO. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Long-term cycle performance of the NFP@C@RGO and NFP@C at 1C. (e) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7 at different scan rates. (f) Ex situ XRD pattern during charging/discharging for Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7 on a small scale. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The schematic diagram of the binary Na2FeP2O7 and Na2ZnP2O7 pyrophosphate system. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
As identified, phosphate can only bring about a weak induction effect, leading both maricite- and olivine-phase NaFePO4 to have potentials lower than 2.5 V. Another type of pyrophosphate, Na2MP2O7 (M = Fe, Co, Mn, Cu, Zn), has been explored for the cathode material of SIBs. This type of material has crystal structures usually existing in the triclinic or orthogonal structures. Barpanda et al.103 developed an iron-based pyrophosphate in which anionic groups had higher electronegativity (Na2FeP2O7). As shown in Fig. 9a-right, this Na2FeP2O7 is composed of the FeO6 octahedron and dimer [Fe2O11] co-angled or co-edged with the PO4 tetrahedron and sodium atoms existing in the frame structure. Sodium ions can be reversibly de-intercalated in the three directions of [100], [110] and [011]. This Na2FeP2O7 can provide an average potential of 3 V. Before optimization, the cathode based on this compound could give an initial capacity of 80 mA h g−1 at a small current density and a capacity close to 50 mA h g−1 at a rate of 10C. Due to the stable structure of pyrophosphate P2O74−, the Na2FeP2O7 has a good thermal stability and neither thermal decomposition nor the oxygen evolution reaction could occur at 600 °C. Choi et al.104 combined theoretical simulation with experimental verification to explore the structural characteristics, electrochemical properties and thermodynamic behavior of Na2FeP2O7. Both synchrotron X-ray diffraction and DFT calculations were also conducted to investigate the crystal structure of Na2FeP2O7. Their results showed that the unit cell contained 8 sodium atom sites and the energy of the Na1 site was higher than that of other sodium atom sites, while the energy barrier for Na1 migration along the [011] direction was the lowest (0.48 eV). Therefore, in terms of kinetics and thermodynamics, the Na1 site was the most easily available site for sodium de-intercalation.
To further enhance the electrochemical properties of Na2FeP2O7 materials, many research studies have been carried out recently. For example, Chen et al.105 synthesized Na2FeP2O7 anchored in a three-dimensional reduced graphene oxide framework through the in situ carbon-coating method, and the schematic diagram of the synthesis process is presented in Fig. 9b. The Na2FeP2O7 particles exhibited a 3D RGO framework with a lot of holes which inhibits the agglomeration of secondary particles and provides an efficient framework for electron and ion transportation (Fig. 9c). The intimate contact between Na2FeP2O7 and graphene oxide could provide high kinetics whereas the modified Na2FeP2O7 manifested a reversible capacity of 78 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 1C which is obviously superior to that of the Na2FeP2O7 only coated with carbon (Fig. 9d).Considering that the voltage platform is not ideal, doping with other transition metals can also improve the electrochemical performance of Na2FeP2O7. Since the redox pair of Mn2+/Mn3+ has a higher working potential, Shakoor et al.106 introduced manganese into Na2FeP2O7 to form Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7. The average working voltage of this manganese-doped Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7 material can be increased to 3.2 V (vs. Na+/Na). From the cyclic voltammetry curves (Fig. 9e), it can be found that a new pair of redox peaks emerges around 3.9 V which can effectively improve the discharge voltage platform. Due to different Na co-ordination and various Na site occupancies in the crystal structure, this mixed pyrophosphate material demonstrates a single solid-solution reaction occurring without phase transition during the charge/discharge process from the ex situ XRD results (Fig. 9f). Gond et al.107 systematically studied the effect of Zn-doping on the electrochemical performance of the Na2FeP2O7. Fig. 9g shows that the binary Na2FeP2O7 and Na2ZnP2O7 pyrophosphate system has been explored to gauge its structure and electrochemical properties. With the increase of the zinc-doping content, the phase would change from triclinic Na2FeP2O7 to tetragonal Na2Fe1−xZnxP2O7,which is different with Mn-doping. Moreover, doping with Zn can prompt the redox reaction of Fe2+/Fe3+ to a higher voltage platform of 3.1 V. In addition, several other research studies have further improved the electrochemical performance of Na2FeP2O7 by means of conductive material coating,105 atomic doping108 and electrolyte optimization.109


4.2.4 Fluorophosphates. 
Due to the relatively high electronegativity of F, it is frequently used for anion doping in cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Xiang et al.110 synthesized LiMn2O4−xYx (Y = F, Cl, Br) by the solid-phase method, and the electrochemical performance and structures were studied in detail. Their results indicated that as the lattice parameter became larger after F doping, the initial capacity was effectively increased and a moderate doping amount could also suppress the capacity fading. Zhang et al.111 successfully synthesized nanospheres of LiFePO4F by a solid-state reaction associated with the chemically induced precipitation method. This material showed a constant cycling stability. In general F doping can improve the electrochemical performances of positive electrode materials for LIBs. Therefore, F doping is naturally applied to the research of sodium-ion batteries, including materials of Na2FePO4F,112–114 Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F115,116 and Na7Fe7(PO4)6F3.117
Ellis et al.118 reported an iron-based alkali metal fluorophosphate material (Na2FePO4F), which belongs to the orthorhombic Pbcn space group. The coplanar FeO4F2 octahedra in the structure are bridged by F atoms to form Fe2O7F2 units. These double octahedral Fe2O7F2 units and PO4 tetrahedra form a two-dimensional structure and two sodium ions are located in the FePO4F layers.119 As seen in Fig. 10a, the sodium in Na2FePO4F is divided into Na1 and Na2 sites. During the de-intercalation of sodium ions, the Na2 sites are electrochemically active, while Na1 sites are inert. It should be noted that in the charge process, the local environment of the Na2 site is also constantly changing.120 Therefore, in the whole charge/discharge process, Na1 remains in the structure while Na2 (de)intercalates from/into the structure.Therefore, it can be seen intuitively from Fig. 10a that at the end of the charge process, the Na2 site has disappeared. In order to understand the effect of atomic-scale features on the electrochemical performance of layered Na2FePO4F, Tripathi et al.113 also explored the conduction behavior and inherent defect characteristics of sodium ions through atomic simulation calculations. It was found that sodium ions in Na2FePO4F were more likely to migrate along the a-plane and the c-plane with lower interlayer energy. Smiley and Goward121 studied the sodium storage mechanism of Na2FePO4F using the in situ XRD technique combined with two reversible voltage platforms in the charge–discharge curve of the Na2FePO4F/C cathode material. As shown in Fig. 10b, Na2FePO4F had two reversible phase transitions in the charge/discharge process: Na2FeIIPO4F ↔ Na1.5FePO4F ↔ NaFeIIIPO4F, and the lattice volume change between Na2FeIIPO4F and its oxide NaFeIIIPO4F is only 3.7%. This trivial change in the lattice volume demonstrates the excellent electrochemical performance of this material.
 Fig. 10  (a) The local environment of Na in different periods of charging. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) Proposed structural changes that occur in Na2FePO4F upon a charge/discharge cycle in a Na-ion cell. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of modified Na2FePO4F/C at 0.1C. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram showing the structural advantages of Na2Fe0.6Mn0.4PO4F/C in sodium storage. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) In situ XRD patterns of the Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F cathode material. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2011. Elsevier. 
Although Na2FePO4F exhibits a series of excellent electrochemical properties, it also faces the common disadvantage of polyanionic materials, that is, low electronic conductivity. Fortunately, carbon coating is also suitable for improving the electronic conductivity of Na2FePO4F. Deng et al.122 studied the electrochemical properties of the Na2FePO4F material through carbon coating and binder optimization. Vitamin C was used as a green organic carbon source and water-based polyacrylic latex was used as the binder. The modified Na2FePO4F/C composite showed a comparable specific capacity of 103.2 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, as shown in Fig. 10c.
Considering that the voltage platform of Na2FeP2O7 is not ideal, doping with other transition metals can also improve the electrochemical performance of Na2FeP2O7. Since the redox pair of Mn2+/Mn3+ has a higher working potential, Tang et al.123 tried to introduce manganese into Na2FePO4F through the spray-drying method and systematically studied the electrochemical performance of different manganese doping contents. Due to the in situ formation of amorphous carbon and the nanoporous structure of Na2Fe0.6Mn0.4PO4F/C, the electronic conductivity was enhanced and the electroactivity was reinforced. Fig. 10d shows intuitively the structural advantages of Na2Fe0.6Mn0.4PO4F/C in sodium storage. After doping with manganese, the voltage platform of the material improved. The resultant Na2Fe0.6Mn0.4PO4F/C cathode can deliver a high discharge capacity of 94.8 mA h g−1 at 0.05C. In order to better understand the phase transitions after the introduction of Mn, Kawabe et al.115 performed in situ XRD characterization of Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F. The crystal structures of Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F and Na2MnPO4F are similar. The optimized Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F cathode material exhibits a reversible discharge capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at a low current density. As shown in Fig. 10e, the in situ XRD results of Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F indicate that the positions of Bragg peaks shift continuously throughout the charge–discharge process without emergence of new peaks, suggesting a single phase solid-solution Na+ intercalation/extraction process.119
In the literature, a wide variety of material modification methods, such as carbon coating,109,117 micro-nano structure control,124,125etc. have been attempted for further improvement of the sodium storage performance of Na2FePO4F materials. Although fluorophosphate can provide a higher voltage platform compared to other phosphates, there are still only a few studies on the electrochemical reaction mechanisms, structure and performance optimization of fluorophosphate cathode materials. Therefore, efforts are still needed to study the energy storage mechanisms and material performance optimization.


4.2.5 NASICON-type phosphate. 
NASICON is an acronym for sodium superionic conductors of the general formula AnB2(PO4)3, where B is generally a TM ion or an element like Zr, Ge, Sn, etc.126 NASICON structural materials have fast sodium ion transmission channels and stable three-dimensional frame structures. Therefore, they have been widely studied in the fields of electrode materials and solid electrolytes.127–130 Usually, these compounds exist in thermodynamically stable rhombohedral structures. However, some of the A3M2(PO4)3 (A = Li, Na, M = Cr, Fe, Zr) materials also exist in monoclinic structures and exhibit reversible structural phase transitions under high temperature conditions.131 Due to the pronounced structural stability and exceptionally high ion conductivity, NASICON structural materials have great advantages whether they are used in LIBs or in SIBs. Na3V2(PO4)3 is a representative NASICON structural material which has been extensively studied.132–134 However, vanadium has certain toxicity, which restricts its utilization in real life applications. Thereby, replacing vanadium with a similar kind of variable valency metal such as low price and non-toxic Fe is needed.135 Therefore, it is quite substantial to study NASICON iron-based cathode materials. Fe-based polyanionic compounds can not only inherit the advantages of NASICON materials but also greatly reduce the cost of the materials.
Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) is considered a NASICON structural material when used as the positive electrode material for sodium-ion batteries. It can be synthesized by the one-step sol–gel method.136 The Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C composite with a NASICON structure showed the advantage of stability in air. Uniform carbon-coated nano-sized particles could provide fast electron transport and high ion diffusion capabilities and also display excellent rate performance. The long-term cycling stability was found to be outstanding with a capacity retention of 69.1% after 4400 cycles. Even in a low temperature environment of −20 °C, it could still maintain good cycle performance. The typical crystalline structure and Rietveld refinement of the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C nanocomposite are shown in Fig. 11a, which indicates a NASICON structure. Furthermore, in situ X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) analysis was conducted to decide the valence state of Fe in Na4Fe3 (PO4)2 (P2O7), and the obtained result is shown in Fig. 11b. The 2D contour plot of the normalized XANES spectra clearly shows the reversible variation in the valence state of Fe in the X-ray energy range around 7120 eV, representing the redox reaction of Fe2+/Fe3+. On the basis of the in situ XANES results, it can be concluded that the excellent electrochemical properties are due to the stability of the crystal structure and the continuous valency change of Fe (Fig. 11c). It is generally believed that pyrophosphate is unstable in air; however, the Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C composite material is still stable after being exposed to air for three months.137 Thus, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C can be considered a suitable candidate for practical applications.
 Fig. 11  (a) Rietveld refinements of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C. The crystal structure is presented in the insets. (b) In situ XANES spectra at the Fe K-edge of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C. (c) Charge process and discharge process of typical Fe K-edge XANES spectra. The insets show the corresponding pre-edge spectra. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesis process. (e) Crystal structure of Na3Fe2(PO4)3; (f) long-term cycling performance of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 up to 500 cycles at 1C. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), Na3Fe2(PO4)3 is also recognized as a NASICON-type material. Due to its typical structure, Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be used not only as a cathode material,138–140 but also as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries.141 Liu et al.140 prepared Na3Fe2(PO4)3 by a simple solid state method. Fig. 11d shows the schematic diagram of its synthesis procedure. An elaborate study of the crystal structure and the corresponding electrochemical performance of Na3Fe2 (PO4)3 as a cathode in sodium-ion batteries has also been carried out. As shown in Fig. 11e, the crystal structure can be formed with FeO6 octahedral and PO4 tetrahedral units by sharing corners to form a typical NASICON structure. As shown in Fig. 11f, the NASICON-type Na3Fe2(PO4)3 exhibits a specific capacity of 60 mA h g−1 at 1C with a capacity retention of 95% after 500 cycles. Rajagopalan et al.138 optimized the charging cut-off voltage of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 to reach a charging cut-off voltage of 4.2 V, and two redox peaks were obtained from the cyclic voltammetry (CV) results. This indicated that when the charging voltage was higher than 3 V, the Fe3+/Fe4+ redox pair in Na3Fe2(PO4)3 could be activated. It was this activated Fe3+/Fe4+ redox pair that provided a higher capacity and energy density when compared with the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 charged to 3.5 V.


4.2.6 Other polyanion-type compounds. 
S and Si have also been extensively studied in iron-based polyanionic materials. The noteworthy representative materials are Na2Fe(SO4)2·2H2O,142,143 Na2Fe2(SO4)3 (ref. 144 and 145) and Na2FeSiO4.146,147 Among these cathode materials, Na2Fe2(SO4)3 is a new material discovered in recent years with a high potential of 3.8 V. Na2Fe2(SO4)3 has the advantages of low cost, stable structure, good thermal stability and large theoretical specific capacity (121 mA h g−1). This compound belongs to the monoclinic crystal system having the space group of P21/c. Its crystal structure is shown in Fig. 12a, where the FeO4 tetrahedra and SO4 tetrahedra are alternately connected to form a stable framework. However, sodium is six co-ordinated and forms a sub lattice separately. Due to the large ionic gap in the structural framework, the movement of sodium ions has a large degree of freedom. Due to easy decomposition of the sulfate radical into SO2 at 400 °C, which is easily soluble in water, it cannot be synthesized under aqueous conditions. Considering this factor, the method of synthesis tends to be solid phase method. Barpanda et al.148 prepared this material through a low temperature solid-phase method. When used in a SIB, the specific capacity could reach up to 100 mA h g−1 through the redox reaction of Fe2+/Fe3+ at 0.05C. The refined results showed that the synthesized Na2Fe2(SO4)3 had a new crystal structure which was different from those of other polyanionic compounds (Fig. 12b). Unfortunately, when the polyanionic Na2Fe2(SO4)3 material is used as the positive electrode for SIBs, it usually has disadvantages such as poor cycle stability and low energy density. In order to overcome these challenges, Chen et al.144 designed a novel method based on one-step freeze-drying and calcination synthesis for controlling the preparation of a graphene oxide tightly wrapped Na2Fe2(SO4)3 composite material. The schematic diagram of the synthesis process is presented in Fig. 12c. As shown in Fig. 12d, when the polyanionic Na2Fe2(SO4)3@C@GO composite material is used as the positive electrode for SIBs, it offers a reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 at a current density of 24 mA g−1. After 300 cycles, the capacity retention rate is 90%, indicating its excellent cycle stability. More importantly, the Na2Fe2(SO4)3@C@GO material has a high voltage of 3.8 V and an energy density of 400 W h kg−1. These results demonstrate that the innovative approach can not only further enhance the energy density of SIBs but also has a high potential for practical SIB applications with low-cost, long-life and high specific energy.
 Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of Na2Fe2(SO4)3. (b) Rietveld refinement results of Na2Fe2(SO4)3. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process for Na2Fe2(SO4)3@C@GO. (d) The long-term cycling performance of Na2Fe2(SO4)3 at a current density of 24 mA g−1. (e) Cycling performance of Na2FeSiO4 at a current density of 10 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
In addition to sulfates, silicate iron-based materials have also been widely explored. Li et al.149 successfully prepared a zero-strain Na2FeSiO4 cathode by the solid phase method, which exhibited a specific capacity of 106 mA h g−1 at a current density of 5 mA g−1 and after 20 cycles, the capacity retention rate was 95% (Fig. 12e). However, it was difficult to prepare a pure phase of Na2FeSiO4 as Na2SiO3 was often present in the obtained product, resulting in relatively poor cycle stability, which limits its practical application.

4.3 Iron-based Prussian blue analogues
When designing positive electrode materials for SIBs, the larger radius of Na+ is a major concern. Many cathode material systems suitable for LIBs cannot be directly applied to SIBs. Therefore, the cathode materials which can provide larger ion channels have become the hotspot of current research.150,151 In this regard, Prussian blue materials and their analogues have open framework structures which can provide abundant sites and transmission channels for the reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions.152–154 Due to the special open-framework structures and rapid migration of alkali metal ions, they have received much attention as potential sodium storage materials in recent years. The general structural formula of Prussian blue compounds is NaxM1M2(CN)6 (0 ≤ x ≤ 2; M = Fe, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, etc.). In the NaxM1M2(CN)6 crystal structure, the transition metal atoms M and –CN– are arranged according to the structure of M–CN–M to form a three-dimensional cubic framework structure. The transition metal atom M is located at the vertex of the face-centered cubic structure and Na ions occupy the vacant positions of the cubic lattice. The large size of the cubic vacancy is beneficial for the rapid migration of sodium ions. Wessells et al.155 reported that in a Prussian blue material of K0.71Cu[Fe(CN)6]0.72, the internal stress of the lattice was small which made the structure stable. The theoretical specific capacity of K0.71Cu[Fe(CN)6]0.72 was 62 mA h g−1. The material also had excellent cycle stability with a capacity retention of 83% even after 10000 cycles. Subsequently, Lu et al.156 carefully studied the application of Prussian blue compounds in an organic electrolyte system. KFe2(CN)6 was synthesized by a conventional co-precipitation process. With 1 mol L−1 NaClO4/(EC:DEC) (1:1, volume ratio) organic solvent as the electrolyte, KFe2(CN)6 showed a discharge specific capacity of about 95 mA h g−1 at 0.05C. These reports above have compelled researchers to realize the feasibility of Prussian blue materials used in SIBs. The related studies on iron-based Prussian blue analogues can be roughly divided into two categories: aqueous systems and organic systems, as discussed in the following two subsections.

4.3.1 Prussian blue compounds in aqueous rechargeable SIBs. 
Wessells et al.157 synthesized K0.6Ni1.2Fe(CN)6·3.6H2O and used it as the cathode material in an aqueous rechargeable SIB. In a 1 mol L−1 NaNO3 electrolyte solution, the capacity was about 60 mA h g−1 at 0.83C and the capacity did not decay even after 5000 cycles at 8.3C. However, the potential of K0.6Ni1.2Fe(CN)6·3.6H2O was relatively low, which might be inadequate for its application as the cathode material. Therefore, they further prepared a K0.71Cu[Fe(CN)6]0.72·3.7H2O compound which possessed a higher potential value (1.0 V vs. SHE).158 The capacity retention rate was 77% after 500 cycles at 8.3C. Although these series of Prussian blue analogues (PBA) can exhibit high cycle stability, the materials themselves do not contain sodium and hence they cannot be matched with the traditional Na-free anode materials.
Wu et al.159 studied Na2NiFe(CN)6, which contains sodium, as the cathode material for aqueous rechargeable SIBs with a Ag/AgCl electrode as the counter electrode. In a 1 mol L−1 Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 7), the capacity of Na2NiFe (CN)6 was 65 mA h g−1 at a current density of 65 mA g−1 with the reversible specific capacity maintained at 61 mA h g−1 at 10C. They also synthesized Na2CoFe(CN)6 (NaCoHCF), which is an analogue to Na2NiFe (CN)6.160 The release of Co in cobalt citrate solution was slow and the concentration of Fe(CN)6 ions in the solution was also very low. Therefore, the synergistic effect resulted in well-shaped nanocubes. Fig. 13a and b show the schematic diagram of the formation of NaCoHCF and the SEM image of the as-synthesized NaCoHCF nanocrystals, respectively. During the reversible de-intercalation of sodium ions in NaCoHCF, the structure of the material also changes, as shown in Fig. 13c. The structural changes can be mainly divided into three processes to form Na2CoIIFeII(CN)6, the cubic Na+-deficient NaCoIIIFeII(CN)6 phase, and the cubic CoIIIFeIII(CN)6 phase. During this entire process, only the insertion and extraction of sodium ions occur without any phase change, giving long-term cycling stability of this NaCoHCF material. In addition to the redox reaction of Fe2+/Fe3+, due to the introduction of cobalt ions, the redox peaks of Co2+/Co3+ could lead to a high specific capacity of 128 mA h g−1 at 1C. As shown in Fig. 13d, after 800 cycles at 5C, the capacity retention rate remains 80%. The water (coordination water and zeolite water) in the Prussian blue analogue can block the insertion of Na ions into the reactive lattice site, resulting in a poor capacity utilization of iron-based PBA in the aqueous electrolyte. In order to resolve this issue, Wu et al.161 prepared a new Prussian blue material of FeFe(CN)6 with low-defects. Since the crystal water and lattice vacancies could severely deteriorate the sodium storage performance, the electrochemical properties of such a low-defect FeFe(CN)6 were further modified. As a result, even at a high discharge rate of 20C, it can still release a satisfactory capacity of 100 mA h g−1 (Fig. 13e). These excellent electrochemical properties confirm the feasibility of Prussian blue materials for aqueous SIBs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of the formation of NaCoHCF. (b) SEM image of the as-prepared NaCoHCF nanocrystals. (c) Schematic representation of the structural changes of NaCoHCF. (d) Long-term cycling performance of NaCoHCF up to 800 cycles at 5C. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Capacity versus cycle number at 2C, 5C, 10C, and 20C, respectively, and back to 2C. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 


4.3.2 Prussian blue compounds in organic rechargeable SIBs. 
In aqueous rechargeable SIBs, although the electrolyte can be better dissolved in water and provide a faster ion transmission rate, water decomposition at a cell voltage of 1.23 V (standard conditions) is an issue, which strongly imposes restrictions on the choice of cathode and anode materials. Wang et al.162 synthesized two types of Prussian blue materials by controlling the concentration of substances in the solution, namely Na1.12MnFe(CN)6 and Na1.40MnFe(CN)6 (NMHFC). The crystal structures of cubic NMHFC are shown in Fig. 14a. The Na1.40MnFe (CN)6 with a higher sodium content shows a higher capacity of 134 mA h g−1 in an EC/DEC (v/v = 1:1) electrolyte with saturated NaPF6. In the charging process, as the content of sodium ions in the material is increased, the crystal form of the material undergoes a reversible change from the cubic to the rhombohedral structure. As shown in Fig. 14b, Na1.40MnFe(CN)6 also exhibits a superior rate capability with a capacity of 45 mA h g−1 at 40C. Structure and morphology control can also be used to optimize the properties of iron-based Prussian blue cathode materials. For example, Dai et al.163 prepared crystal nuclei of NaNiFe(CN)6 through a template-free method. By adjusting the nucleation time, NaNiFe(CN)6 with large-sized mesopores was prepared. Regulation of the nucleation time was also found to be conducive to the improvement of the surface morphology and crystallinity of this material. The schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of NaNiFe(CN)6, shown in Fig. 14c, reveals that the whole process can be summarized as follows: the formation of crystal nuclei, then the growth of crystal nuclei and finally the stacking of particles to obtain the stacked macropores. The reversible specific capacity of the sample with a reaction time of 72 hours is 65 mA h g−1 at low current density (Fig. 14d). Guo et al.164 prepared a zero-strain cathode material (K0.09Ni[Fe(CN)6]0.71) for SIBs through a facile wet-chemical method. In situ XRD technique and the corresponding electrochemical detection were conducted, and it was confirmed that the change of lattice parameter during charging and discharging was within 1% after 200 cycles, indicating that the material exhibited an excellent long-term cycle stability.
 Fig. 14  (a) Crystal structures of cubic NMHFC. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of Na1.40MnFe(CN)6 from 0.1C to 40C. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of NaNiFe(CN)6. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the NaNiFe(CN)6 for the first three cycles. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Cycling performances of PB-4M (4M represents a sodium ion concentration of 4 mol L−1). Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Owing to the structural advantages of Prussian blue materials, they can store two sodium ions per formula unit, attracting significant research interest.165,166 Chen et al.167 investigated the performance of a Na-rich Prussian blue material in an organic electrolyte. Using co-precipitation, some Na-rich Prussian blue materials were synthesized, and different morphologies were obtained by controlling the content of sodium ions in the solution. The number of vacancies and crystals in the Prussian blue structure could be effectively suppressed by a higher concentration of sodium ions in the solution. When synthesized in a solution containing 4 mol L−1 Na ions, the synthetic product exhibited outstanding electrochemical properties with a capacity retention of 95% after 500 cycles (Fig. 14e). Sodium-rich Prussian blue materials could also be prepared by simply adding a reducing agent and controlling the reducing atmosphere.168 The protection of the inert atmosphere could effectively inhibit the oxidation of Fe2+ and [FeII(CN6)]4− in Na1.63Fe1.89(CN)6, giving an initial reversible capacity of 150 mA h g−1. After 200 cycles, the capacity retention rate could still be maintained at 90%, demonstrating that such sodium-rich Prussian blue analogues should have great prospects as positive electrodes of SIBs.

4.4 Iron-based Na-free materials
Conversion-type cathode materials for LIBs or SIBs, including transition metal oxides, polyanionic compounds, etc. have demonstrated high operating potentials and high specific capacities. Because of the renaissance in the study of lithium-metal anodes and the rapid development of solid-state electrolytes, revisiting Li-free cathodes with high energy densities is a necessity. In this regard, many Li-free cathode materials such as FeF3,169,170 CuF2,171,172 FeS2,173 MnO2,174,175 and so on have been explored. In the study of cathode materials for SIBs, many articles have also focused on iron-based sodium-free cathode materials which are low-cost and environmentally benign.

4.4.1 Fluoride-based materials. 
Conventional cathode materials for LIBs and SIBs, such as layered oxides, polyanions, and Prussian blue materials, are based on insertion/extraction mechanisms. In order to maintain the stability of their structures, the extraction amount of lithium ions or sodium ions is limited, leading to insufficient energy density and specific capacity. In recent years, a new type of cathode based on reversible chemical conversion reactions has been explored. This type of material can make full use of its various oxidation states during the electrode reaction processes and exchange all the electrons in the materials. In this regard, its discharge capacities are much higher than those of cathodes based on the insertion/extraction mechanisms. Metal fluorides based on chemical conversion reactions are typical representatives. The general formula of metal fluorides can be expressed as MF3 (M = Fe, Co, Mn, Ni), and they have a typical perovskite (ABO3) structure. Among them, the iron-based fluoride series are low cost and environmentally friendly and can provide high-capacity for the SIB cathodes. There is much research being carried out, including on FeF3, FeF3·0.33H2O and FeF3·3H2O. Although iron fluoride can always demonstrates high capacity because of its conversion reaction with Li/Na, the highly ionic nature of the Fe–F bond leads to a poor electronic conductivity and a wide energy gap, limiting its application.176,177 Bao et al.178 prepared a composite of FeF3/graphene by a one-pot method. The ultrafine particles and the uniform conducting networks of this material could greatly improve the electrochemical performance, offering a new approach to enable Na+ storage.
FeF3·0.33H2O has a crystal structure of the hexagonal tungsten bronze phase with the space group of the orthorhombic system with a unit cell volume of about 0.71 nm3.179Fig. 15a describes the crystal structure of the orthorhombic FeF3·0.33H2O. It can be observed that two different FeF6 octahedra are connected to each other by sharing the apex F atoms to form a hexagonal cavity channel. The H2O is located in the middle of the cavity. The presence of water crystals plays a very important role in stabilizing the pore structure and improving its electronic conductivity, thereby resulting in good electrochemical performance. Li et al.180 used ionic liquid as the fluorine source and solvent, FeF3·3H2O as the raw material, and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as the conductive network, and prepared SWNT-HTB-FeF3·0.33H2O via a solid–solid phase conversion method (Fig. 15b). When this material was used as the positive electrode material for SIBs, the reversible capacity was found to be closely related to the amount of SWNTs used. As shown in Fig. 15c, when the content of SWNTs reaches 10%, the initial reversible capacity becomes 130 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and the capacity retention is about 53% after 50 cycles. In order to improve the cycle performance of FeF3·0.33H2O, Liu et al.181 successfully prepared flower-like mesoporous FeF3·0.33H2O. This mesoporous FeF3·0.33H2O with a three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical nanostructure could be formed through a solvothermal route. Fig. 15d shows the schematic diagram depicting the formation of the 3D hierarchical morphology. It can be seen that the 3D hierarchical porous structure of FeF3·0.33H2O is composed of many nanostructured primary particles. Due to the nano-scale primary particles and special 3D layered structure, this material has a larger specific surface area which can provide more active sites for facilitating rapid electronic and ionic transportation, resulting in a high reversible capacity of 283 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. After 100 cycles, the capacity retention rate is about 70% (Fig. 15e), indicating a good storage performance of sodium ions. Although FeF3·0.33H2O used as the cathode material for SIBs has the advantage of good capacity, the cycle performance is not impressive, and subsequent work should focus more on improving the cycle performance.
 Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structures of FeF3·0.33H2O. (b) Scheme of the top-down fabrication process through IL-alleviating multistep dehydration. (c) Electrochemical performance of SWNT-HTB-FeF3·0.33H2O. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of flower-like mesoporous FeF3·0.33H2O. (e) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of FeF3·0.33H2O at 0.1C. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


4.4.2 Sulfide-based materials. 
Pyrite (FeS2) has the merits of abundance, low cost, non-toxicity and high theoretical capacity, which make it a promising cathode material for primary Li/FeS2 batteries.182,183 FeS2 also has a high electrochemical capacity and decent thermal stability. However, when used for rechargeable SIBs, the FeS2 cathode material exhibits poor electrochemical properties due to the semiconductor properties and the collapse of the material structure induced by the insertion/de-intercalation of sodium ions.184 Therefore, much effort has been devoted to improving the electrochemical properties of the FeS2 electrode for SIBs.
Kim et al.185 conducted research on the application of FeS2 in SIBs. They employed a simple ball milling process to treat natural pyrite and then used it as the SIB cathode material. The initial specific discharge capacity could reach 630 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 but with a quick decay in its capacity form 600 mA h g−1 to 80 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. They also directly mixed Fe and S through ball milling to obtain smaller FeS2 particles, and some improvement was obtained.185
Preparing nanostructured FeS2 combined with carbon materials can effectively suppress the capacity decay. Zhu et al.186 reported a nanoscale FeS2/C composite material, prepared using Fe3O4/C as the precursor by spray pyrolysis and further vulcanization. Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of this FeS2 is presented in Fig. 16 a. The size of the as-obtained FeS2/C is about 100–600 nm, and the nanoparticles are covered with a carbon shell. This structure can well relieve the volume expansion of the electrode material during charging and discharging and the carbon shell can also improve the conductivity. They also compared the electrochemical performance between ether electrolyte (NaSO3CF3/DGM) and ester (NaSO3CF3/EC-DEC), and the performance of the former was found to be much better than that of the latter. This could be because the ester electrolyte could react with polysulfide, resulting in a poor cycle performance. The ether electrolyte could generate a stable SEI film, thereby improving its cycle stability. As shown in Fig. 16b, the specific discharge capacity of the cathode exceeds 600 mA h g−1 and the reversible specific capacity remains at 415 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Chen et al.187 prepared a new composite of FeS2 and graphene oxide using a low-temperature processing method to retain some oxygen-containing functional groups on graphene. In this way, FeS2 and graphene oxide can be strongly connected, as shown in Fig. 16c. Furthermore, graphene oxide can not only improve the conductivity of the electrode material as a 3D conductive structure, but also reduce polysulfide dissolution. Therefore, the cycle stability of this FeS2/rGO composite is enhanced. Even after 800 cycles at 1C, the attenuation of each cycle is only 0.051% (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of FeS2. (b) Cycling performance of Na/FeS2 tested in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the synthesis process of FeS2/rGO. (d) Cycling performance of FeS2/rGO and pure FeS2 at 1C. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.4.3 Amorphous phosphate-based materials. 
At present, the commercially available cathode materials for LIBs and SIBs are crystalline materials, and ion storage in the crystalline materials is affected by factors such as the crystal structure, crystallinity, preferred orientation and structural stability.101 Usually, the de-intercalation of ions in the material is affected by the transmission channels in its lattice. The arrangements of atomic clusters in amorphous and crystalline materials are different. The atomic clusters in amorphous materials have short-range ordering and they are randomly connected.188 Therefore, there is no diffraction peak in the XRD spectra of amorphous materials, which makes it difficult to characterize it with traditional spectroscopy techniques. Amorphous materials have the characteristics of long range dis-ordering and short-range ordering. They also have some unique advantages such as isotropy, enhanced kinetics, free volume and adjustable lattice distortion.189 In recent years, lithium metal anodes have been studied in LIBs, leading to the application possibility of amorphous FePO4 as the cathode material. Similarly, amorphous FePO4 can also serve as the cathode material for SIBs.190,191 When compared with the crystalline FePO4 material, amorphous FePO4 has many advantages, such as simple synthetic method, reliable continuous channels for metal ions (Na+ or Li+), etc. When amorphous FePO4 is used in sodium-ion batteries, it is quite different from FePO4 obtained after the de-sodiation of NaFePO4. The FePO4 procured from maricite-structured NaFePO4 without any special treatment can retain the maricite structure.192–194 Similarly, when it comes to olivine-structured NaFePO4, as sodium ions are de-intercalated from the cathode material, the FePO4 can still retain the olivine structure.195,196
Liu et al.197 prepared amorphous FePO4 nanoparticles engineered with virus structures through a simple hydrothermal method and used them as the cathode material of SIBs. In order to improve the conductivity, the synthesized FePO4 nanoparticles were combined with single-wall carbon nanotubes to form a composite. Due to the porous nanostructure and the introduction of SWNTs, sodium ions and electrons could be transported faster in the amorphous FePO4 material. As a result, this amorphous porous FePO4 showed a reversible discharge capacity of 66 mA h g−1 and there was almost no capacity decay after 300 cycles. Mathew et al.198 explored the storage properties of Na/K in amorphous FePO4. Fig. 17a shows the schematic of different alkali-ion insertions in amorphous FePO4. As shown, amorphous FePO4 exhibits the property of short-range ordering, suggesting that it can facilitate the accommodation/transport of alkali ions irrespective of their sizes. This amorphous FePO4 tends to transform into crystalline NaFePO4 during the intercalation of sodium ions. In addition, the amorphous FePO4 cathode can also be used as the host for divalent and trivalent ions, such as Zn2+, Mg2+ and Al3+. Fang et al.199 prepared a mesoporous carbon skeleton-modified amorphous FePO4. The as-synthesized FePO4/C composite exhibited a reversible discharge capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at low current density and its capacity could still be maintained at 94% after 200 cycles. Furthermore, graphene,200 multi-walled carbon nanotubes,197 and carbonized polyaniline201 have also been used to construct conductive networks to modify the electrochemical performance of amorphous FePO4.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of different alkali-ion insertions in amorphous FePO4. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic diagram of the amorphous FePO4/C synthesis process. (c) Rate performance from 0.1C to 10C. (d) Long-term cycling performance of amorphous FePO4/C up to 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.4.4 Strategies to enhance the electrochemical performance of amorphous phosphates. 
Morphology control can also be an effective strategy for enhancing the electrochemical performance of amorphous FePO4. In this regard, a low-dimensional size or hierarchical porous structure can shorten the transmission distance of ions in the solid phase and provide more electrochemical active sites. Pan et al.202 prepared two-dimensional (2D) amorphous FePO4 nanosheets and mixed them with carbon black to form a composite (Fig. 17b). Due to the size effect, the transmission distance of sodium ions could be shortened and a large specific surface area was achieved for increasing capacitance. The composite of amorphous FePO4 nanosheets shows an initial reversible capacity of 168.9 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1C with a capacity retention of 92.3% after 1000 cycles (Fig. 17c and d). In addition, some amorphous FePO4 materials with different morphologies such as nanospheres203 and nanowires204 have also been synthesized through various physical or chemical approaches.

5. Application prospects of different types of iron-based cathode materials

Table 1 summarizes all the types of ion-based cathode materials and their electrochemical performances when used for cathode materials of SIBs. Great progress has been made in the main electrochemical properties of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs. It can be seen that the potentials of these cathode materials (vs. Na/Na+) are distributed in a wide voltage range from 2.0 V to 3.4 V and their theoretical capacities range from 60 mA h g−1 to 600 mA h g−1, demonstrating that they have excellent development prospects. A qualified commercial cathode material should have the following properties: high energy density, excellent rate performance, high chemical/thermal stability, low cost and environmental friendliness. The specific energy of cathode materials is closely related to the discharge specific capacity (Q) and voltage platform (E). The relationship between Q and E is shown in eqn (1). nf = 3.6MwQ(1)
Table 1 Overview of the electrochemical properties of typical iron-based electrode materials for SIBs




Cathode material
Operating potential
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




O3-NaFeO2
3.3
80 mA h g−1 at 12 mA g−1

46



NaFe0.5Co0.5O2
3.1
160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 100 mA h g−1 at 20C, 85% capacity retention at 0.1C after 50 cycles

53



NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2
3.0
149 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 86% capacity retention at 0.1C after 50 cycles

58



Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2
3.2
100 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 60 mA h g−1 at 5C, 97% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles

56



P2-Na2/3[Fe1/2Mn1/2]O2
2.75
190 mA h g−1 at 13 mA g−1, 133 mA h g−1 at 260 mA g−1, 70% capacity retention at 12 mA g−1 after 30 cycles

60



NaFePO4 (Maricite)
2.6
145 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, 61 mA h g−1 at 50C

81



89% capacity retention at 5C after 6300 cycles


Na2FeP2O7
3.0
87 mA h g−1 at 0.05C, 65 mA h g−1 at 1C

95



95% capacity retention at 0.05C after 80 cycles


Na2FePO4F
3.1
90.3 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, 66.8 mA h g−1 at 4C

112



85% capacity retention at 4C after 1000 cycles


Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F
3.2
110 mA h g−1 at 6.2 mA g−1, 78 mA h g−1 at 124 mA g−1

108



Na3Fe2(PO4)3
3.5
120 mA h g−1 at 24 mA g−1, 90% capacity retention at 24 mA g−1 after 300 cycles

131



Na2NiFe(CN)6
3.3
65 mA h g−1 at 1C, 63 mA h g−1 at 5C

150



98% capacity retention at 5C after 500 cycles


Na4Fe(CN)6
3.2
150 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 90% capacity retention at 0.1C after 200 cycles

152



NaNiFe(CN)6
3.4
55 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, 52 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1. No capacity loss at 100 mA g−1 after 180 cycles

154



Na1.40MnFe(CN)6
3.3
134 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 45 mA h g−1 at 40C

156



FeF3·0.33H2O
2.9
285 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 155 mA h g−1 at 2C, 67% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles

172



FeS2
2.0
600 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 70% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles

179



FePO4
2.4
168 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 77 mA h g−1 at 10C

195



92.1% capacity retention at 1C after 1000





N represents the electron-transfer number, F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1) and Mw represents the relative molecular mass of the corresponding cathode material. From the equation it can be conclude that when the electron-transfer number is the same, the lower molecular mass can lead to a higher specific capacity. Take NaFePO4 and Na2FeP2O7 as examples; in the charge process, they are both known to release one sodium ion. NaFePO4 exhibits a theoretical specific capacity of 154 mA h g−1, while Na2FeP2O7 exhibits a lower theoretical specific capacity of only 97 mA h g−1 due to its larger molecular mass. The voltage platform (E) obeys the following formula (2). E = Ecathode − ENa = −ΔG/nF(2)ΔG represents the Gibbs free energy and Ecathode and ENa are the potentials of the cathode and the Na anode, respectively. Therefore, a higher voltage of the cathode material always leads to a higher voltage plateau of the sodium-ion battery. The potential of the cathode material is intrinsically determined by the energy position (vs. the Fermi level of metallic Na) of the redox couples, which can be raised by increasing the inductive effect of anions. For instance, F has strong electronegativity, so Na2FePO4F has a higher operating potential of 3.1 V than NaFePO4.205 Therefore, a high specific capacity and high voltage platform have become the guidelines for selecting excellent cathode materials for SIBs.

Table 2 shows the comparison between the used materials in sodium-ion batteries and lithium-ion batteries. From the summary, it can be found that the cathode current collectors used for SIBs and LIBs are the same, while the current collector of Al foil is also applicable for the anode material of SIBs. The electrolyte NaPF6 is cheaper than the LiPF6 used in lithium-ion batteries, while the preparation of hard carbon needs high sintering temperatures leading to a higher cost than that for graphite. Taken together, the cost advantage of the whole sodium-ion battery mainly depends on the choice of cathode material. Iron is a metal element with abundant reserves on earth, second only to aluminum among metal elements. The potential of iron-based cathode materials for sodium ion batteries can be as high as 3.5 V by using the variable valence redox reaction of iron, which can realize the application of high energy density. Therefore, iron-based materials are generally considered to be low-cost and environmentally friendly. Therefore, when studying the application prospects of different iron-based materials, more attention should be paid to energy density, rate performance and cycle life. The application prospects of different types of iron based positive materials will be discussed in detail below.
Table 2 Comparison of the materials used in sodium-ion batteries and lithium-ion batteries






Sodium-ion battery
Lithium-ion battery




Cathode material
O3 phase oxides, polyanion compounds, Prussian blue
LiFePO4


LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2


Cathode current collector
Aluminum foil
Aluminum foil


Electrolyte
1 mol L−1
1 mol L−1


NaPF6-EC-DMC
LiPF6-EC-DMC


Anode material
Hard carbon
Graphite


Anode current collector
Aluminum foil
Copper foil




5.1 Layered iron-based oxides
As mentioned above, the electrochemical properties of P2 phase iron-based materials are better than those of O3 phase materials from the perspective of material structures. This is because the spacing between the transition metal layers in P2 phase materials is larger, which makes the insertion/extraction of sodium ions much easier. However, the P2 phase iron-based cathode material has an ignorable defect. The disadvantage of P2-type cathode materials is that the sodium content in the material is generally less than 2/3, leading to a relatively low specific capacity. However, O3-type iron-based layered oxide materials have a relatively high average voltage. Fig. 18 exhibits the average voltage and specific capacity of some typical iron-based oxides. As can be seen from the figure, the O3 phase materials have higher voltage than the P2 phase materials which can lead to a higher specific energy density. In order to enhance the cycling stability of the O3-type iron-based cathode materials, doping with various valence metals can be a very effective strategy. For example, the introduction of cobalt and nickel can effectively suppress the phase change in O3-type materials. Most O3 and P2 phase NaxMO2 have poor water resistance. This is because the interlayer spacing of NaxMO2 is large, and thus an ion exchange reaction with the hydrogen ions of water molecules in air easily occurs.206,207 Moreover, the reaction may generate alkalis such as Na2CO3, NaHCO3, and NaOH on the surface of the material which will change the crystal structure of the material and reduce the crystallinity of the material. The formation of a strong alkaline environment on the surface of the material will defluorinate the binder and make the binder of PVDF invalid, and the alkali will corrode the current collector of aluminum foil.208,209 This defect is more serious in P2 phase cathode materials due to the larger interlayer spacing; therefore, O3 phase cathode materials have more advantages in commercial applications. For example, replacing the transition metal layer with a small amount of the Cu element can effectively improve the water resistance of the layered oxide.209,210 Therefore, as a layered transition metal oxide used in the field of large-scale energy storage, it should possess the properties of water resistance and high cycle life. With comprehensive consideration, the high-sodium iron-based cathode material containing a small amount of the Cu element can be preferentially selected. For instance, O3-Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2 has been shown to be a more promising practical cathode material for SIBs. This is because there are no precious metals such as Co and Ni in Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48], which can effectively reduce costs. On the other hand, this material can deliver a reversible capacity of 100 mA h g−1. Furthermore, its cycling performance is outstanding. After 100 cycles, it can still maintain a capacity retention rate of 97%.211 Although sodium-ion batteries are always considered to be energy storage batteries which are not suitable for new energy vehicles, the modified O3 phase layered iron-based oxides may overcome this issue in the future and can be successfully applied in low-speed electric vehicles. Therefore, considering the above factors, it can be expected that O3-type iron based cathode materials are likely to be more competitive as practical cathode materials of SIBs.
 Fig. 18  Specific capacity and average voltage for selected layered iron-based oxides for SIBs. 
5.2 Iron-based polyanion compounds
As identified, commercially available LiFePO4 has better cycle performance, but its energy density is still insufficient. Similarly, the energy density of iron and phosphate-based sodium-ion batteries is also not ideal: most of them are below 400 W h kg−1.212Fig. 19 shows the energy densities of different iron-based polyanion compounds, most of which are lower than those of layered transition-metal oxides. However, iron-based polyanion compounds are considered to be more suitable for large-scale energy storage equipment due to their ideal cycling life, low cost and environmental friendliness. With the rapid development of large-scale commercialization of 5G, as an important area of new infrastructure, the 5G base stations will surely set off an upsurge of larger-scale construction.213 However, at the same time, the energy demand caused by the operation of a large number of 5G base stations has surged. At present, there are two mainstream power supply systems for 5G base stations, one is the UPS (uninterruptible power supply) system, and the other is the HVDC (high-voltage direct current) power supply system. The UPS system is mainly composed of battery packs, rectifiers, inverters, static switches, etc. At present, the UPS system options for 5G base station mainly include lead-acid batteries and lithium-ion batteries (LiFePO4). The energy consumption of 5G base stations is 3–5 times that of the same-site 4G base station. Fig. 19b shows the 5G base station's demand for backup batteries in 2019–2025. It can be found that there will be a surge in 5G base stations' energy demands in 2021, and then it will level off. The high energy consumption of 5G base stations has become a difficult problem that cannot be ignored. Considering the high price of lithium resources and low energy density of lead acid batteries, sodium-ion batteries with iron-based polyanion compounds as the cathode material can be feasible for the energy supply for 5G base stations due to the excellent cycling life and low cost. Amongst many iron-based polyanionic materials, both olivine and maricite-phase NaFePO4 have relatively low voltage, and the synthesis methods are difficult to realize for industrial mass production, suggesting a low commercial potential. Although fluorophosphate-based SIBs have higher voltage, their commercial usage may be limited by the toxicity of fluorine. Furthermore, the thermodynamic and kinetic characteristics of bulk structures with respect to the electrochemical performance need to be further improved. Although NaFeSO4 has high energy density and is low cost, its instability at high temperature makes it unable to undergo conventional carbon-coating treatment, greatly limiting its commercial prospects. A typical representative NASICON material is Na3Fe2(PO4)3, which can be used as both cathode and anode materials. Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can provide a specific capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with a very flat plateau at about 2.5 V.213 Due to the excellent cycle performance of NASICON materials without toxic hazards and precious metals, Na3Fe2(PO4)3 has great potential as a cathode material for commercial SIBs. Moreover, Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be synthesized through a simple method of a solid state reaction which is suitable for industrialized mass production. However, this material's discharge specific capacity is not satisfactory. Therefore, future research should emphasize more on the strategies to improve the specific discharge capacity. Once the discharge specific capacity of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 can be further increased, it is expected to replace the application of LiFePO4 in 5 G base stations.
 Fig. 19  (a) The energy density of different types of iron-based polyanion compounds. (b) 5G base stations' demand for backup batteries in 2019–2026. 
5.3 Iron-based Prussian blue
The iron-based Prussian blue material is a cathode material system with low cost, long life and high rate. What needs to be emphasized here is its excellent rate performance. Due to its unique open crystal structure which can ensure rapid migration of alkali metal ions, Prussian blue materials are very suitable for the rapid de-intercalation of sodium ions, that is, under high-rate discharge, the ideal capacity can still be maintained.214 This feature is not available in other types of cathode materials which makes Prussian blue materials have great commercialization potential. Prussian blue was mistakenly thought to be toxic because it contains CN−, but in fact the material itself is completely environmentally friendly. Aqueous Prussian blue materials can yield both better cycle and rate performances, but their discharge specific capacity is insufficient. Organic Prussian blue materials exhibit high voltages and impressive capacities. In general, the Prussian blue cathode materials have industrial application prospects because of their facile synthesis process, low cost and good electrochemical performance. What's more, at present, most of the anode materials suitable for sodium-ion batteries are sodium free, which requires that the cathode materials must contain sodium. Regarding this, iron-based hexacyanoferrates (NaxFe[Fe(CN)6]) without expensive Co/Ni may be a choice for SIBs due to their excellent energy densities (400–520 W h kg−1) in organic electrolytes. Fig. 20 shows the raw material cost distribution charts of a LiFePO4/Graphite full battery and Na4Fe(CN)6/hard carbon full battery. From the comparison, it can be concluded that the cost of the Na4Fe(CN)6/hard carbon full battery is about 80% that of the LiFePO4/graphite full battery. Moreover, the sodium-ion battery with Na4Fe(CN)6 as the cathode material can also provide a 3.2 V operating voltage which is the same for a commercialized LiFePO4 battery.215 Taken together, iron-based hexacyanoferrate (NaxFe[Fe(CN)6]) batteries have great commercial potential due to both the energy density and operating voltage and they can replace the commercial LiFePO4 battery in some fields. In particular they can replace LiFePO4 in the energy storage field due to their lower cost. However, the unique structure of Prussian blue materials makes them unstable at high temperatures. When used in SIBs, they may cause some safety hazards. Furthermore, their exploration is still in the stage of basic research, and there is a long way to go before their commercial usage. In large-scale fabrication of Prussian blue materials for SIB cathodes, material consistency, material water content control and separation technology must be realized before commercialization.
 Fig. 20  Raw material cost distribution charts of different cells. 
5.4 Iron-based Na-free material
Sodium-ion batteries with FeF3 as the cathode material have the advantages of high discharge capacity, high theoretical capacity and low price. However, poor conductivity of FeF3 limits its commercial use. FeS2 has the advantages of being abundant, cheap and environmentally friendly and having a high theoretical capacity. It is an ideal choice for the development of large-scale electrochemical energy storage. However, its poor conductivity and large volume change when reacting with sodium result in rapid capacity decay as well as poor rate performance which further impedes its practical application. With the continuous optimization of battery system components such as electrolytes, the performance of FeS2 cathode materials has been significantly improved and provides a good foundation for the future development of sodium-ion batteries. Nevertheless, there are still many problems that need to be addressed. The effect of the voltage window on the cycle stability and the effect of different electrolytes on its electrochemical properties are few such concerns. In addition, these sodium-free cathode materials such as sulfide, fluoride and amorphous iron phosphate face identical problems when these materials are used as cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries. Sodium metal anodes or anode materials containing sodium are indispensable. Though exciting results with sodium metal anodes have been reported, there is still a long way ahead to achieve their practical application.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Due to the quick cost escalation of lithium materials, sodium-ion batteries have turned out to be one of the crucial research hotspots in the field of energy storage and conversion battery technologies. Ample availability of the raw material resources of sodium, its considerable low-cost, good safety performance and environmental friendliness have provided SIBs with greater application prospects. Suitable cathode materials are necessary components amongst the various components of SIBs, which have gained substantial research interest in the recent years. Among these, iron-based materials have had a massive impact due to their low cost, ideal voltage and environmental friendliness. Extensive research over the years has greatly improved the electrochemical properties of iron-based cathode materials. However, the iron-based cathode materials also have drawbacks such as poor structural stabilities, low working potentials, poor theoretical capacities and low electronic conductivities. The common modification methods such as particle nanometerization, surface coating and element doping have proved to be able to significantly improve the electrochemical properties of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs. The nano-scale structures can not only recover the transmission efficiency of sodium ions and electrons, but also augment the utilization of materials. Surface material coating can both improve the conductivity of the material and effectively reduce the side reactions between the electrolyte and the material. The introduction of transition metal elements can provide a certain capacity for the material and improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity.
Furthermore, the theoretical capacities of transition metal oxides are high, but there are issues related to their poor structural stability and difficult preparation methods. The synergistic effect between multiple metals can be enriched by cation substitution. The cycle stability of such materials can also be upgraded. Some polyanionic compounds have the advantages of high voltage and good structural stability; therefore, more focus should be placed on solving the problem of poor conductivities of these materials. In this regard, carbon coating or the design of porous nanostructures can effectively improve the electrochemical performance of the materials. In addtion, designing Prussian blue compounds with low coordination water and vacancy concentrations can effectively maintain the material structure stability which has a greater impact on capacity, rate performance and cycle stability.
Despite the progress achieved in the development of iron-based electrodes for SIBs, several scientific and practical issues still remain challenging, which should be overcome toward commercialization. Several points should be emphasized as follows:
(1) Further exploring new iron-based materials with both high energy and power densities as well as long cycle-life for SIB cathodes. Although SIBs are similar to LIBs, directly applying the iron-based cathode materials of LIBs to SIBs does not seem that easy because sodium ions have a larger ion radius, and the structures of LIB cathode materials are different from those of SIBs. Taking the layered oxide as an example, the lithium content of the layered oxide in LIBs is generally equal to 1 or is even more than 1, but in order to maintain the stability of the layered structure in SIBs, the sodium ion content in the layered oxide is generally less than 1.Therefore, further exploring new cathode materials with both high energy density and power density as well as long cycle-life is necessary for SIBs.
(2) Further optimizing the synthesis methods and developing new methods to achieve high performance iron-based SIB cathode materials. At present, the synthesis methods of iron-based materials for SIB cathodes are still not satisfactory enough for achieving high performance for practical application. Currently, the traditional solid phase method and gel–sol method are the main preparation techniques. There are few approaches for the modification of iron-based cathode materials through doping with other transition metals and carbon coating. The methods need to be optimized to control morphologies and structures with respect to the material performance in SIBs. Furthermore, inventing new synthesis methods through innovative designs and experimental procedures is also necessary for achieving high-performance cathode materials for SIBs.
(3) Further fundamentally understanding the reaction mechanisms of the reactions during the SIB performance of iron-based cathode materials through both theoretical calculations and experiments. Theoretical density functional theory (DFT) calculations (density functional theory (DFT)), advanced modern characterization and experimental validation are all methods for achieving a fundamental understanding of material performances and reaction mechanisms for new material design and performance optimization. Through a combination of physicochemical characterization techniques (e.g. STEM, XAFS, FTIR, NMR, RAMAN, etc.) and theoretical DFT calculations (e.g. DFT), the structures and electrochemical reaction mechanisms of iron-based cathode materials can be investigated and understood. In particular, the development of in situ characterization technologies such as in situ electron microscopy, in situ Raman spectroscopy, and in situ X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy is expected to aid material functional and reaction mechanism research, especially in practical performance validation. Furthermore, the identification and detailed characterization of Na+ ion and electron transportation within the cathode materials will benefit the rational design and optimized synthesis of the materials.
(4) Optimizing the compatibility between the cathode iron-based materials and electrolytes. The electrolyte is an important component that affects the safety performance of the entire battery. Moreover, the properties of the electrolyte greatly limit the electrochemical performance of the entire sodium-ion batteries. Therefore, the compatibility between the cathode material and electrolyte should be optimized for achieving high performance. For example, the choice of solute or solvent will cause a great difference in the final electrochemical performance of cathode materials. Therefore, vigorous development of new electrolyte systems to adapt to different iron-based cathode materials is needed.
(5) Accelerating commercialization of iron-based cathode materials for practical SIBs toward large-scale energy storage. Among all SIB cathode materials developed, both iron-based Prussian blue compounds, polyanion compounds and O3-type layered oxides have high commercial prospects for grid-scale applications due to their low cost and favourable electrochemical performances. However, there are still some issues that limit their commercialization progress, such as the passable stability of the O3 layered oxide structure, poor thermal stability and structural defects in Prussian blue materials. Once these problems are solved, these iron-based materials will be very competitive in the field of large-scale energy storage when compared with lithium-ion batteries.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51774251), Hebei Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (B2017203313), Hundred Excellent Innovative Talents Support Program in Hebei Province (SLRC2017057), Talent Engineering Training Funds of Hebei Province (A201802001), and opening project of the state key laboratory of Advanced Chemical Power Sources (SKL-ACPS-C-11).
References
H. Pan, Y. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, W. Wang, D. Choi, Z. Nie, J. Yu, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3155–3160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Hwang, S. Myung and Y. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
A. Yoshino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5798–5800 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, B. Wang, H. Li, S. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, B. Liu, X. Fan, X. Liu, J. Ding, W. Hu and C. Zhong, J. Power Sources, 2020, 458, 228061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, S. Sarkar, S. Shi, Q.-A. Huang, H. Zhao, L. Yan, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805061 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, B. Chen, T. Fang, Y. Li, Z. Zhou, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902023 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, M. Wang, P. Jia, B. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 225–233 CrossRef .
S. Shi, Z. Li, L. Shen, X. Yin, Y. Liu, G. Chang, J. Wang, S. Xu, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 29, 78–83 CrossRef .
S. Shi, C. Sun, X. Yin, L. Shen, Q. Shi, K. Zhao, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909283 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, J. Xie, W. Guo, D.-S. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904199 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sultana, M. M. Rahman, Y. Chen and A. M. Glushenkov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703857 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, L. Fan, S. Chen, S. Su, R. Ma, X. Han and B. Lu, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900634 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, K. Wang, J. Li and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7870–7874 RSC .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Hong, K. Park, H. Kim, S. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11788–11827 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H. Kim, Z. Ding, M. H. Lee, K. Lim, G. Yoon and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600943 CrossRef .
G. H. Newman and L. P. Klemann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2097 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, X. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Feng and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6301–6306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tie, G. Gao, F. Xia, R. Yue, Q. Wang, R. Qi, B. Wang and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6978–6985 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Shi, X. Yin, J. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126181 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gong and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3223–3242 RSC .
S. Guo, J. Li, Q. Xu, Z. Ma and H. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 285–299 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ni, Y. Bai, F. Wu and C. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600275 CrossRef .
X. Tang, H. Liu, D. Su, P. H. L. Notten and G. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3979–3990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, X. Wu, Y. Yin and Y. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1643–1647 RSC .
J. Qian, C. Wu, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702619 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .
Y. Fang, Z. Chen, L. Xiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703116 CrossRef .
T. Wang, D. Su, D. Shanmukaraj, T. Rojo, M. Armand and G. Wang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 200–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 294–323 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Du, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, J. Li, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, Q. Kong, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, Q. Zhang and G. Cui, Joule, 2020, 4, 1557–1574 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, C. Yuan, H. Luo, X. Zhang, S. Yang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572–574 RSC .
C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Phys. B, 1980, 99, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Mariyappan, J. Vergnet, A. M. Abakumov, G. Rousse, F. Rabuel, M. Chakir and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901785 CrossRef .
L. Liu, X. Li, S.-H. Bo, Y. Wang, H. Chen, N. Twu, D. Wu and G. Ceder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500944 CrossRef .
N. Yabuuchi, R. Hara, K. Kubota, J. Paulsen, S. Kumakura and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16851–16855 RSC .
P. Wang, H. Xin, T. Zuo, Q. Li, X. Yang, Y. Yin, X. Gao, X. Yu and Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8178–8183 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Pang, S. Kalluri, V. K. Peterson, N. Sharma, J. Kimpton, B. Johannessen, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and Z. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3150–3158 CrossRef CAS .
E. Talaie, V. Duffort, H. L. Smith, B. Fultz and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2512–2523 RSC .
J. Yoshida, E. Guerin, M. Arnault, C. Constantin, B. M. De Boisse, D. Carlier, M. Guignard and C. Delmas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, 1256–1261 CrossRef .
S. Wang, C. Sun, N. Wang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10138–10158 RSC .
Y. Takeda, J. Akagi, A. Edagawa, M. Inagaki and S. Naka, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1167–1172 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Blesa, E. Moran, C. Leon, J. Santamaria, J. D. Tornero and N. Menendez, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 126, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, K. Nakahara, M. Nishijima, N. Imanishi, O. Yamamoto, M. Takano and R. Kanno, Mater. Res. Bull., 1994, 29, 659–666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, A. Maazaz, C. Fouassier, J. M. Reau and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1979, 14, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shahi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, L. Zhao, N. Dimov, S. Okada and T. Nishida, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, 156–161 Search PubMed .
E. Lee, D. E. Brown, E. E. Alp, Y. Ren, J. Lu, J. Woo and C. S. Johnson, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6755–6764 CrossRef CAS .
D. Susanto, M. K. Cho, G. Ali, J.-Y. Kim, H. J. Chang, H.-S. Kim, K.-W. Nam and K. Y. Chung, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3644–3651 CrossRef CAS .
E. Monyoncho and R. Bissessur, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2678–2686 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Liu, T. Iwao, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2970–2976 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mortemard de Boisse, D. Carlier, M. Guignard and C. Delmas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, 569–574 CrossRef .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, J. Iwatate, H. Nishikawa, S. Hitomi, R. Okuyama, R. Usui, Y. Yamada and S. Komaba, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 512–517 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Zhong, C. He, F. Gao, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 53, 323–328 CrossRef .
B. M. De Boisse, J. H. Cheng, D. Carlier, M. Guignard, C. Pan, S. Bordere, D. S. Filimonov, C. Drathen, E. Suard and B. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2015, 3, 10976–10989 RSC .
J. Xie, Z. Wang, Z. J. Xu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703509 CrossRef .
B. Mortemard de Boisse, J. H. Cheng, D. Carlier, M. Guignard, C. J. Pan, S. Bordère, D. Filimonov, C. Drathen, E. Suard, B. J. Hwang, A. Wattiaux and C. Delmas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10976–10989 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Liu, T. Iwao, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2970–2976 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, B. Acebedo, M. C. Cabanas, D. Shanmukaraj, M. Armand and T. Rojo, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 37, 61–63 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vassilaras, D.-H. Kwon, S. T. Dacek, T. Shi, D.-H. Seo, G. Ceder and J. C. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4596–4606 RSC .
L. Mu, S. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6928–6933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, F. Zhang, K. Tang, X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, M. Wu and G. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1937–1945 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalluri, K. H. Seng, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo, Z. Chen, H. Liu and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8953–8958 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, J. Wu, E. Hu, Q. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. Stavitski, L. Jiang, X. Rong and X. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2018, 6, 20795–20803 RSC .
P. Wang, Y. You, Y. Yin and Y. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701912 CrossRef .
V. Duffort, E. Talaie, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2515–2524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku and R. J. Brodd, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, S. Nishimura and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 841–859 CrossRef CAS .
C. Masquelier and L. Croguennec, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6552–6591 CrossRef CAS .
B. Senthilkumar, C. Murugesan, L. Sharma, S. Lochab and P. Barpanda, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800253 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gong and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3223–3242 RSC .
B. Lin, Q. Li, B. Liu, S. Zhang and C. Deng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8178–8188 RSC .
S. M. Oh, S. Myung, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati and Y. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 780–787 RSC .
M. Casascabanas, V. Roddatis, D. Saurel, P. Kubiak, J. Carreterogonzalez, V. Palomares, P. Serras and T. Rojo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17421–17423 RSC .
B. L. Ellis, W. R. M. Makahnouk, Y. Makimura, K. E. Toghill and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, I. Park, J.-K. Yoo, S.-K. Jung, Y.-U. Park, W. A. Goddard III and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 540–545 RSC .
L. Zhao, D. M. Zhou, W. X. Huang, X. Y. Kang, Q. W. Shi, Z. L. Deng, X. W. Yan and Y. B. Yu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 3153–3165 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, X. Song, Y. Du, C. Peng, M. Lin, S. Xi, B. Tian, J. Zheng, Y. Wu, F. Pan and K. P. Loh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4882–4892 RSC .
F. Xiong, Q. An, L. Xia, Y. Zhao, L. Mai, H. Tao and Y. Yue, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 608–615 CrossRef CAS .
M.-y. Zheng, Z.-y. Bai, Y.-W. He, S. Wu, Y. Yang and Z.-Z. Zhu, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 5192–5201 CrossRef CAS .
M. Avdeev, Z. Mohamed, C. D. Ling, J. Lu, M. Tamaru, A. Yamada and P. Barpanda, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8685–8693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Liu, L. Jiao and L. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801917 CrossRef .
G. D. Park, J. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, S. A. Scott, M. Huang, W. Peng, A. M. Kiefer, F. S. Flack, D. E. Savage and M. G. Lagally, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 402 CrossRef .
A. Mitra, S. Jena, S. B. Majumder and S. Das, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135899 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Xia, X. Wu, Z. Pan and P. K. Shen, Carbon, 2019, 146, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, J. Zhou, B. Li, L. An, P. Cui, W. Xia, L. Song, D. Xia, W. Chu and Z. Wu, Small, 2015, 11, 2170–2176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gabelicarobert, M. Goreaud, P. Labbe and B. Raveau, J. Solid State Chem., 1982, 45, 389–395 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, K. Matsumoto, T. Nohira, C. Ding, T. Yamamoto and R. Hagiwara, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, T. Ye, M. Avdeev, S. Chung and A. Yamada, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 4194–4197 RSC .
G. S. Gopalakrishna, M. J. Mahesh, K. G. Ashamanjari and J. Shashidharaprasad, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 281, 604–610 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Clark, P. Barpanda, A. Yamada and M. S. Islam, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 11807–11812 RSC .
M. Whangbo, D. Dai and H. Koo, Dalton Trans., 2004, 12, 3019–3025 RSC .
Q. Huang, H. Li, M. Grätzel and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1793–1797 RSC .
S. Poisson and P. Berthet, J. Phys. IV, 1997, 7, 563–569 CrossRef .
P. Barpanda, G. Liu, C. D. Ling, M. Tamaru, M. Avdeev, S. Chung, Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3480–3487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, R. A. Shakoor, C. Park, S. Y. Lim, J.-S. Kim, Y. N. Jo, W. Cho, K. Miyasaka, R. Kahraman, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1147–1155 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, K. Du, Y. Lai, G. Shang, H. Li, Z. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 357, 164–172 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Shakoor, C. S. Park, A. A. Raja, J. Shin and R. Kahraman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3929–3935 RSC .
R. Gond, S. S. Meena, V. Pralong and P. Barpanda, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 277, 329–336 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Liu, Z. Mohamed, C. D. Ling and A. Yamada, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, T. Kiko, T. Hosokawa, K. Matsumoto, T. Nohira and R. Hagiwara, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Xiang, X. Y. Zhou, Z. F. Zhang, M. M. Chen, H. L. Bai and J. M. Guo, Adv. Mater. Res., 2013, 825–830 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. a. Lv, P. Gao, H. Shu, X. Yang, Q. Liang, L. Liu and X. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 751, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, X. Liu and B. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 56, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tripathi, S. M. Wood, M. S. Islam and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2257–2264 RSC .
W. Song, X. Ji, Z. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Yao, K. Huangfu, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 2571–2577 RSC .
Y. Kawabe, N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, N. Fukuhara, T. Inamasu, R. Okuyama, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 80–84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. Wang, R. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Wen, Z. Jiang, Z. Gong and Y. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, 569–574 Search PubMed .
T. Ramireddy, M. Rahman, N. Sharma, A. M. Glushenkov and Y. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, W. R. M. Makahnouk, Y. Makimura, K. Toghill and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kawabe, N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, N. Fukuhara, T. Inamasu, R. Okuyama, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1225–1228 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Liu, F. Zheng, R. Liu, J. Lee, G.-L. Xu, G. Zhong, X. Hou, R. Fu, Z. Chen, K. Amine, J. Mi, S. Wu, C. P. Grey and Y. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11918–11923 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Smiley and G. R. Goward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7645–7656 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, W. Shi, J. Sunarso, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16280–16287 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, L. Wu, Y. Sui and S. Zhong, Adv. Powder Technol., 2020, 31, 1564–1573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hua, S. Cai, R. Ling, Y. Li, Y. Jiang, D. Xie, S. Jiang, Y. Lin and K. Shen, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2018, 95, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, V. Ramar and P. Balaya, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 50155–50164 RSC .
S. Chen, C. Wu, L. Shen, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, K. Xi, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700431 CrossRef .
B. E. Francisco, C. R. Stoldt and J. Mpeko, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4741–4749 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Agaskar, R. K. Grasselli, D. J. Buttrey and B. White, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1997, 110, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chung, J. Ming, L. Lander, J. Lu and A. Yamada, J. Mater. Chem., 2018, 6, 3919–3925 RSC .
X. Liu, G. Feng, E. Wang, H. Chen, Z. Wu, W. Xiang, Y. Zhong, Y. Chen, X. Guo and B. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12421–12430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bykov, Solid State Ionics, 1990, 38, 31–52 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, L. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Hu, H. Li, W. Chen and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, K. Song, P. A. Van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2175–2180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jung, C. H. Lim and D. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 11350–11354 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, Y. Hu, M. Titirici, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 130–151 CrossRef .
M. Chen, W. Hua, J. Xiao, D. L. Cortie, W. Chen, E. Wang, Z. Hu, Q. Gu, X. Wang and S. Indris, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1480 CrossRef .
L. Bo, S. Zhang and C. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2550–2559 RSC .
R. Rajagopalan, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Du, Y. Huang, B. Li, Y. Zong, J. Wang and G. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605694 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. Liu, T. Chen, X. Xia, L.-C. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Xia, Ionics, 2019, 25, 1083–1090 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, T. Chen and S. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1306–1314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu, X. Wu, M. Wang, M. Lucero, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Xu, Q. Wang and M. Gu, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103941 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, C. Ling and A. Yamada, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1297–1299 CrossRef CAS .
T. Watcharatharapong, J. Tthienprasert, P. Barpanda, R. Ahuja and S. Chakraborty, J. Mater. Chem., 2017, 5, 21726–21739 RSC .
M. Chen, D. L. Cortie, Z. Hu, H. Jin, S. Wang, Q. Gu, W. Hua, E. Wang, W. Lai and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800944 CrossRef .
M. Shishkin and H. Sato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20067–20074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kee, N. Dimov, A. Staykov and S. Okada, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 171, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guan, B. Pan, P. Zhou, J. Mi, D. Zhang, J. Xu and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22369–22377 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, S. Nishimura, S. Chung and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. Guo, Z. Ye, X. Zhao, S. Wu, J.-X. Mi, C.-Z. Wang, Z. Gong, M. J. McDonald, Z. Zhu, K.-M. Ho and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17233–17238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dahbi, N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, K. Tokiwa and S. Komaba, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15007–15028 RSC .
X. Wu, W. Deng, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 10130–10134 RSC .
X. Wu, C. Wu, C. Wei, L. Hu, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Wang and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5393–5399 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, M. Qin, Z. Zhu, M. Yan, Q. Li, L. Zhang, D. Liu and L. Mai, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4713–4718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Xie, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Xiao, S. Li, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 273–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 550 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .
C. D. Wessells, S. V. Peddada, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5421 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wessells, M. T. Mcdowell, S. V. Peddada, M. Pasta, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1688–1694 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Qian and H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, M. Sun, S. Guo, J. Qian, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Luo, M. Sun, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. Liu, M. Xu, J. Cheng, D. Zhang and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1964–1967 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yue, A. J. Binder, B. Guo, Z. Zhang, Z. Qiao, C. Tian and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3134–3137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, X. Wu, Y. Yin and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 14061–14065 RSC .
X. Bie, K. Kubota, T. Hosaka, K. Chihara and S. Komaba, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, S. Guo, C. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Chen, J. P. Tu, S. Liu, J. Cheng, J. Xie and G. Cao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16121–16129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. J. Woo, M. Rizwan, R. b. Yahya, D. Cui, D. Luo, L. Chen, A. K. M. Arof and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8570–8579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, X. Yu, Y. Yin, K.-W. Nam and Y.-G. Guo, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 117–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, H. Gwon, J. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5260–5264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Zhao, T. Doi, S. Okada and J. I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4952–4956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hua, R. Robert, L.-S. Du, K. M. Wiaderek, M. Leskes, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas and C. P. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15169–15184 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Thieu, M. H. Fawey, H. Bhatia, T. Diemant, V. S. K. Chakravadhanula, R. J. Behm, C. Kübel and M. Fichtner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701051 CrossRef .
S. B. Son, T. A. Yersak, D. M. Piper, S. C. Kim, S. K. Chan, J. S. Cho, S. S. Suh, Y. U. Kim, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–5 Search PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, M. H. Rossouw, A. D. Kock, A. P. D. L. Harpe and D. C. Liles, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 289–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, N. Kumagai and S. Chiba, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 46, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Doi, S. O. IchiroTanaka and J. I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4837–4841 CrossRef CAS .
F. Badway, N. Pereira, F. Cosandey and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, 1209–1218 CrossRef .
T. Bao, H. Zhong, H. Zheng, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Guo, M. Zhou, Q. Wei, Z. Yang, H. Shu, X. Yang, J. Tan, Z. Yan and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 501–515 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, C. Yin, X. Mu and J. Maier, Chem. Mater., 2013, 6, 962–969 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Liu, H. Hu, L. Yang, Z. Yang, Y. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 7153–7163 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi, G. Cheruvally, H. J. Ahn, K. W. Kim and J. H. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yang, S. Osmialowski and Q. C. Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, 1499–1502 CrossRef .
J. Huo, J. Wu, M. Zheng, Y. Tu and Z. Lan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Kim, W. H. Jung, H. S. Ryu, K. W. Kim, J. H. Ahn, K. K. Cho, G. B. Cho, T. H. Nam, I. S. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 449, 307 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Suo, T. Gao, X. Fan, F. Han and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 54, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Qi, L. Guan, C. Liu, S. Cui, C. Shen and L. Mi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5332–5341 RSC .
Z. Wei, D. Wang, X. Yang, C. Wang, G. Chen and F. Du, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800639 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, J. Zhang, L. Xiao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600392 CrossRef .
Y. S. Hong, K. S. Ryu, Y. J. Park, M. G. Kim, J. M. Lee and S. H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1870–1874 RSC .
S. W. Kim, J. Ryu, B. P. Chan and K. Kang, Chemical Communications, 2010, 46, 7409–7411 RSC .
S. M. Oh, S. T. Myung, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 5, 780–787 RSC .
C. M. Burba and R. Frech, Spectrochimica Acta Part A Molecular & Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 2006, 65, 44–50 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, S. Zhang and P. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2016, 314, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 780–787 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Xu, X. Han, C. Pellegrinelli and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5664 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mathew, S. Kim, J. Kang, J. Gim, J. Song, J. P. Baboo, W. Park, D. Ahn, J. Han and L. Gu, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, 138 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, L. Xiao, J. Qian, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3539–3543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5501–5508 RSC .
L. Yao, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Zhang and Q. Chao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 20, 479–487 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Duan, G. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Feng, J. Hu, J. Zheng, J. Chen and F. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4479–4484 RSC .
J. Zhao, Z. Jian, J. Ma, F. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Chen, L. Chen, H. Liu and S. Dai, Chemsuschem, 2012, 5, 1495–1500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, B. Ding, J. Wang, P. Nie, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8495–8499 RSC .
J. S. Ko, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, H.-S. Kim, X. Petrissans, R. H. DeBlock, C. S. Choi, J. W. Long and B. S. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18707–18715 RSC .
S. Doubaji, B. Philippe, I. Saadoune, M. Gorgoi, T. Gustafsson, A. Solhy, M. Valvo, H. Rensmo and K. Edström, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, N. Yabuuchi, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, T. Ishikawa and I. Nakai, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6211–6220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Q. Li, P. Liu, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 135 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. Yang, S. Xu, L. Mu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li and L. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500031 CrossRef .
H.-R. Yao, P.-F. Wang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Yu, L. Gu, C. OuYang, Y.-X. Yin, E. Hu, X.-Q. Yang, E. Stavitski, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8440–8443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mu, S. Xu, Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6928–6933 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Han, W. Wang, F. A. Gebert, S. Chou, H. Liu, X. Zhang and S. X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700274 CrossRef .
K. Chang, K. Chu, H. Wang, Y. Lin and J. Pan, IEEE Access, 2020, 8, 32935–32946 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Gang, Z. Hu, Z. Yan, W. Li, Y. Li, Q.-F. Gu, Z. Wang, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 980 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, M. Li, D. Abd El-Hady, W. Alshitari, A. S. Al-Bogami, J. Lu and K. Amine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900161 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The mode of energy storage and energy output for sodium-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 2  Categories of iron-based cathode materials for SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Crystal structure of (a) O3-phase and (b) P2-phase layered oxides.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Typical crystal structure of α-NaFeO2. (b) Charge/discharge curves of the α-NaFeO2 cathode material. (c) Ex situ Mössbauer spectra for the NaFeO2 cathode material in different states. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing. (d) Schematic illustration of irreversible Na insertion into Na1−xFeO2 after charging to 4.5 V. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Operando XRPD patterns recorded during the charging of NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2. SEM image of O3-Na0.82Mn1/3Fe2/3O2. (b) Schematic representation of the phase diagram of the NaxMn1/3Fe2/3O2 material upon Na de-intercalation deduced from the in situ XRPD experiment. (c) Three comparative electrochemical tests at different cut-off voltages. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the significant improvement of the electrochemical properties after partial replacement of Fe. (e) Cycle stability for O3-NaFeO2, O3-NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2, and O3-NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 particles. (g) Intensity contour maps of the in situ XRD patterns of NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2 in the 1st charge process. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the Na2/3(Fe1/2Mn1/2)O2 hierarchical nanofiber formation process. (b) Charge–discharge curves of Na2/3(Fe1/2Mn1/2)O2 at the initial and 80th cycles at A 0.1C current rate (solid line). Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) In situ XRD patterns of the Na0.7[Cu0.2Fe0.2Mn0.6]O2 cathode material. (d) Schematics of the corresponding P2 phase and “Z” phase with O2 stacking viewed along the100 direction. (e) The experimental PDF data of Na0.7[Cu0.15Fe0.3Mn0.55]O2 with different charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic derivation of the energy diagram of iron-based mixed polyanion cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of maricite NaFePO4 and olivine NaFePO4. (b) HRTEM images of the as-prepared maricite NaFePO4 obtained by ball milling for 5 hours and 15 hours. (c) The cycling performance at 1C. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for NaFePO4@C nanofibers. (e) Charge/discharge curves at a current density of 20 mA g−1. (f) Possible sodium-ion diffusive pathways and atomistic structure for amorphous NaFePO4. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of NaFeP2O7 and olivine Na2FeP2O7. (b) Schematic illustration of the architecture for the NFP@C@RGO composite. (c) SEM images of NFP@C@RGO. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Long-term cycle performance of the NFP@C@RGO and NFP@C at 1C. (e) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7 at different scan rates. (f) Ex situ XRD pattern during charging/discharging for Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5P2O7 on a small scale. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The schematic diagram of the binary Na2FeP2O7 and Na2ZnP2O7 pyrophosphate system. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The local environment of Na in different periods of charging. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) Proposed structural changes that occur in Na2FePO4F upon a charge/discharge cycle in a Na-ion cell. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of modified Na2FePO4F/C at 0.1C. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram showing the structural advantages of Na2Fe0.6Mn0.4PO4F/C in sodium storage. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) In situ XRD patterns of the Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F cathode material. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2011. Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Rietveld refinements of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C. The crystal structure is presented in the insets. (b) In situ XANES spectra at the Fe K-edge of Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7)/C. (c) Charge process and discharge process of typical Fe K-edge XANES spectra. The insets show the corresponding pre-edge spectra. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the Na3Fe2(PO4)3 synthesis process. (e) Crystal structure of Na3Fe2(PO4)3; (f) long-term cycling performance of Na3Fe2(PO4)3 up to 500 cycles at 1C. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of Na2Fe2(SO4)3. (b) Rietveld refinement results of Na2Fe2(SO4)3. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process for Na2Fe2(SO4)3@C@GO. (d) The long-term cycling performance of Na2Fe2(SO4)3 at a current density of 24 mA g−1. (e) Cycling performance of Na2FeSiO4 at a current density of 10 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of the formation of NaCoHCF. (b) SEM image of the as-prepared NaCoHCF nanocrystals. (c) Schematic representation of the structural changes of NaCoHCF. (d) Long-term cycling performance of NaCoHCF up to 800 cycles at 5C. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Capacity versus cycle number at 2C, 5C, 10C, and 20C, respectively, and back to 2C. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Crystal structures of cubic NMHFC. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of Na1.40MnFe(CN)6 from 0.1C to 40C. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of NaNiFe(CN)6. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the NaNiFe(CN)6 for the first three cycles. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (e) Cycling performances of PB-4M (4M represents a sodium ion concentration of 4 mol L−1). Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structures of FeF3·0.33H2O. (b) Scheme of the top-down fabrication process through IL-alleviating multistep dehydration. (c) Electrochemical performance of SWNT-HTB-FeF3·0.33H2O. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of flower-like mesoporous FeF3·0.33H2O. (e) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of FeF3·0.33H2O at 0.1C. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation mechanism of FeS2. (b) Cycling performance of Na/FeS2 tested in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the synthesis process of FeS2/rGO. (d) Cycling performance of FeS2/rGO and pure FeS2 at 1C. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of different alkali-ion insertions in amorphous FePO4. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic diagram of the amorphous FePO4/C synthesis process. (c) Rate performance from 0.1C to 10C. (d) Long-term cycling performance of amorphous FePO4/C up to 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
nf = 3.6MwQ	(1)

O3-NaFeO2	3.3	80 mA h g−1 at 12 mA g−1	
46

NaFe0.5Co0.5O2	3.1	160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 100 mA h g−1 at 20C, 85% capacity retention at 0.1C after 50 cycles	
53

NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2	3.0	149 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 86% capacity retention at 0.1C after 50 cycles	
58

Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2	3.2	100 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 60 mA h g−1 at 5C, 97% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
56

P2-Na2/3[Fe1/2Mn1/2]O2	2.75	190 mA h g−1 at 13 mA g−1, 133 mA h g−1 at 260 mA g−1, 70% capacity retention at 12 mA g−1 after 30 cycles	
60

NaFePO4 (Maricite)	2.6	145 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, 61 mA h g−1 at 50C	
81

89% capacity retention at 5C after 6300 cycles
Na2FeP2O7	3.0	87 mA h g−1 at 0.05C, 65 mA h g−1 at 1C	
95

95% capacity retention at 0.05C after 80 cycles
Na2FePO4F	3.1	90.3 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, 66.8 mA h g−1 at 4C	
112

85% capacity retention at 4C after 1000 cycles
Na2Fe0.5Mn0.5PO4F	3.2	110 mA h g−1 at 6.2 mA g−1, 78 mA h g−1 at 124 mA g−1	
108

Na3Fe2(PO4)3	3.5	120 mA h g−1 at 24 mA g−1, 90% capacity retention at 24 mA g−1 after 300 cycles	
131

Na2NiFe(CN)6	3.3	65 mA h g−1 at 1C, 63 mA h g−1 at 5C	
150

98% capacity retention at 5C after 500 cycles
Na4Fe(CN)6	3.2	150 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 90% capacity retention at 0.1C after 200 cycles	
152

NaNiFe(CN)6	3.4	55 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, 52 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1. No capacity loss at 100 mA g−1 after 180 cycles	
154

Na1.40MnFe(CN)6	3.3	134 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 45 mA h g−1 at 40C	
156

FeF3·0.33H2O	2.9	285 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 155 mA h g−1 at 2C, 67% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
172

FeS2	2.0	600 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 70% capacity retention at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
179

FePO4	2.4	168 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 77 mA h g−1 at 10C	
195

92.1% capacity retention at 1C after 1000
E = Ecathode − ENa = −ΔG/nF	(2)

Cathode material	O3 phase oxides, polyanion compounds, Prussian blue	LiFePO4
LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2
Cathode current collector	Aluminum foil	Aluminum foil
Electrolyte	1 mol L−1	1 mol L−1
NaPF6-EC-DMC	LiPF6-EC-DMC
Anode material	Hard carbon	Graphite
Anode current collector	Aluminum foil	Copper foil

 	Fig. 18  Specific capacity and average voltage for selected layered iron-based oxides for SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The energy density of different types of iron-based polyanion compounds. (b) 5G base stations' demand for backup batteries in 2019–2026.	 

 	Fig. 20  Raw material cost distribution charts of different cells.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
