Demonstrator devices for artificial photosynthesis: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9FD90023C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9FD90023C
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 345-363Demonstrator devices for artificial photosynthesis: general discussion

        
          
            Ryu 
            Abe
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Catherine M. 
            Aitchison
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Virgil 
            Andrei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthias 
            Beller
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Cheung
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Charles E. 
            Creissen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Víctor A. 
            de la Peña O’Shea
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            James R. 
            Durrant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Leif 
            Hammarström
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sophia 
            Haussener
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Su-Il 
            In
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Evangelos 
            Kalamaras
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Akihiko 
            Kudo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Moritz F. 
            Kuehnel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pramod Patil 
            Kunturu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yi-Hsuan 
            Lai
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chong-Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marcelino 
            Maneiro
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Esther Edwardes 
            Moore
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huu Chuong 
            Nguyen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Aubrey R. 
            Paris
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chanon 
            Pornrungroj
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joost N. H. 
            Reek
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Erwin 
            Reisner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Murielle 
            Schreck
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wilson A. 
            Smith
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Han Sen 
            Soo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Reiner Sebastian 
            Sprick
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anirudh 
            Venugopal
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dominik 
            Wielend
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Martijn A. 
            Zwijnenburg
          
        
      
First published on 24th June 2019

Wilson Smith opened discussion of the paper by Michael Grätzel: For the Cu–Au electrodes, the proposed mechanism is that CO2 is converted to CO on the Au site, then diffuses on the surface to a Cu site where it hydrogenates to form higher order products. Given that the system is highly porous and the local pH may be higher than the bulk solution, can you comment on the likelihood for the proposed mechanism (surface diffusion of CO), or if CO is formed in the gas phase, then re-adsorbs on the Cu surface from the solution? The two pathways have large implications on mechanistic understandings, and different approaches would be needed to optimise these steps in different ways.

Michael Grätzel replied: We propose indeed that the CO directly spills over directly from the Au nanoparticles to the Cu support. Nevertheless your point is well taken that the CO adsorption on Au is reversible and hence that there is an equilibrium between the adsorbed and free CO. So the path of CO transfer from Au to Cu via the gas phase is a viable alternative to the direct spillover. It is favored by the fact that desorption of CO can occur from any Au surface site while in order for the spillover to occur the Au site must have adjacent Cu sites. More analysis is required to determine the predominant mechanism.

Huu Chuong Nguyen queried: What would be the reduction mechanism with the zinc system?

Michael Grätzel replied: We are still examining the details of this mechanism. However it is well known that the Topsoe catalyst promoting the formation of methanol from CO/CO2 also uses a bimetallic Cu/Zn formulation.

James Durrant commented: Michael, you showed impressive results on the electrochemical reduction of CO2. Could you comment on the issue of CO2 solubility in aqueous solutions, and at what current densities gas diffusion electrodes are needed?

Michael Grätzel answered: We find that for our H-cells the current densities for CO2 reduction in aqueous electrolyte are limited to ca. 50 mA cm−2. Going above this limit requires the use of gas diffusion electrodes for which the current densities can attain several hundred mA cm−2.

Qian Wang opened the discussion of the paper by Yi-Hsuan Lai: What is the real Faradic efficiency of your tandem cells? Have you checked the gas evolution? If the hydrogen produced by your system is undetectable, how do you confirm the observed photocathode current was due to the water reduction?

Yi-Hsuan Lai answered: We have tried to detect the hydrogen gas by using gas chromatography. However, at this stage, the photocurrent in our system is far below the detection limit of gas chromatography. The performance of our system must be further improved in order to allow the products to be detected.

Esther Edwardes Moore asked: Looking at Fig. 4a of the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00183a), at potentials less than 0.5 V vs. RHE, the dark current increases on the introduction of O2 into the system. Could you comment on the cause of this effect?

Yi-Hsuan Lai answered: The increased dark current on the introduction of O2 at potentials less than 0.5 V vs. RHE possibly results from the reduction of O2 to peroxide ion via the two-electron pathway.1
1 X. Ge, A. Sumboja, D. Wuu, T. An, B. Li, F. W. T. Goh, T. S. A. Hor, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4643–4667.

Ryu Abe commented: It is a nice idea that you prepared two different semiconductor materials, p-type CuBi2O4 and n-type BiVO4, from a single precursor. Have you ever tried to prepare these two materials on one side of the FTO substrate? In the present study, you eventually prepared these two materials separately, probably due to different conditions required to obtain optimum performance. I understand the difficulty, but if you can prepare such an electrode on which n-type and p-type semiconductors contact directly, as well as via the FTO substrate, some interesting properties might be obtained.

Yi-Hsuan Lai responded: Many thanks for the fruitful comment. Yes, we have considered preparing such an electrode on which n-type and p-type semiconductors contact directly and it is indeed our final goal. However, since the performance of CuBi2O4 is much lower than that of BiVO4, enhancing the performance of CuBi2O4 is our top priority at the current stage.

Sophia Haussener remarked: You mention that hydrogen and oxygen evolution in one location or chamber is possible. Is this however implementable in a practical and scalable reactor?

Yi-Hsuan Lai replied: I am sorry that I do not remember I have mentioned hydrogen and oxygen evolution in one location or chamber is possible. However, I believe a suitable membrane is necessary for a practical and scalable reactor to prevent product crossover.

Sophia Haussener asked: What are the optical properties of your membrane?

Yi-Hsuan Lai replied: The UV–Vis transmittance spectrum suggests the membrane has high transmittance of up to 90% in the wavelength range from 300 to 800 nm.

Chanon Pornrungroj commented: According to the manuscript, there seems to be a similarity in the fabrication process of the CuBi2O4 photocathode and BiVO4 photoanode. Have you ever tried to engineer both types of electrodes on a single FTO at the same time? It could be interesting to use the inkjet printer to engineer and print different patterns of Cu2+ and VO2+ precursors on the nanoBi4O5I2 to achieve an effective overall water splitting.

Yi-Hsuan Lai answered: Many thanks for the suggestion. We have not tried to engineer both types of electrodes on a single FTO, although we have indeed considered that. Enhancing the performance of CuBi2O4 by engineering its synthetic conditions is our top priority at this stage. The two types of semiconductor materials will then be engineered on a single FTO if the performance of the CuBi2O4 photocathode can be comparable with that of the BiVO4 photoanode.

Sophia Haussener asked: Can you comment on the stability of your electrodes and predict long term performance of your photoanode and photocathode?

Yi-Hsuan Lai responded: The photocurrent of the photoanode gradually decreased over time and had a half-life time of approximately one hour at a potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE. On the other hand, the photocurrent of the photocathode quickly dropped within the first five minutes and remained roughly at only 15% of its initial photocurrent at a potential of 0.5 V vs. RHE.

Charles Creissen asked: With respect to the photodegradation of CuBi2O4, is this a process that can be limited through efficient extraction of electrons, for example through immobilisation of a catalyst?

Yi-Hsuan Lai replied: Yes, since the photodegradation of CuBi2O4 might result from the reduction of copper ions, we believe immobilising an efficient catalyst on the surface of the CuBi2O4 electrode can enhance the stability of CuBi2O4.

Murielle Schreck opened the discussion of the paper by Akihiko Kudo: You measure the activity of your systems in μmol h−1 and you use different amounts of photocatalyst depending on the material. Why do you divide only by the time and not by the mass too and what effect does the use of different masses of photocatalysts have on their activity? Can you also make a comment on quantum yield or quantum efficiency?

Akihiko Kudo responded: The optimum amount of photocatalyst depends on the photocatalyst, photocatalytic reaction, light source and setup for the measurement. The optimum amount of photocatalyst should be determined with your experimental setup as well as the reaction condition, such as pH. So, I just show the activity in μmol h−1 and indicating the experimental setup and condition without any normalization. The normalization of a photocatalytic activity by mass of photocatalyst is incorrect, because a photocatalytic activity is not always proportional to the mass.1 A photocatalytic activity is fundamentally limited not by the mass but a photon flux. An activity should be indicated using an optimum amount of photocatalyst for each experimental setup. A quantum yield and a solar energy conversion efficiency are values to evaluate absolutely the performance of a photocatalytic reaction. These values should not depend on an experimental condition, if measurement of a photocatalytic reaction is suitably conducted. The solar energy conversion efficiency (STH: solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency) will be the absolute indication of performance of artificial photosynthesis. For example, the amount of H2 obtained using a solar simulator or actual sunlight should be measured.
1 A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278.

Catherine Aitchison commented: It is particularly interesting that some of your systems work without redox mediators (when catalysts are just in suspension). Could the activities of these Z-schemes be improved by synthesising heterostructures or Janus-like particles of the two photocatalysts? Do you think this is a worthwhile approach or will systems with redox mediators always be more viable?

Akihiko Kudo answered: Synthesizing heterostructures or Janus-like particles of the two photocatalysts will be an attractive strategy in order to improve a Z-schematic photocatalyst system, because the contact becomes better and separations of charge and reaction sites may be enhanced by the asymmetric structure. We reported such a composite photocatalyst of SrTiO3:Rh and BiVO4 (ref. 1) though the morphology is not beautiful compared with the ideal Janus-like particles. It is an advantage for the composite system that no additives such as an electron mediator are required. If the morphology and the structure are suitably designed, the activity will be much enhanced. However, there are other issues for the heterostructure. Undesirable back electron transfer, for example electron transfer from a conduction band of a H2-evolving photocatalyst not to water molecules but a conduction band of an O2-evolving photocatalyst, might also be enhanced due to firm contact resulting in a decrease in a photocatalytic activity. So, I can not say at the present stage which is better, with an electron mediator or just by contact.
1 Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, BiVO4–Ru/SrTiO3:Rh composite of Z-scheme photocatalyst for solar water splitting, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513–1519.

Virgil Andrei asked: Some of the photocathodes present a large hysteresis between the forward and backward scans of the cyclic voltammograms in Fig. 5 of the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00209f). What causes this hysteresis, and why is it not observed in the case of the photoanodes? Could that indicate a capacitive charging of your electrodes, or is there another reason for the dark currents?

Akihiko Kudo responded: It is not clear at the present stage. The hysteresis would mainly be due to the redox behaviour of doped Rh and a capacitance property of powdered materials. In general, such a hysteresis is observed for a material with a capacitance property. We used a powdered material with a rough surface for the photoelectrodes. Such behavior could be suppressed when the quality of a photoelectrode is high. Actually, such a hysteresis is not observed for the photoelectrodes of single crystalline thin films prepared by pulse laser deposition.1,2 TiO2:Rh and Sb does not show the hysteresis, because a TiO2-based photoanode is an efficient photoanode as well as BiVO4.
1 S. Kawasaki, K. Akagi, K. Nakatsuji, S. Yamamoto, I. Matsuda, Y. Harada, J. Yoshinobu, F. Komori, R. Takahashi, M. Lippmaa, C. Sakai, H. Niwa, M. Oshima, K. Iwashina and A. Kudo, Elucidation of Rh-Induced In-Gap States of Rh:SrTiO3 Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalyst by Soft X-Ray Spectroscopy and First-Principles Calculations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24445–24448.
2 S. Kawasaki, R. Takahashi, T. Yamamoto, M. Kobayashi, H. Kumigashira, J. Yoshinobu, F. Komori, A. Kudo and M. Lippmaa, Photoelectrochemical water splitting enhanced by self-assembled metal nanopillars embedded in an oxide semiconductor photoelectrode, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11818.

Reiner Sebastian Sprick asked: When going to large scale applications, it would probably be desirable to use saline water. I would expect that the ionic species used as mediators would be affected by salt content. Have you studied this and how does it effect the performance?

Akihiko Kudo replied: Yes, chloride ions in a salt affect the performance. When saline water was used for water splitting using a Z-scheme photocatalyst employing an Fe3+/2+ redox couple as a mediator, the activity was about half compared with that in pure water. In other words, it worked. Oxidation products of chloride ions such as Cl2 and HClO might have a negative effect on water splitting activity by the redox reactions of those species. If chloride ions coordinate to metal complexes of an electron mediator, some properties of the metal complex such as a redox potential will change. I am not sure that such a coordination effect is significant to the activity. River water is also a candidate, unless it contains heavy metal cations. It will be much better than saline water. If it contains some organic compounds working as an electron donor, more hydrogen could be obtained.

Reiner Sebastian Sprick queried: Would you be able to comment on how to scale up these systems as agitation of suspension on a large scale would be an additional challenge?

Akihiko Kudo responded: We suggest not using an agitation system but instead the photocatalyst sheet system proposed by Prof. Domen for large-scale practical use.1,2 It will be easy to handle it.
1 Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, T. Takata, T. Minegishi, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Particulate photocatalyst sheets for Z-scheme water splitting: advantages over powder suspension and photoelectrochemical systems and future challenges, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 197, 491–504.
2 T. Yamada and K. Domen, ChemEngineering, 2018, 2, 36.

Moritz F. Kuehnel asked: Could you comment on the prospects and challenges of scaling up one-pot water splitting? The formation of H2 and O2 at the same time in the same vessel is supposedly going to be not only a safety problem, but also a cost factor. How much will implementing a separation of H2 mechanism (e.g. membrane) lower the overall efficiency of the process, in particular considering that photocatalytic water splitting has a relatively low efficiency even without separation?

Akihiko Kudo replied: Yes, safety and cost issues are important. Please see the literature for reply to your comments.1,2
The most important issue is still to develop photocatalyst materials showing high solar energy conversion efficiency by utilizing a wide solar spectrum after overcoming the safety and cost issues. The cost issue may rely mainly on the system, such as the reactor, not the photocatalyst.
1 T. Setoyama, T. Takewaki, K. Domen and T. Tatsumi, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 509–527.
2 T. Yamada and K. Domen, ChemEngineering, 2018, 2, 36.

Han Sen Soo said: In your Z-scheme systems, Rh and Ir were used as dopants. However, the Ir and Rh are not used as catalysts but mainly as light absorbers. In this case, to reduce the costs, have you considered using first row transition metals, Mo, or W as the dopants instead?

Akihiko Kudo responded: Yes, we tested various dopants including first row transition metals. Ir and Rh are the best dopants at the present stage, though they are noble metals. Mn and Ru are also effective dopants to give a visible light response.1 It is reasonable judging from their suitable redox properties. I do not think Mo and W can be used instead of Ir and Rh, because those dopants lower the conduction band of SrTiO3. It results in loss of H2-evolution ability.
1 R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Photocatalytic Activities of Noble Metal Ion Doped SrTiO3 Under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Phys. Chem. B., 2004, 108(26), 8992–8995.

Martijn Zwijnenburg asked: Knowledge of the band structure of materials is, based on your work, clearly important when trying to understand which combination of materials, or which combination of materials and a given redox mediator, will form a successful Z-scheme for overall water splitting. Could you please tell us more about how you obtain such information, especially the relative positions of the conduction band minima and valence band maxima vs. NHE as shown in Fig. 6 of the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00209f).

Akihiko Kudo responded: It would be nice if we could experimentally determine the absolute positions of conduction and valence bands and an impurity level, but it is not easy, especially for powdered samples. You can use UPS for the determination of Fermi energy if you have high quality thin film materials. You may see the valence band position by looking at the valence band region in XPS. Here, we have estimated the band positions as follows.1 In many metal oxide semiconductor photocatalysts consisting of MO6 polyhedra, the valence bands are formed with O2p orbitals. The valence band position is around 3.0 V vs. NHE at pH 0. The photocatalysts in Fig. 6 are supposed to be on the line. The positions of a conduction band and an impurity level can be determined from the valence band level and band gaps derived from absorption spectra, usually diffuse reflectance spectra for solid materials. These processes give the band structure of Fig. 4 and 6.
1 A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278.

Wilson Smith opened the discussion of the paper by Evangelos Kalamaras: It was interesting to see that as a function of flow rates, the formate and methanol selectivity was very high across the range tested (especially at low flow rates), but in a batch reactor, only formate was formed. Can you comment on how you think the effects of mass transport improve methanol synthesis? Does this imply formate is a precursor to methanol?

Evangelos Kalamaras responded: Fig. 5b in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00192h) showed that utilization of a continuous flow PEC reactor led to production of higher concentrations of formate and methanol and increased the percentage of methanol formation in the case of α-Fe2O3/CuO photoelectrodes. We believe that this is highly related to the improved mass transport of the flow reactor because the percentage of methanol production is significantly lower in a batch reactor. In addition, crossover of products due to the absence of a separator was significantly higher in the batch reactor leading to re-oxidation of products. A plausible scenario for CO2 reduction into methanol is that its formation is initiated after some amount of formate is already formed. Rajeshwar and co-workers observed a similar behaviour of a continuous PEC flow system for CO2 reduction into ethanol. In order to better understand the proposed mechanism, experiments with electrolytes containing formate should be conducted.
1 H. Homayoni, W. Chanmanee, N. R. de Tacconi, B. H. Dennis and K. Rajeshwar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, E115-E122.

Dominik Wielend asked: I have two questions concerning the issue you mentioned in your Faraday Discussions paper about the “non-linearity of the product formation over time” in your batch-reactor experiment:
Did you actually test if your catalyst is stable after this 12 h reaction by some surface analysis technique?
Or did you also investigate the flow-reactor experiment for this longer time of 12 h instead of the reported 1 h to check if the catalyst still has the same activity after that reaction time?

Evangelos Kalamaras responded: Yes, the photoelectrodes were stable for more than 12 h. Photoelectrodes consisting of similar semiconducting materials have shown remarkably stability for more than one week as Kang and co-workers reported.1 However, in our case we have not performed any surface analysis technique apart from SEM after the reaction. The non-linearity of the product formation in a PEC batch reactor was attributed to back reactions due to the absence of a membrane. For this reason, we believe that the continuous flow PEC reactor showed more linear hourly production. The experiments in the continuous flow system were conducted for 6 to 12 h depending on the flow rate. We could not do experiments for more than 12 h in the continuous-flow system due to limitations of the syringe pump equipment. Generally, the stability of the photoelectrodes was tested by using each photoelectrode for 5 different PEC measurements showing similar performance.
1 U. Kang, S. K. Choi, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji, W. Choi, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab and H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2638–2643.

Han Sen Soo asked: Since you proposed that methanol may be formed from formate, did you examine if formate could be used as a substrate to produce methanol? Are there any other intermediates that can also generate methanol? This can provide some insights about the mechanism of the reduction.

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: We have not conducted experiments with electrolyte containing formate in order to have more evidence about the proposed mechanism. As far as I’m aware, there are no other experimental research works that studied the mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction into methanol in order to provide more insights. Therefore, I believe that further investigation of the CO2 reduction mechanism using in situ and operando characterization techniques is required to unveil the intermediate steps.

Sophia Haussener queried: In order to tailor your products, could it make sense to use a sequential reactor that includes not just one electrode but a second, tailored one?

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: A proposed scenario for CO2 reduction into methanol is that its formation is initiated after some amount of formate is already formed. However, further experiments are required to study the mechanism of PEC CO2 reduction. The existence of intermediate products will definitely favour the utilization of such a reactor with subsequent photoelectrodes allowing the CO2 reduction reaction to take place in a series of multi-electron steps on different photocatalysts. In this way, STF efficiency of the system will be maximized.

Sophia Haussener asked: How would you scale up this microfluidic system? What are the perfect operating conditions, in terms of velocity, etc.?

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: In our system the optimum flow rate was 0.08 ml min−1.
One cost-effective way that microfluidic PEC devices can be scaled-up is the fabrication and utilization of large planar electrodes separated by an electrolyte (1-D scaling-up). Another way to scale-up microfluidic PEC cells is by numbering-up, which requires the incorporation of parallel arrangements of single microfluidic cells (2-D parallelization scaling-up). The main advantage of this approach is that electrochemical processes observed in lab-scale cells will be maintained in each unit at any level of scaling out. Finally, it should be mentioned that new developments in fabrication techniques such as high-resolution additive manufacturing are needed in order to overcome the existing challenges in such numbering-up strategies with complex fluidic interconnections.

Sophia Haussener asked: Why do you use microfluidics? Do we need such small scales or would millimeter-scale also work?

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: Utilization of microfluidic reactors with inter-electrode distance up to 1 mm minimizes the Ohmic drop avoiding short-circuiting the cell, offers high-surface-area-to-volume ratio of photocatalytic and/or electrocatalytic materials and improves mass transfer from the bulk electrolyte solution to the surface of the electrodes. A millimetre-scale reactor would achieve lower efficiency than the proposed reactor since lower separation distance can lead to large fluidic resistances, while larger separation distance can result in large losses from ionic transport.1
1 M. A. Modestino, D. Fernandez Rivas, S. M. H. Hashemi, J. G. E. Gardeniers and D. Psaltis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3381–3391.

Sophia Haussener commented: Without a membrane you have to go to very low velocities in order to suppress mixing. Is this useful for a practical reactor where you want large production rates?

Evangelos Kalamaras responded: For membrane-less operation in the PEC flow reactor, we were limited to flow rates higher than 0.04 ml min−1 to avoid crossover and lower than 0.2 ml min−1 to give sufficient time to complete the desired reaction (Fig 5b in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00192h)). Although membranes are very important components for PEC applications minimizing anolyte and catholyte crossover, they suffer from degradation and significantly increase the total cost of a PEC cell. Therefore, we believe a promising approach to achieve high solar fuel production rates is the utilization of parallel continuous flow microfluidic PEC systems.

Reiner Sebastian Sprick said: I was wondering what your view on scale-up of continuous flow microfluidic PEC reactors is. These systems seem to have potential, but it seems challenging to do this on a very large scale.

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: Scaling-up of conventional reactors requires increased dimensions of the reactor to enhance the production leading to numerous problems. In contrast, the significant advantage of microfluidic reactors stems from the fact that a parallel network with multiple microreactors of the same size can be used for scaling-up. Another significant advantage of this approach is that by using multiple microreactors, the electrochemical processes taking place in each one remains the same at any level of scaling-out. However, scale-up strategies for microfluidic reactors have not yet been comprehensively evaluated.

Aubrey Paris returned to the discussion of the paper by Michael Grätzel: Much of the CO2 reduction literature on improving the selectivity of copper electrodes either focuses on methane or two-carbon product selectivity. In your case, you can tune for a particular two-carbon product over the other (i.e., ethylene over ethanol, or vice versa). However, your electrode system – and other copper-based systems – can also generate propanol. I have not seen reports in the literature that have been able to selectively make propanol (or other C3+ products). Do you have any ideas regarding strategies to selectively generate propanol or other higher-order products from CO2? While C2 products like ethylene may be commercially attractive, it seems beneficial to expand the product scope of CO2 electroreduction to give this technology the greatest probability of succeeding in real-world applications.

Michael Grätzel answered: So far we have not specifically targeted C3 or higher molecular weight products. This is a challenging task which is certainly worth pursuing. For example, Siemens has launched last year a joint venture to produce butanol from sunlight, CO2 and water. The process is divided up in two steps, i.e. the light reaction where CO is first generated from CO2 followed up a dark reaction where microorganisms convert the CO to butanol in a bioreactor.

Wilson Smith asked: Regardless of the mechanism that is found for the electrodes tested in an aqueous H-cell, do you think the mechanism and selectivity will transfer to operation with gas diffusion electrodes with high current density and high local pH?

Michael Grätzel replied: It remains to be seen how the increase in current density and pH on a gas diffusion electrode will affect the product distribution. For our Zn-doped Cu electrodes the ratio of ethanol over ethylene remained around 4 over a wide range of electrode potentials while for the Au/Cu electro-catalyst the product distribution was more sensitive to the applied voltage. Hence we would expect that the use of a gas diffusion electrode will not change significantly the product selectivity for the Zn/Cu catalyst.

Virgil Andrei remarked: The Cu/Au nanostructured electrocatalysts present a very nice product distribution as a function of the applied potential, with the catholyte stirred at 1000 rpm. Have you looked at whether the product distribution is changed at different stirring speeds or under no stirring? The stirring velocity may influence the mass transport and local pH gradient in the vicinity of the electrode, and therefore also the product distribution.

Michael Grätzel answered: Thank you for raising this important point. So far we have always applied the same stirring speed of 1000 rpm but we plan to extend our studies to examine the effect of stirring speed on the product distribution.

Anirudh Venugopal opened a general discussion of the papers by Michael Grätzel, Yi-Hsuan Lai, Akihiko Kudo and Evangelos Kalamaras: This is a general question (to everyone in the room) regarding the future of photoelectrochemical water splitting. If we look at some of the opinion/perspective articles from the last year or so, there seems to be general scepticism about the future of PEC water splitting. One article in particular (ref. 1) comes to my mind. Their arguments are that the PV+electrolyzer route has advanced so much in the recent past that the PEC route cannot really compete even in an ideal/best case scenario for PEC water splitting. Additionally, even though the concept of PEC looks simple and elegant, working with it has made people realize that it is tremendously difficult to optimize each aspect in a PEC system like the right bandgap, band edge positions, stability, catalytic activity etc. without effecting each other. In that sense a decoupled system like a PV+electrolyzer makes more sense for easier optimization. What is the opinion of everyone in the PEC community present here regarding the statements made in such articles? Do you also have similar thoughts?
1 T. Jesper Jacobsson, Photoelectrochemical water splitting: an idea heading towards obsolescence?, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1977–1979.

Akihiko Kudo replied: There are mainly PV+electrolyzer, PEC and powdered photocatalyst systems for solar water splitting. The PV+electrolyzer actually gives the highest efficiency among those systems at the present stage. However, criteria of actual artificial photosynthesis systems are not only the efficiency but also the cost, scalability, recyclability, etc, as discussed in the literature.1,2 Actually, PV+electrolyzer gives a high solar energy conversion efficiency (STH), though it is still not at the stage of practical use implying that there are several problems for such a system, for example the cost of an electrolyzer. Therefore, mainly Japanese research groups believe that the powder based photocatalyst material will be the final and ideal system for the business by practical artificial photosynthesis.1–3 But, anyway, we should develop several kinds of technologies to achieve the practical artificial photosynthesis, because they have advantages and disadvantages. We should not focus on just one technology at the present stage. We should search any possibilities.
1 T. Setoyama, T. Takewaki, K. Domen and T. Tatsumi, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 509–527.
2 T. Yamada and K. Domen, ChemEngineering, 2018, 2, 36.
3 B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Technical and economic feasibility of centralized facilities for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002.

Michael Grätzel responded: It is true that the PV-electrolyzer can operate at higher current densities than PECs depending on whether solar light is concentrated or normal sunlight is used, however this comes at the price of higher overvoltage losses for the Faradaic electrode reactions at the electrodes and for transport of ions between the electrodes. Furthermore, acid electrolyzers require an expensive NAFION membrane (PEM) and noble metal catalysts (Pt and Ir) for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Hence industry uses mainly the much cheaper alkaline electrolyzers, which, however, cannot sustain the discontinuous operation imposed for PV applications via the day and night cycle. The PEC devices have the advantage over PV-electrolyzers that the charges photo-generated in the PEC material can be immediately converted to fuels. There is no need for electricity collection, which requires expensive wiring and interconnection of solar panels. Finally we should keep in mind that natural photosynthesis is nothing else but a photo-electrochemical converter which has worked beautifully over more than 2 billion years. Hence we have every reason to mimic this crucial life-sustaining process on earth by artificial photosynthetic systems such as PECs.

Anirudh Venugopal addressed Michael Grätzel and Akihiko Kudo: Continuing on the discussion, a PV + electrolyzer can operate at high current densities, which tremendously decreases the size of the electrolyzer and its cost. It also means that the amount of precious catalysts that we use are also smaller. New cheaper catalytic materials like MoS2 to replace platinum and NiOOH/FeOOH have also been shown to work well with a normal electrolyzer. Does this take out any economic cost argument in favor of PEC?

Akihiko Kudo answered: Development of efficient electrocatalysts consisting of non-noble metals will decrease the cost of an electrolyzer. But I am not sure if those electrocatalysts make the breakthrough toward the cost issue of the total system of a PV + electrolyzer.

Michael Grätzel replied: It is true that the PV-electrolyzer can operate at high current densities but this comes at the price of higher overvoltage losses for the Faradaic electrode reactions at the electrodes and for transport of ions between the electrodes. Furthermore acid electrolyzers require an expensive NAFION membrane (PEM) and noble metal catalysts (Pt and Ir) for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Hence industry uses mainly the much cheaper alkaline electrolyzers, which, however, cannot sustain the discontinuous operation imposed for PV applications by the day and night cycle. Finally the PEC devices have the advantage over PV-electrolyzers that the charges photo-generated in the PEC material can be immediately converted to fuels.There is no need for electricity collection which requires expensive wiring and interconnection of panels.

Leif Hammarström commented: The paper referred to in the earlier question from Anirudh Venugopal expresses a personal opinion, but lacks scientific and technical background for this opinion. It ignores the research and analysis that has already been published on the topic of PV+electrolysis vs. direct solar-to-fuel conversion.

Akihiko Kudo replied: I agree with this opinion.

Víctor A. de la Peña O’Shea continued the discussion of the paper by Akihiko Kudo: In your reactions you are using two different semiconductors, a molecular mediator and graphene, and during the reactions all of these materials are separate.
How is the electron transfer produced at the same timescale in these different materials? Do you know the maximum distance between the materials to have an efficient charge transfer?

Akihiko Kudo replied: What you pointed out is important. But it is hard to say the distance you mention. Lifetimes of photogenerated carriers in a H2-evolving photocatalyst would be different from those in an O2-evolving photocatalyst. Collision is an indispensable process for electron transfer in the case of a reduced graphene oxide, because RGO/O2-evolving photocatalyst composite particles are suspended with H2-evolving photocatalyst particles. It means that the frequency of the collision between the different particles is important rather than the distance. It is clarified that p-n semiconductor character is a key issue for electron transfer during the collision. The distance depends on the concentration of photocatalysts and mediators in the case of a molecular mediator. We roughly optimize the concentration as listed in the footnotes of the Tables and Figures in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00209f). If redox reactions on an O2-evolving photocatalyst is smoother than that on a H2-evolving photocatalyst, electrons would be accumulated in a molecular mediator as its reduced form or RGO as an electron pool. In the case of the reverse, holes are accumulated in a mediator as its oxidized form.

Su-Il In addressed Akihiko Kudo, Michael Grätzel, Evangelos Kalamaras and Yi-Hsuan Lai: I’m asking this question to all of you. Prof. Domen looked at thousands of materials for water splitting. Water splitting materials are complicated. How do you select materials? What is your strategy? Trial and error? Serendipity? Band gap alignment of the materials?

Akihiko Kudo answered: Suitable band gaps and positions of conduction and valence bands are required for water splitting photocatalyst materials. Those are basically determined by the elements and crystal structures. We can design new photocatalyst materials with the idea based on the band and crystal engineering involving the strategies of doping and substitution of other elements.1,2 Charge separation and migration are also important processes as well as band gap excitation. The band structure calculation by DFT can prove the strategy and further develop other photocatalysts with a suitable band structure as well as giving information on carrier mobility. However, surface redox reactions on the surface of photocatalyst are very important: that can hardly be solved by calculation at the present stage. Electrocatalysts give some hints to the surface properties for the redox reactions including for cocatalysts. AI might be useful for finding new photocatalyst materials in future.
1 A. Kudo, H. Kato and I. Tsuji, Strategies for the Development of Visible-light-driven Photocatalysts for Water Splitting, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33(12), 1534–1539.
2 A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278.

Evangelos Kalamaras responded: In our case, photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, we conducted a theoretical study based on modelling work of Vesborg and co-workers.1 In this study, we found that a combination of two semiconductors with band gap ranging from 1.4 eV to 2.2 eV achieved the best theoretical Solar-to-Fuel efficiency. This is one of the main reasons that we selected semiconducting materials such as hematite and copper oxides.
1 P. C. K. Vesborg and B. Seger, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8844–8850.

Michael Grätzel responded: Yes, water-splitting materials are complicated. But we learned a great deal over the last 3 decades. p-type oxides would be my current preference. For example, Cu2O is a good start for a photoelectrochemical material. It has a band gap of about 2 eV, shows a luminescence and if used with an overlayer of Ga2O3 it develops a photovoltage of over 1 volt. Photocurrents in AM 1.5 sunlight reach over 10 mA cm−2. One needs to protect it from direct water contact since there is a risk of photocorrosion. Starting from Cu2O binary oxides such as perovskites and delafossites should be tested.

Yi-Hsuan Lai replied: In our case, we first select a state-of-the-art photoanode material, BiVO4, followed by finding a photocathode material that can provide sufficient photovoltage for pairing with BiVO4.

Daniel Cheung returned to the discussion of the paper by Akihiko Kudo: My question is directed primarily at Professor Akihiko Kudo but if other delegates would like to contribute that would be useful.
I am also working on Z-scheme photocatalysts based on CdS and WO3 semiconductor nanoparticles. I have synthesised the materials and have characterised them using SEM and TEM. SEM images show that the CdS and WO3 are present in the final material, however, attempts to acquire high-resolution (HR-TEM) images of the materials have been unsuccessful. HR-TEM images are vital for my research because they would provide direct evidence for the formation of a heterojunction between the two semiconductor materials.
I have seen similar heterojunctions in the literature that have been imaged successfully using HR-TEM; the micrographs show clearly that heterojunction formation is possible for these materials. Do you have any advice on how to tackle my problem? Thank-you.

Akihiko Kudo answered: HR-TEM is a powerful technique to see the actual structure. However, CdS is often unstable for electron microscopes because CdS volatilizes during the measurement depending on the acceleration voltage, even for SEM. So you should be advised on the measurement condition by a specialist of HR-TEM. But the important point is not only the geometric structure observed by electron microscopes but the energy structure of the heterojunction. There are two charge separation processes in the composite of CdS and WO3; (i) Z-schematic charge transfer and (ii) electron transfer from a conduction band of CdS to that of WO3 and simultaneous hole transfer from a valence band of WO3 to that of CdS according to the potential difference. If you obtain the activity for water splitting into H2 and O2 at a stoichiometric ratio, not for sacrificial H2 evolution, you can say that the Z-schematic charge transfer proceeds. I do not think that making such a composite for sacrificial H2 evolution is a proper direction for the design of photocatalysts because CdS itself gives a quite high quantum yield close to 90% in the presence of sacrificial electron donors.1 In process (ii), although the charge separation would be enhanced, abilities of the migrated electrons and holes for redox reactions thermodynamically become low losing water splitting ability.
1 J. Yang, H. Yan, X. Wang , F. Wen, Z. Wang, D. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, Roles of cocatalysts in Pt-PdS/CdS with exceptionally high quantum efficiency for photocatalytic hydrogen production, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 151–157.

Sophia Haussener asked: The mediator is very important in these particle-based devices. Could you share some advice on the thermodynamics and kinetics of the mediator? Should we develop catalysts for specific mediators?

Akihiko Kudo replied: From the thermodynamics, it is required that the redox potential is between the conduction band level of an O2-evolving photocatalyst and the valence band level of a H2-evolving photocatalyst at a certain pH. From a viewpoint of kinetics, an adsorption property on the surface of the photocatalyst is important as well as the electron transfer for redox reactions between a photocatalyst and a mediator. But we need to suppress backward reactions by an oxidized form of the mediator on the surface of a H2-evolving photocatalyst and those of a reduced form on an O2-evolving photocatalyst, because those backward reactions compete with water reduction and oxidation, respectively.1
It is also a key issue for a Z-schematic photocatalyst to find efficient mediators as you suggest.
1 H. Kato, Y. Sasaki, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Role of Iron Ion Electron Mediator on Photocatalytic Overall Water Splitting under Visible Light Irradiation using Z-Scheme Systems, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80(12), 2457–2464.

Marcelino Maneiro commented: I would like to discuss further about the role of electron mediators in the work presented here by Kudo et al. Different photocatalytic activities were found depending on the mediator. With the [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ mediator, the activity more than doubles for the same metal oxide material. Have you tried to use other cobalt complexes with different polypyridine ligands? Do you think that other mediators of this type may enhance the water splitting activity of these metal oxide photocatalysts?

Akihiko Kudo responded: We have tried to use [Co(phen)3]3+/2+.1 It worked as well as [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ for several Z-scheme photocatalysts for water splitting. In contrast to them, Fe complexes were not effective for our systems. But, anyway, it is important to find other mediators as you pointed out. There is a factor of affinity between a mediator and a photocatalyst.
1 Y. Sasaki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+ Electron Mediators for Overall Water Splitting under Sunlight Irradiation Using Z-scheme Photocatalyst System, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5441–5449.

Chong-Yong Lee addressed Akihiko Kudo, Michael Grätzel and Yi-Hsuan Lai: From the talks in this session, obviously nanostructuring plays a key role in enhancing performances of electrocatalytic, photocatalytic, as well as photoelectrocatalytic systems. Looking forward to the future, especially for commercial applications in large-scale device fabrication, do you think nanostructuring is the way to go? Due to the cost and being readily available in large amounts, the current industrial systems often involve microscale catalysts rather than nanostructured. Would there be issues with the cost, structural homogeneity etc. when upscaling nanostructured materials? Furthermore, for the electrocatalytic system, such as gas diffusion electrodes that commonly involving mixing with binders and/or support materials etc., is nanostructuring still relevant in such a system?

Akihiko Kudo replied: Nanostructure will be fine if a high efficiency is obtained due to it. Of course, the cost depends on the synthetic process. The cost of preparation of nanostructured materials will be not so serious a problem, if it is a bottom-up process that can make the mass production possible. For the electrocatalytic system, a gas diffusion electrode is OK. It is actually commercially used for soda industries.

Yi-Hsuan Lai responded: I believe nanostructuring photoelectrode materials is necessary to improve their efficiency, especially for those materials having charge carrier diffusion lengths shorter than their respective light absorption length. In our study, we also found nanostructuring indeed plays an important role in the enhancement of our photoelectrode performances.

Michael Grätzel answered: It is true that some types of nanostructures require expensive chemical precursors and sophisticated equipment, such as the high vacuum chambers employed by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) for their realization. However other types of nanostructures, such as the mesoscopic oxides we employ in photovoltaics, photo-electrochemistry and catalysis use cheap precursors and low cost methods for their production. For example the Cu2O nanowires that we use as cathodes for the photo-generation of hydrogen and reduction of CO2 are readily and cheaply prepared by anodic oxidation of Cu films. Up-scaling this preparation method is straightforward. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) would not be required for the photo-electrochemical fuel producing systems since the photo-currents generated in full sunlight would remain in the 10–30 mA cm−2 range. They are used for CO2 reduction in electrochemical reactors. They are normally planar but we are presently testing Cu2O nanowires as well for this electrocatalytic application.

Pramod Patil Kunturu addressed Akihiko Kudo: How should we choose new semiconductor photocatalysts for an efficient PEC water splitting reaction? Are there any software screening techniques available like the combinatorial synthesis technique used by JCAP?

Akihiko Kudo responded: Combinatorial synthesis would be a powerful technique if you use it for surveying some parameters, for example changing a ratio of components and an amount of cocatalyst, around a known photocatalyst. However, it is not easy to discover completely new materials with the combinatorial synthesis. In future, AI may be the technique for it.

Sophia Haussener asked: Following up on your response on selection of materials: do we need to explore a whole range of possibilities or should we stay very focused on one/two materials and mediators?

Akihiko Kudo answered: I am sure we should go to both ways: to find new material systems and to improve the present material systems. So, material design is still a key issue.

Leif Hammarström addressed Michael Grätzel: High throughput screening sounds attractive, but you already highlighted the importance of morphology and nano-structuring. Moreover, a device will most likely have different materials for light harvesting and charge separation on the one hand, and catalysis for the other, and screening junctions is much harder than screening single materials. How do you see the role of high throughput screening in the field?

Michael Grätzel replied: It is correct that high throughput screening has a limited potential given the high risk of misjudging potential of the material. One useful metric that can be employed in the rapid screening process is luminescence. The quantum yield of emission directly gives the maximum photovoltage that can be obtained with a given light harvesting material.

Joost Reek returned to the general discussion of the papers by Michael Grätzel, Yi-Hsuan Lai, Akihiko Kudo and Evangelos Kalamaras: There is a lot of progress in making solar fuel devices, and for most set-ups a membrane is required. Do we have sufficient choice of membranes for future applications or should there be more development in this area?

Akihiko Kudo answered: I do not think that it is already sufficient. To develop membranes is also a key issue for devising artificial photosysnthesis systems. For example, it is necessary for separation of hydrogen from oxygen in the mixed gas. We can use a membrane as a separator and supporter for self-standing Z-scheme photocatalyst devises.

Yi-Hsuan Lai answered: I believe there should be more membranes developed in this area. For example, in our experiments, we use a slightly alkaline solution as the electrolyte and Nafion 117™ as the membrane. However, Nafion is a proton exchange membrane and is more suitable for being applied in acidic solutions. Therefore, developing other membranes such as bipolar and/or anion exchange membranes should be helpful for the progress of solar fuel devices.

Michael Grätzel replied: There is clearly a need for developing better membranes. For example it would be advantageous to use PEMs that transport hydroxide anions instead of protons.

Wilson Smith addressed Evangelos Kalamaras and Yi-Hsuan Lai: Membrane development will play a big role in the coming years for optimising electrochemical systems. For example, the bipolar membrane has already been used for doing electrolysis in two different pH compartments, but can still be further optimised and is understood to improve selectivity/stability. For gas diffusion electrodes, integrating catalysts and membranes in a membrane-electrode-assembly (MEA) will be very interesting to lower overpotentials and improve overall performance. Here, finding the right combinations of membrane/polymers and catalysts, and ways to fabricate and coat them will be very fruitful for the field.

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: Although ion-conducting separators or membranes are critical components in electrochemical and PEC cells, they are vulnerable to degradation effects, add substantial cost, increase the complexity of reactor design and increase the ionic resistance. For all the reasons above, we developed a membrane-less continuous flow PEC cell for CO2 reduction. However, for membrane-less operation in the PEC flow reactor, we were limited to flow rates higher than 0.04 ml min−1 to avoid significant product crossover.

Yi-Hsuan Lai replied: Yes, I agree that the research of membranes is extremely beneficial for the progress of artificial photosynthesis.

Víctor A. de la Peña O’Shea addressed Evangelos Kalamaras: Taking into account that you are not using membranes between both electrodes on your device and some or your experiments are in the batch regime, are you sure that your products are not re-oxidized during the reactions? Did you perform any surface study to determine changes in your photocatalyst after the reactions?

Evangelos Kalamaras replied: The photoelectrodes were characterized before and after PEC measurements using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The obtained SEM images showed no significant alterations on the surface morphology of the photoelectrodes. We believe that re-oxidation of the products took place due to the absence of a membrane which decreased the STF efficiency of the PEC system. However, in the future we need to perform XPS analysis for the photoelectrodes after PEC measurements to further confirm the back reactions.

Erwin Reisner addressed everyone: We have been discussing solar-to-fuel conversion using 1 Sun irradiation so far. What would be the potential benefits and disadvantages of using concentrated solar light for solar fuel synthesis?

Sophia Haussener replied: Concentrated radiation can make PEC approaches and devices more interesting as it intensifies the input and allows for larger energy and power density devices (usually connected to economic and sustainability advantages). Concentrated irradiation also allows the utilization of more precious materials, as their mass and volume can be reduced roughly by the factor of the irradiation concentration. Furthermore, concentrated radiation will result in large energy inputs, requiring thermal management in order to sustain this input (which is challenging). At the same time, thermal management can be used to enhance the performance of PEC devices (for example: larger temperatures reduce kinetic overpotentials). Additionally, the matching of energy and mass flows in a PEC device utilizing liquid water as the reactant could require concentrated irradiation in order to optimally use this “concentrated” stream of reactant (in contrast, the dilute 1 Sun irradiation will always have low reactant conversion as there are too few charge carriers compared to the available reactant). A large challenge is long term operation: devices operating under such intense irradiation conditions and generally at larger current densities could potentially suffer from stronger degradation (to be investigated).

Michael Grätzel responded: Some advantages of using concentrated sunlight for hydrogen generation are (i) increase of photovoltage provided with light intensity and (ii) higher temperature would decrease the voltage require for water splitting and smaller photo-electrolyser size reducing cost. On the other hand, caveats for this technology are (i) the need to have an absolutely clear, dust-free sky, (ii) the high cost of the concentrators including their maintenance and (iii) increased overvoltage losses due to higher photocurrents.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
