Advanced hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts promising sustainable hydrogen and chlor-alkali co-production  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE02798K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02798K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6191-6210Advanced hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts promising sustainable hydrogen and chlor-alkali co-production

        
          
            Lu-Nan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong-Ying 
            Zang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hua-Qiao 
            Tan
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Zhen-Hui 
            Kang
          
          
        
      *cde, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Hui 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yang-Guang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *bf
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225002, Jiangsu, China
bKey Laboratory of Polyoxometalate and Reticular Material Chemistry of Ministry of Education, Faculty of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, Jilin, China. E-mail: tanhq870@nenu.edu.cn; liyg658@nenu.edu.cn
cInstitute of Advanced Materials, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, Jilin, China. E-mail: kangzh@nenu.edu.cn; zhkang@suda.edu.cn
dInstitute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-based Functional Materials and Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China
eMacao Institute of Materials Science and Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa 999078, Macau SAR, China. E-mail: zhkang@must.edu.mo
fKey Laboratory of Preparation and Application of Environmental Friendly Materials, Ministry of Education, Jilin Normal University, Changchun, 130103, China
Received 
      8th September 2021
    , Accepted 29th October 2021First published on 30th October 2021AbstractAdvanced hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) electrocatalysts matching with the chlor-alkali reaction serve as a vital link to realize the cost-effective and environmentally-benign co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. The core problem in this field is to design and fabricate HER electrocatalysts with high activity and stability under the harsh conditions of chlor-alkali electrolysis. This review highlights the scientific, technical, and engineering advances and challenges in this co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. In detail, the working mechanism and performance test criteria of HER electrocatalysts in chlor-alkali condition are provided. Recently developed HER electrocatalysts that can work in chlor-alkali electrolysis are summarized, with a special emphasis on the relationship between their structure and electrolytic properties. Simultaneously, the latest progress in the technology and engineering of the co-production process is also listed. Finally, the opportunities and the way forward for hydrogen and chlor-alkali co-production are also discussed.
Lu-Nan Zhang
Lu-Nan Zhang is currently working as a lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University. She received her Bachelor's degree from Northeast Normal University (NENU) in 2015, and obtained her PhD degree from NENU in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Yang-Guang Li. Her current research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of polyoxometalate (POM)-based and other inorganic materials related to energy conversion.
Hong-Ying Zang
Prof. Hong-Ying Zang received her Bachelor's degree from Harbin University in 2007, and obtained her Master's degree in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Min Su from NENU. Later, she received her PhD degree in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Leroy Cronin from the University of Glasgow. She has been a full professor at NENU since 2014. She was the recipient of the “Changbai Mountain Scholars” award in 2013. She is mainly engaged in the self-assembly of POM-based materials and their application in the field of energy conversion and storage.
Hua-Qiao Tan
Prof. Hua-Qiao Tan received his PhD (2012) from NENU under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang. He worked at the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, from 2012 to 2015. He joined NENU in 2015 as an associate Professor, and was promoted to full Professor in 2020. From 2019 to 2020, he worked as a visiting scholar at the Education University of Hong Kong. His research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of inorganic nanostructures and polyoxometalates for energy and environmental catalysis.
Zhen-Hui Kang
Dr Zhenhui Kang is now Professor at Soochow University and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). Dr Kang's research interest is in the fabrication, properties, and catalytic and bio-application of carbon dots (C-Dots). Dr Kang's research has resulted in more than 300 peer-reviewed publications in authoritative academic journals. He was listed among the ‘Highly Cited Researchers’ by Clarivate Analytics in 2018–2020. He also won the talent projects of National Key Talents Program B and National Distinguished Young Scholars.
Yong-Hui Wang
Yong-Hui Wang is an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry in NENU. She received her Bachelor's degree from NENU in 1997, and obtained her PhD degree from NENU in 2003. Later, she carried out postdoctoral work (2004) in Germany. Her current research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of POM-based metal–organic porous framework materials.
Yang-Guang Li
Prof. Yang-Guang Li received his Bachelor's degree (1997), Master's degree (2000), and PhD degree (2003) from NENU under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang. Right after graduation, he worked as a postdoctorate with Prof. Rodolphe Clérac (2004 in CRPP-CNRS, France) and Prof. Annie K. Powell (2005 in Universität Karlsruhe, Germany). In 2003, he joined NENU as an assistant professor. He was promoted to Professor in 2011. His main research interest is the function-directed design and synthesis of POMs, in particular, basic research into POM chemistry in electro- and photo-catalysis towards water splitting.

Broader context
In the context of global energy shortage and environmental pollution, reducing energy consumption and realizing resource reorganization between industries is considered to be a green and sustainable development strategy. There exist shortcomings of poor economic feasibility, low energy conversion efficiency, and few available electrocatalysts for industrial application in hydrogen production from water electrolysis. At the same time, the chlor-alkali industry, which is a national pillar industry, also faces the problem of high energy consumption. Therefore, the combination of water electrolysis and the chlor-alkali industry is an important direction for the future sustainable development of these two industries. In view of the pivotal role of HER electrocatalysts, which can work under chlor-alkali conditions in this joint system, the design and preparation principle of HER electrocatalysts are highlighted by discussing the influence of chlor-alkali conditions on the electrochemical performance. The potential HER cathode materials for the chlor-alkali industry reported in the recent years are reviewed in great detail. Meanwhile, the reference standard of the test conditions and the evaluation criteria of HER electrocatalysts applied to this co-production system are given. In addition, the engineering and technical progress involved in this joint process are also summarized.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing demand for hydrogen energy has been motivated due to its renewability, high energy density, and zero greenhouse gas emission.1 Electrocatalytic water splitting is considered to be the most environment-friendly alternative for hydrogen production compared with petroleum cracking or coal gasification.2–8 Researchers have done a great deal of excellent work in this area and solved many involved scientific bottlenecks.9–13 On the other hand, the large-scale application of this method is dramatically hampered by the following factors: high cost of the entire output caused by the expensive equipment cost, the low overall energy conversion efficiency, as well as the single product structure; there is a lack of in-depth exploration of the mechanism and the exploitation of high-efficiency industrial electrocatalysts.14,15
The chlor-alkali industry is a pillar chemical industry, which produces caustic soda, chlorine, and hydrogen.16 At the same time, the chlor-alkali industry is also a typical high energy consumption process. According to statistics, the electricity consumed by the chlor-alkali industry accounts for more than 10% of the total electricity consumption of the whole chemical industry.17–20 Also, there is insufficient utilization of hydrogen in the chlor-alkali industry; some chlor-alkali plants even release hydrogen to the atmosphere directly. Under the premise of the irreplaceability of the chlor-alkali industry, how to reduce the energy consumption and optimize the utilization of resources are the preferential problems to be solved for the future sustainable development of the chlor-alkali industry.
Considering the predicaments in the proceeding of the hydrogen production by electrolytic water splitting and chlor-alkali industry, a unique perspective is proposed, i.e., to break the barriers between the two independently developed industries and realize their fusion. HER electrocatalysts match with the chlor-alkali industry just like a connecting point, which would realize the intersection of the two major chemical fields, promote the electrolytic hydrogen evolution from the laboratory research stage to the actual industrial production, and improve the economic benefit and sustainability of the chlor-alkali industry. The design and synthesis of new type HER electrocatalysts that can work efficiently and stably in the chlor-alkali condition as candidates for traditional cathode materials are key points to realize this attractive vision.
Here, we will give a comprehensive overview on the recent progress of the joint process of electrolytic hydrogen evolution and the chlor-alkali industry. It is clearly proposed for the first time that the design of HER electrocatalysts should be combined with the actual chlor-alkali industrial conditions. The catalytic mechanism and the design principle of HER electrocatalysts under the chlor-alkali conditions are not clear, and the relevant reports are sporadic. Therefore, it is highly urgent to summarize the current achievements in the design and synthesis of HER electrocatalysts matching with the chlor-alkali industry. In this perspective, the effects of strong alkalinity, high salt concentration, and high temperature on the catalytic performance of HER electrocatalysts are discussed in detail so as to provide a theoretical foundation for the design of new HER electrocatalysts, which can be used in chlor-alkali electrolysis. Much attention is paid to the latest advances of HER electrocatalysts for chlor-alkali electrolysis, focusing on their design, synthesis, composition, morphology, and catalytic activity. For reference, the test conditions and the evaluation criteria of HER performance under the chlor-alkali conditions are summarized. Accordingly, the progress made in technology and engineering are also surveyed. Finally, the opportunities and challenges for the future development prospect of this joint technology are outlined.
2. Brief analysis of hydrogen and chlor-alkali co-production
According to the type of the electrolyte, the current water electrolysis cell can be mainly divided into three types: proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysis cell, alkaline water electrolysis cell, and solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC). Among them, SOEC is still in the laboratory stage, and alkaline water electrolysis cell is the most mature and commercialized. Nonetheless, alkaline water electrolysis is still limited by the high equipment price and the relatively low reaction kinetics, low efficiency, and low current density in alkaline electrolytes.21,22 As for the chlor-alkali industry, although the continuous revolutions from the diagram cell to the mercury cell to the membrane cell have greatly reduced the power consumption, each ton of caustic soda produced still consumes more than 2000 kW h of electricity.23 As can be seen, there exist development bottlenecks in the two industrial processes of water electrolysis and chlor-alkali production to a certain extent. To highlight the significance of co-production, we further respectively evaluated the expected economic benefits of electrolytic HER and the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali on the premise that the power consumption of these two processes is equal to 1000 kW h. Fig. 1a shows the comparison results in the form of a histogram.
 Fig. 1  Economic benefit analysis and device analysis of the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali: (a) comparison of the economic benefits between the isolated HER and the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali processes; (b) schematic diagram of the whole process of water electrolysis; HER occurs at the cathode and OER occurs at the anode.26 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, ACS; (c) schematic diagram of co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali; HER occurs at the cathode and ClER occurs at the anode. 
From the perspective of thermodynamics, the electrocatalytic water splitting is an endothermic process (ΔH = 285.83 kJ mol−1),24 and can only be driven by an external voltage. Due to the existence of the thermal effect, the energy conversion efficiency (η) of the electrocatalytic cell is between 62% and 82%.25 The electrical energy required (W) to generate 1 mol of H2 from the HER process can be calculated by W = ΔH × 1 mol/η. Thus, considering the η of real devices, the electrical energy that is needed to produce 1 mol of H2 through the HER process is in the range of 9.68 × 10−2–1.28 × 10−1 kW h.† When the consumed electricity is 1000 kW h, the mass of H2 (m-H2) evolved can be considered to be 15.61–20.66 kg, while the mass of O2 (m-O2) is 124.88–165.28 kg.‡ As deduced from the above data, the economic benefit that can be gained should be between $52.59 and $69.60.§
As expressed in formula W′ = V × 1000/(1.492 × η′), the tons of alkali electric consumption (W′, the electricity consumption per ton of NaOH produced) in the chlor-alkali industry is related to the cell voltage (V) and the cathodic current efficiency (η′).18–20 At the same time, the cell voltage is affected by many factors, such as the overpotential of the cathode and the anode, the material type, and potential drop of the membrane. For the membrane electrolysis technology widely used in the current industry, W′ is usually between 2000 kW h and 2300 kW h. On the premise that the electricity consumption is 1000 kW h, we give a calculated result according to the two extreme values of W′. When W′ = 2000 kW h, the mass of caustic soda (NaOH) produced is 0.5 t.¶ According to 2NaCl + 2H2O → 2NaOH + H2↑ + Cl2↑, mH2 = nH2 × MH2 = 1/2nNaOH × MH2 = 0.5 × 12500 mol × 2 g mol−1 = 12500 g = 12.50 kg; mCl2 = nCl2 × MCl2 = 1/2nNaOH × MCl2 = 0.5 × 12500 mol × 70.90 g mol−1 = 443125 g = 443.13 kg. When W′ = 2000 kW h, according to the same algorithm, the masses of H2 and Cl2 can be obtained as 10.75 kg and 381.09 kg.|| The prices of NaOH and Cl2 are estimated to be 387.25 US$ per t and 201.37 US$ per t, respectively. Then, the total economic benefit can be calculated in the range from $270.13 to $314.11.
Based on the above discussion and calculation, when the power consumption is 1000 kW h, the economic benefits of the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali are 3.88–5.97 times that of the isolated HER process (Fig. 1a). In particular, considering that the co-production process no longer requires additional equipment investment, the actual economic benefits should be higher than the calculated value. Since the selling prices of these chemical products (H2, NaOH, Cl2) are affected by many factors such as region, season, the relationship between the supply and demand, and only relatively reasonable prices are used for the estimation here. In summary, no matter from the perspective of economic benefits or from the perspective of resource integration and sustainable development, the exploitation of the co-production of hydrogen energy and chlor-alkali is of great practical significance.
The schematic diagram of the whole process of water electrolysis is displayed in Fig. 1b, which involves two half-reactions: hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) that occurs at the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) that occurs at the anode. In acidic electrolyte, the reaction equation of HER is: 2H+ + 2e− → H2, Eθ = 0 V; the equation of OER is: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, Eθ = 1.23 V. The reaction equations in alkaline electrolyte are different, HER: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−, Eθ = −0.828 V; OER: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−, Eθ = 0.402 V. The thermodynamic potential of the overall reaction is 1.23 V regardless of the electrolyte in which water electrolysis is carried out. In actual electrolysis, the applied voltage is much higher than the theoretical value due to the presence of overpotential (excess potential, η) on both the anode and cathode and other resistances (contact resistance and electrolyte resistance). Indeed, the electrocatalysts coated on the surface of the cathode and anode reduce the overpotentials required for the two half-reactions.26 As shown in Fig. 1c, the electrolysis cell for the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali is also composed of four components: membrane, cathode, anode, and electrolyte. The electrolyte in the anodic zone is usually brine, i.e., the concentrated solution of NaCl. Due to the continuous generation of the alkali at the cathode, the electrolyte in the cathodic zone is usually a mixed solution of NaCl and NaOH, in which the mass fraction of NaOH is approximately 30%. After energization, the chloride ions ionized from NaCl in the electrolyte undergoes oxidation reaction near the anode: 2Cl− − 2e− → Cl2, Eθ = 1.358 V (ClER). At the same time, HER takes place at the cathode, and Na+ combines with OH− at the cathode through the cation exchange membrane to form caustic soda. Similar to the circumstance of water electrolysis, the overpotential also exists on the two half-reactions of the electrolysis cell. According to the Nernst equation, the electrode potential is related to the ion concentration, pH value, and system temperature.
3. Working mechanism of HER electrocatalysts under the chlor-alkali conditions
3.1 General working mechanism and design principles of general HER electrocatalysts
Thanks to the efforts of many researchers, the working mechanism of HER electrocatalysts in acidic electrolyte has been well documented. There are two recognized electrocatalytic mechanisms, namely, Volmer–Heyrovsky approach and Volmer–Tafel approach. Adsorbed hydrogen atom is firstly formed on the surface of the electrocatalyst in the so-called Volmer step: H+ + e− → Hads. Next, the generated adsorbed hydrogen can be converted to H2 in one of the following two ways: Hads + H+ + e− → H2 (Heyrovsky step) or 2Hads → H2 (Tafel step).24,27,28 In these two electrocatalytic pathways, the appropriate interaction strength between the adsorbed hydrogen and the electrocatalyst plays a decisive role in the HER activity. If the interaction is too weak, the Volmer reaction would be limited, leading to the slow overall turnover rate. If the interaction is too strong, the desorption of hydrogen would be hindered.22 By summarizing the relationship between the exchange current density (j0) and the intermediate adsorption energy of various metal electrocatalysts, the well-known volcano curve is obtained.29 As shown in Fig. 2a, the electrocatalyst closer to the apex possesses a higher intrinsic HER activity theoretically. Unlike the current situation where the process of HER in acidic electrolyte is explicit, the HER mechanism in alkaline medium is still ambiguous. There are relatively few advances in alkaline HER electrocatalysts, and the electrocatalytic properties are generally lower than those in acidic electrolytes, which bring challenges to the search of HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry. Regarding the HER mechanism in an alkaline medium, the disputes among several voices mainly focus on whether the water dissociation energy barriers would reduce the whole hydrogen evolution rate and whether the hydrogen adsorption is the sole descriptor for HER activity evaluation. Different viewpoints would be introduced in detail in Section 3.2.1 (Strong alkalinity).
 Fig. 2  (a) The volcano-type relationship between j0 and ΔG (free energy of hydrogen adsorption) in acidic electrolyte.29 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, ACS; (b) log(i0) on mono-metal surfaces as a function of the computed HBE in alkaline electrolyte.34 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, RSC; (c) schematic diagram of water dissociation, generation of Pt–Had intermediates, combination of two Had, desorption of OH−, and adsorption of the next H2O molecule on the surface of Ni(OH)2–Pt (111) in the presence of hydrated cations in alkaline electrolyte.36 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011, science; (d) schematic diagram of the “chimney effect” at the interface of the RuO2/Ni composite catalyst in alkaline electrolyte.40 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
To date, no matter in acidic or alkaline media, the noble metal group represented by Pt is still recognized as the superb HER electrocatalysts with excellent electrochemical performance (small overpotential, fast kinetic process, large electrochemical surface area, small charge transfer resistance, high faradaic efficiency, long-term stability).22 Unfortunately, the low reserves and the high prices of noble metals limit their large-scale application. Therefore, reducing the content of noble metals and exploiting transition metal-based or non-metal alternatives are two main directions for the design of the HER electrocatalyst. The design principles of common HER electrocatalysts, which can be inferred from the electrocatalytic mechanism, are as follows: (1) design and synthesis of new materials with high intrinsic HER activity whose free energy of hydrogen adsorption is close to zero; (2) enlarge the electrochemical surface area so as to expose the maximum active sites. In this regard, some previous reviews have made very comprehensive summaries. A series of specific methods have been employed to optimize the electrochemical activity of HER electrocatalysts: the regulation of the composition and the electronic structure, the preparations of single-atom or nanoclusters, the construction of three-dimensional porous architecture, and the introduction of surface cavities.22,30–33
3.2 Effect of chlor-alkali conditions on the performance of HER electrocatalysts
Understanding the effect of each condition on the performance of HER electrocatalysts is a prerequisite for designing HER electrocatalysts matching with the chlor-alkali industry.

3.2.1 Strong alkalinity. 
In recent years, three theories have been mainly proposed toward understanding the HER mechanism in alkaline medium: hydrogen binding energy (HBE) theory, bifunctional effect, and electronic effect.
Hydrogen binding energy (HBE) theory. 
The HBE theory was first put forward by Yan et al. in 2013.34 The HER activities of a series of mono-metals in the alkaline medium were studied systematically. The results demonstrate that there exists a volcano type relationship between the HER exchange current density and the calculated hydrogen binding energy (HBE) of the metal surface. Such a volcano curve is similar to the observation in the acid media, which verifies that the HBE can be regarded as the sole descriptor for assessing the HER electrocatalysts in alkaline medium (Fig. 2b). This theory was further supported and improved by other groups. For example, Durst et al. tested the HER performance of three kinds of carbon-supported monometallic catalysts in 0.1 M NaOH; the experimental results showed that the activities of these three catalysts decreased in the following order: Pd/C > Ir/C > Pt/C. It is obvious that this activity sequence is independent of the oxytropism of the catalysts, which cannot be explained by the bifunctional mechanism. They believe that H2O is a very fast Had donor; thus, the water dissociation should not be a rate-limiting step in alkaline HER. HBE is the unique and sole description of alkaline HER, and the slow kinetics under the alkaline condition is due to the effect of the pH on the HBE.35 Other researchers have also proved the HBE theory directly or indirectly; at the same time, there exist some disputes. Thus, the HBE theory still needs to be further refined.
Bifunctional effect. 
Markovic et al. found that after the deposition of Ni(OH)2 nanoclusters on Pt(111), the HER activity of the composite electrode is several times higher than that of pure Pt(111), although the available Pt sites are reduced. The explanation given is as follows: The edges of the Ni(OH)2 clusters facilitated the dissociation of H2O, and the generation of OHad intermediates remained at the oxophilic sites (Ni(OH)2 nanoclusters), while the Had intermediates are adsorbed on the nearby Pt surface and combined into hydrogen. Based on this, they proposed the bifunctional effect for the first time, in which the H2O molecule is first adsorbed on the surface of the electrocatalyst and undergoes the process of water dissociation. The bifunctional effect shows that HER dynamics in alkaline medium is determined by a delicate balance between water dissociation and the interactions of the intermediate Had with the surface of the electrocatalyst. The main reason of slow HER kinetics is the difficulty of water dissociation under alkaline conditions. In addition to the fact that the oxophilic sites of the catalyst surface can accelerate the HER, they also found that the presence of Li+ in the electrolyte can further promote the process of HER. From the perspective of the bifunctional effect, it can be explained as follows: the hydrated cations (AC+) stabilized by Ni(OH)2 through van der Waals interaction can further interact with H2O. This interaction changes the orientation of the H2O molecule and the strength of the interaction between H2O and Ni(OH)2, thus promoting the water dissociation and HER dynamics (Fig. 2c).36 Other research groups have found similar experimental phenomena. Jia et al. reported that the deposition of easily oxidized metals on Pt such as Ru and Ni can enhance the HER rate of Pt, which verified the bifunctional effect.37 Wei et al. designed a high-performance composite catalyst Ni(OH)2/NiMoPOx in the alkaline medium according to this mechanism. Ni(OH)2 was used to promote water dissociation, while the introduction of surface oxygen to NiMoP could adjust the adsorption/desorption energy of Had.38
Electronic effect. 
The electronic effect mainly focuses on the changes of the electronic structure at the surface and interface of the catalysts. It claims that OHad not only interact with Had directly but also affects the HER activity by tuning the electronic structure of the catalysts. Zhuang's group found that the CV curve of Pt/C in alkaline solution was dominated by a strong Had peak, while that of PtRu/C was dominated by a weak Had peak. They believe that the incorporation of Ru would weaken the strength of Pt–Had by adsorbing OHad on the surface of Ru, thus making the activity of PtRu/C superior to that of Pt/C.39 Actually, the above electronic effect exists widely in metal/metal oxide composite catalysts. Peng et al. studied the electronic synergistic effect between the interfaces of the composite catalysts using RuO2/Ni and NiO/Ni as two typical model catalysts.40 The charge transfer between the interfaces can optimize the adsorption energy of Had, which greatly accelerates the hydrogen desorption process. Such electronic effect is defined as the “chimney effect” of the interface between the metal and the metal oxide, similar to a “chimney” formed around the interface, which can extract hydrogen rapidly (Fig. 2d).
As for the three HER mechanism in the alkaline medium mentioned above, many researchers hold different opinions, which are verified by the experiments and theoretical simulations to some extent.41,42 However, due to the complexity of the reaction system and the dependence of the double layer structure on the electrode potential and the solvent, there is no mature theory that can explain all the experimental phenomena. Therefore, only on the basis of a full understanding of the existing research results, combined with the in-situ characterization technology and calculation simulation, can a comprehensive theoretical foundation for the design of highly active cathode materials be provided for the chlor-alkali industry.
The strong alkalinity of the chlor-alkali conditions not only affects the catalytic mechanisms and activities of HER electrocatalysts but also puts forward higher requirements for the alkali corrosion resistance of electrocatalysts. When designing HER electrocatalysts matching to the chlor-alkali industry, it is the primary consideration that the material should maintain a stable physical and chemical structure in a strongly alkaline environment.


3.2.2 High salt concentration. 
The high salt concentration of the electrolyte in the chlor-alkali industry has a great influence on the HER activity of the cathode. As mentioned in the previous Section 3.2.1 (bifunctional effect), the addition of alkali metal cations (AM+) to the electrolyte can increase the reaction rate of HER. In order to well explain this phenomenon, Jia et al. put forward the so-called 2B theory for the first time by combining the bifunctional effect with the hard–soft acid–base theory.43 According to the 2B theory, the AM+ added to the electrolyte is a kind of Lewis hard acid, which binds more strongly with the Lewis hard base OH− than the Lewis soft base OHad, which facilitates the Volmer step of alkaline HER (in the presence of AM+): H2O + (H2O)x–AM+ → Had + OHad–(H2O)x–AM+, OHad–(H2O)x–AM+ + e− → OH−–(H2O)x–AM+. With the Lewis acid hardness decreasing in the order Li+ > Na+ > K+, the promoting effect on the HER activity also decreases in the sequence Li+ > Na+ > K+. The 2B theory has been constantly developed since it was proposed,44 which helps researchers to have a deeper understanding of the influence of AM+ in the electrolyte on the HER performance (Fig. 3a–c).
 Fig. 3  (a) LSV plots of the Pt polycrystalline electrode in 0.1 M KOH, NaOH, and LiOH saturated with H2; the inset exhibits the CV plots;43 (b) schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic roles of OHad–(H2O)x–AM+ in alkaline HER kinetics;43 (c) schematic description of the “cation cluster” model for HER in alkaline electrolyte.44 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, ACS and 2020, Elsevier; (d) TEM image and (e) HER polarization plots of Ru/WNO@C (Ru wt% = 3.37%) in the electrolyte containing different concentrations of NaCl at the room temperature.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC. 
In addition to the 2B effect of Na+ on HER, the influence of high salt concentration on the HER process is really complicated. Firstly, the current density of the electrocatalyst would increase as the concentration of the ions in the supporting electrolyte increases, while the amount of the supporting electrolyte is too much, the activity of the catalyst would decrease due to the competition of Na+ and H2O/Had on the surface of the catalyst. Secondly, the presence of Cl− would affect the reaction occurring on the counter electrode (carbon rod). In fact, when Cl− is present in the electrolyte, the competition between the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and the chlorine evolution reaction (ClER) takes place on the anode. As the concentration of Cl− increases, the ClER gradually dominates the competitive reaction, which might increase the HER overpotential of the cathode. To date, there are few studies on this aspect. Our research group simply tested the HER performance of the Ru/WNO@C electrocatalyst at the room temperature in 3 M NaOH electrolyte containing different concentrations of NaCl. As seen from the results in Fig. 3d–e, the comprehensive results of various factors are as follows: With the concentration of NaCl increasing, the HER activity of the catalyst decreases. This is only a preliminary result; a lot of experiments and calculations are needed for further exploration.45


3.2.3 High temperature. 
Little attention has been paid to the influence of the electrolyte temperature on the HER performance; however, it is worthy of exploring deeply. We believe that the influence of the temperature on the HER performance exists in the following two aspects: activity and stability. In terms of the activity, with the increase in the temperature, the migration rate of the ions in the electrolyte would increase, which could lead to an increase in the current density. Secondly, from the perspective of thermodynamics, the Nernst equation tells us that an increase in the temperature would reduce the voltage of water splitting. The above two factors all reflect the promotion effect of the high temperature on the HER activity. However, we found that the initial overpotential of Ru/WNO@C would gradually become larger with the increase in the temperature, which was completely different from that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 4).45 This difference may be related to the composition and electronic structure of the electrocatalyst; the specific and detailed reasons are being analyzed and sorted out. As for the stability, the high temperature might bring about the physical detachment and chemical decomposition of the electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the changing trend of the HER performance of Ru/WNO@C and 20% Pt/C with increasing temperature.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC. 

4. Advances of HER electrocatalysts matchingthe chlor-alkali industry
Thanks to the vigorous progress of a variety of nanotechnologies, the continuous improvement of the characterization, and the in-depth development of theoretical calculations, fruitful results have been achieved in the design and synthesis of general HER electrocatalysts. A series of pure metals and their alloys, metal phosphides, oxides, borides, carbides, nitrides, and nitrogen-doped carbon materials have been found to show comparable HER performance to those of benchmarking Pt-based materials.22,46–48 For the specific research progress of general HER electrocatalysts, recent reviews have made a detailed introduction. This review would focus on the advances in HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry.
Mild steel (low carbon steel) is the most traditional and widely-used cathode material in the chlor-alkali industry due to its low cost, availability, and strong plasticity. However, mild steel is not the most ideal cathode material due to the following considerations: (1) the overpotential of hydrogen evolution is as high as 300 mV (the exact value of which depends on the state of the surface), resulting in high energy consumption; (2) the corrosion effect of NaCl and electrolytic products is serious, which greatly shortens the service life of mild steel.20,49–51 Therefore, it is one of the key problems to exploit new active cathode materials, which is superior to mild steel with low overpotential, high robustness, and low cost in the joint technology of the chlor-alkali industry and water splitting. Similar to general HER electrocatalysts, the overpotential of HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry can be reduced from the following two aspects: the optimization of the material composition and the increase in the specific surface area.52 In terms of the robustness, it is necessary to consider the harsh operating condition of the real chlor-alkali industry to choose the appropriate materials. This review will mainly focus on the development of active HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry in the last six years since F. Safizadeh et al. have reviewed the progress of cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry systematically in 2015.20
4.1 Nickel-based materials
The low price and good corrosion resistance to hot concentrated alkaline electrolyte enable the nickel element to be thoroughly investigated for cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry. Nickel-based materials that have been extensively studied mainly include the alloys/amorphous materials of nickel and other metals, the alloys/amorphous materials of nickel and nonmetals, and RANEY® Ni-type materials.
The alloys or amorphous materials between Ni and other metals often exhibit much higher electrocatalytic performance than pure Ni due to the special d-electron synergistic effect of Ni. The Ni–Mo alloy is considered to be the most active one in HER under strong alkaline conditions among many combinations of Ni and different metals, and it is also the most popular one investigated by various research groups. This type of alloy usually possesses low hydrogen evolution overpotential, good corrosion resistance, long-term stability, excellent hardness, and wear resistance under operational conditions of the chlor-alkali industry. In fact, the great electrocatalytic activity of the Ni–Mo alloy has been confirmed by Arul et al. through a series of experiments.20 They coated steel with a variety of Ni-based binary alloys by electrodeposition, and tested their HER performance in 6 M KOH at 353 K. The activity order of these Ni-based alloys is as follows: Ni–Mo > Ni–Zn > Ni–Co > Ni–W > Ni–Fe > Ni–Cr > Ni. At present, there are mainly two theories to explain the good electrocatalytic property of the Ni–Mo alloy: the first explanation is that the d-electron effect between Ni and Mo endows it with excellent activity; the second explanation is that alloying optimizes the adsorption strength of the hydrogen atom on Ni and Mo, making it more favorable for the evolution of H2.20
Wang et al. prepared NiMo film with a three-dimensional porous structure by one-step electrodeposition method under supergravity field (G = 740).53 The thickness of the prepared film is between 180 and 240 μm. They tested the HER property of porous NiMo film in 10% NaOH electrolyte at room temperature and found that it required 47 mV to drive a current density of 100 mA cm−2, which was much lower than that of compact NiMo film (132 mV). The authors insist that the enhanced HER activity of this porous NiMo film should be attributed to its extremely high actual active area. The cross-section SEM image and the formation mechanism of the porous NiMo film are shown in Fig. 5a and b.
 Fig. 5  (a) The intersecting surface of NiMo porous films electrodeposited under a G value of 740 at 2.4 A cm−2; (b) the formation mechanism of porous metal films under supergravity field.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Elsevier; (c) SEM image of NiMo MT/NF (inset: high-resolution SEM image of NiMo MT/NF); (d) LSV plots of NiMo MT/NF and NiMo NP/NF in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) schematic diagram of the procedure for synthesizing Ni-based bimetallic alloy by the topotactic transformation of layered nickel hydroxide salts; (f) SEM image of the Ni–Mo alloy, scale bars: 1 μm; (g) LSV plots in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
By the template strategy, the radially-aligned Ni10Mo alloy microtube arrays on nickel foam (denoted as NiMo MT/NF) was constructed by Cao and co-workers.54 The NiMo MT/NF possessed more efficient electronic transport ability and better HER performance compared to NiMo NP/NF due to its unique tubular structure. The hydrogen overpotential of NiMo MT/NF is 119 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH, lower than that of NiMo NP/NF (Fig. 5c and d), which demonstrates the positive effect of the micron scale tubular structure on the electrochemical performance improvement.
With the rapid development of nanotechnology, the Ni–Mo alloy has been prepared in nanometer size to further modify the electrochemical property. Self-supporting Ni–Mo alloy nanosheets were prepared via a two-step hydrothermal and annealing procedure by Jiang et al.55 They not only synthesized Ni–Mo alloy nanosheets but also constructed Ni–Ge and Ni–Sn alloy nanosheets in a similar way. Among them, Ni4Mo/NF exhibited the best HER performance because the Ni–Mo alloy possesses the highest intrinsic electrocatalytic property. Specifically, Ni4Mo/NF only needs 69.6 mV to drive a current density of 100 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH, as illustrated in Fig. 5e–g.
Furthermore, the incorporation of the third metal into the Ni–Mo alloy system to enhance the HER activity in the chlor-alkali industry has also been reported by Arul et al. The samples exhibited the electroactivity in 6 M KOH at 353 K with the sequence of Ni–Mo–Fe > Ni–Mo–Cu > Ni–Mo–Zn > Ni–Mo–Co ≈ Ni–Mo–W > Ni–Mo–Cr > Ni.20 Wu et al. prepared Ni–Mo–Al ternary alloy (Ni3Al–Mo) and assessed its HER performance in 6 M KOH at room temperature.56 They mainly focused on the stability of Ni3Al–Mo. The galvanostatic test (current density = 100 mA cm−2) showed that the overpotential decreased slightly with the increase in the electrolysis time. This activation phenomenon of Ni3Al–Mo was attributed to the gradual removal of oxides formed during the sintering process.
The alloy of Ni and Ag has also been excavated as a possible cathode material for the chlor-alkali industry. Wang et al. constructed 3D multi-structural porous Ni–Ag porous films by the hydrogen bubble template method, and investigated the HER performance in concentrated alkaline.57 It was revealed by the contact angle experiment that the porous Ni–Ag film possessed better hydrophilicity than the pure Ni film, which was conducive to the desorption of H2, thus improving the HER performance.
Sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2) is usually used as the reducing agent during electroless nickel plating, which results in inevitable phosphorus doping in the Ni-based coatings obtained in this way. It is for this reason that Ni–P is the most important and common type of Ni-nonmetal cathode material. For phosphorus doping of the Ni-based coating, the phosphorus content directly determines the physicochemical properties and HER performance. The lower the phosphorus content, the more tendency to form Ni–P alloy materials; on the contrary, the higher the phosphorus content, the more tendency to form Ni–P amorphous materials. To date, the exact demarcation point of the phosphorus content between the alloy and the amorphous forms remains unclear. Some studies have shown that the Ni–P material was amorphous when the phosphorus content was greater than 9%, and some other studies have shown that this demarcation value is higher than 9%.58 In general, alloy Ni–P materials with low phosphorus content possess high hardness, while amorphous materials with high phosphorus content exhibit good corrosion resistance. Therefore, it is necessary to balance the phosphorus content of Ni–P type cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry. Two main strategies have been reported to strengthen the HER performance of Ni–P coatings, besides the regulation of the phosphorus content: the construction of ternary or pluralistic Ni–P–X (X = metal or nonmetal), and the combination of transition metal oxides with the Ni–P system.
Bachvarov et al. prepared the NiFeCoP amorphous cathode material by the electrodeposition method.59 The HER performance of amorphous NiFeCoP is much better than that of the crystallized NiFeCo alloy without phosphorus. The hydrogen overpotential is only 135 mV in 6 M KOH (current density = 100 mA cm−2). Recently, Mohebbi et al. synthesized ternary NiPLa alloy by introducing La into the Ni–P coating, which improved the HER activity and robustness at high current density in 1 M NaOH (Fig. 6a and b).60
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Ni–P–La; (b) LSV curves of Ni–P–La and other control samples. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (c) EDAX spectrum of RuO2/Ni–P/Ni; (d) and (e) HER performance of RuO2/Ni–P/Ni and other control samples. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
On the basis of the literatures available, there are many transition metal oxides such as RuO2, WO3, TiO2, Fe2O3, MnO2, ZrO2, and CeO2 have been incorporated into the Ni–P coating to optimize the HER activity in alkaline electrolyte. This effect of metal oxide enhancing the electrocatalytic activity of electrocatalysts is called strong metal support interactions (SMSI).61 Shibli et al. reported a nano-WO3-incorporated Ni–P cathode material Ni–P–WO3, which could improve the surface homogeneity, while maintaining the electrocatalytic active sites of the Ni–P coating, thus promoting the HER activity and stability in 32% NaOH.61 Similarly, RuO2 was combined with the Ni–P coating to prepare RuO2/Ni–P by Wei's group, which greatly lowered the electrochemical impedance and thus enhanced the HER activity (Fig. 6c–e).62 Apart from the incorporation of the single metal oxide, Shibli et al. also incorporated mixed metal oxides (CeO2 and RuO2) into the Ni–P coating. They firstly prepared the CeO2–RuO2–Ni–P electrode material and carefully optimized the phosphorus content.58
Ni–S alloy/amorphous is also a kind of HER material in the chlor-alkali industry. Similar to the Ni–P system, the electrochemical activity is closely related to the content of sulfur.63 There are few reports about the Ni–S system in the recent years.
The RANEY®-type Ni electrode was developed by August Winsel and Eduard W. Justi in 1948.64 It is a porous Ni-based electrode obtained by selectivity, dissolving the more active components of the Ni–M (M = Zn, Al) composites in alkaline media. The chemical etching preparation method endows the RANEY® Ni electrode larger specific surface area than the pure Ni electrode, resulting in excellent electrochemical performance. To prepare RANEY® Ni electrode, a number of technologies have been employed, including plasma spraying, electrodeposition, and hot rolling.65 Recent advances in this type of Ni electrode will be discussed as follows.
Noble metals have been incorporated into the system of RANEY® Ni to further improve the electrocatalytic HER performance. For example, Solmaz et al. first prepared Pd-modified RANEY® Ni coatings by electrochemical and chemical replacement methods.66 The trace amount of Pd significantly enhances the electrochemical performance of RANEY® Ni, which might be attributed to the intrinsic activity of Pd and the synergistic effect between Pd and Ni. In addition to the chemical modification, the effect of oxygen content in RANEY® Ni on the HER performance was also researched by Delgado et al. in detail.67 Different from the traditional vacuum plasma spraying method, Lee et al. realized the preparation of Ni–Al alloy in the atmospheric environment, which solves the problem of complex equipment.64 In order to enhance the adhesion of the coating to the substrate and improve the uniformity of the Al distribution, the Ni–Al alloy was pyrolyzed in hydrogen atmosphere at 610 °C for one hour. RANEY® Ni electrode was successfully prepared after Al etching. However, the results of electrochemical test showed that the heat treatment process did not improve the hydrogen evolution activity and durability of RANEY® Ni.
Recently, Razmjooei et al. reported a kind of binder-free and free-standing RANEY®-type Ni–Mo electrode, which exhibits promising HER performance in 30 wt% KOH.68 This RANEY® Ni–Mo electrode was prepared by the method of atmospheric plasma spraying (APS) using NiAlMo particles as the feedstock. The specific processes of plasma spraying and chemical activation are shown in Fig. 7 above.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the APS coating of RANEY®-type Ni–Mo electrode on perforated Ni sheet; (b) the structure schematic of thermal-spray coating; (c) coating and chemical activation procedures of RANEY®-type electrode.68 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature. 
4.2 Iron-based materials
Iron-based materials are also one of the most studied cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry. Gajić-Krstajić et al. confirmed that the electrocatalytic HER performance of mild steel was greatly improved after the modification of the Fe–Mo alloy coating on its surface, and the resistance to cathodic hypochlorite and chlorate reduction side reactions was also strengthened.69 The hydrogen production properties of binary Fe–Mo and ternary Fe–Mo–P amorphous coatings were studied by Safizadeh et al.70 They demonstrated that the Fe–Mo–P ternary coating possessed higher electrochemical performance than the phosphorus-free binary coating by the steady-state polarization technology, impedance spectroscopy, and stability test. The promotion effect of phosphorus doping on the electroactivity of Fe–Mo amorphous coating was attributed to the increase in the effective area and the optimization of the intrinsic activity. Recently, the stainless-steel scrubber has also been creatively applied in this field. Anantharaj et al. developed stainless steel scrubber as a cost-efficient alkaline water splitting (hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution) electrocatalyst, which also has potential application in the chlor-alkali industry (Fig. 8).71
 Fig. 8  (a) CV curve of stainless steel scrubber for HER polarization without iR-compensation in 1 M KOH; (b) point diagram of current density vs. overpotential (without iR-compensation) for the stainless steel scrubber; (c) the schematic diagram of stainless steel scrubber as water splitting electrocatalysts.71 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, ACS. 
4.3 Cobalt-based materials
Co–Mo alloys have also been studied extensively due to their high hardness, corrosion resistance, and electrocatalytic ability toward HER in alkaline media. The research results of Mascaro et al. demonstrated that the electrocatalytic performance of this system was significantly optimized after the addition of the third component of copper.72 The Co–Mo–Cu ternary coating was covered on carbon steel by electro-deposition. It is worth mentioning that the electrochemical properties of ternary alloy are not always directly proportional to the content of Cu. The electrochemical activity is a combination result of many factors, which is related to both the electroactive area and the intrinsic catalytic activity. It can be seen from the experimental data reported by the authors that the Co–Mo–Cu ternary alloy with the composition of Co56Mo21Cu23 exhibits the highest performance (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (a) LSV plots and (b) Tafel plots for the Co–Mo and Co–Mo–Cu films measured in 6 M KOH at 25 °C; (c) schematic diagram of Cu introduction into the Co–Mo binary alloy system.72 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition to Ni, Fe, and Co, some other elements, such as Ru, Ce, Ti, and Ag, have also been researched as hydrogen evolution cathodes in the chlor-alkali industry.62,73,74 For example, 3D Ag nanodomes with large specific surface area and roughness have been synthesized by soft lithography, nanosphere lithography, and electrochemical deposition method, and employed as an HER material under the chlor-alkali conditions.75
4.4 Carbon-based materials
There are few reports on non-metallic carbon-based hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts that could be applied in the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. The reported carbon-based materials are usually doped with nitrogen, fluorine, silicon, and other non-metallic elements, and possess certain special morphologies, such as nanotubes or nanodots. Carbon-based materials exhibit robust stability in a strong alkaline environment but their current densities always tend to be low due to the poor intrinsic activities.
Chen et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene microtubes with ultra-thin walls of 1–4 nm (N-GMT) through the pyrolysis of a mixture of dicyandiamide and glycine, and tested the alkaline HER properties. The experimental results show that N-GMT is expected to be used as the cathode material in the chlor-alkali industry. The ultra-thin curled walls of graphene microtubes prevent N-GMT from agglomerating during the electrochemical process, while increasing its contact area with the electrolyte. Furthermore, the good performance of N-GMT also benefits from the enhancement of the intrinsic catalytic activity with the introduction of nitrogen (Fig. 10a–b).76 After that, silicon-doped carbon nanotubes (Si-CNTs) have also been prepared using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) by Tavakol et al. Si-CNTs requires an overpotential of 440 mV to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10c–d).77 Graphene quantum dots co-doped with nitrogen and fluorine (N, F-GQDs) have also been proved to possess HER activity in 1 M KOH. N, F-GQDs, whose average size was 8.7 nm, were synthesized by a two-step functionalization method (Fig. 10e and f).78
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of hydrogen production for N-GMT; (b) LSV curves with iR-compensation of N-GMT in alkaline electrolyte with various concentrations.76 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer; (c) the morphology and (d) HER property of Si-CNTs in 1 M KOH.77 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley; (e) the schematic diagram of the preparation process of N, F-GQDs.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
4.5 Composite materials
Yang et al. decorated CoMoO3 cuboid arrays with MoNi nanoparticles with good intrinsic activity to construct MoNi/CoMoO3/NF, which served as the hydrogen evolution electrode.79 The electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution ability of MoNi/CoMoO3/NF is even better than that of Pt/C in 1 M KOH (Fig. 11a–c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of MoNi/CoMoO3/NF; (b) SEM image and (c) HRTEM image of MoNi/CoMoO3/NF. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, RSC; (d) schematic illustration of the synthesis of C-CWC via one-step thermal treatment; (e) TEM image of C-CWC; (f) LSV plots in 1 M KOH solution.80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, RSC. 
As mentioned in Section 4.1 above, Ni–P coatings are widely researched cathode materials with excellent performance. As known to all, nano-MoS2 is a star material emerging in the HER field in the recent years. Ma et al. modified the MoS2 nanostructure on the surface of the Ni–P coating by the electrodeposition method to combine these two potential HER materials.81 Similar to the expected experimental results, the hybrid MoS2/Ni–P exhibits better electrocatalytic activity toward HER than those of pure Ni–P coating and nano-MoS2 in alkaline media. Zou et al. constructed a nanocomposite consisting of bimetallic Co–W carbide-coated by carbon shells by the annealing treatment of cobalt, tungsten, and carbon sources under flowing N2, named as C-CWC.80 The results of the electrochemical performance test revealed that the hydrogen evolution activity of C-CWC in alkaline electrolyte was higher than that of the popular Ni–Mo electrode in the chlor-alkali industry. The superb electrochemical performance was credited to the cooperative effect between nano-sized Co6W6C and carbon shells (Fig. 11d–f). In 2018, reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-supported Ni and Ni–MoO2 composites have been synthesized and evaluated for alkaline HER by Halder et al.82 The authors proved that the introduction of MoO2 into Ni-rGO could enhance the HER activity of this system through the kinetic study and the activation energy calculation.
Our research group has also done some work in this respect. Cobalt molybdenum phosphide nanoparticles covered with N-doped carbon shells, denoted as CoMoP@C, were synthesized by the one-step annealing method with a mixture of polyoxometalate (Co16Mo16P24) and dicyandiamide. CoMoP@C shows excellent HER performance in the whole pH range (0–14), especially exhibiting better activity and stability than that of commercial Pt/C in real seawater. Such superb corrosion resistance should be ascribed to the carbon shells outside the CoMoP nanocrystals. It is also due to the HER ability in the electrolytes of the whole pH range and remarkable electrochemical robustness that CoMoP@C possesses the potential to be applied as a cathode material in the chlor-alkali industry (Fig. 12).83
 Fig. 12  (a and b) LSV plots of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in simulated seawater in the 5th and 10th measurements (scan rate = 5 mV s−1); (c) LSV curves of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in real seawater (scan rate = 5 mV s−1); (d) faradaic efficiencies of CoMoP@C toward HER in seawater (the overpotential = 600 mV); (e) I–T curves of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in real seawater for 10 h (overpotential = 500 mV); (f–h) the morphology characterization of CoMoP@C.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, RSC. 
Further, we regarded tungsten oxynitride (WNO) nanowires rich in anchoring sites as the substrates to disperse and stabilize Ru nanoclusters, and obtained the composite catalyst of Ru/WNO@C with suitable hydrogen adsorption energy and low water dissociation barrier. Ru/WNO@C demonstrated HER performance under the simulated conditions of the chlor-alkali industry (the mixture of 3 M NaCl and 3 M NaOH as the electrolyte, the temperature of electrolyte is 90 °C) superior to commercial Pt/C and even the popular industrial cathode of low carbon steel. It takes only 108 mV to drive a current density of 500 mA cm−2, which is 594.4 mV lower than that of carbon steel under the same conditions. To simulate the actual chlor-alkali industry, a homemade ionic membrane electrolyzer with Ru/WNO@C (Ru wt% = 3.37%) as the cathode was assembled, while the commercial chlorine evolution material of RuO2/IrO2-coated Ti-mesh was used as the anode. The electrolytic cell requires a low cell voltage of 2.48 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, and can operate stably at this current density for at least 25 h (Fig. 13).45
 Fig. 13  (a–c) HER property parameters in simulated chlorine-alkali electrolyte at 20 °C; (d–f) HER property parameters in simulated chlorine-alkali electrolyte at 90 °C; (g) a photograph of the membrane electrolyzer; (h) polarization plots for chlorine-alkali electrolysis in a membrane electrolyzer at 20 °C; (i) the chronopotentiometric curve of the Ru/WNO@C (Ru wt% = 3.37%)//RuO2/IrO2-coated Ti-mesh couple for 25 h (current density = 10 mA cm−2).45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC. 
Generally speaking, there are relatively few studies on HER electrocatalysts matching the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali (the test condition and electrochemical performance of the reported materials are listed in Table 1). Judging from the current progress, the HER activities of the reported materials need to be continuously enhanced, while the durability of most materials have not yet reached the industrial application standard. Moreover, the performance test conditions of some electrocatalysts are far from that of the actual co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali.
Table 1 HER electrochemical parameters for some cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry




Cathode materials
Substrate
Electrolyte
Temperature (°C)

η
CD

 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.





a Measured overpotential at different current densities (mA cm−2); —indicates that the data is not given.





NiMo films (G = 740)
Cu
10% NaOH
25
47100
136.7

53



NiMo MT/NF
Ni foam
1 M KOH
25
11910
119

54



Ni4Mo/NF
Ni foam
1 M KOH
25
69.6100
37

55



NiAg
Cu foil
6 M KOH
25
15016.6
95.43

57



NiFeCoP
Cu
6 M KOH
25
7810, 135100
42

59



NiPLa
Cu
1 M NaOH
25
139250
93

60



Ni–P–WO3
Mild steel
32% NaOH
25
165250
108

61



RuO2/Ni–P
Ni plate
1 M NaOH
25
7010
77

62



CeO2–RuO2–Ni–P
Mild steel
32% NaOH
25
—
—

58



NiZn–Pd (30s)
Cu
1 M KOH
25
135100
59

66



RANEY® Ni (APS)
Ni plate
1 M KOH
25
108300
54

64



RANEY®-type Ni–Mo electrode-No. 4
Ni sheet
30 wt% KOH
70
80200
33

68



Fe–Mo alloy coating
Mild steel
300 g dm−3 NaCl + 150 g dm−3 NaClO3
60
—
—

69



Fe53Mo47
Mild steel
300 g L−1 of NaCl and 4 g L−1 of K2Cr2O7 (pH = 6.4)
80
857250
90

70



Fe54Mo30P16
Mild steel
300 g L−1 of NaCl and 4 g L−1 of K2Cr2O7 (pH = 6.4)
80
716250
80

70



Stainless steel scrubber
—
1 M KOH
25
38050
121

71



Co67Mo33
Carbon steel
6 M KOH
25
15610
83

72



Co56Mo21Cu23
Carbon steel
6 M KOH
25
11910
82

72



3D Ag NDs
Bulk Ag electrode
6 M KOH
25
—
114

75



N-GMT
-
6 M KOH
25
42610
—

76



MoNi/CoMoO3/NF
Ni foam
1 M KOH
25
1810
35

79



MoS2/Ni–P
Ni foam
1 M KOH
25
12510
51

81



C-CWC
—
1 M KOH
25
7310
25

80



Ni–MoO2/RGO
—
1 M KOH
60
—
138

82



CoMoP@C
—
1 M KOH
25
136.950
55.53

83



Ru/WNO@C
—
3 M NaOH + 3 M NaCl
90
108500
30

45





5. The evaluation of HER electrocatalysts under the chlor-alkali condition
To date, there is no clear testing standard for the HER electrocatalysts matching chlor-alkali electrolysis. The electrochemical performance of different materials given by different researchers cannot be compared with each other, which is not conductive for the advancement of this field. Based on this, we tried to provide the performance testing conditions and performance evaluation criteria for HER electrocatalysts matching chlor-alkali electrolysis to provide researchers with references to a certain extent.
5.1 Test condition
The electrochemical performance of the prepared materials should be firstly tested in an alkaline electrolyte, such as 1 M KOH, similar to the general alkaline HER electrocatalysts. The HER materials suitable for the chlor-alkali industry can be preliminarily screened out. The actual chlor-alkali electrolysis is subjected to a very harsh operating environment, including the strong alkalinity and high salt concentration of the electrolyte, high temperature of the system, and high current density during operation. Therefore, it is necessary to measure the HER performance of promising materials in the simulated chlor-alkali industrial electrolyte, containing the components of the cathode electrolyte in the real chlor-alkali industry (the mixture of NaCl and NaOH, the mass content of NaOH is approximately 33%). It is worth noting that the test temperature range must cover the operating temperature of the chlor-alkali industry (about 90 °C).20,50,84
5.2 The evaluation criteria of the electrochemical performance

5.2.1 Overpotential. 
The potential required to drive HER consists of three parts: the equilibrium potential (EHER, 0 V vs. RHE), overpotential (η), and ohmic potential drop (iRs), which can be expressed as E = EHER + iRs + η.21 To obtain the activity overpotential, the ohmic potential drop can be eliminated by iRs compensation but it is indispensable to indicate that the overpotential is iRs-corrected. A smaller overpotential manifests a higher activity, which is the most direct and basic index to assess the HER performance of the electrode material. Recently, the overpotential value corresponding to the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (η10) is always identified as the vital reference since this current density matches well with 12.3% efficiency of the solar water splitting device.26,85 However, the current density must be large enough to achieve the large-scale generation of Cl2, H2, and NaOH. Therefore, η500 and η1000 should also be considered as a significant criterion for the electrode material evaluation. Moreover, the specific activity and mass activity should be obtained by normalizing the electrochemical surface area (ECSA, be mentioned in Section 5.2.2) and the mass loading of the active species in order to distinguish the HER performance of different materials accurately.


5.2.2 Tafel slope, j0, EIS, ECSA, faradaic efficiency, and TOF. 
In addition to the overpotential, Tafel slope, exchange current density (j0), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), electrochemical surface area (ECSA), faradaic efficiency, and turnover frequency (TOF) value are also considered as important parameters to evaluate the HER activity of the electrode material.86–88 There is nothing special about the measurement of the above indexes in the HER activity test of the cathode electrode for the chlor-alkali industry. Both the theory and the test method of these indicators have been described in great detail in many literatures reported previously; thus, we would not elaborate too much in this review.89,90


5.2.3 Stability. 
Stability is a crucial adjective criterion to be assessed for the potential large-scale application in the chlor-alkali industry of a cathode material. There exist some heavy metals or transition metal ions in the electrolytic cell inevitably in the actual chlor-alkali industry, which usually poisons HER electrocatalysts. Therefore, it is very necessary to investigate the resistance to heavy metals and transition metal ions of HER materials. It is a convenient way to determine the resistance to the metal ion poisoning of electrocatalysts by testing and comparing the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves before and after the artificial introduction of different metal ions into the electrolyte.83,91
The active cathode must be able to work stably for a long time under the harsh conditions of high alkali and salt concentration, high temperature, and high current density. Generally, there are two electrocatalytic ways for long-term stability evaluation: accelerated degradation test (ADT) and potentiostatic/galvanostatic electrolysis. The ADT test compares the LSV curves before and after a certain cyclic voltammetry (CV) or LSV run (no less than 5000 runs). The smaller the overpotential change after multiple cycles, the more stable the electrode material. As for potentiostatic/galvanostatic electrolysis, the duration should last no less than 100 hours.87,92
It is generally believed that there are several factors affecting the durability of cathode materials in the chlor-alkali industry. First, the hydride formed after a long period of electrolysis would enter the lattice of the electrocatalyst and cause the corresponding structural change. Second, the counter-current caused by short circuit leads to the corrosion dissolution or oxidation of the active ingredients. Third, the reactive oxide is reduced due to the long-term cathodic polarization. Fourth, the electrocatalyst falls off due to the mechanical damage or the impact of bubbles and liquid flow. On the basis of comprehending the cause of cathode material inactivation, the electrode material can be designed specifically to alleviate the inactivation process.20,93,94


5.2.4 The performance of the assembled chlor-alkali electrolytic cell. 
To better simulate the real chlor-alkali industry, the ionic membrane electrolyzer should be constructed using the prepared material as the cathode and industrial chlorine evolved electrode (RuO2/IrO2-coated Ti-mesh) as the anode. The activity and stability of the home-made electrolyzer are tested under the working conditions of the chlor-alkali industry, and the practicability of the cathode material can be further evaluated. Specific indexes include the electrolyzer voltage at a certain current density and long-term electrolytic duration (through the chronopotentiometric test).45
In addition to the above parameters for the evaluation of the activity and stability, the manufacturing cost and the accessibility of the material preparation should also be taken into account. The balance between these four aspects should be considered comprehensively to develop appropriate chlor-alkali industrial HER electrocatalysts. Finally, the evaluation criteria of HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry and the comparison with general HER electrocatalysts are displayed in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of the evaluation criteria for HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry and general HER electrocatalysts






Working condition
Activity
Durability
Cost




HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry
The mixture of NaCl and NaOH (wt%NaOH ≈ 33%); around 90 °C; large current density; small amount of transition metal ions

η
500 and η1000 (the smaller, the better)
Super corrosion resistance, alkali resistance, anti-transition metal ion poisoning ability, and long-term stability under high temperature and large current density
Cheap enough to adapt marketing


General HER electrocatalysts
0.5 M H2SO4/1 M KOH/1 M PBS

η
10 (the closer to zero, the better)
Possess physical and chemical stability in the electrolyte and can work for a long time under a low current density
—





6. Progress in technology and engineering
Whether the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali can be realized or not, HER electrocatalysts matching chlor-alkali electrolysis is the core problem, and the guarantee of the co-production process in terms of the technology and engineering is also indispensable. In this part, we summarize the several processes of traditional chlor-alkali electrolysis, sort out the advantages and disadvantages of each electrolysis process, and introduce the recent technology and engineering achievements in the chlor-alkali industry as well as new technologies that might promote the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali.
6.1 Traditional chlor-alkali process
The emergence of chlor-alkali electrolysis can be traced back to 1851, when James Watt put forward the patent of Cl2 production by the saturated NaCl solution electrolysis. It wasn't until the 1880s that several chlorine-alkaline plants went into operation.95 In industrial production, the separation of products obtained at the cathode and the anode is so significant that it can effectively prevent various side and secondary reactions, and avoid a sharp decline in the quality and yield of the products, as well as possible explosion. The diaphragm cell process was the earliest to appear; asbestos with porous permeability was generally used as the diaphragm.96 After the diaphragm cell process, the chlor-alkali electrolysis technology experienced two stages, namely, mercury cell and membrane cell, according to the different separation methods of the products.95,96
With the advancement in fuel cells, researchers gradually realized that the gas diffusion electrode (GDE) used in the fuel cell can be introduced into the chlor-alkali industry to reduce power consumption. As is known to all, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) possesses a more positive standard electrode potential than HER.HER: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− E = 0.00 V (vs. RHE)ORR: 2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH− E = 1.23 V (vs. RHE)
If the GDE is used to replace the HER with ORR, the cathode potential would become more positive, thus reducing the energy consumption. In this optimized chlor-alkali process, the gas diffusion electrode used is named as the oxygen depolarized cathode (ODC).19,97–99 Although the ODC cell process can significantly reduce the electrical energy required for electrolysis (the cell voltage can be reduced by 0.85–1.00 V), it is also accompanied by the disappearance of hydrogen production. In addition, considering the cost of the new electrolytic cell, ODC electrode, and additional oxygen gas needed, the application of the ODC technology should be flexible, which can be decided according to the situation of the plants. At least, the ODC cell process is not desirable for the co-production of hydrogen energy and chlor-alkali.
As can be seen from Table 3, the membrane cell technology not only perfectly solves the potential environmental problems of mercury in the mercury cell and asbestos in the diaphragm cell but also possess the advantages of relatively low energy consumption and high product purity. Therefore, membrane cell is considered to be the most available electrolysis technology in the current co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali.20,95
Table 3 Comparison of four chlor-alkali electrolysis processes20,95




Electrolysis process
Diaphragm
Electrode reactions
Power consumption (kW h per t Cl2)
NaOH qualitya
Environmental issues
Hydrogen production





a The concentration of caustic soda produced in the electrolysis cel.





Diaphragm cell
Asbestos
Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−
2300–2900

ca. 12 wt%
Asbestos used for diaphragm
Yes


Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH−


Mercury cell
None
Electrolyzer:
3100–3400

ca. 50 wt%
Hg used as cathode material
Yes


Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−


Cathode: 2Na+ + 2Hg + 2e− → 2Na–Hg


Decomposer:


Anode: 2Na–Hg → 2Na+ + 2Hg + 2e−


Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2↑


Membrane cell
Cation exchange membrane
Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−
2100–2600

ca. 50 wt%
None
Yes


Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH−


ODC cell
Cation exchange membrane
Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−
1500–1600

ca. 50 wt%
None
None


Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−




6.2 The latest progress of technology and engineering

6.2.1 Membrane-free chlor-alkali process. 
Although the membrane cell process is a relatively mature process, some drawbacks exist. On the one hand, the use of the cation exchange membrane drives up the cost of electrolysis and also increases the internal resistance of the cell. On the other hand, the high-pressure gases in the electrolytic cell and the intermediate products produced in the anodic oxidation process would aggravate the degradation of the membrane, thus further increasing the cost. To solve these problems, the groups of Xia and Cao realized film-free multi-step chlor-alkali electrolysis using an redox intermediate.100,101 Hashemi et al. designed a membrane-free electrolysis cell that could be applied to water electrolysis and chlor-alkali electrolysis, which has made a technical contribution to the membrane-free chlor-alkali process.102 Although the membrane-free chlor-alkali electrolysis technology is still in the research and exploration stage, it also provides new possibilities for the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali.


6.2.2 Photo-electrochemical chlor-alkali process. 
Dincer et al. assembled a multi-membrane photo-electrochemical reactor configuration, which introduced photocatalysis into chlor-alkali electrolysis, and realized the combination of brine electrolysis and photocatalytic hydrogen production.103 With zinc sulfide as the photocatalyst, chlorine, hydrogen, and sodium hydroxide can be obtained simultaneously in this reactor cell. The whole reactor efficiency is affected by light intensity, applied voltage, and catalyst concentration. The photo-electrochemical chlor-alkali process would further reduce the electricity consumption in the co-production of hydrogen energy and chlor-alkali.

7. Conclusions and outlook
The co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali could provide sustainable hydrogen energy output in the future hydrogen economy era, and would also reduce the energy consumption required in the necessary chlor-alkali industry. Thus, it is a very wise and thoughtful choice to develop the combination technology of HER and the chlor-alkali industry. Despite some efforts that have been made, as listed in this review, there is still a long way ahead before the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali can be industrialized at a large scale. In order to approach or even achieve such an aim, more studies are urgently needed to be devoted to this field, mainly with regard to HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali condition and some engineering issues.
7.1 HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali condition
(i) Discovery of new materials
To reduce the overpotential and improve the efficiency of hydrogen evolution of traditional cathode materials in the current chlor-alkali industry are the key prerequisites for realizing the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. At present, there are few studies on HER electrocatalysts that can be applied in the chlor-alkali industry. The hydrogen evolution activity, durability under chlor-alkali conditions, and the accessibility of the reported HER electrocatalysts are not able to meet the needs of industrial application. Therefore, more attention should be paid to the design and synthesis of new HER electrocatalysts with low price, low overpotential, and excellent durability under the condition of chlor-alkali electrolysis in the field of basic HER research.
(ii) Investigation of electrocatalytic mechanism
There are still many ambiguities in the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution mechanism under such complicated conditions of chlor-alkali electrolysis. In the recent years, with the improvement in the theoretical calculations and in situ characterization techniques, it is believed that it would provide us with new opportunities to explore the electrolytic mechanism at the atomic and molecular levels under the chlor-alkali conditions. The in-depth investigation of the electrocatalytic mechanism is not only of scientific significance but can also provide guidance for us to modify the electrocatalytic performance.
(iii) Standardization of the test method
The standardization of the test procedures and performance evaluation is very critical in any research field. Similarly, the research on HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry also needs to establish standards and requires everyone to cooperate and accumulate experience to complete.
7.2 Engineering issues
(i) Coupling with seawater desalination
The electrolyte in the co-production process is actually concentrated brine (sodium chloride solution with high concentration). There are several approaches to acquire this concentrated brine: (1) seawater; (2) natural underground brine and mineral salt; (3) refined salt. As we all know, most of the water on Earth is in the form of seawater with extremely high salt concentration and cannot be drunk directly.104 Therefore, abundant seawater must be a reliable source of concentrated brine in the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali in the future. Concentrated brine after seawater desalination can be used as the raw source of the electrolyte for the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. Lienhard V, Domenech, and other research groups have conducted detailed studies on this combined technology of seawater desalination and chlor-alkali industry.104–106 Then, a difficult choice arises for the utilization of concentrated brine from seawater. Should it be electrolyzed directly or should it undergo a purification process to remove impurities other than NaCl before electrolysis? Recent perspectives written by Matthias Driess and Md Golam Kibria groups bring us very good enlightenment.107,108 They analyzed two processes of hydrogen production by the electrolysis of seawater directly and the two steps of purification and electrolysis carefully from multiple perspectives such as thermodynamics, energy consumption, thermodynamics, cost, equipment complexity, and fresh water consumption. Their research results demonstrate that the additional investment in the seawater purification process is not worth mentioning compared to the cost of the electrolysis process. They proposed that it is meaningless to investigate the direct electrolysis of seawater based on the current industrial basis. In our opinion, this conclusion might also be applicable to the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. It is necessary to purify concentrated brine before electrolysis. The purification would not significantly push up the overall cost of the co-production technology but might greatly increase the service life of the equipment.
(ii) Upgrade of equipment
Membrane material is an expensive consumable in the chlor-alkali industry. Whether hydrogen evolved at the cathode and chlorine evolved at the anode can be effectively and safely separated depends a lot on the quality of the membrane. The searching for new membrane materials with low cost and long service life and developing membrane-free chlor-alkali process are two feasible directions to overcome this predicament. Of course, not only the membrane material but also the entire co-production equipment needs to be upgraded, including the purification of concentrated brine, the separation, and storage of products.
(iii) Utilization of hydrogen
How to rationally utilize the hydrogen generated at the cathode possesses very important practical significance for the real implementation of the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali. Moreover, the collection, purification, storage, and transportation in the practical operation of hydrogen also need to be seriously considered.109–113 The possible applications of hydrogen are introduced in detail below.
The utilization of hydrogen energy after collection and purification can be divided into the following points: (1) used as a feedstock gas for ammonia synthesis; (2) used in hydrocracking and other petroleum processing industries; (3) used for the synthesis of hydrochloric acid, polyvinyl chloride, hydrogen peroxide, and other chemical products; (4) used to produce compressed H2 with high purity for direct sale; (5) used as fuel; (6) converted into electricity by means of the hydrogen fuel cell technology.82 Due to the excessive consumption of hydrogen in the ammonia synthesis and petroleum processing industries, the amount of hydrogen in chlor-alkali electrolysis is difficult to meet their demands. Among the applications mentioned above, the synthesis of HCl and other chemicals and the combination with fuel cell technology are the most widely used, and also the main potential applications of hydrogen from the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali.34,114–119
(iv) Coupling with renewable energy system
The contradiction between the increasing demand for energy and the depletion of fossil fuel reserves has driven people to maximize the development of renewable energy such as solar, wind, geothermal, and biomass energy.120 The introduction of the renewable energy system into the combination technology of HER and the chlor-alkali industry is still a point that needs to be studied in the future.
In summary, the development of the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali is an inevitable choice for future green and sustainable chemical production. A breakthrough in the design and preparation of HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali condition is urgently required to put this scientific concept into practice. In addition, the advances in technology and engineering are also indispensable to the realization of the co-production route. Both aspects call for more attention and exploration from researchers.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFA0406101, 2020YFA0406104), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 22071020, 21771033, 21401131, 51725204, 21771132, 51972216, 52041202), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant no. 2412018BJ001, 2412018ZD007), National MCF Energy R&D Program of China (2018YFE0306105), Innovative Research Group Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51821002), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20190041), Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guang Dong Province (2019B010933001), Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), the 111 Project, the Opening Project of Key Laboratory of Polyoxometalate and Reticular Material Chemistry of Ministry of Education.
Notes and references
P. Kuang, Y. Wang, B. Zhu, F. Xia, C. W. Tung, J. Wu, H. M. Chen and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, e2008599,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202008599 .
X. Gu, X. Yang and L. Feng, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, H. Liu and L. Feng, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 13491 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Yang, G. Hu and L. Feng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9136 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Yu, H. Xue and L. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13242 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Yang, B. Dong, X. Yu, H. Xue and L. Feng, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 92, 33 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Z. Zhao, X. Yu and L. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1490 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, H. Wang, Y. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 418, 129343 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, H. Jin, H. Zhou, B. Liu, C. Hu, D. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. W. Li, D. He and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106221 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, Z. Dong, Y. Yao, L. Yang, F. Fang and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002176 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, C. Pan, C. Wang, S. Hu, W. Xiao, X. Chi, Y. Fang, J. Yang, H. Deng, S. Xiao, J. Li, Z. Luo and Y. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, Z. Lin, K. Song, Z. Wang, L. Huang, L. Yan, F. Meng, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and W. Zhong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 12360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, J. Yin, H. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Hu, H. Zhang, M. Sun, Y. Peng, P. Xi and C. H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Giz, S. C. Bento and E. R. Gonzalez, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25, 621 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Crook and A. Mousavi, Environ. Forensics, 2016, 17, 211 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Park, C.-Y. Ahn, J. H. Lee, D. W. Lee, C. H. Lee, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 16079 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, M. Hou, J. Wang, X. Teng, Y. Niu, M. Xu and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 339, 135878 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ohl, D. Franzen, M. Paulisch, S. Dieckhofer, S. Barwe, C. Andronescu, I. Manke, T. Turek and W. Schuhmann, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2732 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Safizadeh, E. Ghali and G. Houlachi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 256 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148 RSC .
J. R. McKone, S. C. Marinescu, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 865 RSC .
C. F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. P. Pan, J. F. Zhang and Y. Kang, Chlor-Alkali Industry, 2016, 52(5), 1 CAS .

          J. R. Rumble, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, 100th edn,  2019 Search PubMed .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Michalsky, Y.-J. Zhang and A. A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942 RSC .
E. Skulason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bjorketun, S. Gudmundsdottir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Ding and L. Qiao, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 60, 451 CrossRef .
S. Maiti, K. Maiti, M. T. Curnan, K. Kim, K.-J. Noh and J. W. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3717 RSC .
Z. Kang, M. A. Khan, Y. Gong, R. Javed, Y. Xu, D. Ye, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6089 RSC .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509 RSC .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic, N. M. Markovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, M. K. Bates, T. E. Miller, V. Davies, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, S. Mukerjee, Z. F. Ma and Q. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, M. Liao, X. Zheng, Y. Nie, L. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Xiang, J. Wang, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2487 RSC .
Y. Wang, G. Wang, G. Li, B. Huang, J. Pan, Q. Liu, J. Han, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 177 RSC .
L. Peng, X. Zheng, L. Li, L. Zhang, N. Yang, K. Xiong, H. Chen, J. Li and Z. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 122 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. McCrum and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 891 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, E. Liu, L. Jiao, J. Li and S. Mukerjee, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 12, 209 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, J. Li, L. Jiao, H. T. T. Doan, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, K. M. Abraham, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, G. Xu, Y. He, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, Q. Mao and Y. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 51, 101 CrossRef .
L.-N. Zhang, Z.-L. Lang, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2569 RSC .
J. Li, M. N. Banis, Z. Ren, K. R. Adair, K. Doyle-Davis, D. M. Meira, Y. Z. Finfrock, L. Zhang, F. Kong, T. K. Sham, R. Li, J. Luo and X. Sun, Small, 2021, 17, 2007245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Theerthagiri, A. P. Murthy, S. J. Lee, K. Karuppasamy, S. R. Arumugam, Y. Yu, M. M. Hanafiah, H.-S. Kim, V. Mittal and M. Y. Choi, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 4404 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, C. Dong, D. Sun and F. Huang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1581 RSC .
R. Simpraga, G. Tremiliosi-Filho, S. Y. Qian and B. E. Conway, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 424, 141 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Antozzi, C. Bargioni, L. Iacopetti, M. Musiani and L. Vázquez-Gómez, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7410 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Jović, U. Č. Lačnjevac, N. V. Krstajić and V. D. Jović, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 8947 CrossRef .
F. Y. Yu, Z. L. Lang, L. Y. Yin, K. Feng, Y. J. Xia, H. Q. Tan, H. T. Zhu, J. Zhong, Z. H. Kang and Y. G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 490 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Yu and Z. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, H. Li, J. Pu, S. Zeng, L. Liu, L. Zhang, F. Luo, L. Ma, K. Zhou and Q. Wei, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24712 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Y. Zou, L. Deng and J. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901949 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Y. He, T. Lei, B. Nan, N. Xu, J. Zou, B. Huang and C. T. Liu, Energy, 2014, 67, 19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, M. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Gong and Z. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 900 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. A. Shibli, A. H. Riyas, M. Ameen Sha and R. Mole, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 595 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bachvarov, E. Lefterova and R. Rashkov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 12762 CrossRef CAS .
A. Madram, M. Mohebbi, M. Nasiri and M. R. Sovizi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 3940 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. A. Shibli, V. R. Anupama, P. S. Arun, P. Jineesh and L. Suji, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10090 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, S. S. A. Shah, T. Najam, X. Qi and Z. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 358 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 1207 CrossRef CAS .
J.-E. Kim, K.-K. Bae, C.-S. Park, S.-U. Jeong, K.-H. Baik, J.-W. Kim, K.-S. Kang, K.-B. Lee and Y.-H. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 70, 160 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chade, L. Berlouis, D. Infield, A. Cruden, P. T. Nielsen and T. Mathiesen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14380 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solmaz, A. Salcı, H. Yüksel, M. Doğrubaş and G. Kardaş, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2464 CrossRef CAS .
D. Delgado, M. Minakshi, D.-J. Kim and C. W. Kyeong, Anal. Lett., 2017, 50, 2386 CrossRef CAS .
F. Razmjooei, T. Liu, D. A. Azevedo, E. Hadjixenophontos, R. Reissner, G. Schiller, S. A. Ansar and K. A. Friedrich, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 10948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gajic-Krstajic, N. Elezovic, B. Jovic, G. Martelli, V. Jovic and N. Krstajic, Hem. Ind., 2016, 70, 81 CrossRef .
F. Safizadeh, N. Sorour, E. Ghali and G. Houlachi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 5455 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. Chatterjee, K. C. Swaathini, T. S. Amarnath, E. Subhashini, D. K. Pattanayak and S. Kundu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2498 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. S. Santos, P. G. Corradini, M. Medina and L. H. Mascaro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 33586 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhu, T. Xie, Y. Peng, S. Liu and J. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1182 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Franceschini, G. I. Lacconi and H. R. Corti, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 3326 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yüksel, A. Özbay, R. Solmaz and M. Kahraman, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2476 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, H. Su, L.-B. Lv, T.-J. Zhao, J.-M. Ge, X. Wei, K.-X. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2606 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bakhshi and H. Tavakol, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sim, S. J. Kim, G. Janani, Y. Chae, S. Surendran, H. Kim, S. Yoo, D. C. Seok, Y. H. Jung, C. Jeon, J. Moon and U. Sim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145157 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, C. Han, Z. Xing, Q. Li and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15558 RSC .
Y. Liu, G. D. Li, L. Yuan, L. Ge, H. Ding, D. Wang and X. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3130 RSC .
Q. Hua, Z. Zhen, X. Qiu, L. Zheng and Y. Ma, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 397, 12135 Search PubMed .
L. Sharma, H. S. Khushwaha, A. Mathur and A. Halder, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 265, 208 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Ma, C.-X. Wu, X.-J. Feng, H.-Q. Tan, L.-K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang, E.-B. Wang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788 RSC .
S. Garmsiri, S. Koohi-Fayegh, M. A. Rosen and G. R. Smith, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 8337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, J. Chen, J. Liu, Q. Tian and P. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 284 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, T. Jiang, Z. Fu, N. Cheng, X. Zhang, K. Zhu, H. Xue, W. Wang, J. Tian and P. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 106347 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, H. Qing, K. Zhou, D. Sun and R. Wu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 108, 100618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, D. Liu, L. Zhao, J. Tian, J. Yang and L. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7750 RSC .
D. Yao, L. Gu, B. Zuo, S. Weng, S. Deng and W. Hao, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 10624 RSC .
M. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. He and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5320 RSC .
L. N. Zhang, S. H. Li, H. Q. Tan, S. U. Khan, Y. Y. Ma, H. Y. Zang, Y. H. Wang and Y. G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, R. Zhao, K. Zhou, C. Shen, X. Zhang, H. Wu, L. Ni, H. Yan, G. Diao and M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8443 RSC .
A. Manabe, M. Kashiwase, T. Hashimoto, T. Hayashida, A. Kato, K. Hirao, I. Shimomura and I. Nagashima, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 249 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, N. H. El-Farra and A. Palazoglu, Renewable Energy, 2017, 100, 53 CrossRef .
S. Lakshmanan and T. Murugesan, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2013, 16, 225 CrossRef .
N. Shojaikaveh, S. N. Ashrafizadeh, F. Mohammadi and A. Amerighasrodashti, ECS Trans., 2010, 25, 43 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moussallem, J. Jörissen, U. Kunz, S. Pinnow and T. Turek, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 1177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Röhe, A. Botz, D. Franzen, F. Kubannek, B. Ellendorff, D. Öhl, W. Schuhmann, T. Turek and U. Krewer, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5671 CrossRef .
M. Gebhard, T. Tichter, D. Franzen, M. C. Paulisch, K. Schutjajew, T. Turek, I. Manke and C. Roth, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 830 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hou, L. Chen, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 438 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zhao, F. Zhong, X. Feng, W. Chen, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. H. Hashemi, P. Karnakov, P. Hadikhani, E. Chinello, S. Litvinov, C. Moser, P. Koumoutsakos and D. Psaltis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1592 RSC .
M. Rabbani, I. Dincer and G. F. Naterer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7766 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, D. M. Warsinger, T. I. Urmi, G. P. Thiel, A. Kumar and V. J. Lienhard, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 5949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. d'Amore-Domenech, E. Navarro, E. Mora and T. J. Leo, International Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering, 2018, June 17-22, OMAE2018-77209.
A. Kumar, K. R. Phillips, G. P. Thiel, U. Schröder and J. H. Lienhard, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 106 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Hausmann, R. Schlögl, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3679 RSC .
M. A. Khan, T. Al-Attas, S. Roy, M. M. Rahman, N. Ghaffour, V. Thangadurai, S. Larter, J. Hu, P. M. Ajayan and M. G. Kibria, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4831 RSC .
I. Rossetti, A. Tripodi and G. Ramis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 10292 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Li, H. L. Wang, B. R. Wulan, X. B. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800625 CrossRef .
S. Durr, M. Muller, H. Jorschick, M. Helmin, A. Bosmann, R. Palkovits and P. Wasserscheid, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sato and S. Orimo, Top. Catal., 2021, 64, 614 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. He, H. R. Sun, Y. Xu and S. Y. Lv, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 16313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campanari, G. Guandalini, J. Coolegem, J. ten Have, P. Hayes and A. H. Pichel, J. Electrochem. Energy Convers. Storage, 2019, 16, 41001 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. L. Verhage, J. F. Coolegem, M. J. J. Mulder, M. H. Yildirim and F. A. de Bruijn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4714 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Xue, B.-L. Lin, Z. Lei and Z. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 275, 123061 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hao, Z. Mu, Z. Liu and F. Zhao, Front. Energy, 2018, 12, 466 CrossRef .
G. Guandalini, S. Foresti, S. Campanari, J. Coolegem and J. ten Have, Energy Procedia, 2017, 105, 1839 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Lee, A. Elgowainy and Q. Dai, Appl. Energy, 2018, 217, 467 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karakilcik, M. Erden and M. Karakilcik, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 14145 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† When η = 62%, Wmax = 285.83 kJ mol−1 × 1 mol/62% = 461.02 kJ = 1.28 × 10−1 kW h; when η = 82%, Wmin = 285.83 kJ mol−1 × 1 mol/82% = 348.57 kJ = 9.68 × 10−2 kW h.‡ m-H2(max) = n-H2(max) × M(H2) = 1000 kW h/9.68 × 10−2 kW h × 2 g mol−1 = 20661.16 g = 20.66 kg; m-H2(min) = n-H2(min) × M (H2) = 1000 kW h/1.28 × 10−1 kW h × 2 g mol−1 = 15625.00 g = 15.61 kg; m-O2(max) = 8 × m-H2(max) = 8 × 20.66 kg = 165.28 kg; m-H2(min) = 8 × m-H2(min) = 8 × 15.61 kg = 124.88 kg.§ In this estimate model, the prices of H2 and O2 are calculated at 2.50 US$ per kg and 108.61 US$ per t based on current market prices.¶ mNaOH = 1000 kW h/W′ × 1 t = 1000 kW h/2000 kW h × 1 t = 0.5 t, nNaOH = mNaOH/MNaOH = 0.5 × 106 g/40 g mol−1 = 12500 mol.|| The mass of caustic soda (NaOH) produced is 0.43 tons (mNaOH = 1000 kW h/W′ × 1 t = 1000 kW h/2300 kW h × 1 t = 0.43 t). nNaOH = mNaOH/MNaOH = 0.43 × 106 g/40 g mol−1 = 10750 mol. mH2 = nH2 × MH2 = 1/2nNaOH × MH2 = 0.5 × 10750 mol × 2 g mol−1 = 10750 g = 10.75 kg; mCl2 = nCl2 × MCl2 = 1/2nNaOH × MCl2 = 0.5 × 10750 mol × 70.90 g mol−1 = 381087.5 g = 381.09 kg.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Lu-Nan Zhang
	Lu-Nan Zhang is currently working as a lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University. She received her Bachelor's degree from Northeast Normal University (NENU) in 2015, and obtained her PhD degree from NENU in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Yang-Guang Li. Her current research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of polyoxometalate (POM)-based and other inorganic materials related to energy conversion.

Hong-Ying Zang
	Prof. Hong-Ying Zang received her Bachelor's degree from Harbin University in 2007, and obtained her Master's degree in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Min Su from NENU. Later, she received her PhD degree in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Leroy Cronin from the University of Glasgow. She has been a full professor at NENU since 2014. She was the recipient of the “Changbai Mountain Scholars” award in 2013. She is mainly engaged in the self-assembly of POM-based materials and their application in the field of energy conversion and storage.

Hua-Qiao Tan
	Prof. Hua-Qiao Tan received his PhD (2012) from NENU under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang. He worked at the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, from 2012 to 2015. He joined NENU in 2015 as an associate Professor, and was promoted to full Professor in 2020. From 2019 to 2020, he worked as a visiting scholar at the Education University of Hong Kong. His research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of inorganic nanostructures and polyoxometalates for energy and environmental catalysis.

Zhen-Hui Kang
	Dr Zhenhui Kang is now Professor at Soochow University and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC). Dr Kang's research interest is in the fabrication, properties, and catalytic and bio-application of carbon dots (C-Dots). Dr Kang's research has resulted in more than 300 peer-reviewed publications in authoritative academic journals. He was listed among the ‘Highly Cited Researchers’ by Clarivate Analytics in 2018–2020. He also won the talent projects of National Key Talents Program B and National Distinguished Young Scholars.

Yong-Hui Wang
	Yong-Hui Wang is an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry in NENU. She received her Bachelor's degree from NENU in 1997, and obtained her PhD degree from NENU in 2003. Later, she carried out postdoctoral work (2004) in Germany. Her current research interest is concentrated on the design and synthesis of POM-based metal–organic porous framework materials.

Yang-Guang Li
	Prof. Yang-Guang Li received his Bachelor's degree (1997), Master's degree (2000), and PhD degree (2003) from NENU under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang. Right after graduation, he worked as a postdoctorate with Prof. Rodolphe Clérac (2004 in CRPP-CNRS, France) and Prof. Annie K. Powell (2005 in Universität Karlsruhe, Germany). In 2003, he joined NENU as an assistant professor. He was promoted to Professor in 2011. His main research interest is the function-directed design and synthesis of POMs, in particular, basic research into POM chemistry in electro- and photo-catalysis towards water splitting.

Broader context
In the context of global energy shortage and environmental pollution, reducing energy consumption and realizing resource reorganization between industries is considered to be a green and sustainable development strategy. There exist shortcomings of poor economic feasibility, low energy conversion efficiency, and few available electrocatalysts for industrial application in hydrogen production from water electrolysis. At the same time, the chlor-alkali industry, which is a national pillar industry, also faces the problem of high energy consumption. Therefore, the combination of water electrolysis and the chlor-alkali industry is an important direction for the future sustainable development of these two industries. In view of the pivotal role of HER electrocatalysts, which can work under chlor-alkali conditions in this joint system, the design and preparation principle of HER electrocatalysts are highlighted by discussing the influence of chlor-alkali conditions on the electrochemical performance. The potential HER cathode materials for the chlor-alkali industry reported in the recent years are reviewed in great detail. Meanwhile, the reference standard of the test conditions and the evaluation criteria of HER electrocatalysts applied to this co-production system are given. In addition, the engineering and technical progress involved in this joint process are also summarized.


 	Fig. 1  Economic benefit analysis and device analysis of the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali: (a) comparison of the economic benefits between the isolated HER and the co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali processes; (b) schematic diagram of the whole process of water electrolysis; HER occurs at the cathode and OER occurs at the anode.26 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, ACS; (c) schematic diagram of co-production of hydrogen and chlor-alkali; HER occurs at the cathode and ClER occurs at the anode.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The volcano-type relationship between j0 and ΔG (free energy of hydrogen adsorption) in acidic electrolyte.29 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, ACS; (b) log(i0) on mono-metal surfaces as a function of the computed HBE in alkaline electrolyte.34 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, RSC; (c) schematic diagram of water dissociation, generation of Pt–Had intermediates, combination of two Had, desorption of OH−, and adsorption of the next H2O molecule on the surface of Ni(OH)2–Pt (111) in the presence of hydrated cations in alkaline electrolyte.36 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011, science; (d) schematic diagram of the “chimney effect” at the interface of the RuO2/Ni composite catalyst in alkaline electrolyte.40 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) LSV plots of the Pt polycrystalline electrode in 0.1 M KOH, NaOH, and LiOH saturated with H2; the inset exhibits the CV plots;43 (b) schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic roles of OHad–(H2O)x–AM+ in alkaline HER kinetics;43 (c) schematic description of the “cation cluster” model for HER in alkaline electrolyte.44 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, ACS and 2020, Elsevier; (d) TEM image and (e) HER polarization plots of Ru/WNO@C (Ru wt% = 3.37%) in the electrolyte containing different concentrations of NaCl at the room temperature.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the changing trend of the HER performance of Ru/WNO@C and 20% Pt/C with increasing temperature.45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The intersecting surface of NiMo porous films electrodeposited under a G value of 740 at 2.4 A cm−2; (b) the formation mechanism of porous metal films under supergravity field.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Elsevier; (c) SEM image of NiMo MT/NF (inset: high-resolution SEM image of NiMo MT/NF); (d) LSV plots of NiMo MT/NF and NiMo NP/NF in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) schematic diagram of the procedure for synthesizing Ni-based bimetallic alloy by the topotactic transformation of layered nickel hydroxide salts; (f) SEM image of the Ni–Mo alloy, scale bars: 1 μm; (g) LSV plots in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Ni–P–La; (b) LSV curves of Ni–P–La and other control samples. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (c) EDAX spectrum of RuO2/Ni–P/Ni; (d) and (e) HER performance of RuO2/Ni–P/Ni and other control samples. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the APS coating of RANEY®-type Ni–Mo electrode on perforated Ni sheet; (b) the structure schematic of thermal-spray coating; (c) coating and chemical activation procedures of RANEY®-type electrode.68 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) CV curve of stainless steel scrubber for HER polarization without iR-compensation in 1 M KOH; (b) point diagram of current density vs. overpotential (without iR-compensation) for the stainless steel scrubber; (c) the schematic diagram of stainless steel scrubber as water splitting electrocatalysts.71 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) LSV plots and (b) Tafel plots for the Co–Mo and Co–Mo–Cu films measured in 6 M KOH at 25 °C; (c) schematic diagram of Cu introduction into the Co–Mo binary alloy system.72 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of hydrogen production for N-GMT; (b) LSV curves with iR-compensation of N-GMT in alkaline electrolyte with various concentrations.76 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer; (c) the morphology and (d) HER property of Si-CNTs in 1 M KOH.77 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley; (e) the schematic diagram of the preparation process of N, F-GQDs.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of MoNi/CoMoO3/NF; (b) SEM image and (c) HRTEM image of MoNi/CoMoO3/NF. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, RSC; (d) schematic illustration of the synthesis of C-CWC via one-step thermal treatment; (e) TEM image of C-CWC; (f) LSV plots in 1 M KOH solution.80 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) LSV plots of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in simulated seawater in the 5th and 10th measurements (scan rate = 5 mV s−1); (c) LSV curves of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in real seawater (scan rate = 5 mV s−1); (d) faradaic efficiencies of CoMoP@C toward HER in seawater (the overpotential = 600 mV); (e) I–T curves of CoMoP@C and commercial Pt/C (20%, 40%) in real seawater for 10 h (overpotential = 500 mV); (f–h) the morphology characterization of CoMoP@C.83 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–c) HER property parameters in simulated chlorine-alkali electrolyte at 20 °C; (d–f) HER property parameters in simulated chlorine-alkali electrolyte at 90 °C; (g) a photograph of the membrane electrolyzer; (h) polarization plots for chlorine-alkali electrolysis in a membrane electrolyzer at 20 °C; (i) the chronopotentiometric curve of the Ru/WNO@C (Ru wt% = 3.37%)//RuO2/IrO2-coated Ti-mesh couple for 25 h (current density = 10 mA cm−2).45 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, RSC.	 


NiMo films (G = 740)	Cu	10% NaOH	25	47100	136.7	
53

NiMo MT/NF	Ni foam	1 M KOH	25	11910	119	
54

Ni4Mo/NF	Ni foam	1 M KOH	25	69.6100	37	
55

NiAg	Cu foil	6 M KOH	25	15016.6	95.43	
57

NiFeCoP	Cu	6 M KOH	25	7810, 135100	42	
59

NiPLa	Cu	1 M NaOH	25	139250	93	
60

Ni–P–WO3	Mild steel	32% NaOH	25	165250	108	
61

RuO2/Ni–P	Ni plate	1 M NaOH	25	7010	77	
62

CeO2–RuO2–Ni–P	Mild steel	32% NaOH	25	—	—	
58

NiZn–Pd (30s)	Cu	1 M KOH	25	135100	59	
66

RANEY® Ni (APS)	Ni plate	1 M KOH	25	108300	54	
64

RANEY®-type Ni–Mo electrode-No. 4	Ni sheet	30 wt% KOH	70	80200	33	
68

Fe–Mo alloy coating	Mild steel	300 g dm−3 NaCl + 150 g dm−3 NaClO3	60	—	—	
69

Fe53Mo47	Mild steel	300 g L−1 of NaCl and 4 g L−1 of K2Cr2O7 (pH = 6.4)	80	857250	90	
70

Fe54Mo30P16	Mild steel	300 g L−1 of NaCl and 4 g L−1 of K2Cr2O7 (pH = 6.4)	80	716250	80	
70

Stainless steel scrubber	—	1 M KOH	25	38050	121	
71

Co67Mo33	Carbon steel	6 M KOH	25	15610	83	
72

Co56Mo21Cu23	Carbon steel	6 M KOH	25	11910	82	
72

3D Ag NDs	Bulk Ag electrode	6 M KOH	25	—	114	
75

N-GMT	-	6 M KOH	25	42610	—	
76

MoNi/CoMoO3/NF	Ni foam	1 M KOH	25	1810	35	
79

MoS2/Ni–P	Ni foam	1 M KOH	25	12510	51	
81

C-CWC	—	1 M KOH	25	7310	25	
80

Ni–MoO2/RGO	—	1 M KOH	60	—	138	
82

CoMoP@C	—	1 M KOH	25	136.950	55.53	
83

Ru/WNO@C	—	3 M NaOH + 3 M NaCl	90	108500	30	
45


HER electrocatalysts matching the chlor-alkali industry	The mixture of NaCl and NaOH (wt%NaOH ≈ 33%); around 90 °C; large current density; small amount of transition metal ions	
η
500 and η1000 (the smaller, the better)	Super corrosion resistance, alkali resistance, anti-transition metal ion poisoning ability, and long-term stability under high temperature and large current density	Cheap enough to adapt marketing
General HER electrocatalysts	0.5 M H2SO4/1 M KOH/1 M PBS	
η
10 (the closer to zero, the better)	Possess physical and chemical stability in the electrolyte and can work for a long time under a low current density	—
HER: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− E = 0.00 V (vs. RHE)
ORR: 2H2O + O2 + 4e− → 4OH− E = 1.23 V (vs. RHE)


Diaphragm cell	Asbestos	Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−	2300–2900	
ca. 12 wt%	Asbestos used for diaphragm	Yes
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH−
Mercury cell	None	Electrolyzer:	3100–3400	
ca. 50 wt%	Hg used as cathode material	Yes
Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−
Cathode: 2Na+ + 2Hg + 2e− → 2Na–Hg
Decomposer:
Anode: 2Na–Hg → 2Na+ + 2Hg + 2e−
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2↑
Membrane cell	Cation exchange membrane	Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−	2100–2600	
ca. 50 wt%	None	Yes
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2↑ + 2OH−
ODC cell	Cation exchange membrane	Anode: 2Cl− → Cl2↑ + 2e−	1500–1600	
ca. 50 wt%	None	None
Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−
Footnotes
† When η = 62%, Wmax = 285.83 kJ mol−1 × 1 mol/62% = 461.02 kJ = 1.28 × 10−1 kW h; when η = 82%, Wmin = 285.83 kJ mol−1 × 1 mol/82% = 348.57 kJ = 9.68 × 10−2 kW h.
‡ m-H2(max) = n-H2(max) × M(H2) = 1000 kW h/9.68 × 10−2 kW h × 2 g mol−1 = 20661.16 g = 20.66 kg; m-H2(min) = n-H2(min) × M (H2) = 1000 kW h/1.28 × 10−1 kW h × 2 g mol−1 = 15625.00 g = 15.61 kg; m-O2(max) = 8 × m-H2(max) = 8 × 20.66 kg = 165.28 kg; m-H2(min) = 8 × m-H2(min) = 8 × 15.61 kg = 124.88 kg.
§ In this estimate model, the prices of H2 and O2 are calculated at 2.50 US$ per kg and 108.61 US$ per t based on current market prices.
¶ mNaOH = 1000 kW h/W′ × 1 t = 1000 kW h/2000 kW h × 1 t = 0.5 t, nNaOH = mNaOH/MNaOH = 0.5 × 106 g/40 g mol−1 = 12500 mol.
|| The mass of caustic soda (NaOH) produced is 0.43 tons (mNaOH = 1000 kW h/W′ × 1 t = 1000 kW h/2300 kW h × 1 t = 0.43 t). nNaOH = mNaOH/MNaOH = 0.43 × 106 g/40 g mol−1 = 10750 mol. mH2 = nH2 × MH2 = 1/2nNaOH × MH2 = 0.5 × 10750 mol × 2 g mol−1 = 10750 g = 10.75 kg; mCl2 = nCl2 × MCl2 = 1/2nNaOH × MCl2 = 0.5 × 10750 mol × 70.90 g mol−1 = 381087.5 g = 381.09 kg.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
