Ionic Liquids: Past, present and future  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00112D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00112D
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 154, 9-27Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsIonic Liquids: Past, present and future

        
          
            C. 
            Austen Angell
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Younes 
            Ansari
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zuofeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      
Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1604, USA
Received 
      8th November 2011
    , Accepted 8th November 2011First published on 24th November 2011AbstractAn overview of the field of low-melting ionic liquids is given from its inception in 1886 through to the present time. The subject is divided into an introductory section that summarizes the early history of the field, and differentiates its sub-sections, before addressing matters judged of some interest in “pre-surge” and “post-surge” stages of its development, focusing on physicochemical as opposed to the prolific synthetic and industrial aspects in which the author has no competence. We give a final section specifically to protic ionic liquids, which we consider to have particular scientific potential.
A. Introduction
This article is intended to provide some background to the subject of the present Faraday Discussion on Ionic Liquids and, to this end, will consist of three sections after this introduction. The first will be devoted to a short history of the subject intended to show how the present state of enthusiasm for low melting ionic assemblages has arisen out of a diverse background of ionic liquid studies before taking off under its own considerable force of innovation. The second section is intended to provide some understanding of the various reasons for the current state of enthusiasm for the field, and the third section will attempt to give it some additional depth and projection as it enters the stage of a maturing discipline, mostly using examples from the authors’ own recent works.
Like all of electrochemistry and ionic liquid physical chemistry, the field started with Humphrey Davy's pioneering work on the electrolytic decomposition of simple molten salts under the influence of an applied dc electric field, to yield the elements that initially had been chemically combined in the salt under study. Davy's studies, collected in his major work,1 place the investigation of ionic liquids at the very beginning of organized chemical science. They were preceded only by the alchemists' more chaotic studies of molten nitrates and ammonium salts to which no reference will be made here.
Davy worked primarily with the high-melting simple salts. The first person to consciously use an ambient temperature ionic liquid for scientific purposes seems to have been the Nobel Prize-winning physicist, Ramsay, who is reported by Schottenberger and co-workers2 to have described “syrupy ionic liquids” that he prepared by combination of acids with picoline.3 Although other early studies are known2 the first that we will discuss here is the case of ethylammonium nitrate, prepared deliberately for its ionic character by Paul Walden in 1914.4 It has probably been studied in more detail, and for more purposes, than any other ionic liquid. Walden and his works are important to us because in his earlier studies of aqueous solutions, he had formulated the Walden rule5 that relates the equivalent conductivity Λ of an ionically conducting liquid to its viscosity η. Λη = const.(1)The rule has provided the basis for a very useful classification of ionic liquids, about which more will be said below.
Although eqn (1) worked reliably for aqueous solutions the early German school of molten salt chemists, studying low-melting silver salts, found that the rule broke down seriously and needed to be replaced by the “fractional” Walden rule where γ is a constant 0 < γ < 1. Ληγ = const.(2)
The fractional Walden rule implied that the Arrhenius activation energy for conductivity was lower than that for viscosity, which was readily interpreted in terms of the smaller silver ion slipping through the quasilattice of the larger halide ions, this picture being particularly clear in the case of the silver iodide which was a good conductor even in its crystalline state at temperatures near the melting point. Such violations of the Walden rule are now referred to as “superionic” behavior, and are much sought after in the field of glassforming ionic liquids (where solid electrolytes are the prize) and particularly protonic ionic liquids (that might serve as fuel cell electrolytes). Some progress in this area will provide the substance of the last section of this article.
The silver salts of the early German studies were low-melting but were not ambient temperature liquids or even liquids with melting points below 100 °C in the sense of the “ionic liquids” that are in focus in most of the papers at this discussion. Inorganic examples of ionic liquids that satisfy this criterion do exist, however, and it would be useful at this point to briefly delineate the types of substances that together make up the sub 100 °C melting subjects of this discussion —liquids that in principle consist only of ions. Here we follow the classification given by the present author6 in the book edited by Ohno “Electrochemical Aspects of Ionic Liquids” (Chapter 2).
Classes of ionic liquids

1. Aprotic ionic liquids. 
The majority of ionic liquids, and certainly those responsible for the meteoric rise in the number of publications in this area since the mid-90's, are liquids in which the cations are organic molecular-ions. Examples would be the resonance stabilized alkyl pyridinium and dialklyimidazolium cations that go back to Hurley and Weir7 in the middle of the last century. They mixed N-substituted alkyl and aryl pyridinium halides with various metal chlorides and nitrates and obtained low- liquids with which they performed electrochemical extractions (though they seem to be best known for their efforts on aluminum deposition on which they took the first patents). Hurley and Weir presented the first phase diagram on an aluminum chloride + organic cation halide system, which showed the existence of stable ionic liquids at temperatures of −40 °C (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Phase diagram of the system ethylpyridinium bromide + AlCl3 (from Hurley and Weir, ref. 7). 
Much more recently developed have been the cyclic,8 and non-cyclic9,10 tetraalkyl ammonium salts like those with alkylpyrrolidinium cations, and particularly those with ether oxygenated sidechains.10 Such cations are usually charge-compensated by anions of oxidic character like nitrate perchlorate or more frequently fluorinated-oxidic character like triflate. Among the most common of the latter are the PF6−, BF4−, triflate (trifluoromethane sulfonate, CF3SO3), and bis-trifluoromethanesulfonyl-imide, (CF3SO2)2N, or NTf2) ions. The fluorinated anions are prominent because of the viscosity-lowering reduction of the van der Waals interactions (thanks to the tightly bound, hence unpolarizable, character of the fluorine electrons). The particular success of the NTf2− anion, which is quite a large anion, may be due to the feature pointed out by Henderson,11 namely, that this ion has two isoenergetic forms, hence can add an extra, (and therefore liquid-stabilizing) mode to the configurational entropy.


2. Protic ionic liquids. 
These are formed by the simple transfer of a proton from pure Brønsted acid to pure Brønsted base. Historically the first ILs made, as noted already, their development in the modern era was spearheaded by the Ohno12,13 laboratory in Japan. The nature and reversibility of this process establishes a proton potential in the liquid product that lends this class of ionic liquids a special tunability —to which more attention will be given in the last section of this article. The NTf2 anion mentioned in the previous section serve equally well to lower the cohesion, hence also the fluidity, of these liquids. But the cohesion can also be manipulated by tuning the proton transfer energy, with the result that it is possible for protic ionic liquids, according to eqn (1), to become more conductive than the aprotic cases. Indeed, by taking advantage of these features, some of the most conductive liquids ever known, have been obtained.


3. Inorganic ionic liquids. 
These may be obtained, in both aprotic and protic forms, by taking advantage of the same packing problems that lead to low-melting ILs of the organic cation type. There may be fewer of them, but there are aprotic examples like lithium chlorate (melting point 115 °C), and its glassforming eutectic with lithium perchlorate, and protic examples like hydrazinium nitrate, Tm = 80 °C, not to mention low-melting mixtures of ammonium salts, and finally the largely unexplored cases of salts with inorganic molecular cations, such as PBr3Cl+, SCl3+, ClSO2NH3+etc., with appropriate weak base anions.


4. Solvate (chelate) ionic liquids. 
These form a largely unstudied class of ILs that needs to be recognized because the class includes cases of multivalent cation salts that would not ordinarily be able to satisfy the criterion of Tm < 100 °C. The first recognized members of this class were molten salt hydrates, like Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, whose mixtures with alkali metal salts were found to be almost ideal mixtures, most with liquidus temperatures well below ambient.14 These were hailed as a “new class of molten salt mixtures”, but there has been some question about the lifetime of the water molecules in the cation coordination shell. This should be long with respect to the diffusion time scale for the “ionic liquids” classification to be unambiguous. Recently the Watanabe laboratory has described new cases where long lifetime is guaranteed because the ligating groups all belong to the same molecule. Thus instead of 4 water molecules, Tamura et al.15 use 4 alkoxy groups linked together, e.g. tetraglyme chelating the Li+ cation, and find the salts with imide type anions to be ambient temperature liquids (with many desirable cell electrolyte properties). An anion solvate, to be identified in section C, proves to be the most conductive IL known.

B. Post WW2 developments, preliminary to the present surge
1. Molten salts
There were a number of motivations for pursuing work in the field of molten salts, some of which became studies that would belong to the present sub 100 °C field, and these bear brief summarization. Much of it was motivated by the interest in molten salts as heat transfer fluids for the molten salt nuclear reactor project of the Department of Energy and centred at the Oak Ridge National laboratory. To borrow from a previous article of this type:16

“At Oak Ridge, people were studying the “weak field” analogs of the “basic” MgO–SiO2metallurgical slags, represented by solutions of alkali fluorides and the Lewis acid BeF2 (all ion charges halved relative to the MgO–SiO2melts). Complexation of the fluoride ions17to yield tetrahedral BeF42−and Be2F73−anions, reduced the Coulomb energy of the liquid, lowering liquidus temperatures and also lowering viscosity18to give fluids with the excellent heat transfer characteristics needed for a successful nuclear reactor program.

The high degree of analogy to silicate systems presented by the LiF–BeF

2

system was not of great interest to Oak Ridge scientists, but became the center of attention in the East German laboratory of Vogel. Vogel19not only determined the phase diagram but showed that, in solutions rich in BeF2, the glassforming solutions underwent a liquid-liquid phase separation20during cooling, similar to that which had been identified in silica-rich Li2O–SiO2glasses.

A further analogy was waiting to be made, using molten chlorides closer in nature to those with which the field is currently so involved. With ZnCl2as the network glassformer and pyridinium chloride as the network breaker or “modifier”, Easteal21demonstrated that the glassforming properties of the binary chloride system were highly analogous to those of the Na2O–SiO2system.

While complex anions that could be enlarged into glassforming networks were clearly of interest, complex cations were not to be neglected. The rare earth analogs of Humphrey Davy's crimson alkali metal-alkali halide solutions were then under study at Imperial College in the group of John Bockris' former student John W. Tomlinson. The writer had the privilege of working under Tomlinson as the Imperial College Stanley Armstrong fellow, and studied the deep scarlet solution formed by the solution of metallic cadmium in CdCl2.22Rather than forming the liquid equivalent of blue-purple alkali chloride crystal f-centers, (lattice vacancies containing an excess electron) which was Gruen and co-workers23interpretation of Humphrey Davy's crimson alkali halide solutions, the excess cadmium in CdCl2appeared to form metal dimers, Cd22+.”
A parallel effort in molten salt chemistry was in place at Argonne National Laboratory, where some of the first applications of the chemical activity of the chloride ions compensating the positive charges on organic cations, were being made. The spectrum of Ni(II) in the tetrahedral field provided by chloride ions in the anionic complex NiCl42− was published in 1959 by Gruen and McBeth24 and is shown in Figure 2, where it is contrasted with the equivalent spectrum obtained when the same Ni(II) species is present in an inorganic chloride melt at a somewhat higher temperature.
 Fig. 2  (a) The electronic (visible) spectrum of Ni2+ dissolved in pyridinium chloride at 160 °C at a concentration of 1 × 10−4 M (A) and in the crystalline state (solid solution of Ni2Cl4 in Cs2ZnCl4 where the Zn site is known to be tetrahedral (B). (b) Electronic spectrum of Ni(II) in liquid Cs2ZnCl4 at 650 °C (A), liquid CsCl at 700 °C (B) and liquid LiCl (C). Note the difference in intensities of the two tetrahedral-like spectra in the high temperature melt and in the organic cation melt of Fig. 2a. Redrawn in ref. 16 from figures in ref. 24, by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The striking difference in spectra between the LiCl and CsCl melts on the one hand, and the CsCl and pyridinium chloride melts on the other, illustrates an important feature of the low melting organic cation ionic liquid milieu. It is a difference that has recently been used to interpret some striking anion effects on redox potentials in ambient temperature ionic liquids.25 It is that, because of the weaker polarizing field of the large organic cations, the anions in many of the low-melting ionic liquids have a much higher chemical activity in the sense of electron density on the negative species. In consequence, the ability of these electrons to mix into the orbitals of a transition metal species, like Ni(II) in the present case —and so cause breakdown of the Laporte rule of quantum mechanics that formally forbids the transitions seen in Fig. 1— is much enhanced, and the intensity of the electronic transitions is greatly increased. This is called the nephelauxitic effect, an electronic phenomenon that also determines the effect of anion character on the redox potentials of redox couples dissolved in ionic liquids.
While this work was going on at Argonne, and Oak Ridge, National Laboratories some quite unrelated, but very important, studies were in progress at Purdue University. These involved proton transfer ionic liquids analogous to those of some current work in the field to be described near the end of this article. H. C. Brown, later to become Purdue's first Nobel Laureate in chemistry, and coworker Pearsall, were exploring the manner in which Friedel Crafts catalysts work, and in the process they transferred protons from HCl to toluene by simultaneously complexing the Cl to AlCl3 to yield the ultra- weakly basic anion AlCl4− and a protonated toluene species.26 The latter must be described as the toluenium cation, which was a bright emerald green species, and undoubtedly also an extremely potent protonating agent itself. It was only stable below −45 °C, however. At that temperature it lost one mole of HCl, forming the even weaker base, the heptachlorodialuminate anion.26
At the same time, but with more metallurgical purpose, Hurley and Weir7 described the ionic liquids in the system ethylpyridinium bromide + AlCl3, to which we earlier made reference. They also studied other metallic halides that would dissolve in the ionic liquid, and described the cases in which electrodeposition could be achieved. However the electrodeposition of aluminum quickly became their principal interest. They cited experiments from the 1930s that showed that, even in such early times, much was understood of the potential of these systems for electrochemical manipulations. This line of research involving haloaluminates was later to become a major activity in the laboratories of first Robert Osteryoung and Gleb Mamantov, and later, John Wilkes and Charles Hussey, who together pushed the field of chloroaluminate physical chemistry and electrochemistry to sophisticated levels. A minor parallel effort in the author's laboratory, that was initiated in a study of the air and water-stable zinc chloride-pyridinium chloride system and was followed by a study of the properties of solutions of α-picolinium chloride + various inorganic cation chlorides, helped emphasize the role that the anion played in determining the fluidity (and hence conductivity) of these systems. This is explored a little further in the next section.
2. Role of complex anions in development of ambient temperature ionic liquids
In order to complete this introductory lecture manuscript in time for publication the following section is taken verbatim from ref. 16 in lieu of being paraphrased. The reference and figure numbers have been changed to values compatible with the present text.

“Organic cation halides have proved very useful for the study of complex anions and their effects on molten salt properties. The dramatically different effects of complexation on the liquid viscosity are well illustrated by the 1976 study of Hodge
27
who used the lower-melting α-methyl derivative of pyridinium chloride as the source of the Lewis base chloride. Data seen in Fig. 3 show that the cohesive energy of an ionic liquid is lowered most strongly when chloride ions are complexed by FeCl

3

to produce the large singly charged FeCl

4

−
anion. This observation lead to the prediction that, amongst ionic liquids of a given cation, the tetrachloroferrate salt should be the most fluid and also most conductive, even more so than the well-studied ionic liquids containing AlCl4−anions.28,29The veracity of this expectation is demonstrated in Fig. 4 for salts of the butylmethylimidazolium cation.30For the 25 °C conductivity, the tetrachloroferrate is half an order of magnitude above any others in the group.
 Fig. 3  Effect of the second component on the cohesion of the liquid containing common cation α-picolinium chloride (Redrawn for ref. 37 from a figure in ref. 27, reproduced by permission of the American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 4  Arrhenius plot of fluidities of various salts of the common cation butylemethyl imidazolium. Note the place of the FeCl4− salt in each case (Redrawn for ref. 37 from a figure in ref. 30, reproduced by permission of the American Chemical Society). 

The increase of ionic mobility by complexation seen here is no different in principle from the use of BeF

2

additions to alkali fluoride melts utilized in the molten salt reactor technology discussed in our introduction. There, the addition of one mole of BeF2replaced two high charge intensity fluoride anions with a doubly charged anion of much larger dimensions, for net decrease in cohesion.

The fluorinated anion salts (with BF4−and PF6−) that are most frequently cited in connection with practical applications of ambient temperature ionic liquids,31–33are to be understood in the same terms. (Unfortunately, the tetrachloroferrate anion is slowly hydrolyzed by water, and application of ambient temperature ionic liquids usually requires the presence of water-stable anions). Fluorinated species, in addition to being water-stable, have the advantage of being unpolarizable and so their presence minimizes the contribution of van der Waals interactions to the liquid cohesion. This characteristic of fluorinated anions in the ionic liquids context was first noted in a 1983 study of binary solutions of lithium halides with organic salt halides by Cooper (see ref. 10), where the replacement of iodide anions by the equivalent amount of BF4−anions was predicted to lead to an increase of ambient temperature conductivity, and then shown to do so, (in a note added in proof†)by some two orders of magnitude (due to lowering of Tg by ∼50 K).34Cooper's further extensive syntheses and measurements on viscosity and conductivity of a family of tetra-alkylammonium tetrafluoroborate and tetrachloroferrate salts, unfortunately remained unpublished (for over two decades) until 2003.30”
After a decade had passed, Cooper, now at IBM, who had been in discussion with Wilkes about the stability of imidazole-based cations relative to pyridine-based cations and tetraalkyl ammonium cations in ionic liquids, presented basic data on imidazolium triflates (trifluoromethansulfonates) and mesylates (methanesulfonates) to the Electrochemical Society's 1991 International Conference on Molten Salts,35 while Wilkes and coworker Zaworotko36 submitted their parallel work to Chem. Commun. Both contributions appeared during 1992. The stage was set for the flowering of the present era but it took a surprisingly long time for these solvents to enter the common perspective. We take up that part of the story after considering some further applications of ionic liquid halides of the benign (non-hydrolysable) variety.
3. Spectroscopic applications of the weakly polarized ionic liquid anions. Coordination geometry at high pressure, and at negative pressure.
In the heyday of molten salt/ionic liquid chemistry driven by the molten salt reactor program discussed in a previous section, there was a great deal of interest in the electronic spectra of transition metals dissolved in the melts some of which was described already. The interest lay largely in the application of the ligand field energy level diagrams to the problem of coordination numbers and speciation in the solvent-free ionic melts. Specific applications of the ambient temperature melt electronic spectra were sparse.
But one of the first “task specific” applications of the low temperature ionic liquids was based on visible spectroscopy. The electronic spectra were adopted to take advantage of new ambient temperature instrumentation for reaching very high pressures— the recently invented diamond anvil cell. The exploration of coordination geometry of cobalt ions in organic cation chlorides up to 3.5 GPa, undertaken in the author's laboratory, was quite successful. The findings on the conversion of tetrahedral to octahedral cobalt coordination, and the concordance of the equilibrium ΔV values with the volume of the chloride ion, have been recalled in a recent Accounts of Chemical Research article,37 and will not be described again here. However, there is an oppositely directed, and hence interesting, application of the visible spectroscopy of the Co(II) ion in ambient temperature ionic liquids that is worth describing. This application exploits the spectroscopic consequences of coordination geometry changes, to verify the physical reality of negative pressures.
To verify and quantify the existence of states of negative pressure in ionic liquids, a member of the fourth class of ionic liquids, viz., the solvated cation class, was used. The hexahydrate of lithium chloride has chloride ions that, while not as basic as in an organic cation chloride, are nonetheless sufficiently basic to give very definitive tetrahedral CoCl42− electronic spectra when a modest amount of CoCl2 is added. The solution is a bright blue color like the ambient pressure sample of the organic chloride used in the diamond anvil cell high pressure study. To demonstrate, visually, that negative pressure can be “impressed” on physical systems, two experiments are performed,38,39 the findings of which are presented in Fig. 5. Firstly, the solution is studied at ambient temperature in a simple glass window high pressure cell up to 400 bar (40 mPa) pressure, which is enough to cause a marked change in spectral intensity at the tetrahedral coordination peak (660 nm). The solution is then degassed and transferred to a thick-walled glass optical cell which has been modified for easy conversion to a Berthelot tube, as illustrated in the inset to Fig. 5 (RH panel). Residual air is removed from the tubular cell extension and, while under vacuum, the stem is sealed off. The cell and contents are then carefully warmed until the remaining vacuum bubble has been eliminated by thermal expansion, and then spectra are taken every few degrees during cooling related to the surface energy of a nanoscopic nucleus, the bubble cannot reappear at the original temperature of elimination, and so the liquid, now cooling along an isochore, goes into tension. As the temperature approaches ambient temperature at which the spectra of the compressed sample of Fig. 5 LHS panel were taken, the tension in the liquid is suddenly broken and the pressure returns to the vapor pressure of the solution. The spectra before and after the bubble reappears are compared in Fig. 4 RH panel.
 Fig. 5  The visible spectrum Co(II) in liquid LiCl·6H2O, as a function of positive pressure (LHS) and negative pressure (RHS) (Rearranged from Refs. 34, 35 by permission). 
The dashed curves are in each case the ∼0 pressure spectra (1 atm and ∼0.01 atm pressure respectively). The difference between the spectra before and after cavitation leave little doubt that the solution was at a pressure on the other side of zero just before it cavitated. The magnitude of the tension can be easily estimated by extrapolation of the positive pressure intensities. A value of −70 atm. was obtained. It would now be of considerable interest to repeat this simple experiment for a cobalt solution in an ionic liquid like the tetraglyme “solution” of Watanabe and coworkers,15 in which there is no labile species to initiate a cavitation.
C. The post Cooper–O'Sullivan, Wilkes–Zaworotko era
1. Sources of the surge
When the Cooper and O'Sullivan findings35 on their study of ambient temperature triflates and mesylates of imidazolium cations were reported at the International Conference of Molten Salts, Wilkes and Zaworotko36 quickly reported their own studies on salts of similar character. The latter authors chose the communications route and their paper appeared first, and also appeared in a location of high visibility. The Wilkes group was already well known for study of ambient temperature molten salts and so it is not surprising that they are most widely credited with the discovery of this new and practically very important class of solvent liquids, but the Cooper–O'Sullivan report is of wide perspective and should be part of everyone's reading.
It is unlikely, however, that either group's developments would have been given much attention had it not been for the vision of groups like those of Grätzel in Switzerland and MacFarlane in Australia who quickly saw the possibilities that lay ahead for these new low vapor pressure liquids in the fields of materials science and synthetic chemistry,40 as Seddon and other synthetic organic chemists had already recognized for the chloroaluminates. The exponential rise in publications and patents in the ionic liquids field can be attributed to these early demonstrations of applied chemistry potential. Interestingly enough, Seddon's highly cited paper that foresaw the rise in applications of low vapor pressure ionic liquids40 makes no mention of the perfluoro anion salts of the Cooper-Wilkes breakthrough (though he enquires into the factors predetermining low melting points). The first reference to tetrafluoroborates from the Seddon laboratory seems to have been the Holbrey–Seddon contribution of 1999.41 Even Welton's enormously cited review on chemical synthesis in ionic liquids relates first to the chloroaluminate cases.42 Applications of the fluorinated anion salts seems to have been first brought into focus by the Grätzel group, whose interest lay in involatile electrolytes for solar cells. The enormously cited 1996 paper by Bonhote et al.,43 which showed awareness of Cooper and O'Sullivan's work, was quickly followed by the MacFarlane group's detailed quaternary ammonium NTf2 paper,44 though both were preceded by Fuller et al.s' description of the hexafluorophosphate salt of a resonance stabilized cation as “a model ambient temperature ionic liquid.44 A vinyl polymer version of these ambient temperature ionic liquids was described by Ohno and Ito.45
Also in the mid-90's a variety of ionic mixtures that are liquid and highly conductive at ambient temperature and include lithium salts for battery electrolyte applications, were described by Watanabe and coworkers,46 and by the authors' group, in search of systems that might generate “polymer-in-salt” electrolytes.47 These have recently been improved by incorporation of the low Tg, mobility-conferring NTf2 and chlorosulfonate anions (though the latter, like the chloroaluminate anion is easily hydrolysed)
The contribution of the MacFarlane laboratory to both the physical chemistry and chemical kinetics aspects of this field has been of enormous value, while additional impetus had been generated by the recognition by Breneke,48 Maginn49 and others that properly chosen ionic liquid compositions have high capacity for ingesting CO2, reversibly. However the most powerful driver of the ionic liquids field must at present surely come from the recognition of Ionic Liquids as unique solvents/catalysts for chemical synthesis. The extraordinary citation counts for the overview works of authors like Welton,42 Wasserscheid32 and Seddon40 are an indication of the number of people who are responding to this opportunity.
The present author is, however, not the appropriate person to assess this surge of synthetic activity, and so we will give the remainder of this article to discussion of some physico-chemical aspects, mostly of recent origin, and some new applications.
2. Physico-chemical aspects: The volatility of ionic liquids

Aprotic ionic liquids and ionicity. 
It is generally believed that aprotic ionic liquids are highly involatile, while protic ionic liquids are of volatility somewhere between aprotic and molecular liquids. There are some corrections to be made to this view. Firstly, relatively high vapor pressures have been observed, unexpectedly, for some aprotic cation tetrafluoroborates,30,50 as well as other cases of expected high ionicity.51 In the fluoroborate case, a correlation was made with conductivities that are much lower than expected from the high fluidities exhibited. The latter observation requires that there be some mechanism for coupling the cation and anion together to reduce the conductive efficiency of normal diffusive motion. The relationship is examined in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Walden plot showing the classification of ionic liquids into superionic, “good” and “poor” (subionic) and the relation between low equivalent conductivity and low ionicity (ion pairing). 

Fig. 6 is an example of the use of Walden's rule to establish a classification diagram of broad utility, now commonly referred to as a “Walden plot”, where the ideal line is based on the properties of classical dilute aqueous solutions for which the Walden rule was originally formulated. As reminded by MacFarlane et al.52 a small correction is needed if the diffusing particles are abnormally large. Equivalent conductivities that are higher than expected from the Walden rule indicate a decoupling of one of the charge carriers from the structure that determines the viscosity, and is a very desirable characteristic. Values that are below the ideal line indicate the pairing up of the ions referred to above. The fluoroborate with data points well below the ideal line was the one that was observed to distil easily.
For the purpose of understanding how some aprotic ionic liquids can have relatively high vapor pressures, we illustrate in the figure how ion pairing can reduce the symmetric charge shielding that is characteristic of an ionic crystal lattice and determines the “Madelung energy” component of the crystal lattice energy. It is the component that makes the difference between the vapor pressure of a strongly polar molecular liquid like propylene carbonate (PC), and a (much less volatile) protic ionic liquid like ethylammonium nitrate (where the cation is comparable in size to propane and the nitrate anion is comparable in size to the carbonate unit of PC). It is also a characteristic of a “good” ionic liquid, in which each ion is surrounded by a more or less uniform shell of ions of the opposite charge. If the screen is too symmetric, however, the melting point is likely to be high, and the system will have too high a melting point to meet the IL criterion. The Madelung energy of a number of crystals forms of salts that yield low melting ion liquids have been assessed by Izgorodina et al.53 If some energetic feature, like a strong hydrogen bond, interferes with the formation of the coulomb screen then the Madelung energy, will be turned off and the vapor pressure will go up. The subject of ionicity in ionic liquids has been extensively discussed by the groups of Watanabe54,55 and MacFarlane52 among others. A review of aprotic IL volatility has recently appeared56, but the ionicity connection is not discussed.
In Fig. 6 it is seen that one of the tetrasubstituted ammonium tetrafluoroborates has a conductivity that is an order of magnitude below the ideal line suggesting that the liquid is heavily ion-paired, which is surprising for an aprotic ionic liquid with a weakly basic anion. That this is not a unique case is shown by Fig. 7,50 where it is seen that three of the four examples of this sort of system behave the same way. The methoxymethyldimethylethylammonium salt of Fig. 6 was observed to be easily distilled, but similar measurements have not been made for the additional cases of Fig. 7. The origin of the ion-pairing tendency seen in Fig. 6 was presumed to originate in the enhanced acidity of the methylene protons when sandwiched between the more active N and O atoms, leading to hydrogen bonding to the fluorines of the anion,30 but this does not explain the observations of Fig. 7. A crystal structure would be helpful but has not yet been made.
 Fig. 7  Walden plot for four oxygenated substituted ammonium tetrafluoroborates, indicating order of magnitude losses of conductivity in three cases, presumed due to ion pairing effects. 


Protic ionic liquids and the relevance of ΔpKa from aqueous solutions. 
For protic ionic liquids, formed by simple acid-to-base proton transfer, the origin of volatility and the connection to low ionicity is much more obvious. If the free energy of proton transfer is small then little thermal energy is required to return the proton to its original site for which case the vapor pressure will not differ much from the mean of the two original molecular liquids. Equivalently, the observed boiling point, in the case of small proton transfer energy, will not differ much from the mean of the two end members. The observation of non-linear boiling points is a mark of non-ideal solution behavior due the proton transfer and can be take as a guide to the proton transfer energy.57 This measure of deviation from ideal behavior was found to correlate surprisingly well with the difference in aqueous pKa values for the interacting pairs which requires that the free energy of hydration for the ions of the anhydrous PIL be nearly the same. Direct evaluations of the proton transfer energies involved in PIL formation have only just begun58,59 and are urgently needed to advance our understanding in this area. At the limit of very large proton transfer energy, as between superacid and superbase, the properties of protic and aprotic ionic liquids are not discernible.60
The rich phenomenology of protic ionic liquids will be given further attention in a later section.

3. Conductivity, viscosity and fragility
One of the most attractive features of the ambient temperature ionic liquid state is the availability of ionic conducting materials of low vapor pressure. It is unfortunate that the conductivity is not quite high enough to provide a viable alternative to the molecular solutions that are currently used in the electrolytes of portable power sources since the added safety factor would be very favorable. Since the Li+ cation is so much smaller than either the cations or anions in the typical ionic liquids, it might naively have been expected that superionic behavior, like that seen for LiAlCl4 in Fig. 6, would be found in mixtures of lithium salts and ionic liquids. However the opposite is found to be true (as could be anticipated from the behavior shown in Fig. 3 where the complexing of chlorides by lithium caused the Tg of the ionic liquid to increase, opposite to the effect of adding a trivalent chloride like FeCl3. Indeed it was this finding, for the case of the larger anion I−, and the associated implication that Li+ would always “win” the electrostatic tug-o'-war, and so dig itself a trap, that lead the author and Cooper to abandon the ionic liquid approach to finding superionic lithium electrolytes.10 It also to the discovery of the early examples of low-melting tetrafluoroborate ILs.10,61
The conductivities of aprotic ionic liquids are problematic for portable energy purposes because the cohesive energies are a little too high, leading to viscosities that impede the ionic mobilities to an undesirable extent. A decrease in cohesion is necessary to overcome this factor. For some purposes this decrease can be accomplished, without affecting the ionicity, by using a protic IL PIL) in place of the aprotic substance. With the right choice of acid and base the cohesive energy can be lowered with respect to that of the nearest equivalent aprotic IL without affecting the ionicity too seriously. Certain PILs have been shown to have ionic conductivities approaching those of aqueous solutions.,62 as for all other liquids Their consequent promise as fuel cell a electrolytes will be discussed further below.
The conductivities and viscosities of ionic liquids depend on temperature as for all other liquids, but there are qualitative differences. Where most simple liquids conform well to the Arrhenius equation, most ionic liquids do not. The reason is that they are observed in their “low temperature regimes” T < 2Tg, which usually means that the Arrhenius equation does not apply. Instead these transport properties follow a modified Arrhenius equation in which absolute zero is replaced by a finite divergence temperature, often called an ideal glass transition temperature, T0. Thus, for transport property PP = P0exp(DT0/(T − T0)where P0, D, and T0 are constants. Before the temperature T0 can be reached, however, the liquid structure becomes arrested at the glass temperature Tg. The sharpness of the deviation from the Arrhenius equation is determined by the value of D which is infinity for Arrhenius behavior (which forces T0 to 0 K). The smallest value of D that has been recorded is about 3. This behavior is one of the leading puzzles of the “glassy state problem”, which continues to confound theoreticians in this research area. Some examples of the deviations from Arrhenius behavior have already been seen for the case of aprotic ILs in Fig. 4. In Fig. 8 we show further cases with even higher conductivities that have been obtained with protic ionic liquids. Comparison of recently determined values for PILs of the symmetrical guanidinium cation (Gdm: C(NH2)3+)63, is made with the high values observed for aqueous LiCl hexahydrate, and also with some inorganic ILs of the chloroaluminate type that are used for high power energy storage systems.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of the conductivities of protic ionic liquids of guanidinium cations with those of other high conductivity systems like aqueous LiCl, hydrated phosphoric acid, and some alkali chloroaluminate eutectics (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society). 
Missing from Figure 8 is the extraordinary case of EMImF.2.3HF, reported by Hagiwara and coworkers.64 This liquid has an aprotic cation but the fluoride anion is complexed by two or three additional HF molecules to make a sort of inverse solvate (class 4 IL) where it is now the anion that is solvated. The bonds in the complex anion are evidently very strong as no weight loss occurs until well above 200ºC in TGA. The conductivity is almost as high as that of LiCl·6H2O in Figure 8, making it the most conductive IL known. It is also the most fluid.
The unusual temperature dependence of conductivity of the guanidinium salts in Figure 8 is to be noted. An unusually large temperature dependence is also found for the viscosities of the guanidinium salts. Using the glass transition temperature measurable for the GdmSCN-GdmFormate we can establish that the large temperature dependence is a consequence of a small value of D in the VFT equation. The existence of different values of D is shown in Fig. 8 in which the values of viscosity for different liquids are plotted in scaled Arrhenius form replacing the usual 1/T by Tg/T where Tg is taken as the temperature at which the viscosity reaches the value 1012 Pa.s so that all curves share the common point Tg = 1.0. The Gdm salt system is the most fragile ionic liquid ever studied. Eqn (1) is often interpreted in terms of the Adam Gibbs theory, according to which the temperature dependence of the transport coefficients is determined by the temperature dependence of the configurational entropy. It is suspected that in the case of Gdm salts, this quantity is enhanced by a “loose” proton contribution, as further suggested below (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  
T
g-scaled Arrhenius plot of viscosities for aprotic and protic ionic liquids, with data comparisons with some classical “strong” and “fragile” liquids. It seems that the Gdm salts have the highest fragility observed so far (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society). 
D. Protic ionic liquids
We give a separate section to the case of protic ionic liquids, because of the special characteristics that the presence of a variable proton activity bestow on this class of ionic liquid. Although there is in no solvent present, hence no means by which the concentration of protonated species can be varied as in aqueous solutions, there is no doubt that the equivalent of a pH in the true thermodynamic sense of proton activity, is a feature of protic ionic liquids. Having a variable proton activity should mean having some control over proton-mediated chemical processes and, to the best of our knowledge, this additional dimension of ionic liquid science has not yet been properly exploited. Much experience with protic ionic liquids has been reviewed by Greaves and Drummond.65
Our interest in the special characteristics attributable to protons can be divided into two branches, viz., (1) those dealing with the physical consequences of the active protons, primarily proton exchange processes and the possibility of a free proton contribution to the dynamics, and (2) those dealing with the chemical and biological consequences. The latter are of particular interest because they control such vital phenomena as the folding of proteins to the native state and, under extreme departure from stabilizing conditions, the misfolding and fibrilization of proteins. The ability to control and enhance proton-catalyzed chemical reactions should be another feature of protic ionic liquid chemistry, and one that has not been deliberately explored to the best of our knowledge. We explore these two aspects briefly in the following paragraphs.
1. Superprotonic dynamics
It was expected, when Belieres began his wide-ranging study of PILs of different types,66 that a number of cases with delocalized proton hopping transport would emerge, but this proved not to be the case. Except for highly viscous and poorly conducting cases of dihydrogen phosphates, the organic cation salts all either obeyed the Walden rule expectations or fell on the subionic side of the ideal line. Even the case of ethylammonium nitrate EAN, that several authors have hailed as a water analog with a hydrogen-bonded network, fails to reach the ideal line, let alone exceed it. The only protic salt of high enough conductivity to reach the ideal line so far is the case of GdmSCN, This is marked as a red star in Fig. 10, which also includes EAN. It also the most decoupled case of all —dilute aqueous HCl under supercooled liquid conditions where the tetrahedral network of water is most highly developed, the rotational relaxation time of the molecule remains short, and the Grotthus mechanism at its most efficient. A new approach, in which acidity is varied independently of ionicity, will be described separately.67
 Fig. 10  Walden plot for some Gdm salts and reference materials. Note the position of GdmSCN relative to EAN and extrapolated phosphoric acid (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society). 
2. Protic ionic liquids as solvents for control of protein folding and fibrilization
The solubility of proteins in aqueous solutions of several protic ionic liquids of “neutral” character, has an interesting form. It first decreases, passes through a minimum and then increases again.68 At high EAN contents, with water:salt mole ratios of about 1:1, the solubility reaches extraordinary values, approaching 500 mg ml−1 if the solubility measurements (always a problematical issue) are taken at face value. The remarkable finding is that despite the enormous concentration, the protein can be thermally unfolded and refolded many times without much loss to aggregation. The origin of such stability is unknown at this time. A refoldability index has been suggested70 on the basis of comparison of the unfolding enthalpy in successive runs, and values of 0.98 are commonly found. The unfolding enthalpy, and the endotherm shape, is very similar to that seen in aqueous (physiological) solutions, as illustrated in Fig. 11. The unfolding retains its quasi two-state character. Most of the organic cations can be replaced by ammonium ions without changing this remarkable ability to refold.70
 Fig. 11  Comparison of the unfolding endotherm of lysozyme in hydrated EAN with that in physiological conditions at different values of pH by Privalov and Pfeil.69 
If the proton activity of the solvent PIL is increased by choosing the anion of a strong acid, e.g. using hydrated ammonium bisulfate as solvent, then the protein is destabilized and rapidly fibrilizes. The process has been followed by beta sheet markers, and by electron microscopy.71 In the case of proto-fibrils, the process can be reversed by redissolution in EAN and dilution to physiological conditions, when standard assays show that most of the biological activity has been restored. There is a great deal of challenging work in this field waiting to be reported and very much more waiting to be performed.
3. Proton activity, and the proton energy level diagram
The activity of the proton in protic ionic liquids is determined by the properties of the acid and base between which the proton exchange occurs. The effective proton activity of the PIL falls roughly half way between that of the acid and that of the base. In the absence of direct measurements, this energy gap across which the proton falls has been estimated from aqueous solution data, and theoretical estimates. An energy level diagram analogous to those proposed by Gurney for aqueous solutions and by the author for electron transfers in ionic liquids, has been presented for protic ionic liquids, initially in ref,66 and in more advanced forms in refs. 6 and 37 and other papers in preparation.67Fig. 12 is a current version from which the lower (superbase section60) about which little is known, has been withheld. Some direct assessments have recently been made electrochemically in scrupulously dry conditions,72 and the evidence to date is that the present version, Fig. 12, is semiquantitative. Lacking a common solvent, and a common standard state, it cannot be quantitative.25 The application of Figure 5 to determine the conditions for forming superacidic and superprotonic ionic liquids while maintaining high ionicity, is currently being reported.73
 Fig. 12  Gurney free energy level diagram for acid/base pairs, showing superacid, acid and neutral electrolyte formation possibilities. *Proton transfer gap needs to be about 0.7 eV for a high ionicity electrolyte. 
4. New electrolytes for fuel cells.
This section would be incomplete without some mention of the role that protic ionic liquids may play as substitutes for the usual acid or base solution electrolytes in fuel cells. This possibility was only a recent recognition, first explored via the substitution of an ionic liquid for water in the Nafion membrane by the MacFarlane group,74 closely followed by the Watanabe group,75 who have followed it with full membrane assemblies.76 PILs of the inorganic IL (class 3) type, can also serve in this capacity77 and may have some stability advantages.
Concluding remarks
While we have attempted to do justice to the depth of the subject of ionic liquids here, it is not possible in a work of this size to do any justice to its breadth, which continues to expand with no end in sight. It may be expected that, as new applications like those in chromatography, electron microscopy, and biochemistry, become more widely appreciated, the field will become properly recognized as one of the major accomplishments of 21st century science.
Acknowledgements
The writer acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under Experimental Chemistry under collaborative Grant No. CHE0404714. He acknowledges valuable monthly discussions of section D material with Pablo Debenedetti, Gene Stanley, and Peter Rossky. Also acknowledged is the DOD Army Research Office for support under Grant No. W911NF0710423.
References
H. Davy, Researches, Chemical and Philosophical. Biggs and Cottle, Bristol, 1800, 1800 Search PubMed .
G. Laus, G. Bentivoglio, H. Schottenberger, V. Kahlenberg and H. Kopacka, Lenzinger Berichte, 2009, 84, 71 Search PubMed .
W. Ramsay, Philos. Mag., Ser. 5, 1876, 11, 269 Search PubMed .
P. Walden, Bull. Acad. Imper. Sci. (St. Petersburg), 1914, 405 Search PubMed .
P. Walden, Z. Physik Chem., 1906, 55, 207 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Angell; W. Xu; F. M. Yoshizawa; A. Hayashi; J.-P. Belieres; P. Lucas; M. Videa; Z.-F. Zhao; K. Ueno; Y. Ansari; J. Thomson; D. Gervasio In Electrochemical Aspects of Ionic Liquids; second ed.; Ohno, H., Ed.; John Wiley & sons: Hoboken,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. H. Hurley and T. P. Wier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1951, 98, 203 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, S. A. Forsyth, J. Golding and G. B. Deacon, Green Chem., 2002, 4, 444 RSC .
J. Sun, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8858 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Cooper and C. A. Angell, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9–10, 617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Henderson, Invited presentation at 4th International Congress on Ionic Liquids (COIL4)(to be published), 2011 Search PubMed .
M. Hirao, M. Yoshizawa and H. Ohno, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1291 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohno and M. Yoshizawa, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 154, 303 CrossRef .
C. A. Angell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1965, 112, 1224 Search PubMed .
T. Tamura, T. Hachida, K. Yoshida, N. Tachikawa, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6095 CrossRef CAS .

          C. A. Angell. In Molten Salts and Ionic Liquids: Never the Twain?; Seddon, M. G.-E. a. K. R., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.:  2009, p 1 Search PubMed .
B. F. Hitch and C. F. Baes, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 201 Search PubMed .
G. D. Robbins and J. Braunste, Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society, 1970, 86 Search PubMed .
W. Vogel, H. Reiss and J. Seifert, Glass Technology, 1983, 24, 133 Search PubMed .
W. Vogel, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1977, 25, 170 Search PubMed .
J. Easteala and C.a. Angell, J. Phys. Chem., 1970, 74, 3987 CrossRef .
C. A. Angell and J. W. Tomlinson, Disc. Faraday Soc., 1962, 32 Search PubMed .
D. M. Gruen, Q. Rev. Chem. Soc., 1965, 19, 349 RSC .
D. M. Gruen and R. L. McBeth, J. Phys. Chem., 1959, 63, 393 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno and C. A. Angell, J. Chem. Phys. (in press), 2011 Search PubMed .
H. C. Brown and H. W. Pearsall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 5347 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Angell; I. M. Hodge; P. A. Cheeseman. In International conference on solten salts; Pemsler, J. P., Ed.; The Electrochemical Society:  1976, p 138 Search PubMed .
J.a. Boon, R. T. Carlin, a. M. Elias and J. S. Wilkes, J. Chem. Crystallogr., 1995, 25, 57 Search PubMed .
R. T. Carlin and J. S. Wilkes, J. Mol. Catal., 1990, 63, 125 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, E. I. Cooper and C. A. Angell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6170 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, Science, 2003, 302, 792 CrossRef .
P. Wasserschied and W. Keim, Angewandte Chemie - Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3773 Search PubMed .

Ionic Liquids: Industrial Applications to Green Chemistry; Rogers, R. D.; Seddon, K. R., ed.; Americn Chemical Society,  2002 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Angell, in Molten Salts: From Fundamentals to Applications, NATO Science Series II. Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry - Vol. 52, ed., M. Gaune-Escarde, Kluwer Academic Pub., Delft,  2002, p. 305–322 Search PubMed .

          E. I. Cooper and E. J. O’Sullivan, Proc. 8th. Intern. Symp. Molten Salts 92-16 1992, 92-16, 386-396. Search PubMed .
J. S. Wilkes and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 965 RSC .
C. A. Angell, N. Byrne and J.-P. Belieres, Accounts of Chemical Research (special issue on Ionic Liquids), 2007, 40, 1228 Search PubMed .
Q. Zheng, J. Green, J. Kieffer, P. H. Poole, J. Shao, G. H. Wolf and C. A. Angell, NATO-ASI (Liquids under Negative pressure)Kluwer Scientific, 2002, 1 Search PubMed .

          Q. P. D. Zheng. Ph. D. Thesis, Purdue University 1991 .
K. R. Seddon, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1997, 68, 351 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Holbrey and K. R. Seddon, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1999, 2133 RSC .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bonhote, A. P. Dias, N. Papageorgiou and M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 1168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fuller, R. T. Carlin, C., D.H. and D. Hayworth, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 299 RSC .
H. Ohno and K. Ito, Chem. Lett., 1998, 751 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe and T. Mizumura, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 86, 353 CrossRef .
C. A. Angell, C.-L. Liu and E. Sanchez, Nature, 1993, 362, 137 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Blanchard, D. Hancu, E. J. Beckman and J. F. Brennecke, Nature, 1999, 399, 28 CrossRef .
E. J. Maginn and J. F. Brennecke, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7315 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and C. A. Angell, unpublished results, presented at ECS symposium, Honolulu, 2008 Search PubMed .
M. J. Earle, J. M. S. S. Esperança, M. A. Gilea, J. N. Canongia Lopes, L. P. N. Rebelo, J. W. Magee, K. R. Seddon and A. W. J., Nature, 2006, 439, 831 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, E. I. Izgorodina, A. P. Abbott and K. Fraser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4962 RSC .
E. I. Izgorodina, U. L. Bernard and P. M. Dean, 
            etal.
          , Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4834 CrossRef .
H. S. T. Tokuda, M. A. B. H. Susan, K. Hayamizu and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19593 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, H. Tokuda and M. Watanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1649 RSC .
J. M. S. S. Esperanca, J. N. Canongia Lopes, M. Tariq, L. M. N. B. F. Santos, J. W. Magee and L. P. N. Rebelo, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 3 CrossRef .
M. Yoshizawa, W. Xu and C. A. Angell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kanzaki, K. Uchida, X.-D. Song, Y. Umebayashi and S.-i. Ishiguro, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kanzaki, X.-D. Song, Y. Umebayashi and S.-i. Ishiguro, Chem. Lett., 2011, 39, 578 Search PubMed .
H. Luo, G. A. Baker, J. S. Lee, R. M. Pagni and S. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 113, 4181 Search PubMed .
E. I. Cooper and C. A. Angell, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18&19, 570 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and C. A. Angell, Science, 2003, 302, 422 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Zhao, K. Ueno and C. A. Angell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011 DOI:10.1021/jp206491z .
R. Hagiwara, T. Hirashige, T. Tsuda and I. Yasuhiko, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, D1 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Greaves and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 206 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Belieres and C. A. Angell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4926 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Ansari; K. Ueno; C. A. Angell. to be published  2011.
N. Byrne and C. A. Angell, Molecules, 2010, 15, 793 Search PubMed .
W. Pfeil and P. L. Privalov, Biophys. Chem., 1976, 4, 23 CrossRef CAS .
N. Byrne, J.-P. Belieres and C. A. Angell, Aust. J. Chem., 2009, 62, 328 CrossRef CAS .
N. Byrne and C. A. Angell, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1046 RSC .
J. A. Bautista-Martinez, L. Tang, J.-P. Belieres, C. A. Angell and C. Friesen, J. Phys. Chem., 2009, 113, 12586 Search PubMed .
Y. Ansari, K. Ueno and C. A. Angell, (unpublished work), 2011 Search PubMed .
J.-Z. Suna, L. R. Jordana, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. B. H. Susan, A. Noda, S. Mitsushima and M. Watanabe, Chem. Commun., 2003, 938 RSC .
S.-Y. Lee, T. Yasuda and M. Watanabe, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5909 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Belieres, D. Gervasio and C. A. Angell, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4799 RSC .

Footnote† We have prepared the tetrafluoroborate analog of (MeOEt)EtMe2N+1, though in a slightly impure form. This room temperature molten salt has a remarkable conductivity of 1.7 × 10−3 (ohm cm)−1 at 25 °C and may in fact represent an important development in nonaqueous supporting electrolytes for ambient temperature applications.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Λη = const.	(1)
Ληγ = const.	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Phase diagram of the system ethylpyridinium bromide + AlCl3 (from Hurley and Weir, ref. 7).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The electronic (visible) spectrum of Ni2+ dissolved in pyridinium chloride at 160 °C at a concentration of 1 × 10−4 M (A) and in the crystalline state (solid solution of Ni2Cl4 in Cs2ZnCl4 where the Zn site is known to be tetrahedral (B). (b) Electronic spectrum of Ni(II) in liquid Cs2ZnCl4 at 650 °C (A), liquid CsCl at 700 °C (B) and liquid LiCl (C). Note the difference in intensities of the two tetrahedral-like spectra in the high temperature melt and in the organic cation melt of Fig. 2a. Redrawn in ref. 16 from figures in ref. 24, by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Effect of the second component on the cohesion of the liquid containing common cation α-picolinium chloride (Redrawn for ref. 37 from a figure in ref. 27, reproduced by permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Arrhenius plot of fluidities of various salts of the common cation butylemethyl imidazolium. Note the place of the FeCl4− salt in each case (Redrawn for ref. 37 from a figure in ref. 30, reproduced by permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  The visible spectrum Co(II) in liquid LiCl·6H2O, as a function of positive pressure (LHS) and negative pressure (RHS) (Rearranged from Refs. 34, 35 by permission).	 

 	Fig. 6  Walden plot showing the classification of ionic liquids into superionic, “good” and “poor” (subionic) and the relation between low equivalent conductivity and low ionicity (ion pairing).	 

 	Fig. 7  Walden plot for four oxygenated substituted ammonium tetrafluoroborates, indicating order of magnitude losses of conductivity in three cases, presumed due to ion pairing effects.	 
P = P0exp(DT0/(T − T0)

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of the conductivities of protic ionic liquids of guanidinium cations with those of other high conductivity systems like aqueous LiCl, hydrated phosphoric acid, and some alkali chloroaluminate eutectics (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  
T
g-scaled Arrhenius plot of viscosities for aprotic and protic ionic liquids, with data comparisons with some classical “strong” and “fragile” liquids. It seems that the Gdm salts have the highest fragility observed so far (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  Walden plot for some Gdm salts and reference materials. Note the position of GdmSCN relative to EAN and extrapolated phosphoric acid (reproduced from ref. 63, by permission of the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of the unfolding endotherm of lysozyme in hydrated EAN with that in physiological conditions at different values of pH by Privalov and Pfeil.69	 

 	Fig. 12  Gurney free energy level diagram for acid/base pairs, showing superacid, acid and neutral electrolyte formation possibilities. *Proton transfer gap needs to be about 0.7 eV for a high ionicity electrolyte.	 
Footnote
† We have prepared the tetrafluoroborate analog of (MeOEt)EtMe2N+1, though in a slightly impure form. This room temperature molten salt has a remarkable conductivity of 1.7 × 10−3 (ohm cm)−1 at 25 °C and may in fact represent an important development in nonaqueous supporting electrolytes for ambient temperature applications.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
