Is it possible to develop biopolymer production systems independent of fossil fuels? Case study in energy profiling of polyhydroxybutyrate-valerate (P ...  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2GC36546D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2GC36546D
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2013, 15, 706-717Is it possible to develop biopolymer production systems independent of fossil fuels? Case study in energy profiling of polyhydroxybutyrate-valerate (PHBV)†M. Guo‡*a, D. C. Stuckeyb and R. J. Murphy*aaDepartment of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. E-mail: guomiao2005@hotmail.com; r.murphy@imperial.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)2075842056;   Tel: +44 (0)7726479669  Tel: +44 (0)2075945389bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. E-mail: d.stuckey@imperial.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)2075945591Received 1st October 2012, Accepted 12th December 2012First published on 13th December 2012AbstractA life cycle assessment (LCA) approach was used to explore fossil energy profiles of current and future scenarios for the production of the biopolymer polyhydroxybutyrate-valerate (PHBV). The study was based on primary data collected from industry sources and laboratory research, focused on evaluating the long-term quantitative and qualitative depletion of fossil fuel resources associated with the production of PHBV. The results show that corn farming and corn-glucose production were the dominant contributors to fossil fuel depletion (expressed in MJ surplus energy) over the life cycle of PHBV produced under the current production scale. However, PHBV is presently undergoing substantial development in comparison with the well-developed petrochemical alternatives. The results of forward-looking scenarios under an expanded production scale indicate that the use of renewable resources for process energy requirements for PHBV and glucose production coupled with improved C-utilization efficiency have the potential to reduce fossil fuel depletion by over 50% compared with its current production scale. The use of appropriate lignocellulosic feedstocks and processing technology for glucose production offers potential for further improvement. These results with PHBV support the view that it will be possible with future developments to move to biopolymer production systems that are largely independent of fossil fuels.1. IntroductionBackground. Increasing demand for petroleum-based polymers results in fossil resource depletion (especially oil and natural gas) due to the energy and feedstock needs. These demands for gas and oil cause long-term quantitative and qualitative depletion of fossil resources. Minimising reliance on fossil resources is one of the main drivers for the development of biopolymers, although other aspects such as the use of renewable feedstocks and, for some applications, biodegradability are also important. However, the production of biopolymers requires energy and, depending upon the energy supply system(s), this usually incurs some demand for fossil fuel inputs. Profiling the energy requirements for biopolymer production on a life-cycle basis and optimization of fossil fuel profiles to minimize dependence on fossil resources are therefore important considerations when designing and developing biopolymer production systems which contribute to a sustainable future.This paper uses polyhydroxybutyrate-valerate (PHBV) as a case study to explore the process optimization options for improving the fossil energy profiles of this biopolymer over its life cycle. PHBV is a co-polymer of poly-(β-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and is produced from microbial synthesis of the C4 monomer 3-hydroxybutyrate and the C5 monomer 3-hydroxyvalerate (3HV).1 The C5 monomer is formed through the condensation of acetyl-coenzyme A and propionyl-coenzyme A (propionyl-CoA) by the action of β-ketothiolase.2 Various species in the gram-positive bacterial genera Nocardia or Rhodococcus can naturally synthesize PHBV but their direct use without modification is considered to be economically non-viable2 due to difficulties in purifying the PHBV. Technical bottlenecks for PHBV biosynthesis are the high toxicity of propionate to microbial cells (co-fed as a precursor of propionyl-CoA) and the low fraction of 3HV in the copolymer produced from propionate substrate. To overcome these and obtain PHBV with a high fraction of 3HV, attempts have been made either to optimize the utilization of propionate substrates or to construct a novel propionate-independent pathway e.g. using Escherichia coli as the host for PHBV production.2–4Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a cradle-to-grave approach to evaluating the environmental impacts of products and services. The LCA method has been formalized by the International Standards Organization (ISO)5 and has been widely applied to evaluate the environmental aspects of biopolymers derived from renewable resources on a life-cycle basis. However, few publically available LCA studies can be found on PHBV. Based on the limited information available the two main findings to date are: (1) PHBV derived from sugarcane delivers better energy consumption and GWP profiles than corn-based PHBV,6 and (2) a corn-based PHBV plastic bottle had higher impacts on the environment than its petrochemical counterparts due to corn-glucose production and heating requirements throughout the process.7The LCAs on microbial production of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) in general (particularly PHB) can also give inference on the LCA profiles of PHBV. A comprehensive review by Koller et al.8 indicated that PHA yield and energy consumption are important factors in the environmental profile. They point out that the substrates and the chemicals involved in PHA purification and processing are significant contributors to the environmental impacts of PHA.8 Harding et al.9 concluded that, when considering the production process only, PHB derived from sugarcane sucrose was environmentally superior to PE and PP over almost all impact categories. Similar findings have been reported for corn-glucose derived PHB by Kim and Dale10 who found that PHB delivered better GWP100 and energy consumption scores than petrochemical polymers. These results are in agreement with Pietrini et al.11 who compared a PHB-based composite with PP and HIPS alternatives, but also found that when considering the full life cycle, including the end-of-life disposal, the results for the comparison of the different polymers varied, depending on applications in various products. The drawing of general and consistent conclusions about PHAs is hampered by between-study variations in LCA methodological choices, data quality and the assumptions of the individual studies.Research objectives. In the present study, an attributional LCA approach (aLCA focuses on describing the environmentally relevant flows specific to the life cycle of a given product or service and its subsystems) was applied to evaluate the long-term quantitative and qualitative depletion of fossil resources resulting from the fossil energy demand for producing and disposing over the life-cycle of a reference quantity of PHBV (1 kg granulate or polymer product). The study aims to provide insights on the opportunities available for ongoing and future optimisation of PHBV production to deliver a sustainable production system with minimised damage to fossil fuel resources from a long-term perspective.2. Methods2.1 LCA modellingThe main polymer modelled is a PHBV biopolymer (Enmat Y1000®) derived from biosynthesis and produced in China by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. The baseline case was modelled on PHBV produced from corn glucose at the current production scale (2000 ton PHBV per year). The prospective scenarios with optimized PHBV production processes were modelled including a future scenario for PHBV under an expanded production scale at 50000 ton PHBV per year (data provided by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd). The reference unit for the study was “1 kg PHBV biopolymer granulates delivered to a UK user plus the end-of-life disposal in the UK (incl. transport) of 1 kg of PHBV biopolymer product”. The use phase of a full life cycle is thus excluded from the assessment, primarily because it is assumed that the fossil fuel consumption at this phase is negligible.The product system for the PHBV biopolymer is illustrated in Fig. 1. The following unit processes were included in the system boundary – corn farming, corn grain milling, enzymatic hydrolysis of corn starch to glucose, fermentation of glucose to PHBV and the production of PHBV granulate (all in China) and the end-of-life processes (in the UK). Environmental burdens associated with land use and human labour were excluded from the analysis. Fig. 1  PHBV product system modelled (production data provided by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd; product consumption and disposal in the UK were modelled; line  indicates that the use phase was excluded from the analysis). Economic allocation was applied to most stages of the life cycle where multiple physical co-products occurred (except for carbon). A stoichiometric carbon counting approach was applied to determine (1) biogenic carbon sequestration into PHBV (from biobased substrates via crops), and (2) other fossil carbon components in PHBV and the downstream release of biogenic and fossil carbon during subsequent stages of the PHBV life cycle. A system expansion approach was used for energy-related co-products (e.g. electrical power from the combined heat and power (CHP) system) or for closed-loop recycling.PHBV production. For the current PHBV production process (the base case with no co-product electricity), over 99% of the fossil fuel depletion was allocated to the PHBV polymer following economic allocation for physical co-products and system boundary expansion allocation for the closed-loop recycling of packaging material involved in the PHBV production process (i.e. virgin packaging material demand was assumed to be displaced by the recycling of packaging materials within the same product system). For the future scenario for the PHBV production process (includes an anaerobic digestion (AD) waste water treatment plus CHP system at the factory with an electrical power co-product) the co-produced electricity was assumed to displace an equivalent amount of electrical power generation from fossil fuels in the average China national grid mix. The approach to allocation by system boundary expansion for the electricity co-product therefore credited the PHBV production process with an ‘avoided burdens’ credit for the avoided fossil fuel consumption (mainly coal and natural gas) for the equivalent amount of electrical power generation from the China grid. As for the current production process, the system boundary expansion approach was also applied to the closed-loop recycling of packaging material involved in the future scenario PHBV production process.PHBV end-of-life. For the energy produced from AD or incineration at the end-of-life stages of the current and future scenarios for the PHBV product, it was assumed that the net electrical and thermal energy were recovered and the fossil fuel consumptions from equivalent amounts of electrical or thermal energy generated by the average supply mix for the UK were allocated as avoided burden credits to the PHBV life cycle. For the digestate from the AD or the compost from the composting end-of-life processes, the carbon and nitrogen contents were used to determine the amount of fossil fuel required for the production of a ‘functional equivalent’ quantity (dry basis) of nutrient (e.g. N) and/or soil improver (organic C) which was then allocated as an ‘avoided burden’ credit to the AD or the composting system.A damage-oriented (endpoint) approach – Eco-Indicator 99 hierarchist version (EI 99 H) – was applied in the current study as the LCIA method. The rationale for choosing EI 99 H is that this characterization model handles fossil fuel and minerals as two separate resource-related impact categories and takes into account the long-term trend of resource quality depletion from a balanced time-horizon perspective. The surplus energy concept applied in the EI 99 H fossil fuel impact category (surplus energy is referred to as the difference between the energy needed to extract a resource now and at a point in the future) provides a relative measure for the ‘damage’ that the depletion of a fossil resource causes.12 The LCA modelling was performed in Simapro 7.3.0 (PRé Consultants).2.2 Experimental methodsTo determine the anaerobic digestibility of the PHBV biopolymer Enmat Y1000® granulate (provided by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd), the Biochemical Methane Potential (BMP) assay was conducted according to the techniques developed by Owen et al.13 and Angelidaki et al.14 BMP assays were run in 165 mL serum bottles against controls of inoculum without substrate. In each bottle, a total liquid volume of 100 mL was added, including media, inoculum and substrates. The inocula were collected from a commercial AD plant in the UK which is operated as a mesophilic, wet (<15% dry solid), continuous-feeding two-stage AD system. The final concentrations of inocula in the serum bottles were 2 g volatile suspended solid (VSS) L−1.To determine the inoculum activity, the protocol of Angelidaki et al.14 was applied. Model substrates amorphous cellulose (1 g L−1), glucose (1 g L−1), a mixture of propionic and butyric acid (0.5 g L−1 for each acid), and acetic acid (1 g L−1) were used to determine hydrolytic, acidogenic, acetogenic and methanogenic activities respectively. The BMP assays for the model substrates and for the PHBV biopolymer Enmat Y1000® granulate were conducted in triplicate at an approximate 1:1 ratio of inoculum VSS to substrate chemical oxygen demand (COD). All the serum bottles were incubated at 37 °C and shaken at 200 rpm in constant room temperature and the total digestion duration was 120 days. 1 mL headspace gas was collected from serum bottles using plastic syringes (Terumo) to determine the composition of biogas.The COD was measured based on the standard closed reflux colorimetric method.15 The VSS of the inoculum was assayed according to standard methods.15 The biogas compositions were determined on a gas chromatograph (GC) (Shimadzu GC-14A) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and Porapak N column (1500 × 6.35 mm). The temperature of the column, TCD and injection port were set at 28 °C, 38 °C and 128 °C, respectively. Calibration gases were accurate to 5%, and the coefficient of variation (CV) for 10 identical samples was 2%.The inoculum activity tests gave average conversion efficiencies of 64% for cellulose, 61% for glucose, 98% for propionic/butyric acid and 86% for acetic acid (where conversion efficiency (%) = (CH4Measured/CH4Theoretical) × 100%, and CH4Theoretical is calculated based on 1 g COD biodegraded producing 395 mL CH4 per g COD at 35 °C and one atmosphere16). These assays confirmed the presence of highly active bacterial and archaeal trophic groups and a balanced microbial population likely to have good inherent abilities to undertake degradation of biopolymers.The aerobic biodegradability of the PHBV biopolymer Enmat Y1000® granulate was tested by China National Centre for Quality Supervision & Test of Plastics Products (CNCQST) according to ISO 14855.17 The elemental analysis for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur contained in PHBV biopolymer were carried out by OEA Laboratories Ltd using a Thermoquest EA1110 elemental analyser. The calorific value measurement was conducted in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London using the Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter (Parr 6100) to determine the higher heating value (HHV) of PHBV. The lower heating value (LHV) was calculated from the HHV and the total hydrogen content in the PHBV according to LHV (J g−1) = HHV (J g−1) − 218.13 × H percent (wt%).18The laboratory results were used to develop parameters for the end-of-life AD and incineration with energy recovery (termed Energy-from-Waste (EfW)) for the LCA inventory.3. Life cycle inventory analysis (LCI)3.1 LCI for polymers at the factory gateThe inventories representing the current average technology for the corn-glucose production process and PHBV production (representative data provided by the specific glucose supplier and by Tianan Biologic Material Co., Ltd, respectively) are given in Table 1. The commercial confidentiality precludes the inclusion of data on mass and energy values in Table 1. The dataset for amylase enzyme production was provided by Novozymes A/S to represent the site-specific enzymes used in glucose production in China. In the current production process, fossil energy is used to provide the electricity and heat required for glucose and PHBV production and China average electrical and thermal energies (Table 2) were used in the LCA model to represent these inputs.
Table 1 Inputs and outputs for PHBV and glucose production

Glucose productionPHBV production (current production scale of 2000 tons per year)Energy and material inputsElectricityElectricityProcess and cooling waterProcess and cooling waterSteamSteamCorn grainCorn glucoseα-AmylaseOrganic acid (trace amount)Gluco-amylaseDetergentOther chemicalsHydrochloric acidSodium hydroxideAirHydrochloric acidAmmoniaSodium carbonateOther media components ProductsGlucosePHBVCo-products Emissions and solid wasteEffluentSolid wastePackaging to recyclingEffluentCO2 generated from waste water treatment
Table 2 Energy sources for electrical energy and heat generation in Chinaa

Energy source (% of energy generated)Electrical energyHeata Data source: International Energy Association (IEA).19Hard coal78.95%92.32%Oil0.67%4.60%Gas1.23%2.62%Biomass0.07%0.46%Waste0.00%—Nuclear1.96%—Hydro power16.74%—Wind0.37%—Solar PV0.005%—3.2 LCI for end-of-lifeAt the PHBV end-of-life stage, three disposal routes were modelled – industrial composting (windrow), AD and incineration with energy recovery (EfW).The LCI for the AD of PHBV products were derived from a UK commercial AD plant and the experimental results. The experimental results demonstrated a high ultimate biogas production (224.5 ± 2.8 mL CH4 per g COD, 234.5 ± 1.8 mL CO2 per g COD) from PHBV granulate digestion, equivalent to a 57% conversion efficiency (measured CH4/theoretical CH4). This is similar to that achieved with the glucose and cellulose reference substrates, indicating that under anaerobic conditions (with the active bacterial and archaeal trophic groups present), the PHBV granulate is biodegradable. The C-balance suggested that nearly 80% of the biogenic C sequestered from the atmosphere and contained in the PHBV biopolymer was converted to biogas (CO2 and CH4). However, as expected, the composition of biogas observed in the laboratory (51% CO2 and 49% CH4) differed somewhat from the gas composition reported at the commercial AD plant (32–35% CO2 and 65% CH4). Therefore, it was assumed that under industrial-scale digestion conditions, higher conversion efficiencies of carbon to CH4 would be achieved from PHBV digestion and the typical biogas composition at the AD plant was used in the LCA model. The electrical power generated at the AD plant was based on the average electrical conversion efficiency (1.2 kWh m−3 biogas) derived from the UK commercial AD system and the thermal energy output was estimated based on an assumed net calorific value for biogas of 21.48 MJ m−3 with 50% of the biogas being converted to heat.20 The surplus electrical and thermal energy products from the AD plant were modelled as net co-products exported from the plant (Table 3) after accounting for the energy requirement for the AD plant operation.
Table 3 Properties of PHBV and key parameters for end-of-life scenarios

PHBV biopolymer Enmat Y1000® (standard deviation in brackets)C (% w/w)55.58 (±0.12)HHV (MJ kg−1 polymer)23.25 (±0.09)H (% w/w)7.05 (±0.02)LHV (MJ kg−1 polymer)23.23 (±0.09)N (% w/w)0.07 (±0.007)Aerobic biodegradability (%)66.90S (% w/w)0.00Anaerobic biodegradability (%)56.82 (±0.71)COD (g O2 per g polymer)1.79 (±0.02)   End-of-life scenarios – Input-output per 1 kg of received biopolymer waste EfWWindrow compostingADa N/A = not applicable.b Electricity consumption for milling waste.c Electricity and gas used for incineration shut-down; diesel used as off-road oil.d 50% fresh water and 50% recycled process water.e 85% energy recovery assumed (heat:electricity energy ratio = 3/2). Based on the data derived from the Ecoinvent dataset, 35% of electricity and 45% of thermal energy generated were assumed to be exported.f Compost contains 2.47 × 10−4 kg N kg−1 biopolymer waste.g Thermal energy consumption (3.37 MJ kg−1 waste) and electricity required for AD plant operation (15.7% of the generated electricity) were based on data from a UK commercial AD plant.Operation energy and material inputsInfrastructureEfW plantComposting plantAD plantElectricity input (MJ)4.63 × 10−3c1.83 × 10−37.20 × 10−2bDiesel input (kg)7.42 × 10−5c3.07 × 10−3N/AaNatural gas (MJ)8.50 × 10−4cN/AaN/AaWater (kg)1.25 × 10−1N/Aa3.34 × 10−3dActivated carbon (kg)4.71 × 10−4N/AaN/AHydrochloric acid (kg)5.80 × 10−5N/AaN/ABoiler feed water chemicals (kg)1.61 × 10−5N/AaN/ACondenser treatment chemicals (kg)1.43 × 10−5N/AaN/ALime (kg)1.13 × 10−2N/AaN/AUrea powder (kg)1.47 × 10−3N/AaN/ASodium hydroxide (kg)3.28 × 10−5N/AaN/ASodium hypochlorite (kg)N/AaN/Aa5.02 × 10−5 OutputsExported electricity (MJ)2.77eNAa3.01gExported heat (MJ)5.34eNAa5.50gEmissions CO2 (kg)2.041.371.63Emissions NOx (kg)1.18 × 10−3N/A3.15 × 10−5Emissions NH3 (kg)NA6.09 × 10−4N/AaCompost/digestate (kg)NA1.84 × 10−1f1.12 × 10−1Two gaseous emission sources from the AD plant were considered: (1) oxidized gases released from the CHP system, where complete biogas combustion was assumed; and (2) fugitive gases escaping from reactors during operation/maintenance, where good practice was assumed (unintentional CH4 emissions are flared, thus uncontrolled CH4 emissions are nearly zero).21 Released NH3 from biopolymer degradation was estimated according to an on-line model22 which is based on the pH and temperature dependent relationship between NH4+ and free NH3. The remaining C and N, including un-degraded or partially digested fractions, are contained in the digestate. As presented in Table 3, 0.112 kg digestate per kg PHBV is produced, which is close to the data reported for a commercial AD plant (0.18 kg digestate per kg feedstock). The fossil fuel requirement needed to produce an amount of compost (from a generic composting process (Ecoinvent database v2.2)) ‘functional equivalent’ to the amount (dry basis) of the carbon and nitrogen in this AD digestate (0.112 kg digestate per kg PHBV) was allocated to the AD system as an ‘avoided burden’ credit.The modelling of the end-of-life disposal routes by composting or EfW for PHBV was based on the experimentally determined chemical and physical properties of PHBV (Table 3) and the operational parameters and infrastructure data derived from the Waste and Resources Assessment Tool for the Environment (WRATE) model.23 These represent UK current technologies for composting and EfW. The key inputs and outputs for each disposal route are given in Table 3. In EfW, complete combustion was assumed and the exported surplus electrical and thermal energy were allocated to PHBV as avoided burden credits against the fossil fuel consumptions for UK average electrical and thermal energy generation. In the composting scenario, aerobic operation conditions were assumed and CO2 and NH3 gas releases from the decomposition of PHBV were estimated based on the laboratory results for elemental analysis and biodegradability test (carried out by CNCQST) (Table 3). The fractions of C and N inputs not released in the gas phase were assumed to be retained in the mature compost and to be available as a soil improver and a fertilizer respectively (Table 3). Only the N present in compost was accounted for as having a fertilizer value and the fossil fuel needs for production of an equivalent quantity of ammonium nitrate fertilizer (Ecoinvent v2.2 database) was allocated as an avoided burden credit to PHBV.The sea transport of the PHBV biopolymer from China to the UK was estimated as 9500 km by container ship (fuel oil). A notional total road transport distance of 500 km by a 32 ton truck in China and UK was assumed for delivery of the PHBV polymer (diesel fuel). The post-consumer biopolymers were assumed to be disposed of locally in the UK with transport modelled as a 32 ton lorry and 100 km (diesel fuel).4. Life cycle impact assessment (LCIA)4.1 ‘Cradle-to-grave’ fossil energy profiles for current PHBVThe major factors contributing to the fossil fuel depletion (expressed in MJ surplus energy) for the current production of corn-glucose based PHBV are presented in Fig. 2. The fossil energy profiles for the PHBV up to the factory gate were dominated by corn farming and glucose production which accounted for approximately 70% of the total fossil fuel depletion. Electrical and thermal energy for the PHBV production step contributed to about 14% of the overall fossil fuel depletion. These fossil fuel demands were mainly for coal-dependent energy for glucose and PHBV production, diesel consumed for field operations in corn farming and natural gas and crude oil required for fertilizer manufacture. The fossil fuel depletion of corn-glucose based PHBV products over the whole life cycle of production and disposal (excluding the use phase) were dominated by the polymer production process (>90% of the fossil fuel depletion). Transportation involved in polymer granulate distribution from China to UK and in the end-of-life phase made only a minor contribution (<5% of net fossil fuel depletion). AD and incineration (EfW) offered better disposal options for PHBV products, delivering 20% lower fossil fuel depletion than windrow composting. This was largely attributable to the avoided burden credits (from avoided fossil fuel depletion for conventional UK electrical and heat generation) awarded to the PHBV product for the energy generated from these two end-of-life disposal options. The environmental ‘savings’ from the use of AD digestate or compost nutrient were negligible (<1% saving). Fig. 2  Characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus) for corn-glucose PHBV under the current production scale (2000 tonnes per year) (unit: 1 kg PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08). 4.2 Process optimization for PHBV productionThe technology for PHBV production is still under considerable development. The following section explores this dynamic perspective to evaluate the effect on the fossil fuel profiles of PHBV under several demonstrative potential processing and technology optimisations. Other promising process optimization options (e.g. recovery of low-grade heat from the fermentation step) are also of interest and would be useful to explore as ongoing work.To provide an overview of the key research findings, the key assumptions and characterized LCIA profiles for all the PHBV production scenarios have been summarized in Tables S.1 and S.2 in the ESI.†Substrate carbon utilization efficiency. The substrate C-utilization efficiency is referred to here as the proportion of C contained in the glucose feedstock that is converted to C in the final PHBV polymer product at the factory gate. Although a commercially acceptable C-utilization efficiency (approximately 50%) has been achieved under the current production scale (2000 tons per year), a higher efficiency can be expected when expanding the production scale (to 50000 tons per year),24 or regulating the composition of substrates, i.e. ratio of propionate and glucose or using recombinant bacteria (e.g. constructing a propionate-independent pathway) for PHBV production.2–4,25 Up to 80% C-utilization efficiency was modeled.24The environmental benefits brought by the improvement in C-utilization efficiency are presented in Fig. 3A. An 80% C-utilization efficiency can bring up to a 29% saving in fossil fuel depletion compared with current practice based on a corn glucose substrate. Fig. 3  ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus energy) (A). Optimization of C utilization efficiency and energy supply system for corn-glucose based PHBV production (unit: 1 kg corn-glucose PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08) (B). Optimized corn-glucose PHBV (unit: 1 kg corn-glucose PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08). Energy supply system and waste water treatment. Fossil energy is currently utilized for the corn-glucose production and for PHBV plant operation in Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. To identify the major environmental contributor in the energy supply system and investigate the potential for beneficial effects from introducing bioenergy, four future scenarios were modelled (Fig. 3A). The specifications for these are given in Table 4 where bioenergy was assumed to be generated from wood biomass combustion in a CHP system (Ecoinvent dataset v 2.2). The current waste water treatment technology is an aerobic biodegradation system. An AD plus CHP system was modelled as a potential optimisation and compared with the current waste water treatment system (Table 4).
Table 4 Scenarios for process optimization of energy supply system and waste water treatment

Scenarios for energy supply system optimization Electricity for PHBV productionSteam for PHBV productionElectricity for glucose productionSteam for glucose productionWaste water treatment for PHBV productionCurrentFossilFossilFossilFossilAerobicRenewable PHBV, fossil glucose, aerobicRenewable resourceRenewable resourceFossilFossilAerobicFossil PHBV, renewable glucose, aerobicFossilFossilRenewable resourceRenewable resourceAerobic100% Renewable, aerobicRenewable resourceRenewable resourceRenewable resourceRenewable resourceAerobic100% Renewable, ADRenewable resourceRenewable resourceRenewable resourceRenewable resourceADWaste water treatment Aerobic treatment systemAD systema Results provided by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd. The COD removal efficiency represents the digestibility of organic compounds contained in waste water.b A typical composition of biogas generated from AD process was assumed.19,30c The biogas calorific value (21.48 MJ m−3 biogas) was obtained from the study by Monson et al.19 The electricity conversion efficiency was estimated according to the electrical conversion efficiency in EU AD plants (20–25%) and the theoretical efficiency (30%–35%).19 Based on commercial AD plant case studies,19,30 over 50% of the energy contained in biogas was assumed to be converted to thermal energy and the surplus heat generated from a CHP system was assumed to be wasted.COD removal efficiency92.67%aAssume all biodegradable compounds are digestedN removal efficiency46.03%a C flowBiodegradable C converted to CO2 and released to atmosphereBiodegradable C is converted to biogas with a composition of 65% CH4 and 35% CO2bEnergy recoveryN/ACHP system – 30% of energy contained in biogas (calorific value 21.48 MJ m−3 biogas) is recovered as electricity; 30% recovered electricity is used on-site for AD operation and surplus electricity is exported to the China national grid; thermal energy is wastedcA 100% bio-energy supply instead of fossil energy for the glucose and PHBV production systems brought an 18.6% decrease in fossil fuel profiles for the PHBV granulate (Fig. 3A) due to the avoidance of mainly coal-driven energy consumption. The energy supply system at the PHBV production stage was a more significant contributor to fossil fuel consumption (∼10% saving with bioenergy) than the energy supply for the glucose production stage (∼3% saving with bioenergy).Although the contributions of waste water treatment to the fossil fuel depletion for PHBV granulate were negligible (Fig. 2), the replacement of the aerobic only waste water treatment with the AD system brought a 5% fossil fuel saving. This is due to the environmental ‘benefits’ brought by the avoided burden credits from the energy substitution. Overall, switching energy source to renewable bioenergy and introducing AD with energy recovery into the waste water treatment system at the PHBV production stage has the potential to bring about a 23% saving in fossil fuel depletion for the PHBV granulate compared with the current system (Fig. 3A).Best scenarios for corn-glucose based PHBV. There is a significant potential to reduce the fossil fuel depletion (by over 50%) at a C-utilization efficiency of 80% when 100% bioenergy is used for both glucose and PHBV production (see Fig. 3B).Lignocellulosic glucose feedstock. The fossil fuel profiles of PHBV derived from lignocellulose-based glucose i.e. ‘second generation’ (2G) sources were modelled. These potential 2G supplies of glucose derived from woody plant material e.g. agricultural wastes are currently developmental and are constrained by economic considerations. However, they represent a likely mid- to long-term source of glucose feedstock supply. As shown in Table 5, different technologies were modelled for glucose production from corn stover and softwood chips. The datasets for glucose production from corn stover (via pretreatment followed by an enzymatic hydrolysis) and softwood chips (by 2-stage dilute acid catalysed pretreatment and hydrolysis) were derived from the literature26–28 and unpublished work.
Table 5 Specifications for energy sources for lignocellulose-based PHBV scenarios

 Glucose production processElectricity and steam for glucose productionElectricity and steam for PHBV productiona The scenarios with 100% bioenergy represent the fully optimized energy system, i.e. 100% bioenergy generated from wood biomass combustion in a CHP system was assumed for glucose and PHBV production processes.Current scenarioEnzymatic hydrolysisFossilFossilCorn stoverEnzymatic hydrolysisRenewable resourceFossilCorn stover 100% bioenergyaEnzymatic hydrolysisRenewable resourceRenewable resourceSoftwood chipsDilute acid hydrolysisRenewable resourceFossilSoftwood chips 100% bioenergyaDilute acid hydrolysisRenewable resourceRenewable resourceLignocellulosic feedstocks provided an option to improve the fossil energy profiles of PHBV but not all the feedstock and processing technologies deliver favourable LCA results. The PHBV derived from softwood chips (dilute acid hydrolysis) delivered better energy profiles than the current corn-glucose (enzymatic hydrolysis) based PHBV, bringing a 65% saving over current production (Fig. 4). These results are due to the relatively low fossil energy profiles for softwood chip feedstock production and for production of chemicals (required for dilute acid hydrolysis) and the renewable energy used for the dilute acid hydrolysis technology during the glucose production processes. In the corn stover enzymatic hydrolysis process a high demand for natural gas in cellulase enzyme production led to a PHBV product with a higher fossil fuel profile than the softwood chip dilute acid hydrolysis process or the current corn grain based PHBV. The switch from fossil energy to bioenergy at the PHBV production stages led to a 12% and 43% reduction in fossil fuel depletion for the corn-stover and softwood chip scenarios for PHBV production respectively (Fig. 4). Improved substrate C-utilization efficiency contributed a further 12–38% reduction in fossil fuel depletion scores of lignocellulose-based PHBV. Fig. 4  ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus) for PHBV production based on corn-stover with enzymatic hydrolysis or softwood chip with dilute acid pretreatment and hydrolysis (unit: 1 kg PHBV, method: Eco-indicators 99 H v2.08). Overall, a generic switch to lignocellulosic feedstocks alone did not represent a solution leading to a PHBV with more favourable fossil fuel profiles. The selection of an appropriate 2G glucose feedstock and processing technology is a key factor in further improving the fossil fuel profile of PHBV, coupled with optimization of the energy supply system and C-utilization efficiency.4.3 Corn-glucose PHBV and petrochemical polymersLCA scoping and LCI. This section presents indicative but not functional comparisons between corn-glucose based PHBV and petrochemical counterparts including high density polyethylene (HDPE), low density polyethylene (LDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polypropylene (PP). A similar structure to PHBV is used for preparation of the data for the petrochemical polymers based on the production of 1 kg of granulate (in the EU) and end-of-life disposal of 1 kg of petrochemical product in the UK. Thus a reference unit, rather than a functional unit, is applied in this illustration – 1 kg of polymer granulate at the factory gate and disposal of 1 kg of polymer product in the UK at end-of-life stage.For the petrochemical counterparts, gas and oil extraction, cracking (propylene and ethylene production), intermediate products production (e.g. terephthalic acid), polymerization all in the EU and the end-of-life processes in the UK were included in the analysis (Fig. S1 in ESI†).A system boundary expansion approach was applied for the life cycle of petrochemical polymers. For the energy produced from incineration at the end-of-life stages of the petrochemical products, it was assumed that the net electrical and thermal energy were recovered as co-products and the resource consumptions from equivalent amounts of electrical or thermal energy generated by the average supply mix for the UK were allocated as avoided burden credits to the petrochemicals. For the recycled petrochemical polymers, a closed-loop recycling allocation approach was applied – virgin materials for the life cycle were assumed to be displaced by recycled materials within the same product system.EU average data for petrochemical polymers (PE, EPS, PP) were used in LCA study to represent the current technology for petrochemical production.29 The production processes of other input materials were derived from the Ecoinvent database (v2.2). The end-of-life scenarios (recycling, landfill and EfW) for petrochemical products were mainly based on the Ecoinvent database (v2.2) and data on the recycling process were collected from Nextek Ltd, UK. In the recycling scenarios a ‘maximum’ perspective was modelled (though one that is an aspiration for 2020) in which, to facilitate clear comparisons of the various options between polymers and disposal scenarios examined, the polymer recovery rate was assumed to be 100% (i.e. full recovery of post-consumer polymer) and virgin PE/PP/PET granulate for the life cycle were also assumed to be capable of full (100%) displacement by recycled materials within the same product system. In the incineration (EfW) scenarios, it was assumed that 100% of the net electrical energy generated (3.74 MJ kg−1 PP, 5.00 MJ kg−1 PE, 4.51 MJ kg−1 EPS) was exported and 100% of the net thermal energy (7.54 MJ kg−1 PP, 10.02 MJ kg−1 PE, and 9.05 MJ kg−1 EPS) was recovered.30 Road transportation distances for delivery and end-of-life were assumed to be the same as for the biopolymer (32 ton lorry, 500 km and 100 km respectively; EU production so no sea transport).Indicative LCIA comparison results (the range of variables tested in comparisons between a full range of PHBV scenarios with petrochemicals as well as their comparison results are given in Tables S.1 and S.2 in ESI†). At the factory gate the PHBV produced under the current production scale in China delivered 23–30% lower fossil fuel depletion per kg of polymer granulate than the petrochemical counterparts produced in the EU (Fig. 5A). Over the production and disposal life cycle (Fig. 5B), PHBV biopolymers showed lower fossil fuel depletion than petrochemical alternatives with EfW or landfill as their end-of-life scenarios. However, the petrochemical polymer products with closed-loop 100% recovery and recycling had lower impacts on fossil fuel depletion than the PHBV product life cycles due to the avoidance of virgin fossil polymer manufacturing processes. Fig. 5  Characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus). (A) ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ indicative comparison of current corn-glucose based PHBV scenarios vs. petrochemical polymers (unit: 1 kg granulate, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08). (B) ‘Cradle-to-grave’ indicative comparison of corn-glucose based PHBV current and future scenarios vs. petrochemical polymer products (unit: 1 kg product, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08; PHBV future scenario = 100% bioenergy and 80% C-utilization efficiency). Processing and technology optimisations projected for future production of the PHBV biopolymer in this study offer PHBV products with substantial savings in their fossil fuel depletion. As indicated in Fig. 5A, the scenario for a corn glucose based PHBV with a 100% bioenergy supply (for PHBV and glucose production) and 60–80% C-utilization efficiency would have a 50–65% saving in fossil fuel depletion at the factory gate compared with current production of an equivalent quantity of PET, PP and PE polymers. Under future scenarios, with an expanded production scale (i.e. improved C utilization efficiency), 100% bioenergy (for PHBV and glucose production), and AD, EfW or composting end-of-life disposal, significant savings (up to 75%) were also found in ‘cradle-to-grave’ fossil fuel depletion for corn glucose based PHBV over petrochemical alternatives with EfW and landfill end-of-life (Fig. 5B). These indicative comparisons presented here were carried out on the PHBV produced in China and consumed in the UK against petrochemical counterparts manufactured in the EU and consumed in the UK. Thus, if factoring in the potential production of PHBV in the EU or other regions with local consumption, some further reductions in the fossil fuel demand of PHBV can be expected as a result of the elimination of long-distance transportation.The LCIA results in this study must be regarded as providing only indicative information as the comparison between PHBV and petrochemical counterparts in terms of damage caused by fossil resource depletion is not on a functional unit basis. The aspects such as polymer suitability for a given function, relevant quantity required to meet the function and wider aspects (such as transparency, thermal stability etc.) and technical feasibility for commercialized-scale production of functional products to meet demands are not considered here. Some alternative potential waste management options for petrochemicals and/or PHBV were not examined, e.g. chemical recycling options gasification and pyrolysis, though subject to suitable data availability would be of interest to explore in future research. The analysis is also restricted to one impact assessment method (EI 99 H) to explore the long-term trend of damage to fossil resource quality depletion. However, the potential for advantage for the PHBV over petrochemical polymers in the future scenarios (with processing and technology optimization and expansion of production scale) is clearly demonstrated – this finding is not sensitive to different characterization models (data not shown). Sensitivity analyses on wider methodological aspects (in addition to key data aspects such as energy supply options) and evaluations of other environmental impact categories (e.g. eutrophication, water footprint) fall outside the scope of the present study, but can be explored in further research.5. ConclusionsPHBV polymers produced under the current production scale (2000 tons per year) have a somewhat lower fossil fuel depletion (expressed in MJ surplus energy) at the factory gate on a per kg polymer basis than examples of petrochemical polymers. The current production processes and production scale for PHBV are still undergoing substantial development in comparison with the well-developed petrochemical polymers. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that further optimization in PHBV technologies and expansion of its production scale (e.g. to 50000 tons per year) could bring improvements to its environmental profile. The present results demonstrate that the use of renewable rather than fossil resources for electrical and thermal energy required for PHBV and glucose production provide an effective optimization option. This, coupled with improved C-utilization efficiency has the potential to reduce the fossil energy requirement for PHBV production by over 50% in the future compared with its current production scale. The use of appropriate lignocellulosic feedstocks (with appropriate processing technology) as glucose sources also offers potential for additional improvement. The inclusion of the end-of-life phase in the assessment demonstrates the importance of capturing environmental ‘benefit’ when disposing of biopolymers such as PHBV. The end-of-life scenarios briefly examined here with petrochemical polymers also indicate the strong life-cycle benefits achievable from efficient polymer recycling.The exploration here of the fossil fuel depletion over the PHBV life cycle demonstrates that there is significant available opportunity to develop promising biopolymers that can have very low requirements for fossil resources. These results support the view that it will be possible, with future developments, to move to biopolymer production systems that are largely independent of fossil fuels.AbbreviationsADanaerobic digestionaLCAattributional life cycle assessmentEI 99 HEco-Indicator 99 hierarchist versionEfWEnergy-from-WasteHDPEhigh density polyethyleneLCAlife cycle assessmentLCIlife cycle inventory analysisLCIAlife cycle impact assessmentLDPElow density polyethylenePETpolyethylene terephthalatePHBVpolyhydroxybutyrate-valeratePHBpoly-(β-hydroxybutyrate)PPpolypropyleneWRATEWaste and Resources Assessment Tool for the EnvironmentAcknowledgementsThis study is based on research financially supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and the Technology Strategy Board (TSB) through the Technology Programme. We would like to thank all the participants in the consortium project led by Bangor University and Nextek Ltd. We are especially grateful to Xuejun Chen and Guanghui Chen and the Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd for their valuable support during the LCA inventory development. We wish to acknowledge Novozymes A/S, Demark for their support with the inventory development on the amylase enzyme production.ReferencesI. Aldor and J. D. Keasling, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2001, 76, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .Q. Chen, Q. Wang, G. Q. Wei, Q. F. Liang and Q. S. Qi, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 4886–4893 CrossRef CAS .S. Slater, T. Gallaher and D. Dennis, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1992, 58, 1089–1094 CAS .A. C. Eschenlauer, S. K. Stoup, F. Srienc and D. A. Somers, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1996, 19, 121–130 CrossRef CAS .ISO, BS EN ISO 14040 Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework, International Standards Organization, Geneva,  2006 Search PubMed .M. Patel, M. Crank, B. Hermann, L. Roes, B. Husing, L. Overbeek, F. Terragni and E. Recchia, Medium and Long-term Opportunities and Risks of Biotechnology Production of Bulk Chemicals from Renewable Resources – The BREW Project Final Report,  2006 .G. Rebitzer, A. W. Marin and O. Jolliet, Int. J. LCA, 2002, 7, 127–129 CrossRef .M. Koller, I. Gasser, F. Schmid and G. Berg, Eng. Life Sci., 2011, 11, 222–237 CrossRef CAS .K. G. Harding, J. S. Dennis, H. von Blottnitz and S. T. L. Harrison, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 130, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Kim and B. E. Dale, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 7690–7695 CrossRef CAS .M. Pietrini, L. Roes, M. K. Patel and E. Chiellini, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 2210–2218 CrossRef CAS .M. Goedkoop and R. Spriensma, The Eco-indicator 99 A damage oriented method for Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methodology Report,  2001 .W. F. Owen, D. C. Stuckey, J. B. Healy, L. Y. Young and P. L. McCarty, Water Res., 1979, 13, 485–492 CrossRef CAS .I. Angelidaki, M. Alves, D. Bolzonella, L. Borzacconim, A. J. Guwy, S. Kalyuzhnyi, P. Jenicek, L. Campos and J. B. van Lier, presented in part at the 5th International Symposium of anaerobic digestion of solid waste and energy crops, Hammamet, Tunisia, 25–28 May 2008,  2008.APHA, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Public Health Association, Washington D.C,  1999 Search PubMed .R. E. Speece, Anaerobic Biotechnology for Industrial Wastewaters, Archae Press, Nashville, Tennessee, USA,  1996 Search PubMed .ISO, BS EN ISO 14855 Determination of the Ultimate Aerobic Biodegradability and Disintegration of Plastic Materials Under Controlled Composting Conditions – Method by Analysis of Evolved Carbon Dioxide, International Standards Organization, Geneva,  2004 Search PubMed .L. Ingram, D. Mohan, M. Bricka, P. Steele, D. Strobel, D. Crocker, B. Mitchell, J. Mohammad, K. Cantrell and C. U. Pittman, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 614–625 CrossRef CAS .IEA, Electricity/Heat in China, People's Republic of in 2008, http://www.iea.org/stats/electricitydata.asp?COUNTRY_CODE=CN, Accessed 15 Nov.,  2011.K. D. Monson, S. R. Esteves, A. J. Guwy and R. M. Dinsdale, Anaerobic Digestion of Biodegradable Municipal Solid Wastes A Review, Univerisity of Glamorgan,  2007 Search PubMed .IPCC, 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories prepared by National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme, IGES, Japan,  2006.J. E. Alleman, Free Ammonia-Nitrogen Calculator & Information, http://cobweb.ecn.purdue.edu/~piwc/w3-research/free-ammonia/nh3.html, Accessed Jan. 11,  2010.Environment Agency, Waste and Resources Assessment Tool for the Environment (WRATE), http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/research/commercial/102922.aspx, Accessed Nov. 11,  2009.Tianan Tianan Biologic Materials Co., personal communication,  2012.J. Asrar and K. J. Gruys, Biodegradable Polymer (Biopol),  2002 Search PubMed .A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan and B. Wallace, Lignocellulosic Biomass to Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-current Dilute Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stove, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2002 Search PubMed .P. Bosch, O. Wallberg, E. Joelsson, M. Galbe and G. Zacchi, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2010, 3, 15 CrossRef .R. Slade, A. Bauen and N. Shah, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2009, 2, 3 CrossRef .I. Boustead, Eco-profiles of the European Plastics Industry, Pastics Europe, Brussels,  2005 Search PubMed .R. Frischknecht, N. Jungbluth, H.-J. Althaus, G. Doka, T. Heck, S. Hellweg, R. Hischier, T. Nemecek, G. Rebitzer, M. Spielmann and G. Wernet, Overview and Methodology. Ecoinvent report No.1., Swiss Center for Life Cycle Inventories, Dubendorf,  2007 .Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2gc36546d‡ Current address: Centro de Estudios Ambientales, Universidad Austral de Chile.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  PHBV product system modelled (production data provided by Tianan Biologic Materials Co., Ltd; product consumption and disposal in the UK were modelled; line  indicates that the use phase was excluded from the analysis).	 

Energy and material inputs
Electricity	Electricity
Process and cooling water	Process and cooling water
Steam	Steam
Corn grain	Corn glucose
α-Amylase	Organic acid (trace amount)
Gluco-amylase	Detergent
Other chemicals	Hydrochloric acid
Sodium hydroxide	Air
Hydrochloric acid	Ammonia
Sodium carbonate	Other media components
 
Products
Glucose	PHBV
Co-products
 
Emissions and solid waste
Effluent	Solid waste
Packaging to recycling
Effluent
CO2 generated from waste water treatment


Hard coal	78.95%	92.32%
Oil	0.67%	4.60%
Gas	1.23%	2.62%
Biomass	0.07%	0.46%
Waste	0.00%	—
Nuclear	1.96%	—
Hydro power	16.74%	—
Wind	0.37%	—
Solar PV	0.005%	—

C (% w/w)	55.58 (±0.12)	HHV (MJ kg−1 polymer)	23.25 (±0.09)
H (% w/w)	7.05 (±0.02)	LHV (MJ kg−1 polymer)	23.23 (±0.09)
N (% w/w)	0.07 (±0.007)	Aerobic biodegradability (%)	66.90
S (% w/w)	0.00	Anaerobic biodegradability (%)	56.82 (±0.71)
COD (g O2 per g polymer)	1.79 (±0.02)	 	 
 



Operation energy and material inputs
Infrastructure	EfW plant	Composting plant	AD plant
Electricity input (MJ)	4.63 × 10−3c	1.83 × 10−3	7.20 × 10−2b
Diesel input (kg)	7.42 × 10−5c	3.07 × 10−3	N/Aa
Natural gas (MJ)	8.50 × 10−4c	N/Aa	N/Aa
Water (kg)	1.25 × 10−1	N/Aa	3.34 × 10−3d
Activated carbon (kg)	4.71 × 10−4	N/Aa	N/A
Hydrochloric acid (kg)	5.80 × 10−5	N/Aa	N/A
Boiler feed water chemicals (kg)	1.61 × 10−5	N/Aa	N/A
Condenser treatment chemicals (kg)	1.43 × 10−5	N/Aa	N/A
Lime (kg)	1.13 × 10−2	N/Aa	N/A
Urea powder (kg)	1.47 × 10−3	N/Aa	N/A
Sodium hydroxide (kg)	3.28 × 10−5	N/Aa	N/A
Sodium hypochlorite (kg)	N/Aa	N/Aa	5.02 × 10−5
 
Outputs
Exported electricity (MJ)	2.77e	NAa	3.01g
Exported heat (MJ)	5.34e	NAa	5.50g
Emissions CO2 (kg)	2.04	1.37	1.63
Emissions NOx (kg)	1.18 × 10−3	N/A	3.15 × 10−5
Emissions NH3 (kg)	NA	6.09 × 10−4	N/Aa
Compost/digestate (kg)	NA	1.84 × 10−1f	1.12 × 10−1

 	Fig. 2  Characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus) for corn-glucose PHBV under the current production scale (2000 tonnes per year) (unit: 1 kg PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08).	 

 	Fig. 3  ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus energy) (A). Optimization of C utilization efficiency and energy supply system for corn-glucose based PHBV production (unit: 1 kg corn-glucose PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08) (B). Optimized corn-glucose PHBV (unit: 1 kg corn-glucose PHBV, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08).	 


Current	Fossil	Fossil	Fossil	Fossil	Aerobic
Renewable PHBV, fossil glucose, aerobic	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Fossil	Fossil	Aerobic
Fossil PHBV, renewable glucose, aerobic	Fossil	Fossil	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Aerobic
100% Renewable, aerobic	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Aerobic
100% Renewable, AD	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	Renewable resource	AD



COD removal efficiency	92.67%a	Assume all biodegradable compounds are digested
N removal efficiency	46.03%a	 
C flow	Biodegradable C converted to CO2 and released to atmosphere	Biodegradable C is converted to biogas with a composition of 65% CH4 and 35% CO2b
Energy recovery	N/A	CHP system – 30% of energy contained in biogas (calorific value 21.48 MJ m−3 biogas) is recovered as electricity; 30% recovered electricity is used on-site for AD operation and surplus electricity is exported to the China national grid; thermal energy is wastedc


Current scenario	Enzymatic hydrolysis	Fossil	Fossil
Corn stover	Enzymatic hydrolysis	Renewable resource	Fossil
Corn stover 100% bioenergya	Enzymatic hydrolysis	Renewable resource	Renewable resource
Softwood chips	Dilute acid hydrolysis	Renewable resource	Fossil
Softwood chips 100% bioenergya	Dilute acid hydrolysis	Renewable resource	Renewable resource

 	Fig. 4  ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus) for PHBV production based on corn-stover with enzymatic hydrolysis or softwood chip with dilute acid pretreatment and hydrolysis (unit: 1 kg PHBV, method: Eco-indicators 99 H v2.08).	 

 	Fig. 5  Characterized fossil fuel profiles (MJ surplus). (A) ‘Cradle-to-factory-gate’ indicative comparison of current corn-glucose based PHBV scenarios vs. petrochemical polymers (unit: 1 kg granulate, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08). (B) ‘Cradle-to-grave’ indicative comparison of corn-glucose based PHBV current and future scenarios vs. petrochemical polymer products (unit: 1 kg product, method: Eco-indicator 99 H V2.08; PHBV future scenario = 100% bioenergy and 80% C-utilization efficiency).	 
AD	anaerobic digestion
aLCA	attributional life cycle assessment
EI 99 H	Eco-Indicator 99 hierarchist version
EfW	Energy-from-Waste
HDPE	high density polyethylene
LCA	life cycle assessment
LCI	life cycle inventory analysis
LCIA	life cycle impact assessment
LDPE	low density polyethylene
PET	polyethylene terephthalate
PHBV	polyhydroxybutyrate-valerate
PHB	poly-(β-hydroxybutyrate)
PP	polypropylene
WRATE	Waste and Resources Assessment Tool for the Environment
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2gc36546d
‡ Current address: Centro de Estudios Ambientales, Universidad Austral de Chile.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
