Realizing a new class of hybrid organic–inorganic multifunctional perovskite   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01327B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01327B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10640-10650Realizing a new class of hybrid organic–inorganic multifunctional perovskite†

        
          
            S. T. 
            Williams‡
a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Rajagopal‡
a, 
      
        
          
            S. B. 
            Jo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C.-C. 
            Chueh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            T. F. L. 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Kraeger
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            A. K.-Y. 
            Jen
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2120, USA. E-mail: ajen@u.washington.edu
bDepartment of Biology & Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Received 
      12th February 2017
    , Accepted 7th May 2017First published on 8th May 2017AbstractModification of CH3NH3PbI3 and related hybrid organic–inorganic semiconductors has become an increasingly important effort because of the need to control fundamental material properties. Herein, we closely study material growth to identify the most significant controlling variables determining morphological evolution in a new class of hybrid perovskite alloy. Specifically, drop-casting based perovskite analysis shows that CH3NH3Pb(Mn)yI3, CH3NH3Pb(Fe)yI3, CH3NH3Pb(Co)yI3, and CH3NH3Pb(Ni)yI3 constitute a unique class of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite in which growth route most strongly determines morphology. Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni consistently modify CH3NH3PbI3 growth, enabling direct perovskite nucleation to compete with growth through solvent induced intermediate states. We show unambiguously that solvent-perovskite co-crystal formation is responsible for the rod-like thin-film morphology that a great deal of work optimizing perovskite growth in planar heterojunction solar cells endeavors to circumvent. In addition to providing insight into the role of growth route in morphological evolution, we also identity the impact of CH3NH3I stoichiometry and the impact of magnetic properties on growth as secondary variables that significantly affect optoelectronic properties. Leveraging this understanding to minimize the impact of morphological phenomena on performance, we closely analyze the compositional impact of these transition metals on optoelectronic quality using CH3NH3Pb(Fe)yI3 as a model system showing that transition metal inclusion of this type leads to trap-assisted recombination within the perovskite bulk that both sharply limits Jsc and causes significant hysteresis. By comparing device performance of Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni based systems, we show that Mn relieves this sharp limitation on Jsc and almost completely eliminates hysteresis. CH3NH3Pb(Mn)yI3 thus allows the implementation of direct perovskite nucleation while minimizing the deleterious impact of transition metal inclusion. PL analysis shows that this material is also more emissive than CH3NH3PbI3, making it ideal for light production as well. Methodology and insights developed herein outline a generalizable approach for navigating complexity of perovskite compositional modification.
Introduction
Since the first application of CH3NH3PbI3 in solar cells,1 the explosive rise of perovskite photovoltaics has stimulated development of the hybrid organic–inorganic AMX3 material system. Developing strategies to modify the hybrid perovskite lattice has become a dominant theme in the perovskite field because of the need to modify material properties like ion diffusivity,2 carrier concentration,3 band gap,4,5 and thermodynamic stability.6 This effort has been directed at different sites in the perovskite lattice with varying degrees of success.5,7–24 Initial attempts to realize CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (ref. 5) and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (ref. 7) solid solutions gave way to realizations of photoinstability in CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx (ref. 8) and large scale loss of Cl in CH3NH3PbI3−xClx.7,9 Exploration of CH3NH3SnI3 (ref. 10) has led to identification of anomalous band-gap behaviour in CH3NH3Pb1−xSnxI3 (ref. 11) and the utility of Sn in addressing material issues like the photoinstability of CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx.12 The organic cation has received significant attention as well, with work on materials employing variants of CH3NH3+ like formamidinium,13 Cs,14 and Rb15 giving way to realization of new routes to increase material stability.16–18 Efforts in compositional modification have even begun to reach into more exotic areas of the periodic table.19–23
Despite the aggressive effort that has led to the rapid growth of this area of research, challenges in understanding relationships between material growth, morphology, and resulting properties have complicated progress. In the early progression of research directed toward compositional engineering, this issue manifested in difficulty in understanding how Cl modifies CH3NH3PbI3. Initially it was thought that a substitutional alloy was readily realized with significant amounts of Cl,7 but over time it became clear that instead of remaining in the perovskite film, the vast majority of Cl leaves the system.9 Rather than a simple change in composition, this revealed that the impact of Cl on perovskite was partially due to a dramatic impact on morphology caused by a modification of growth route.25
Morphology is determined by many synthetic parameters, and it is difficult to identify how growth route affects morphology because of the convoluting impacts of solution concentration, annealing profile, and other synthesis conditions. We have previously shown that because of the competing growth routes Cl inclusion establishes, solution aging, solution composition, and growth conditions all become significant in determining the exact material consequences of Cl inclusion.25 Despite the importance of morphology, the subtle compositional modification induced by Cl has also proven to have an impact,26 illustrating the inherent complexity of compositional engineering in hybrid perovskites.
When it comes to understanding how a new element modifies a material, especially one as complex as CH3NH3PbI3, understanding material growth is paramount. It has been shown in many ways that morphology of pure hybrid perovskite is a strong determinant of resulting properties. Adding another level of complexity like the use of Cl, or various other less well studied species, creates the possibility for new kinds of chemical processes,9,25 phase separation events,8 complex secondary phases,20 and compositional gradients,24 making morphology and growth even more important considerations for the compositional engineering of hybrid perovskites.
Because the coordination structure created by Pb is at the core of what makes hybrid perovskites and their ideal properties possible, it is not easy to replace. Differences in how bonding occurs between metal ions and halogens lead to a great deal of complexity in how new metal species modify CH3NH3PbI3.21,22,27–30 Herein, we study how a set of closely related transition metals (Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) modify CH3NH3PbI3 functionality and properties by first identifying what primary controlling variables determine the nature of material growth and resulting morphology. Through this effort we develop mechanistic insight into how both DMSO and this class of transition metal affect growth and morphology, allowing us to ultimately deconvolute the compositional and morphological influences of these transition metals and directly analyze their compositional impact on CH3NH3PbI3 properties.
Results
Analysis of transition metal inclusion to elucidate primary variables controlling growth and morphology
Analysis of hybrid perovskite is often done via thin films because of the intended application in thin film solar cells, but here we compliment this with a drop-casting based technique to generate more direct insight into thermodynamic tendencies inherent to the growth processes under investigation. In addition to lifting most of the kinetic limitations imposed by processes like spin-casting and solvent washing,21,22,31 this affords systems with much more material than thin films contain, making structural, compositional, and microstructural analysis more effective. Identifying underlying thermodynamic tendency via drop-casting allows more efficient identification of the significant controlling variables in material formation.
Use of metal halides as starting materials is key in identifying underlying thermodynamic tendency because the use of spectator ions like Cl− and CH3CO2− create complex kinetic limitations like spectator ion based intermediate formation and spectator ion/excess methylammonium volatilization.25,31,32 We chose pure DMSO as solvent because of its ubiquitous use in perovskite growth and its ability to mutually solvate PbI2 and transition metal iodides. Aprotic solvents like DMSO tend to encourage solvation of molecular transition metal halide units in a process reminiscent of complex ion formation during PbI2 solvation25,33 making DMSO ideal in the solution state, regardless of its potential impact in the solid state.
Solutions containing 5 at%, 10 at%, and 25 at% of each foreign element were fabricated, where at% = moles of transition metal ions/moles of total metal ions. Drop-cast films were characterized to determine the (1) impact of the new species on the lattice via XRD, (2) extent and nature of phase separation via EDS, and (3) impact of the new species on growth via SEM. Experimental details are in the ESI.†
As can be seen in the XRD patterns in Fig. 1a–d, the amount of material in drop-cast films provides a very thorough structural picture of the perovskite lattice. There are almost no contributions from impurity phases like the precursor metal halide salts or competing hybrid phases. At ∼25 at%, most of these systems begin to show slight phase separation via precursor metal halide formation indicating that the limit of solid solubility is around 25 at%. Notably, Mn and Fe display less phase separation at 25 at% than Co and Ni.
 Fig. 1  (a)–(d) XRD showing phase purity of drop cast films of Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni based transition metal perovskite alloys respectively; amount of transition metal is expressed in at%. Positions of the three strongest peaks of the pure transition metal halide salts (i.e. MnI2, FeI2, CoI2, and NiI2) are indicated with an x to show the lack of phase separation, and peaks from ITO are marked with an asterisk (*). (e) Lattice parameters calculated from diffraction patterns in (a)–(d) showing slight but consistent lattice expansion. 
Although difficult to see in Fig. 1a–d, lattice spacing is changing as transition metal is introduced. These metals are smaller than Pb2+, however we see slight but consistent lattice expansion rather than the lattice contraction previously observed21,22 (Fig. 1e). Since these transition metals are smaller than all ions in CH3NH3PbI3, this lack of lattice contraction suggests that these elements don't exclusively occupy substitutional sites within the perovskite lattice.
Because the shifts in lattice parameter are quite small, we used Rietveld refinement to more thoroughly explore the possible ways in which these transition metals become integrated into perovskite. We used three structural models to fit the XRD data in Fig. 1: direct Pb substitution by transition metal, interstitial transition metal inclusion along the c–a plane, and interstitial transition metal inclusion along the a–b plane (fitting details in the ESI†). To gauge the relative efficacy of these different models, we used each to evaluate the fractional site occupancy of Pb, I, and transition metal sites (Table S1†). The strong and simultaneous crystal orientation along both [110] and [200] directions in these drop cast films along with the assumption of constant FWHM and the ambiguity inherent in the mechanism of transition metal inclusion limit the direct quantitative insight that can be taken from this analysis. However, differentiating the potentially physically meaningful values from physically unmeaningful values produced by fitting with these three models shows that a simple model based on direct Pb substitution by transition metals does not adequately describe the behaviour of this class of hybrid perovskite alloy.
Because of the ambiguity in exactly what site these transition metals occupy in CH3NH3PbI3, we will adopt a new way of writing a formula for these perovskite alloys. We will refer to this class of transition metal perovskite alloy with the formula AM(T)yX3 where (T) is the transition metal and y is its stoichiometry relative to Pb. Table S2† shows how each composition in at% translates to a AM(T)yX3. We continue to use an amount of CH3NH3I directly proportional to total moles of metal (i.e. PbI2 + FeI2) until we optimize methylammonium iodide stoichiometry directly.
The phase purity indicated by XRD is reinforced by elemental mapping of each thick, drop cast film. As can be seen in Fig. S1,† compositional inhomogeneities only just begin to develop at ∼25 at% transition metal, with Mn and Fe based systems showing less severe inhomogeneity. Interestingly, despite the demonstrated homogenous composition in EDS mapping below 25 at% foreign species (Fig. S1†), two distinct morphologies exist (Fig. 2). Morphology in the absence of transition metal is rod-like, and as transition metal content is increased this becomes strongly out-competed by a leaf-like morphology.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM micrographs of the rod-like morphology produced by CH3NH3PbI3 growth from DMSO (drop-cast). (b)–(e) Drop cast perovskite films grown with increasing amounts (expressed in at%) of Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni respectively. The two competing transformation pathways and their microstructural consequences (rods vs. leaves) are highlighted, as well as the eventual slight precipitation. 
To understand what competing growth routes are generating these two strikingly different morphologies, we must first address the origin of the rod-like morphology that occurs in the absence of transition metal. Fig. S2† shows the morphology (SEM) and phase content (XRD) of a partially transformed, pure Pb, drop-cast perovskite film (∼50 °C for 2 h). The morphology in Fig. S2a† is identical to the morphology of fully transformed pure Pb films (Fig. 2, 90 °C for 2 h), but as Fig. S2b† shows, phase content is very different. While the fully transformed film is CH3NH3PbI3, the partially transformed film with similar morphology is primarily DMSO-PbI2-CH3NH3I,34 which implicates DMSO-PbI2-CH3NH3I formation as a likely cause of rod-like morphology (Fig. 2).
This drop casting based analysis establishes the high solid solubility of these transition metals, insight into how they become incorporated into perovskite, and an elegant demonstration of the striking consistencies with which each species modifies morphology. More importantly however, DMSO-PbI2-CH3NH3I formation and its link to the rod-like morphology that each of these transition metals dramatically modify suggests that growth route is the most significant controlling variable determining morphology.
To translate insights from our drop-casting based analysis to a context more directly relevant to solar cell preparation, we carried out a closer investigation of growth route in thin films. Because of the strikingly consistent morphological, compositional, and structural impacts of Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni, we use a single representative species (Fe) to more closely study the relationship between growth route and morphology.
Fig. S3† shows SEM images of perovskite thin films fabricated with a range of compositions. In the kinetic extreme of spin-coating, competition between growth routes is fiercer. Below y = 0.1, morphology is exclusively rod-like, but past y = 0.1 a high quality thin film forms with full substrate coverage and reasonable grain size. Past y = 0.1, films begin to require annealing to grow, but near y = 0.1, films grow readily without annealing. However, if films with less than y = 0.1 are left at room temperature a white film forms rather than perovskite, a phenomenon that will soon be addressed directly.

Fig. 3a shows XRD patterns of these CH3NH3(Fe)yPbI3 films. These films show excellent phase purity, but the uniqueness of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 is more important to note. Not only is crystallinity quite high in CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3, crystal orientation is unique. Direct analysis of the 2D XRD patterns reveals that in these CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films there is nearly complete orientation along the (100) axis (Fig. 3b). With less Fe, orientation rapidly becomes random (Fig. 3c). Transformation and resulting orientation depend weakly, but notably, on solution concentration (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD of thin films grown from 0.6 M perovskite solutions with differing amounts of Fe illustrating the intense crystallinity and unique crystal orientation of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films. Peaks marked with an asterisk (*) are from ITO. (b) A blown-up diffraction pattern of a film grown from a more dilute solution (0.4 M) is indexed to illustrate almost complete crystal orientation along the [100] direction in thin films of this composition. (c) Shows how orientation and the direct perovskite nucleation that enables it depends weakly on solution concentration of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3, and strongly on amount of transition metal. Crystal orientation increases clockwise. 
Morphological trends in these films (Fig. S3†) show that growth route is having a similar impact in thin films as was noted in the drop-casting based analysis of the same systems (Fig. 2). The structural trends in these thin films (Fig. 3) show that whatever is leading to the rod-like morphology is also leading to random crystal orientation and thus more limited long-range order, while the growth route enabled by transition metal addition is leading to almost complete collective crystal orientation and thus greater long-range order. While this is informative, we still need direct insight into the nature of the growth route created by DMSO, its morphological consequences, and how the process is being altered by transition metal inclusion.
As a first step toward more clearly understanding the impact of growth route, we investigated the impact of DMSO on thin perovskite films containing different amounts of Fe. Although there are many possible strategies for elucidating the impact of a solvent molecule like DMSO on perovskite morphology, we chose an approach that is both simple and intimately related to conditions relevant for solar cell preparation.
We fabricated perovskite thin films via spin-casting and annealing in a glovebox and then allowed the films to sit exposed to the DMSO vapor generated during deposition. A more detailed discussion is included in the ESI,† but in short, this simple experiment revealed that DMSO vapor readily invades perovskite films even at low concentrations, with eventual bleaching caused by CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation (Fig. S4†). This has also been shown by Guo et al.35 Although Fig. S4† shows that transition metal inclusion increases resistance toward this bleaching, it also shows that CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation occurs spontaneously in even completely formed CH3NH3PbI3 films at low DMSO vapor pressures created during spin-coating.
This shows unambiguously that DMSO ingress into CH3NH3PbI3 films leads to CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation, and thus it is unsurprising that CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO plays such a significant role in the morphological evolution of perovskite grown directly from DMSO. To understand more closely how CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation impacts morphology in the transition metal modified perovskite films this work aims to understand, we directly investigated the exact structural and microstructural consequences of CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation by simply fabricating three 10% Fe perovskite films in sequence.
In Fig. S5,† we show the macroscopic impact of CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation with photographs, we show its microscopic impact with SEM, and we show its impact on long range atomic order within the film with XRD. The photographs show that CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation leads to a less reflective film, SEM shows that this is a result of a reduction in film quality at the microstructural level, and XRD shows that this leads to an obliteration of the almost complete overall crystal orientation that growth with these transition metals otherwise enables.
Although this clarifies the intrinsic role of DMSO and CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO in morphological development, this does not show what process is enabled by transition metal inclusion that circumvents these issues. To directly analyse growth route, we grew spin-cast CH3NH3Pb(Fe)yI3 films with y = 0 & 0.1 (Fig. 4). XRD of CH3NH3PbI3 after room temperature annealing for 60 min (Fig. 4b) shows that the white phase that spontaneously forms is CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO. Conversely, XRD of the brown phase that forms directly after spin-coating CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 shows pure perovskite, demonstrating that direct perovskite nucleation is responsible for the high quality film formation inherent to CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3. Direct perovskite nucleation is thus also responsible for the leaf-like morphology in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 4  Characterization of the two competing transformation pathways via (a) photographs, (b) XRD of films mid transformation (60 min of room temperature annealing), and (c) SEM images of final film morphologies. Films were made from 1 M solutions. 

Fig. 4 shows that the problematic rod-like morphology and film dewetting common to perovskite fabrication is an issue inherent to solvent-perovskite co-crystal formation. This is consistent with perovskite growth from DMF (Fig. S6†), a solvent enabling an analogous solvent-perovskite co-crystal.36 This understanding is important for the field as a whole, and for this work it means that growth route is the most significant controlling variable that shapes morphology in these transition metal modified perovskite films. However, this work also shows that other synthetic conditions like atmospheric composition, solution concentration, and annealing profile modify the balance between these competing growth routes (Fig. 3, 4, S4, and S5†).
Transformation through direct perovskite nucleation in the presence of transition metal is encouraged through low solution concentrations and room temperature annealing (Fig. 3c and 4), while DMSO in the atmosphere aggressively encourages CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation (Fig. S5†). Thus, to study how these transition metals impact properties, we used relatively low solution concentrations, room temperature annealing before brief thermal annealing, and control of atmosphere (experimental details in ESI†). However, before transitioning to an analysis of how Fe and the other transition metals under investigation alter properties, two other secondary variables should be noted that significantly impact morphology and resulting optoelectronic quality in these systems.
The exact amount of transition metal in a growing perovskite film is key in determining through what route the film grows, but we also quickly realized that CH3NH3I stoichiometry impacts material quality more dramatically in these alloyed systems than it does in pure Pb perovskites.37–39 More detailed discussion is offered in the ESI,† but in short, disorder induced by excess CH3NH3I (Fig. S7a†) leads to poor material performance (Fig. S7b and S8a†). However, matching CH3NH3I stoichiometry (x = 0.9) with that of PbI2 alleviates this disorder and its functional consequences (Fig. S7b, S8b and c). The overall stoichiometry represented by x = 0.9 equates to an exact stoichiometry of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3. This formula is now exact with regard to the stoichiometry of all species in the precursor solution. This stoichiometry suggests that these transition metal species prefer interstitial inclusion, in agreement with the slight lattice expansion observed via XRD (Fig. 1) and the subsequent Rietveld refinement (Table S1†).
Beyond composition, we began to suspect that the magnetic stir-bar in our hot plate affects film formation. To explore this possibility, CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films were grown under magnetic fields of different strengths (details in ESI, Fig. S9†). A more detailed discussion is offered in the ESI,† but in short, although a strong magnetic field encourages larger grains and better coverage (Fig. S10a†), it also leads to new and subtle morphological features indicative of twinning40 and an accompanying decrease in optoelectronic quality (Fig. S11†). To substantiate this link between magnetic field and growth, Fig. S10b† shows the impact of magnetic field on crystal orientation and Fig. S10c† shows that CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 displays a paramagnetic response at room temperature. The impact of magnetic field on morphology, crystal orientation, and material performance taken together with the paramagnetic response of the material indicate new magnetic functionality in this class of transition metal perovskite alloy.41 While these magnetic properties are potentially interesting, herein we minimize their deleterious impact on morphology by shutting off magnetic stirring during annealing.
Stoichiometry and magnetic field are secondary variables that have unique impacts on material quality in this system, but as has been shown, synthetic variables like solution concentration and atmospheric conditions serve primarily to alter the balance between competing growth routes. Ultimately, this work shows that growth route is the most significant controlling variable determining morphological development in these systems. The deleterious role that DMSO can play in perovskite growth this work identifies contradicts some opinions about simple benefits of solvent molecules and intermediates they create,34 but as the work of Guo et al. demonstrates,35 with careful kinetic control these intermediates can become navigable and possibly even beneficial. Based on Fig. 2 and 4, as well as the rest of the work in this section, the transition metals studied here (Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni) allow direct perovskite nucleation to compete with CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation, enabling high quality films without kinetically limited processes like solvent washing.
Impact of transition metal inclusion on optoelectronic properties
Identifying that growth route is the most significant controlling variable in morphological evolution allows us to realize systems that primarily bear the compositional impact of added transition metal rather than a convolution of morphological and compositional impacts. Although this effort by no means completely eliminates the potential impact that the environment will have on morphology, the rational control over solution preparation, annealing profile, and atmospheric composition puts us in the best possible position to analyse the impact of these transition metals themselves on perovskite optoelectronic properties. Through our deep morphological study and device optimization we systematically eliminated the impact of nonidealities on material performance including the poor film quality caused by CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation (Fig. S5†), the disorder induced by excess methylammonium iodide (Fig. S7 and S8†), and the morphological impact of magnetic field (Fig. S11†). Before expanding our investigation to all species in this study (Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni), we first closely analyse the impact of transition metal incorporation on recombination using Fe perovskite alloys as a model system.
CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films preserve optical properties of CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. S8b and c†). While band-gap remains unchanged, these transition metals invariably introduce valence d-orbitals that may alter recombination kinetics despite the preservation of optical properties.42,43 The absorption of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films scale with perovskite thickness as expected (Fig. 5a), but performance does not (Fig. 5b). Specifically, Jsc does not proportionately scale with absorption (Fig. S12a†) and Voc decreases with increasing thickness which parallels FF trends (Table S3†). The ideality factor (η) of 1.6–1.8, calculated with dark I–V characteristics (Fig. S12b†), indicates dominant monomolecular recombination.44 Comparable series and shunt resistances among these devices (Fig. 5b) implicates this recombination as the cause of FF trends with thickness.
 Fig. 5  Optoelectronic characterization of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films with varying thickness via (a) UV-vis absorption spectra (photographs inset) and (b) I–V characteristics of solar cell devices. (c)–(e) Recombination analysis for different thicknesses of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films via light intensity dependence of (c) photocurrent density at short circuit condition (Vapp = 0 V) and (d) open circuit voltage; (e) variation of recombination resistance and hysteresis factor with thickness. 
Light intensity (G) dependent I–V measurements (Fig. 5c–d) and impedance spectroscopy (Fig. S13†) were performed to identify the nature, extent, and origin of this monomolecular recombination. Detailed discussion is in the ESI,† but in short, this analysis shows that Fe inclusion leads to increased monomolecular recombination via trap states created within the perovskite bulk. The consistent hysteresis in this material system (Fig. 5b) is intimately related to transition metal inclusion as hysteresis is not observed in unalloyed CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells with PEDOT:PSS and PC61BM interlayers regardless of processing.45–51
Hysteresis in perovskite solar cells is a combined effect of trap sites and ion motion.2,50,52,53 To quantify and compare hysteresis among devices,54 we define Hysteresis Factor (HF) as  where Aforward and Areverse are areas under SC → OC and OC → SC scans respectively. Larger HF was observed for thicker active layers (Table S3† and Fig. 5e), which correlates with trends in trap assisted recombination (Fig. 5c–d and S13†) and recombination resistance (Fig. 5e). This indicates that with these alloys in this device architecture, contributions from traps most strongly determine the extent of I–V hysteresis.
While this provides some insight into how these transition metals optoelectronically impact perovskite, it does not probe the potential of this class of hybrid perovskite alloy. If defect states induced by the d-orbital of the transition metal are indeed leading to some of the troublesome recombination behaviour in Fe based alloys, it is possible that the differing energetics and occupancy of d-orbitals belonging to the other transition metals21 in this study may alter these limitations.
In the previous section, we identified both that growth route is the most significant controlling variable in the morphological evolution of these transition metal modified perovskites (Fig. 4) and that each of the four transition metals studied (Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni) modify growth route in essentially the same manner (Fig. 2). This combined with consistent high solid solubility of these species (Fig. 1 and S1†), our insight into the importance of stoichiometry (Fig. 3, S3, S6, and S8†), and the impact of environmental conditions in affecting transformation route (Fig. 3c, S4, and S5†) allow us to compare the compositional impacts of Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni with minimal convolution from morphological differences. This is evidenced by the consistent morphology and absorption profiles of CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3, CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3, CH3NH3Pb(Co)0.1I3, CH3NH3Pb(Ni)0.1I3 thin films made via optimized growth conditions and stoichiometry identified above (details in ESI†) (Fig. S14†). Band gaps are comparable to that of CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. S14b, S8b and c†).21,22
Solar cell devices based on each different perovskite alloy display distinct characteristics in terms of device performance and I–V hysteresis (Table S4† and Fig. 6a). The CH3NH3Pb(Ni)0.1I3 devices show the worst performance and highest HF, with steadily increasing performance and decreasing HF as we work backwards through the periodic table from Ni → Co → Mn (Table S4†). The difference in performance between Fe and Mn based devices is slight, but hysteresis that is ubiquitously present in CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 devices (Fig. 5 and Table S3†) is negligible in CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 devices (Fig. 6a and Table S4†).
 Fig. 6  (a) I–V characteristics of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 solar cell devices demonstrating the influence of different transition metal inclusion (T = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) on photovoltaic performance and hysteresis. (b) I–V characteristics of solar cell devices with varying film thickness of CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3; a less dramatic increase in hysteresis with thickness is observed in sharp contrast to the CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 case discussed earlier. (c) Emission of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 alloys under 1 μJ cm−2 365 nm excitation; all spectra were corrected with respect to excitation pulse to accommodate the luminescent quantum yield. (d) Transient photoluminescence dynamics of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 alloys; the data for a ∼200 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by solvent washing was included for reference. 
To establish if this indicates that CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 minimizes the severity of recombination caused by transition metal inclusion, we fabricated a series of devices with increasing perovskite thickness in the same fashion as in Fig. 5b. In contrast to the case of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 (Fig. 5b), the CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 devices showed minimal increase in hysteresis with increasing thickness (Fig. 6b).
As has been noted, growth route is the most significant controlling variable in morphological evolution in these systems, but synthetic variables like solution concentration (Fig. 3c) have an influence on which route perovskite growth proceeds through. When looking at the data in Fig. 6b, it is important to note that Mn slightly less aggressively alters perovskite transformation compared to Fe (Fig. 2). The increased tendency to transform through CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO with increasing solution concentration noted in the case of Fe (Fig. 3c) becomes uniquely problematic in CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 films deposited from solutions above 0.8 M (Fig. S15†). Morphological problems are likely the dominant cause of suppressed performance for devices with CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 films made from 1 and 1.2 M solutions.
In the case of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3, increasing perovskite thickness does not increase Jsc despite the observation that absorption scales appropriately with thickness (Fig. 5a–b). Despite the complication with growth in thick CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 films, the series of Mn based devices show that Jsc is not sharply limited as in CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 analogues (Fig. S12a†). Voc also increases with thickness for CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 devices (until problems with growth set in at 1 M) compared to the monotonic decrease observed in CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 devices (Table S3 and S5†). Thus, the CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 device made with a ∼160 nm perovskite film (0.8 M solution) yielded the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) in this study (Fig. S16a and Table S5†). Fig S16b† shows scan rate dependent I–V characteristics for a typical CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 device made with a ∼160 nm active layer demonstrating the minimization of hysteresis in this alloy.
Dramatic reduction of hysteresis and elimination of the strict limit on Jsc and Voc with thickness suggest that Mn minimizes the impact of deleterious trap-assisted recombination inherent to transition metal inclusion in CH3NH3PbI3. To refine material insight that can be drawn from this trend in performance, we used time resolved photoluminescence (trPL) spectroscopy to compare CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 films (details in ESI†). Fig. 6c and d compare emission spectra and radiative decay kinetics for each alloy under 365 nm excitation with 1 μJ cm−2 fluence. This excitation condition corresponds to a charge carrier density in the range of 1017 cm−3, which is close to the onset of amplified spontaneous emission. Although Mn minimizes the deleterious impact of transition metal inclusion, emission did not persist the longest in this system. Rather, the dominance of fast radiative decay over non-radiative loss in this system led to a relatively short lifetime but a significant increase in quantum yield compared to all other alloyed systems, as well as pure CH3NH3PbI3. On the other hand, despite showing lower performance and larger HF than both Mn and Fe based alloys, CH3NH3Pb(Co)0.1I3 clearly showed the longest carrier lifetime within this class of perovskite alloy (Table S6†).
Two primary things distinguish the optoelectronic behaviour of CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3. Firstly, CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 is much more emissive than all other materials in this class of perovskite alloy. Secondly, together with peculiar luminescence efficiency, the relatively short lifetime of CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 strongly implies an abnormally high radiative bimolecular recombination rate rather than the fast loss of charge carrier density mediated by defective traps, in stark contrast to other alloys studied.
The inclusion of transition metals leads to fundamental alterations in recombination processes originating from modification of band structure, creation of trap sites, and/or modification of trap site populations and distributions.55,56 Klug et al.21 have found that transition metals can alter band positions despite invariance of band gap. Their modelling of these alloys indicated that the energy of states generated by transition metals are dependent on what metal is used,21 possibly to the extent of moving trap states near or within bands. As we have shown, the impact that these transition metals have on perovskite growth, crystallinity, and morphology is comparable. Counterintuitive distinctions between CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 and CH3NH3Pb(Co)0.1I3 may point to complex modifications to band structure through states Mn and Co create. Regardless, minimization of the deleterious impact of trap-assisted recombination and markedly improved quantum yield offered by CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3 make this system ideal for tuning material growth and properties for optoelectronic applications.
Conclusions
Study of a new class of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite alloy was enabled through a deep morphological investigation revealing growth route to be the most significant variable controlling morphological evolution. We developed a drop-casting based technique to analyse material consequences of alloying with new species, and through this showed that Fe, Mn, Co, and Ni have comparably high solubility in CH3NH3PbI3, comparable impacts on the lattice, and a comparably dramatic impact on growth route. Although DMSO is ideal in the solution state, we found that it causes CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation which leads to the rod-like thin film morphology that a great deal of work in the perovskite field endeavours to circumvent via creative processing techniques like 2-step deposition and solvent washing. We found that transition metal inclusion allows direct perovskite nucleation to strongly compete with CH3NH3I-PbI2-DMSO formation. Although we found that solution concentration, atmospheric composition, and annealing profile all impact the route through which transformation proceeds, CH3NH3I stoichiometry and magnetic field have unique optoelectronic consequences that should be considered when studying this class of perovskite alloy.
This extensive analysis of growth allowed us to minimize convolution from morphological issues and directly analyse the compositional impact of transition metal inclusion on optoelectronic properties of CH3NH3PbI3. With Fe based alloys as a model system, we closely studied recombination behaviour and its impact on photovoltaic performance and J–V hysteresis. Although this revealed that trap-assisted recombination induced by transition metal inclusion is problematic, extending this functional analysis to the other transition metals discussed revealed that Mn mitigates the impact of trap-assisted recombination inherent to this class of transition metal perovskite alloy and significantly enhances photoluminescence quantum yield. In addition to this functional analysis, this study also gives insight into other currently relevant aspects of perovskite design including the magnetic properties these transition metals impart,41 the origin of complex J–V hysteresis,38,57 the impact of morphological phenomena like CH3NH3I induced disorder37–39 and field induced twinning,40 and the roles of transformation route25,31 and solvent induced intermediates35 in determining morphology. Methodology and insights developed herein provide a general approach for navigating the complexity of perovskite compositional modification.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR-1608279), the Office of Naval Research (N00014-14-1-0246), the Department of Energy SunShot (DE-EE0006710), and the Asian Office of Aerospace R&D (FA2386-15-1-4106). A. K.-Y. Jen thanks the Boeing-Johnson Foundation for financial support This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-0718124 and DGE-1256082. This work was made possible by the Molecular Analysis Facility at the University of Washington.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. Katsiev, E. Alarousu, R. Comin, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, E. H. Sargent, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 295–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kitazawa, Y. Watanabe and Y. Nakamura, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 3585–3587 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, T. H. Thomas, S. E. Dutton, K. C. Goedel, F. C. Hanusch, M. L. Lai, U. Steiner, T. Bein, P. Docampo, D. Cahen and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2501–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y.-Y. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu, H. Xiang, X.-G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. Wei, Arxiv Prepr.,  2015, arXiv:1506.01301.
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
H. Yu, F. Wang, F. Xie, W. Li, J. Chen and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7102–7108 CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061 CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, S. B. Jo, C.-C. Chueh, S. Williams, C.-C. Huang, J. K. Katahara, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7739–7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, D.-J. Seol, A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17939–17945 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem.
Res., 2017, 50, 487–491 CrossRef .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pérez-del-Rey, D. Forgács, E. M. Hutter, T. J. Savenije, D. Nordlund, P. Schulz, J. J. Berry, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9839–9845 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Navas, A. Sánchez-Coronilla, J. Jesús Gallardo, J. Carlos Piñero, D. De los Santos, E. I. Martín, N. C. Hernández, R. Alcántara, C. Fernández-Lorenzo and J. Martín-Calleja, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 141–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T.-W. Wang, X. Dang, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 236–246 CAS .
L. A. Frolova, D. V. Anokhin, K. L. Gerasimov, N. N. Dremova and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4353–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Chen, F. Ye, T. Zhao, F. Tang, A. Rajagopal, Z. Jiang, S. Jiang, A. K.-Y. Jen, Y. Xie, J. Cai and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017 DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00847 .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1–27 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Williams, F. Zuo, C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, P.-W. Liang and A. K.-Y. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10640–10654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
J. T.-W. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Pathak, W. Zhang, D. W. DeQuilettes, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, J. Huang, P. K. Nayak, J. B. Patel, H. A. Mohd Yusof, Y. Vaynzof, R. Zhu, I. Ramirez, J. Zhang, C. Ducati, C. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, D. S. Ginger, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892–2901 CAS .
D. Yang, W. Ming, H. Shi, L. Zhang and M. Du, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Williams, C. Chueh and A. K.-Y. Jen, Small, 2015, 11, 3088–3096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Moore, H. Sai, K. W. Tan, D.-M. Smilgies, W. Zhang, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2350–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Katzin, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1957, 4, 187–204 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, K. Shoyama, W. Sato, Y. Matsuo, K. Inoue, K. Harano, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15907–15914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 711–713 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, S. C. Watthage, A. B. Phillips, B. L. Tompkins, R. J. Ellingson and M. J. Heben, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4612–4619 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, H. Lu, F. Xie, S. Zhou and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1411–1419 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ke, J. Yan, A. Zhang, B. Zhang and Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 91904 CrossRef .
M. U. Rothmann, W. Li, Y. Zhu, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, J. Etheridge and Y.-B. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Náfrádi, P. Szirmai, M. Spina, H. Lee, O. V. Yazyev, A. Arakcheeva, D. Chernyshov, M. Gibert, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13406 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Shao, D. Yao, H. Gao, Y. Liu, W. Yu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2239–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Ávila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhao, S. T. Williams, C.-C. Chueh, D. W. DeQuilettes, P.-W. Liang, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27475–27484 RSC .
A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, C.-C. Chueh and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Momblona, O. Malinkiewicz, C. Roldán-Carmona, A. Soriano, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, M. Scheepers, E. Edri and H. J. Bolink, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 81504 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levine, P. K. Nayak, J. T.-W. Wang, N. Sakai, S. Van Reenen, T. M. Brenner, S. Mukhopadhyay, H. J. Snaith, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16399–16411 CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, B. T. Phelan, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14750–14755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, supplemental discussion, and supplemental data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01327b‡ Spencer T. Williams and Adharsh Rajagopal contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a)–(d) XRD showing phase purity of drop cast films of Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni based transition metal perovskite alloys respectively; amount of transition metal is expressed in at%. Positions of the three strongest peaks of the pure transition metal halide salts (i.e. MnI2, FeI2, CoI2, and NiI2) are indicated with an x to show the lack of phase separation, and peaks from ITO are marked with an asterisk (*). (e) Lattice parameters calculated from diffraction patterns in (a)–(d) showing slight but consistent lattice expansion.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM micrographs of the rod-like morphology produced by CH3NH3PbI3 growth from DMSO (drop-cast). (b)–(e) Drop cast perovskite films grown with increasing amounts (expressed in at%) of Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni respectively. The two competing transformation pathways and their microstructural consequences (rods vs. leaves) are highlighted, as well as the eventual slight precipitation.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD of thin films grown from 0.6 M perovskite solutions with differing amounts of Fe illustrating the intense crystallinity and unique crystal orientation of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films. Peaks marked with an asterisk (*) are from ITO. (b) A blown-up diffraction pattern of a film grown from a more dilute solution (0.4 M) is indexed to illustrate almost complete crystal orientation along the [100] direction in thin films of this composition. (c) Shows how orientation and the direct perovskite nucleation that enables it depends weakly on solution concentration of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3, and strongly on amount of transition metal. Crystal orientation increases clockwise.	 

 	Fig. 4  Characterization of the two competing transformation pathways via (a) photographs, (b) XRD of films mid transformation (60 min of room temperature annealing), and (c) SEM images of final film morphologies. Films were made from 1 M solutions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optoelectronic characterization of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films with varying thickness via (a) UV-vis absorption spectra (photographs inset) and (b) I–V characteristics of solar cell devices. (c)–(e) Recombination analysis for different thicknesses of CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 films via light intensity dependence of (c) photocurrent density at short circuit condition (Vapp = 0 V) and (d) open circuit voltage; (e) variation of recombination resistance and hysteresis factor with thickness.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) I–V characteristics of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 solar cell devices demonstrating the influence of different transition metal inclusion (T = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) on photovoltaic performance and hysteresis. (b) I–V characteristics of solar cell devices with varying film thickness of CH3NH3Pb(Mn)0.1I3; a less dramatic increase in hysteresis with thickness is observed in sharp contrast to the CH3NH3Pb(Fe)0.1I3 case discussed earlier. (c) Emission of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 alloys under 1 μJ cm−2 365 nm excitation; all spectra were corrected with respect to excitation pulse to accommodate the luminescent quantum yield. (d) Transient photoluminescence dynamics of CH3NH3Pb(T)0.1I3 alloys; the data for a ∼200 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3 film prepared by solvent washing was included for reference.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, supplemental discussion, and supplemental data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01327b
‡ Spencer T. Williams and Adharsh Rajagopal contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
