Single-particle to single-particle transformation of an active type organic μ-tubular homo-structure photonic resonator into a passive type hetero-str ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP01295G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01295G
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15528-15533Single-particle to single-particle transformation of an active type organic μ-tubular homo-structure photonic resonator into a passive type hetero-structure resonator†

        
          
            Uppari 
            Venkataramudu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Dasari 
            Venkatakrishnarao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Naisa 
            Chandrasekhar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mahamad Ahamad 
            Mohiddon§
b and 

        
          
            Rajadurai 
            Chandrasekar
          
        
      *a
aFunctional Molecular Nano/Micro Solids Laboratory School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500046, India. E-mail: r.chandrasekar@uohyd.ac.in
bCentre for Nanotechnology, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500046, India
Received 
      25th February 2016
    , Accepted 14th May 2016First published on 17th May 2016AbstractSelf-assembled hexagonal organic submicrotubes, upon electronic excitation with an UV laser, display an active type polarized whispering gallery mode (WGM) resonance in the visible (Vis) range (400–600 nm). Due to the photonic cavity effect the tubes show fluorescence (FL) signal intensity 5× greater than the corresponding powder state. Furthermore, the same tubes, which are passive to a visible laser, produce yellow-orange emitting carbonaceous lumps when burnt with an intense laser beam (42 mW) forming a chemically binary heterogeneous structure. The hetero-structure upon excitation with a visible laser at the passive tubular part showed emission in the Vis-Near infrared (NIR) range (500–800 nm) with WGMs thus producing a passive/active type hetero-structure photonic resonator.
1. Introduction
Nano- and micro-scale organic solids or particles are evolving as promising hi-tech materials for realizing future photonic device applications.1–3 In recent times, single particle μ-FL spectroscopy studies down to ∼1 μm scale demonstrated that organic particles can act as unique photonic components such as active4,5 or passive6 optical waveguides, optical micro-filters,7,8 micro-lasers,9,10 optical micro-modulators,11 and micro-resonators12,13. Among these properties, micro-resonators or micro-cavities are crucial to applications for instance, optical filters,7,8 solar cells,14 micro-lasers,9,10 label free bio-sensing15etc. The properties of a resonating organic particle are determined by its shape, size and emission band width. For example, dielectric materials with circular cross-sections such as spheres, rings, toroid, disk, hemispheres, fibres, tubes, and support WGM resonance.16
Within the WGM resonator, constructive interference of circulating light occurs when the optical path length (circumference) is an integral multiple of the wavelength of the light,15i.e. m(λ/n) = 2πR, where m is the mode number with an integer value, λ is the resonant wavelength, R is the resonator radius, and n is the refractive index. These multiple constructive interference phenomena can be seen as periodic sharp emission in the FL spectra. Additionally, due to the WGM effect, the resonator enhances the normal FL intensity by many folds.12 To date, the WGM emission has been exhibited by organic resonators of different shapes such as rings, spheres, hemispheres, and fibres, but one of the missing shapes is tubular. Tubular ring resonators have advantages over the other resonators as the air (n = 1) medium within a hollow area and around the tube provides a tight confinement of the trapped light (Fig. 1c). In particular, the tubular resonators with a hexagonal cross-section are interesting and recently ZnO hexagonal tubes showed wall thickness (T) dependent mode patterns.17 So far almost all the reported resonators are active type in nature i.e., the electronic excitation of a molecular building block followed by trapping the FL light. A passive type resonator can be realized in a photonic hetero-structure waveguide when it is comprised of chemically distinctive active and passive type segments. For example, a visible light active structure, locally created in a visible light passive waveguide, might act as a passive type resonator if the excitation and detection are performed in the passive part of the waveguide. To our knowledge, there is no report verified this concept due to difficulties in creating hetero-structures displaying excitation wavelength dependent emissions. There are reports, which demonstrated both the active and passive type wave guiding tendency of a single epitaxially grown binary hetero-structure24 and a self-assembled single homostructure.25
 Fig. 1  (a) Self-assembly of molecule 1 into hexagonal microtubes. (b) Solid state absorbance of 1. The inset shows the field-emission electron microscopy image of a microtube. (c) FL image and spectrum of an active type submicrotubular resonator excited with a 355 nm UV laser. The cartoon represents the length (L), radius (R), and thickness (T) of a submicrotube. n stands for the refractive index. (d) FL image and spectrum of a tip burnt tube (hetero-structure) acting as a passive resonator under visible laser excitation. The bottom cartoon represents the passive type photonic heterostructure resonator. 
Recently, for the first time, we have demonstrated the passive type wave guiding tendency of organic submicro-tubes down to the single particle level.6,18,19,22 These organic hexagonal submicro-tubes were fabricated via solvent-assisted self-assembly of a back-to-back coupled 2,6-bis(pyrazolyl) pyridine (BPP) units connected through a biphenyl molecule 1.20 These tubes acted as passive optical waveguides upon excitation with visible lasers, since the laser energy is outside the molecular absorption window (Fig. 1b).18 In this work we present: (i) active type WGM resonating action of submicro-tubes self-assembled from 1. (ii) Single-particle to single particle in situ transformation of an active type homo-structure submicro-tubular resonator into a passive type hetero-structure resonator using a high power laser, (iii) detailed microscopy examination of the hetero-structure resonator, and (iv) comparative performance analysis of these active and passive type single particle resonators using single-particle μ-FL and polarization resolved spectroscopy studies using continuous wave (CW) UV and visible lasers.
2. Experimental
The size and morphology of the submicrotubes of 1 were examined by using a Zeiss field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) operating at 5 kV. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) measurements were performed on a Tecnai G2 FEI F12 instrument operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Carbon coated TEM grids (200 Mesh Type-B) were purchased from Ted Pella Inc. USA.
The Raman spectra of the samples were recorded on a WI-Tec confocal Raman spectrometer equipped with a Peltier-cooled CCD detector. Using a 300 grooves per mm grating BLZ = 750 nm, the accumulation time was typically 10 s and the integration time was typically 1.0 s. Twenty accumulations were performed for acquiring a single spectrum. An argon ion (Ar+) laser operating at 488 nm and 633 nm (He–Ne) was used as an excitation source for the Raman scattering. The optical spectra of single particles were recorded on Wi-Tec alpha laser confocal optical microscopes equipped with Peltier-cooled CCD detectors. For excitation 355 nm and 488 nm (Ar+) lasers were used. 150× and 40× objectives were used for the measurements using 488, and 355 nm lasers, respectively (Fig. S1, ESI1†). The single particle polarization resolved experiments were carried out on a Wi-Tec alpha laser confocal optical microscope in a reflection mode. For the experiments, a 355 nm laser was focused using 40× objective onto the sample. An analyser (A) was placed between the beam splitter (BS) and the detector. All measurement data were collected in air.
3. Results and discussion
In the solid state, molecule 1 showed absorption maximum (λmax) at 330 nm with its absorption tail extending up to ∼410 nm (Fig. 1b). Electronic excitation within the molecular absorption range displayed a blue FL spectrum with a maximum at 451 nm. Excitation beyond the absorption range (with visible lasers) produced characteristic Raman signals corresponding to 1. For single particle micro-(μ)-FL spectroscopy studies (reflection mode) the tubes (n ∼ 1.6) were self-assembled on a clean glass substrate (Fig. 2a). UV laser excitation (355 nm) of one of the tips of a tube showed the active type optical wave guiding tendency along the tube axis (Fig. 2b, see the red circle). The μ-FL spectrum collected from the irradiation area showed a broad feature with an intensity maximum centered around 440 nm (Fig. 2g). Interestingly, laser irradiation away from the tube ends showed a high intensity spectrum with a periodic modulation of the FL intensity indicating resonating behaviour of the tube (Fig. 2c–g). Maximum FL intensity was detected for the localized optical excitation performed at the middle part of the tube (Fig. 2e and g). It is expected that the observed FL intensity modulation is due to the repeated total internal reflection (TIR) of the trapped FL light inside the hexagonal tube walls, thereby creating WGM resonance (Fig. 1c). Further compared to the powder state, the photonic microtubes showed five times enhancement in the FL signal intensity due to the optical cavity effect (Fig. S2, ESI†). The comparative study of the peak-to-peak separation (Δλ) between two adjacent mode numbers m and m − 1 or free spectrum range (FSR) values of different tubes is intricate by two parameters. For example, in tubular resonators, apart from diameter (D), according to a plane wave model,23 the wall thickness T and R should satisfy the relationship , so that the TIR (at the interface of tube wall and air) and optical interference can occur to produce WGMs. Although the dimension D is feasible to estimate, the measurement of T is not possible for an organic tube with a confocal optical set-up. Furthermore, several μ-FL spectroscopy measurements performed along the tube axis showed only a slight variation of the FSR values (∼11.6 to ∼12.2 nm) for the same wavelength modes (Fig. 2h–k). This variation in the FSR values can be attributed to small disparity of the tube D and T values. Interestingly the observed FL spectra consisted of pairs of several sharp lines. The observations of these split peaks are very much sensitive to the measurement positions. Generally these polarized pairs of peaks correspond to transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) WGMs indicating the orientation of the electric and magnetic fields, which appear due to the collapse of TE/TM degeneracy.16
 Fig. 2  (a) Bright-field optical micrograph of a tube. (b–f) FL images of a wave guiding tube selectively excited at five different positions. The red circles show the laser excitation and spectral collection point. (g) The corresponding FL spectra with WGM resonance. (h) Bright field image of a tube. (i) FL image of a tube with labels. (j and k) The corresponding FL spectra displaying position sensitive TM/TE modes. 
To investigate the polarization nature of the pairs of multiple sharp lines observed in the WGM resonance, polarization resolved single particle microscopy studies were performed (Fig. 3a). Generally, for the same angular mode number (m), the TM modes resonate at shorter wavelengths than TE modes.16 The intensity of these pairs of peaks (TM/TE) is sensitive to the polarizer angle (θ). For instance, the intensities of ∼480 nm (TM) and ∼485 nm (TE) modes are very much responsive to the θ values. At a polarizer angle of 90° the spectrum mostly consisted of strong TM polarized WGM resonance modes. At 45°, equal intensities of TE and TM modes were recorded. Interestingly at 0° the spectrum displayed a clear TE polarized WGMs (Fig. 3a and Fig. S3, ESI†). In agreement with the experiment the TM/TE polar plots showed vertically and horizontally oriented lobes (Fig. 3b). In tubular resonators the Q factor gives an estimation of light trapping efficiency and is given by the expression, Q = λ/Δλ; where λ is the wavelength at which a resonance occurs and Δλ is the line width of the Lorentzian resonant peak at full-width-half-maximum (FWHM). The Q factor of the tubes as a function of D exhibited an increasing trend beyond D ∼ 3.5 μm, reaching a maximum value of 280 for TM modes (Fig. 4a). The lower magnitude and the slight variation of the Q values for D values ∼2.0–3.5 μm are probably due to various loss factors such as radiation (curvature) loss due to smaller D, scattering loss due to surface inhomogeneity and leakage of the light to the surrounding at the air–organic/glass–organic interfaces as an evanescent field. The evanescent field occurs via the Goos–Hänchen shift during each TIR along the circular tube wall and it is very much dependent upon the tube T.21 Furthermore, for each mode, the TM-polarized peak showed higher Q values than the TE-polarized peak as a result of larger light loss (in comparison to TM modes) during each reflection of TM-polarized wave along the circular path.21
 Fig. 3  (a) Polarization resolved active type single particle FL spectra of a tube supporting WGM resonance (λex = 355 nm). (b) The polar plots of the emission intensity observed for TM (red line) and TE (blue line) polarized modes. 
 Fig. 4  (a) A plot of Q versus D for the TM and TE modes. (b) An AFM cantilever carrying a submicro-tube. (c and e-top) FL image and spectrum, respectively, obtained from a tube area, which is not in contact with the AFM cantilever (label a). (d and e-bottom) FL image and spectrum, respectively, obtained from a tube area, which is in contact with the cantilever (label b). 
Additionally to investigate the influence of a surface on the resonating characteristics, nanomanipulation was performed using a confocal microscope equipped with an atomic force microscope (AFM).13 One of the selected tubes was picked up by an AFM cantilever by placing some force on the tube and the cantilever carrying the tube was titled and subjected to single particle photonic studies (Fig. 4b). Upon local excitation (355 nm) of a tube area, which was not in contact with any substrate, a clear, highly resolved WGM resonance peak (Fig. 4c, see label a) was observed, whereas the tube area which was in contact with the AFM cantilever (n = 2.01) showed the poorly resolved spectrum due to the seepage of light to the high refractive index medium (Fig. 4d, see label b). Interestingly, when the tube tip (Fig. 5a) was point focused with a 488 nm Ar+ laser beam (power = 42 mW), the tip started burning22 in a few seconds with a bright yellow orange radiance forming a black colour lump (Fig. 5b, c and Video S1, ESI†) at the tube ends. Prolonged burning decreased the tube length by converting the organic matter into a dark carbonaceous mass (Fig. S4, ESI†) creating a hetero-structure. FESEM studies of the same hetero-structure (attached to a cantilever) revealed the formation of a nearly spherical lump with a smooth surface morphology shaped by the surface tension effect (Fig. 5d and e). Furthermore, energy dispersive elemental analysis (EDS) of the lump exhibited the presence of C and N elements. The AFM cantilever carrying a hetero-structure was carefully transferred into a carbon coated TEM grid for further investigation (Fig. 5f). The TEM micrograph exhibited a dark contrast without any notable distinction between the tube and the lump, but selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis of the tube and the lump demonstrated their single crystalline (with diffraction spots) and amorphous natures, respectively (Fig. 5h and j). Single particle μ-Raman spectroscopy studies (633 nm: He–Ne) of a hetero-structure exhibited a strong Raman signal from the tubular area, whereas the lumps showed a signal corresponding to the sp2 carbon indicating a possible conversion of the building block molecules 1 into other low band-gap organic solid matter (Fig. S5, ESI†). The chemical composition of the visible light absorbing and yellow-orange emitting lump is not clear yet. Nevertheless the final hetero-structure consisted of both active and passive type binary constituents which are chemically and electronically different.
 Fig. 5  (a) Bright-field confocal micrograph of a single tube with carbonaceous lumps at both ends. (b and c) FL images of the same tube captured during tip burning. (d and e) FESEM images of the tube with spherical lumps. (f, g and i) TEM image of the tube with lumps on its both ends. (h) Selected area electron micrograph collected from the lump shown in g. (j) Selected area electron micrograph collected from the tube body shown in i. 
The homo-structure submicrotubes when excited with a 488 laser displayed a Raman spectrum, which corresponds to molecule 1 (Fig. 6b). However during selective excitation (488 laser) and collection at the carbonaceous lump (active part) of the chemically binary hetero-structure (Fig. 6a) showed a broad Vis-NIR emission (500–750 nm) with a weak signature of WGMs (Fig. 6c and g). Conversely when the excitation (488 laser) and collection were performed at the visible light passive part (tubular part) of the hetero-structure a notable yellow-orange FL spectrum (500–750 nm) together with Raman signals (sharp: CC; 1609 cm−1) was observed due to the contributions from both tube (Raman) and lumps (FL) (Fig. 6d–f). Remarkably the broad Vis-NIR spectrum is also comprised of strong WGM resonance peaks with a very high FSR values. This observation demonstrates the occurrence of the passive type WGM resonance in the passive tubular part attached to FL lumps. The mechanism of the formation of the passive type WGM resonance within the hetero-structure is as follows: upon CW excitation with a 488 laser, the wave guiding tube passively propagates the 488 nm radiation towards carbonaceous lumps. Due to the absorbance of the radiation the carbonaceous matter reaches electronically excited states and subsequently releases a broad 500–750 nm range emission and act as a FL source. Apart from scattering loss, some part of this emission passively propagates into the hexagonal tubular structure via TIR and generates WGM resonance.
 Fig. 6  (a) An AFM cantilever carrying a hetero-structure tube. (b) Single particle μ-Raman spectrum of a homo-structure tube. (c–g) Selected area single particle μ-Raman/FL spectra of a hetero-structure excited (488 nm) at the right lump, three different areas of the tube, and left lump, respectively. The red circles show the excitation/collection spot. The insets show the corresponding FL images. 
The FWHM of each peak was rather broad reducing the Q value. This is possibly due to light loss into the high n cantilever, and reduced FL photon lifetimes which broaden the resonance modes, resulting in low quality factors. An illustration defining the transformation of an active type single-particle resonator into a passive type single-particle heterostructure resonator is given in Fig. 7. Furthermore, a similar hetero-structure resonator created on a glass surface (Fig. S6, ESI†) demonstrated WGM resonance in the Vis-NIR spectrum (500–750 nm) with TE/TM modes and slightly improved Q values (∼200).
 Fig. 7  (a) Single particle μ-FL spectrum of a tube supporting WGMs. (b) Single particle μ-Raman spectrum of a tube, which is passive to 488 nm light. (c) Single particle μ-FL/Raman spectra of a burnt tube. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, our single particle μ-FL spectroscopy experiments demonstrated the occurrence of active type polarized WGM resonances (TE or TM) from a blue emitting homo-structure submicro-tubular resonator. In comparison to the powder state the tube showed nearly 5× times increase of the FL intensity due to the photonic cavity effect. Furthermore these active type of homo-structure submicrotubes were transformed into (active/passive) chemically binary hetero-structures by intense laser burning of the tube tips. The burnt tip (lump) part was composed of carbonaceous visible light active matter. Remarkably, upon excitation of a visible light passive part of the hetero-structure with a 488 laser displayed WGM resonances in the Vis-NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum together with Raman signals. This is the first example of a passive type organic WGM resonator and we believe our original resonator design strategy can be applied to fabricate chemically heterogeneous μ-scale photonic structures with distinctive light-emitting properties for various applications.
Acknowledgements
RC acknowledges funds from UGC-UPE 2, and SERB – New Delhi (EMR/2015/000186) projects. RC thanks the Centre for Nanotechnology (CFN), UoH for the confocal FL/Raman microscopy and TEM facilities. UV and DV thank CSIR-New Delhi for SRFs.
References
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Praveen, C. Ranjith, E. Bandini, A. Ajayaghosh and N. Armaroli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4222 RSC .
S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 114, 1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhao, H. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Ma, D. Xiao and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2859 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9060 RSC .
R. Chandrasekar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7173 RSC .
K. Takazawa, J. Inoue and K. Mitsuishi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6182 CAS .
N. Chandrasekhar, S. Basak, M. A. Mohiddon and R. Chandrasekar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1488 CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Liao, X. Lu, H. Li, Z. Xu and H. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7011 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, Y. Cui, H. Xu, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, B. Chen and G. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2719 Search PubMed .
D. Venkatakrishnarao, M. A. Mohiddon, N. Chandrasekhar and R. Chandrasekar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. L. V. Narayana, D. Venkatakrishnarao, M. A. Mohiddon, A. Biswas, N. Viswanathan and R. Chandrasekar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 952 CAS .
D. Venkatakrishnarao and R. Chandrasekar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mariano, F. J. Rodríguez, P. Romero-Gomez, G. Kozyreff and J. Martorell, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4959 CAS .
M. Schubert, A. Steude, P. Liehm, N. M. Kronenberg, M. Karl, E. C. Campbell, S. J. Powis and M. C. Gather, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Wang and H. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, Z. Chen, L. Sun, W. Xie, H. Hoe Tan, J. Lu, C. Jagadishb and X. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5510 RSC .
N. Chandrasekhar, M. A. Mohiddon and R. Chandrasekar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 305 CrossRef .
P. Hui and R. Chandrasekar, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chandrasekhar and R. Chandrasekar, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2915 RSC .
J. Wang, T. Zhan, G. Huang, P. K. Chu and Y. Mei, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8, 521 CrossRef .
S. Basak and R. Chandrasekar, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1404 RSC .
J. Wiersig, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2003, 67, 023807 CrossRef .
Q. Kong, Q. Liao, Z. Xu, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. N. Tripathi, A. Dasgupta, R. Chikkaraddy, P. P. Patra, A. B. Vasista and G. V. P. Kumar, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 065002 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01295g‡ Authors UV and DV contributed equally to the work.§ Current address: Department of Science and Humanities, National Institute of Technology, Tadepalligudem 534101, Andhra Pradesh, India.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Self-assembly of molecule 1 into hexagonal microtubes. (b) Solid state absorbance of 1. The inset shows the field-emission electron microscopy image of a microtube. (c) FL image and spectrum of an active type submicrotubular resonator excited with a 355 nm UV laser. The cartoon represents the length (L), radius (R), and thickness (T) of a submicrotube. n stands for the refractive index. (d) FL image and spectrum of a tip burnt tube (hetero-structure) acting as a passive resonator under visible laser excitation. The bottom cartoon represents the passive type photonic heterostructure resonator.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Bright-field optical micrograph of a tube. (b–f) FL images of a wave guiding tube selectively excited at five different positions. The red circles show the laser excitation and spectral collection point. (g) The corresponding FL spectra with WGM resonance. (h) Bright field image of a tube. (i) FL image of a tube with labels. (j and k) The corresponding FL spectra displaying position sensitive TM/TE modes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Polarization resolved active type single particle FL spectra of a tube supporting WGM resonance (λex = 355 nm). (b) The polar plots of the emission intensity observed for TM (red line) and TE (blue line) polarized modes.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A plot of Q versus D for the TM and TE modes. (b) An AFM cantilever carrying a submicro-tube. (c and e-top) FL image and spectrum, respectively, obtained from a tube area, which is not in contact with the AFM cantilever (label a). (d and e-bottom) FL image and spectrum, respectively, obtained from a tube area, which is in contact with the cantilever (label b).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Bright-field confocal micrograph of a single tube with carbonaceous lumps at both ends. (b and c) FL images of the same tube captured during tip burning. (d and e) FESEM images of the tube with spherical lumps. (f, g and i) TEM image of the tube with lumps on its both ends. (h) Selected area electron micrograph collected from the lump shown in g. (j) Selected area electron micrograph collected from the tube body shown in i.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) An AFM cantilever carrying a hetero-structure tube. (b) Single particle μ-Raman spectrum of a homo-structure tube. (c–g) Selected area single particle μ-Raman/FL spectra of a hetero-structure excited (488 nm) at the right lump, three different areas of the tube, and left lump, respectively. The red circles show the excitation/collection spot. The insets show the corresponding FL images.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Single particle μ-FL spectrum of a tube supporting WGMs. (b) Single particle μ-Raman spectrum of a tube, which is passive to 488 nm light. (c) Single particle μ-FL/Raman spectra of a burnt tube.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01295g
‡ Authors UV and DV contributed equally to the work.
§ Current address: Department of Science and Humanities, National Institute of Technology, Tadepalligudem 534101, Andhra Pradesh, India.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
