Dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00987B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00987B
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3705-3722Dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells†

        
          
            Sining 
            Yun
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Nick 
            Vlachopoulos
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Ahsanulhaq 
            Qurashi
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shahzada 
            Ahmad
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
          
        
      b
aFunctional Materials Laboratory (FML), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710055, China. E-mail: alexsyun1974@aliyun.com; yunsining@xauat.edu.cn
bLaboratory of Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: nikolaos.vlachopoulos@epfl.ch
cCenter of Excellence in Nanotechnology, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
dBasque Center for Materials Applications and Nanostructures, Martina Casiano, UPV/EHU Science Park, Barrio Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa, Spain
Received 
      18th March 2019
    First published on 23rd May 2019AbstractTo advance the progress of photoelectrolysis, various promising devices integrated with p- and n-type photocatalysts and dye sensitized photoelectrodes have been systematically studied. This review discusses, from theory to practice, an integration strategy for state-of-the-art dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) with potential p- and n-type photo-electrocatalysts or directly with dye sensitized photoanodes and cathodes for hydrogen and oxygen production through water splitting. Thorough insight into the theoretical approach which systematically drives the photoelectrolysis reaction directly or in a coupled mode, with diverse configurations of DSSCs and other photovoltaic (PV) cells, is crucial to understand the underlying fundamental concepts and elucidate trends in such reactions, and will serve as a guide to design new electrocatalysts and their integration with new PV devices, while simultaneously underlining major gaps that are required to address the challenges. Likewise, challenges, opportunities and frontiers in tandem and hybrid perovskite electrolysis processes are also discoursed in the present tutorial review. We illustrate our analysis by encompassing these integrated systems to photo-electrolysis, artificial photosynthesis such as CO2 conversion into value-added chemical reduction-products, where advancements in new catalysts and solution-processed inexpensive PV devices can certainly enrich the overall performance of the renewable production of solar fuels, including solar driven carbonaceous fuels.
Sining Yun
Sining Yun is a Professor in the School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2007 and was a postdoctoral fellow in Yonsei University (Korea). He is a visiting professor at the State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals (China), University of Reading (UK), and Prof. Michael Grätzel and Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's laboratory at EPFL (Switzerland). He is currently a Research Director and Group Leader of Functional Materials Laboratory and the Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology of Shaanxi Province (China). His research focuses on solar energy and biomass energy. Details can be found at: http://xy.xauat.edu.cn/gnclyjs/listyjsgk.asp?id=262&bh=2080.
Nick Vlachopoulos
Dr Nick Vlachopoulos obtained his chemical engineering degree from the National Technical University of Athens, Greece (1979), and two doctorates from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA (1984), and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland (1990), respectively. He worked as a researcher in Michael Grätzel's group in EPFL (1986–1999). Later, he was employed in Denmark, Germany, Sweden and Ireland. In 2014 he returned to EPFL as a senior research scientist and lecturer in Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's team. His activities are related to the molecular electrochemistry of chemically-modified mesoscopic oxide electrodes and their application to generate electricity and fuels from sunlight.
Ahsanulhaq Qurashi
Dr Ahsanulhaq received his PhD degree in 2008 from Chonbuk National University, South Korea, and completed his postdoctoral fellowship from Toyama University, Japan (2008–2010). He joined as assistant professor in KFUPM in 2010, and became associate professor in 2016. His research is focused on the development of advanced functional nanomaterials for clean energy and chemical sensor applications. He is the editor of the book “Metal Chalcogenide Nanostructures for Renewable Energy Applications”, a subject assistant editor for the International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, and an editorial board member of Scientific Reports and MRB. He has published more than 83 papers in internationally reputed peer reviewed (ISI) journals and presented over 50 papers in various international conferences.
Shahzada Ahmad
Prof. S. Ahmad is Ikerbasque professor; his scientific interests include materials for energy applications. He obtained his PhD degree in the field of materials science and moved to the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, to work on surfaces and interfaces by scanning probe microscopy. At EPFL, he developed nanoporous films for metal-free electro-catalysis and new redox shuttles. From 2012 to 2017 he was the program director of photovoltaics at Abengoa Research, a corporate research center. He is the inventor of many patents and European research council consolidator grant awardee and among the cohort of distinguished scientists at the World Economic Forum.
Anders Hagfeldt
Anders Hagfeldt has been Professor at the Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and the Head of the Laboratory of Photomolecular Science since 2013. He obtained his PhD degree in 1993 from Uppsala University and was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL, Switzerland. Before 2014 he was professor in Physical Chemistry and the director of the Center for Molecular Devices at Uppsala University, Sweden. He is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the European Academy of Sciences, the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in Stockholm.

Key learning points
(1) How to design a dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cell.
(2) Underlying principles in the design of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(3) Potential applications of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(4) Key challenges and opportunities in the field of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(5) Potential function of catalysts for the production of solar fuels.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the significance of electrochemistry has been recognized for the development of next generation energy based devices. This view was also endorsed by the World Economic Forum by choosing “liquid fuels from sunshine” as one of the emerging technologies in 2017. With the seminal work of Edmond Becquerel on the photoelectric effect, the research community has been exploiting the idea of utilizing sunlight to harvest electric power or liquid fuels for nearly two centuries. Carbon free energy is now of utmost importance for the stabilization of CO2 emission to an acceptable or preindustrial level. The possibility of converting solar energy directly into chemical energy stored in fuels provides a solution to the challenges of intermittency in renewable energy sources, which suffer from issues such as effective storage and transport. Photoelectrochemistry provides an attractive option to produce carbon neutral renewable products by utilizing suitable electrocatalysts. Light absorption in the semiconductor depletion layer allows electrical charge formation and separation as electron–hole pairs. In the case of an n-type semiconductor layer, the holes travel to the surface, while the electrons are transported to the semiconductor layer, and the reverse process can be achieved in the case of a p-type semiconductor. The oxidizing and reducing agents available in the electrolytes capture injected photo-generated carriers and facilitate the reactions. Absorption of one photon produces one electron–hole pair, which ideally makes the quantum yield value = 1. Charge-transport limitations are currently seen as an obstacle in these systems, which can be partially solved by the addition of protic species in the corresponding electrolytes. In a similar fashion, through light-assisted photo-electrochemical reactions, several renewable products can be realized by elaborating cost-effective photoelectrodes.
In the presence of sunlight, plants have generated their food by storing chemical energy for over the last 2 billion years through the photosynthetic process. By adopting similar pathways, and mimicking the photosynthetic process, liquid fuels can be generated by harvesting solar energy. Renewable products, such as hydrogen, which is the simplest form of energy carrier, can be produced by means of either photoelectrochemical cells by performing water splitting based on direct photo-excitation at the electrodes or electrolysis cells coupled to photovoltaic (PV) devices in a self-sustainable manner. In the case of water splitting,1 an applied voltage of ca. 1.5 V for current densities of the order of 100 A m−2 or higher, i.e. of the same order of magnitude as those provided by solar cells. In accordance with the current density, a prerequisite to provide the thermodynamic driving force (1.23 V) and the required overpotentials at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, as well as the ohmic losses in the electrode materials and the electrolyte; in particular, the four-electron oxygen evolution reaction involving the coupling of several electrochemical and chemical steps is a kinetically uphill task. It is difficult to supply such voltage by a single PV cell at the maximum power point. Coupling of more than one solar cell to one or more electrolysis cells will be essential. In this respect, solar cells providing open-circuit voltages (Voc) exceeding 1 V are preferred candidates; introductory concepts on this issue are presented in the Appendix (ESI†). The possibility of providing the required power using multi-junction solar cells, for example based on III–V semiconductors, or using Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2(CIGS)-based solar cells,2 was exploited in the past; for example, two such cells in series are sufficient for water electrolysis as compared to three amorphous silicon cells, but in most of the cases the low photovoltage remains a challenge. With the recent success of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), and by tweaking the halide content, i.e. in bromide-based PSCs, a Voc of approximately 1.5 V can be easily achieved in a single junction cell.1
In the case of water-splitting, noble metal and noble metal oxide-based electrocatalysts are preferred due to their low charge-transfer overpotentials and good corrosion stability, particularly in acidic electrolytes. However, for future large-scale applications, the development of efficient and stable electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant materials, e.g. Fe, Ni, and C, is of paramount importance. In an ideal case, for the techno-economic feasibility, both the catalysts for hydrogen and oxygen evolution should be active in the same electrolyte; however, the recent development of bipolar membranes has enabled the efficient operation of electrolysers with solutions of different pHs at the anode and the cathode.
The generation and charge separation of photoexcited electrons will not be sufficient to allow the functioning of photoelectrochemical devices. For this, the generated species need to be channeled in such a way that association with an electrocatalyst can be achieved in order to facilitate the electrochemical reaction of interest. The cell in which the photoelectrode forms a charge-extracting junction in conjugation with an electrolyte by achieving equilibrium, thereby eliminating the need for a built-in p–n junction, is termed a photoelectrosynthetic cell. In this cell, when a p-type semiconductor comes into contact with an electrolyte, electrons or holes are exchanged from the electrolyte to the semiconductor, resulting in a built-in potential. This effect has the potential for implementation on a large scale; however, photoelectrosynthetic cells need to be filled with an electrolyte, which should be replaced periodically or monitored for degradation. In spite of this realistic approach, monitoring and handling large volumes of liquid electrolytes make photoelectrochemical devices impractical currently.
To overcome such issues, the strategy for utilizing PV cells for electrical current generation, which can then be fed to a separate electrolysis device for fuel generation, can be a viable option. This process, differentiated from photoelectrochemical cell operation with directly illuminated semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces, is also being exploited in a so-called artificial leaf system, where the PV element is immersed into the electrolyte or is placed in close proximity. In this case, chemical species are transported from the solar absorber to the storage site, while in a system relying on light harvesting by PV cells, electrons are transported. A PV-driven based system can intensify the value of current density and thus minimize the amount of catalyst and membranes used.
There is a trade-off between these two approaches. The transport of fluids is cheaper than that of electrical power. Also, electrical power transportation is prone to losses, while the artificial leaf process was suggested to be cost competitive. With the design and integration of a multifunction system, a facile chemical approach can be intended, which can allow for a further diminishment of the cost for solar fuel conversion. To achieve this target, new photoelectrodes, appropriate PV devices and earth-abundant electrocatalysts are being extensively exploited (ref. 1 and 2 and references therein).
Performing the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to yield fuels is another competitive way to obtain renewable energy and simultaneously close the anthropogenic carbon cycle. Despite the uphill electrochemical and associated chemical kinetics of the participating processes.3 This will also provide a solution to long-term energy storage while contributing to a balance of the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. The reaction pathways can be altered to produce a range of carbon-based products. Research efforts are being made towards increasing the yield of such targeted products to make it cost competitive, with particular emphasis on designing efficient and selective catalysts for electrochemical reduction. Some of the reported electrocatalysts, which are suitable for different reactions, are mainly inactive towards CO2 reduction. For this purpose, activated metal surfaces are being introduced to promote this reaction.1–3 To understand the underlying process and to control the catalytic activity of such a designed surface, the understanding of the related mechanistic process is of paramount importance.
2. Basic origin of dye sensitized photoelectrolytic reactions
In a classical regenerative dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC), a single redox mediator acts as a charge transporter (in a p-DSSC, it is an electron transporter) between the photoelectrode (PE) and counter electrode (CE), with no net chemical change occurring in the electrolyte between the PE and CE. The DSSC theory and operation have been discussed in several reviews.2,4
At first, the most common cases of the n-DSSC will be considered. The reactions at the PE are: (1)where D0, D* and D+ denote the reduced, photoexcited and oxidized forms of the dye, eSC− denotes the electrons injected into the semiconductor (SC) support of the dye, ePE− denotes the electrons at the conductive support of the dye/oxide layer at the PE, and M0 and M+ denote the reduced and the oxidized redox mediator, respectively. eCE− denotes the electron at the CE. The superscripts 0 and + denote relative charges and not the charges of the species themselves. At the CE, the reaction is M+ + e(CE)− → M0(2)where eCE− are electrons at the CE. In the electrolyte, transport of the mediator between the PE and CE takes place:M0(PE) → M0(CE) M(CE)+ → M(PE)+(3)No chemical change occurs in the electrolyte. In the external circuit, electrons flow from the PE to the CE and power is delivered: (4)However, as an alternative to the electrolyte without chemical change, electrolytes with two redox mediators, one interacts with the PE and the other effects charge transport between the PE and CE, can also be used. Here the most common type of dual mediator DSSC with an n-type PE and a dark (light is not required for its operation) CE, termed an n-DSSC, will be considered. The reduced form of the co-mediator M1(M01) is oxidized at the PE and the oxidized form of the mediator (M2+) is reduced at the CE, with the Fermi level (EF) of M01/M1+ being lower that of M02/M2+. EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)(5)
The reactions at the PE are (6)and at the CE M2+ + e(CE)− → M02(7)
In the electrolyte between the two electrodes, and in the proximity of the PE, the reaction taking place is M1(PE)+ + M02(PE) → M2(PE)+ + M01(PE)(8)together with transport of M02 and M2+ between the PE and CEM02(PE) → M02(CE) M2(CE)+ → M2(PE)+(9)
After cell assembly, in principle, it would be sufficient to add M01 and M2+ only, with the concentrations of M1+ and M02 being established during cell operation.
The dual mediator system is preferred over M1 alone in case of problems with M1+ due to its high coloration, low solubility, relatively poor stability or slow reaction towards the CE.5,6 Hao et al. described a DSSC with tris(4-alkoxyphenyl)-amine as M1 and a tris(bipyridine)cobalt-based coordination complex as M2. Since the concentration of M1 in the immediate proximity of the dye layer is very low, the rate of recombination reaction is lower than that with an electrolyte containing a substantial concentration. The power conversion efficiency of this system is 11.0% under simulated AM 1.5 full sun irradiation and 12.6% under 33% sun irradiation (ref. 6 and references therein).
The above system is thermodynamically equivalent to dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DSPELCs) based on combining an n-type PE and a catalytic CE of metallic conductivity (n-DSPELC), with the essential difference that a separator is interposed between the PE and CE, so that the products of the dye regeneration reaction at the PE and CE, respectively, M1+ and M02, do not react with one another. The redox reactions are formulated as one-electron reactions, with M0 and M+ denoting all species in the reduction and oxidation sides of the redox equation (ref. 2 and references therein). Thus, if the overall stoichiometry is represented by (10)then this reaction is equivalent to M0 → M1 + e−(11)
by introducing the substitutions (12)
For example, in the case of the hydrogen electrode in aqueous acidic media H2 → 2H+ + 2e− → 1/2H2 → H+ + e− M0 = 1/2H2; M+ = H+(13)and for the oxygen electrode in acidic and neutral media 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ⇔ 1/2H2O → 1/4O2 + H+ + e− M0 = 1/2H2O; M+ = 1/4O2 + H+(14)The overall DSPELC cell reaction is (15)with  indicating the contribution of light to the overall process in contrast to light absorption by the species in the electrolyte.
In their quest for efficient DSPELCs, researchers have devoted enormous efforts during the last two decades towards developing high efficiency photo-electrodes for both oxidation and reduction respectively. Several features of DSPELCs are presented in Tables 1 and 2. In the former, a list of photoelectrodes for which H2 and CO have been analytically detected is presented. In Table 2, the essential operational parameters of several DSPELCs are provided. In the cited references, the conversion efficiency of sunlight to stored chemical energy, in general less than 1%, has been cited only in two cases. There are two issues associated with the efficiency determination. First, a variety of white light sources are often used, which, unlike standardized solar simulators used for the characterization of electricity-generating DSSCs, are not easily compared to AM1.5 solar irradiance. Additionally, in several cases the tests are performed potentiostatically, in 3-electrode cells, where the potential difference between the photoelectrode (working electrode) and the dark counter electrode (auxiliary electrode) is neither regulated nor measured; the controlled parameter is the potential difference between the photoelectrode and the reference electrode. Any applied bias potential between the photoelectrode and counter electrode has to be considered in the efficiency determination, as described below.
Table 1 DSPELCs evolving dihydrogen (H2) or carbon monoxide (CO). Only publications in which the aforementioned products were analytically detected are listed




Photoelectrode
Product
Catalyst
Location of catalyst, other information
Ref.




Metal-free subporphyrin dye/n-TiO2
H2
Ru complex
Coadsorbed

7



Ru dye/n-TiO2
H2
Ru complex
Polymer-immobilized

8



Metal-free dyes on n-TiO2 and p-NiO
H2
n-TiO2:Ru complex
Both coadsorbed, tandem photoelectrochemical cell, energy conversion efficiency 0.05%

9



p-NiO:Co complex


Ru dye/n-TiO2
H2
Ru complex
Supramolecular self-assembly between the dye and catalyst, Zr4+ ions between them

10



Ru dye/n-TiO2
H2
Ru complex
Supramolecular host–guest complex between the dye and catalyst

11



Zn porphyrin dye/n-TiO2
H2
Ru complex
Supramolecular self-assembly between the dye and catalyst

12



Ru dye/n-TiO2 shell/n-SnO2 core
H2
Ru complex
Covalently attached to the dye

13



Ru dye/n-TiO2 shell/n-SnO2 core
H2
Ru complex
Covalently attached to the dye; a regenerative DSSC in series to a DSPELC; energy conversion efficiency of 0.06%

14



Metal-free dye/p-NiO
H2
Co complex
Dissolved

15



Metal-free dye/p-NiO
H2
Co complex
Covalently attached to the dye

16



Metal-free dye/p-NiO
H2
Co complex
Covalently attached to the dye or dissolved

17



Metal-free dye/p-NiO
H2
Mn–S cluster
Polymer-immobilized

18



Zn porphyrin dye/p-NiO
CO
Re complex
Covalently attached to the dye

19



Ru dye/n-TiO2
CO
Re complex
Covalently attached to the dye or coadsorbed

20





Table 2 A comparison of the performances (IPCE/STH/IQE) of different DSPELCs for water splitting operating under different electrolytesa




Cell type
Irradiation area
PCE/IPCE/STH/IQE
Electrolyte
Ref.





a PCE: power conversion efficiency; IPCE: incident photon conversion efficiency; STH: solar-to-hydrogen; IQE: internal quantum efficiency.





Tandem redox system, 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO-Co)
0.25 cm2
PCE = 8.4% in DSSC
TEMPO added to a standard Co-based electrolyte

5



DSSC, tandem redox system, Co complex as a mediator and tris(4-alkoxyphenyl)-amine as a co-mediator
0.25 cm2
PCE = 11.0% in DSSC
Amine added to a standard Co-based electrolyte

6



Tandem cell, metal-free dye/n-TiO2 with a covalently linked Ru molecular catalyst; metal-free dye/p-NiO, coadsorbed Co molecular catalyst
1 cm2
IPCE = 25% at 380 nm (two-electrode cell, no bias), STH = 0.05%
Phosphate buffer pH = 7

9



Metal-free subporphyrin dye/n-TiO2, coadsorbed Ru molecular catalyst
0.28 cm2
IPCE = 40% at 520 nm
NaPi pH = 7.3

7



Zn porphyrin dye/n-TiO2, covalently-linked Ru molecular catalyst
0.28 cm2
IPCE = 18% at 424 nm
Sodium phosphate buffer pH = 7.5

12



Ru dye/n-TiO2 and supramolecularly attached Ru catalyst, Zr4+ ions between the dye and catalyst
0.8 cm2
IPCE = 4.1% at 450 nm
Na2SO4 solution at pH = 6.4

10



Ru dye/n-TiO2, supramolecularly assembled into a Ru molecular catalyst (host–guest interaction)
0.8 cm2
IPCE = 7% at 460 nm
Phosphate buffer pH = 7

11



Ru dye/n-TiO2/n-SnO2 (core shell), covalently-attached Ru molecular catalyst
0.28 cm2
STH = 0.06%
Alkaline pH = 9

14



Ru dye, adsorbed Ru-polyoxometalate molecular catalyst
0.5 cm2
IQE = 0.2%
NaSiF6 and NaHCO pH = 5.8

21



Metal-free dye/p-NiO and polymer-attached Mn–S cluster catalyst
—
IPCE = 1.54% at 460 nm
HCl, acidic pH = 0

22





3. n-type dye sensitized photoelectrolytic reactions

Fig. 1 presents the energy diagram for an n-type DSPELC where the overall reaction is endoergic (positive Gibbs free energy). This type of DSPELC is called a photoelectrosynthetic cell. Typical reactions in this type of cell include water splitting into H2 and O2, and CO2 reduction to various products coupled to H2O oxidation toward O2. There are also cases, to be discussed later, where the overall reaction is spontaneous (exoergic) and the PE plays the role of a photocatalyst; such a DSPELC is called a photocatalytic cell (ref. 2 and references therein).
 Fig. 1  Energy diagram for a DSPELC with an n-type photoelectrode and a dark counter electrode. 
An example of such a system is a DSPELC where acetic acid is photo-oxidized to ethylene (photo-Kolbe reaction) and H2 is evolved by H2O oxidation at the dark cathode. (16)
Therefore, in general the process in the external circuit may be written as (17)so that the overall process in the anode, the cathode and the external circuit is (18)
For water splitting in acidic media (19)where ΔGm is the molar Gibbs free energy for the reaction under consideration and L is the Avogadro constant (L = 6.022 × 1023 mol−1).
Photoreactions in DSPELCs have been extensively studied; while most of the efforts have been directed towards oxygen evolution in n-type DSPELCs, sincere efforts have also been made towards studying hydrogen evolution or CO2 reduction in p-type DSPELCs, as well as oxidation of organic compounds in n-type DSPELCs.
The basic energy level requirements for the PE are as follows:
(a) the Fermi level of the excited state of the dye should lie above the conduction band edge of the semiconductor EF(D0*/D+) > Ecb(20)
(b) the Fermi level of the ground state of the dye should lie below that of species M01/M1+ EF(D0/D+) < EF(M01/M1+)(21)
As a result, the dye's band gap for light absorption Eg(dye), approximately equal to EF(D0*/D+) − EF(D0/D+), should exceed the difference between the conducting band edge and the Fermi level of M01/M1+ Eg(dye) = [EF(D0*/D+) − EF(D0/D+)] > [Ecs − EF(M01/M1+)](22)
For the oxygen evolution half-reaction and TiO2 (anatase), the typical n-type semiconductor for DSPELC studies to date, the corresponding Ecb and EF(M01/M1+) values vs. the reversible H2 electrode (RHE), i.e., a hydrogen electrode at the same pH as the PE electrolyte, are Ecb = +0.1 eV/RHE(23) EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE(24)so that the requirements for the ground and excited states of the dye and the dye light absorption threshold should be EF(D*0/D+) > 0.1 eV(25) EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE(26)and, as a result, EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE(27) Eg(dye) > 1.3 eV/RHE(28)corresponding to a light absorption threshold of 954 nm.
For DSSC redox mediators, EF(D0/D+) lies above EF(H2O/O2,H+) in acidic and neutral aqueous solutions. Therefore, a dye for which Eg(dye) would allow it exhibit significant light adsorption in the NIR region can be suitable for efficient DSSC operation; however, it might not be suitable for an oxygen photoanode operation.
The cell voltage Ucell between the CE and PE is expressed in terms of the Fermi level difference between the CE and PE as (29)where ψCE and ψPE are the electrical potentials at the two metal contacts of the same composition attached to the CE and PE, respectively, and Q0 is the elementary charge (magnitude of electron charge).
Depending on whether the DSPELC can operate without or with the need for an external bias potential, three cases can be distinguished.
Case I: Ecb above EF(M02/M2+).
If Ecb > EF(M02/M2+) and |EF(M02/M2+) − Ecb| is sufficiently large, the DSPELC can operate without the need for an external bias potential, simply by connecting the PE and CE by a short circuit.
Initially, the zero-current situation, i.e. that of the DSPELC under open-circuit (I = 0), will be considered. In this case, electrochemical equilibrium will prevail at the CE: E(I=0)F(CE) = EF(M02,M2+)(30)
Therefore, under open-circuit illumination (31)
The upper limit for E(I=0)F(PE) is the conduction band edge Ecb. E(I=0)F(PE) moves closer to Ecb with increasing light intensity. Therefore, the upper limit for U(I=0)cell is (32)
Under current I, the Fermi level at the PE shifts below its open-circuit value E(I>0)F(PE) < E(I=0)F(PE)(33)and the Fermi level at the CE above its equilibrium value E(I>0)F(PE) < E(I=0)F(PE)(34)with the difference E(I>0)F(PE) − E(I=0)F(PE) corresponding to a larger band bending at the photoelectrode, and the difference E(I>0)F(CE) − EF(M0/M+) corresponding to the overpotential for the reduction of M+ to M0 at the counter electrode. (35)
Therefore, (36)
Usually, a short circuit is introduced between the PE and CE so that U(I>0)cell = 0 and the largest photocurrent, i.e. the highest rate of the photoelectrosynthetic reaction, is achieved. However, if the conversion of solar energy to both electrical and chemical energies is desired, a non-zero resistance can be inserted between the electrodes.
Case II: Ecb below EF(M02/M2+).
If Ecb lies below EF(M02/M2+), then an external bias voltage Ucell has to be externally applied. The minimal value of the absolute value of the bias potential is expressed in terms of the difference of the Fermi levels of the photoelectrode under open circuit and the redox species at the counter electrode (37)with the positive pole of an external source applied to the PE and the negative pole to the CE. Under current, by following the same arguments as in case I, the bias potential will be larger: U(I>0)cell > U(I=0)cell(38)
Case III: Ecb slightly above EF(M02/M2+).
If EF(M02/M2+) < Ecb but with a small |EF(M02/M2+) − Ecb|, it is possible that EF(CE) and EF(PE) move away from EF(M02/M2+) and Ecb, respectively, to an extent that EF(CE) eventually shifts above EF(PE), so that the imposition of an external bias voltage would be necessary: (39)
This is usually the case for DSPELCs based on a TiO2 photoanode where (40)
Moreover, for polycrystalline materials, such as ones prepared from colloids, the published Ecb values should be considered as rather approximate. Single-crystal materials with an exposed definite crystallographic phase have a well-defined Ecb; however, for polycrystalline materials Ecb would be determined by the relative proportions of the particular crystallographic phases, depending on the preparation of the material. Therefore, it may occur that EF(H2/H+) < Ecb for a single-crystal but EF(H2/H+) > Ecb for a polycrystalline semiconductor of the same chemical composition, thus further justifying the need for an external bias potential.
For fundamental research at a single PE, the question of adjusting U(I>0)cell to an appropriate value is solved by the use of a 3-electrode potentiostatic electrochemical configuration, which provides the desired potential to the PE (vs. a reference electrode) and accordingly regulates the voltage between the PE and CE so that the appropriate photocurrent flows at the PE.
The energy storage efficiency ηst under current density i can be expressed according to the formula (41)where ηFarad is the faradaic efficiency for the photoelectrosynthetic reaction in consideration, Plight is the incident light intensity at the electrode, ΔGr is the free energy of the overall cell reaction, expressed as the sum of two one-electron half-reactions, and F is the Faraday constant.
For example, if water splitting is the aim of the DSPELC process, ΔGr/F = 1.23 V under ambient conditions. If the incident light intensity is 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun), then an i of 1 mA cm−2 corresponds to 1.2% energy storage efficiency in the absence of any external bias potential and with ηFarad = 1.
If nH2 is the amount, in mol units, of evolved hydrogen at irradiation time tirr, then the energy storage efficiency can be derived on the basis of nH2 as (42)
At first, the oxygen evolution reaction in DSPELCs will be discussed in some detail. The dye regeneration reaction D+ + 1/2H2O → D0 + H+ + 1/4O2(43)is a very complex reaction. The oxidation of water to O2 needs an injection of 4 holes from the oxidized dye and will involve several electron transfer and intermediate steps. In this respect, a significant driving force is required, which can be drastically reduced by the use of a catalyst. Two categories of such oxygen evolution catalysts (OECs) have been investigated: molecular OECs and heterogeneous microdispersed OECs. Firstly, molecular OECs will be discussed.
In the case of molecular OECs, DSPELCs are widely investigated by the inorganic chemistry of oxygen evolution in homogeneous or micro-heterogeneous systems, often involving the addition of a strong oxidant as sacrificial electron donor species like Ce4+. The most efficient molecule (OEC) for DSPELCs utilizes ruthenium (Ru-OEC), as reported in several works of the Sun group,7,9,12 the Imahori group7,12 and the Meyer group.23

Fig. 2 depicts the molecular structures of a typical Ru-based dye and Ru-based water oxidation catalyst. The ruthenium tris(bipyridine) Ru(bpy)3-based type sensitizer used in all these studies is chemisorbed via peripheral phosphonate group attachment. The catalyst is immobilized by various methods: (a) co-adsorption together with the dye (the catalyst has peripheral phosphonate or carboxylate pendant groups for this purpose);7,9 (b) covalent attachment to the dye;12,23 (c) entrapment into a Nafion layer overlaied onto dye/TiO2;8 (d) electro-polymerization onto the dye/TiO2 layer;24 (e) linkage to the dye via a Zr4+ bridge;10 and (f) host–guest supra-molecular linkage to the dye11 (for more details, see Sun group's and Meyer group's papers, including ref. 11–17 and references therein).
 Fig. 2  A typical Ru-based dye (a) and Ru-based oxygen-evolution catalyst (b) for n-DSPELCs: (a) ruthenium(II)bis(2,2′-bipyridine)([2,2′-bipyridine]-4,4′-diylbis(phosphonic acid))dibromide for DSPELCs and (b) a typical oxygen evolution catalyst, ruthenium(II)tris(4-methylpyridine)(4-(4-(2,6-bis((l1-oxidanyl)carbonyl)pyridin-4-yl)phenyl)pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid). 
The stable PE potential-independent photocurrent value for a Ru-OEC, obtained by linear sweep voltammetry, was reported by Li et al.24 as 1.4 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V/RHE in a pH = 7 buffer electrolyte. Li et al.11 reported a photocurrent transient exceeding 3.2 mA cm−2 upon irradiation using the same light source; however, this value decreased to below 1.0 mA cm−2 (in 10 s). Alibabaei et al.13 obtained a transient peak photocurrent of 2.0 mA cm−2 under 445 nm, ∼90 mW cm−2 monochromatic light irradiation, which also decreased to below 1.0 mA cm−2 in 10 s. Such transients clearly illustrate the fact that the dye regeneration by water, even in the presence of a catalyst, unfavourably competes with the various recombination mechanisms.
In all these publications the sensitizer was based on a phosphonated Ru(bpy)3 complex, known to possess a favourable EF/RHE(H2O/O2,H+) towards O2 evolution in acidic and neutral electrolytes. In the publication by Sundström, Sun and Imahori,7 the sensitizer was a push–pull type B-centred sub porphyrin with –COOH attachment groups, while, in the report by Sun and Imahori,12 the sensitizer was a Zn-centred porphyrin with –COOH attachment groups.
Recently, Eom et al.25 proposed an organic metal-free dye, 2,2′-(benzo[c][1,2,5]-thiadiazole-4,7-diyl)bis(thiophene-3-carboxylic acid) (T2-BTD), for water oxidation. In the presence of the Ru complex [Ru(bda)(pyP)2] (RuC, bda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate; pyP = 3-(pyridine-4-yloxy)-propyl)phosphonic acid), coadsorbed with the dye, as an O2 evolution catalyst in 0.1 M acetate buffer at pH = 3.9, a photocurrent of 38 μA cm−2 was obtained under simulated AM1.5 sunlight, corresponding to a 12% faradaic efficiency for O2 evolution.
The particular aspect in the studies of Meyer and collaborators13,23 was the use of core–shell type PEs. SnO2 particles were coated with a very thin TiO2 layer (∼5 nm thickness) that was deposited by atomic layer deposition, which then acts as the active sites for dye chemisorption. The advantage of this particular construction is that the dark recombination current can be decreased due to the fact that the conduction band edge of SnO2 is lower than that of TiO2. This builds an effective barrier to electron transfer from SnO2 to TiO2 as long as EF(PE) lies below Ecb, a condition that is normally fulfilled under the conditions of DSPELC operation.
The most efficient system for O2 evolution of the above type developed by Meyer and co-workers was based on using Br2/Br− or Br3−/Br− (redox potential 1.09 or 1.05 vs. SHE) as a photomediator at pH 5.6 in 0.2 M acetate.26 The photooxidized dye [Ru(4,4′-PO3H2-bpy)(bpy)2]2+ (RuP2+, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) attached on the SnO2-core/TiO2-shell mesoporous oxide is regenerated by oxidation. The product of the reaction further forms oxo-bromide species by reacting with the acetate ion; such species are the actual sacrificial electron acceptor catalysts for water oxidation. In addition, an homogeneous catalyst, [Ru(bda)(pic)2] (pic = picoline, bda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate), is present in solution. Considering that the redox potential for O2 evolution is 0.90 V vs. SHE, there is a sufficient driving force of around 0.15–0.2 eV for water oxidation by photogenerated Br2 or Br3. When Br2 is used as the intermediate catalyst, under simulated AM1.5 sunlight, a photocurrent of 1.2 mA cm−2 is obtained with a faradaic efficiency of 70% for O2 evolution (ref. 15–17 and references therein); the reaction scheme can be written as follows: (44)
In addition to Ru-based species as water oxidation catalysts, other types of molecules have also attracted intense attention. Tetranuclear Mn complexes based on the cubane-type cluster [Mn4O4]6+ core have been investigated by Dismukes.27 This molecule mimics the Mn-based water-oxidation complex as similar to natural photosynthesis (photosystem II). The catalyst was immobilized into a Nafion layer overlaid on the sensitizer, which was a Ru tris(bipyridine)-type complex immobilized via –COOH groups. The photocurrents for water oxidation were below 100 μA cm−2 for illumination with white light provided using a Xe lamp with an intensity comparable to that of sunlight.
Xiang et al. investigated a polyoxometallate catalyst, [{Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4}(γ-SiW10O36)2]10−, in conjunction with a phosphonated Ru(bpy)3-type dye.21 Further Moore et al. proposed a cyclopentanediyl-type OEC.28 In both these studies the photocurrents remain below 100 μA cm−2. In the context of heterogeneous catalysts, colloidal IrO2 has been investigated by Mallouk and co-workers.29,30 IrO2 has been covalently attached to the sensitizer, phosphonated Ru(bpy)3. As in the previous case, photocurrents were below 100 mW cm−2.
Apart from the aforementioned reactions, DSPELCs can possibly be used for other energy storage and chemical synthesis reactions, with less positive oxidation potentials or less negative reduction potentials compared to the redox systems mentioned above. An earlier (1999) example is the study of Treadway et al.31 on the photoelectrochemical dehydrogenation of 2-propanol (45)at a dye sensitized TiO2 electrode. The sensitizer was a specially designed supra-molecular Ru sensitizer, with two covalently-linked Ru-based subunits, one acting as the light absorber, while the other as the dehydrogenation catalyst.
Sherman et al. studied a photoelectrolysis cell with the oxidation of hydroquinone (QH2) to benzoquinone (Q) in aqueous solution at dye/TiO2 as the PE reaction in place of oxygen evolution; the CE reaction was H2 evolution.32 This photoelectrolysis cell was coupled to a DSSC in order to provide the necessary external bias potential. Since the EF(QH2/Q) lies above EF(H2O/O2), the dye's band gap required for the QH2 oxidation photoreaction was lower than that for H2O oxidation. Consequently, PEs absorbing high amounts of dye can be used effectively.
Another competitive system is a photocatalytic (exoergic) one, which involves coupling of the enzyme-catalysed oxidation of an organic compound for hydrogen evolution. In this aspect, the practical interest could be the oxidation of inexpensive organic species in waste solutions towards generating hydrogen. The general scheme can be formulated as (46)
This approach is somewhat similar to that of replacing the H2O/O2 as a redox system interacting with D0/D+ with hydroquinone/benzoquinone, which can be more easily oxidized. An additional feature is that the redox species directly interacting with D0/D+ is not M01/M1+ itself but a species produced upon its enzymatic oxidation, with a lower EF, closer to that of D0/D+.
Such a reaction sequence was discussed by Gust and Moore.33Fig. 3 shows a photoelectrochemical biofuel cell for generating hydrogen. A typical example is a reaction with M01/M1+, denoted Fuelred/Fuelox, corresponding to the partial 2-electron oxidation of glucose (GLH2) to gluconolactone (GLO). In an enzyme-catalysed reaction, GLH2 is oxidized to GLO by the electron acceptor NAD+, which is the oxidized form of the biological metabolite nicotinamide NADH.
 Fig. 3  Photoelectrochemical biofuel cell for hydrogen generation. 
The overall reaction preceding the PE reaction, considered as the sum of two one-electron half-reactions, can be written as follows: (47)
The redox mediator interacting with the PE is NADH, which is oxidized to NAD+ upon dye regeneration: (48)
Therefore, the overall photoreaction is (49)
In the case of a TiO2-based DSPELCs for water oxidation, an external bias potential is required for the operation of the cell based on the above reaction (for more details, see Moore Group's papers, ref. 24 and 25 and references therein).
4. p-type dye sensitized photoelectrolytic reactions
For the reaction in a p-DSPELC, like the hydrogen evolution, the description is analogous to that in an n-DSPELC, with the excited state injecting holes into the valence band (vb) of the oxide support and the photo-reduced dye being regenerated by injecting an electron into the oxidized form M2+ of a redox species. The energy diagram of a p-type DSPELC is depicted in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Energy diagram for a p-DSPELC with a p-type photoelectrode and a dark counter electrode. 
In the case of the p-DSPELC, two redox species M01/M1+ and M02/M2+ are chosen for which EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)(50)
However, in this case, M02/M2+ is the system interacting with the photo-electrode and M01/M1+ with the CE.
Therefore, the PE reactions are  D0* + SC → D− + hSC+ePE− + hSC+ → SC D− + M2+ → D0 + M02(51)
with the overall PE reaction (52)
A prerequisite for injecting a hole from the photoexcited dye into the valence band or, equivalently, bringing an electron from the valence band to the hole that is created in the dye after photo-excitation, the valence band edge Evb should lie higher than the Fermi level of the dye in the excited state Evb > EF(D−/D*)(53)
With regard to the dye regeneration reaction, the Fermi level of the dye, EF(D−/D0), should lie above that of the redox species EF(M02/M2+): EF(D−/D0) > EF(M02/M2+)(54)
The reaction at the CE with species M01/M1+ is M01 → M01 + e−(55)
The Fermi level of M01/M1+ should lie below that of M02/M1+ for a PELC performing an endoergic reaction. EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)(56)
Furthermore, the positions of EF(CE) and EF(PE) should be analogous to the n-DSSC case involving Ecb and M02/M2+ EF(M02/M2+) > EF(CE)(57)EF(PE) > Evb
A sufficiently positive EF(M02/M2+) − Evb(CE) can ensure that the p-DSPELC can operate without the need for an auxiliary bias potential. Otherwise an external bias potential Ucell = ϕPE − ϕCE < 0(58)is required to be applied in order to bring electrons from the CE to the PE, which will neutralize the holes injected into the PE after dye photo-excitation.
Firstly, the case of M02/M2+ and M01/M1+, corresponding to the H2 and O2 evolution reactions, will be examined. For preliminary experiments, the PE reaction can be regulated by means of a potentiostat. The choice of semiconductor as a substrate is p-NiO.34 Li et al. demonstrated for the first time hydrogen evolution in aqueous pH = 7 solution on p-NiO that was coated with an organic triphenylamine-based metal-free dye.15 A cobalt coordination complex was deposited on a dye/p-NiO as hydrogen evolution catalyst (HEC) in aqueous solution (pH = 7). At an electrode potential of 0.2 V/RHE the maximum transient photocurrent was lower than 100 μA cm−2. The dye was covalently attached to a cobalt coordination complex as a HEC. The structures of the sensitizer and HEC are depicted in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  A typical dye (a) and hydrogen-evolution catalyst (b) for p-DSPELCs. (a) 4-(Bis-{4-[5-(2,2-dicyano-vinyl)-thiophene-2-yl]-phenyl}-amino)-benzoic acid (P1) and (b) chloro([4,4′-bipyridine]-2,6-dicarboxylic acid)bis(dimethylglyoximato)cobalt(III). 
Further studies of H2 evolution with dye-coated NiO electrodes mediated by a cobalimine-oxime catalyst covalently attached to a metal-free organic dye were published by Kaeffer et al.16 and Pati et al.17 Kaeffer et al.16 used (E)-4,40-((4-(5-(2-cyano-3-ethoxy-3-oxoprop-1-en-1-yl)thiophen-2-yl)phenyl)azanediyl)dibenzoic acid as a sensitizer, with attachment to NiO via –COOH groups, a triphenylamine electron donor and an ethyl cyanoacetate electron acceptor, in a buffered pH 5.5 supporting electrolyte (2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid 0.1 M, NaCl 0.1 M). Under white light provided using a 17 W LED lamp (λ > 400 nm), a steady-state photocurrent in the 15–20 mA cm−2 range was derived at an electrode potential of 0.54 V/RHE, with the highest faradaic efficiency of 10% for H2 evolution. Pati et al.17 used the sensitizer termed PB-1 anchored to NiO via –COOH groups, triphenylamine as an electron donor and dicyanovinyl as an electron acceptor; on this dye the Co catalyst is covalently attached via a dibenzylcyclooctyne (DBCO) bridge. The electrolyte was buffered at either pH = 4.8 (0.1 M acetate buffer) or pH = 6.8 (0.1 M phosphate buffer). A higher rate of H2 evolution was observed in the pH = 4.8 electrolyte (at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl/saturated KCl or 0.48 V vs. RHE), with a stable photocurrent of less than 10 μA cm−2. H2 was qualitatively detected in the pH = 6.8 buffer (at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl/saturated KCl or 0.60 V vs. RHE).
The system by Click et al.,22 which constituted a significant improvement in terms of robustness, efficiency, and stability, demonstrated H2 evolution on organic metal-free dye coated NiO in acidic aqueous solution (pH = 0) containing a molybdenum cluster [Mo3S4]4+ HEC. Hydrophobic peripheral groups attached to the dye molecule stabilized the layer in the strongly acidic electrolyte while suppressing the recombination of photoinjected holes. Under illumination with a 300 W Xe lamp a transient photocurrent exceeding 0.3 mA cm−2 and a steady state photocurrent of 0.19 mA cm−2 were observed at 0.2 V/RHE. The H2 evolution continued for 16 hours.
5. n–p tandem type dye sensitized photoelectrolytic reactions
Here, two cases of tandem n–p DSPELCs for water splitting will be discussed with the energy diagram in Fig. 6. Sun et al.18 demonstrated a tandem n–p DSPELC cell with illuminated dye/TiO2 as a photoanode and dye/NiO as a photocathode operating under Xe lamp light (100 or 300 mW cm−2) without an external bias. Steady-state photocurrents of 25 μA cm−2 at 100 mW cm−2 and 30 μA cm−2 at 300 mW cm−2 were measured. The photoanode was based on a phosphonated Ru(bpy)3 dye and a Ru molecular catalyst chemisorbed by means of –COOH. On the photocathode, the same Ru dye acts as the sensitizer. A molecular Co complex, functioning as a hydrogen evolution catalyst, was co-adsorbed by means of –COOH. Later, Sun et al.9 demonstrated a similar system with an organic triphenylamine-based metal-free dye with sufficiently positive EF(D/D+) at the photoanode co-adsorbed together with a molecular Ru-OEC. Naturally, at the NiO photocathode, the same organic dye was used together with a molecular Co-HER by the Sun group in 2010 (for more details, see Sun group's papers and ref. 22 and references therein).
 Fig. 6  Tandem n–p DSPELC for water splitting operating under short-circuit. The long red-coloured arrow indicates transport of electrons from the photoanode to photocathode. 
Another important aspect, which has attracted a surge of interest, is the reduction of CO2 by means of DSPELCs. It is targeted to the generation of carbonaceous fuels by the reduction of the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. Thermodynamically, this is a steep reaction which involves substantial molecular rearrangements and thus design of new catalysts.
In both aqueous and nonaqueous solutions, the simplest CO2 reduction reaction is the 2-electron conversion to CO according to 2CO2 + 2e− → CO + CO32− M2+ = CO2, M02 = 1/2(CO + CO32−)(59)
Several publications have investigated the above electrocatalytic reactions at dye/sensitized NiO. Armstrong et al.35 used an organic triphenylamine metal-free sensitizer and the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase as a catalyst. Slow declining photocurrents vs. time in the range 10–100 μA cm−2 were obtained at 0.62 V/RHE when using a W-halogen lamp (45 mW cm−2 intensity) as the light source. Inoue et al.19 employed a supra-molecular catalyst consisting of a Zn porphyrin sensitizer covalently linked to an Rh coordination complex acting as the actual catalyst for CO2 reduction. The solvent was N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF) with Et4NBF4 as a supporting electrolyte. Ishitani et al.20 used a Ru–Rh supra-molecular catalyst at NiO, with the Ru(bpy)3 subunit being effective in light absorption and the Re subunit operating in catalysis. The electrolyte was non-aqueous based acetonitrile (MeCN) in Et4NBF4 as a supporting electrolyte. At −1.2 V/Ag–AgNO3(MeCN), i.e. approximately at −0.25 V/RHE(pH = 7), CO evolution was detected with high faradaic efficiency.
6. Tandem n/dye-p/dye electrolysis devices
In addition to the pursuit of new and promising materials, device architecture plays a very significant role in renewable hydrogen generation (artificial photosynthesis), which can probably replace conventional electrolysis limited by the use of precious metals. There are basic and advanced device configurations reported, which include three electrode photoelectrochemical cells, photocatalysis and externally biased oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution catalysts with PSCs, integrative DSPELCs and more recently tandem devices.1,2,36 In tandem cells, two types of photoreactions occur, which require double the number of photons at a single photo-electrode; however, well configured tandem devices offer a broader solar spectral range and ameliorated efficiency. In photo-electrochemical tandem devices, the combination of the photoanode and photocathode results in two distinct water redox half-reactions. Subsequently, the photoanode and photocathode must be n-type and p-type semiconductors with desired ohmic contacts.
Though DSSC driven photoelectrolysis is yet far from the required solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH above 20%), for practical applications still extensive efforts are being made in this direction to understand different intriguing configurations and their integrated tandem device systems. Coupling of PESCs with DSSCs, with the desired geometries and performances of p- and n-type semiconductor photoelectrocatalysts, is expected to provide competitive efficiency. Improved efficiency can be achieved by exploiting best performing DSSC panel for an external bias to derive the PESC system consists of novel performing semiconductor photocatalyst at neutral pH. The coupling of a PESC with a DSSC is demonstrated recently by Yun et al. (ref. 2 and references therein).
The overall PE reaction of the DSSC is defined as CTM0(PEDSSC) → CTM+(PEDSSC) + e−(PEDSSC)(60)where CTM(PEDSSC) are charge transport species between the PE and CE in the DSSC, which act as redox mediators in liquid electrolyte or solid state hole conductors.
The CE reaction of the DSSC of the tandem cell is e−(CEDSSC) + CTM+ → CTM0(61)
The overall DSSC process can be expressed by combining the above two equations: e−(PEDSSC) → e−(CEDSSC)(62)
The overall process of the tandem PESC/DSSC can be derived as (63)Here, two redox couples, with PESC electrodes interacting with oxidation and reduction electrodes, will be termed M01/M1+ and M02/M2+. The desired configuration of an artificial leaf where the CE and PESC are outside of the DSSC and directly on top of the CE and PE of the DSSC is demonstrated in Fig. 7 for a PESC with an illuminated PE and a dark CE. Illumination from the PESC may be sufficient in the case of the transparent CEDSSC. Alternatively, in the case of the transparent CEPESC, illumination from both sides is possible, i.e. by means of a beam splitter.2 Light illumination can also be modulated to improve the device architecture such as by using a beam splitter which can divide the incident light into two parts to align the spectrum of each part with the absorption properties of a photoelectrocatalytic surface towards which it is directed.37
 Fig. 7  Artificial leaf-type compact n-PESC/DSSC tandem cell. 
Sivula et al.38 developed three different configurations of tandem devices. Comparative to two side-by-side dye cells behind semitransparent hematite photoanode and two semitransparent dye sensitized solar cells in front of the hematite, tri-level (hematite/SQ1 dye/N749 dye) device architecture, which resulted in 1.36% solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency. Traditionally, the operating water-splitting current density Jop in a tandem cell is measured using current–voltage (I–V) curves. The operating potential Uop is well-defined as the measurable potential at the common node between two devices such as a PV cell and a PEC. The overall STH efficiency can be defined by (64)V is the volume of hydrogen (L s−1 cm−2), Jop is the operating current density (A cm2), Vm is the molar volume of gas at STP, F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1) and n is the number of electrons.38
Later, Sivula et al.39 demonstrated an improved dual-absorbing tandem device (WO3/DSSC) with 3.10% STH efficiency and 1.17% for an Fe2O3/DSSC. Fig. 8 demonstrates stacking of both the tandem devices with oxidation and reduction potentials.39 The current density generated by each light absorbing element would be estimated by integration of electron flux accomplished by multiplying the photon flux incident at the semiconductor (Φphoton) by its measured IPCE. This calculation adopted for the oxygen evolving photoanode as Φphoton was directly taken from the standard AM 1.5G solar spectrum.
 Fig. 8  General schemes and energy diagrams for a photoanode/DSSC D4 tandem cell: (a) WO3 tandem cell and (b) Fe2O3 tandem cell. Red dotted lines indicate the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from NPG, copyright 2012. 
Over the same period, Mozer et al.40 investigated a dye/NiO photocathode in a tandem cell with a directly photoexcited BiVO4 photoanode. Their electrolyte was 0.1 M Na2SO4 in deionized water with the pH adjusted to 7. When the photocathode was part of a 3-electrode electrochemical cell, a net photocurrent of ≈5 μA cm−2 (under illumination minus dark current) under simulated full sunlight (λ > 420 nm) provided using a 300 W Xe lamp was generated for the electrode potential in the range 0 to −0.6 V/RHE. In the tandem cell the steady photocurrent was ≈3 μA cm−2, corresponding to ≈0.05 μmol cm−2 h−1 of evolved H2 (≈1 mm3 cm−2 h−1 under 1 bar and 298 K).
Recently, Meyer et al.14 reported a tandem cell made of a DPSEC and connected in series with a DSSC and p-type catalyst NiO or CuO employing N719 dye with an I3−/I− redox mediator solution and D35 dye with a tris(bipyridine)cobalt ([Co(bpy)3]3+/2+) based mediator. Fig. 9 shows an energy diagram for the redox and excited potentials of various components constituting the tandem device.14 The left side of the schematic depicts the complete tandem cell, while the right side shows the DSSC. The [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ redox mediator has a 0.22 V higher positive potential than I3−/I−, and this increases the open circuit voltage (as represented by a taller “ΔV”) immensely. However, a higher “ΔV” can produce an extra overpotential for improving H2 production.
 Fig. 9  Energy diagram utilizing the various components of the tandem cell with DSPELC-D1 (in the top frame) and DSPELC-N1 (in the bottom frame). The upward arrows represent the increase in potential upon the formation of the photoexcited state. The downward arrows represent electron transfer events, and the upward arrow in the box marked “ΔV” indicates the increase in electron energy as supplied by the DSSC. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from ACS, copyright 2016. 
Seger et al.41 investigated critical issues for two-photon type tandem solar devices. It was concluded that in such devices, due to the larger distance of charge travelling, the conductivity of semiconductors is always a major challenge for bulk semiconductors. Moreover, the conductivity of the protection layer at the surface is a key issue due to band bending. Depletion layers forming instinctively at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface are useful for photoabsorbers since they block majority carriers from getting into the electrolyte. Nevertheless, generally, the semiconductor protection layer needs to be in the dark, so that it can offer majority carriers for electrical conduction, which requires the prevention of the depletion layer. The problem of the depletion layer can be resolved by the use of a thinner protection layer than the depletion layer. The general thickness of the depletion layer can be found via this eqn (65).41 (65)  where ε0 is the permittivity in a vacuum, εSC is the permittivity constant of the semiconductor, e is the elementary charge, ND is the donor density, CB is the conduction band edge energy, EF is the Fermi level, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. Similarly, in tandem devices surface passivation is carried out to increase the life-time of carriers, which increases the overall efficiency using insulator materials. The concept of using an insulator as the protection layer of tandem devices might be ineffective as it cannot conduct electricity, but if the passivation layer is ultrathin, tunneling can occur through the insulator. This insulator or surface passivation layer can be effectively deposited by atomic layer deposition or electron beam deposition, electrochemical deposition, sputtering, dip coating and spin coating methods with a thickness of less than 5 nm. Thus an insulator can conduct electricity through the tunneling process. If one assumes a triangle tunneling barrier, the total tunneling current can be approximated by using the Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin approximation as shown in eqn (66).41 (66)In this equation, Jt is the tunneling current, ℏ is the Planck constant divided by 2π, q is the elementary charge, φb is the barrier height, Δx is the barrier width, and Nc is the effective density of states. Shi et al. reported 5.7% STH efficiency for a wireless monolithic photoanode/dye sensitized tandem cell without an external bias. In this device, photoanode comprised of BiVO4-embedded mesoporous WO3 bulk heterojunction.42
Overall, the daunting challenge for hydrogen production is to decrease the cost of the hydrogen production to allow the new technologies for practical applications. In this aspect, there are at least three major requirements which are important to understand and required the pursuit for ideal PE materials, their respective device configurations (tandem) and the possible integration with high performance PV panels. They include: (i) solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency exceeding 20%; (ii) photo-electrode materials’ stability (∼5000 hours); and (iii) materials’ photoactivity at neutral pH.
Though largely the fundamental understanding of the process is being well established, we believe in terms of the above-reviewed work that conflating few important modulations on the PE side can drastically improve the performance of these new integrated tandem device systems. They are:
(i) Choice of high performance PEs: it is important to mention that n-type (PE) and p-type (CE) semiconductors should be optimal. Earlier in the above mentioned tandem devices mostly researchers explored bismuth vanadate systems and NiO PEs; however, there is a great scope to combine high performance photocathodes, such as Al:SrTiO3, Cu2O, and Si nanowires (SiNWs), and photoanodes, such as AlGaN, GaN:ZnO, triclinic copper vanadates, cobalt phosphate (CoPi), TaON, and Nb2O5, with DSSCs and in tandem cell configurations which can significantly improve the overall performance.
(ii) Role of a co-catalyst in tandem devices’ photoelectrodes: a suitable co-catalyst depending on the nature of the reaction (HER and OER) under photoelectrochemical conditions is indispensable for enhancing the overall efficiency of tandem devices. The co-catalyst can dispense oxidation or reduction active sites, accelerate the surface reactions by decreasing the activation energies and suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron and hole pairs. Earth abundant transition metal oxides, biomimetic enzymes, noble metals and sulphides can act as the best co-catalysts if combined with specific PEs. However, use of co-catalysts depends on various factors such as the choice of materials, and electronic compatibility with semiconductors with regard to energy levels, electronic structure, suitable overloading, shape, and size distribution. In order to accomplish improvement in STH efficiency, design of novel co-catalysts on PEs can significantly impact the overall performance of tandem devices.
(iii) Surface passivation of PEs: generally, a semiconductor surface/interface is a prominent region in photoelectrochemical water splitting systems. Swift surface recombination, steady charge transfer kinetics and, most importantly, appalling photoelectrochemical stability are three colossal challenges which impede the progress of solar-driven water splitting. Recently, various reports have suggested that ultrathin (less than 5 nm) surface passivation layers can dramatically affect surface recombination, improve charge transfer kinetics and protect against the chemical/photo-corrosion of PEs. To improve the overall performance of tandem p- and n-type electrolysis, the surface passivation of the PE could modulate the overpotential and increase the photovoltage and stability of these devices. There are various promising surface passivation layers investigated for semiconductor devices which can be employed in the above mentioned tandem device systems such as SiOx, Al2O3, Ga2O3, In2O3, and In2O3 and self-assembled monolayers.
Here, we want to emphasize that there has been no research coupling DSSCs and direct electrolysis (with metal cathodes and anodes). The efficiency of DSSCs, and in particular of hybrid n–p DSSCs, is too low for this purpose. Researchers in solar fuels usually prefer high-efficiency III–V based solid-state semiconductor cells or junctions, or eventually PSCs. PSCs are less efficient than III–V based semiconductor cells. The subject of coupling DSSCs and photoelectrochemical cells was covered in our previous review and, as far as we know, there has not been substantial progress in this direction during the last two years (ref. 2, 18, 21, 22, and 25 and references therein).
7. Perovskite-electrochemical hybrid devices
Various groups made efforts towards increasing the efficiency of PSCs over 23% using low cost solution processed routes. Perovskite based solar cells can achieve open circuit voltages in excess of 1.5 V, which is sufficient to drive electrochemical water splitting in a hybrid system. The concept of perovskite based hybrid devices for electrochemical water splitting was first conceived by Grätzel et al. in 2014.1 They used earth abundant bifunctional catalysts for the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. The water splitting cell was connected with a PSC and this resulted in 12.3% STH efficiency. They used high surface area NiFe LDH (double layer hydroxide)/Ni foam as a bifunctional catalyst, where 10 mA cm−2 current density was achieved by applying 1.7 V.
Bin et al. used a nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide/nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube (NrGO/NCNT) hybrid as an electrocatalyst, which showed a current density of more than 7 mA cm−2 at 1.4 V with 9.02% STH efficiency.43 Photoelectrochemical water splitting was carried out in a tandem device where semiconducting polymer:fullerene coupled with a perovskite planar heterojunction demonstrated 11.8% power conversion efficiency. Recently, Roy et al. demonstrated TiO2/Co doped hematite as an electron transport bilayer which was treated with a perovskite layer (CH3NH3PbI3).44 However, the overall STH conversion efficiency for these electrodes was 2.46%. The STH conversion efficiency is obtained from the combined current density–voltage measurement curve of PSC–hematite photo-electrode tandem devices.
Zhang et al.45 developed a core–shell TiO2/BiVO4 photoanode driven by a hybrid PSC for un-assisted water splitting, which exhibited an improved (more than three fold) STH efficiency (1.4 mA cm−2) as compared to pristine TiO2 demonstrated in Fig. 10a. For TiO2/BiVO4 electrodes, they investigated individual light harvesting (LHE = 1–10−A, charge separation (ηsep) and electron transfer (ηtransfer) efficiencies. It was concluded that better charge transfer and light absorption were observed for core–shell type electrodes. The authors argued that the charge transfer (ηtransfer) efficiency can be increased by adding a swift hole scavenger to electrolyte. Cui et al.37 achieved highly efficient solar driven water splitting through a BiVO4–perovskite hybrid system. By doing so, they improved carrier diffusion and charge separation multifold by doping Mo:BiVO4 onto the surfaces of nano-engineered nanocones formed through the reactive ion etching (RIE) process. The system was driven by a single PSC and achieved 6.2% STH efficiency unlike the abovementioned LDH based system driven by two cells. The main reason for this high performance was that the geometry of the electrode surface was designed as nanocones coated with Mo:BiVO4, which assisted charge separation and high absorption of photons. To advance the process of solar water splitting, Gurudayal et al.46 reported perovskite–haematite tandem cells for overall water splitting by using single perovskite cells in series. Fig. 10b shows a photoanode composed of haematite nanoarrays. In this device architecture, about 2.4% STH efficiency was accomplished; however, the STH efficiency was limited due to the low onset potential and photocurrent density of the photoanode (haematite). It is important to note that while combining with high photocurrent producing photoanodes the efficiency of these tandem devices can be significantly ameliorated. Due to the high performance (greater than 23% efficiency) of solution processed PSCs, various promising applications of PSCs were explored. Increasing CO2 (400 ppm) in the ecosystem poses various challenges; thus it is important to convert CO2 into value added products such as CO, formic acid, methane, methanol, ethanol and ethylene depending on the nature of reaction (number of electrons). Grätzel et al.47 reported a perovskite integrated hybrid system for CO2 reduction to CO. The system was connected to three perovskite cells to provide a sufficient voltage to catalyst load for considerable reduction. The product formation was analyzed by gas chromatography. Fig. 10c shows the schematic device structure of three combined electrochemical PSCs and a generalized energy diagram of three PSCs.47 During the 18 h period of operation the faradaic efficiency varied between 80 and 90%. Later, Jang et al. also reported a sunlight driven perovskite assisted tandem cell hybrid system combined with a photocathode composed of ZnO@ZnTe@CdTe core–shell nanorod arrays for CO2 reduction into CO without any bias voltage.48Fig. 10d shows a schematic representation of a perovskite driven photoelectrochemical photoanode. The device illuminated under the light for 3 h using Au coupled ZnO@ZnTe@CdTe core–shell nanorod arrays based photoanode in tandem configuration. Jang et al. also used cobalt bicarbonate as a potential cathode replacing the conventional platinum electrode. When high performance photoanode and cathode is applied, this hybrid device has great prospects for practical artificial photosynthesis reactions. Advancing water photolysis and artificial photosynthesis through integrated hybrid PSCs could be a new beginning for practical solutions. However, emphasizing only on PSCs while ignoring major electrode components and electrochemical system design will hinder the progress in STH conversion in such systems. In order to accomplish highly efficient water splitting using solar energy technology, high performance PSCs combined with perfect HER and OER electrocatalysts and hybrid electrochemical cell design can be considered as a practical approach. However, more efforts are needed to design and select suitable electrocatalysts with required functionalities. Earth abundant metal based catalysts, which give high turnover frequency (TOF), and high turnover numbers (TONs), bifunctional in nature, easy to process exhibit, desired overpotential of half-cell, and stable over a wide range of pH and show ideal performance in neutral pH etc., can significantly provide improved STH for hybrid devices. Other aspects to improve this system could be depositing a bifunctional catalyst on the back side of the PSC to develop an integrated system for a more practical solution. It should be noted that such research has not been systematically pursued in the last year, with the investigations of the Grätzel group constituting a landmark in this case. One disadvantage of PSCs is their moisture sensitivity; thus they cannot be used in integrated systems based on water-immersed p–n junctions.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the tandem cell (TiO2@BiVO4 PA + PVSC) for solar water splitting without an external bias. In this configuration, the PSC harvests the transmitted photons above 500 nm, and the resulting photogenerated electrons induced by the TiO2@BiVO4 PA to drive H2 production. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from RSC, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic of the dual junction PSC/hematite photoanode tandem cell. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from ACS, copyright 2015. (c) Generalized energy diagram for converting CO2 into CO with three PSCs. The series-connected PVs produce a voltage sufficient to overcome the sum of the reaction free energy (DE) and the reaction overpotentials (Z) at the electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from NPG, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic diagram of a tandem cell comprising a ZnO@ ZnTe@CdTe–Au NR photocathode (ZCT-Au PC)–PSC (Perov SC)–cobalt bicarbonate (Co-Ci) anode. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from ACS, copyright 2016. 
8. Concluding remarks
Dye sensitized photoelectrodes have been systematically investigated as direct cathodes or anodes for solar fuel generation during the last few decades. Encouraging preliminary results were obtained due to the ultrafast charge separation occurring in a picosecond range and sluggish back reaction in these systems. However, the energy storage efficiency is below 10% in most of the cases. Traditional design of new dyes for electricity-producing regenerative solar cells is not ideally suited for solar fuel applications, and thus it is vital to undertake the design and synthesis of suitable dyes through a molecular engineering approach. Important factors such as the matching of the energy levels of dyes, the semiconductor properties, and the redox reactions pertaining to fuel generation need to be optimized. Additionally, the electron transfer kinetics between the dye and electroactive species in the electrolyte should be improved by the development of suitable interposed molecular or heterogeneous catalysts. In this aspect, the synergy between photochemistry, photophysics, electrochemistry, materials science, and molecular chemistry promises to contribute substantial advances in the near future. A systematic understanding of underlying theoretical principles and experimental findings is essential in the process of laying a solid foundation for the comprehension of diverse photoelectrochemical reactions in integrated and direct p- and n-type DSPELCs, tandem cells and hybrid perovskite-driven photoelectrosynthetic cells. In tandem devices, in addition to the improvement of charge-transfer kinetics and long-term stability, together with the development of new and robust catalysts, there is tremendous scope for the exploration of the currently available high-performance hydrogen and oxygen evolution catalysts which can deliver promising performance.
Preliminary investigations reveal that this direction towards hybrid perovskite-driven electrolysis has achieved a sunlight-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of 12.3%; however, still there are major challenges to be addressed, which include: (i) the development of highly stable and performing perovskite cells, which can drive the reactions in excess of 10000 s h with the required efficiency; (ii) the design of robust, stable and efficient electrocatalysts for both the HER and OER and (iii) the development of catalysts which can demonstrate good performance at neutral pH and are active over a wide pH range.
A perusal of extant paradigms of advances of novel DPSELCs and photoelectrode materials is beyond doubt a first step. However, additionally, various ubiquitous challenges need to be effectively addressed in order to realize creative innovations: for instance, the development of high-performance photoelectrodes; assembly of new architectures, in the initial stage based on the existing efficient catalysts; the improvements of the existing approaches of surface passivation so as to enhance charge separation; and the effective use of potential co-catalysts in order to improve the overall STH efficiency of DSPELCs.
DSPELCs as well as tandem and hybrid perovskite systems have been extended to CO2 reduction to carbonaceous fuels, e.g., carbon monoxide or formate, and serve dual purposes of making our planet carbon neutral and converting the emissions into energy based products. CO2 reduction is a kinetically uphill reaction which involves complex molecular reorganization, with the actual mechanism still under extensive debate. There is an enormous scope for the development of new catalysts that can be integrated with DSPELCs and perovskite systems towards the realization of a variety of C1 and C2 products via reduction of CO2. One particular example could be Cu-based catalysts, which are extensively considered for C–C coupling reactions, such as Cu nanocrystals with engineered grain boundaries, Cu complexes, and nanoporous Cu, which can be variously integrated within the aforementioned framework to target C2 products such as ethanol and ethylene.
The recently proposed DSPELCs, tandem system and hybrid perovskite framework can be applied to alternative electrosynthetic reactions such as hydrogen peroxide production, nitrogen reduction, and various other essential photo-electrochemical photocatalytic and electrocatalytic transformations. To completely understand the underlying principles of these systems, a theoretical investigation (ref. 2 and references therein), based on first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and ab initio Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics (CPMD) simulations, is highly required.49,50
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the NSFC (51672208), the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1502902), the Key Program for International S&T Cooperation Projects of Shaanxi Province (2019KWZ-03), and the Sci-Tech R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (2010K01-120, 2011JM6010 and 2015JM5183) is greatly acknowledged. The project was partly sponsored by SRF ((2012)940) for ROCS, SEM.
References
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, Y. Qin, A. R. Uhl, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Yin, D. Li, X. Han and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 476–526 RSC .
M. Schreier, F. Héroguel, L. Steier, S. Ahmad, J. S. Luterbacher, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17087 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yun, J. N. Freitas, A. F. Nogueira, Y. Wang, S. Ahmad and Z.-S. Wang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 59, 1–40 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cong, Y. Hao, G. Boschloo and L. Kloo, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 264–268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, W. Yang, M. Karlsson, J. Cong, S. Wang, X. Li, B. Xu, J. Hua, L. Kloo and G. Boschloo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1929–1937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamamoto, Y. Nishizawa, P. Chabera, F. Li, T. Pascher, V. Sundström, L. Sun and H. Imahori, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13702–13705 RSC .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
F. Li, K. Fan, B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, Q. Daniel, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9153–9159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Gao, L. Zhang, Z. Yu, J. Liu and L. Sun, ACS, Catalysis, 2014, 4, 2347–2350 CAS .
H. Li, F. Li, Y. Wang, L. Bai, F. Yu and L. Sun, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 1056–1059 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamamoto, L. Wang, F. Li, T. Fukushima, K. Tanaka, L. Sun and H. Imahori, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1430–1439 RSC .
L. Alibabaei, B. D. Sherman, M. R. Norris, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5899–5902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, K.-R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, D. Wang, L. Alibabaei, D. L. Ashford and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16745–16753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. L. Duan, F. Y. Wen, C. Li, M. Wang, A. Hagfeld and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 988–990 RSC .
N. Kaeffer, J. Massin, C. Lebrun, O. Renault, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and V. Artero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12308–12311 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Pati, L. Zhang, B. Philippe, R. Fernández-Terán, S. Ahmadi, L. Tian, H. Rensmo, L. Hammarström and H. Tian, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2480–2495 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, E. Gabrielsson and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25234–25240 RSC .
Y. Kou, S. Nakatani, G. Sunagawa, Y. Tachikawa, D. Masui, T. Shimada, S. Takagi, D. A. Tryk, Y. Nabetani, H. Tachibana and H. Inoue, J. Catal., 2014, 310, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sahara, R. Abe, M. Higashi, T. Morikawa, K. Maeda, Y. Ueda and O. Ishitani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10722–10725 RSC .
X. Xiang, J. Fielden, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Z. Huang, N. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 918–926 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Click, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, W. Chen and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1174–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, Y. Xie, M. V. Sheridan, D. Wang, D. W. Shaffer, T. J. Meyer and J. J. Concepcion, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 124–128 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, K. Fan, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, L. Duan and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3786–3790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Eom, L. Nhon, G. Leem, B. D. Sherman, D. Wang, L. Troian-Gautier, S. Kim, J. Kim, T. J. Meyer, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2114–2119 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Sheridan, Y. Wang, D. Wang, L. Troian-Gautier, C. J. Dares, B. D. Sherman and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3449–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H. E. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389–2392 RSC .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760–775 RSC .
J. A. Treadway, J. A. Moss and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 4386–4387 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Sherman, J. J. Bergkamp, C. L. Brown, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1812–1817 RSC .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Gibson, L. Le Pleux, J. Fortage, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, F. Odobel, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6485–6493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bachmeier, S. Hall, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13518–13521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Navarro Yerga, M. C. Álvarez Galván, F. del Valle, J. A. Villoria de la Mano and J. L. G. Fierro, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 471–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. L. Formal, J.-H. Yum, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, A. Iwase, A. Nattestad, U. Bach, M. Weidelener, G. Götz, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, R. Amal, G. G. Wallace and A. J. Mozer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9472–9475 RSC .
B. Seger, I. E. Castelli, P. C. K. Vesborg, K. W. Jacobsen, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2397–2413 RSC .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, M. Ma, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, J. K. Kim, H. K. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 182–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bin, M. Yusoff and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5824–5827 RSC .
S. Roy and G. G. Botte, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 5388–5394 RSC .
X. Zhang, B. Zhang, K. Cao, J. Brillet, J. Chen, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21630–21636 RSC .
G. Dayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schreier, L. Curvat, F. Giordano, L. Steier, A. Abate, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Luo, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6980–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yun, X. Zhou, J. Even and A. Hagfeldt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15806–15817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yun, X. Zhou, Y. Hou, T. Zhang, J. Li and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 390–399 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00987bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Sining Yun
	Sining Yun is a Professor in the School of Materials & Mineral Resources, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2007 and was a postdoctoral fellow in Yonsei University (Korea). He is a visiting professor at the State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals (China), University of Reading (UK), and Prof. Michael Grätzel and Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's laboratory at EPFL (Switzerland). He is currently a Research Director and Group Leader of Functional Materials Laboratory and the Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology of Shaanxi Province (China). His research focuses on solar energy and biomass energy. Details can be found at: http://xy.xauat.edu.cn/gnclyjs/listyjsgk.asp?id=262&bh=2080.

Nick Vlachopoulos
	Dr Nick Vlachopoulos obtained his chemical engineering degree from the National Technical University of Athens, Greece (1979), and two doctorates from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA (1984), and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland (1990), respectively. He worked as a researcher in Michael Grätzel's group in EPFL (1986–1999). Later, he was employed in Denmark, Germany, Sweden and Ireland. In 2014 he returned to EPFL as a senior research scientist and lecturer in Prof. Anders Hagfeldt's team. His activities are related to the molecular electrochemistry of chemically-modified mesoscopic oxide electrodes and their application to generate electricity and fuels from sunlight.

Ahsanulhaq Qurashi
	Dr Ahsanulhaq received his PhD degree in 2008 from Chonbuk National University, South Korea, and completed his postdoctoral fellowship from Toyama University, Japan (2008–2010). He joined as assistant professor in KFUPM in 2010, and became associate professor in 2016. His research is focused on the development of advanced functional nanomaterials for clean energy and chemical sensor applications. He is the editor of the book “Metal Chalcogenide Nanostructures for Renewable Energy Applications”, a subject assistant editor for the International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, and an editorial board member of Scientific Reports and MRB. He has published more than 83 papers in internationally reputed peer reviewed (ISI) journals and presented over 50 papers in various international conferences.

Shahzada Ahmad
	Prof. S. Ahmad is Ikerbasque professor; his scientific interests include materials for energy applications. He obtained his PhD degree in the field of materials science and moved to the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, to work on surfaces and interfaces by scanning probe microscopy. At EPFL, he developed nanoporous films for metal-free electro-catalysis and new redox shuttles. From 2012 to 2017 he was the program director of photovoltaics at Abengoa Research, a corporate research center. He is the inventor of many patents and European research council consolidator grant awardee and among the cohort of distinguished scientists at the World Economic Forum.

Anders Hagfeldt
	Anders Hagfeldt has been Professor at the Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Ēcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and the Head of the Laboratory of Photomolecular Science since 2013. He obtained his PhD degree in 1993 from Uppsala University and was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Grätzel (1993–1994) at EPFL, Switzerland. Before 2014 he was professor in Physical Chemistry and the director of the Center for Molecular Devices at Uppsala University, Sweden. He is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the European Academy of Sciences, the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in Stockholm.

Key learning points
(1) How to design a dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cell.
(2) Underlying principles in the design of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(3) Potential applications of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(4) Key challenges and opportunities in the field of dye sensitized photoelectrolysis cells.
(5) Potential function of catalysts for the production of solar fuels.

	(1)
M+ + e(CE)− → M0	(2)
M0(PE) → M0(CE)
M(CE)+ → M(PE)+	(3)
	(4)
EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)	(5)
	(6)
M2+ + e(CE)− → M02	(7)
M1(PE)+ + M02(PE) → M2(PE)+ + M01(PE)	(8)
M02(PE) → M02(CE)
M2(CE)+ → M2(PE)+	(9)
	(10)
M0 → M1 + e−	(11)
	(12)
H2 → 2H+ + 2e− → 1/2H2 → H+ + e− M0 = 1/2H2; M+ = H+	(13)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ⇔ 1/2H2O → 1/4O2 + H+ + e− M0 = 1/2H2O; M+ = 1/4O2 + H+	(14)
	(15)

Metal-free subporphyrin dye/n-TiO2	H2	Ru complex	Coadsorbed	
7

Ru dye/n-TiO2	H2	Ru complex	Polymer-immobilized	
8

Metal-free dyes on n-TiO2 and p-NiO	H2	n-TiO2:Ru complex	Both coadsorbed, tandem photoelectrochemical cell, energy conversion efficiency 0.05%	
9

p-NiO:Co complex
Ru dye/n-TiO2	H2	Ru complex	Supramolecular self-assembly between the dye and catalyst, Zr4+ ions between them	
10

Ru dye/n-TiO2	H2	Ru complex	Supramolecular host–guest complex between the dye and catalyst	
11

Zn porphyrin dye/n-TiO2	H2	Ru complex	Supramolecular self-assembly between the dye and catalyst	
12

Ru dye/n-TiO2 shell/n-SnO2 core	H2	Ru complex	Covalently attached to the dye	
13

Ru dye/n-TiO2 shell/n-SnO2 core	H2	Ru complex	Covalently attached to the dye; a regenerative DSSC in series to a DSPELC; energy conversion efficiency of 0.06%	
14

Metal-free dye/p-NiO	H2	Co complex	Dissolved	
15

Metal-free dye/p-NiO	H2	Co complex	Covalently attached to the dye	
16

Metal-free dye/p-NiO	H2	Co complex	Covalently attached to the dye or dissolved	
17

Metal-free dye/p-NiO	H2	Mn–S cluster	Polymer-immobilized	
18

Zn porphyrin dye/p-NiO	CO	Re complex	Covalently attached to the dye	
19

Ru dye/n-TiO2	CO	Re complex	Covalently attached to the dye or coadsorbed	
20



Tandem redox system, 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO-Co)	0.25 cm2	PCE = 8.4% in DSSC	TEMPO added to a standard Co-based electrolyte	
5

DSSC, tandem redox system, Co complex as a mediator and tris(4-alkoxyphenyl)-amine as a co-mediator	0.25 cm2	PCE = 11.0% in DSSC	Amine added to a standard Co-based electrolyte	
6

Tandem cell, metal-free dye/n-TiO2 with a covalently linked Ru molecular catalyst; metal-free dye/p-NiO, coadsorbed Co molecular catalyst	1 cm2	IPCE = 25% at 380 nm (two-electrode cell, no bias), STH = 0.05%	Phosphate buffer pH = 7	
9

Metal-free subporphyrin dye/n-TiO2, coadsorbed Ru molecular catalyst	0.28 cm2	IPCE = 40% at 520 nm	NaPi pH = 7.3	
7

Zn porphyrin dye/n-TiO2, covalently-linked Ru molecular catalyst	0.28 cm2	IPCE = 18% at 424 nm	Sodium phosphate buffer pH = 7.5	
12

Ru dye/n-TiO2 and supramolecularly attached Ru catalyst, Zr4+ ions between the dye and catalyst	0.8 cm2	IPCE = 4.1% at 450 nm	Na2SO4 solution at pH = 6.4	
10

Ru dye/n-TiO2, supramolecularly assembled into a Ru molecular catalyst (host–guest interaction)	0.8 cm2	IPCE = 7% at 460 nm	Phosphate buffer pH = 7	
11

Ru dye/n-TiO2/n-SnO2 (core shell), covalently-attached Ru molecular catalyst	0.28 cm2	STH = 0.06%	Alkaline pH = 9	
14

Ru dye, adsorbed Ru-polyoxometalate molecular catalyst	0.5 cm2	IQE = 0.2%	NaSiF6 and NaHCO pH = 5.8	
21

Metal-free dye/p-NiO and polymer-attached Mn–S cluster catalyst	—	IPCE = 1.54% at 460 nm	HCl, acidic pH = 0	
22


 	Fig. 1  Energy diagram for a DSPELC with an n-type photoelectrode and a dark counter electrode.	 
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
EF(D0*/D+) > Ecb	(20)
EF(D0/D+) < EF(M01/M1+)	(21)
Eg(dye) = [EF(D0*/D+) − EF(D0/D+)] > [Ecs − EF(M01/M1+)]	(22)
Ecb = +0.1 eV/RHE	(23)
EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE	(24)
EF(D*0/D+) > 0.1 eV	(25)
EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE	(26)
EF(M0/M+) = EF(H2O/O2,H+) = −1.23 eV/RHE	(27)
Eg(dye) > 1.3 eV/RHE	(28)
	(29)
E(I=0)F(CE) = EF(M02,M2+)	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
E(I>0)F(PE) < E(I=0)F(PE)	(33)
E(I>0)F(PE) < E(I=0)F(PE)	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
U(I>0)cell > U(I=0)cell	(38)
	(39)
	(40)
	(41)
	(42)
D+ + 1/2H2O → D0 + H+ + 1/4O2	(43)

 	Fig. 2  A typical Ru-based dye (a) and Ru-based oxygen-evolution catalyst (b) for n-DSPELCs: (a) ruthenium(II)bis(2,2′-bipyridine)([2,2′-bipyridine]-4,4′-diylbis(phosphonic acid))dibromide for DSPELCs and (b) a typical oxygen evolution catalyst, ruthenium(II)tris(4-methylpyridine)(4-(4-(2,6-bis((l1-oxidanyl)carbonyl)pyridin-4-yl)phenyl)pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid).	 
	(44)
	(45)
	(46)

 	Fig. 3  Photoelectrochemical biofuel cell for hydrogen generation.	 
	(47)
	(48)
	(49)

 	Fig. 4  Energy diagram for a p-DSPELC with a p-type photoelectrode and a dark counter electrode.	 
EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)	(50)

 		 
D0* + SC → D− + hSC+
ePE− + hSC+ → SC
D− + M2+ → D0 + M02	(51)
	(52)
Evb > EF(D−/D*)	(53)
EF(D−/D0) > EF(M02/M2+)	(54)
M01 → M01 + e−	(55)
EF(M01/M1+) < EF(M02/M2+)	(56)
EF(M02/M2+) > EF(CE)	(57)
EF(PE) > Evb
Ucell = ϕPE − ϕCE < 0	(58)

 	Fig. 5  A typical dye (a) and hydrogen-evolution catalyst (b) for p-DSPELCs. (a) 4-(Bis-{4-[5-(2,2-dicyano-vinyl)-thiophene-2-yl]-phenyl}-amino)-benzoic acid (P1) and (b) chloro([4,4′-bipyridine]-2,6-dicarboxylic acid)bis(dimethylglyoximato)cobalt(III).	 

 	Fig. 6  Tandem n–p DSPELC for water splitting operating under short-circuit. The long red-coloured arrow indicates transport of electrons from the photoanode to photocathode.	 
2CO2 + 2e− → CO + CO32− M2+ = CO2, M02 = 1/2(CO + CO32−)	(59)
CTM0(PEDSSC) → CTM+(PEDSSC) + e−(PEDSSC)	(60)
e−(CEDSSC) + CTM+ → CTM0	(61)
e−(PEDSSC) → e−(CEDSSC)	(62)
	(63)

 	Fig. 7  Artificial leaf-type compact n-PESC/DSSC tandem cell.	 
	(64)

 	Fig. 8  General schemes and energy diagrams for a photoanode/DSSC D4 tandem cell: (a) WO3 tandem cell and (b) Fe2O3 tandem cell. Red dotted lines indicate the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from NPG, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 9  Energy diagram utilizing the various components of the tandem cell with DSPELC-D1 (in the top frame) and DSPELC-N1 (in the bottom frame). The upward arrows represent the increase in potential upon the formation of the photoexcited state. The downward arrows represent electron transfer events, and the upward arrow in the box marked “ΔV” indicates the increase in electron energy as supplied by the DSSC. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from ACS, copyright 2016.	 
	(65)

 		 
	(66)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the tandem cell (TiO2@BiVO4 PA + PVSC) for solar water splitting without an external bias. In this configuration, the PSC harvests the transmitted photons above 500 nm, and the resulting photogenerated electrons induced by the TiO2@BiVO4 PA to drive H2 production. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from RSC, copyright 2015. (b) Schematic of the dual junction PSC/hematite photoanode tandem cell. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from ACS, copyright 2015. (c) Generalized energy diagram for converting CO2 into CO with three PSCs. The series-connected PVs produce a voltage sufficient to overcome the sum of the reaction free energy (DE) and the reaction overpotentials (Z) at the electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from NPG, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic diagram of a tandem cell comprising a ZnO@ ZnTe@CdTe–Au NR photocathode (ZCT-Au PC)–PSC (Perov SC)–cobalt bicarbonate (Co-Ci) anode. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from ACS, copyright 2016.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00987b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
