A review on g-C 3 N 4 /graphene nanocomposites: multifunctional roles of graphene in the nanohybrid photocatalyst toward photocatalytic applications  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CY00784J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CY00784J
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 6018-6040A review on g-C3N4/graphene nanocomposites: multifunctional roles of graphene in the nanohybrid photocatalyst toward photocatalytic applications

        
          
            Sulagna 
            Patnaik
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Arjun 
            Behera
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan, Bhubaneswar 751030, India. E-mail: paridakulamani@yahoo.com
Received 
      2nd May 2021
    , Accepted 12th July 2021First published on 6th August 2021Abstract2-Dimensional conductive surface hybrid semiconducting materials have been drawing attention among researchers owing to their photocatalytic performance toward environmental remediation and energy conversion. Surface hybridization between 2D hybrid nanomaterials is considered well-organized owing to their unique physical and chemical properties, inhibition toward photocorrosion, and expansion in spectral response. New approaches toward structural design at the nanoscale level introduce tailored electronic properties and extend their applications as visible light-induced photocatalysts. In particular, the large specific surface area, an increased number of active sites, and high charge mobility endow these 2D/2D hybrid materials with remarkably high performance. In view of recent advances, unlike other reviews in this field and our research work, in this review, we have summarized the designing methods, properties, photocatalytic applications, and the mechanisms of carbon-based 2D/2D hybrid material with special reference to g-C3N4/graphene nanostructured hybrids. The architectural assembly of well-connected g-C3N4/graphene nanostructured hybrid materials exhibit superior activities due to the extended light absorption and improved transportation of charge across the interface. We have categorically discussed the multifunctional role of graphene as a functional material, as a conductor, as a solid-state mediator, and as a co-catalyst in g-C3N4/graphene nanostructured hybrids. We hope that this review will offer new insights into lucid design strategies for efficient photocatalysts to address energy and environmental problems in a sustainable manner.Sulagna PatnaikDr. Sulagna Patnaik completed her master's degree at NIT, Rourkela, in 1989 in chemistry. Then, she joined as a lecturer in chemistry at Rayagada Autonomous College, Odisha, in 1991. She is presently working as a reader at Nimapara Autonomous College and pursuing research work at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, SOA University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha. She has published 18 research articles and 2 book chapters in international journals and also filed one patent. Her research work is focused on the development of modified g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for hydrogen energy production and pollution abatement.Arjun BeheraDr. Arjun Behera completed his Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Applied Chemistry at the Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT), Odisha, India in 2015, and then qualified CSIR-NET-LS in June 2018. He worked as a junior project fellow at Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar. He then completed his Ph.D. in 2020 at SOA under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. He is currently working as a Research Assistant at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology (CNSNT), Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, SOA. He is the author of 22 international journal articles, and has filed two patents. His research activities are mainly focused on the synthesis of modified ZnFe2O4-based nanocomposite materials toward H2 energy production and environmental pollutant (organic and inorganic) degradation.Kulamani ParidaProf. Kulamani Parida is a distinguished Professor in Chemistry and the Director of the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, he worked for 37 years at CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry. Dr. Parida has made significant contributions toward exploring the chemistry related to structural, morphological, optical, electronic, and electrochemical properties of a number of wide bandgap and narrow bandgap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulphides, and nitrides for effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, degradation of pollutants, and synthesis of fine chemicals. He has published around 400 papers in high impact factor journals, 7 book chapters, filed 35 patents, and supervised 50 Ph.D. students. The importance and current relevance of his work is amply reflected in the large number of citations (18524) of his work and the H index of 72.
1. Introduction
Heterogeneous semiconductor photocatalysis has received significant awareness due to its potential of solving energy crisis and environmental pollution using solar energy.1 In response to the worldwide energy demand due to fast growth and increase in population, it has become most important to generate an environmentally clean, sustainable, and cost-effective source of energy. Generally, coal, oil, and natural gases (fossil and fuels) remain the major sources of energy as they are easily accessible and effective.2 Moreover, the high energy of combustion of hydrogen (122 kJ mol−1), compared to that of gasoline or any other fossil fuel, and environment-friendly nature with no secondary byproducts makes it a suitable alternative source of energy in the near future.1–3 Traditional methods of hydrogen production involve the formation of a large amount of CO2, resulting in environmental pollution. Since the last few decades, designing a suitable, highly efficient semiconductor photocatalyst for water reduction has been a great challenge. In this context, the utilization of solar energy to produce hydrogen energy photocatalytically by avoiding the formation of any greenhouse gases is emerging as one of the promising techniques. Henceforth, a good number of photoactive semiconducting materials have been explored and their hydrogen production potential as well as environmental remediation activity have also been evaluated.4,5 Heterogeneous semiconductor-based photocatalytic water redox reactions have been found to be a facile and proficient method and are promising alternatives for the generation of energy and the environment.
Among all, 2D semiconducting materials have fascinated researchers since the last few decades. 2-Dimensional nanomaterials correspond to a class of promising photocatalysts that have layered structures and a width of single or many atoms.6 In the search for highly proficient semiconductor-based photocatalysts, metal-free semiconductor photocatalysts such as g-C3N4 (graphitic carbon nitride) have drawn much more interest in the research community due to the simplistic designing method, unique electronic structure, high thermal stability, and abundant nature.7–9 G-C3N4 is an emerging artificial semiconductor photocatalyst and is easily prepared using various easily obtainable nitrogenous starting materials such as melamine, urea, thiourea, cyanamide, and di-cyanamide. The 2D-layered structure of g-C3N4 composed of a linear polymer, which is interconnected with a tri-s-triazine ring via secondary nitrogen, was first discovered by Berzelius and its name was assigned by Liebig.10,11 Wang et al. first discovered metal-free polymeric g-C3N4 toward H2 evolution reaction in 2009.10 In 2004, the discovery of another 2D material consisting of single-sheet graphene also has fascinated the research community due to its excellent thermal, electrical, and mechanical properties. New approaches toward the structural design of g-C3N4 and graphene at the nanoscale level tend to introduce tailored electronic properties and extend their applications as visible light-induced photocatalysts. In particular, elevated specific surface area with more number of reactive sites and high charge mobility endow these 2D/2D hybrid materials with remarkably high performance.10–13 In addition, the design of 2D/2D nanocomposites is favorable for the catalytic stability and the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Currently, 2D/2D heterostructures are more beneficial because of their unique band alignments, high charge transfer behavior, and superior photocatalytic activity. In this direction, our group has also worked extensively on various 2D materials such as LDH, graphene, carbon nitride, boron nitrides, and metal dichalcogenides for application in energy and environment.14–28
In the past few years, some excellent reviews have also been published on 2D nanoheterostructures, which have focused on the design strategies, modifications, tunable band positions, the role of an interface, computational screening, and photocatalytic applications in various fields.29–33 However, a very few number of reviews has been published on g-C3N4 and graphene nanohybrid involving the multifunctional roles of graphene in photocatalysis. Therefore, we have tried to systematically review the design strategies of g-C3N4 and graphene-based nanohybrids in the field of photocatalysts, highlighting the latest advancement in the field of energy and environment. The well-built in-plane chemical bonds along with weak van der Waals interactions make these materials beneficial for surface-related applications. The state-of-the-art for the design and modification of g-C3N4/graphene-based hybrid materials are discussed in detail along with the influence of electronic, electrical, structural, and surface manipulation strategies, giving special emphasis on the diverse roles of graphene. Fig. 1 represents the highlights of the present study involving the diverse role of graphene in various nanohybrids of graphitic C3N4 and graphene toward energy and environmental applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the highlights of the review. 
2. Importance of 2-dimensional carbonaceous materials in photocatalysis
Among various 2-dimensional nanomaterials, carbon-based nanomaterials such as graphitic C3N4, graphene, CNT (carbon nanotube), and modified 2D carbon frameworks have come out as prospective photocatalysts due to their unique characteristics such as quantum confinement effect, efficient visible light absorption, tunable energy levels, superior charge transport, high surface area, easy processability, and high quantum yield.34–37 Carbonaceous semiconducting materials are considered as gifted nanomaterials to convert solar energy into chemical energy. Moreover, carbonaceous materials are plentifully available and involve easily accessible methods for modification at the nanoscale level. The design of various carbon-based functionalized hybrid nanomaterials has also been reported by incorporating carbon-based species into/onto g-C3N4 2D nanosheets with improved electronic properties, electrical conductivity, and synergistic functionalities to realize excellent photocatalytic performance. The induced surface functionality readily improves the interaction through covalent linkage, stability, processability, biocompatibility, and physical adsorption onto the surface of the hybrid nanomaterial. Strong in-plane covalent bond and van der Waals interaction within the planes results in the formation of heterojunctions for the easy channelization of electrons.38–41 In recent research studies, new design strategies have been introduced to engineer the band structure by calculating the number of layers and their interfaces in multi-layered g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrid heterostructures to increase charge transfer between the adjacent layers.42,43 The electronic structure and density of electrons at the Fermi level of these materials play a very important job in the process of adsorption of the reactant molecules on the surface.
3. g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids in photocatalysis
Graphene, among all carbonaceous nanomaterials, has appeared to be a miraculous material in the field of material science. Graphene is known to be made up of a mono-atomic layer of graphite having conjugated sp2 hybridized carbon networks arranged in a hexagonal manner. It has been used in various fields such as solar cells, batteries, fuel cells, photocatalysts, and supercapacitors. It has a wide range of applicability due to its surprisingly high surface area (2630 m2 g−1), high mechanical strength (1060 GPa), excellent electron mobility on its surface (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1), high thermal conductivity (3000 W m−1 K−1), and favorable chemical properties. A defect-free 2D single layer is the most appealing due to speedy charge transport and a more conductive surface to facilitate photocatalytic reactions.44,45 The insertion of graphene as a conductive carbon support favors the charge transferability and tends to enhance the number of active reaction sites to carry out photocatalytic reactions. However, as graphene lacks reactive edges and light absorption, it may be functionalized or modified to make it suitable for reactant diffusion and dispersion of other semiconducting materials on its surface.46–48 In 1859, at Oxford University, Benjamin C. Brodie, for the first time, synthesized GO, and in 1898, L. Staudenmaier attempted it again. Later on, Hummers et al. reported a modified technique for the preparation of GO from graphite, potassium chlorate, and nitric acid. Most commonly GO is formed by the oxidation of natural graphite with strong oxidizing agents such as (KMnO4 and NaNO3) in an acidic medium to insert a good number of oxygenated functional groups. The extent of oxidation also introduces several surface defects on GO, which act as centers of recombination for photogenerated charges and would decrease the photocatalytic activity. Moreover, the presence of a large number of functional groups destructs the conjugation in the graphitic structure and decreases its conductivity, and makes it an insulator. To optimize its photocatalytic properties various research groups reported mild oxidation methods for the formation of GO by introducing a fewer number of functional groups, maintaining its conjugated structure and conductivity. The method of conversion and structure of graphene to reduced graphene oxide is schematically represented in Fig. 2(a). As another emerging carbonaceous material, highly stable crystalline g-C3N4 possesses a lamellar structure, known to have numerous excellent electronic, optical, and physiochemical properties. Recently it has emerged as a potential candidate for numerous photocatalytic applications. With a suitable bandgap of 2.7 eV and appropriate band edge potential, it could undergo photoredox reactions, making use of more energy from solar radiation. However, bulk g-C3N4 due to the low surface area, inadequate light absorption, and quick recombination tendency shows low quantum yield. Graphene, owing to its extraordinary surface area and porosity, is able to overcome the disadvantages of g-C3N4 to some extent, and provides many active sites for photocatalytic reactions. Taking into consideration the most serious limitations of g-C3N4, a number of g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids has been reported by different research groups. The introduction of rGO into the g-C3N4 network has the tendency to (1) widen the light response of g-C3N4 and improve the absorption intensity; (2) favor charge transferability due to excellent conductivity and by the formation of hydrogen bond, and (3) make available more number of active sites for photocatalytic reactions. Owing to the well-organized geometrical interaction between two-layered structures, graphene, and g-C3N4, the fabrication of g-C3N4/graphene hybrids can be easily realized through electrostatic or π–π stacking intermolecular interaction. The 2D/2D hybrid nanostructure between graphene and g-C3N4 has been most commonly created by electrostatic self-assembly of positively charged surfaces of protonated g-C3N4 and electronegative RGO. Theoretical hybrid functional calculations further established the structural and electronic properties of g-C3N4/graphene based nanohybrids successfully.45,48 The geometry and electronic structure of g-C3N4 and graphene and of the g-C3N4/graphene hybrid confirms the presence of π–π type interaction at the interface.49Fig. 2(b) and (c) represent the optimized geometry of monolayer g-C3N4 and graphene, and Fig. 2(d) and (e) represent the corresponding band structure calculated by computational method. Fig. 2(f) and (g) represent the top view and side view of the g-C3N4/graphene hybrid interface and the corresponding band structure (Fig. 2(h)). The concentration of oxygen in rGO is found to be a vital parameter that affects the electrical property of rGO. It helps in the dispersion in polar solvents and allows the formation of nanocomposites with g-C3N4. The band structure and band edge potential of the hybrid can also be controlled easily by changing the wt% of rGO, as shown in Fig. 2(i).52 The extent of shifting in the band potential and change in the semiconducting character of g-C3N4 from n- to p-type is also dependent on the concentration of oxygen incorporated during the formation of rGO and in the g-C3N4/graphene based nanohybrids.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the conversion of graphite to reduced graphene oxide using oxidation, exfoliation, and reduction processes, (b and c) optimized geometry, (d and e) band structure of monolayer g-C3N4 and graphene, (f) optimized graphene/g-C3N4 interface in top view and (g) side view, (h) charge migration at the graphene/g-C3N4 interface (HSE06 functional was used to calculate the band structure of graphene on g-C3N4, where C and N atoms are represented by the green and blue spheres, respectively). (i) Energy level diagram of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO (CN/rGO) photocatalysts with different rGO ratios. (j–l) Schematic design of band bending in rGO/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (l) Adapted with permission from ref. 45 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2012. 
The incorporation of rGO into the g-C3N4 network plays an important role in the photocatalytic performance due to certain voltage loss during the electron transfer process resulting from the energy difference between the CB of g-C3N4 and rGO. Moreover, the presence of oxygen rich sites in rGO has the capacity to form crosslinked C–O–C bonds. The presence of these C–O–C bonds formed due to strong π–π stacking interaction results in positive shifting VB edge potential of the g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrid.36 Moreover, the shorter spatial distance of the C–O–C bonds further lowered the local energy barrier for intermolecular charge carrier transfer through the cohesive interface. With tunable oxygen concentration, a staggered band alignment was achieved in the nanohybrid.
Several studies have showed that it is conceivable to enhance the amount of charge carriers on the g-C3N4 photocatalysts by inducing comparable sp2 π-conjugated carbon structures for modifying the electronic characteristics from the customized band structure. Coupling between two π-conjugated carbon structures favor interfacial charge transport, resulting in band bending in the rGO/g-C3N4 nanohybrids. Fermi levels have the ability to alter the space charge areas at the interfacial contact surface, as shown in Fig. 2(c). During the band bending process, free photocarrier aggregation might occur along the interface between rGO and g-C3N4. The intrinsic architecture of g-C3N4 is altered by these triggered internal electric fields, resulting in the development of direct Z-scheme (Fig. 2(k)) and type II (Fig. 2(l)) heterojunctions.
The design process mostly involves the modification of the g-C3N4 structure for the development of reverse charge on its surface so that it can readily assemble with the RGO sheets. For the synthesis of g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids, various synthetic methods such as thermal annealing, solvothermal method, photoassisted electrostatic assembly, and chemical impregnation are used. However, most common design processes involve chemical impregnation, followed by calcination, involving nitrogen-rich precursors of g-C3N4 (cyanamide, dicyandiamide, melamine, urea, ethylenediamine) and graphene oxide.49,50 The mixture of melamine and GO was reduced by hydrazine monohydrate with constant stirring and then calcined at 823 K. Depending on the graphene content, the surface area and light absorption capacity of the hybrid varies.51 Depending on the uniqueness of graphene, it may act as a support material, may introduce a functionality, may act as a conductor to increase charge separation, or as a solid-state electron mediator in a ternary heterostructure through Z-scheme mechanism, or in the formation of 0-D quantum dots, it may act as a co-catalyst in case of various g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Types of various graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid heterostructures. (a) Graphene as a support material, (b) graphene as a functional material, (c) graphene as a semiconductor forming the heterojunction, (d) graphene as a solid-state of electron mediator, and (e) graphene as a co-catalyst. 
3.1 Graphene as a support material in g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids
The unique structural features of GO can notably enhance the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 by extending the π-conjugation, which helps in the mobility of photogenerated electrons, promotes the charge separation on the surface of g-C3N4, and increases the light absorption in the visible region. Owing to the presence of surface functional groups, single or even a few layers of GO sheets exceptionally load other nanomaterials onto the high surface area and open up new opportunities in photo/electrocatalysis. Furthermore, the reduction of GO (sp3 carbon bond) to RGO (sp2 carbon bond) makes a more efficient charge transfer and offers a conductive 2D carbon network. The reduction of GO mainly us focused on the loss of oxygen functional groups to form RGO, which acts as an exceptional conductive support, which helps in efficient exciton separation and charge transport.
Li et al. reported the designing of a g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid through a cross-linked approach, as shown in Fig. 4(a).52 The electronic band structure of the nanohybrid can be controlled by varying the cyanamide to the graphene oxide weight ratio during synthesis. The fabricated g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrids having different band structures were investigated toward the photodegradation of 4-nitrophenol and RhB. The X-ray diffraction patterns of neat g-C3N4, RGO, and g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrids with varying RGO ratios are depicted in Fig. 4(b), which shows a broad diffraction peak at 24.3°, indicating the presence of loosely-stacked RGO sheets. It was also observed that the intensity of the (002) peaks increased on increasing the wt% of the RGO ratio in the nanohybrid. Moreover, with increasing RGO ratio in the g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid, a red-shift was observed in the absorption edge along with the narrowing of the bandgap from 2.5 eV in the case of neat g-C3N4 to 1.55 eV in the case of the nanohybrid. The TEM images (Fig. 4(c and d)) of neat g-C3N4 and the g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid along with the SAED patterns (inserted) further explains the platelet-like textures of both and the distribution of RGO sheets to have a negligible effect on the layered structure of g-C3N4.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the reaction pathway and the g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposite (b) XRD patterns of pure g-C3N4, rGO, and g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposites. (c and d) Both HRTEM and SAED patterns (insets) of pure g-C3N4 and CN/rGO nanocomposites. (e) MS plot of the as-synthesized photocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 with permission from Wiley-VCH Copyright 2013. 
During thermal conversion, the oxygen-rich functional groups (–OH, –COOH, etc.) found on the surface of GO can play an important function as cross-linkers by forming C–O–C bonds rather than inter-layer π–π interaction and are mainly responsible for the narrowing of the bandgap and better light absorption. The band edge calculation from the Mott–Schottky plot (Fig. 4(e)), ECB, and EVB potential of the n-type g-C3N4/RGO (2.5%) nanohybrid was found to be −0.96 V and 1.38 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), respectively. Compared to all the prepared nanohybrids, g-C3N4/RGO (2.5%) nanohybrid with the most positive VB potential explains the maximum degradation of RhB (100% in 75 min) and 4-nitrophenol (52% in 150 min). This literature satisfactorily explains the role of RGO as an electron collector to decrease the rate of photoexcited charge recombination, increased light absorption behavior, and shows excellent photocatalytic performance.
Similarly, Sun et al. investigated the ORR performance of g-C3N4 dispersed on chemically converted sheets of graphene in the nanohybrid with improved conductivity and durability.51 Recently, Haffeze et al. reported a ternary RGO-loaded InVO4–GO–g-C3N4-3 monohybrid by the wet impregnation method, which shows efficient H2 evolution, i.e., 7449 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 45 times more compared to InVO4 and 10 times more than that of neat CN.53 The bending and stretching frequencies in the FTIR spectra indicate the presence of GO, InVO4, and InVO4–GO–g-C3N4-3 nanocomposites, as shown in Fig. 5(a). However, the peak intensities in the case of GO were found to decrease significantly in the composite, suggesting reduction during calcination. Furthermore, a shift in the vibrational frequency in the case of g-C3N4 toward higher wavenumber (blue shift) indicates the extension in the conjugation after the incorporation of InVO4 and GO. The reduction in the bandgap energy and superior light absorption capacity of the heterojunction can be attributed to the successful hybridization between InVO4 and GO, which sped up the process of charge transfer, as depicted in Fig. 5(b). The ICR-3 nanohybrid also showed no perceptible decrease in the activity in the reusable study (Fig. 5(c and d)).
 Fig. 5  (a) FTIR spectra of the as-synthesized samples, (b) reaction mechanism and charge transfer processes of the nanocomposites, (c) H2 energy production of the as-prepared samples, (d) reusability plot of the nanocomposites for four cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. 
Compared to other carbonaceous materials graphene possesses an exceptionally high surface area that improves interfacial contact between other incorporated materials. Moreover, the defective sites present on the surface of graphene-based nanohybrids work as nucleation centers to incorporate other semiconducting nanoparticles. Specifically, reduced graphene oxide (RGO), having a negatively charged surface, attracts other materials onto the surface to get adsorbed. Due to this attractive force, the incorporated nanoparticles get distributed and prevent agglomeration. Also, the surface can be modified with various surfactants to improve the adsorption efficiency and photocatalytic activity.
3.2 Graphene as a functional material in g-C3N4/graphene-based heterojunctions
Although graphene is known to have zero bandgaps, the functionalization of graphene sheets by oxidation results in the formation of graphene oxide (GO). The formation of graphene oxide leads to a change in the state of hybridization from sp2 to sp3 and an increase in the electronegativity of the oxygen atoms. Due to this, GO sheets behave as p-type semiconducting materials and develop a bandgap. The bandgap of GO mainly depends upon the oxidation level and can be easily tuned by controlling the extent of oxidation.54 Also, owing to the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups on the GO surface, other semiconducting materials or their precursors get deposited on GO sheets more readily than that on graphene. This would enable the enhancement in the stability as well as the dispersion of the incorporated material. Most commonly, GO is formed by the oxidation of natural graphite in the presence of strong oxidizing agents (KMnO4 and NaNO3) in an acidic medium. Due to the introduction of a good number of oxygenated functional groups on the edge and basal planes of GO, nanosheets of about 1 nm thickness are formed with good dispersibility. The excess surface defects upon oxidation also act as centers of recombination for photogenerated charges and would decrease the photocatalytic performance. Thus, upon high-temperature treatment with NH3, these defects on the surface of the GO sheets can be repaired by removing some of the carboxyl and epoxy groups and by the insertion of various nitrogen functionalities, i.e., pyridinic, pyrrolic, and quaternary groups. Furthermore, the bandgap of GO can be decreased due to the delocalization of electrons through the overlapping of π-orbitals of N and C atoms; also, it results in a slight upward shift in the position of HOMO.32 Thus, designing processes that mostly involve the modification of the g-C3N4 structure for the development of reverse charge on its surface, so that it can readily assemble with the RGO sheets is important. Though GO shows superb adaptability for coupling with g-C3N4, the presence of an optimum number of functional groups through strong interactions and the residual defects will significantly reduce the electrical conductivity by lowering the charge carrier separation and finally degrade the photocatalytic performance.32 Hence, it is highly essential to optimize GO sheets through reduction to have reduced graphene sheets (RGO), which can couple with 2D g-C3N4 easily to extend the photocatalytic performance. Generally, a variety of reducing agents such as NaBH4, hydrazine monohydrate, hydroiodic acid, vitamin C, and hydroquinone have been used to synthesize RGO through the chemical reduction strategy. However, due to hydrophobic property and strong π–π staking, RGO sheets get easily aggregated. To overcome this drawback and to improve the dispersibility, methods such as pH control or chemical modification may be adopted.
Recently, a good number of attractive and intriguing nanohybrids of g-C3N4 with GO and RGO were established as the most exceptional metal-free visible light-induced photocatalysts.55 It has been established that by calculating the RGO weight ratio, the oxidation power of g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid was found to increase by a negative shift in the VB potential. Moreover, it has also been reported that the formation of a heterojunction between the n-type g-C3N4 and p-type RGO can easily modulate the band structure by varying the doping amount of RGO. Yang et al. investigated a g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid, which involves a combination of g-C3N4 with doped graphene as the conductive component that synergistically assists in proton adsorption and HER activity.56 Yang explained the creation of a larger number of surface-active sites for HER after the introduction of g-C3N4 on doped graphene due to good chemical coupling and electronic effect. Furthermore, the method of introduction of g-C3N4 through the sonication of the mixture of dicyandiamide and B-doped graphene (BG), upon evaporation, lyophilization, and polymerization, was found to strengthen the coupling effect and successfully adjust the surface chemical and electronic properties of the nanohybrid. The porous layered structure of g-C3N4/B-doped graphene with available defects works as dynamic catalytic centers for hydrogen adsorption and enhanced HER activity.56 As reported by Zheng et al., the incorporation of phosphorus and nitrogen atoms as dopants was found to stimulate the carbon atoms in graphene, facilitate the adsorption of a proton, and reduce to show excellent HER reactivity.57 However, excellent catalytic activities were reported using boron atom as a p-type dopant, in comparison to nitrogen atom as an n-type dopant, on the crystal lattice of graphene.56 This improved activity was mainly accredited to the lower electronegativity value and positively polarized B-atom compared to that of C-atom, due to which boron attracts negatively polarized oxygen atoms more readily, leading to the activation of O–O cleavage.
Xu et al. explained for the first time the importance and role of oxygen in g-C3N4/RGO-based nanohybrids.55 g-C3N4 and RGO interfacial contact was also systematically investigated using density functional theory studies of the nanohybrid. It was observed that in comparison to isolated mono layered g-C3N4, the bandgap energy of the nanohybrid was found to decrease at higher oxygen concentration. Fascinatingly, an optimum oxygen concentration even modifies the direct-band gap of the nanohybrid to the indirect-band gap. In the case of the g-C3N4/RGO-based nanohybrid, a type-II, staggered band alignment was obtained at higher oxygen concentration. O atoms on the surface of RGO, being negatively charged, became active sites for adsorption to carry out photoredox reactions. From the results of the hybrid functional calculations, it was observed that the interfacial interaction is largely dependent on the oxygen atom concentration. Furthermore, it was also observed that by controlling the concentration of oxygen, the band structure can also be readily adjusted. The optimum concentration of oxygen will significantly increase the ability of photocatalytic water redox reaction over the g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid.
Mou et al. designed g-C3N4/NGQDs (nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots) nanohybrid to investigate the visible light-induced H2 evolution activity.58 During nitrogen doping, a number of surface amino groups are introduced in NGQDs, which can provide reaction sites for binding with g-C3N4 by the deamination reaction. During the preparation process by the thermal condensation of urea and NGQDs, lone pair of electrons on NGQDs get attached covalently through the N–C bonds of tri-s-triazine units, resulting in the π–p–π network, as shown in the TEM image (Fig. 6(a–d)).
 Fig. 6  (a) Reaction strategy to prepare the NGQDs/g-C3N4 composite, (b) TEM image and (c and d) HRTEM images of the NGQDs(1.66)/g-C3N4 nanocomposites, (e) UV-vis spectra of the as-synthesized photocatalysts, (f) direct band gap of pure g-C3N4, NGQDs, and NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanocomposites, g) photocatalytic H2 evolution of the as-prepared photocatalysts, (h) band edge potential arrangements of g-C3N4, NGQDs, and NGQDs/g-C3N4 composites and exciton separation process for the NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanocomposite under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
During the synthesis of the NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanohybrid, the NGQDs, when calcined with urea (the precursor of g-C3N4), would notably alter the electronic structure through reduction and change the amino groups present on the surface (C–NH) to tertiary N groups (N–C3) of NGQDs, resulting in the reduction of the bandgap energy. Neat g-C3N4 shows an absorption edge at ∼460 nm, related to the bandgap of ∼2.70 eV. However, after coupling with the NGQDs (1.66 wt%), the absorption edge of the NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanohybrid is red-shifted and the bandgap decreases to ∼2.55 eV in the case of NGQDs/g-C3N4. The reduction in the bandgap is due to the extension in π conjugation in the 2D plane (Fig. 6(e) and (f)). Mou et al. investigated visible light-induced H2 evolution rates over NGQDs(x)/g-C3N4 nanohybrid (0.5 mg mL−1) for 3 hours of irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) (Fig. 6(g)). Compared to neat g-C3N4, the optimized NGQDs ratio (1.66 wt%) shows an enhanced H2 evolution rate of 139.6 μmol h−1, which is about 7.7 times more than that of the neat g-C3N4 (18.2 μmol h−1).58 The higher H2 evolution rate in NGQDs(1.66)/g-C3N4 nanohybrid explains better charge separation due to the generation of new bands by NGQDs into the g-C3N4 network. Moreover, wavelength-dependent H2 production was also investigated and suggested a higher rate at 520 ± 15 nm due to more new bands. The intensity of PL emission peaks of the as-synthesized samples and at different excitation wavelengths further confirm maximum quenching in the case of NGQDs (1.66)/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. The PL emission peaks are due to interband electronic transitions caused by the surface defects. This decreased PL intensity suggests efficient charge separation due to integration with the NGQDs in the g-C3N4 lattice, which is favorable due to the presence of the π–p–π network and the electron-withdrawing nature of the N atoms within the conjugated system.
This deamination coupling among NGQDs and the g-C3N4 matrix is capable of generating new energy levels within the bandgap through a unique π–p–π link, which decreases the bandgap and thus strengthens the absorption of light radiation. The photogenerated electrons of NGQDs/g-C3N4 not only gets transferred to the CB of g-C3N4 but also infuses directly into the newly created energy levels, as shown in Fig. 6(h). Moreover, the presence of unique π–p–π connections significantly decreases the charge transfer distance, considerably increasing the charge separation and the photocatalytic performance.
3.3 Graphene as a conductive material in the g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids
The design of g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids is of great significance as they improve the conductivity as well as the photocatalytic performance. By the introduction of graphene into the g-C3N4 network, the transfer of electron is facilitated as the graphene sheets serve the purpose of electron-conducting channels. The presence of π-conjugation and oxygen-containing functional groups on GO simultaneously makes it sensitive for light absorption and favors the photocatalytic performance due to its strong hydrophilic nature. By incorporating oxygen-containing functional groups, the degree of oxidation varies and GO could change its behavior from a conductor to an insulator depending on the C/O ratio. Thus, optimum functionalization could facilitate surface modification and make it suitable to design hybrids with other semiconducting materials. The most commonly used thermal annealing method for the design of g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids usually results in hybrids with a low specific surface area due to the aggregation of the 2D-sheets of graphene and g-C3N4. To overcome this discrepancy, Xiang et al. reported a nanocasting method for the design of sandwich-like g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids.59 The synthesis procedure involves the preparation of GO-based silica nanosheets by the hydrolysis of tetraethylortho-silicate and the cationic surfactant. The TEM image (Fig. 7(a) and (b)) of the nanohybrid confirms a layered and more compact structure than that of graphite as g-C3N4 got sandwiched between the graphene sheets during the calcination process. All the g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids are found to have higher specific surface areas, which increase with an increase in the graphene amount. Moreover, optical absorption is also found to increase in the case of the g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids as the color gradually changes from yellow to gray with the addition of graphene, as in Fig. 7(c). The series of g-C3N4/graphene nanohybrids designed by Xiang et al. were investigated for photocatalytic H2-evolution activity in the presence of Pt as the cocatalyst (Fig. 7(d)).59 After the formation of the nanohybrid, g-C3N4 gets anchored onto the graphene surface and results in a layered photocatalytic material. Graphene sheets behave as conductive channels to improve charge carrier separation and thus enhance H2 production activity with good stability (Fig. 7(e)). Upon irradiation with visible light, electrons (e) get excited from the VB (N 2p orbital) to the CB (C 2p orbital) of g-C3N4, leaving behind holes in the VB. A fraction of electrons that moved onto the surface of Pt nanoparticles get accumulated and effectively carry out water reduction reaction to produce H2. However, in the presence of graphene sheets, these photogenerated electrons get transferred to graphene sheets from the CB of g-C3N4 due to excellent electronic conductivity, leading to effective charge separation. The mechanisms of the H2 evolution rate are shown in Fig. 7(f).
 Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) graphene oxide (b) and GC 1.0 composites, (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of the as-synthesized samples, (d) rate of H2 evolution over the as-prepared photocatalysts, (e) reusability study, (f) mechanistic pathway of H2 evolution. Adapted with permission from ref. 59 with permission from ACS, Copyright 2011. 
Zhao et al. reported the design of another metal-free g-C3N4/RGO 2D–2D nanohybrid decorated with B-doped g-C3N4 (BCND) through a facile one-pot hydrothermal method.60 The two solutions having opposite charges, i.e., protonated g-C3N4 (positively charged) and RGO (negatively charged) can form 2D–2D nanohybrid easily due to the electrostatic force of attraction. During hydrothermal treatment, BCNDs, being negatively charged, get distributed on the surface of protonated g-C3N4. The surface charge of protonated g-C3N4, GO, and BCNDs were confirmed from the zeta potential measurements. The zeta potential value of g-C3N4 gets transformed from −16.6 mV to +16.7 mV upon protonation, whereas the zeta potential values of GO and BCNDs were −15.5 mV and −0.06 mV, respectively (Fig. 8(a)). Thus, good self-assembly is developed to form a ternary nanohybrid. By forming a hybrid with GO, the absorption edge of g-C3N4 was blue-shifted from 466 nm to 446 nm. The bandgap also becomes larger owing to the formation of a gauzy sheet-like g-C3N4 and a strong quantum confinement effect. Similarly, PL emission spectra also show more intense peaks after protonation upon excitation at 325 nm. However, after the incorporation of GO, there was a quenching of the PL intensity in the case of the g-C3N4/RGO 2D–2D nanohybrid, representing the proficient separation of electron–hole pairs. When BCNDs get dispersed on the surface of the g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid, the intensity of PL emission spectra in the case of g-C3N4/BCNDs is found to be the weakest among all, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The as-synthesized ternary nanohybrid (g-C3N4/rGO/BCNDs) photocatalyst was found to exhibit a superior H2 evolution rate in comparison to the g-C3N4/rGO nanohybrid and neat counterparts. g-C3N4/rGO/BCNDs show the highest rate of H2 evolution, i.e., 741.4 μmol h−1 g−1, with a 19.0% apparent quantum efficiency at 420 nm (Fig. 8(c)). This superior H2 evolution rate may be due to the larger specific surface area of g-C3N4/rGO/BCNDs (52.13 m2 g−1), which can make available more surface active sites and a reduction in the charge transport path after the introduction of BCNDs. The improved H2 evolution rate was further supported by the largest photocurrent generated in the case of the g-C3N4/rGO/BCNDs nanohybrid, suggesting favorable charge transfer through the interface and efficient charge separation. Upon visible light irradiation, g-C3N4/RGO nanosheets were excited, wherein rGO serves as a medium for electron transport to form a Schottky junction, which restrains electron–hole recombination and increases the activity. However, the incorporation of BCNDs results in band bending and an internal electric field was formed in the interface of the g-C3N4 and BCNDs to promote electron–hole pair separation. The mechanism of hydrogen evolution is schematically represented in (Fig. 8(d)).
 Fig. 8  (a) Zeta potential of BCNDs, GO, g-C3N4, and protonated g-C3N4, (b) PL spectra of the as-prepared samples, (c) rate of photocatalytic H2 evolution over different samples, (d) schematic representation of the photocatalytic mechanism showing the role of GO as a conductive support. Adapted with permission from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier Copyright 2019. 
A novel hybrid g-C3N4/RGO (CN-G) photocatalyst was prepared by Ai et al. through in situ thermal condensations of a mixture of melamine with GO.61 Graphene was found to behave as a promising promoter as well as conductor for the photooxidation of phenol and MB degradation over g-C3N4. After hybridization, GO and g-C3N4 formed closer interfacial interactions, resulting in a compactly-packed porous structure. The pore volume and surface area of the g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrids were found to have greater pore volume (0.118 vs. 0.067 cm3 g−1 of g-C3N4) and larger surface area (44.63 vs. 14.73 m2 g−1 of g-C3N4). With the incorporation of RGO, the absorption edge was also red-shifted and the bandgap energy decreases to 2.33 eV. These results explain increased light absorption by the hybrid photocatalyst due to the incorporation of graphene. MB, being a cationic dye, preferably gets adsorbed through the oxygen-containing functional groups on the porous carbon materials. The adsorption of MB over neat g-C3N4 is only 3% in 30 min. However, MB adsorption was found to increase significantly by the introduction of rGO in the CN-G samples and increases with an increase in the content of rGO. The rate of MB removal was found to be about 20% and 30% by adsorption on CN-G-0.4 and CN-G-0.6 in 30 min, respectively, whereas about 90% of MB gets removed by adsorption in 180 min over neat g-C3N4. The removal rate was about 95% on CN-G-0.1 and CN-G-0.2 and 100% on the CN-G-0.4 and CN-G-0.6 samples. It was observed that both the adsorption of MB and the absorption of light were found to increase with an increase in the graphene content, and thus, the photocatalytic activity was also enhanced.61 CN-G-0.4 was further used to study the photodegradation of phenol. It has been observed that about 60% of phenol was removed in 210 min in the presence of 0.2 g L−1 of catalyst dosage. With an increase in the catalyst loading to 0.5 and 1.5 g L−1, phenol degradation was about 75% and 87%, respectively. The apparent reaction rate constants with different amounts of catalyst loading (0.2, 0.5, and 1.5 g L−1) were found to be 4.59 × 10−3, 6.35 × 10−3, and 8.71 × 10−3 min−1, respectively. With an increase in the catalyst loading, more photogenerated active sites were obtained and the introduction of graphene could appreciably improve the optical absorption, thus increasing the photooxidation activity. The CN/graphene nanohybrids facilitated the transfer of photoelectrons from the VB of g-C3N4 to the CB and is then channelized to the graphene sheet, which results in a decrease in the rate of charge recombination. Moreover, the extra electron, which was transferred into the sp2 hybridized carbon network, maybe inhibited at the Lewis basic sites of rGO but get transferred to the water and oxygen molecules from the basal plane and the defective sites of graphene to form active radicals responsible for MB degradation and oxidation of phenol.
Hafeez et al. investigated visible light-induced H2 evolution over the RGO-supported g-C3N4/TiO2 ternary nanohybrid.62 The photocatalyst was prepared by the ultrasonication-assisted simple wet impregnation method by varying the g-C3N4 to TiO2 weight ratio. The incorporation of RGO and TiO2 results in a red-shift in the absorption edge from 455 nm to 505 nm. Thus, the results increased the photoabsorption and improved the photocatalytic performance. It was found that a mass ratio of 70:30 in the case of g-C3N4 and TiO2 in the ternary nanohybrid exhibits maximum H2 evolution rate (23143 μmol g−1 h−1) through water reduction in the presence of glycerol–water solution as the sacrificial agent,62 which was about 78 times and 2.5 times more than that of neat g-C3N4 (296 μmol g−1 h−1) and TiO2 (11954 μmol g−1 h−1), respectively. Effective H2 evolution was further supported by reduced PL intensity, confirming the formation of a p–n heterojunction and faster transfer of photoelectrons through the interface. Further quenching of the PL intensity by loading RGO reveals faster electron mobility due to low resistance offered by RGO and the effective separation of charge carriers. Hafeez and group also carried out H2 evolution activity over the ternary nanohybrid by taking different sacrificial agents (methanol, TEA), which shows 13978 μmol g−1 h−1 and 8510 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. To comprehend the formation mechanism, Hafeez carried out the preparation using two different methods. In the first method, g-C3N4 was added to a mixture of RGO and TiO2 as g-C3N4–TiO2/rGO (CTR). In another way, he prepared the nanohybrid by adding TiO2 to a mixture of g-C3N4 and RGO after ultrasonication as TiO2–g-C3N4/rGO (TCR). From the rate of H2 evolution, it was found that the CTR sample shows better hydrogen evolution compared to TCR, which may be due to the ease of transfer of electrons through the interface formed between TiO2 and RGO through direct contact. However, the role of MoS2 in favoring the charge transfer activity of g-C3N4/reduced graphene nanohybrid was investigated by Yuan et al.63 Designing a well-defined 2-dimensional ternary nanoheterojunction offers an intimate contact interface, provides a short diffusion path, and superior charge transportation toward enhanced H2 evolution. The g-C3N4/RGO/MoS2 photocatalyst was designed by the pyrolysis method to couple g-C3N4 and RGO in an argon atmosphere. GO gets reduced on the g-C3N4 surface prepared formed from urea and gets attached to the surface. Subsequently, through hydrothermal treatment, a solution of g-C3N4/RGO nanohybrid and (NH4)2MoS4 in dimethylformamide results in the formation of the g-C3N4/RGO/MoS2 ternary nanoheterojunction through the crystallization of MoS2. As reported by Yuan et al., the efficient H2 evolution activity of the g-C3N4/RGO/MoS2 ternary nanohybrid was chiefly accredited to the combined effect of RGO and MoS2, where MoS2 acts as a charge transfer path and favors charge separation. However, an optimum amount of MoS2 is helpful for efficient photocatalytic activity. Due to the presence of black-colored RGO or MoS2, light absorption is shielded and the photocatalytic activity decreases. H2 evolution by g-C3N4/RGO with 0.5 wt% RGO was found to be 48 μmol g−1 h−1 because of accelerated charge transfer rate.63 Although the presence of a small content of MoS2 (0.4%) noticeably increased the rate of H2 to 138 μmol g−1 h−1, the optimum amount of MoS2 was found to be 1.2%, which shows the maximum rate of H2 evolution (317 μmol g−1 h−1) with an apparent quantum yield of 3.4%. Moreover, the catalyst was found to be photostable and shows a steady rate of H2 evolution during the next four successive runs with H2 evolution found to be 317, 314, and 313 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively.63 Xu et al. in another study reported the effect of doping Co-atom in the MoS2 lattice. Due to the incorporation of unsaturated atoms in the MoS2/g-C3N4 nanohybrid, the number of active sites increases.64 MoS2 lacks a sufficient number of active sites due to the presence of coordinatively unsaturated atoms in MoS2 that restrict its performance. However, in the CoMoS2/rGO/g-C3N4 nanohybrid, the synergistic effect of RGO and Co-doped MoS2 nanosheets is supposed to increase the conductivity and charge separation. MoS2 usually behaves like a good electrocatalyst due to the less number of available active sites and its photocatalytic performance is quite low. However, by designing the heterojunction, its interface conductivity can be increased and the photocatalytic activity can also be enhanced. Xu et al. designed a ternary heterojunction by introducing RGO in CoMoS2/g-C3N4 by the solvothermal method, in which the high conductivity of RGO plays a vital role in the electron transfer process and Co-doping in MoS2 increases the number of active sites in the MoS2 nanosheets. The preparation process involves Co(NO3)2 and (NH4)2MoS4 solution as the starting materials to design Co-doped MoS2 due to the formation of well-built 3d–π interactions connecting Co2+ and MoS42−. During hydrothermal treatment, RGO gets attached to of the g-C3N4 surface through strong π–π interaction. As reported by Xu et al., XPS analysis shows the atomic ratio of Mo6+/Mo4+ in the case of the MoS2/RGO/g-C3N4 nanohybrid, which is found to increase from 0.74 to 0.98 by Co-doping in the case of CoMoS2/RGO/g-C3N4. An increase in the Mo6+/Mo4+ atomic ratio confirms the creation of more defect levels through Co-doping. The photocatalytic H2 evolution rate under visible light over neat g-C3N4 nanosheets showed 11 μmol g−1 h−1, which was almost negligible. Upon loading 0.5 wt% RGO, the rate of H2 evolution was found to increase to 18 μmol g−1 h−1. However, by incorporating 2 wt% MoS2 as the cocatalyst, the rate increased to 279 μmol g−1 h−1 and in the case of the CoS/rGO/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure, it increases to 400 μmol g−1 h−1. By incorporating Co-doped MoS2, the H2 evolution rate was significantly increased to 684 μmol g−1 h−1 along with excellent stability, which was solely dependent on the atomic ratio of Co/Mo.64 The enhanced photocatalytic performance (about 30%) due to RGO loading is mainly accredited to the function of RGO as an electron mediator, which greatly influences the transfer of charge carriers. The insertion of transition metal (Co) in MoS2 offers an effective technique to modulate the geometry and increase the active sites through bonding with coordinatively unsaturated atoms. Thus, Co doping by introducing more defects in the crystal structure further enhances the H2 evolution activity through catalytic activity. Therefore, the enhanced photocatalytic activity was due to the synergistic effect of efficient light absorption, superior interfacial charge transfer, and good adsorption over the defect sites.65,66
3.4 Graphene as an electron mediator in the g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrid
In the race of designing artificial Z-scheme systems to provide an efficient mechanism for charge separation, a combination of two semiconductor photocatalysts with strong redox ability is highly essential to carry out several photocatalytic reactions through the Z-scheme charge transfer process, which involves the combination of electrons from the CB of one semiconductor system with the holes present in the VB of another semiconductor. Thus, this helps in decreasing the recombination tendency of the photogenerated charge carriers and increasing the efficiency. The whole process requires an electron mediator to offer sites for charge recombination and channelization. Therefore, the selection and development of a suitable mediator is a big challenge before the researchers. Moreover, the low diffusion rate of the ions in the liquid state restricts the transfer of charge carriers. To overcome such drawbacks, insoluble solid-state electron mediators are reported to solve the purpose best by acting as a shuttle between the two photosystems. Taking this into account, the major requirement of a solid-state electron mediator is high conductivity, less energy barrier, minimum interfacial resistance, shielding effect, and high stability. GO acts as an efficient solid-state electron mediator. Among a good number of studies involving GO as an electron mediator in g-C3N4 based systems, some of the recent studies are discussed below.
Manchala and group designed a smart g-C3N4/graphene junction-based ternary photocatalyst by inserting ZnIn2S4. ZnIn2S4 (ZIS) is a chalcogenide (AB2X4) photocatalytic material that has drawn significant interest due to its high chemical stability, high surface area, and good absorption with suitably narrow bandgap energy.67 In addition, by developing a ternary hybrid photocatalytic system, the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers can be successfully suppressed at the interface. Manchala et al. synthesized a graphene-based ZnIn2S4/g-C3N4 (ZIS-CN-G) smart architecture through a one-step simple hydrothermal route that showed excellent H2 evolution under visible light, i.e., 477 μmol h−1 g−1. They also have synthesized various binary nanocomposites using neat ZnIn2S4, graphene, and g-C3N4 (CN) materials, i.e., g-C3N4/graphene (CN-G), ZnIn2S4/g-C3N4 (ZIS/CN), and ZnIn2S4/graphene (ZIS/G) to investigate their hydrogen evolution performance. The FE-SEM image of neat ZIS shows marigold flower-like microspheres and in the CN-G nanohybrid, tiny 2D nanoflakes of CN were found to be evenly dispersed on the graphene surface. In the case of the ZIS-CN-G nanohybrid also (Fig. 9(a–f)), the ZIS flower and CN nanoflakes were well distributed on the surface of the 2D graphene sheets. The results of nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms display higher surface area of the ZIS-CN-G nanohybrid (189 m2 g−1) than that of ZIS-CN (79 m2 g−1) and ZIS-G (127 m2 g−1), which can make more surface active sites available for adsorption. The rate of H2 evolution over the synthesized photocatalysts was also dependent on the irradiation time during 4 h of solar light irradiation along with good stability and reusability. The rate of H2 evolution in the case of the ZIS-CN-G nanohybrid is 477 μmol h−1 g−1, which is much more than that of the corresponding neat counterparts such as neat CN (6.1 μmol h−1 g−1), neat ZIS (139 μmol h−1 g−1), CN-G (192 μmol h−1 g−1), ZIS-CN (184 μmol h−1 g−1), and ZIS-G (400 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 9(g)). The ZIS-CN-G nanohybrid illustrated 78.2, 3.4, 2.5, 2.6, and 1.2 times increased rate in comparison to the corresponding binary nanohybrids.67 This enhanced photocatalytic performance of the ZIS-CN-G nanohybrid is ascribed to the trapping and transport of photoelectrons immediately due to graphene, which is confirmed from the photocurrent data. During the photocatalytic reaction, photoexcitation results in the transfer of electrons to the CB, leaving behind holes in the VB of ZIS and CN in the presence of sacrificial agents (Na2S and Na2SO4). Because of the difference in the band potentials and proper band alignment, the electrons get transferred from the CB of CN to the CB of ZIS through a heterojunction mechanism and reduce H+ to H2. The graphene sheets not only trap the electrons but also act as a transport medium in the ZIS-CN-G smart nanojunction architecture, thus promoting charge separation, as shown in Fig. 9(h).
 Fig. 9  FE-SEM images of (a) ZIS, (b) CN-G, (c) ZIS-G, (d) ZIS-CN, (e and f) ZIS-CN-G samples, (g) bar plot represent the comparative H2 evolution plot of different samples, (h) charge transfer mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 67 with permission from RSC Copyright 2019. 
Recently, Gebreslassie et al. reported the design of a magnetically separable g-C3N4/graphene/NiFe2O4 (CGN) nanohybrid through a hydrothermal method to investigate the photodegradation of MO (Fig. 10).68 The light absorption properties of the as-prepared photocatalyst showed that maximum absorption of light in the range of 200–700 nm are shown in Fig. 10(a). From the PL analysis, the reduced PL intensity of the CGN-25% nanohybrid among all the synthesized photocatalysts confirmed a larger lifetime of the charge carriers and supports the efficient MO degradation activity (Fig. 10(b)). The transfer of charges at the interface of the two semiconducting materials may be owing to the type-II heterojunction or Z-scheme charge transfer process. The CGN-25% nanohybrid was reported to exhibit 15 and 6 times higher rate of photodegradation in comparison to that of neat NiFe2O4 and g-C3N4, respectively (Fig. 10(c)). The improved photocatalytic performance was chiefly ascribed to the synergistic effect of light absorption of NiFe2O4 as a sensitizer and the insertion of GO as a solid-state electron mediator between NiFe2O4 and g-C3N4, which critically influences the separation of charges through the direct Z-scheme mechanism (Fig. 10(d)). Moreover, the considerable optical properties and ease of recyclability up to six consecutive cycles without any loss due to the magnetic property makes the nanohybrid sustainable (Fig. 10(e)). However, from various experimental studies and scavenger tests, the actual charge transfer was found to be through Z-scheme. Graphene sheets as a mediator speed up the migration of charges from NiFe2O4 to g-C3N4 following a direct Z-scheme charge transfer pathway. Thus, a synergistic effect of NiFe2O4 as the sensitizer and electron channelization through graphene sheet to promote charge separation and stability improves the photoredox ability of the nanohybrid.
 Fig. 10  (a) UV-vis spectra of pure g-C3N4, NiFe2O4, and CGN nanocomposites, (b) PL spectra of the as-prepared photocatalyst, (c) effect of the scavenger on the degradation of MO over the CGN-25% nanocomposites, (d) Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for CGN nanocomposites under visible light, (e) reusability plot of CGN-25% photocatalyst under light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 68 with permission from RSC, Copyright 2019. 
A ternary CdS/RGO/g-C3N4 nanohybrid was fabricated by Jo et al. through the hydrothermal method. CdS-Integrated RGO and exfoliated nanosheets of g-C3N4 were found to show efficient H2 evolution and atrazine (an herbicide) degradation under visible light irradiation.69 The enhanced photocatalytic performance was mainly attributed to improved charge separation because of RGO as an electron mediator, which accelerates the charge transfer process at the CdS/g-C3N4 interface, following a Z-scheme charge transfer pathway. Moreover, the greater surface area of the exfoliated nanosheets of g-C3N4 and reduced distance for charge transfer offer superior redox ability. Thangavel et al. reported the g-C3N4/RGO/Fe2O3 nanohybrid by distributing the RGO/Fe2O3 core–shell structures on the g-C3N4 surface via the ultrasonic aided hydrothermal method and simple wet impregnation.70 From the FESEM and TEM images, a laminar sheet-like morphology of g-C3N4 and Fe2O3 uniformly coated with RGO were confirmed. The as-synthesized g-C3N4/RGO/Fe2O3 nanohybrid was found to show efficient H2 generation (6607 μmol g−1 h−1) due to the Z-scheme charge transfer process, where RGO acts as a solid-state electron mediator.
In our group, Nayak et al. synthesized the NiFe LDH/N-RGO (nitrogen-doped GO)/g-C3N4 heterostructure, which shows superior photocatalytic performance toward the mineralization of RhB and phenol, along with good H2 (2508 μmol g−1 2 h−1) and O2 evolution (1280 μmol g−1 2 h−1) under visible light.71 In addition, the photocatalytic mechanism involved a mediator-based Z-scheme charge transfer. NiFe LDH enriched with defects through oxygen vacancy and the role of N-RGO as an electron mediator follows a Z-scheme charge transfer mechanism, which was further supported by electrochemical studies. N-GO gets converted to N-RGO during hydrothermal treatment. The negatively charged N-RGO and g-C3N4 simultaneously anchored onto the surface of the positively charged LDH nanosheets. The incredible photocatalytic performances of NiFe LDH/N-RGO was accredited to the excellent coupling effects of (i) effective charge separation owing to the existence of oxygen vacancies and by N-doped RGO, (ii) suitable VB potential of NiFe LDH for oxidation, and (iii) appropriate CB potential of g-C3N4 for reduction. Furthermore, the most remarkable red shift in the optical absorbance of CNNG-x LDH was in the range of 720–800 nm. The presence of tiny pores on the surface of CN due to the evolution of large amounts of gases during the pyrolysis process permits the efficient scattering of light during photocatalytic reactions. Electrostatic interaction exists between positively charged exfoliated NiFe LDH nanosheets and negatively charged N-RGO sheets result in the formation of the hybrid. The incorporation of N-RGO prevents the aggregation of the LDH nanosheets. The intimate interfacial contact in CNNG3LDH favors the photocatalytic activities by shortening the charge transfer path. The photocatalytic H2 production rate over NiFe LDH exhibit 633 μmol g−1 2 h−1 and CN showed 46 μmol g−1 2 h−1, whereas the CNLDH composite showed an H2 production rate of 1488 μmol g−1 2 h−1. Interestingly, in CNNGxLDH, the Z-scheme carrier transfer mechanism mediated by N-RGO displays higher H2 production activity than the corresponding neat counterparts. When the wt% of N-RGO varies from 1 to 3 in CNNGxLDH, H2 evolution increases due to the highly transparent and conductive nature of the N-RGO sheets, leading to the easy transport of electrons. However, an excess of N-RGO resulted in a decrease in the H2 evolution rates because of the shielding effect of N-RGO. The electrical charge transport kinetics and conductivity across the electrode/electrolyte interface of the heterostructure material were confirmed through the EIS study. The declining order of ohmic resistance across the interface of the synthesized electrodes further supports the photocatalytic performance (CNNG3LDH (43.8 Ω) < CNLDH (52.3 Ω) < CN (59.1 Ω) < NiFe LDH (154.2 Ω)). The superior photocatalytic activity is mainly related to the strong electrostatic bonding and effective charge separation by N-RGO as a mediator through the Z-scheme mechanism.
3.5 Graphene as a co-catalyst in g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids
In recent times, carbon quantum dots (CDs) and graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have fascinated researchers much owing to their exceptional nature and a broad range of applications in the field of photo/electrocatalysis and bioimaging.72,73,79 Several studies have been reported for the successful design of high conductive N and/or S doped GQDs showing good electrocatalytic activity and have found applications in lithium-ion batteries.74 Graphene quantum dots (GQDs), having a lateral diameter less than 100 nm, usually consist of single or few-layers graphene, which possesses a size-dependent quantum confinement effect as well as special optical and electronic properties. Thus, GQDs in a photocatalytic system behaves as an excellent light absorber and good transporter of electrons to improve the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Taking advantage of these properties, many research groups have studied their applications in the field of photocatalysis and considered g-C3N4/GQDs nanohybrids as an effective photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. However, the inherent hydrophobicity of GQDs does not result in strong electronic coupling with g-C3N4. Due to this, doped GQDs (GQDs) were preferred over normal GQDs by many scientists because of their efficient light absorption and strong coupling to favor electron transfer. Zou et al. reported a nitrogen-doped GQDs (NGQDs) induced excitation independent upconversion PL property and significantly improved light absorption of even longer wavelength than that of GQDs.75 Nitrogen doped-graphene quantum dots/g-C3N4 nanohybrid was fabricated using g-C3N4 obtained from different precursors and GQDs prepared hydrothermally to study visible light-induced hydrogen evolution. Graphene quantum dots have drawn much interest in photocatalysis and bio-imaging owing to their unique properties. In particular, nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots possess exceptional PL properties and show extended absorption in the visible region. Because of these properties, GQDs behave as good co-catalysts in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. The increased photocatalytic activity was attributed to a significant red shift in the absorption edge, quantum confinement effect of GQDs, and good electronic coupling between N-doped GQDs and g-C3N4.
From the XRD and FTIR study, it was confirmed that there was no structural change in the case of g-C3N4 upon coupling with GQDs. The TEM images, as shown in the figure, indicate well dispersed 2–6 nm size N-GQDs on the surface of porous g-C3N4. UV-vis absorption spectra of g-C3N4 (CN-U) and 15NGQDs-CNU shows that in comparison to g-C3N4, 15NGQDs-CNU show a remarkable red shift in the absorption due to a quantum confinement effect decrease in the band gap (from 2.8 to 2.72 eV) and electronic coupling of N-GQDs with g-C3N4. As established by Zou and coworkers, the mechanism of H2 generation of N-GQDs/g-C3N4 (prepared from urea) is shown in Scheme 1. After loading N-GQDs, the rate of H2 generation was found to increase about 2.16 times compared to that of neat g-C3N4 with a quantum efficiency of 5.25% at 420 nm, as shown in Fig. 11(a). This enhanced activity was further in good agreement with the photocurrent value of N-GQDs/g-C3N4, which was 2 times more compared to that of neat g-C3N4 prepared from urea. PL analysis also suggests an effective separation of charge carriers; thus, the photogenerated electrons get enough time to reduce H2O to H2 on the surface of the co-catalyst (N-GQDs). Under visible light irradiation, both g-C3N4 and N-GQDs/CN-U directly absorb light to produce electrons–hole pairs (Fig. 11(b)). The photocurrent response (Fig. 11(c)) of the nanohybrid was 2 times higher than that of neat g-C3N4. N-GQDs by absorbing light irradiation in the 600–800 nm range, later emitting radiations of shorter wavelength light (λ < 470 nm), which in turn are absorbed by g-C3N4 to produce electrons (e−) and holes (h+). These photoelectrons get transferred onto the surface of the N-GQDs and reduce water to generate H2 gas, as shown in Fig. 11(d).
 Scheme 1  Proposed photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution over NGQDs/CN-U under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 11  (a) The rate of hydrogen production with different samples, b) UV-visible spectra of CN-U and 15N-CNU samples (inserted bandgap image), (c) transient photocurrent curves of CN-U and 15N-CNU catalysts, (d) the PL spectra of N-GQDs under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. 
The summary of the photocatalytic performance along with the synthesis methods amd reaction conditions of some representativeg-C3N4/graphene based nanohybrid nanomaterials are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrid nanomaterials




Photocatalyst
Role of graphene
Precursor
Method
Bandgap

S
bet in m2 g−1
Reaction condition
Photo/electrocatalytic activity
Rate
Ref.




g-C3N4/RGO
Support material
Cyanamide + graphene oxide
Thermal conversion
2.34 eV
—

λ ≥ 400 nm
RhB
100% in 75 min

52



4-NP
52% in 75 min


g-C3N4/RGO
Support material
Melamine + chemically converted graphene
Adsorption
—
—
−0.4 V, in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH
ORR
—

51



g-C3N4/RGO/InVO4
Support material
Melamine + InCl3 + graphene oxide
Wet impregnation
2.33 eV
42.31
TEOA, Sun light
H2 evolution
7449 μmol g−1 h−1

53



B-GO/g-C3N4
Functional material
Dicyanamide, B2O3 and graphene oxide
Rotary evaporation, lyophilization, polymerization
—
—
—
HER
Electrocatalyst

56



g-C3N4/rGO
Functional material
Cyanamide and graphene oxide
Thermal treatment
1.73 eV
—
—
HER
Electrocatalyst

57



N-Doped GO/g-C3N4
Functional material
Urea, citric acid, and ethanol
Hydrothermal treatment followed by thermal polycondensation
2.55 eV
—

λ ≥ 420 nm, TEOA, 3% Pt
H2 evolution
139.6 μmol h−1 g−1

58



g-C3N4/rGO
Functional material
Melamine, graphene oxide, KCl, LiCl
Thermal treatment
2.61 eV
55.0
350 W Xe arc lamp with an AM1.5 filter
CO2 reduction
87%

36



g-C3N4/rGO
Conductive material
Melamine, graphene oxide, nitric acid
Calcination method
2.53 eV
84.9
300 W Xe arc lamp with UV-cutoff filter λ ≥ 420 nm
RhB degradation
99.7%

81



S-Doped g-C3N4/rGO
Conductive material
Melamine, cyanuric acid, DMSO graphene oxide
Solvothermal method
2.48 eV
188.5
300 W Xe arc lamp with UV-cutoff filter λ ≥ 420 nm
1. RhB
100%

82



2. Cr(VI)
85.2%


Graphene/g-C3N4
Conductive material
Melamine, graphene oxide and hydrazine hydrate
Impregnation chemical reduction strategy
2.7 eV
20.4
25% methanol, 350 W Xe arc lamp
H2 evolution
451 μmol h−1 g−1

59



B-Doped graphene/g-C3N4
Conductive material
Melamine, B2O3, GO
One-pot hydrothermal method
2.66 eV
52.13
10 vol% TEOA and 2.5 wt% H2PtCl6·6H2O, ≤420 nm
H2 evolution
741.4 μmol h−1 g−1 and an apparent quantum efficiency of 19.0% at 420 nm

60



g-C3N4/RGO
Conductive material
Melamine
Thermal condensation
2.33 eV
44.63

λ > 420 nm
i) MB
i) 100% in 3 h

61



ii) Phenol
ii) 60% in 210 min


GCN/TiO2/RGO
Conductive material
Melamine, graphite powder, titanium tetraisopropoxide
Simple ultrasonic assisted wet impregnation method
2.56 eV
—
250 W (300–800 nm) Xe lamp
H2 evolution
1) 23143 μmol h−1 g−1

62



1. Glycerol (5 vol%)


2. Methanol
2) 13978 μmol h−1 g−1


3. TEA
3) 8510 μmol h−1 g−1


GCN-RGO-MoS2
Conductive material
Urea, GO, (NH4)2MoS4
Pyrolysis followed by hydrothermal treatment
2.8 eV
13.1
(λ > 420 nm) using TEOA
H2 evolution
317 μmol h−1 g−1 Q.A. 3.4% at 420 nm

63



GCN-RGO CoMoS2
Conductive material
Co(NO3)2·6H2O, (NH4)2MoS4, (NH2)2CS, graphite
Hydrothermal treatment
—
—
TEOA and H2O, 300 W Xe lamp λ > 400 nm
H2 evolution
684 μmol h−1 g−1

64



Graphene/FeZnO/g-C3N4
Conductive material
Melamine, graphite, ZnO
Hydrothermal method
2.41 eV
50.0
i) (λmax = 663 nm)
i) MB
i) 100% in 50 min

65



ii) Cr(VI)
ii) 82% in 120 min


iii) 4-NP
iii) 100% in 30 min


g-C3N4 Nanosheets/RGO
Conductive material
Dicyanamide, RGO
Thermal treatment, ultrasonication, photoassisted coupling
3.08 eV
—

λ ≥ 420 nm
MB degradation
88% in 40 min

76



GO/Ag3PO4/g-C3N4
Conductive material
g-C3N4, GO, AgNO3Na2HPO4·12H2O
One-step precipitation method
—
—
500 W halogen tungsten lamp with a cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
RhB degradation
162 times than that of neat g-C3N4

77



g-C3N4/GO
Conductive material
Melamine, HCl, GO
Ultrasonication followed by calcinations
2.62 eV

NA

250 W metal halide lamp
NO removal
79.68%

78



ZnIn2S4/graphene/g-C3N4
Solid state electron mediator
g-C3N4, Zn(CH3COOH)2·2H2O, InCl3·3H2O
Hydrothermal method
NA
189.0
Solar light in presence of 0.3 M Na2S and Na2SO4
H2
477 μmol h−1 g−1

67



g-C3N4/graphene/NiFe2O4
Solid state electron mediator
Urea, graphite oxide, NiFe2O4
Modified Hummers' method
1.68 eV
77.6
10 W LED lamp as a visible-light source
MO
100% in 120 min

68



g-C3N4/graphene/CdS
Solid state electron mediator
Graphite oxide and Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O, DMSO, melamine
Hydrothermal method
2.25 eV
98.48
350 W Xe lamp, lactic acid
H2
1980.2 μmol h−1 g−1

69



g-C3N4/RGO (3 wt%)/Fe2O3
Solid state electron mediator
Melamine, FeCl3, graphite powder
Sonochemical-assisted hydrothermal followed by wet-impregnation method
2.4 eV
—
Xe-250 W lamp with UV cut-off filter (λ > 420 nm), TEOA
H2
6607 μmol h−1 g−1

70



g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6
Electron mediator
Melamine, RGO, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O
Hydrothermal method

2.78 eV


30.4

500 W Xe lamp, with UV cut-off filter (λ > 420)
RhB
97.3%

80



N-Doped GQDs/g-C3N4
Co-catalyst
Urea, pre-synthesized NGQDs
Thermal pyrolysis

2.55 eV

—

λ > 420 nm, TEOA
H2
139.6 μmol h−1 g−1

75





4. Conclusion
In this review, various g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrid photocatalysts are overviewed thoroughly with particular weightage on in-plane or inter-plane interactions, synergistic properties, and enhanced photocatalytic activity. Remarkable intrinsic properties of two polymeric, commercially available, and environment friendly carbon-based nanomaterials are found essential to design green, sustainable, and efficient photosystems for energy and environment. The unique structural and electronic properties of some representative g-C3N4/graphene-based nanohybrids were systematically discussed considering the various roles of rGO. Most importantly, it was concluded that strong electronic coupling between g-C3N4 and graphene due to functionality or flexibility in the structures, effective light absorption, compatible band edge potential along with shorter diffusion pathways excitingly increases the interfacial charge transfer, which were found to be the most important to extend their potential applications. Although a good number of studies with encouraging results are available, still, due to limited compatibility and recyclability, many more challenges exist in using g-C3N4/rGO-based nanohybrids in photocatalysis and require more attention to extend their commercial applications in many more challenges such as
1) Although various design strategies involving interface coupling,59 cross linking,52etc., for fabricating g-C3N4/rGO-based nanohybrids have been established due to the local in-plane π-conjugation,60 the major limitation is the strong dependency on their composition and controlled oxidation process to reduce the defective sites. During the formation of a composite (functionalized graphene and g-C3N4), the stacking issue of two 2D materials is also a concern. Thus, major advancement in optimized synthesis techniques must be required to design high-performance g-C3N4/rGO-based nanohybrids. For large-scale preparation, the optimization of numerous reaction conditions such as pH, temperature, and proportion of starting materials is very essential. Moreover, the defect sites introduced during functionalization are crucial to obtain an efficient photoactive material.
2) Even if the first principles study and DFT calculations to some extent revealed the presence of strong electronic coupling at the interface,45 it is also highly essential to carry out an in-depth study of the conjugated domains and functional groups to establish interaction mechanism between g-C3N4, rGO, and other photoactive materials and the actual photocatalytic mechanism.
3) The thermal and chemical stability of the g-C3N4/rGO-based nanohybrids is also important to extend their practical application. As it has been observed that the percentage of rGO changes the semiconducting character of g-C3N4,52 it is essential to tune the semiconducting character as required for a particular photocatalytic reaction. The possible synergistic effects in the nanohybrids, the electrical conductivity of the hybrid materials, could also be further improved by adopting optimal reaction conditions.
4) As the intrinsic reactivity of these materials relies on synergistic electron transfer process, the role of unpaired electrons in the photocatalytic mechanism should be given more attention both theoretically and experimentally with the help of localized probing technique. The intrinsic reactivity of the nanohybrids can be maximized by tuning the edge defects suitably.
5) As a low-cost metal free sustainable photoactive material, g-C3N4/rGO-based nanohybrids are very important for practical benefits and can be used to substitute hazardous metal-based materials. Despite great advances, the practical applications are still a long-term challenge to design a realistic device for energy and environmental applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
All authors are thankful to Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University) for providing infrastructure facilities.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeng, W. Xu, W. J. Ong, J. Xu, H. Ren, Y. Chen, H. Zheng and D. L. Peng, Toward noble-metal-free visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen evolution: Monodisperse sub-15 nm Ni2P nanoparticles anchored on porous g-C3N4 nanosheets to engineer 0D-2D heterojunction interfaces, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao and J. Yu, g-C3N4-Based Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Generation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, Polymeric Graphitic Carbon Nitride for Heterogeneous Photocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Two-Dimensional Layered Composite Photocatalysts, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
C. Butchosa, P. Guiglion and M. A. Zwijnenburg, Carbon Nitride Photocatalysts for Water Splitting: A Computational Perspective, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24833–24842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Zuo, H. Tang, G. Li and Z. Zhou, Origin of Photoactivity in Graphitic Carbon Nitride and Strategies for Enhancement of Photocatalytic Efficiency: Insights from First-Principles Computations, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 6280–6288 RSC .
A. Behera, D. Kandi, S. Mansingh, S. Martha and K. Parida, Facile synthesis of ZnFe2O4@RGO nanocomposites towards photocatalytic ciprofloxacin degradation and H2 energy production, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 667–679 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, S. Yang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Pt-Decorated 3D Architectures Built from Graphene and Graphitic Carbon Nitride Nanosheets as Efficient Methanol Oxidation Catalysts, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5160–5165 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, A Metal-Free Polymeric Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Production from Water under Visible ight, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Recent Advances in Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Nanosheets of oxides and hydroxides: Ultimate 2D charge-bearing functional crystallites, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082–5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Pattnaik, A. Behera, S. Martha, R. Acharya and K. Parida, Facile synthesis of exfoliated graphitic carbon nitride for photocatalytic degradation of ciprofloxacin under solar irradiation, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 5726–5742 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mishra, A. Behera, D. Kandi and K. Parida, Facile construction of a novel NiFe2O4@ P-doped gC3N4 nanocomposite with enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1864–1879 RSC .
K. K. Das, S. Patnaik, S. Mansingh, A. Behera, A. Mohanty, C. Acharya and K. M. Parida, Enhanced photocatalytic activities of polypyrrole sensitized zinc ferrite/graphitic carbon nitride nn heterojunction towards ciprofloxacin degradation, hydrogen evolution and antibacterial studies, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 551–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Pattnaik, A. Behera, R. Acharya and K. Parida, Green exfoliation of graphitic carbon nitride towards decolourization of Congo-Red under solar irradiation, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103456 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mishra, A. Behera, D. Kandi, S. Ratha and K. Parida, Novel Magnetic Retrievable Visible-Light-Driven Ternary Fe3O4@ NiFe2O4/Phosphorus-Doped g-C3N4 Nanocomposite Photocatalyst with Significantly Enhanced Activity through a Double-Z-Scheme System, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 4255–4272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Acharya, S. Nayak, S. P. Pattnaik, R. Acharya and K. Parida, Resurrection of boron nitride in pn type-II boron nitride/B-doped-g-C3N4 nanocomposite during solid-state Z-scheme charge transfer path for the degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 566, 211–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Acharya and K. Parida, A review on TiO2/g-C3N4 visible-light-responsive photocatalysts for sustainable energy generation and environmental remediation, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 103896 CrossRef CAS .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. Parida, Constructing a Novel Surfactant-free MoS2 Nanosheet Modified MgIn2S4 Marigold Microflower: An Efficient Visible-Light Driven 2D-2D pn Heterojunction Photocatalyst toward HER and pH Regulated NRR, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4848–4862 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, D. P. Sahoo and K. M. Parida, Bimetallic co-effect of Au-Pd alloyed nanoparticles on mesoporous silica modified g-C3N4 for single and simultaneous photocatalytic oxidation of phenol and reduction of hexavalent chromium, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 519–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Sahoo, K. K. Das, S. Patnaik and K. Parida, Double charge carrier mechanism through 2D/2D interface-assisted ultrafast water reduction and antibiotic degradation over architectural S, P co-doped g-C 3 N 4/ZnCr LDH photocatalyst, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 3695–3717 RSC .
S. Nayak and K. Parida, Superactive NiFe-LDH/graphene nanocomposites as competent catalysts for water splitting reactions, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 3805–3836 RSC .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Patnaik and K. Parida, Construction of a Z-Scheme Dictated WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH Synergistically Visible Light-Induced Photocatalyst towards Tetracycline Degradation and H2 Evolution, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 14721–14741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. Parida, One-Pot-Architectured Au-Nanodot-Promoted MoS2/ZnIn2S4: A Novel p–n Heterojunction Photocatalyst for Enhanced Hydrogen Production and Phenol Degradation, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9941–9955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak, G. Swain and K. Parida, Enhanced photocatalytic activities of RhB degradation and H2 evolution from in situ formation of the electrostatic heterostructure MoS2/NiFe LDH nanocomposite through the Z-Scheme mechanism via p–n heterojunctions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20923–20942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mansingh, D. K. Padhi and K. Parida, Bio-surfactant assisted solvothermal synthesis of Magnetic retrievable Fe3O4@ rGO nanocomposite for photocatalytic reduction of 2-nitrophenol and degradation of TCH under visible light illumination, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 466, 679–690 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, N. Chen, J. Zhang and L. Qu, Graphene/graphitic carbon nitride hybrids for catalysis, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 832–850 RSC .
F. Li, X. Jiang, J. Zhao and S. Zhang, Graphene oxide: a promising nanomaterial for energy and environmental applications, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 488–515 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Graphene in photocatalysis: a review, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Radich, A. L. Krenselewski, J. Zhu and P. V. Kamat, Is graphene a stable platform for photocatalysis? Mineralization of reduced graphene oxide with UV-irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4662–4668 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Yaqoob, A. Serrà and M. N. M. Ibrahim, Advances and Challenges in Developing Efficient Graphene Oxide-Based ZnO Photocatalysts for Dye PhotoOxidation, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 932 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, S. Martha, R. Acharya and K. M. Parida, An overview of the modification of g-C 3 N 4 with high carbon containing materials for photocatalytic applications, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 336–347 RSC .
A. Behera, S. Mansingh, K. K. Das and K. Parida, Synergistic ZnFe2O4-carbon allotropes nanocomposite photocatalyst for norfloxacin degradation and Cr (VI) reduction, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 544, 96–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Z. Tian, T. Heil, A. Meng, B. Cheng, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Antonietti, Highly Selective CO2 Capture and Its Direct Photochemical Conversion on Ordered 2D/1D Heterojunctions, Joule, 2019, 3, 2792–2805 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Lin, S. Shen, W. Zhong and S. Cao, Advances in designing heterojunction photocatalytic materials, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 710–730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Focusing on energy and optoelectronic applications: a journey for graphene and graphene oxide at large scale, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Nia, L. Ti Qu and J. L. Li, Progress in the Understanding and Applications of the Intrinsic Reactivity of Graphene-Based Materials, Small Sci., 2021, 1, 2000026 CrossRef .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Graphene-based composites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
C. Huang and C. Li, Graphene Based Catalysts, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 RSC .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Graphene oxide, highly reduced graphene oxide, and graphene: versatile building blocks for carbon-based materials, Small, 2010, 6, 711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and L. Qu, Graphitic carbon nitride/graphene hybrids as new active materials for energy conversion and storage, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 298 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, D. P. Sahoo and K. Parida, An overview on Ag modified g-C3N4 based nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 1297–1312 CrossRef CAS .
A. Du, S. Sanvito, Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Jiao, T. Liao, Q. Sun, Y. Hau Ng, Z. Zhu, R. Amal and S. C. Smith, Hybrid Graphene and Graphitic Carbon Nitride Nanocomposite: Gap Opening, Electron−Hole Puddle, Interfacial Charge Transfer, and Enhanced Visible Light Response, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4393–4397 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Pradhan, D. K. Padhi and K. M. Parida, Fabrication of α-Fe2O3 nanorod/RGO composite: a novel hybrid photocatalyst for phenol degradation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9101–9110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Padhi, T. K. Panigrahi, K. Parida, S. K. Singh and P. M. Mishra, Green synthesis of Fe3O4/RGO nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic performance for Cr (VI) reduction, phenol degradation, and antibacterial activity, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10551–10562 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Padhi and K. Parida, Facile fabrication of α-FeOOH nanorod/RGO composite: a robust photocatalyst for reduction of Cr (VI) under visible light irradiation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10300–10312 RSC .
A. Mondal, A. Prabhakaran, S. Gupta and V. R. Subramanian, Boosting Photocatalytic Activity Using Reduced Graphene Oxide (RGO)/Semiconductor Nanocomposites: Issues and Future Scope, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 8734–8743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and Z. Q. Shi, Nanoporous Graphitic-C3N4@Carbon Metal-Free Electrocatalysts for Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 13, 20116–20119 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Yao and G. Shi, Chemically converted graphene as substrate for immobilizing and enhancing the activity of a polymeric catalyst, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Cross-Linked g-C3N4/rGO Nanocomposites with Tunable Band Structure and Enhanced Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity, Small, 2013, 9, 3336–3344 CAS .
H. Y. Hafeez, S. K. Lakhera, M. V. Shankar and B. Neppolian, Synergetic improvement in charge carrier transport and light harvesting over ternary InVO4-g-C3N4/rGO hybrid nanocomposite for hydrogen evolution reaction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7530–7540 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zhuang and R. G. Hennig, Single-layer group-III monochalcogenide photocatalysts for water splitting, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3232–3238 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, W. Q. Huang, L. L. Wang, Z. A. Tian, W. Hu, Y. Ma and G. F. Huang, Insights into enhanced visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of g-C3N4 and highly reduced graphene oxide composite: the role of oxygen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1612–1621 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, X. Wang, J. Wang, G. Cui and D. Liu, Graphite carbon nitride/boron-doped graphene hybrid for efficient hydrogen generation reaction, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 345705 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Toward design of synergistically active carbon-based catalysts for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mou, C. Lu, K. Yu, H. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Sun and G. M. Cynthia, Chemical Interaction in Nitrogen-Doped Graphene Quantum Dots/Graphitic Carbon Nitride Heterostructures with Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1800589 CrossRef .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Preparation and enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2 production activity of graphene/C3N4 composites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Wang and Z. Li, Boron doped graphitic carbon nitride dots dispersed on graphitic carbon nitride/graphene hybrid nanosheets as high performance photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 923–932 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ai, X. Duan, H. Sun, X. Qiu and S. Wang, Metal-free graphene-carbon nitride hybrids for photodegradation of organic pollutants in water, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 668–675 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Hafeez, S. K. Lakhera, S. Bellamkonda, G. R. Rao, M. V. Shankar, D. W. Bahneman and B. Neppolian, Construction of ternary hybrid layered reduced graphene oxide supported g-C3N4-TiO2 nanocomposite and its photocatalytic hydrogen production activity, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 3892–3904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yuan, Y. Yang, Z. Li, D. Chen, S. Wu, G. Fang and Z. T. Yu, Promoting charge separation in g-C3N4/graphene/MoS2 photocatalysts by two-dimensional nanojunction for enhanced photocatalytic H2 production, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1400–1407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Si, L. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, R. Ran and D. Weng, CoMoS2/rGO/C3N4 ternary heterojunctions catalysts with high photocatalytic activity and stability for hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 435, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
W. Raza and M. Faraz, Novel g-C3N4/Fe-ZnO/RGO nanocomposites with boosting visible light photocatalytic activity for MB, Cr (VI), and outstanding catalytic activity toward para-nitrophenol reduction, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 325603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, S. Martha and K. M. Parida, An overview of the structural, textural and morphological modulations of gC3N4 towards photocatalytic hydrogen production, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46929–46951 RSC .
S. Manchala, V. S. R. K. Tandava, L. R. Nagappagari, S. M. Venkatakrishnan, D. Jampaiah, Y. M. Sabri and V. Shanker, Fabrication of a novel ZnIn2S4/gC3N4/graphene ternary nanocomposite with enhanced charge separation for efficient photocatalytic H2 evolution under solar light illumination, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2019, 18, 2952–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gebreslassie, P. Bharali, U. Chandra, A. Sergawie, P. K. Boruah, M. R. Das and E. Alemayehu, Novel g-C3N4/graphene/NiFe2O4 nanocomposites as magnetically separable visible light driven photocatalysts, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 382, 111960 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Jo and N. C. S. Selvam, Z-scheme CdS/g-C3N4 composites with RGO as an electron mediator for efficient photocatalytic H2 production and pollutant degradation, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 913–924 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thangavel, S. Bellamkonda, A. D. Arulraj, G. R. Rao and B. Neppolian, Visible light induced efficient hydrogen production through semiconductor–conductor–semiconductor (S–C–S) interfaces formed between gC3N4 and rGO/Fe2O3 core–shell composites, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 5081–5090 RSC .
S. Nayak and K. M. Parida, Deciphering Z-scheme Charge Transfer Dynamics in Heterostructure NiFe-LDH/N-rGO/gC 3 N 4 Nanocomposite for Photocatalytic Pollutant Removal and Water Splitting Reactions, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–23 CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou, Z. Ren, S. Du, X. Meng, G. Tian and H. Fu, Facile preparation of porous NiTiO3 nanorods with enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16471–16476 RSC .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Luminescent carbon nanodots: emergent nanolights, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Y. Cheng, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots with oxygen-rich functional groups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zou, L. C. Wang, J. Luo, Y. C. Nie, Q. J. Xing, X. B. Luo and S. L. Suib, Synthesis and efficient visible light photocatalytic H2 evolution of a metal-free g-C3N4/graphene quantum dots hybrid photocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 93, 103–109 CrossRef .
J. Chen, X. Xu, T. Li, K. Pandiselvi and J. Wang, Toward high performance 2D/2D hybrid photocatalyst by electrostatic assembly of rationally modified carbon nitride on reduced graphene oxide, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Zhou, C. Chen, L. Cheng and H. Ding, A g-C3N4 supported graphene oxide/Ag3PO4 composite with remarkably enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light, Catal. Commun., 2016, 73, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, X. Yang, X. Cao and M. Denga, rGO/g-C3N4 photocatalyst with an enhanced catalytic activity for NO removal, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 125509 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singla, S. Sharma, S. Basu, N. P. Shetti and K. R. Reddy, Graphene/graphitic carbonnitride-based ternary nanohybrids: Synthesis methods, properties, and applications for photocatalytic hydrogen production, FlatChem, 2020, 24, 100200 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maa, J. Wu, M. Gao, Y. Xin, Y. Sun and T. Ma, Hydrothermal synthesis of an artificial Z-scheme visible lightphotocatalytic system using reduced graphene oxide as the electronmediator, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 1567–1576 CrossRef .
X. Yang, G. Cao, H. Liu, C. Wang, X. Li and Z. Song, Construction of mesoporous C3N4/rGO composite with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, Optik, 2021, 24, 167159 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Guo, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Sulfur-doped g-C3N4/rGO porous nanosheets for highly efficient photocatalytic degradation of refractory contaminants, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 41, 117–126 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Sulagna Patnaik	Dr. Sulagna Patnaik completed her master's degree at NIT, Rourkela, in 1989 in chemistry. Then, she joined as a lecturer in chemistry at Rayagada Autonomous College, Odisha, in 1991. She is presently working as a reader at Nimapara Autonomous College and pursuing research work at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, SOA University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha. She has published 18 research articles and 2 book chapters in international journals and also filed one patent. Her research work is focused on the development of modified g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for hydrogen energy production and pollution abatement.
Arjun Behera	Dr. Arjun Behera completed his Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Applied Chemistry at the Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT), Odisha, India in 2015, and then qualified CSIR-NET-LS in June 2018. He worked as a junior project fellow at Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar. He then completed his Ph.D. in 2020 at SOA under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. He is currently working as a Research Assistant at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology (CNSNT), Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, SOA. He is the author of 22 international journal articles, and has filed two patents. His research activities are mainly focused on the synthesis of modified ZnFe2O4-based nanocomposite materials toward H2 energy production and environmental pollutant (organic and inorganic) degradation.
Kulamani Parida	Prof. Kulamani Parida is a distinguished Professor in Chemistry and the Director of the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, he worked for 37 years at CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry. Dr. Parida has made significant contributions toward exploring the chemistry related to structural, morphological, optical, electronic, and electrochemical properties of a number of wide bandgap and narrow bandgap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulphides, and nitrides for effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, degradation of pollutants, and synthesis of fine chemicals. He has published around 400 papers in high impact factor journals, 7 book chapters, filed 35 patents, and supervised 50 Ph.D. students. The importance and current relevance of his work is amply reflected in the large number of citations (18524) of his work and the H index of 72.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the highlights of the review.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the conversion of graphite to reduced graphene oxide using oxidation, exfoliation, and reduction processes, (b and c) optimized geometry, (d and e) band structure of monolayer g-C3N4 and graphene, (f) optimized graphene/g-C3N4 interface in top view and (g) side view, (h) charge migration at the graphene/g-C3N4 interface (HSE06 functional was used to calculate the band structure of graphene on g-C3N4, where C and N atoms are represented by the green and blue spheres, respectively). (i) Energy level diagram of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/rGO (CN/rGO) photocatalysts with different rGO ratios. (j–l) Schematic design of band bending in rGO/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (l) Adapted with permission from ref. 45 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  Types of various graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid heterostructures. (a) Graphene as a support material, (b) graphene as a functional material, (c) graphene as a semiconductor forming the heterojunction, (d) graphene as a solid-state of electron mediator, and (e) graphene as a co-catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the reaction pathway and the g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposite (b) XRD patterns of pure g-C3N4, rGO, and g-C3N4/rGO nanocomposites. (c and d) Both HRTEM and SAED patterns (insets) of pure g-C3N4 and CN/rGO nanocomposites. (e) MS plot of the as-synthesized photocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 with permission from Wiley-VCH Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) FTIR spectra of the as-synthesized samples, (b) reaction mechanism and charge transfer processes of the nanocomposites, (c) H2 energy production of the as-prepared samples, (d) reusability plot of the nanocomposites for four cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Reaction strategy to prepare the NGQDs/g-C3N4 composite, (b) TEM image and (c and d) HRTEM images of the NGQDs(1.66)/g-C3N4 nanocomposites, (e) UV-vis spectra of the as-synthesized photocatalysts, (f) direct band gap of pure g-C3N4, NGQDs, and NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanocomposites, g) photocatalytic H2 evolution of the as-prepared photocatalysts, (h) band edge potential arrangements of g-C3N4, NGQDs, and NGQDs/g-C3N4 composites and exciton separation process for the NGQDs/g-C3N4 nanocomposite under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) graphene oxide (b) and GC 1.0 composites, (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of the as-synthesized samples, (d) rate of H2 evolution over the as-prepared photocatalysts, (e) reusability study, (f) mechanistic pathway of H2 evolution. Adapted with permission from ref. 59 with permission from ACS, Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Zeta potential of BCNDs, GO, g-C3N4, and protonated g-C3N4, (b) PL spectra of the as-prepared samples, (c) rate of photocatalytic H2 evolution over different samples, (d) schematic representation of the photocatalytic mechanism showing the role of GO as a conductive support. Adapted with permission from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  FE-SEM images of (a) ZIS, (b) CN-G, (c) ZIS-G, (d) ZIS-CN, (e and f) ZIS-CN-G samples, (g) bar plot represent the comparative H2 evolution plot of different samples, (h) charge transfer mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 67 with permission from RSC Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) UV-vis spectra of pure g-C3N4, NiFe2O4, and CGN nanocomposites, (b) PL spectra of the as-prepared photocatalyst, (c) effect of the scavenger on the degradation of MO over the CGN-25% nanocomposites, (d) Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for CGN nanocomposites under visible light, (e) reusability plot of CGN-25% photocatalyst under light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 68 with permission from RSC, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Scheme 1  Proposed photocatalytic mechanism for H2 evolution over NGQDs/CN-U under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The rate of hydrogen production with different samples, b) UV-visible spectra of CN-U and 15N-CNU samples (inserted bandgap image), (c) transient photocurrent curves of CN-U and 15N-CNU catalysts, (d) the PL spectra of N-GQDs under visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.	 

g-C3N4/RGO	Support material	Cyanamide + graphene oxide	Thermal conversion	2.34 eV	—	
λ ≥ 400 nm	RhB	100% in 75 min	
52

4-NP	52% in 75 min
g-C3N4/RGO	Support material	Melamine + chemically converted graphene	Adsorption	—	—	−0.4 V, in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH	ORR	—	
51

g-C3N4/RGO/InVO4	Support material	Melamine + InCl3 + graphene oxide	Wet impregnation	2.33 eV	42.31	TEOA, Sun light	H2 evolution	7449 μmol g−1 h−1	
53

B-GO/g-C3N4	Functional material	Dicyanamide, B2O3 and graphene oxide	Rotary evaporation, lyophilization, polymerization	—	—	—	HER	Electrocatalyst	
56

g-C3N4/rGO	Functional material	Cyanamide and graphene oxide	Thermal treatment	1.73 eV	—	—	HER	Electrocatalyst	
57

N-Doped GO/g-C3N4	Functional material	Urea, citric acid, and ethanol	Hydrothermal treatment followed by thermal polycondensation	2.55 eV	—	
λ ≥ 420 nm, TEOA, 3% Pt	H2 evolution	139.6 μmol h−1 g−1	
58

g-C3N4/rGO	Functional material	Melamine, graphene oxide, KCl, LiCl	Thermal treatment	2.61 eV	55.0	350 W Xe arc lamp with an AM1.5 filter	CO2 reduction	87%	
36

g-C3N4/rGO	Conductive material	Melamine, graphene oxide, nitric acid	Calcination method	2.53 eV	84.9	300 W Xe arc lamp with UV-cutoff filter λ ≥ 420 nm	RhB degradation	99.7%	
81

S-Doped g-C3N4/rGO	Conductive material	Melamine, cyanuric acid, DMSO graphene oxide	Solvothermal method	2.48 eV	188.5	300 W Xe arc lamp with UV-cutoff filter λ ≥ 420 nm	1. RhB	100%	
82

2. Cr(VI)	85.2%
Graphene/g-C3N4	Conductive material	Melamine, graphene oxide and hydrazine hydrate	Impregnation chemical reduction strategy	2.7 eV	20.4	25% methanol, 350 W Xe arc lamp	H2 evolution	451 μmol h−1 g−1	
59

B-Doped graphene/g-C3N4	Conductive material	Melamine, B2O3, GO	One-pot hydrothermal method	2.66 eV	52.13	10 vol% TEOA and 2.5 wt% H2PtCl6·6H2O, ≤420 nm	H2 evolution	741.4 μmol h−1 g−1 and an apparent quantum efficiency of 19.0% at 420 nm	
60

g-C3N4/RGO	Conductive material	Melamine	Thermal condensation	2.33 eV	44.63	
λ > 420 nm	i) MB	i) 100% in 3 h	
61

ii) Phenol	ii) 60% in 210 min
GCN/TiO2/RGO	Conductive material	Melamine, graphite powder, titanium tetraisopropoxide	Simple ultrasonic assisted wet impregnation method	2.56 eV	—	250 W (300–800 nm) Xe lamp	H2 evolution	1) 23143 μmol h−1 g−1	
62

1. Glycerol (5 vol%)
2. Methanol	2) 13978 μmol h−1 g−1
3. TEA	3) 8510 μmol h−1 g−1
GCN-RGO-MoS2	Conductive material	Urea, GO, (NH4)2MoS4	Pyrolysis followed by hydrothermal treatment	2.8 eV	13.1	(λ > 420 nm) using TEOA	H2 evolution	317 μmol h−1 g−1 Q.A. 3.4% at 420 nm	
63

GCN-RGO CoMoS2	Conductive material	Co(NO3)2·6H2O, (NH4)2MoS4, (NH2)2CS, graphite	Hydrothermal treatment	—	—	TEOA and H2O, 300 W Xe lamp λ > 400 nm	H2 evolution	684 μmol h−1 g−1	
64

Graphene/FeZnO/g-C3N4	Conductive material	Melamine, graphite, ZnO	Hydrothermal method	2.41 eV	50.0	i) (λmax = 663 nm)	i) MB	i) 100% in 50 min	
65

ii) Cr(VI)	ii) 82% in 120 min
iii) 4-NP	iii) 100% in 30 min
g-C3N4 Nanosheets/RGO	Conductive material	Dicyanamide, RGO	Thermal treatment, ultrasonication, photoassisted coupling	3.08 eV	—	
λ ≥ 420 nm	MB degradation	88% in 40 min	
76

GO/Ag3PO4/g-C3N4	Conductive material	g-C3N4, GO, AgNO3Na2HPO4·12H2O	One-step precipitation method	—	—	500 W halogen tungsten lamp with a cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	RhB degradation	162 times than that of neat g-C3N4	
77

g-C3N4/GO	Conductive material	Melamine, HCl, GO	Ultrasonication followed by calcinations	2.62 eV	
NA
	250 W metal halide lamp	NO removal	79.68%	
78

ZnIn2S4/graphene/g-C3N4	Solid state electron mediator	g-C3N4, Zn(CH3COOH)2·2H2O, InCl3·3H2O	Hydrothermal method	NA	189.0	Solar light in presence of 0.3 M Na2S and Na2SO4	H2	477 μmol h−1 g−1	
67

g-C3N4/graphene/NiFe2O4	Solid state electron mediator	Urea, graphite oxide, NiFe2O4	Modified Hummers' method	1.68 eV	77.6	10 W LED lamp as a visible-light source	MO	100% in 120 min	
68

g-C3N4/graphene/CdS	Solid state electron mediator	Graphite oxide and Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O, DMSO, melamine	Hydrothermal method	2.25 eV	98.48	350 W Xe lamp, lactic acid	H2	1980.2 μmol h−1 g−1	
69

g-C3N4/RGO (3 wt%)/Fe2O3	Solid state electron mediator	Melamine, FeCl3, graphite powder	Sonochemical-assisted hydrothermal followed by wet-impregnation method	2.4 eV	—	Xe-250 W lamp with UV cut-off filter (λ > 420 nm), TEOA	H2	6607 μmol h−1 g−1	
70

g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6	Electron mediator	Melamine, RGO, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O	Hydrothermal method	
2.78 eV
	
30.4
	500 W Xe lamp, with UV cut-off filter (λ > 420)	RhB	97.3%	
80

N-Doped GQDs/g-C3N4	Co-catalyst	Urea, pre-synthesized NGQDs	Thermal pyrolysis	
2.55 eV
	—	
λ > 420 nm, TEOA	H2	139.6 μmol h−1 g−1	
75


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
