Hydrogen-bond enhancement triggered structural evolution and band gap engineering of hybrid perovskite (C 6 H 5 CH 2 NH 3 ) 2 PbI 4 under high pressur ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP05904K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP05904K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 1841-1846Hydrogen-bond enhancement triggered structural evolution and band gap engineering of hybrid perovskite (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4 under high pressure†

        
          
            Can 
            Tian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongfu 
            Liang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wuhao 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanping 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Huang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Fubo 
            Tian
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xinyi 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: huangxiaoli@jlu.edu.cn; yangxinyi@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      30th October 2019
    , Accepted 7th January 2020First published on 8th January 2020AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) have gained substantial attention due to their excellent photovoltaic and optoelectronic properties. Herein, we comprehensively investigate a typical two-dimensional (2D) hybrid perovskite (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4 to track its structural and band gap evolution applied by the maximum pressure of 27.2 GPa. Remarkably, an unprecedented band gap narrowing down to the Shockley–Queisser limit is observed upon compression to 20.1 GPa. Two phase transitions have been observed during this process: the ambient Pbca phase converts into the Pccn phase at 4.6 GPa and then undergoes an isostructural phase transition at 7.7 GPa. The Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy reveals that pressure-enhanced hydrogen bonding plays an important role in structural modifications and band gap variations. This work not only enables high pressure as a clean tool to tune the structure and band gap of hybrid perovskite, but also maps a pioneering route towards realizing ideal photovoltaic materials-by-design.
1. Introduction
Perovskites have emerged as star materials owing to their superior optoelectronic properties and relatively low processing cost. The hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) have triggered a new research upsurge in photovoltaic fields with the highest certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 24.2%.1 Two-dimensional (2D) HOIPs have a layered sandwich structure consisting of alternating organic cations (barrier) and corner-shared PbI6 octahedra anionic inorganic networks (well),2 producing a remarkable quantum confinement effect, dielectric confinement effect and large exciton binding energy.3 Importantly, in contrast to 3D hybrid perovskites, 2D HOIPs exhibit improved environmental stability4 and excellent band gap tunability owing to its structural flexibility, which relaxes the constraints on organic cations and allows a much wider component configuration.
According to Shockley–Queisser theory, arduous material science is facing the challenge of further upgrading to the next level, which requires a further narrowing of the band gap for broader absorption in the solar spectrum. Efforts to adjust the band gap by the conventional method (substitution of I by Cl or Br) leads to an unwanted larger band gap.5 Furthermore, the efficiency of photovoltaic solar cell devices is strongly influenced by the structure and band gap of the absorber. As a typical perovskite material, (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4 (abbreviated as (PMA)2PbI4) exhibits a direct band gap of 2.19 eV, and its practical performance is hurdled by the large band gap. This inherent defect is extraordinarily difficult to overcome by traditional chemical modifications to meet the Shockley–Queisser limit. It is thus highly desirable to look for an effective way to accurately engineer the band gap and then catch an in-depth insight into its structure–property relationship in (PMA)2PbI4.
High pressure has been proposed as a clean and powerful tool to effectively modulate the crystal and electronic structure of perovskites with the understanding of narrowing down to the atomic level.6–10 Application of pressure can greatly enhance the electronic conductivity of halide perovskites. For example, apparent band gap closure and insulator-to-metal transformation of cesium lead iodine (CsPbI3) reveal a whole new kind of electronic structure and transport properties.11 In particular, the partial retainability of high-pressure treated materials maintain their superior performance after decompression.12 This will encourage scientists to synthesize more outstanding photovoltaic materials at ambient conditions, which is of great significance for practical applications. In recent years, the reported high-pressure studies of HOIPs mainly focused on modifying the electronic properties of 3D perovskites, while less attention has been paid to 2D HOIPs under high pressure. Therefore, in this work, we report the pressure-induced structural and electronic properties of 2D (PMA)2PbI4 perovskite by using a high-pressure method in a diamond anvil cell (DAC).
2. Methods
2.1 Sample preparation and high-pressure generation
The sample of (PMA)2PbI4 perovskite was purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. High-pressure experiments were carried out by using a symmetrical DAC with culet 300 μm. A T301 stainless steel gasket was pre-indented with 44 μm thickness and a 150 μm diameter center hole was drilled as the sample chamber. Typically, the perovskite sample was loaded into the sample chamber together with a small ruby ball to determine the actual pressure according to the ruby fluorescence method. Silicone oil was used as the pressure-transmitting medium (PTM) for optical absorption and X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments, while KBr was used as PTM for in situ FTIR spectroscopy experiments.
2.2 
          In situ high pressure FTIR spectroscopy measurements
The FTIR spectroscopy measurements were performed at room temperature by using a Bruker Vertex 80 V FTIR spectrometer equipped with a nitrogen-cold mercury–cadmium–telluride (MCT) detector in the range of 500–7000 cm−1. IIa-type ultralow fluorescence diamonds were used for high pressure FTIR experiments.
2.3 
          In situ high pressure XRD measurements

In situ high-pressure angle-dispersive XRD patterns with a 0.6199 Å beam were collected at the BL15U1 beamline in the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). Prior to experimental measurement, CeO2 was used as the standard sample to calibrate the geometric parameters. The diffraction patterns were integrated into a standard one-dimensional profile by using Fit2D software. The Reflex module combined in Materials Studio program was utilized to refine the collected experimental XRD profiles.
2.4 Computational methodology
Electronic band structures and DOS were calculated using the pseudopotential plane-wave methods based on first-principles density functional theory implemented in the CASTEP package. The local density approximation (LDA-CAPZ)13 approach of exchange–correlation functional was employed with the plane-wave energy cutoff 760 eV and the k-point spacing 0.03 Å−1 in the Brillouin zone. The self-consistent field (SCF) tolerance was set as 5.0 × 10−7 eV per atom. The convergence thresholds between optimization cycles for maximum force, maximum stress and maximum displacement are set as 0.03 eV Å−1, 0.05 GPa, and 1.0 × 10−3 Å, respectively.
3. Results and discussion
As shown in (Fig. 1a), the extraordinary piezoceramic transition of the crystal (PMA)2PbI4 is obviously observed through optical micrographs. The initial transparent tangerine changed into translucent maroon at 6.9 GPa, followed by gradual darkening and eventually turns into opaque black at 17.2 GPa. Pressure-dependent UV/Vis absorption experiments reveal significant band gap evolution of up to 20.1 GPa (Fig. 1b). At ambient conditions, we observed a steep absorption edge located at about 539 nm corresponding to electronic transitions in the inorganic layer from mainly Pb (6s)–I (5p) mixed states to Pb (6p) states.14 With increasing pressure to 5.1 GPa, the absorption edge gradually red shifts, indicating the band gap narrowing. When the pressure reaches 7.1 GPa, the absorption edge shows an abnormal pronounced blue shift, possibly proving the electronic or structural transition. Upon further compression, the absorption edge red shifts slowly from the visible region to the near-infrared region. The band gap of (PMA)2PbI4 was estimated at different pressures by extrapolating the linear portion of (αdhν)2versus hν curve direct band-gap Tauc Plots (shown in Fig. 1c and Fig. S1, ESI†),12 where α is the absorption coefficient, d is the sample thickness, and hν is the photon energy. At ambient pressure, (PMA)2PbI4 shows a direct band gap of 2.19 eV, which is consistent with the previous study.15 With further compression, the band gap presented a sharp increase between 5.1 and 7.7 GPa, which is possibly considered as the inorganic layer structure distortion. Under high pressure, the band gap of (PMA)2PbI4 underwent a process of continuously evident reduction. The original band gap reduced to 1.26 eV at 20.1 GPa, reaching the Shockley–Queisser limit. During decompression, the band gap of (PMA)2PbI4 monotonically increased as pressure was reduced from 20.1 GPa to 1 atm. This band gap evolution trend indicates that no new energy route was produced from the pressure treatment process. During the whole compression process, an unprecedented band gap narrowing was achieved up to 0.9 eV (Table S1, ESI†), which is of great significance for improving photovoltaic performances.
 Fig. 1  The optical micrographs, absorption spectra and band gap of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (a) The representative optical micrographs of (PMA)2PbI4 in a DAC upon compression. (b) UV/Vis absorption spectra of the (PMA)2PbI4 crystal at high pressure. (c) Band gap evolution of (PMA)2PbI4 under high pressure. The inset illustration exhibits calculated band gap Tauc plot for (PMA)2PbI4 at 1 atm. 
At ambient conditions, the layered crystal structure of (PMA)2PbI4 is viewed as a corner-shared PbI6 octahedra anionic inorganic layer alternate with symmetric organic PMA+ cation bilayers (Fig. S2, ESI†). Moreover, the amino group of the bulky organic cations by distinct hydrogen bonds connected the Pb–I inorganic framework. We noted a weak van der Waals interaction between the adjacent PMA+ organic layer and the inorganic framework. Such a layered crystal structure and the presence of the various interactions indicate that the lattice pressure response is anisotropic upon compression.
To figure out the change of optical properties caused by pressure, in situ high pressure X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were carried out to track the evolution of the crystal structure in (PMA)2PbI4 at various pressures. Representative XRD patterns of (PMA)2PbI4 are shown in (Fig. 2a). With increasing pressure, all Bragg diffraction peaks progressively shift to higher 2-theta owing to the lattice contraction as expected. At 4.6 GPa, an additional peak appears at 6.2° indicating a possible pressure-induced phase transition. As the pressure increased to 7.7 GPa, the splitting of the peak near 5.8° indicates the possible phase change. Upon further compression, this phase stabilizes up to 27.2 GPa without further structural transitions.
 Fig. 2  The selected XRD patterns, lattice parameters, and volume at various pressures. (a) Integrated in situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction patterns of (PMA)2PbI4 upon compression to 27.2 GPa at room temperature. The asterisk highlights new diffraction peaks appearing at 4.6 GPa and 7.7 GPa. (b) The lattice parameters of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (c) Pressure dependence of cell volume in (PMA)2PbI4. 
The most possible high pressure crystal structures of (PMA)2PbI4 are provided by indexing and refining the powder diffraction data in the Materials Studio Program.16 The first phase transition at 4.6 GPa is associated with a pressure-induced Pbca to Pccn phase transition. However, no noticeable change was observed before and after acquiring the XRD pattern at 7.7 GPa. Therefore, we suggested that the second phase transition at 7.7 GPa is a Pccn to Pccn isostructural phase transition. Similar isostructural phase transitions have been reported in other organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites under high pressure.17 The Rietveld refinement profiles for representative XRD patterns collected at 1 atm, 4.6 GPa, and 7.7 GPa are shown in Fig. S3, ESI†. Some of the differences are probably owing to preferred orientation or texture of the perovskite samples.18 Details of the refined lattice parameters and cell volume of (PMA)2PbI4 are presented in (Fig. 2b and c) and (Table S2, ESI†). We note that the orthorhombic (PMA)2PbI4 material exhibited different anisotropic axial compressibility: the cell parameter for the b-axis decreases more rapidly than the a-axis and c-axis with increasing pressure, corresponding to the sandwich structure consisting of alternating organic and inorganic layers. This result may be attributed to distinct effects of PMA molecules on the in-plane and out-of-plane distortion of PbI6 octahedra dominated by hydrogen bond interactions.
The pressure dependence of the volume for these three phases has been fitted with the third-order Birch–Murnaghan (BM) equation of state in (Fig. 2c). These two phase transitions are accompanied by the volume collapse of 5.45% and 3.55%, respectively. Phase II is considered as an intermediate state from the first phase to the third phase stabilized in the pressure range of 4.6–7.1 GPa. We note that isothermal bulk modulus K0 for phase II of (PMA)2PbI4 was estimated as 21.2 GPa, which is much less than that of phase I (73.6 GPa). Such a soft characteristic causes the electronic orbitals overlapping at relatively low pressure range, further verifying that the band gap is narrowed. The fitting bulk modulus K0 was estimated to be 68.4 GPa in phase III. Nevertheless, the bulk modulus K0 of these three phases is far less than the inorganic oxide perovskites that generally possess K0 > 100 GPa.19 It is worth noting that the large compressibility means that compression can be a very effective potential way to adjust the crystal structure, which is desirable.
To further effectively probe the effects of pressure on the interaction of the organic layer and its inorganic sublattice layer, we performed an in situ Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy experiment (Fig. 3a) to monitor direct information about PMA+ cation changes. In the mid-infrared region, optical absorption is completely attributed to the vibrations of organic PMA (C6H5CH2–NH3). Characteristic internal vibrational modes of PMA appeared at high frequencies, namely, near 760 cm−1 (C–N stretching), and at 850–1100 cm−1 (C–H in-plane and out-of-plane bending in the benzene ring)20 (Fig. S4, ESI†). The N–H bending mode between 1400 and 1500 cm−1 displayed a prominent redshift with increasing pressure. Moreover, C–C stretching of the benzene ring appeared at 1570 cm−1, whereas C–H and N–H stretching modes were obtained at 2900 cm−1 and 3000–3200 cm−1 (Fig. 3c). We recognize that the electronegativity of N is greater than that of C (N: 3.04 vs. C: 2.55) and the N⋯I distances are much shorter than those of C⋯I in orthorhombic Pbca and also the angle of C–HC⋯I5 is much smaller than that of N–HN⋯I5 (Table S3, ESI†). Accordingly, the hydrogen-bond interactions mainly derive from the H atoms on nitrogen. The inorganic–organic layers communicate via hydrogen-bonding between NH3+ groups and halide I− ions. If we presume that hydrogen-bonding is important when H⋯I < 3.3 Å, there are different hydrogen-bonds between Pb and I, as shown in (Fig. 3d). The redshift of the symmetric N–H stretching modes could be attributed to the enhancement of the intermolecular interaction, indicating the strengthening of pressure-induced hydrogen bonds. The pressure-induced softening of the X–H bond mode has been widely recognized as a strong evidence for the formation and enhancement of X–H⋯Y hydrogen bonds leading to the weakening of X–H bonds.21
 Fig. 3  FTIR spectra and frequency shift of (PMA)2PbI4 at high pressure. (a) Pressure-dependent FTIR spectra of (PMA)2PbI4 upon compression up to 25.7 GPa. The corresponding representative variation modes are marked: ν, stretching; δ, bending; s, symmetric; as, asymmetric. (b) Schematic of the corresponding representative vibration modes, where the red lines are the atomic displacements and arrows denote the molecular mode. (c) The frequency shift of the PMA molecule at different pressures. (d) The hydrogen bonding between H and halide I onions. 
Further insights into hydrogen-bonding interactions can also be found from the bending and stretching modes of the C–N bonding (Fig. 3b), with a continuous blueshift from the Pbca phase to Pccn phase, indicating that the C–N bonds have stretched and weakened. Meanwhile, in the Pccn phase, HN atoms form HN⋯I hydrogen bonds at ∼2.83 Å, which is smaller than the HN⋯I hydrogen bonds at ∼3.39 Å in the Pbca phase. This statement once again proves the enhancement of pressure-induced hydrogen bonding. Above 9.2 GPa, the broadening and disappearance of some high-frequency vibrational modes indicate that distorted inorganic layers cannot satisfy the flexible space needs for organic cations. Hence, the bulky PMA+ organic cations are progressively distorted under higher pressure.
To further our understanding of the effects of hydrogen bonding enhancement on band gap, we have also compared the band gap between (PMA)2PbI4 and (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 (abbreviated as (PEA)2PbI4) as a function of pressure (Fig. S5, ESI†). It is clearly seen that the band gap of (PEA)2PbI4 decreases slowly compared with (PMA)2PbI4. (PEA)2PbI4 has more CH2 molecules than (PMA)2PbI4 and the HN⋯I bond distance in (PEA)2PbI4 is shorter than (PMA)2PbI4, which leads to the electron density function wave being increased more between Pb and I in (PMA)2PbI4. These differences explain that the band gap of (PEA)2PbI4 decreases slowly. These results therefore suggest that pressure-enhanced hydrogen bonding plays a key role in band gap variations.
To better understand the evolution of the crystal structure and electronic structure in (PMA)2PbI4 under high pressure, we have carried out band structure (Fig. S6, ESI†) and DOS calculations for (PMA)2PbI4, as shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. S7, ESI†. The calculated results of the band gap are in good agreement with the experimental ones. The calculated direct band gap is 1.761 eV for the Pbca phase at ambient pressure, and then exhibited an increase to 1.774 eV as the pressure approached 5 GPa in the Pccn phase. As is known to us, the band gap is dominated by the alteration of conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM). Meanwhile, DOS indicated that (PMA)2PbI4 exhibited an inverted band structure, with VBM characterized by strong hybridization, which is mainly originating from the Pb 6s and I 5p antibonding interactions in the [PbI6]2− octahedral network, whereas CBM is mostly determined by Pb 6p and I 5p antibonding hybridizations. Note that the VBM state has almost an I 5p character, due to the higher energy level and more electrons of the I 5p state compared with that of the Pb 6s orbital. The CBM state was almost entirely contributed from the Pb 6p orbital, due to the fact that the Pb 6p state possessed a much higher energy level than the I 5s orbital. When the pressure was applied to the (PMA)2PbI4 perovskite, CBM was mostly a nonbonding localized state of Pb 6p orbitals, which is less sensitive to external pressure. Therefore, the band gap evolution was initially determined by the change of VBM. We also calculated the band gap considering the contribution of spin–orbit coupling. From the density of states with (Fig. S7, ESI†) and without spin–orbit coupling (Fig. 4), it can be seen that the main contribution elements orbits of VBM and CBM are the same at 0 GPa and 4.6 GPa, while there exist only tiny differences in the band gap.
 Fig. 4  The calculated density of states (DOSs) and the evolution of the Pb–I bond length and Pb–I–Pb bond angle at different pressures. (a) DOS of (PMA)2PbI4 at 1 atm. (b) DOS of (PMA)2PbI4 at 4.6 GPa. (c) The evolution of the Pb–I bond lengths of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (d) The evolution of the Pb–I–Pb bond angles of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. 
The mechanisms of band gap narrowing are correlated with the hydrogen bonding and unique structural evolution behavior upon compression through our analysis. The underlying reasons for substantial bandgap narrowing are the widening of Pb–I–Pb bond angles and more overlapped electron density function wave coupling between Pb and I. Meanwhile, hydrogen bond enhancement triggers the change of Pb–I bond angles and bond lengths. In the low-pressure phase, the significant redshift of band gap is mainly attributed to the reduction of Pb–I bond length (Fig. 4c) leading to an increased orbital coupling of VBM between Pb 6s and I 5p (Fig. S9a, ESI†), but the Pb–I–Pb bond angle remains nearly at 158° (Fig. 4d). This phenomenon can be comprehended by the easier layer-to-layer compression and is correlated with the orientated soft organic cation layer. When the increasing pressure approached 5 GPa, CBM happened to be dominated by the strong coupling of Pb 6p and I 5p orbitals. Accordingly, the blue jump can be understood from the significant shift to the higher energy level of the CBM by applying the exertion pressure, which gives rise to the widened band gap. Such distinctive behavior also can be interpreted from PbI6 octahedral in-plane distortion (Fig. S8, ESI†), accompanied by simultaneous decline in Pb–I–Pb bond angles and Pb–I bond lengths (Fig. S9b, ESI†), which further confirms the appearance of the first phase transition and the isothermal bulk modulus K0 of phase II is much smaller than that of phase I. When a much higher pressure was applied, an isostructural phase transition from Pccn to Pccn occurred. Generally, the isostructural phase transitions are thought to be caused by changes in the electronic structure of some materials.22,23 When the phase transition appears, the bond lengths of Pb–I continuously shortened and the increase of Pb–I–Pb bond angles (Fig. S9c, ESI†) originated from the deformation and movement of PMA+ cations on compression coupled with out-of-plane distorted inorganic PbI6 octahedra (Fig. S8, ESI†), causing the electron density function wave increase between Pb and I. As such, Pb 6s and I 5p orbital overlap enhances and pushes up the VBM due to its antibonding character, which explains the decrease of the band gap at higher pressure. Moreover, the competition of compression effect between the interlayer bond contraction and lattice distortion leads to band-gap narrowing at higher pressure. This experiment is critical to help us look for the optimal route to achieve the perovskite of wide bandgap tuning, even if the applied pressure is completely released.
4. Conclusions
In summary, our results illustrate that the structural and optical properties of the 2D hybrid perovskites (PMA)2PbI4 could be greatly tuned by pressure. A large band gap narrowing from 2.15 eV to 1.26 eV (an unprecedented 41.4% reduce), was achieved upon compression to 20.1 GPa, which is a particularly desirable trend to achieve better photovoltaic performance. The pressure-driven Pbca → Pccn → Pccn phase transition in (PMA)2PbI4 is identified in this study for the first time, and therefore alters the electronic wave function between Pb and I atoms through the change of bond lengths and bond angles. The effects of hydrogen bonding enhancement resulting in the distortion of PbI6 octahedra explains the optical and structural changes, especially by comparing with another similar organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite (PEA)2PbI4. Our results not only clarify that 2D HOIPs have a considerable tunability in their performance that can fit them to various applications, but also provides a useful route towards better materials-by-design.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFA0703404), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51632002, 11974133, 91745203, 11634004), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB0201204), The Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (No. IRT_15R23) and the National Found for Fostering Talents of basic Science (No. J1103202).
References
A. Kooijman, L. A. Muscarella and R. M. Williams, Perovskite Thin Film Materials Stabilized and Enhanced by Zinc(II) Doping, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 1678 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kawano, M. Koshimizu, Y. Sun, N. Yahaba, Y. Fujimoto, T. Yanagida and K. Asai, Effects of Organic Moieties on Luminescence Properties of Organic–Inorganic Layered Perovskite-Type Compounds, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9101–9106 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. Du, Q. Tu, X. Zhang, Q. Han, J. Liu, S. Zauscher and D. B. Mitzi, Two-Dimensional Lead(II) Halide-Based Hybrid Perovskites Templated by Acene Alkylamines: Crystal Structures, Optical Properties, and Piezoelectricity, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 9291–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Li, J. Chang, B. Ding, S. Zheng, Y. Wu, J. Yang, G. Yang, X. Zhong and J. Wang, (C6H5CH2NH3)2CuBr4: A Lead-Free, Highly Stable Two-Dimensional Perovskite for Solar Cell Applications, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2709–2716 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Liao, Y. Zhang, C.-L. Hu, J.-G. Mao, H.-Y. Ye, P.-F. Li, S. D. Huang and R.-G. Xiong, A lead-halide perovskite molecular ferroelectric semiconductor, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7338 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, High-Pressure Single-Crystal Structures of 3D Lead-Halide Hybrid Perovskites and Pressure Effects on their Electronic and Optical Properties, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsuishi, T. Ishihara, S. Onari, Y. H. Chang and C. H. Park, Optical properties and structural phase transitions of lead-halide based inorganic–organic 3D and 2D perovskite semiconductors under high pressure, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2004, 241, 3328–3333 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ou, J. Yan, C. Xiao, W. Shen, C. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Visible light response, electrical transport, and amorphization in compressed organolead iodine perovskites, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11426–11431 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Lü, W. Yang, T. Wen, L. Yang, X. Ren, L. Wang, Z. Lin and Y. Zhao, Pressure-Induced Phase Transformation, Reversible Amorphization, and Anomalous Visible Light Response in Organolead Bromide Perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11144–11149 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Gong, L. Kong, R. D. Schaller, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, S. Yan, W. Yang, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis, H. K. Mao and T. Xu, Isothermal pressure-derived metastable states in 2D hybrid perovskites showing enduring bandgap narrowing, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8076–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, X. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wang, F. Li, Y. Wang, F. Tian, B. Liu, Z. X. Shen and T. Cui, New Metallic Ordered Phase of Perovskite CsPbI3 under Pressure, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900399 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Kong, J. Gong, W. Yang, H.-K. Mao, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, R. D. Schaller, D. Zhang and T. Xu, Pressure-Induced Bandgap Optimization in Lead-Based Perovskites with Prolonged Carrier Lifetime and Ambient Retainability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604208 CrossRef .
D. M. C. B. J. Alder, The Group State of the Electron Gas By a Stochastic Method, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980, 45, 566 CrossRef .
N. Kitazawa, Excitons in two-dimensional layered
perovskite compounds: (C6H5C2H4NH3)2Pb(Br,I)4 and (C6H5C2H4NH3)2Pb(Cl,Br)4, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1997, 49, 233–238 CrossRef .
S. Liu, F. Li, X. Han, L. Xu, F. Yao and Y. Liu, Preparation and Two-Photon Photoluminescence Properties of Organic Inorganic Hybrid Perovskites (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbBr4 and (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 2286 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Rietveld, The Rietveld Method, Phys. Scr., 2014, 89, 098002 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. Wang, G. Xiao, Q. Zeng and B. Zou, Pressure-Induced Structural Evolution and Band Gap Shifts of Organometal Halide Perovskite-Based Methylammonium Lead Chloride, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5273–5279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Wenk, I. Lonardeli, J. Pehl, J. Devine, V. Prakapenka, G. Shen and H. K. Mao, In situ observation of texture development in olivine, ringwoodite, magnesiowüstite and silicate perovskite at high pressure, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2004, 226, 507–519 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Fischer, Z. Wang and S.-i. Karato, Elasticity of CaTiO3, SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 Perovskites up to 3.0 GPa: the Effect of Crystallographic Structure, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1993, 20, 97–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Lv and J. Feng, Spectral Characterization of Four Kinds of Biodegradable Plastics: Poly(Lactic Acid), Poly (Butylenes Adipate-Co-Terephthalate), Poly (Hydroxybutyrate-Co-Hydroxyvalerate) and Poly(Butylenes Succinate) with FTIR and Raman Spectroscopy, J. Polym. Environ., 2012, 21, 108–114 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, N. Shinde, A. Hu, C. Cook, M. Murugesu and Y. Song, Structural Tuning of Energetic Material Bis (1H-tetrazol-5-yl) amine Monohydrate under Pressures Probed by Vibrational Spectroscopy and X-ray Diffraction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26504–26512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, Pressure-Induced Conductivity and Yellow-to-Black Piezochromism in a Layered Cu–Cl Hybrid Perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1673–1678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Deng, Y. Lv, J. Zhu, S. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Yang, L. Wang, H. Mao, G. Shen, Z.-Y. Lu, Y. Ren, Z. Chen, Z. Lin, Y. Zhao and C. Jin, Pressure-Induced Isostructural Phase Transition and Correlation of FeAs Coordination with the Superconducting Properties of 111-Type Na1–xFeAs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7892–7896 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05904kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The optical micrographs, absorption spectra and band gap of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (a) The representative optical micrographs of (PMA)2PbI4 in a DAC upon compression. (b) UV/Vis absorption spectra of the (PMA)2PbI4 crystal at high pressure. (c) Band gap evolution of (PMA)2PbI4 under high pressure. The inset illustration exhibits calculated band gap Tauc plot for (PMA)2PbI4 at 1 atm.	 

 	Fig. 2  The selected XRD patterns, lattice parameters, and volume at various pressures. (a) Integrated in situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction patterns of (PMA)2PbI4 upon compression to 27.2 GPa at room temperature. The asterisk highlights new diffraction peaks appearing at 4.6 GPa and 7.7 GPa. (b) The lattice parameters of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (c) Pressure dependence of cell volume in (PMA)2PbI4.	 

 	Fig. 3  FTIR spectra and frequency shift of (PMA)2PbI4 at high pressure. (a) Pressure-dependent FTIR spectra of (PMA)2PbI4 upon compression up to 25.7 GPa. The corresponding representative variation modes are marked: ν, stretching; δ, bending; s, symmetric; as, asymmetric. (b) Schematic of the corresponding representative vibration modes, where the red lines are the atomic displacements and arrows denote the molecular mode. (c) The frequency shift of the PMA molecule at different pressures. (d) The hydrogen bonding between H and halide I onions.	 

 	Fig. 4  The calculated density of states (DOSs) and the evolution of the Pb–I bond length and Pb–I–Pb bond angle at different pressures. (a) DOS of (PMA)2PbI4 at 1 atm. (b) DOS of (PMA)2PbI4 at 4.6 GPa. (c) The evolution of the Pb–I bond lengths of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure. (d) The evolution of the Pb–I–Pb bond angles of (PMA)2PbI4 as a function of pressure.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05904k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
