Bio-based materials: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD90047C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD90047C
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 202, 121-139Bio-based materials: general discussion

        
          
            George 
            Huber
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dimitris 
            Argyropoulos
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Avtar 
            Matharu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Harry 
            Bitter
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christian 
            Stevens
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Servann 
            Herou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Karen 
            Wilson
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            James 
            Clark
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Deepak 
            Pant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Carlos I. 
            Cabrera-Rodríguez
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joseph 
            Samec
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bruce E. 
            Dale
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Farmer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mark 
            Mascal
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anne 
            Horan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrzej 
            Stankiewicz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Florence 
            Gschwend
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xindong 
            Mu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Zhou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Changwei 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Terence 
            Cooper
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Laura 
            Sparlinek
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Vitaliy 
            Budarin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eero 
            Kontturi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Hunt
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Amalio 
            Garrido
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Keith 
            Waldron
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Zhenova
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            David 
            Constable
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Simo 
            Sarkanen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Magdalena 
            Titirici
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gadi 
            Rothenberg
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jakob 
            Albert
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Duncan 
            Macquarrie
          
        
      
First published on 7th September 2017

Simo Sarkanen opened the discussion of the introductory lecture by Bruce Dale: The supposition that the strength of a national economy is directly related to energy consumption is incomplete. This hypothesis is reminiscent of Marx’s suggestion that the value of an article is equivalent to the labor expended in producing it. Actually, the functional demand for the articles produced and services offered is a more realistic basis for evaluating the strength of an economy.

Bruce Dale replied: Perhaps all suppositions are incomplete in one way or another. And if Marx said something true, it remains true nonetheless. Truth does not depend on who speaks it. I am no Marxist, and I am not a capitalist either. I try to observe what is really going on in the world and draw correct conclusions. I observe that the total GDP is directly and linearly related to the total power consumption with a very high (95% plus) correlation coefficient. No other variable so completely and so logically explains GDP as power consumption does. Not one. If someone can point me toward another variable that does a better job of explaining GDP, and show me the supporting data, I will be glad to update my beliefs.
Here is a “thought experiment”, as some like to term it, about demand side analysis. I demand a cell phone with all of its wonderful features. But there is no electricity to charge it and run the routers, no fuels to run the machines that will mine, refine, and assemble the hundreds of materials that make up the cell phone, and no fuels and electricity to support the lives of the highly-paid and highly-skilled individuals who will design, build and market the phones and produce the apps. In other words, no energy. How many cell phones will be produced? Not one, in spite of the demand.
So I respectfully but firmly disagree, I think there is demand for many goods and services that remains theoretical until there is energy to meet that demand.

Xindong Mu said: Thank you for your comprehensive and instructive presentation. As you mentioned in your talk, the cost of biomass is crucial for the economic feasibility of biorefineries. What is the optimum proposed price for the cost of biomass feedstocks that could make farmers happy and companies profitable? Should biorefineries be run by farmers? Or what kind of relationship should there be between them?

Bruce Dale answered: I do not think that there is a single universal price for biomass that will satisfy all farmers and biorefiners. The price will probably have to be determined on a regional basis. However, we can be certain that if we pay the farmers more, they will grow more. If they grow more biomass, then transportation distances to the biorefineries will decrease and the size of the biorefineries will increase. Both of these factors (decreased transportation distances and bigger biorefineries with better economies of scale) will tend to decrease the cost of the production of the biofuel. These effects are demonstrated in a paper for the U.S. Midwest.1 I think most biorefineries are probably too complex to be run by farmers, with the exception of on-farm or local biogas plants. The Italian Biogas Consortium is showing that farmers can readily manage these on-farm digesters to produce biogas and electricity.2 Also, the capital costs of a competitive lignocellulose to ethanol plant are far beyond the financial resources of even the largest farmer.
So, I think the best way for farmers to participate in a large scale biorefinery is to establish farmer cooperatives to interface with the biorefineries. These cooperatives would aggregate local biomass and then process the biomass in local facilities called “depots” to stabilize and densify the biomass for later sale to the biorefinery. I think this approach would work well for both the farmers and biorefiners. The depot approach using the AFEX pretreatment process has been reported previously.3 Other technologies might be used instead of AFEX, but this is one example.
1 S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2015, 9, 422–434.
2 B. E. Dale, F. Sibilla, C. Fabbri, M. Pezzaglia, B. Pecorino, E. Veggia, A. Baronchelli, P. Gattoni and S. Bozzetto, 2016, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2016, 10, 341–345.
3 P. L. Eranki, D. H. Manowitz, B. D. Bals, R. C. Izaurralde, S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2013, 7, 537–550.

Karen Wilson remarked: With falling costs of crude oil, and tight profit margins, industry often comments that while they would like to use more bio-derived chemicals, they are currently too expensive for their processes. Given there are many potential bio-derived chemicals that can be synthesised, what do you think are the most promising target molecules or classes of molecules that researchers should be focusing their efforts on developing processes for?

Bruce Dale answered: Well, clearly some bio-derived molecules have made it into the chemical industry. I count polylactic acid and propanediol among this small number. These chemicals are made in high yield from corn starch and have some advantages over their petroleum-derived competitors. The various diacids, like succinic acid, are promising. I would currently be looking for substitutes for aromatic compounds also, including PTE.

Keith Waldron asked: Is there an argument to have an interconnected world solar (and maybe wind) energy grid?

Bruce Dale replied: I do not think transmission of electrical power internationally makes much sense. If I understand line losses (electrical resistance heating), we would probably lose too much of the energy to make it worthwhile. And, of course, the capital expense would be enormous, especially for inter-continental transmission lines.

Deepak Pant communicated: Prof. Dale mentioned about improvements in the biorefinery establishment when the price paid to the farmers was doubled from $40 per ton to $80 per ton.
A slide showed the remarkable increase in the surface area that was covered by the crop (I assume it was corn). Prof. Dale mentioned that there is no food vs. fuel debate but it is more like a food and fuel situation where the increased corn growth does not take away food. However, when the price paid to farmers was doubled, they were incentivized to go for one particular crop, corn in this case. This, in turn, took away the land where probably other food crops were growing earlier and which is now corn dominated. Perhaps this is not such a problem in the US but I assume there will be problems in the rest of the world.
What are your thoughts on the seeming dichotomy between the two statements?

Bruce Dale communicated in reply: Ref. 1 does a much better job of explaining this effect than I was able to do in 30 seconds. A subsequent paper using the same approach estimated the increased employment achieved by increasing the biomass price paid to farmers.2 What the farmers supplied at higher biomass prices were mostly grasses such as switchgrass and more stover and residues.
1 S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2015, 9, 422–434.
2 S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2015, 9, 639–647.

Deepak Pant communicated: Thank you for your answer. Can you direct me towards the source of the figure from your presentation where you made a comparison of status quo and different types of biofuel management scenarios?

Bruce Dale communicated in reply: I think the figure you mention is regarding the different biogas production approaches in Italy. If so, the figure can be found in ref. 1.
1 L. Valli, L. Rossi, C. Fabbri, F. Sibilla, P. Gattoni, B. E. Dale, S. Kim, R. G. Ong and S. Bozzetto, Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref., 2017, DOI: 10.1002/bbb.1789.

George Huber opened the discussion of the paper by Avtar Matharu: What is the purpose of the ethanol and heptane extractions? The residence times in this process seem long. Do you have any ways to reduce the residence times? Another challenge with this technology is recylcing the solvents. Can you explain how you recycle the solvents?

Harry Bitter communicated: Thank you very much for the talk on using mango peels as feedstock. This is a nice example where the chemical and food worlds can meet. From your paper and presentation, I got the impression that you take the heptane/ethanol extraction preceding the sub critical water extraction for granted. Did you consider changing the order of the extraction step? Might there be an advantage to changing the order?

Avtar Matharu answered George Huber and Harry Bitter: The purpose of the ethanol and heptane extractions was to extract any waxes and soluble polyphenolics, oligosugars, etc. within the context of a cascade approach to biomass valorisation. These steps are not necessary if we are just chasing pectin. I assume you mean residence times for ethanol and heptane? If so, then yes, these can be optimised, solvents evaporated/distilled and re-used. With respect to sub-critical water, it can recycled within a loop system but once it is treated with ethanol to precipitate pectinaceous matter, distillation must be considered. We have not explored the order, whether we extract waxes/polyphenolics first and then pectin or vice-versa.

Changwei Hu asked: Have you extracted in different orders?

Avtar Matharu replied: Yes, we have extracted in different orders using Design of Experiment. The processing temperature is more significant than the concentration (water:biomass ratio).

Andrew Hunt said: In your paper you highlight that up to 15% of the biomass can extracted with ethanol, then superheated water can generate a maximum yield of 18% of pectin. Therefore, what is the remaining 67% residue and what can it be used for?

Avtar Matharu responded: We are converting the remaining depectinated residues into nanocellulose fibrils and crystals. We have just published such work in Green Chemistry.1
1 E. M. de Melo, J. H. Clark and A. S. Matharu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3408–3417.

Eero Kontturi enquired: What is the amount of pectin extracted with respect to the original amount of pectin in the mango peel? In other words, what is the theoretical yield of pectin in the extraction? Furthermore, what are the reasons behind the theoretical yield? Why is some of the pectin left unextracted after exposure to subcritical water?

Avtar Matharu answered: The amount of pectin extracted with respect to the theoretical amount is a moot point. We often talk about the extractable pectin rather than the total amount as tightly-bound protopectins remain in the material. However, it is suffice to say that based on TGA data of depectinated residues, which show the pectin signature at approximately 208 °C, we are extracting close to 80% of the pectin.

Anna Zhenova asked: Do the different varieties of mangoes grown in each region depend entirely on climate, or would it be possible to convince farmers in one region to grow a different type of mango if that peel is more useful for pectin production? For example, since the Kesar variety has the highest pectin yield overall, could growers around the world switch to that?

Avtar Matharu responded: You raise a good question. Climate plays an important role in the type of geographic cultivar. I am not sure if Kesar can be grown, say, in the wilds of Brazil.

Joseph Samec queried: Have you studied how the chemical structure of pectin is affected by the residence time of the extraction step in supercritical water?

Avtar Matharu replied: Firstly, for clarity, we are using pseudo-sub-critical water not supercritical water. The latter is highly destructive not only to biomass but also to the reaction vessels used.
The residence time will affect the pectin structure based on the assumption that the degree of esterification will be reduced in the case of prolonged residence times (increased hydrolytic activity).

Deepak Pant asked: In your paper, you did a conventional acid extraction for comparison and obtained a yield of only 4.88%, which is much lower than that reported in the literature. So what could be the reason for this low yield in your case? Secondly, what is the average yield that is reported in the literature for such acid based extractions?
Finally, I have a question about the application of this approach. You have shown it works for mangoes, which other fruits could this approach be utilized for?

Avtar Matharu answered: The conventional acid extraction may have been too harsh and cleaved pectinaceous matter, thus reducing the yield. The average literature yields vary quite significantly from paper to paper. A conservative estimate is 12% dry weight basis.
Our approach works for a wide variety of feedstocks.

Christian Stevens said: You analyzed the pectins of different sources and measured, amongst others, the degree of esterification. Did you also check the quality of the pectins by analyzing the gelling properties and characteristics of the gel? Gels can be obtained with calcium ions or with added sugars and can differ in different applications.

Avtar Matharu responded: Yes, we have checked the gelling quality using the standard sucrose (added sugar) method. We are yet to test the gel strength – this is on-going.

Andrzej Stankiewicz asked: Are there any specific equipment design issues related to the technology presented?

Avtar Matharu replied: There are no specific equipment issues as we are working under pseudo-subcritical conditions and not super-critical, which is a major challenge. I do hope that this process can benefit from advances in engineering and process intensification so that we do not always use “off the shelf” but promote innovation.

Mark Mascal said: You reflux the dry peel in ethanol for 2 h and then later the sample is left overnight in ethanol for pectin precipitation. Since pectin is acidic, you could be seeing some transesterification. I wondered whether the small peak at about 63 ppm in the 13C-NMR spectrum could be an ethyl ester CH2.

Avtar Matharu answered: Yes, the mysterious unidentified peak could well be some transesterification. Thank you for commenting on this.

James Clark opened the discussion of the paper by Simo Sarkanen: What are the opportunities for making small molecules (typically mono-aromatics) from lignin?

Simo Sarkanen replied: Extensive cleavage of lignin derivatives into low molecular weight compounds can certainly be chemically achieved, but the economic viability of such degradative processes is usually confounded by the complexity of the resulting product mixtures. Among the topics presented during this Faraday Discussions about bio-resources for the chemical industry, RANEY® Ni-catalyzed reductive cleavage of hardwood lignin (R. Rinaldi et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00069C)) undoubtedly merits further study. Additionally, the biological funneling of lignin-biodegradation products towards specific intermediates in microbial metabolic pathways has been proposed as a likely means of minimizing by-product levels to a substantial extent.1
1 J. G. Linger, D. R. Vardon, M. T. Guarnieri, E. M. Karp, G. B. Hunsinger, M. A. Franden, C. W. Johnson, G. Chupka, T. J. Strathmann, P. T. Pienkos and G. T. Beckham, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 12013–12018.

Thomas Farmer said: Certain properties for materials can often be opposed to one another. For example, long-term stability for use in building materials may be opposed to biodegradability over a reasonable timescale. Prior literature would suggest very varied rates of biodegradability for lignin. Therefore, do you know about the biodegradability of your materials, including after your treatment with ball-milling and methylation, and what impact this has on the long-term stability for building materials?

Simo Sarkanen answered: Some aerobic bacteria can grow on lignin as a sole carbon source,1 but white-rot fungi are the most frequently cited biological agents of lignin biodegradation. To degrade lignins, these microorganisms require some carbohydrates, the absence of which will inhibit lignin biodegradation. Whether methylated or not, the lignin materials employed in plastics formulations with a high lignin content are biodegradable before they are incorporated into the new materials. However, we have not yet studied the biodegradability of these lignin-based plastics in their final form.
1 E. Odier, G. Janin and B. Monties, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1981, 41, 337–341.

Vitaliy Budarin commented: Your paper demonstrates a huge potential for making a new polymer based on a lignin–poly(ethylene glycol) blend. This result has also provided some extra information about the lignin structure, showing that the lignin polymer is significantly flexible. This is controversial to the commonly held views about crosslinking or hyper-branching in lignin chains. Therefore, do you have any evidence that the structure of the lignin used in this experiment represents a unique lignin structure within a plant?

Simo Sarkanen replied: In terms of the 13C NMR analyses, pine milled wood lignin (isolated in 22% yield) is similar (although not identical) to the corresponding cellulolytic enzyme lignin (isolated in 23% and 86% yields), as shown in Table 3 of an 11-year-old article by J. F. Kadla et al.1 However, the carbohydrate content of the cellulolytic enzyme lignin is about 4-fold higher than that of the milled wood lignin (4%). Thus, milled wood lignin isolated in yields greater than 20% seems to represent softwood lignin as a whole reasonably well, although the molecular weight after milling is undoubtedly lower than in the native state.
1 J. F. Kadla et al., Holzforschung, 2006, 60, 389–397.

Servann Herou asked: Since lignin has been used for the production of carbon fibres, what do you expect would be the influence of the blending agent on the mechanical strength of lignin based carbon fibres after pyrolysis?

Simo Sarkanen answered: Lignin-based blend formulations that, on casting, produce stronger polymeric materials would be expected to capture improvements in the mechanical properties of carbon fibers formed through pyrolysis. It is worth noting that uniform electrospun fibers can be generated from kraft lignin solutions in DMF without small quantities of poly(ethylene oxide) as a spinning aid.1
1 I. Dallmeyer, F. Ko and J. F. Kadla, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2697–2705.

Magdalena Titirici asked: What is the potential for supercapacitors? You are using extremely toxic chemicals, do we gain in terms of sustainability? Is it really biodegradable?

Simo Sarkanen responded: Industrial kraft lignin-derived carbon nanofibers have shown promise with regards to supercapacitor electrode applications,1 but this preliminary evaluation needs to be confirmed through further studies. Otherwise, solution casting of blends to produce plastics with a high lignin content has been employed only to identify successful formulations for functional polymeric materials. Of course, solution casting will be replaced by injection-molding in industrial processes that produce materials for consumer markets.
1 J. I. Dallmeyer, Ph.D. Thesis, University of British Columbia, 2013.

Dimitris Argyropoulos enquired: Can you please provide a historical link and a description for the reasons you moved to the very expensive and cumbersome product of methylated ball-milled lignin (that you use now) from your early efforts with kraft and lignosulfonates that date back 15–20 years?

Simo Sarkanen replied: There are two reasons why methylated ball-milled lignin was adopted as a starting material for producing functional polymeric materials with a very high lignin content. First, except in molecular weight, ball-milled lignins are structurally similar to a sizable portion of the native lignins that preserve cell-wall integrity in trees and crops. Thus, as materials, their mechanical properties are more likely to support their utility than those of the derivatives formed through high-temperature exposure to alkaline solutions or aqueous bisulfite under acidic conditions. Second, hydrogen bonding generally increases the overall strength of the powerful intermolecular noncovalent forces between lignin components,1 and so underivatized lignins, as materials, are more difficult to deform (and are therefore more brittle) than their methylated counterparts. The clarity of the trends in the X-ray powder diffraction patterns displayed by the methylated ball-milled lignin-based blends with poly(ethylene glycol) quickly led to a comprehensive model for the configuration of the macromolecular lignin species in these new materials. Of course, such insights are directly pertinent to the development of functional industrial lignin-based polymeric material blends.
1 Y. Chen and S. Sarkanen, Phytochemistry, 2010, 71, 453–462.

Simo Sarkanen opened the discussion of the paper by Mark Mascal: Do the overall yields of diols and dicarboxylic acids from CMF affect the economic viability of producing these compounds as monomers for synthesizing polyesters? To avoid confusion, the term “branching” should be restricted to its customary meaning with regards to the (linear or branched) configurations of polymer chains. It should not be used to describe the carbon skeletons of individual monomer units.

Mark Mascal answered: The yields at each step in the synthesis of the monomers are good, so the overall process has the potential at least to find traction in renewable markets. While the number of unit operations is a consideration, we are aware that a multistep process to make bio-terephthalic acid via CMF is now being commercialized. We are mindful that the use of the term “branching” to describe the nature of the hydrocarbon chain in the monomers has the potential to be confused with the concept of polymer branching. We will look for ways to avoid this matter in future publications.

Karen Wilson asked: How is 5-chloro-methylfurfural (CMF) produced? Given that many early reports of 5-hydroxy-methylfurfural (HMF) production from fructose employed the use of HCl or Lewis acid chlorides in the presence of ionic liquids, is it possible that CMF was also produced in these studies? What is the hydrocarbon solvent used for the extraction of CMF? Solvent extraction is used during HMF isolation, can you selectively partition CMF versus and HMF formed in the reaction?

Mark Mascal responded: The CMF process I described in this talk does, in fact, involve HMF as a fleeting intermediate. Earlier reports of the preparation of HMF using HCl or other acidic systems that include chloride generally did not have a sufficient concentration of HCl to generate CMF. One hydrocarbon that I know has been successfully used to extract CMF is cyclohexane. In the CMF process, the product is partitioned effectively into the organic solvent. No HMF is isolated either from the organic or aqueous layer, but some humic material is observed, which is likely due to unconverted HMF.

Magdalena Titirici enquired: How do you detect CMF? How do you quantify the CMF? Do you quantify against other elements in there?

Mark Mascal replied: We always quantify CMF by the isolated yield, confirmed by NMR spectroscopy. Any minor products, such as, for example, levulinic acid, are isolated and quantified separately.

Andrew Hunt said: In your paper, you have CP-3-15-7*, which only appears in one figure. Please can you explain what this is?

Mark Mascal answered: The asterisk denotes a 25:75 molar load ratio of compounds 15:7. The figure caption in the paper has been edited to include this information.

Avtar Matharu commented: I see very interesting applications for low surface energy materials. Can you comment on the refractive index of your materials and when blended do you observe phase separation?

Mark Mascal responded: At this point, we have only made the monomers and our collaborators are working toward obtaining the first samples of polymer, so we do not yet have refractive index or phase separation data. These will, of course, be useful data to obtain.

David Constable said: Please consider other metrics as well as yield. Can you comment on the nature of the catalyst?

Mark Mascal replied: As Professor Dale strongly pointed out, there is no more important metric than yield in biomass conversion. Other metrics for the CMF process include low energy intensity. The HCl has multiple recycle paths and the solvent is used in a loop. High yield means minimal waste. The lignin is valorized. Inorganics from biomass and excess water produced by dehydrating the sugars are the only significant waste streams. High carbon efficiency, high atom economy, high E factor. The hydrogenation catalyst was Pd/C. Earth-abundant metal catalysts generally show inferior performance.

Magdalena Titirici asked: Do you think biomass will give significant gains in terms of sustainability?

Mark Mascal answered: Yes. I think this is the whole basis of the biorefinery movement, although we have to be careful to ensure that the carbon footprint of the technologies (energy costs of biomass transportation, processing, etc.) is lower than what would be the case from deriving the petrochemical equivalents.

Harry Bitter remarked: During the discussion, the issue came up of the cost of a catalyst. As you rightly stated, in general, the price of a catalyst is not so important since it is not consumed. However, I think that is only partially true. The price is related to the availability and the availability of some elements is endangered. This holds for the noble metals and also, for example, for Co. When an application is found and a scarce element is used, an issue might arise with its supply. How do you feel about that? Will there be a need for replacing endangered elements in catalysts?

Mark Mascal responded: There are a number of misconceptions on this subject. The key metric of importance for industrial catalyst use is performance, not price. Earth-abundant catalysts may be less expensive and in plentiful supply, but if they are inferior in terms of activity and less robust than catalysts prepared from less common elements, then this is a poor value proposition, since high productivity is essential and time offline in a process is very costly. Since expensive metals like Pd, Pt, and Ir are routinely recycled, there is no need to panic that they will become unavailable any time soon. However, when we find opportunities to avoid using such metals in cases where performance is not sacrificed, we should take advantage of that. This means that research in the area of cheap catalysts is indeed valuable, but it should not be taken to the point that we discriminate against research done with noble metals.

Florence Gschwend said: Sustainable sourcing of the feedstock is important to achieve environmental benefits from using biomass. Have you looked at any waste feedstocks?

Mark Mascal replied: We have used various forms of waste, including straw, municipal wastewater solids, corn stover, and sawmill waste. All give CMF yields consistent with their glucan content.

Christian Stevens enquired: What is known about the inherent toxicity of CMF? Although it is only an intermediate in the valorisation chain, it might be important to be aware of toxicity problems and try to work around it if necessary.

Fang Zhang asked: Have you considered the toxicity of CMF due to the existence of the Cl atom?

Mark Mascal answered Christian Stevens and Fang Zhang: CMF is known to be toxic. It hydrolyzes in vivo to HMF, which, like other Maillard reaction compounds, has secondary metabolites that show various forms of toxicity. CMF also has primary toxicity due to the release of HCl. However, like many toxic chemicals, it is an intermediate that, when handled responsibly in a multistep chemical process, should not be a significant concern.

Changwei Hu queried: How about the lifetime of the Pt catalyst?

Mark Mascal responded: The only place we use Pt ourselves in this work is as an electrode material for the Kolbe coupling of levulinic acid to 2,7-octanedione, thus not as a catalyst per se. In this role, its lifetime is not limited. In fact, we can use graphite instead of Pt as the anode.

Bruce Dale opened a general discussion of the papers by Avtar Matharu, Simo Sarkanen and Mark Mascal: After we have had a chance to chat, I think we found ourselves in agreement. There are a number of ways of measuring yield, and some of them are not very valuable. But for many reasons, the mass yield (kg of salable products per kg of primary feedstock(s)) is critical for both life cycle and economic thinking and should be featured in all research reports for biofuels and bioproducts.

David Constable responded: The point I was trying to make is that yield is a poor measure of “greenness” or of the sustainability of the chemistry. It considers only the reactants and is based on the limiting reactant. It does not matter as to the renewability or sustainability of any of the reactants, the toxicity, the physical hazards, etc. It assumes that chemists have no responsibility to conduct their science in a manner that can be sustained. Assessments of chemistry should be multivariate, easy to understand and perform, and include elements of hazard and risk.

Amalio Garrido said: From an engineering company’s perspective, the big issues are the logistics of the feedstock and the scale. Have you considered the feasibility of the processes for future industrial applications?

Keith Waldron replied: Regarding my own paper (DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00044H), the economies of scale in biorefining of biomass are critically important due to the low energy density of the feedstock. Likewise, the residues left at the end would be most beneficially exploited in a relatively local situation.

Dimitris Argyropoulos commented: In any efforts of biomass utilization, we need to be cognizant of the fact that species, seasonal, geographic and process variations (as they relate to pulp and paper waste streams) need to be taken into account. As such, we, as a community that develops the science and technology of biomass transformation, need to be aware of these issues and ensure that a good understanding and the foundations for plasticity and flexibility are built into our processes.

Avtar Matharu responded: Yes, biomass variability dependent on geographical location, season, soil, stress, etc. is a key factor for the isolation of small molecules that may or may not be present as the biomass grows. We have found that for bipolymers and oligomers global (geographical) variation is less of a concern. We have experimental data from citrus pectin sourced from several global locations, which show no significant variation in pectin yield.
The “plasticity” and flexibility is less of a concern for pectin extraction and in an ideal scenario we envisage multiple, mixed feedstocks, i.e. Keitt, Sindhri and Kesar being combined to afford pectin.

Andrew Hunt opened the discussion of the paper by Xindong Mu: Your materials are very highly microporous, is there any method to tune the synthesis to get meso- or macroporous systems?

Xindong Mu replied: The bamboo shoot-derived carbons are prepared by hydrothermal treatment and a subsequent carbonization process in our work, which produces a mainly microporous structure with some meso- and macropores. However, a high meso/macropore proportion of carbons is difficult to synthesize by this method without an activating agent. The chemical activation method using activating agents (e.g. ZnCl2, KHCO3) can be used to produce carbons with meso- or macroporous structures.

Deepak Pant said: You used 5 wt% platinum in your system. How did you reach this particular number? Did you try other ratios, like 1% or 10%?

Xindong Mu answered: We have investigated the impact of the Pt content in Pt/NC-BS-500 on the hydrogenation of furfural in water at 100 °C. As the Pt content increases from 1 wt% to 10 wt%, the conversion of furfural after 1 h increases from 21% to 95% with a high furfuryl alcohol selectivity of >99%. The corresponding activity of 1% Pt/NC-BS-500, 5% Pt/NC-BS-500 and 10% Pt/NC-BS-500 is 409, 294 and 185 h−1, respectively. As 5% Pt/NC-BS-500 has both a high furfural conversion in a short time (75.4% in 1 h) and a relatively high specific activity, it was chosen for our system.

Deepak Pant commented: You mentioned surface area as being one of the critical parameters for the performance of your system. Have you tried other feedstocks (other than bamboo) to check if with another feedstock you get a higher surface area and perhaps better conversion?

Xindong Mu responded: The surface area of carbon supports could affect the catalytic performance of the Pt catalyst. In our system, NC-BS-800 (670 m2 g−1) has a much higher surface area than that of NC-BS-500 (287 m2 g−1), but Pt/NC-BS-800 shows a much lower activity for the transformation of furfural to furfuryl alcohol under mild conditions than Pt/NC-BS-500. This indicates that other factors (e.g. changes in surface properties) might favorably influence the catalytic performance of the N,O-doped carbon supported Pt catalyst. Coconut husk-derived activated carbons (∼860 m2 g−1) were also used as supports to load Pt nanoparticles and they displayed much lower conversions of furfural to furfuryl alcohol than Pt/NC-BS-500.

Magdalena Titirici asked: What is the morphology of the bamboo shoots before and after hydrothermal treatment? How much nitrogen is in the bamboo shoots before and after?

Xindong Mu replied: The bamboo shoots are relatively loose tissues with some irregular fused sphere-like particles. After hydrothermal treatment, the hydrochars show a loose and interconnected structure, which is made up of numerous relatively uniformly-distributed fused sphere-like nanoparticles.
The nitrogen content of the bamboo shoots is 4.3 at% based on the dry weight of the bamboo shoot, while the nitrogen content of the hydrochars is 3.2 at%.

Magdalena Titirici queried: Do you get uniform spheres?

Xindong Mu answered: The bamboo shoot-derived carbon support is made up of numerous uniformly-distributed sphere-like nanoparticles with small sizes of about 40–80 nm (Fig. 1). Fig. 1  Image of the bamboo shoot-derived carbon support. 

Xiaoming Huang said: You prepared two N-doped activated carbon supported Pt catalysts by changing the carbonization temperature. You found that the amount of nitrogen in the two samples is different. The one calcined at 500 °C contained more nitrogen than the one calcined at 800 °C. Since you claim that the nitrogen species have the function of stabilizing the Pt nanoparticles, I was wondering, did you observe any difference between these two samples in terms of the catalyst stability?

Xindong Mu replied: Both the Pt/NC-BS-500 and Pt/NC-BS-800 catalysts were stable in the furfural hydrogenation reaction, and can be recycled for five runs without any significant loss of activity.

Long Zhou enquired: Bamboo grows very fast, in your work why did you use bamboo shoots but not older bamboo? If you use older bamboo, you will have more feedstock, which I believe is more sustainable.

Xindong Mu responded: Common carbons without nitrogen functionalities are obtained with mature bamboo as the starting material because there are few nitrogen-containing compounds in mature bamboo. By contrast, porous heteroatom doped carbon materials are prepared by using bamboo shoots as the raw material without any templates, chemical activation or exogenous nitrogen sources. The bamboo shoots have some unique characteristics in chemical compositions and physical textures, which significantly differ from the mature bamboo. The lignin, crystalline cellulose and xylan predominantly accumulate in the cell wall in the bamboo shoot, which is unlike the high lignification of the mature bamboo. The low degree of lignification in bamboo shoots along with considerable amounts of acid-soluble lignin mean they have unlignified and loose tissues and less extended crystalline cellulose textures, which are beneficial for the decomposition into small carbon nanoparticles during the hydrothermal process. Moreover, bamboo shoots are intrinsically rich in nitrogen-containing organics, including proteins and amino acids. The nitrogen content can reach up to 4.3% based on the dry weight of the bamboo shoot, which ensured the incorporation of nitrogen and oxygen into the structure of the carbon materials.

Harry Bitter said: You showed that your Pt on nitrogen containing carbon has special activity with respect to furfural hydrogenation. You used a pure furfural feedstock. To keep biobased feedstocks low priced, their purification should be limited. Do you know anything about the resistance of your catalyst with respect to potential poisons in the feedstock, such as salts or sulfur containing compounds?

Xindong Mu answered: Furfural directly obtained from a factory (Shandong Baiqian Chemical Co., Ltd.) was also used as the reactant, and was reacted at 100 °C using 1 MPa H2 in water in the presence of the Pt/NC-BS-500 catalyst. The results showed that 98.2% conversion of furfural and 99% selectivity for furfuryl alcohol were achieved within 4 h, indicating that the Pt catalyst is robust for furfural hydrogenation in water. Pt/NC-BS-500 shows no apparent deactivation in furfural feedstock provided by the factory.

Deepak Pant opened the discussion of the paper by Jakob Albert: You have mentioned carbon dioxide as a by-product, which could be recycled back to grow algal biomass. Wouldn’t it make sense to recycle the CO2 to formic acid electrocatalytically to have an even higher yield of the main product? How does biomass to formic acid compare to current state-of-the-art for CO2 to formic acid? Also, at what scale is the process currently?

Jakob Albert replied: Of course electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to formic acid is an alternative but this is currently not available on an industrial scale compared to algae growing in fermenters.
Biomass to formic acid is, from an industrial point of view, much more interesting compared to CO2 hydrogenation as biomass is not just seasonally available (compared to fluctuating electricity for electrochemical CO2 hydrogenation), very flexible concerning quality and origin of feedstock, and very robust against poisoning (compared to CO2 hydrogenation). Moreover, the current scale of the OxFA process is 60 kg of formic acid per day.

Vitaliy Budarin said: The technology developed in your paper is reasonably harsh: a high final concentration of formic acid, a strong catalyst, the presence of oxygen and an elevated temperature. Under these conditions, a cellulose structure could be significantly degraded. Have you optimized the process for the production of high quality cellulose? It looks like the Lindqvist-type catalyst is colloidal. If this is true, how do you visualize the interaction between the solid biomass and the solid colloid catalyst?

Jakob Albert responded: I would contradict this statement as we are working under mild conditions (below 100 °C, aqueous solution, O2 and no H2O2 as an oxidant). The final concentration of formic acid is typically 1–5 wt% in our process, I would also not state this as “high”. The key feature of the Lindqvist POM is that it is not as strong as the Keggin POM, so cellulose conversion is prevented (in contrast to the Keggin POMs). The process is, so far, not fully optimized for cellulose quality but we can improve that further (maybe in collaboration with partners). The Lindqvist-type POM (in its salt form with a K countercation) as well as the hydrolyzed hemicellulose and lignin fragments are completely soluble under the applied reaction conditions, so it is a homogeneous catalysis and not a slurry reaction.

Simo Sarkanen enquired: Neither phenol nor 4-hydroxy-3-methylbenzoic acid are realistic model substrates for lignin. Why did you not use 4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzyl alcohol (vanillyl alcohol) instead?

Jakob Albert answered: The pre-selection of suitable model substrates was done according to the literature. You are right, phenol is not a realistic model substrate. However, I think that 4H3MB is a suitable model compound. Within the project, we have now changed to 3,4-dimethoxybenzylalcohol.

Carlos I. Cabrera-Rodríguez queried: Is the reported low yield in your paper due to the low oxygen solubility in water or do you have another explanation for it? Have you calculated the maximum theoretical yield based on oxygen solubility at 20 bar? What is the final formic acid concentration that you can obtain?

Jakob Albert replied: The low yield described in the paper is mostly due to the low availability of oxygen in the liquid phase because of inefficient mixing in our screening apparatus. By using another setup with a gas entrainment stirrer, we could significantly improve the yields of formic acid. The maximum theoretical yield of formic acid is dependent on the carbon framework within the substrate and thus different for each feedstock.
The final formic acid concentration that can be achieved is around 40 wt%. Typically, we operate between 5 and 10 wt% in order to keep an optimum performance of our catalyst with respect to the pH value.

Eero Kontturi asked: What happens to the cellulose during the process? Did you check the molecular weight distribution before and after the oxidation? It is quite unusual that nothing happens to cellulose during such treatments, at least some depolymerization generally occurs. Whether this interferes with the quality of the cellulose in further applications is another matter. Generally, slight depolymerization of cellulose is irrelevant from an applications point of view but the figures would be interesting scientifically, especially if nothing happens to the cellulose.

Jakob Albert answered: To the best of our knowledge, the cellulose shows no significant changes after the treatment in our process. This is due to the insolubility of cellulose in water. As we are performing a homogeneous catalysis in aqueous solution, depolymerization/degradation can only occur if (at least) partial solubilisation of the biomass takes place.

Amalio Garrido enquired: In the final acylation, what is the retention/residence time? Do you have any idea of the kinetics? Have you tried to wash the cellulose to remove the acid?

Jakob Albert answered: I am not sure what you mean by “final acylation”. The chemical conversion itself is a three-step process with the following steps:
(1) Hydrolysis of the biomass.
(2) Oxidation of water-soluble biomass-fragments by the POM catalyst to formic acid and CO2.
(3) Re-oxidation of the POM by molecular O2.
So far, the whole process has been batch/fed-batch, so no “retention/residence time” exists.
We have indeed studied the kinetics of different substrates using Keggin-type POMs. This will soon be published in ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng.1
For your last question, yes, you are right, we have washed the cellulose several times with water in order to remove the cellulose completely.
1 J. Reichert and J. Albert, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7383–7392.

Avtar Matharu said: You say high grade cellulose many times, can you tell me what you mean by high grade cellulose? Is it just purified cellulose or are you forming nanocellulose crystals and fibres. Are you changing the degree of crystallinity?

Jakob Albert responded: By high grade cellulose we mean cellulose that has:
(1) Unchanged signals using FT-IR spectroscopy.
(2) Unchanged REM images of fibers before and after treatment (in case of the model substrates).
(3) A degree of crystallinity that is still very high.
(4) A high degree of polymerization.

Simo Sarkanen commented: The yields of formic acid obtained by oxidizing cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin for 8 h in the presence of the Lindqvist-type polyoxometalate K5V3W3O19 were 0%, 8.3% and 2.4%, respectively. The contrasting results from cellulose and hemicellulose are surprising. Are there any preliminary indications about what occurs when the reaction time is extended beyond 8 h?

Jakob Albert answered: We have already extended the reaction time and optimized the reaction conditions in order to increase the conversion. Luckily, the same trends are observable. So far, we achieved up to 30% formic acid yield from hemicellulose and 12% yield from lignin.

Terence Cooper opened the discussion of the paper by Gadi Rothenberg: The first sample you showed us had a very large pore size. Can you control the pore size? The later samples had much smaller pore sizes. What is producing the foaming? Is there a gas being evolved to do this?

Gadi Rothenberg replied: Yes, we can control the pore size. At this stage I can not give more details about this, sorry.

Harry Bitter said: Thank you for the inspiring presentation with respect to the making and use of a bio-based material. My question is about patenting your material. How did you do that? When I look on the Internet, I find a number of publications and claims about the making and degradation of polymers made from citric acid and glycerol. For example, ref. 1. Does this not conflict with your patent?
1 D. Pramanick and T. T. Ray, Polymer Bulletin, 1988, 19, 368–370.

Gadi Rothenberg answered: I think the difference is that our patents cover the making of a foamed polymer, which necessitates specific conditions. Further patents of Plantics BV cover the composites of this polymer with man-made fibres and with natural fibres, and the possibilities and applications thereof, as well as the applications and process for making the polymer on a metallic substrate.
The patent numbers are all given in the paper and the patents themselves are available online.

Carlos I. Cabrera-Rodríguez asked: Is this reaction specific for citric acid and glycerol? Or have you tried other acids or alcohols?

Gadi Rothenberg replied: The esterification reaction itself is not specific – practically every carboxylic acid and alcohol combination will do. However, the formation of the three-dimensional polymeric foam is, as far as we can see (after testing many combinations), nearly unique to glycerol and citric acid. Combined with the large-scale availability and low market price of these two monomers, this makes Plantics-GX a unique case.

Thomas Farmer said: On page 8 of your article you discuss how altering the molar ratio of glycerol and citric acid altered the properties of the final material, with higher amounts of glycerol producing memory foam characteristics. Have you investigated the substitution of some proportion of the glycerol with alternative polyols, such as sorbitol and xylitol? If so, does this achieve the same outcome but allow for the polyol + glycerol to citric acid ratio to remain at 1:1?

Gadi Rothenberg responded: Yes, we have tested numerous combinations and alcohol:acid ratios. In general, the 1:1 ratio allows for the most complete polymerisation, and the higher the polymerisation degree, the higher the rigidity. When you increase the alcohol:acid ratio or when you use another alcohol, for example, you will have a less rigid material because you will prevent the formation of more ester bonds.

Anna Zhenova asked: Could you give some adhesion testing data for your material? Specifically, would it be suitable for something like aerospace applications, or is it limited in terms of temperature/strain? I would also love to hear more about the lessons learned from the table that fell apart.

Gadi Rothenberg answered: At this time we cannot give further adhesion data, apart from saying that it is a very good adhesive. The composite patents that are cited in the paper include some adhesion examples.
A major lesson learned from the table is that biodegradable materials are more suitable to some applications than to others. The same goes for all bio-based materials: we should find the applications where such materials truly give better value compared to petro-based ones.

Laura Sparlinek enquired: How is the durability increased when using the material as an isolation material?

Gadi Rothenberg replied: Typically the durability is increased by spraying it with a water-resistant layer or by placing it between two layers of aluminium. If it does not get wet, it will stay strong forever.

Keith Waldron queried: Is the material toxic? Can you eat it? If so, what is it like?

Gadi Rothenberg responded: It is non-toxic. You can eat it but it tastes a little acidic (probably because it breaks down to citric acid). Considering that it breaks down to glycerol and citric acid, I would not recommend eating large quantities.

Mark Mascal said: You appear to have already achieved a measure of commercial success. What is your forward projection in terms of existing and new markets?

Gadi Rothenberg answered: We have made numerous prototypes and secured some investments, but we have not yet achieved commercial success. The markets we are trying to enter are very large and highly conservative. The “green premium” that a lot of people talk about is still zero, no matter how much it is featured in the press. To succeed, Plantics BV needs to scale up production considerably, the current ton scale is really only samples. The company is now in the process of securing more investments for this growth.

Andrew Hunt remarked: Some of the materials were those produced on aluminium sheets and these resulted in traces of aluminium salts present in the polymer. Can you tell us more about the trace aluminium salts? Are they helping to catalyse the process?

Gadi Rothenberg responded: We are currently investigating this, so we hope to be able to discuss it soon, perhaps in another Faraday Discussions.

Dimitris Argyropoulos commented: One needs to emphasize that the actual polymerization statistics that are applied in the described system are those developed by Flory and Stockmayer at the turn of the century. These could be very valuable in ensuring that the actual polymerization/gelation process is well described and followed especially when the ratios of the two monomers are varied when different products are sought.

Gadi Rothenberg replied: That is a highly appropriate and correct comment. We are, in fact, now working in this direction, in collaboration with Dr C. P. Lowe.

Anne Horan asked: Could the polymer have medical applications, for example scaffolds for regenerative medicine?

Gadi Rothenberg answered: In principle, yes, as long as the acidity of the citric acid would not be a problem.

Magdalena Titirici asked: Do you have any numbers in terms of tensile strain, etc.?

Gadi Rothenberg replied: Yes. The numbers that we can report at this stage are included in the paper.

Avtar Matharu enquired: How many plant pots per week are needed? How many are you making currently, per batch, per hour?

Gadi Rothenberg responded: The market for plant pots in the Netherlands is very large, millions every year.
Right now Plantics is making, in collaboration with partners, sample batches of 100000 pots. These are still “test samples”, as growers use 100000 pots quickly.

Simo Sarkanen opened a general discussion of the papers by Xindong Mu, Jakob Albert and Gadi Rothenberg: In order to produce high-grade cellulose from lignocellulosic biomass, is it justifiable to convert the hemicellulose and lignin selectively to formic acid and CO2? Considerable energy and biochemical reducing equivalents are necessary for plants to biosynthesize polysaccharides and lignin from CO2 in the first place (more than 3 ATP and 2 NADH per molecule of CO2 incorporated).

Joseph Samec addressed Jakob Albert and Gadi Rothenberg: How do your institutions support your efforts in commercialization? Not just funding, but more – do you get cuts in teaching and administrative duties, for example?

Gadi Rothenberg replied: There is no official policy on that but cases are done on a case-by-case basis. In general, there is good support.

Jakob Albert responded: My university offered me an “Akademischer Rat” position during my habilitation. Concerning commercialization, they supported us in founding the spin-off company OxFA – not financially, only in terms of legal support.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Image of the bamboo shoot-derived carbon support.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
