Responsive hydrogels – structurally and dimensionally optimized smart frameworks for applications in catalysis, micro-system technology and material s ...  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60031A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60031A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7391-7420Responsive hydrogels – structurally and dimensionally optimized smart frameworks for applications in catalysis, micro-system technology and material scienceArtjom Döring, Wolfgang Birnbaum and Dirk Kuckling*Chemistry Department, University of Paderborn, Warburger Str. 100, D-33098 Paderborn, Germany. E-mail: dirk.kuckling@uni-paderborn.deReceived 28th January 2013First published on 15th May 2013AbstractAlthough the technological and scientific importance of functional polymers has been well established over the last few decades, the most recent focus that has attracted much attention has been on stimuli-responsive polymers. This group of materials is of particular interest due to its ability to respond to internal and/or external chemico-physical stimuli, which is often manifested as large macroscopic responses. Aside from scientific challenges of designing stimuli-responsive polymers, the main technological interest lies in their numerous applications ranging from catalysis through microsystem technology and chemomechanical actuators to sensors that have been extensively explored. Since the phase transition phenomenon of hydrogels is theoretically well understood advanced materials based on the predictions can be prepared. Since the volume phase transition of hydrogels is a diffusion-limited process the size of the synthesized hydrogels is an important factor. Consistent downscaling of the gel size will result in fast smart gels with sufficient response times. In order to apply smart gels in microsystems and sensors, new preparation techniques for hydrogels have to be developed. For the up-coming nanotechnology, nano-sized gels as actuating materials would be of great interest.Artjom DöringArtjom Doering is a scientific coworker in the research group of Prof. Kuckling at the University of Paderborn. He studied chemistry at the Dresden University of Technology and received his diploma in 2007. Afterwards he specialized in synthetic polymer chemistry by joining the group of Prof. Kuckling. He received his PhD degree from the University of Paderborn in 2012. His work is focused on the controlled synthesis of stimuli-responsive block copolymers for application in catalysis.Wolfgang BirnbaumWolfgang Birnbaum currently works as a postdoctoral research fellow in the group of Prof. Kuckling. He studied chemistry at the Dresden University of Technology and obtained his diploma in polymer chemistry in 2007 followed by a PhD at the University of Paderborn under the supervision of Prof. Kuckling in 2011. The focus of his PhD thesis was on the preparation of functionalized stimuli-responsive polymers and their application in controlling the motility of motor proteins. His work involves the development of responsive polymers and hydrogels for applications in biotechnology and polymer resins for lightweight construction.Dirk KucklingDirk Kuckling is Professor of “Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry” at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Paderborn, Germany. He studied chemistry at Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany, and received his PhD degree in 1994 in the field of synthetic organic chemistry. In 1994 he joined the Institute for Macromolecular Chemistry of the Dresden University of Technology as a postdoc and started his own research group in 1995. From 2001–2002 he worked as a visiting assistant professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering at the Stanford University, USA. After his “Habilitation” in 2004 he was appointed in 2008 as a full professor at the University of Paderborn. The main focus of his work is the synthesis of novel functional polymers. For this purpose different polymerization techniques are used to prepare polymers with designed structure and functionality. Such polymers were applied as actuators and sensor materials for microfluidic and biomedical applications.1. IntroductionThree-dimensional (3D) polymer networks, either chemically or physically cross-linked, can swell by uptaking solvents. In the case of water the resulting swollen polymer network is called a hydrogel. If the polymer network consists of stimuli-responsive polymers the uptake and release of solvent from the network can be triggered by slightly altering environmental conditions. A change in polymer–solvent interactions caused by external stimuli is the basic step inducing a change in polymer conformation. These processes on a molecular level are accompanied by a volume phase transition between a swollen and a deswollen (shrunken) state of the gel, thus leading to a change in properties of the macroscopic network (dimensions, elasticity, turbidity, etc.).Basics of stimuli-responsive (stimuli-sensitive, smart, intelligent) behaviour, different geometries and dimensions of stimuli-responsive systems as well as their applications were recently reviewed.1 The trend of reducing the dimensions of stimuli-responsive gels originated from a publication of Tanaka and Fillmore in 1979.2 Therein, swelling kinetics were described to be inversely proportional to the square of the gel radius. Thus, the volume phase transition proceeds much faster for small gels. Both improving methods for surface patterning as well as novel routes for hydrogel synthesis facilitated the reduction of hydrogel size, thus opening up new fields of sophisticated applications.Herein, we describe how the specific structural design of a polymer network can be adjusted to meet the criteria of respective applications. Recent advances in the fields of catalysis, sensors, and actuators are highlighted. Biotechnological and medical applications are discussed in several articles,3–6 but they are not within the scope of this review. Since this review deals with cross-linked macromolecular systems polymer brushes are not considered in this article, but elsewhere in the literature.7,82. Smart gels in catalysisDuring the last decade new strategies in chemical reaction engineering evolved in order to facilitate the handling as well as to improve the efficiency of chemical reactions (facilitated synthesis).9 These developments are mostly dedicated to meet the requirements of “green chemistry”.10 One important issue in this field of research deals with techniques for efficient catalyst separation and recycling. Catalyst immobilization on polymeric scaffolds provides not only improved catalyst stability and solubility, but also an easy workup including filtration or centrifugation techniques.11 Such organic polymer supports for catalysts can be used to conduct catalysis under heterogeneous and homogeneous conditions.12,13 The implementation of stimuli-sensitive polymeric carriers offers the possibility of controlling catalyst accessibility by altering environmental conditions, thus affording not only efficient catalyst separation but also control over reaction progress.14,15 In this chapter we will focus on cross-linked stimuli-responsive polymer systems of various dimensions and architectures with respect to their use as catalyst supports.2.1 Bulk gelsMacroscopic swollen polymer networks, so-called bulk gels, can be easily obtained by free radical polymerization of at least one monomer in solution and in the presence of a certain amount of cross-linker. In the case of a smart gel, the degree of swelling depends on changes in ambient parameters. Unfortunately, swelling kinetics show an indirect proportionality to the square of the gel dimension. Therefore, it usually takes several hours to days until smart bulk gels have reached their equilibrium swelling degree. Thus, the uptake and release of solvent and solved components are very slow.Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) is one of the most intensively investigated temperature-responsive polymers showing lower critical solution temperature (LCST) behaviour. Hydrogels based on PNIPAAm exhibit a phase transition temperature of about 32 °C, where the gel can be switched between a swollen (T < 32 °C) and a shrunken state (T > 32 °C). Unfortunately, such randomly cross-linked PNIPAAm hydrogels suffer from poor mechanical properties.16 Incorporation of inorganic nanoparticles led to a new class of hydrogels with remarkably improved mechanical stability and swelling behaviour – nanocomposite hydrogels.16,17 If transition metal nanoparticles are integrated into the polymer network, the resulting nanocomposite hydrogels will probably show catalytic activity. Moreover, the hydrogel itself does not only serve as a nanoparticle support but its porous structure can also be used as a template for in situ nanoparticle generation.18 Later on, Mohan et al. utilized hydrogels based on N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAAm) and sodium acrylate for preparation of silver nanoparticles.19 While NIPAAm was chosen to introduce temperature-responsiveness, integration of sodium acrylate should provide both an increased phase transition temperature and increased stability for the nanoparticles. After free radical copolymerization in the presence of the cross-linker N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA) the resulting polymer network was allowed to swell in an aqueous solution of silver nitrate. Consequently, the incorporated silver ions were reduced with sodium borohydride. Cross-linking density was reported to mainly influence the size of the silver nanoparticles (Fig. 1). The synthesized hybrid bulk gels were successfully employed as antibacterial material. Regrettably, no studies on the catalytic properties were done. Fig. 1  TEM and histograms of 21.11 ± 4.60 (a) and 2.67 ± 0.97 nm Ag nanoparticles (b) in 4.50 and 13.00 mM MBA-cross-linked hydrogels, respectively. Reprinted from Y. M. Mohan, K. Lee, T. Premkumar and K. E. Geckeler, Polymer, 2007, 48, 158,19 Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. In a similar procedure Sivudu et al. prepared hydrogel-supported palladium nanoparticles.20 The hydrogel network comprised a copolymer of NIPAAm and potassium methacrylate cross-linked with MBA. In situ reduction of palladium chloride was conducted with hydrazine hydrate. The metal uptake showed direct proportionality towards the methacrylate content, thus proving that the methacrylate units are also capable of stabilizing palladium nanoparticles. The catalytic activity of such Pd nanoparticles was investigated for the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction between aryl halides and arylboronic acids. Results pointed out that the reaction progress mainly depends on the swelling degree of the hydrogel in different co-solvent mixtures. Good catalyst accessibility requires an expanded porous polymer network, thus high swelling ratios caused the cross-coupling reaction to proceed faster than in the deswollen state. Once the reaction was finished, the catalyst could be removed from the reaction mixture by simple filtration techniques and reused in five consecutive catalysis cycles with only minimal loss in activity.The inorganic species itself can be used to form hydrogels with thermomorphic properties. Hamamoto et al. prepared copolymers of NIPAAm and an acrylamide (AAm) bearing quaternary ammonium units, which were subsequently cross-linked by phosphotungstate anions (Fig. 2, upper part).21 The resulting physical network was able to soak up hydrophobic components at higher temperatures (60 °C). By lowering the temperature the organic compounds could be released again. The phosphotungstate centres showed catalytic activity in the oxidative cyclization of pent-4-en-1-ol. In combination with the thermo-responsive swelling behaviour a thermomorphic catalysis including catalyst recycling can be performed (Fig. 2, lower part). In aqueous media conversions of more than 80% could be achieved, even after three consecutive catalysis cycles. A review on the potential of such physical gels with respect to catalysis as well as product and catalyst separation was recently written by Ikegami and Hamamoto.14 Fig. 2  PNIPAAm–PW12O403− complex (upper left part); simplified structure of the PNIPAAm–inorganic complex network (upper right part); schematic representation of thermomorphic catalysis (lower part). Reprinted from H. Hamamoto, Y. Suzuki, H. Takahashi and S. Ikegami, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 2685,21 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Recently, pH-sensitive nanocomposite hydrogels showing catalytic activity have been prepared. Yun et al. synthesized TiO2/poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAAc) composite hydrogels by free radical polymerization of acrylic acid (AAc) and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) in the presence of PVA, glutaraldehyde and TiO2 nanoparticles.22 Besides bulk nanocomposite hydrogels Yun et al. also prepared nanofibres of the same composition via electrospinning. SEM analysis revealed the bulk PAAc/PVA hydrogel matrix to be a good support for TiO2 particles. No cracks at the interface between hydrogel and the inorganic particles were observed (Fig. 3, left). However, the size of the TiO2 domains indicated that depending on the TiO2 content, aggregation of the particles occurred. In the case of the nanofibres with an average diameter of about 320 nm TiO2 particles were deposited on the fibre surface (Fig. 3, right). Fig. 3  SEM micrographs of TiO2/PVA/PAAc nanocomposite bulk hydrogel (left) and nanofibres (right), both with 3 wt% of TiO2. Reprinted from J. Yun, J. S. Im, A. Oh, D.-H. Jin, T.-S. Bae, Y.-S. Lee and H.-I. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2011, 176, 276,22 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier. Investigation on the pH-dependent swelling behaviour showed an increase in the swelling degree by raising the pH value. As expected, differences between bulk hydrogels and nanofibres occurred according to the swelling degree. At pH 10 the nanofibres exhibit a swelling ratio of about 450%, which is twice the swelling ratio of the bulk hydrogels under the same conditions.With respect to environmental purification processes TiO2 particles have attracted much interest due to their photocatalytic activity. The immobilized TiO2 particles were used as a catalyst for the UV photodegradation of CBB dye as a model pollutant. As a result, pH-dependent degradation studies showed a faster conversion at higher pH values (Fig. 4). In the case of the bulk hydrogel complete conversion was achieved after 800 min (pH 10). Both the position of the TiO2 particles on the fibre surface and the higher swelling degree of the fibres should provide a better accessibility of the catalytically active inorganic particles. Thus, the use of the nanocomposite fibres resulted in complete conversion after 250 min at pH 10. Fig. 4  Photodegradation of CBB dye by the TiO2/PVA/PAAc bulk hydrogel (a) and nanofibre (b), both with 4 wt% of TiO2. Reprinted from J. Yun, J. S. Im, A. Oh, D.-H. Jin, T.-S. Bae, Y.-S. Lee and H.-I. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2011, 176, 276,22 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier. Formation of iron and ruthenium nanoparticles by in situ reduction within a hydrogel matrix afforded a catalyst for hydrogen generation, whose accessibility could be controlled by magnetic fields. Sahiner et al. synthesized hydrogels based on 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulphonic acid (AMPS) by photopolymerization.23 These hydrogels have been used as template and support for Fe and Ru nanoparticles by stepwise introduction and in situ reduction. TEM images revealed Ru and Fe nanoparticles of about 5 nm and 20–30 nm in size respectively. EDX analysis confirmed the Ru particles to be amorphous, while the magnetic ferrite particles exhibited a crystalline structure. Ru is capable of generating hydrogen by catalysing the hydrolysis of sodium borohydride under basic conditions (Fig. 5). Reaction can be stopped by simply removing the nanocomposite hydrogel with a magnetic stick. In the same manner, Sahiner et al. were able to immobilize Co and Ni particles for potential use in hydrogen generation as well as catalytic reduction of aromatic nitro compounds.24,25 Fig. 5  (a) The removal of hydrogen-catalyst system during hydrolysis reaction by an external magnetic field, and (b) the control of H2 generation by an externally applied magnetic field on the hydrolysis of NaBH4. Reprinted from N. Sahiner, O. Ozay, E. Inger and N. Aktas, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10105,23 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier. Recently, research focus was extended to smart supramolecular gels formed by low molecular weight gelators (LMWG) as catalyst supports. Mostly, formation of such gels is based on multiple hydrogen bonding. For example, Rodríguez-Llansola et al. synthesized a L-valine-based LMWG with terminal L-proline moieties.26 These molecules showed thermo-responsive gelation in nitromethane and nitroethane as solvents. SEM analysis of the bulk gels revealed a fibrillar microstructure (xerogel). Catalytic activity of the attached L-proline groups was tested in a Henry nitroaldol reaction of the solvents with 4-nitrobenzaldehyde and 4-chlorobenzaldehyde. A sharp change in catalytic activity associated with supramolecular gelation was found. A boost in the basicity of the L-proline secondary amine due to stronger hydrogen bonding upon gelation was proposed to be the cause for the enhanced activity, and proven by respective pH studies (Fig. 6). Fig. 6  Schematic model for the reversible sol–gel transition of the L-proline functionalized low molecular weight gelator.26 α-Cyclodextrins are reported to form supramolecular gels after being threaded on linear chains.27 Such polyrotaxanes undergo thermo-responsive gelation at low temperatures. Léger et al. used such polyrotaxane hydrogels as a template and support for Ru nanoparticles.28 Addition of sodium borohydrate to a warm aqueous solution of ruthenium(III) chloride and α-cyclodextrin with an enclosed stabilizer and a phase transfer agent resulted in the formation of a colloidal solution of Ru nanoparticles. Subsequent rapid cooling to 10 °C led to supramolecular gelation and prevented the nanoparticles from aggregation. TEM analysis confirmed the presence of Ru nanoparticles, homogeneously distributed and with about 1.6 nm in size. The catalytic activity of the Ru nanoparticles was evaluated in hydrogenation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic alkenyl substrates. At elevated temperatures (50 °C), in the sol phase, high turnover frequencies for the hydrogenation catalyst were observed. Meanwhile, at 10 °C, in the gel phase, only minimal catalyst activity occurred. These results were explained by an interfacial reaction mechanism promoted by the phase transfer agent (Fig. 7). Consequently, probability of contact between components would be higher in the sol phase. Once the reaction was finished, catalyst could be separated by simply cooling to room temperature, so that the hydrogenated product and the gel-supported catalyst formed two distinct phases. Fig. 7  Polyrotaxane hydrogel-supported Ru nanoparticles as catalyst in the thermo-regulated hydrogenation of alkynes. Reprinted from B. Léger, S. Menuel, A. Ponchel, F. Hapiot and E. Monflier, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 1269,28 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. A detailed review on low molecular weight gels and their use as smart catalysts was recently written by Díaz Díaz et al.29So far, examples for immobilizing transition metal catalysts or organocatalysts on smart gels have been discussed. But such stimuli-sensitive cross-linked polymeric systems also play an important role in supporting biocatalysts. Besides the well-known benefits of biocatalysis, immobilization of enzymes further provides more efficient recovery and reuse of costly enzymes as well as enhanced stability and accessibility of the catalytic centre, even in organic media. Multiple developments in the field of enzyme immobilization have been reviewed in detail by R. A. Sheldon.30 One method for immobilization is the physical, ionic or covalent binding of the enzyme to the polymeric support. Such polymer bioconjugates exhibit enhanced stability as well as no biocatalyst leaching and they can be prepared via several synthetic strategies.31,32 Alternatively, the enzyme can be entrapped into the polymer network. Although biocatalyst leaching might occur, this method offers the opportunity of exchanging irreversibly deactivated enzymes without affecting the polymer matrix. Harada et al. could minimize biocatalyst leaching by entrapment of core–shell type bioconjugates into a PNIPAAm hydrogel.33 At first, bovine pancreas trypsin stabilized in block copolymer micelles of PEG-b-poly(α,β-aspartic acid) was cross-linked with glutaraldehyde resulting in bioconjugates with core–shell structure. Afterwards the PNIPAAm hydrogel was synthesized by free radical polymerization of NIPAAm with MBA as a cross-linker in the presence of the core–shell type bioconjugates. Thus, the biocatalyst was entrapped during network synthesis. Immersing the PNIPAAm gel entrapped bioconjugates in buffer solution showed no release of the biocatalyst, even after one week. In contrast, entrapment of the native trypsin biocatalyst into the PNIPAAm gel caused almost complete release of the biocatalyst upon immersion in buffer solution. Therefore, effective immobilization of the core–shell type biocatalyst was ascribed to the size effect of the bioconjugates, which had an average diameter of about 70 nm. As expected, there was no shift in LCST of the PNIPAAm hydrogel upon immobilization of the bioconjugates, thus proving the pure physical entrapment without any interaction with the polymer network (Fig. 8 left). Trypsin is known to be capable of cleaving peptide bonds. Therefore catalytic activity of the immobilized enzyme was evaluated for the cleavage of L-lysine-p-nitroanilide. Raising the temperature above the LCST caused significant lower relative reaction rates (Fig. 8 right). Harada et al. concluded from Arrhenius plots that there was no denaturation of the enzyme that might be responsible for the lower reaction rates. Therefore, diminished diffusion rates of the substrate due to a more compact network structure in the deswollen state remained as possible explanation for the decreasing reaction rates. Fig. 8  Changes in equilibrium swelling degree of PNIPAAm gels containing different amounts of core–shell type bioconjugates (○ 0 μg, ● 80 μg, ▲ 150 μg, ■ 270 μg) (left); temperature dependence of enzymatic activity of core–shell type bioconjugates in PNIPAAm gels of different cross-linking density (● 2 mol%, ▲ 5 mol%, ■ 7 mol%) (right). Reprinted from A. Harada, K. Johnin, A. Kawamura and K. Kono, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 5942,33 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Wack et al. reported the synthesis of macroporous temperature-responsive hydrogels capable of reversibly entrapping enzymes.34 The macroporous structure was achieved by copolymerizing NIPAAm with either AAc or methacrylic acid (MAAc) in the presence of MBA as the cross-linker. Despite the open network structure, mechanical stability of the gel support was ensured by reinforcing with cellulosic fleeces. The resulting hydrogel fleece composites exhibited fast swelling kinetics as well as sharp phase transitions. The biocatalytic activity of entrapped enzymes was evaluated in transesterification of rapeseed oil with ethanol. In comparison to the free enzyme, similar activities were observed for the immobilized biocatalysts. Nevertheless, mechanical stability, easier catalyst separation as well as the option of exchanging deactivated enzymes favours the use of such hydrogel supports.Enzymes can also be trapped into supramolecular networks. Aida and co-workers recently presented an interesting example of a self-healing mouldable composite hydrogels with enhanced mechanical properties.35 On mixing with aqueous sodium polyacrylate solution, clay nanosheets (CNS) were homogeneously dispersed and exfoliated. Addition of a telechelic dendritic macromolecule with positively charged edges afforded physical cross-linking of the homogeneously dispersed CNS. The resulting high water content supramolecular network exhibited enhanced mechanical and self-healing properties during dynamic mechanical analysis. By entrapping into the physical network during the cross-linking process, myoglobin could be prevented from denaturation for more than one week, retaining about 71% of the native activity in catalysing the oxidation of o-phenylenediamine.2.2 MembranesOne-dimensional (1D) reduction of smart bulk gels leads to planar systems, usually defined as stimuli-responsive membranes, films or layers.36–39 Such planar systems are usually obtained by deposition, coating or grafting techniques. Introducing smart hydrogels on or in porous membranes yields composites of different possible architectures.40 The majority of membrane applications deal with separation techniques, sensing and analytics, microsystem technologies and biomedical engineering. Only scarce examples of membranes applied to catalysis are available. Since polymer brushes are excluded from the scope of this review, this section will focus on membranes created by deposition or coating techniques.Tokarev et al. obtained porous membranes by phase separation in thin films.41 Beside porous poly(2-vinylpyridine) membranes, they were able to synthesize alginate gel membranes with tuneable pore sizes by salt-induced phase separation of alginate and gelatin and subsequent cross-linking with divalent cations (Ca2+). Thin films (100–200 nm thickness) could be prepared by dip- or spin-coating on any flat substrate with low surface roughness. Spherical domains of gelatin rich phases in the film were washed away during the cross-linking process. The diameter of the remaining pores could be adjusted between 200 nm and 1 μm by processing. Due to pH-responsiveness of the alginate gel, the pores were fully open at pH < 4, and completely closed at pH > 5 (Fig. 9). These alginate gels were loaded with silver nanoparticles by in situ reduction within the membrane, thus receiving antimicrobial properties. Moreover, these silver nanoparticles could exhibit catalytic activity, but, unfortunately, no experiments were done regarding transition metal catalysis. But Tokarev et al. utilized these alginate gel membranes for biocatalyst immobilization. Glucose oxidase enzyme was chemically attached to the membrane surface by carbodiimide chemistry. Enzyme loading was determined to be 1.3 mg m−2. Experiments on oxidation of β-D(+)glucose to D-gluconic acid revealed an activity of 2% of the immobilized enzyme relative to the free enzyme. Fig. 9  SPM topography images (10 × 10 μm2) of an alginate membrane under water of pH > 5 (left) and pH < 4 (right). Reprinted from I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 241,41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Phase separation cannot be used only for creating pores in membranes but also for bringing the hydrophilic biocatalyst and hydrophobic substrates efficiently into contact. Bruns and Tiller synthesized amphiphilic polymer networks for efficient biocatalysis in organic media.42 The gel matrix comprised hydrophilic poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) PHEMA and hydrophobic poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) nanodomains. Enzyme loading was achieved by local swelling of the hydrophilic domains, thus entrapping the enzyme into the PHEMA domains. Accessibility of the biocatalyst for hydrophobic substrates was accomplished by swelling of the hydrophobic PDMS domains in organic media.Zhao et al. prepared temperature-sensitive nanocomposite films with switchable bioelectrocatalytic capability.43 Deposition and self-assembly of PNIPAAm-grafted multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNT) onto PNIPAAm-modified gold substrates yielded smart conductive nanocomposite films of more than 6 μm thickness. SEM images revealed an extremely porous film structure (Fig. 10, left part). Electrocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite film for the oxidation of NADH at low temperatures was investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. At low temperatures the PNIPAAm film was totally swollen, allowing the NADH molecules to access the embedded MWNTs. Due to the conductive properties of the film oxidation of NADH could proceed. Increasing the temperature would lead to a denser and compact film structure reducing the accessibility of the MWNTs. Thus, no electrocatalytic oxidation should be detected (Fig. 10, upper right part). CV spectra of the PNIPAAm–MWNT composite film at 25 °C showed a clear oxidation peak potential of +710 mV (Fig. 10, lower right part). By raising the temperature to 45 °C, the electrocatalytic oxidation response of NADH completely vanished. Periodic variation of the temperature between 25 and 45 °C allowed the reversible activation/inactivation of the interface for the bioelectrocatalytic oxidation of NADH. Fig. 10  SEM images of the PNIPAAm–MWNT nanocomposite films (left part); schematic depiction of the reversible bioelectrocatalysis controlled by temperature (upper right part); CV spectra of NADH at the nanocomposite film modified Au electrode at 25 (curve a) and 45 °C (curve b) as well as temperature-induced changes of the oxidation peak current of NADH (lower right part). Reprinted from X. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Lu, J. Zhou and J. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3687,43 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 2.3 Microgels/nanogelsSince swelling kinetics of smart cross-linked polymer systems show indirect proportionality to the dimension of the network, main research expends effort to reduce gel size in order to obtain fast responding systems. Three-dimensional reduction of bulk gels inevitably results in microgels or nanogels. There is an ambiguous transition between these two terms. Microgels are defined as colloidal particles within a particle size range of 10–1000 nm, which are swollen by and dispersed in a solvent.44 Moreover, microgels exhibit a stable structure resulting from covalent or strong physical forces. Within that definition, the term nanogel refers to cross-linked colloidal particles of about 10–100 nm in size. Usually, microgels can be prepared via heterogeneous polymerization techniques, via cross-linking of pre-assembled polymer aggregates or via complexation of polyelectrolytes.44–46 Beside the dimension, such cross-linked colloidal polymers can be classified according to their structure. Microgels comprising distinct organic or inorganic domains are called hybrid microgels. Recently, Karg and Hellweg published a review on the classification, synthesis and characterization of smart hybrid microgels.47 Smart hybrid microgels with a core–shell structure have been intensively studied by Ballauf and co-workers.48 Core–shell type hybrid microgels based on poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) showing temperature-, pH-, and magnetic-field-sensitivity were obtained by the research group of A. Pich.49 In general, applications of microgels cover the fields of drug delivery, biosensors, molecular imprinting, enhanced oil recovery and last but not least the field of catalysis.50–53Microgels for catalysis mostly result from incorporation of catalytically active nanoparticles or immobilization of biocatalysts into the colloidal smart polymer matrix providing catalyst stability and controlling catalyst accessibility by external stimuli. Stimuli-responsive hybrid microgels with inorganic nanoparticles have been extensively used for catalysis of organic reactions. An illustrative example was given by Jiang et al. in 2007.54 Microgels comprising PNIPAAm and poly(glycidyl methacrylate) PGMA moieties were synthesized by cross-linking of PNIPAAm-co-PGMA copolymer aggregates in aqueous solution with diethylenetriamine. Dynamic Light Scattering confirmed the size of the monodisperse microgel to be about 280 nm in hydrodynamic diameter. The cross-linker itself is also capable of complexing gold(III) ions. Thus, in situ reduction of gold(III) led to the formation of catalytically active gold nanoparticles of about 15 nm in size (Fig. 11 upper part and lower part a). The LCST of the microgels was shown to be not affected by the incorporated gold particles. Shrinking of the hybrid microgels was observed at temperatures above 50 °C resulting in a hydrodynamic diameter of about 120 nm for the deswollen microgel. Accessibility of the gold nanoparticles substantially affected the reaction progress of the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenole. Below LCST the hybrid microgels showed a stable colloidal dispersion in aqueous media as well as an open network structure. Thus, the gold nanoparticles were freely accessible and the microgels could act as a homogeneous catalyst. Nearly quantitative conversion was achieved within a couple of minutes (Fig. 11 lower part b). As expected, increasing the temperature to above LCST led to a dense microgel structure with isolated gold nanoparticles. Furthermore destabilization of the colloidal dispersion and precipitation of the microgel occurred. Both the reduced accessibility of the gold particles and the heterogeneous character of the catalyst are reasons for the significantly lower conversion of 4-nitrophenole at elevated temperatures. Fig. 11  Synthesis of the PGMA-co-PNIPAAm microgel particles loaded with gold nanoparticles (upper part); high resolution TEM image of the microgel/gold composite (lower part a); conversion of 4-nitrophenole during the gold catalysed reduction with sodium borohydride at temperatures below and above LCST of the microgel (lower part b). Reprinted from X. Jiang, D. Xiong, Y. An, P. Zheng, W. Zhang and L. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2812,54 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Sahiner et al. reported the use of multi-responsive gels for catalysis.55 Hybrid microgel particles with core–shell morphology were synthesized by microemulsion polymerization of acrylonitrile and 1-vinylimidazole with EGDMA as the cross-linker in the presence of magnetite particles. Subsequent quaternization of the imidazole moieties and conversion of the hydrophobic nitrile groups into hydrophilic amidoxime groups afforded hydrogels responding to pH changes and external magnetic fields. In situ reduction of absorbed metal ions resulted in composite hydrogels containing Cu, Co or Ni, thus introducing catalytically active nanoparticles into the multi-responsive hydrogel matrix. Catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenole was chosen as model reaction to prove the catalytic activity of the immobilized nanoparticles. Unfortunately, effects of pH changes or external magnetic fields on the catalytic properties were not reported.Even complex catalyst structures with tuneable catalytic activity can be built up within a smart microgel matrix. Lu et al. were able to synthesize gold nanorods within a thermo-responsive microgel consisting of a polystyrene (PS) core and a PNIPAAm shell.56In situ preformation of spherical gold seeds subsequently followed by further in situ reduction of chloroauric acid in the presence of the surfactant CTAB yielded gold nanorods located in the PNIPAAm shell of the microgels. The role of the CTAB is crucial in the formation of nanorods, which only proceeded within the microgel matrix. Addition of silver nitrate during the seed-mediated growth of the nanorods afforded control over the aspect ratio. In this way gold nanorods with an average width of 6.6 nm and a length of 34 nm could be obtained. In situ reduction of potassium tetrachloroplatinate in the presence of the gold nanorods led to deposition of platinum mainly on the tips of the gold nanorods (Fig. 12 upper part). These bimetallic gold platinum nanorods exhibited enhanced catalytic activity for the reduction of 4-nitrophenole (Fig. 12 lower left part). The respective apparent rate constant was vastly superior to the rate constants of the pure gold or pure platinum nanoparticles. Even a mixture of gold nanorods and platinum nanoparticles could not measure up to the catalytic activity of the bimetallic catalyst. These kinetic studies pointed out that the high catalytic activity results from a synergistic effect of the bimetallic gold platinum nanorods. Immobilization of the bimetallic catalyst in the thermo-responsive microgel provided control over catalyst activity by simply altering the temperature. Exceeding LCST caused a volume phase transition resulting in a collapsed PNIPAAm shell. Thus, diffusion of the reactants to the bimetallic catalyst is hindered and the rate constant decreased. Therefore, the Arrhenius plot does not show a linear relationship for the rate constants (Fig. 12 lower right part). After passing a minimum the rate constants start to increase since the thermal motion of the reactants overcomes the hindered diffusion. Fig. 12  Cryo-TEM images of the gold nanorods with platinum tips within the thermo-responsive core–shell microgels (upper part); rate constant for the reduction of 4-nitrophenole as a function of the surface area of the nanoparticles (lower left part); Arrhenius plot of the rate constant corresponding to the temperature-dependent hydrodynamic radius of the microgel (lower right part). Reprinted with permission from Y. Lu, J. Yuan, F. Polzer, M. Drechsler and J. Preussner, Nano, 2010, 4, 7078,56 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. Indeed, sophisticated photocatalysis including several interconnected cycles can be conducted inside smart hydrogels. Okeyoshi et al. prepared a photo-induced hydrogen-generating nanogel system.57 The nanogel was prepared by surfactant-free aqueous radical precipitation polymerization of NIPAAm and a ruthenium bipyridine complex monomer in the presence of MBA as the cross-linker. The resulting nanogel possessed positively charged ruthenium bipyridine complex moieties. In the swollen state (below LCST) the nanogel was loaded with platinum nanoparticles stabilized by an anionic surfactant. Electrostatic interactions between the oppositely charged species enhanced the loading process. Increasing the temperature above LCST caused a volume phase transition to a denser structure, physically entrapping the platinum nanoparticles inside the nanogel (Fig. 13). Upon irradiation with visible light the ruthenium bipyridine complex acts as a sensitizer reducing methyl viologen (MV2+). This reduced methyl viologen species is capable of transferring electrons to the platinum nanoparticles promoting hydrogen generation. Fig. 13  Positively charged nanogel structure enhancing the uptake of platinum nanoparticles stabilized by an anionic surfactant (S180A); interconnected catalysis cycles of the photo-induced hydrogen generation. Reprinted from K. Okeyoshi, D. Suzuki, A. Kishimura and R. Yoshida, Small, 2011, 7, 311,57 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. The amount of incorporated platinum nanoparticles as well as spatial proximity between the ruthenium complex and the platinum nanoparticles were found to be crucial to the process of hydrogen generation. The uptake of platinum particles could be controlled via cross-linking density. Proximity control was achieved by temperature-induced swelling and deswelling of the nanogel.58Besides their use for immobilization of transition metal catalysts, microgels can also act as a carrier for biocatalysts. Control of protein adsorption as well as maintaining and regulating the activity of the immobilized protein are critical aspects, which were reviewed in detail by the group of M. Ballauff.52 Smart microgels exhibit a volume phase transition induced by altering environmental conditions. This volume phase transition can be used for both the uptake of enzymes and the control of the enzyme activity. In principle, there are two ways of immobilizing a biocatalyst in a microgel. For instance, Xu et al. prepared core–shell microgels by grafting poly(ethyleneimine) onto PNIPAAm particles above LCST.59 Afterwards microgels were swollen in an aqueous buffer solution containing different amounts of the enzyme horseradish peroxidase. Thus, the enzyme uptake proceeded by diffusion of the enzyme into the expanded polymer network. In this case, conjugation was even promoted by gold nanoparticles previously generated by in situ reduction in the shell of the microgels. The enzymes conjugated on the microgel exhibited enhanced biocatalytic activity as well as prolonged storage stability. Takahashi et al. showed that protein adsorption on microgels is also influenced by hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions as well as by the size of the particles.60 They prepared core–shell gel beads by emulsion polymerization. The core was formed by PNIPAAm, whereas the shell consisted of a copolymer of NIPAAm and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA). Both core and shell were cross-linked with MBA. HEMA content in the shell was varied, altering shell hydrophilicity. Adsorption of chicken egg white lysozyme increased with higher content of HEMA. Raising the temperature above the LCST of the PNIPAAm core further improved enzyme adsorption. Increased HEMA contents and temperatures also led to enhanced enzyme activity. Above the LCST of the gel beads adsorbed enzymes exhibited almost the same activity as the native ones. These results indicate that conformational changes during enzyme adsorption also depend on the molecular size of the carrier.A second route for immobilizing proteins in microgels was presented by Pich and co-workers.61 Small aqueous droplets stabilized in heptane by non-ionic surfactants were utilized for conducting free radical copolymerization of NIPAAm and vinylimidazole in the presence of MBA as the cross-linker. Since this heterogeneous radical polymerization proceeds in water under ambient conditions enzymes could be encapsulated within the microgels during the polymerization, without risking denaturation. Biocatalyst loading was determined by the enzyme concentration within the droplets. Moreover, a high content of vinylimidazole was found to improve enzyme loading and activity due to electrostatic interactions between the oppositely charged polymer network and the biocatalyst.An illustrative example of how the induced volume phase transition of a smart microgel carrier can affect accessibility of the immobilized protein was given by Marten et al.62 The protein porcine pancreas trypsin was immobilized on core–shell microgels with a magnetite (Fe3O4) core and a temperature-sensitive shell consisting of an oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate copolymer with active ester moieties for enzyme binding. The shell exhibited typical LCST behaviour with the respective volume phase transition to a shrunken state by exceeding a critical temperature. As a remarkable feature of this system, it was shown that an external oscillating magnetic field can be used for energy transfer to the core, resulting in an increased solution temperature inducing the volume phase transition of the shell. On closer inspection, this system turns out to be an excellent example for the use of multi-responsive gels in biocatalysis. Enzyme catalysed hydrolysis of benzoyl-Arg p-nitroanilide showed a divergent temperature dependence of the Michaelis–Menten constant for the immobilized and the native protein (Fig. 14). Whereas the Michaelis–Menten constant for the native trypsin declined with increasing temperature, volume phase transition caused a significant enhancement of this constant for the microgel-bound enzyme. This acceleration was attributed to a better accessibility of the enzyme due to the collapse of the shell. Nevertheless, the turnover numbers of the immobilized enzyme were still lower for the immobilized biocatalyst. Fig. 14  Temperature dependence of the Michaelis–Menten constant for the particle-immobilized and the free trypsin (left); proposed mechanism for the enhanced catalytic activity of the immobilized trypsin after exceeding LCST of the shell. Reprinted from G. U. Marten, T. Gelbrich and A. M. Schmidt, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6, 922.62 3. Hydrogel-based sensorsResponsive hydrogels are very suitable for detecting different kinds of analytes und thus can be used in a wide field of sensing applications. One of these fields are DNA sensors,63,64 but humidity65,66 and solvent67,68 sensors were also of interest in the last few years. Although many different pH sensors are well established, new ways of pH sensing69–73 are still desired, especially very small systems would be appreciated, e.g. for use in invasive medical areas. Toxic metal ions like Hg2+ and Pb2+, but also other metal ions were of great interest, too.74–80 However, glucose sensors and their application in monitoring blood glucose level of the rising population group with diabetes attracted the most interest.81–96 In this research field many advanced sensors can be seen. The basis of the sensors is in most cases an analyte-induced volume change of the hydrogel. Changes in volume can be easily recognized for bulk hydrogels. But those gels have a very slow response time, which can be greatly reduced by reducing the hydrogel dimensions. To visualize the volume change of thin hydrogel films, nano- or microgels expensive or very bulky instruments might be needed, thus limiting the use of a sensor or sensor material. Thus, special signal transducers are needed. Piezoresistive sensors were used where the hydrogel led to a deflection of a silicon membrane within the sensor chip.97 Based on such results a new type of an on-line analytics system for biomedical and environmental monitoring was developed.69,98 A flex-circuit inductive wireless transducer,99 a field-effect-transistor-based transducer, in which intrinsic molecular charges immobilized onto the field-effect transistor gate surface can directly be transduced into electrical signals,100 an optical fibre that is capped by a small hydrogel tip that makes up a Fabry–Perot cavity for high-resolution detection of the optical path length in the hydrogel90,101 or a magnetoelastic biosensor, that was used to detect organophosphorus pesticides102 were used as signal transducers, too. Also optical sensing with diffraction gratings,103e.g. for human immunoglobin-G detection104 or the incorporation of noble metal particles in the hydrogel to produce a localized surface plasmon resonance optical bio sensor105,106 are possible. However, in the last few years desires have arisen to fabricate low cost, visually – by the naked eye – readable colorimetric sensors, which consume no power. Such sensors were developed by the use of hydrogels containing photonic crystals (PC). Examples of such sensors can be found in the Humidity and solvent sensors section. Besides the big potential of the PC-containing hydrogel sensors for easy readout, imprinted hydrogel sensors have very great potential to detect perhaps every desired analyte, and might have a big impact on development of sensors for environmental, doping and protein analysis. Bisphenol A,107 3-pyridinecarboxamide,108 cholic acid,109 ephedrine,110 bovine serum albumin (BSA)111 and other proteins112 are examples that have already used imprinted hydrogels.3.1 pH sensorsChronically implantable devices for on-line monitoring of blood glucose and in addition blood pH and CO2 attracted much attention in recent years. Within this field hydrogel-based piezoresistive pH sensors could be suitable candidates. Therefore, a pH sensor that works in the physiological pH was developed.69 First, a thin hydrogel film was prepared by redoxpolymerization between two glass slides and a spacer. The cavity was filled with N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA), that bears a tertiary amine and thus is the pH-sensitive component, hydroxypropyl methacrylate (HPMA), to obtain a transition of the pH close to the physiological range, tetraethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA), which is the cross-linker and ethylene glycol, tetramethylethylenediamine and ammonium persulphate for redoxpolymerization. The ratio of DMAEMA to HPMA to TEGDMA was 70/30/2. A hydrogel film thickness of 330 μm in the dry state was achieved. This film was fixed between a Si-substrate and the bending plate within the piezoresistive microsensor, see Fig. 15a. Two other configurations are also possible as can be seen in Fig. 15b and c. Fig. 15  Schematic cross-sectional view of the hydrogel-based piezoresistive pH microsensor in three different configurations: (a) a relatively thick hydrogel layer (100 μm range) is mechanically constrained at the bottom of the holder, (b) bimorph-configuration with a thin hydrogel film directly bound to the bending plate, (c) a hydrogel sheet is clamped between a rigid grate and the chip; 1 hydrogel, 2 piezoresistor, 3 Si-substrate, 4 Si pressure sensor chip, 5 socket, 6 fluidic channel for solution inlet–outlet, 7 electrical interconnect, 8 measuring solution, 9 backside clamp, 10 rigid grate, 11 fluidic channel (optional). Reprinted with permission from V. Schulz, G. Gerlach, M. Guenther, J. J. Magda and F. Solzbacher, Piezoresistive pH Microsensors Based on Stimuli-Sensitive Polyelectrolyte Hydrogels, Tech. Mess., 2010, 77, 179, Copyright, © 2010 Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH.69 Upon swelling or shrinkage of the responsive hydrogel due to a change of pH a certain pressure deforms the bending plate. The bending plate is connected to four piezoresistors, which are electrically connected to a Wheatstone bridge circuit. The deformation of the bending plate causes a mechanical stress state inside the piezoresistors. The following change of resistivity in the bridge circuit proportionally affects the electrical output voltage. Thus, the mechanical work of the hydrogel volume change is transduced in an electrical signal. In particular, the tertiary amine groups of the prepared hydrogel get protonated below a pH of 8. With decreasing pH the osmotic pressure increases and is compensated by swelling. This gives a sharp transition in the region between pH 7.8 and pH 6.8 with a signal increase of about 250 mV. The increase in the signal in this range is almost linear and the pH range of the sensor is of great interest in biological processes. However, the sensor also shows cross-sensitivity to ionic strength. But it was mentioned that the influence of the ionic strength can be separated by use of a second sensor element with a neutral hydrogel, which responds only to ionic strength and not pH.A sensor system exploiting the localized surface plasmon resonance of noble metal particles as transducer for the pH-induced volume change in a thin hydrogel film is described by Jiang et al.70 On a glass slide coated with 25 nm indium oxide to make it conductive and a 200 nm thick layer of photoresist, periodic circular lines with a lattice constant of 330 nm and circles with a diameter of 220 nm are exposed by electron beam lithography. After developing the photoresist, small posts of the photoresist on the substrate are created. Those posts are narrower at the base of the substrate and will fall in a random direction when dried as can be seen in Fig. 16. Fig. 16  Fabrication of the gold nanocrescent array. (a) SEM micrograph of the fabricated gold nanocrescent array structure. (b) SEM micrograph at a tilted angle of the developed photoresist thin film coated with gold. (c) Schematic of the fabrication process of the gold nanocrescents. Reprinted with permission from H. Jiang, J. Markowski and J. Sabarinathan, Near-infrared optical response of thin film pH-sensitive hydrogel coated on a gold nanocrescent array, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 21802.70 Afterwards a 2 nm titanium and 50 nm gold film were deposited on this structure to fabricate the nanocrescents. The surface was then treated with an adhesion promoter and covered with a hydrogel. The coated film was 150 nm in thickness. The localized surface plasmon resonance was measured by unpolarized near-infrared (NIR) light. The pH was increased from 3 to 9 causing swelling of the hydrogel and a decrease in the refractive index. The latter is transduced in a change of the measured extinction spectra. The peak wavelength and the extinction amplitude both decrease with increasing pH. These two characteristics were used to measure pH and were consistent. The sensitive range of the pH sensor was determined to be 4.5 to 6.4. The fabricated sensor was very robust and showed good results even after 30 d.Another pH sensor is produced by Griffete et al.72 It is based on an inverse opal hydrogel (IOH) structure, containing a planar defect layer. The defect layer was introduced to enhance the response and the response time. To produce the IOH film the Langmuir–Blodgett technique was used, which allowed the control of the layer number and the insertion of a defect layer. In particular, five layers were made using silica particles of a diameter of 240 nm, one layer with silica particles of 390 nm and again five layers with silica particles of 240 nm. A second film with 10 layers and without a defect layer was also prepared, using silica particles of size 280 nm. Both films had a thickness of about 2.8 μm and were supported on poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) slides. Afterwards, the monomer MAAc and the cross-linker EGDMA were filled in the interspaces of the opal template and were polymerized for 20 min under UV irradiation. The last step was the removal of the silica template by treatment with hydrofluoric acid. SEM images confirmed that the layer structure and the defect layer were very clearly visible. Both IOHs showed a red-shift of the Bragg peak upon increase of pH. This was addressed due to increased ionization and thus swelling of the hydrogel. The defect-containing IOH had a larger red-shift of about 60 nm compared to 40 nm of the defect-free one and was explained by the enhancement of the chemomechanical response because of the disrupted periodicity by the defect layer. The response time was measured in the range of highest sensitivity between pH 7.5 and 8.5. The defect-free IOH took 16 s for increasing pH and 25 s, when the pH was decreased. However, the defect-containing IOH took 9 s and 13 s, respectively. Thus, the defect layer in an IOH enhances the response and the response time.Responsive hydrogels containing quantum dots (QD) that change their photoluminescence intensity by varying pH were fabricated by Kharlampieva et al.73 In particular, the hydrogel consists of a special layer structure of different polymers that were deposited by spin-coating: poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulphonate) (PSS) as well as hydrogen-bonded poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAAc) – a pH-responsive polymer – and poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP). After the PMAAc layer was cross-linked PVP was washed out. The thioglycolic acid stabilized negatively charged CdTe QDs were tethered at the positively charged PAH layer and diffusion out of the layer structure was successfully prevented. One PAH–PSS bilayer had a thickness of about 2.4 nm. If the QDs were incorporated into the (PAH–PSS)5 multilayer the thickness increased from 10 nm to 20 nm. The whole layer structure had a thickness smaller than 100 nm. The prepared multilayer structure showed suppressed photoluminescence intensity by excess negative charge in the PMAAc hydrogel layer at pH 8. At a pH of 3 a significant photoluminescence intensity increase was visible as a result of excess positive charge in the PMAAc hydrogel layer. Several switching cycles between pH 3 and pH 8 did show that the intensity change was reversible and the absolute intensity at pH 3 or 8 was almost the same.3.2 Metal ion sensorsMercury is a highly toxic and bioaccumulative heavy metal that causes serious health problems. Contaminated drinking water and water resources are the major concerns and need to be monitored. Therefore, it is of high interest to develop mercury sensors with a visual output to omit the need of analytical instruments. The Hg2+-mediated thymine–thymine DNA base pairing is one observation that can be exploited in the development of a Hg2+ sensor.80 In the presence of Hg2+, the DNA forms a hairpin structure. The fluorescent dye SYBR Green I can bind to this structure and gives a strong green fluorescence that is also visible by the eye. In the absence of Hg2+, the DNA is a random coil and upon addition of SYBR Green I a yellowish weak fluorescence is visible. The final concentration of DNA in the hydrogel was tested by a SYBR Green I assay and about half of the initial acrydite-Hg-DNA in polymerization was bound to the hydrogel. The essential of the thymine rich DNA was proved by preparing a hydrogel with a cytosine rich DNA. In the presence of Hg2+ and SYBR Green I the gel had a yellowish fluorescence instead of a green one. Almost no or yellow fluorescence was also observed when other metal ions like Zn2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Mn2+, Pb2+, Fe3+, Mg2+ or Ca2+ were used. Thus the hydrogel showed good selectivity. The optimal time for detection was determined to be 1 h. But even after about 10 min fluorescence could be observed. When soaking the gel in one millilitre volume, at least 200 nM Hg2+ were required for visual detection. The toxic level of Hg2+ in drinking water is 10 nM, as reported by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Increasing the sample volume to 50 mL, even 10 nM of Hg2+ showed a visible green fluorescence (Fig. 17). This feature was addressed through the fact that the AAm-based hydrogel could actively absorb Hg2+. Thus, the DNA in the hydrogel is only suitable for sensing Hg2+, while the nitrogen of the AAm can actively bind Hg2+. The latter was also used to remove Hg2+ from water samples. Fig. 17  Sensor-sensitivity detected using a digital camera (A) and a fluorescence gel documentation system (B) and its quantification (C). (D) The gel-sensitivity using 50 mL samples (previously in 1 mL). (E) Selectivity test with 1 μM concentrations of various metal ions in 1 mL samples. Reprinted with permission from N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and Juewen Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668,80 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. The gels were also tested with real water samples and showed good performance with slightly lower fluorescence compared to the buffer samples, which was attributed to other anions that could bind Hg2+, thus decreasing the effective concentration. The hydrogels could be also regenerated, showing good resistance to DNase 1 when soaked for 1 h and could be dried and rehydrated without losing performance.The sensor design was further tuned to enhance sensitivity. Instead of a neutral hydrogel the use of an anionic or cationic hydrogel was tested, while the latter showed very good performance.75 The cationic or positively charged hydrogel showed very low background fluorescence but also lowered fluorescence intensity in the presence of Pb2+ compared to the neutral hydrogel. This was addressed to the disfavoured diffusion of the positively charged SYBR Green I into the cationic hydrogel. Due to the binding of the anionic DNA strands to the cationic hydrogel the fluorescence dye was also not capable of binding to the DNA strands, thus reducing the background fluorescence. In the presence of Hg2+ the DNA folds to the hairpin structure so that SYBR Green I has a much higher affinity, showing green fluorescence. By varying the allylamine/AAm ratio in the gel the sensitivity of the sensor was tuned. At a ratio of 20% allylamine and 80% AAm the background fluorescence was almost not visible and the fluorescence in the presence of Pb2+ was still high resulting in a very good contrast. Thus, the detection limit for this tuned cationic hydrogel was determined to be 1.1 nM, instead of 10.2 nM for the neutral hydrogel.The principal sensor concept of using DNA strands to bind Hg2+ and visualization of this structure change by a fluorescent dye was further expanded to detect lead(II).78 Lead is also a highly toxic heavy metal ion and its easy recognition without analytical instruments is much desired. The formation of a DNA guanine quadruplex structure is effectively stabilized by Pb2+, resulting in a DNA conformational change. The DNA forms a quadruplex structure in the presence of Pb2+. A yellowish to green fluorescence change was observed upon the Pb2+-induced DNA conformational change when using SYBR Green I or thiazole orange. The latter was used in subsequent experiments because of its brighter intensity. The colour change was observed in 5 min with a low fluorescence that got much brighter after 1 h. It was possible to detect 20 nM Pb2+ with the naked eye using a sample volume of 50 mL. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency defined a maximum contamination in drinking water of 72 nM. Hence, the sensor is suitable to analyze Pb2+ in drinking water. It was also shown that shape encoded hydrogels, e.g. a spherical Pb2+ hydrogel and triangular Hg2+ hydrogel, could be used to simultaneously detect analytes in one pot.A lead-sensitive microgel with crown ether groups was synthesized by Luo et al.74 NIPAAm/AAc-based microgels were prepared and in the next step post-modified with 4′-aminobenzo-18-crown-6 using EDC as the coupling agent. Different microgels were synthesized with varying AAc or 4′-aminobenzo-18-crown-6 contents, respectively. The microgels did initially shrink with increasing Pb2+ concentration and at a certain point began to swell again. In sodium chloride solution the microgel size decreases monotonously with increasing salt concentration. With increasing salt concentration or ionic strength water becomes a relatively poor solvent for PNIPAAm polymers, hence the microgel shrinks. If the ions have a high binding constant to the crown ether, the ions are bound to the polymer increasing the hydrophilicity, hence the polymer swells. The first effect can be found mainly for Na+. The combination of both effects causes the observed behaviour of Pb2+. If the ionic strength is constant, the diameter of the microgel increases with increasing Pb2+ concentration. The microgels with the highest crown ether content swells up to 420% of its original volume at a concentration of 10 mM Pb2+. The microgel response was also studied with certain other ions. It was concluded that the intensity of the induced volume change follows the trend of the binding constants of the ions with the crown ether. Especially Ba2+ shows also a large response and might interfere in applications for Pb2+-sensing.A sensor material based on an interpenetrating network of PVA and PAAc with incorporated PS colloid crystals can act as a pH sensor and after functionalization of the PAAc with a certain ligand as Ni2+-, Cu2+- or Zn2+-sensitive PC hydrogel.79 The metal ion-responsive hydrogel was prepared by post-modification of the carboxylic acid groups with 5-amino-8-hydroxyquinoline dihydrochloride and EDC as coupling agent. The pH-sensitive hydrogel showed a red-shift from 611 nm to 850 nm between a pH of 2.8 and 9.5 at a fixed ionic strength. This was attributed to the hydrogel swelling through increased pH and the increased centre-to-centre distance between the incorporated PS spheres. The change in colour was visually apparent. The red-shift intensity is dependent on the PVA cross-link density. In the interpenetrating network a higher cross-link density of PVA constrains the PAAc network from swelling more compared to a lower cross-linking density, thus the red-shift is also smaller. The durability and reversibility of the sensor material was confirmed by cycling the pH between 4.8 and 7.6, in which the stopband position and intensity reversibly shift between their corresponding original positions. The metal ion-responsive hydrogel showed a monotonically decreasing blue-shift from 618 nm to 509 nm, when the Ni2+ concentration was increased to 1.6 μM. Also Cu2+ and Zn2+ showed similar behaviour but with different intensity. All three metal ions form a bisliganded complex that causes further cross-linking in the hydrogel and thus, the hydrogel volume decreases and as a result, the stopband blue-shifts. Again, the colour change is visually evident.A Pb2+-, Cu2+- or Ag+-responsive polyelectrolyte photonic hydrogel that is fabricated under conditions in which the ligands are pre-organized to the metal ion in order to enhance sensitivity and selectivity were described by Hong et al.77 The response here is based on a cation exchange mechanism. The water release from the hydrogel is based on the hydration shell of the exchanged cation. In addition to a high charge density in the polyelectrolyte hydrogel this design will prevent interference from ionic strength. To prepare those photonic hydrogels, monodisperse silica particles were dispersed in ethanol. Silica colloid crystal templates on glass slides were obtained after evaporation of the ethanol. For each metal ion sensor different monomer mixtures were dropped on the silica colloid crystal templates and polymerized under UV light. The silica template was removed by treatment with hydrofluoric acid. At the end, photonic hydrogels with an inverse opal structure were obtained. For the Pb2+-responsive hydrogel a monomer mixture of 4-vinylbenzo-18-crown-6, that acts as a ligand for Pb2+, and potassium 3-sulphopropyl methacrylate in a ratio of 1 to 2, methyl methacrylate (MMA) and poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate (PEGDMA) as a cross-linker were used. For the Cu2+-responsive hydrogel a mixture of 4-vinylpyridine, which can coordinate to Cu2+, copper(II) hydroxide and AMPS in a ratio of 4:1:2 and PEGDMA were used. The introduction of copper in this mixture will control the stereo-chemical arrangement of the ligands on the absorption side of the polymer. For the Ag+-responsive hydrogel a mixture of glycidyl methacrylate for post-modification of the hydrogel, potassium 3-sulphopropyl methacrylate, MMA and PEGDMA were used. The Ag+-sensitive hydrogel film was post-modified with a thiourea formaldehyde prepolymer as the ligand for Ag+. All three photonic hydrogels showed a blue-shift with increasing concentration of their target cations. This is attributed to the release of water from the target cation hydration shell after ligandation. Cu2+ and Ag+ can bind to multiple ligands in the prepared hydrogels inducing further cross-linking and thus shrinkage that also causes a blue-shift. All three hydrogels showed little effect due to interference of other ions. Only Ni2+, at higher concentrations, might interfere with the Cu2+-responsive hydrogels. Very little effect of pH in the range of 6.5 to 2 on the Pb2+ and Ag+-responsive hydrogels is visible because crown ether and thiourea are weak proton acceptors. The basic property of pyridine caused sensitivity to pH when it was lower than 4 in the Cu2+-responsive hydrogel. All three hydrogels show a very high detection limit of their target ion of 1 nM, 50 pM and 1 nM for Pb2+, Cu2+ and Ag+ respectively. All the photonic hydrogel films were mechanically robust, stable for at least three months and are completely reversible. However, for at least 8 cycles no differences were detected.3.3 Humidity and solvent sensorsAlthough electrical-based humidity sensors are widely applied, sensors that are of low cost, do not consume power and can be read out visually by colour change are highly desired. Such sensors can be prepared by the use of hydrogels containing PCs.65,66 Tian et al. prepared monodisperse latex spheres with a hydrophobic PS core and a hydrophilic PMMA/PAAc shell with a diameter of 150 nm. The PCs were fabricated via the vertical deposition method and subsequently immersed in an AAm–MBA solution. After UV irradiation the poly(acrylamide) (PAAm) hydrogel with incorporated PCs was prepared. It was found that the PS/PMMA/PAAc PCs were arranged in a face-centred cubic manner. Upon wetting the hydrogel swells and the refractive index contrast between PS/PMMA/PAAc and PAAm increases leading to a visible red-shift of the whole material. At 20% humidity the film is transparent and changed from violet, blue, cyan, green to red when the humidity was increased from 50%, 70%, 80%, 90% to 100%, as can be seen in Fig. 18a. The sensor showed good durability and it was no significant change in the stopband position for each humidity after 10 cycles visible (Fig. 18b). The film thickness in the dry state was about 6.3 μm and increased to 15.1 μm in the fully wetted state. Fig. 18  Reversible changes of the colour/stopband of the PC hydrogel with relative humidity. (a) Photographs of the colour change of the PC hydrogel. (b) Reversible conversion of the stopband position of the PC hydrogel by alternately exposing to increasing and decreasing relative humidity conditions between 20% and 100%. Reproduced from ref. 65. Xuan et al. used magnetite colloids in a poly(ethylene glycol) acrylate (PEGA) hydrogel to produce a humidity sensor. Super-paramagnetic Fe3O4 was prepared and coated with a silica layer. Afterwards, those colloids were dispersed in a mixture of PEGA/poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) and covered by two glass slides. The substrate was placed over an NdFeB magnet and the dispersion was UV-irradiated. The photonic structure was achieved by the magnetic self-assembly of the Fe3O4–SiO2 colloids and fixed in the PEGA hydrogel by UV irradiation. The advantage of this approach is the easy and fast fabrication. The prepared films showed a red-shift upon wetting starting with a bluish-green at a relative humidity of 33%, green at 75%, yellow at 85% and red at 97%. The response time depends on the film thickness and whether the hydrogel is swelling or shrinking. For films with a thickness of 240 μm the response time is 52 min for swelling as humidity increases to 100% and 26 min for shrinking as the hydrogel recovers to 22% humidity. If the film thickness is decreased to 30 μm the response time is also decreased to 9 min and 3 min, respectively. The samples showed good reversibility and durability in cycling experiments.In order to prepare a solvent sensor that might be used in oil quality control, the food industry or the biotechnology field, 1D PCs were developed.67 First, a polymer precursor solution was prepared by radical polymerization of MMA, HEMA, EGDMA and AIBN in butanone at 60 °C. On a silicon wafer the polymer precursor solution was spin-coated and subsequently tempered at 60 °C for 10 min. The next layer was spin-coated from a titania sol and also tempered at 60 °C. In total 10 layers in an alternating manner of polymer and titania were deposited on the silicon wafer. The high difference in the refractive index of the titania layer and the polymer layer led to an obvious photonic stopband in several layers. By using different concentrations of the polymer solution and the titania sol in the PC preparation, varying layer thicknesses can be obtained and the position of the stopband can be tuned. When a 1D PC with layers of 9 nm polymer and 70 nm titania is used, the photonic stopband red-shifts upon soaking in solvents. This can be addressed through the swelling of the polymer layers and the change in refractive index. The change in the optical properties of the PC can be seen by the naked eye, and was attributed mainly to the change in the layer thickness of the hydrogel. The shift of the stopband in carbon disulphide, ethyl acetate, ethanol, acetonitrile, dichloromethane, trichloromethane, butanone, tetrahydrofuran, 1,4-dioxane, acetone, dimethylformamide and dimethylsulphoxide are 29 nm, 37 nm, 62 nm, 113 nm, 127 nm, 171 nm, 202 nm, 253 nm, 267 nm, 285 nm, 388 nm and 420 nm, respectively. Fig. 19 shows the colour change of the PCs. Fig. 19  (a) Reflective spectra of a 1D PC in different solvents. (b) Shift of the photonic stopband of a 1D PC in different solvents. (c) Photographs of a 1D PC in different solvents. Reproduced from ref. 67. The response time is different for each organic solvent. The shortest response time of 10 s was observed with dichloromethane and the longest was 2 min. After this time the colour changes little until it becomes constant after 20 min. Swelling–deswelling cycles were repeated more than 100 times. After each cycle the Bragg peak maximum shifts reversibly to the original position within a few nanometres, showing the high durability of the sensor.In an analogous fashion PAAm IOCs were used as alcohol sensors.68 In pure water the colour of the hydrogel is red. When it is soaked in different alcohols with one hydroxyl group, the hydrogel shrinks within a few seconds, and the colour changes from red to green and finally to blue. So a blue-shift can be seen that is dependent on the alcohol concentration and the alcohol itself. For methanol the biggest blue-shift was observed and with increasing chain length of the alcohol the blue-shift gets smaller. The blue-shift was attributed to the change in the refractive index and swelling ratio. Isopropanol showed a greater blue-shift than tert-butanol. Because the difference in the refracting index of both alcohols is quite small, the difference in the swelling is the main cause for this observation. In general it can be said that with the increasing number of carbon atoms of the alcohol it shrinks less and the blue-shift gets smaller. Ethylene glycol, glycerol and sorbitol instead showed a red-shift that was attributed mainly to the change in the refractive index, since the shrinkage of the gel was a lot smaller compared to the alcohols with one hydroxyl group. The hydrogel showed good physical stability and could be recovered over 20 times. Even after half a year the reflection spectra of the hydrogel films were almost the same.3.4 DNA sensorsHighly sensitive DNA detection plays an important role in many fields of research like genomics, bacterial and viral detection, disease diagnostics, forensic science and many more. Thus, easy and label-free DNA detection is highly desired. An interesting hydrogel-based system for label-free DNA detection is described by Zhao et al.63 Using a silica colloidal crystal template photonic hydrogel beads with an inverse opal structure were synthesized. The MBA cross-linked PAAm hydrogel consisted of further cross-links based on 5′- and 3′-acryloyl modified single stranded DNA (ssDNA). In addition thioglycolic acid capped CdSe QDs were bound into the PAAm hydrogel using EDC as the coupling agent. Thus, hydrogels with different ssDNA could be encoded with different QDs. A complete array of different encoded hydrogels could be prepared by two QDs with different emission wavelengths. By varying the amount of both QDs incorporated in the hydrogel, the intensity ratio in the emission spectra can be used to distinguish each hydrogel bead and its individual ssDNA. Thus, different hydrogel beads can be used in multiplex DNA detection arrays. The photonic hydrogel is capable to bind the corresponding target DNA specifically at the ssDNA and a double helix is formed. The conformational change due to the formation of a double helix leads to a shrinkage of the gel and a blue-shift of the Bragg diffraction peak occurs, which becomes more apparent with increasing concentration of the corresponding target DNA. Already an amount of 1 nM of target DNA was detectable. Single mismatch target DNA led to a significantly lowered blue-shift and double mismatch DNA showed practically no blue-shift. To show the described concept of multiplex label-free DNA detection three kinds of DNA-responsive hydrogels were prepared, using probe DNA A, B and C as cross-linkers. Two different coloured QDs with intensity ratios of 1:2, 1:1 and 2:1 were incorporated in the three hydrogels, respectively. The different hydrogel beads were mixed together and incubated in an analyte solution containing the corresponding target analyte for hydrogels A and C. As can be seen in Fig. 20, probe A and probe C showed a blue-shift in the diffraction spectra, indicating that the specific target DNA is bound to the hydrogel. The three different hydrogels could be distinguished by the fluorescence spectra and the different intensity ratios. Fig. 20  Bragg diffraction spectra and fluorescence spectra (inset) of the QD-encoded DNA-responsive hydrogel photonic beads. The fluorescence spectra are the coding of the beads and the Bragg diffraction spectra are used for DNA detection. The dashed lines and solid lines are the Bragg diffraction spectra of the beads before and after multiplex label-free DNA detection. Reprinted from Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, B. Tang, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 976,63 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 3.5 Glucose sensorsIn the past years intensive research in the area of glucose sensing is carried out due to the large number of humans with diabetes. Most of the current instruments for glucose determination are intermittent tests. Continuous glucose monitoring is much desired for self-regulating insulin systems or critically ill patients. A promising sensor for in vivo glucose monitoring is presented by Tierney et al.90 They use a half spherical glucose-responsive hydrogel with a length of about 50 μm covalently bound at the end of an optical fibre that can be used for determination of the glucose concentration. The readout of the swelling/shrinkage of the hydrogel was conducted by an optical method based on an interferometric fringe technique where changes in the optical length of the hydrogel are manifested by a change in the phase of the interference wave arising from light reflected at the fibre-gel and gel-solution interfaces.101 The hydrogel was prepared from a polymerization solution consisting of AAm, MBA for cross-linking, 3-acrylamidophenylboronic acid (3-PBA) as the glucose-responsive component, N-(3-dimethyl-aminopropyl)-acrylamide (DMAPAAm) for fine-tuning the response and a photoinitiator. A drop of this mixture was placed on the fibre end where the polymerization was conducted. The hydrogel was tested for glucose-sensitivity in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) by stepwise increasing and decreasing the glucose concentration and a reversible swelling was observed, as can be seen in Fig. 21. Fig. 21  Change in optical length of 8 mol% 3-PBA and 10 mol% DMAPAAm hydrogel versus time induced by stepwise increasing and decreasing glucose concentrations in PBS at 37 °C, pH = 7.4, and ionic strength of 155 mM. The glucose concentrations are indicated at the determined equilibrium lengths of the hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from S. Tierney, B. M. H. Falch, D. R. Hjelme and B. T. Stokke, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3630,90 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. The kinetics for increasing and decreasing concentrations of glucose are similar and lie in the range of 100 to 140 s. Boronic acids react not only with glucose, but also with other cis-diols. Most sugars like fructose or mannose are present in blood only in a low concentration and will not interfere much. In contrast, lactate is present in blood with a concentration of 1 mM and can increase during exercise. The sensor showed a reduced response of about 4% at 1 mM sodium lactate in PBS that can be neglected. At evaluated levels of sodium lactate of 5 mM the response was reduced by 17% that cannot be neglected. The sensor showed also good performance in ex vivo blood plasma experiments with some interference from foreign species, most likely from proteins. Encapsulation of the sensor in a membrane could avoid such factors. Overall, this sensor showed good results to be applied for glucose monitoring in vivo.An ultrathin hydrogel film for fast detection of glucose was designed by Zhang et al.96 Onto a wafer or glass slide with introduced amino groups a ground layer of PAAc was first assembled. Using EDC as the coupling agent the PAAc was bound to the substrate and in addition phenylboronic acid (PBA) groups were introduced. Alternating layers of PVA and poly(AAm-co-3-PBA) were coated on the previously prepared substrate in a layer-by-layer assembly. The layer thickness was varied between 30 to 90 bilayers. The film is cross-linked by the reaction of diol from the PVA and the PBA groups of the PAAm copolymer. Glucose can also bind to the PBA sides and compete with the PVA. As a result some cross-links may get cleaved. Or the glucose can bind to a free PBA group leading to a new negative charge and increased hydrophilicity of the polymer. Either way, the hydrogel thickness increases. The swelling of the hydrogel was monitored by the change in the reflection spectra in the UV, visible and NIR regions, which showed an oscillation that is also known as Fabrey–Perot fringes. With increasing glucose concentration a shift of these fringes was observed. The calculated optical path length showed a linear increase with increasing glucose concentration. In addition, the swelling of the hydrogel is completely reversible. At the physiological pH of 7.4 a rather low glucose-sensitivity was observed. With increasing pH the sensitivity also increases. Thus, the hydrogel should be tuned, e.g. by using a PBA derivative with a lower pKa. Very little sensitivity decrease was observed upon a temperature increase from 25 °C to 37 °C because both polymers do not show thermo-sensitivity in this temperature region. The thin hydrogel films showed a fast response of less than a minute, but the response time increased with the increasing layer number. The sensitivity also increases with increasing film thickness. Thus, an optimized film thickness for high sensitivity and fast response must be found. However, the fast response makes this hydrogel a suitable candidate for continuous glucose sensing.A glucose-responsive bulky hydrogel using glucose/galactose binding protein (GBP) as the glucose sensitive part was prepared by Ehrick et al.86 The GBP consists of two domains connected by a hinge and undergoes a conformational change in the presence of glucose, in particular the two domains rotate 31° toward each other upon glucose binding. This change in conformation is used to trigger shrinkage of the hydrogel upon glucose addition. Genetically engineered GBP containing one cysteine at each terminus was modified with allylamine using a maleimide succinimide ester as the coupling agent, to make the GBP capable of binding to the hydrogel. In the presence of glucose the GBP changes its conformation and pulls the hydrogel backbone closer together inducing shrinkage. This shrinkage was measured by displacement measurements with slices of the cylindrical hydrogel with a diameter of about 5 mm. The displacement of the hydrogel showed glucose concentration-dependent contraction that positively correlated in the range of 10−5 to 10−3 M. No significant loss of glucose-responsive function was found after 17 swelling–deswelling cycles, showing the reversible nature of this material. In the presence of glucose the hydrogel contracts, and the pore size decreases, making this material a good candidate for controlled gating. Very little transport of BSA through the hydrogel in the presence of glucose, but faster transport in the absence of glucose was observed. Small molecules, like 10 kDa dextran or vitamin B12, were also transported through the gel in the presence of glucose. By changing the cross-link density it is possible to fine-tune the pore size in a manner such that therapeutically relevant molecules can pass or get retained depending on the glucose concentration.A nanogel with integrated optical glucose detection and self-regulated insulin delivery at physiological pH was prepared by Wu et al.95 The nanogel consists of a gold nanoparticle core with a shell of poly(4-vinylboronic acid-co-2-(dimethylamino)ethyl acrylate-co-N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide). The hydrogel shell can respond to glucose and the Ag nanoparticle provides a fluorescence signal. This hybrid structure was prepared by free radical precipitation polymerization of the monomers in the presence of SDS capped Ag nanoparticles with a size of about 10 nm. At physiological pH that is far below the pKa of 8.9 of the PBA, the complexation with glucose is unstable and susceptible to hydrolysis. The binding affinity was thus enhanced by incorporation of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl acrylate (DMAEA) in the hydrogel. DMAEA stabilizes the boronate ester by electrostatically attraction through the slightly protonated dimethyl amino group. The nanogel size increases from 139 nm to 172 nm when the DMAEA content of about 4.5% is increased to about 16%. In the range of 0 nM to 30 nM of glucose at a pH of 7.4 the nanogels continually swells and the fluorescence intensity gets continually quenched. The detection sensibility was determined to be ±0.1 mM. At 30 nM glucose a swelling ratio of 1.7 and 1.4 was obtained for the nanogels with DMAEA and without DMAEA, respectively. The lower swelling ratio was addressed to the weaker bound glucose because of the absence of DMAEA. The swelling was reversible when the glucose was removed from the solution and the fluorescence was recovered even after five cycles. Besides other sugars with low concentrations in blood lactate could be the major interference. In the presence of 0.8 mM lactate a lower quenching of fluorescence was observed, which corresponded to 2–4% lower apparent concentration of glucose, in contrast to the DMAEA-free nanogel with about 7%. Excellent sensitivity and selectivity of glucose over lactate is provided by DMAEA-containing nanogels. The nanogels were capable of trapping insulin and releasing it upon glucose addition in less than 30 min, which should be compatible with the patients’ need. Higher glucose concentrations also lead to a higher amount of released insulin. The prepared nanogel and the Ag nanoparticles were tested to be non-toxic to cells, which is a requirement for application in biological systems.4. Hydrogel-based actuatorsHydrogels are soft materials and show a large volume change depending on various environmental parameters. Therefore, hydrogel-based actuators can generate manifold developments in microfluidics, biotechnology, and chemical and medical engineering.113,114 The poor mechanical properties remain the largest barrier to traditional synthetic hydrogels for extensive practical applications, such as tissue scaffolds. Microgel-reinforced hydrogels, as an example, exhibit dramatic enhancement in mechanical strength and toughness.115 The potential development of polymer hydrogels in terms of fast stimuli-responsiveness and superior mechanical properties has recently been highlighted.1164.1 Novel materials for hydrogel-based actuatorsChemically actuated hydrogels share a unique feature with living systems: they are both driven by their ability to convert chemical energy into a mechanical response. However, macroscopic applications of hydrogels are limited due to the slow response rate of these materials. This problem has been overcome by developing materials at micrometre-length-scales, as the diffusion kinetics are related to the square of the size of the smallest dimensions of the gel.117 Microgel cross-linked hydrogels (MCG) are featured with both fast response rate and large volume change ratio to environmental stimuli. The cooperative function of all the fast shrinking microgels, the fast collapse of the grafted dangling chains on the microgel surfaces and the 3D interconnected water transportation channels between the microgels and polymeric networks inside the MCG make the hydrogels respond fast to the environmental temperature change.118Stimuli-responsive polymer microgels can be produced with exquisite control using droplet microfluidics; however, in existing methods, the droplet templating is strongly coupled to the material synthesis, because droplet solidification usually occurs through rapid polymerization immediately after the microfluidic droplet formation. This circumstance limits independent control of the material properties and the morphology of the resulting microgel particles. To overcome this limitation, sensitive polymer microgels were produced from pre-fabricated precursor polymers. Microfluidic devices were used to emulsify semidilute solutions of cross-linkable PNIPAAm and solidify the drops via polymer-analogous gelation. This approach separates the polymer synthesis from the particle gelation and allows each to be controlled independently, thus enabling to form monodisperse, thermo-responsive microgel particles with well-controlled composition and functionality. In addition, the microfluidic templating allows formation of complex particle morphologies such as hollow gel shells, anisotropic microgels, or multi-layered microgel capsules.119Magnetic-field-sensitive gels, called ferrogels, were prepared by a two-step procedure in which the first step requires synthesis of the hydrogel and during the second step magnetite particles were formed in the hydrogel.120 Tuneable magnetic nanoparticles embedded in cylindrical hydrogel materials are feasible for guided actuation via controlled modulation of oscillating magnetic field and frequency. Ferromagnetic nanoparticles (Fe3O4) encapsulated within a thermo-sensitive polymer network (PNIPAM) were polymerized inside 1.5 mm diameter capillary tubes. Inside alternating magnetic fields the polymer monolith quickly bends along the longitudinal axis.121 Poly(ferrocenylsilane)-based organometallic gels and hydrogels are a novel class of redox-responsive materials.122 Rheoreversible gels, magnetic gels, and “peelable” gels were investigated for use on artwork to solve the removal problem.123A new light-responsive PNIPAAm hydrogel nanocomposite incorporating glycidyl methacrylate functionalized graphene oxide (GO-GMA) instead of metallic nanoparticle fillers was described. Results show that such a nanocomposite hydrogel can undergo a large volumetric change in response to IR light illumination, due to the highly efficient photothermal conversion of GO-GMA. It also exhibits significantly larger water uptake compared to conventional PNIPAAm hydrogel by 3 times. Based on the developed IR-responsive nanocomposite hydrogel, a microvalve was realized that controls the fluidic flow within a microfluidic channel through remote IR light actuation.124 Another approach to fabricate reversible self-bending actuators utilizing a photo-triggered pH jump reaction was recently developed. A photo-initiated proton-releasing agent of o-nitrobenzaldehyde (NBA) was successfully integrated into bilayer hydrogels. The NBA-integrated bilayer gels demonstrated quick proton release upon UV irradiation, allowing the pH within the gel to decrease below the volume phase transition pH in 30 s. Such gels can be potentially applied in the fields of mechanical actuators, controlled encapsulation and drug release, robotics and microfluidic technologies because control over autonomous motion by both physical and chemical signals is essential as a programmable system for real biomedical and nanotechnological applications.125 A new responsive nanocomposite material consisting of a PNIPAAm hydrogel and “super-cross-linking” silica nanoparticles was prepared by mixing both components in solution, spin-coating a thin film, and photocross-linking by UV irradiation.126Stimuli-responsive nanocomposites composed of functional nanoparticles that are embedded within polymer matrices have begun to attract much attention as a new generation of mechanically-adaptive materials. These systems exhibit properties that exploit the influence of the filler beyond static mechanical reinforcement. The underlying mechanisms of these new nanomaterials typically involve an external stimulus that impacts the composite material, altering its bulk mechanics.127 The move toward sustainability and efficiency in nearly every field calls for dynamic materials that can harvest energy from and adapt to a changing environment. The recently developed, widely applicable strategy for adaptive surface design that integrates two rarely associated categories of materials – nanostructured surfaces and hydrogels – into a hybrid architecture was highlighted.128 The nanostructure arrays (hydrogel-actuated integrated responsive systems, HAIRS) provide unique topographic patterns that confer wetting, optical, and many other functions but on their own are generally static; by embedding them in a layer of responsive hydrogel, the mechanical forces generated within the swelling/contracting gel were channelled to reversibly reconfigure the nanostructures in response to stimuli (Fig. 22). Since the sensing and responding components are structurally distinct, they can each be programmed independently to match potentially almost any type of environmental change with almost any type of output. Fig. 22  HAR structures can either be suspended in hydrogel (not attached to the substrate, bottom left) or attached to the substrate (bottom right) allowing for two different actuation systems (HAIRS-1 and HAIRS-2). Reprinted from P. Kim, L. D. Zarzar, X. He, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 15, 236,128 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier. This procedure allows hydrogels to be precisely positioned in a suspended state on high-aspect-ratio (HAR) micropillar structures giving rise to significant gel expansion without the surface constraint that typically results from traditional patterning methods in which the gel is attached to the basal surface. The bending angle and actuation direction of microposts are shown to depend on their relative lateral positions (i.e., centre versus edge) within the swelling gel, thus providing a means to direct the movement of post structures with a high degree of tunability. Such patterned responsive hydrogels that incorporate chemical, optical, and catalytic or enzymatic functions will provide great opportunities to develop multicomponent chemical reaction, sensing, and diagnostic systems.129,130 Based on such systems a novel chemomechanical hybrid actuation system was developed that enables pH-responsive reversible motion of microstructures in liquid. Inspired by biological actuators, the system is a composite of passive structural skeletal elements put in motion by a poly(AAc-co-AAm) hydrogel muscle that swells and contracts in response to chemical signals.131 Such procedures orchestrate coordinated actuation of the microbristle and make it possible to create elaborate reconfigurable micropatterns, such as opening/closing microflorets and microtraps.132 Further hybrid polymer actuator arrays based on environmentally responsive hydrogel and actuatable optical microstructures that are designed to reversibly switch optical properties in response to the environment were developed. Arrays of micrometre-scale plates were patterned by deep reactive ion etching of silicon which served as master structures for replica moulding in PDMS. UV-curable epoxy was cast in a metal-sputtered PDMS mould to transfer a thin metal film onto each microplate to form a micromirror array. A polyelectrolyte hydrogel, such as poly(AAm-co-AAc), was patterned on the micromirror array and acted as an artificial muscle, bending the micromirrors in response to the change in humidity or pH. Such hybrid systems showed reversible switching between high transmittance (low reflectivity) and low transmittance (high reflectivity) without the aid of external power.1334.2 Hydrogel-based microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)Hydrogel-based valves have several advantages compared to common valves. Highly miniaturized valves are still showing a distinctive pressure resistance without a leakage flow. Furthermore, the valves are highly particle tolerant. Due to the manifold sensitivities of hydrogels a number of automatic sensor-actuator functions can be obtained.134 However, such functions can only be realized successfully, if cross-sensitivities caused by the composition of the process media or environmental parameters are considered.One of the major limitations in the use of hydrogels in stimuli-responsive applications is the diffusion rate-limited transduction of signals. This can be obviated by engineering interconnected pores in the polymer structure to form capillary networks in the matrix and by downscaling the size of hydrogels to significantly decrease diffusion paths.135 Beebe et al. elucidated the potentials of hydrogels in the fabrication of flow control devices in the format of smart channels and valves.136 The hydrogels used in the fabrication of these flow modulators typically respond to pH or temperature alterations in the environment and (ideally) reversibly actuate flow through the microfluidic device. West and colleagues have developed nanocomposite hydrogels demonstrating dramatic changes in size and shape when exposed to specific wavelengths of light.137 The use of light as a stimulus is particularly attractive since it affords accurate spatial tuning of exposure to photochemical stimuli.138 Further, microfluidic systems can be engineered that are responsive to ambient glucose levels.139Microvalves can be used in microfluidic processors due to their capability of miniaturization combined with other advantages like a small dead volume, a simple set-up and the integrability into microsystems. The used hydrogel actuators show a good chemical and long-term resistance. The application potential of the valves is limited by two special circumstances. The switch behaviour of the hydrogel actuators is a diffusion controlled process. Thus, switch frequencies of >10 Hz are difficult to realize. Hence, hydrogel-based microvalves cannot be used in highly dynamic applications. The second limitation results from the fact that hydrogels need the direct contact with the process medium as the swelling agent. The development of hydrogel-based microvalves will hence be in two directions.140 In automatic microvalves the hydrogel can act as an integrated actuator-sensor. In this kind of application a critical concentration, e.g. nutrient broth for cell cultivation, can be kept constant by opening or shut-off while maintaining a threshold value. Secondly electronically controllable microvalves as toggle elements for microfluidic processors can be developed. By appropriately combining these microvalves different operations can be realized. Due to their properties hydrogel-based microvalves are supposed for the handling of small liquid volumes as well as liquids containing particles. The activation by a thin organic photoelectric film that controls the expansion and shrinkage of a pH-sensitive HEMA-AAc hydrogel actuator is the key feature to fabricate a light driven microvalve.141 Another design of a mechanically flexible diaphragm-based microvalve actuator employs a reservoir of the thermally responsive hydrogel PNIPAAm and a conductive nanocomposite polymer heater element. Shrinking of the hydrogel under the application of heat supplied by the flexible heater, or the removal of this thermal energy by turning off the heater, forces the diaphragm to move.142Polymeric micropumps based on the temperature-sensitive hydrogel PNIPAAm can be designed in two ways. The diffusion-based micropump contains a photopatterned monolithic actuator, which is placed within the pump chamber, and provides a valveless single layer set-up. The diffusion micropump is intended for low performance applications and can operate in two modes: peristaltic or pulsatile. The second type, a displacement pump, provides a higher performance. The pump comprises a microgel-based actuator, which is placed within a separate actuator layer, and active microvalves.143 The actuation of micropumps is utilizing the bending behaviour of hydrogel films under asymmetric solvent-stimulus. The micropump could absorb and discharge fluid reversibly by simply alternating solvent composition.144 The further approach can be extended to polymeric large-scale integrated MEMS based on a stimuli-responsive polymer. These devices provide a simple single layer set-up and allow simultaneous but individual control of a large number of random elements.145 Multifunctional responsive gel membranes present a new and promising platform for the development of “smart” devices for bioseparation, biosensors, and “smart” drug release. These membranes combine functions of stimuli-responsive control and regulation of the mass transport with a range of properties such as storage, catalysis of chemical reactions, antimicrobial activity, and optical signal transduction. Recent developments have been highlighted.41A micromixer which can control mixing with responsive hydrogel actuators to modulate mixing between two adjacent fluids dependent on the chemistries of the fluid was developed. This is achieved by the responsive hydrogels swelling or contracting under different stimuli, which alters the mixing between the two fluids.146 Also an autonomously-triggered on-chip microfluidic cooling device that utilizes thermo-responsive hydrogels to adapt to local environmental temperatures was prepared. An external rotating magnetic stirrer couples with an in situ fabricated nickel impeller in these centrifugal-based microfluidic cooling devices to recirculate cooler water. Temperature-responsive hydrogels, which exhibit volumetric expansion and contraction, are integrated at the axle of the impeller.147There has been increasing interest in integrated microfluidic systems because performing biological and chemical laboratory tasks on a single chip is appealing. One straightforward approach to constructing these “lab on chips” (LOC) is to fabricate individual components and to assemble them for desired functionalities. As the functionalities of the microfluidic systems become increasingly complicated, more functional components and relevant controls need to be integrated on a miniaturized chip, especially when a closed loop is needed for autonomous functionality. Instead, an emerging approach is to incorporate stimuli-responsive hydrogels directly into microfluidics to reduce the system complexity. Due to the ability of the hydrogels to transduce stimuli into mechanical actions in response to their surrounding aqueous environment, hydrogel-based microfluidic elements can act as both sensors and actuators simultaneously, alleviating the requirement of most controls and even power sources. This provides microfluidic systems with autonomous functionalities.148 A new concept of LOC which is based on fluidic microchemomechanical systems (μCMS) has recently been presented. During the fabrication process, these μCMS are pre-programmed by monolithic integration of special active components. These active components are holding chemical energy that can be transformed at least once into mechanical energy and thus provide a timed and quantitative exactly defined fluidic function.149A number of researchers have recognized that 3D hydrogels may provide a viable alternative to two-dimensional surfaces for biomedical applications involving proteins and whole cells. The ideal hydrogel material for biochip applications would (i) be easily micropatterned, (ii) contain a high density of functional groups to allow incorporation of biomolecules, (iii) provide a passive background, thus preventing non-specific protein adsorption, (iv) be highly hydrated (semiwet or gel-like), thus mimicking the natural environment of cells and proteins, and (v) be optically transparent, allowing for unimpaired optical assessment of results.150 Thus, hydrogels would be excellent candidates. An oligonucleotide-polymer hybrid hydrogel displaying swelling response in a logical AND and OR fashion depending on specific stimuli by probe oligonucleotides was prepared. The hydrogel acts as a transducer of the specific recognition of DNA sequences into micro- and macro-scale mechanics. Input oligonucleotide probes induce the hydrogel swelling ratio at two signal levels (Fig. 23).151 Enzyme-responsive hydrogel particles for the controlled release of proteins can be prepared by functionalizing amino-end capped poly(ethylene glycol) acrylamide (PEGAAm). Hydrogel particles were functionalized with peptide actuators that cause charge-induced swelling and payload release when triggered enzymatically. Peptide-based actuators were designed to match the specificity of the target enzyme, while also matching the charge properties of the to-be released protein payload, thereby uniquely allowing for tuneable release profiles. These gels show a drug release mechanism, where guest molecules are only released upon the action of a specific protease. The release can be controlled by matching the charge on the peptide actuator to the charge on the payload protein.152 Further the preparation of enzyme-responsive PEGAAm hydrogel microparticles functionalized by solid phase synthesis with new branched peptide actuators was described. Branched peptide actuators provide enhanced charge density and overcome electrostatic screening at physiological ionic strength when compared to linear ones which do not show triggered swelling under these conditions. Particle swelling was induced by enzymatic hydrolysis which caused a change in the charge balance of the branched peptide actuators from zwitterionic (neutral) to cationic.153 Fig. 23  (A) Sequences of the oligonucleotides integrated as cross-linkers in the hydrogel (A1 and A2) and probes (P1 and P2) used for inducing readjustment of swelling in a Boolean way. The A1–A2 pair is designed with base pair complementarity in two distinct regions (yellow). (B) Schematic illustration of interactions between oligonucleotide cross-links in A1–A2 hydrogel and complementary probes inducing readjustment of the hydrogel swelling monitored by the interferometric technique. Reproduced from ref. 151. A variety of previous studies have used the ligand-binding capability of proteins to design hydrogels that change their cross-linking density in response to stimuli. However, these materials generally exhibit a relatively small dynamic response, with limited control over response characteristics. An alternative approach is to exploit the ability of proteins to undergo nanometre-scale conformational changes in response to stimuli. Novel protein-based hydrogel materials that undergo tuneable, reversible dynamic responses with a wide dynamic range (volume decreases to 25–90% of initial volume) were prepared. These materials also undergo tuneable, reversible changes in optical transparency (optical transparency decreases to 35–100% of initial optical transparency), and this phenomenon is used as a mechanism for label-free biosensing. Most proteins bind to specific ligands with high affinity, and several protein-based dynamic hydrogels have been developed based on reversible protein–ligand interactions, including protein–saccharide, antibody–antigen and protein–small molecule interactions. In these systems the protein–ligand interaction constitutes a reversible cross-link in the network, and a change in the protein–ligand interaction induces a rearrangement that changes the distribution of cross-link points. This molecular rearrangement ultimately leads to changes in network properties, including swelling and mechanical properties.154A continuously growing area of controlled and tuneable transport and separation of biomolecules and drugs has recently attracted attention to the structures which can be referred to as stimuli-responsive porous hydrogel thin films. Because of spatial constraints, swelling/shrinking of the hydrogel films results in closing/opening (or vice versa) of the film’s pores. Such responsive systems can be used in the configuration of plane films or capsules. The combination of a low thickness (translating into a low hydrodynamic flow resistance and rapid response) with well-defined size and shape of pores (translating into better control of transport and separation), which can be closed, opened, or tuned by an external signal (allowing a large amplitude of changes in diffusivity of solutes in the thin film and a precise control of the pore size), makes these materials very attractive for a range of applications, such as molecular filtration, separation, drug delivery, sensors, and actuators.155 For example, inorganic nanoparticles, large molecules, and also polymers have been applied to prevent guest molecules from leaving the pore system.156 The opening of the valve is achieved by DNA strand melting at the specific melting temperature of the oligonucleotide.1574.3 Other hydrogel-based actuatorsBased on hydrogel technology using simple wet-chemical methods a high-density microlens array have been fabricated that can be tuned or switched by an external laser source. The fabrication technology is inexpensive, scalable, and rapid, in contrast to traditional micromoulding or photolithographic approaches.158,159 Adaptive liquid microlenses activated by stimuli-responsive hydrogels have been prepared.160 Liquid-based tuneable microlenses can be actuated by IR light. Multiple micropost structures, made of IR light-responsive hydrogel with entrapped gold nanoparticles, are photopatterned around a lens aperture. The volumetric change in the hydrogel, controlled by IR light, regulates the curvature of a liquid–liquid interface forming the microlens at the aperture and its focal length.161 A microlens array consisting of multiple liquid-based tuneable-focus microlenses omnidirectionally fabricated on a hemisphere resulted in a large field of view.162The fabrication of photopatterned actuators, composed of stimuli-responsive hydrogel bilayers made from NIPAAm, AAc, and PEGDA were described. The hydrogels were deposited by spin-coating and casting and were patterned by non-contact photolithography. By combining materials with optimal swelling responses, bilayer structures were triggered via changes in pH and ionic strength to actuate into 3D structures.163 Design of hollow 3D objects such as capsules and tubes is highly demanded for cell encapsulation, drug delivery and design of self-healing materials.164 Recently, the use of self-folding films that are able to form different 3D structures was suggested as a template-free alternative to the traditional template-based approaches.165 The main advantage of self-folding films is the possibility to transfer a pattern, created on the surface of the unfolded film, into the inner and outer walls of the folded 3D structure.166 The folding of rectangular stimuli-responsive hydrogel-based polymer bilayers with different aspect ratios and relative thicknesses placed on a substrate has been highlighted. It was found that long-side rolling dominates at high aspect ratios (ratio of length to width) when the width is comparable to the circumference of the formed tubes, which corresponds to a small actuation strain. Rolling from all sides occurs for higher actuation, namely when the width and length considerably exceed the deformed circumference. In the case of moderate actuation, when both the width and length are comparable to the deformed circumference, diagonal rolling is observed. Short-side rolling was observed very rarely and in combination with diagonal rolling.167The prototypical soft actuator (muscle) developed through the course of evolution. There is currently no technology that can replicate the balanced performance of muscle:168 it is simultaneously strong and fast, and enables a remarkable range of movements. Muscle-like contraction and dilation occur in ionic polymeric gels on changes in the acidity or salinity of a surrounding ionic solution, but actuation in macroscopic structures is mass-transport limited and typically slow. New designs use embedded pneumatic networks of channels in elastomers that inflate like balloons for actuation. A series of parallel chambers embedded in elastomers as repeating components was used. When pressurized, the channels expand in the regions that are most compliant or have the lowest stiffness.169To fabricate reversible, thermally and optically responsive actuators composites of PNIPAAm loaded with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) were utilized. With nanotube loading at concentrations of 0.75 mg mL−1, up to 5 times enhancement to the thermal response time of the nanotube-PNIPAAm hydrogel actuators was achieved caused by the enhanced mass transport of water molecules. The ability to obtain ultrafast NIR optical response in nanotube-PNIPAAm hydrogels under laser excitation was enabled by the strong absorption properties of nanotubes. The work opens the framework to design complex and programmable self-folding materials, such as cubes and flowers, with advanced built-in features, including tuneable response time as determined by the nanotube loading (Fig. 24).170 Fig. 24  Programmable cubes – a folding cube based on thermal-responsive actuators. (a) Fabrication scheme for folding cubes based on SWNT-PNIPAAm/LDPE bilayer actuators. (b) Cube folding by thermal actuation at 48 °C in water. (c) Cube reversibly unfolds by cooling down the water bath in which cube is immersed. Reprinted with permission from X. Zhang, C. L. Pint, M. H. Lee, B. E. Schubert, A. Jamshidi, K. Takei, H. Ko, A. Gillies, R. Bardhan, J. J. Urban, M. Wu, R. Fearing and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3239,170 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Hydrogels have long been proposed and investigated as artificial muscle materials.171 The principal problem with hydrogel actuators is their prohibitively slow actuation rate. Hydrogel volume transitions triggered by changes in temperature, pH and ionic strength involve the mass transport of solvent (water) into and out of the hydrogel. The water diffusion coefficient in hydrogels is typically 1–10 mm2 s−1 so that the equilibrium swelling time for millimetre-scale gels can be several hours.2 Hydrogel micro- and nanofibres are particularly promising for artificial muscles. Most attention has been given to hydrolysed polyacrylonitrile (PAN) gel fibres since they can be prepared from commercially available PAN by treatment with a strong base. Actuation strains of 20–100% have been achieved by changing the pH of the surrounding solution172 with response times of 5–10 s.173 The actuation of a single hydrogel nanofibre was measured for the first time by AFM. The actuation stress generated was comparable to that produced by the skeletal muscle and the actuation rate was significantly increased by the nano-scale dimensions of the fibre. The pH-induced actuation force generated by individual PAAc nanofibres when held at increasing constant pre-strains was measured. The actuation stress generated was similar in magnitude to that produced by the skeletal muscle (appr. 300 kPa).174 The fluidic McKibben artificial muscle is one of the best biomimetic actuators, exhibiting static and dynamic behaviour in close analogy with the skeletal muscle. It is also known that the McKibben muscle can combine this analogical behaviour with a high force on mass and on volume ratio. The working possibility of a small-size McKibben muscle for which a chemical activation mode is substituted in place of pneumatic energy, with the hope of deriving an original actuator for new applications in robotics and medicine was described.175 The advancement in polymer muscle-like actuator technologies is of immense importance in the development of biologically inspired designs for tissue substitutes where the mechanical robustness is combined with fast physico-chemical responsiveness, biocompatibility and electroactivity. The multiformability (films, fibres, tubules, etc.) and the multifunctionality (response to temperature, pH, electromagnetic excitation, etc.) of hydrogels make them a great candidate for electro-bio-active artificial implantable muscular fibres and as soft actuators for gentle micro-scale manipulations. Long, thin self-assembled hydrogel fibres with an aspect ratio greater than 105 (length/diameter) are electroactive and dynamically tuneable under low applied electric field (as low as 500 V m−1).176 Using epoxy hydrogels with the addition of fibre reinforcement as a self-actuating fibre reinforced polymer composite can improve the structural performance whilst maintaining the actuation potential of the system.177Cooling as a primary component of building operations is a key energy consumer. Recently it has been demonstrated how thermo-responsive hydrogels can rapidly and reversibly assist surface cooling through a sweating-type mechanism that avoids formation of diffusion-limiting top layers as observed for conventional polymers. Surface temperature reductions of up to 20 °C under tropic solar irradiance were attained through coating with a simple, 3 mm thick sandwiched gel layer and sustained cooling for one full day (Fig. 25).178 Fig. 25  (a) Thermo-responsive polymer sandwiched between a mechanical support layer (bottom, PVC foil) and a nanoporous top membrane. (b) Model houses with roofs covered with conventional (left) and thermo-responsive hydrogels (right). (c) Infrared pictures of the two houses taken during irradiation experiments modelling sub-tropic, dry conditions. The enhanced cooling is best visible at intermediate irradiation time (60 min). Reprinted from A. C. C. Rotzetter, C. M. Schumacher, S. B. Bubenhofer, R. N. Grass, L. C. Gerber, M. Zeltner and W. J. Stark, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5352,178 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Using sensitive hydrogels a micromachined drug delivery device that is wirelessly operated using radiofrequency magnetic fields for implant applications could be fabricated. The controlled release from the drug reservoir of the device is achieved with the microvalves of a PNIPAAm thermo-responsive hydrogel that are actuated with a wireless resonant heater, which is activated only when the field frequency is tuned to the resonant frequency of the heater circuit.179 An easy setup to fabricate, thermally-actuated, self-regulated hydrogel valves for flow control in pneumatically driven, microfluidic systems was described.180 A similar approach could be used for the development and optimization of a low flow open-loop infusion device for continuous delivery of protein therapeutics. Specifically, a non-electronic polymer device is actuated with responsive hydrogels to infuse at 2 μL h−1 for 12 h. Hydrogel actuators transduce a chemical signal (change in pH of the local environment) into a mechanical response (swelling) generating the pressure to drive the infusion. The hydrogel actuators are separated from the drug reservoir by an elastomeric impermeable membrane. As the hydrogel actuators expand, the expansion deflects the flexible membrane down and reduces the volume of the drug reservoir causing the infusion of drug through the needle that is the only outlet for the reservoir.181In most applications, environmentally responsive hydrogels are used to create an isotropic volume change or 1D motion by constraining the hydrogel in the other two directions. Actuator designs are demonstrated that can generate a variety of shape changes by carefully patterning responsive hydrogels on a non-responsive hydrogel matrix.182 A novel temperature-sensitive hydrogel with fast deswelling and swelling rates was prepared from a NIPAAm monomer mixture with PVP and its lightly cross-linked counterpart (so-called polyvinyl-polypyrrolidone, PVPP). The PVP worked as a porogen for the polymerization-induced phase separation of the hydrogel while the PVPP microgels were used as a pore-structure modifier. The hydrogel, in the form of a layer, was laminated with an acrylic resin layer to make a temperature-sensitive flap which can work as a bimetallic-like actuator with fast responses.183Providing realistic impressions about a virtual ambient for interaction with human’s auditory, visual, and tactile perception is one of the core challenges of modern imaging systems. However, particularly tactile displays with high spatial resolution implemented as a large-scale integrated microelectromechanical system are not yet realized. A multimodal display with thousands of actuator pixels, which generates both visual and tactile impressions of a virtual surface has been prepared. The fully polymeric, monolithically integrated device consists of an actuator array made from PNIPAAm. Controlling the actuator temperature via an optoelectrothermic interface between an upper and lower temperature the actuator can be switched from the swollen to the shrunken state (volume change up to 90%) in several hundred milliseconds.184 Finally a concept of a microfluidic central processing unit (CPU) which shows remarkable similarities to early electronic Von Neumann microprocessors was developed. It combines both control and execution units and, moreover, the complete power supply on a single chip and introduces the decision-making ability regarding chemical information into fluidic integrated circuits (ICs). As a consequence of this system concept, the ICs process chemical information in a completely self-controlled and energy self-sustaining manner.1855. ConclusionsResponsive polymers networks are interesting materials for a variety of different applications due to the fact that they can perform a large volume transition. However, the swelling transition is a diffusion limited process. Thus, the decrease of the feature size (e.g. in thin layers or as particles) is an appropriate way to create structures with a reasonable response time. The possibility of patterning responsive polymer networks makes them useful for application in microsystem technology as well as in catalysis. The ability to optimize the integration of these polymers is critical for the fabrication and development of platforms that harness the unique abilities of responsive polymer networks.In order to meet the requirements for hydrogel applications tailor-made polymers were developed. Smart hydrogels with defined degree of swelling and transition temperature were synthesized. Consistent down-scaling of the gel size resulted in fast smart gels with sufficient response times. The experiments have shown that it is possible to use sensitive polymer gels as material for flow control in micro-valves, automatic valves, flow sorters or pumps, which can be switched by temperature, pH, different cosolvents, salts, etc. The utilization of hydrogels is not limited to their actuator properties only. While undergoing a phase transition drastic changes in the material properties occurs. Changes in volume or elastic modulus are applicable in sensors. Transducers can be based on different principles like piezo resistive devices. Such devices have great potential as hydrogel based sensors in liquid analysis. Responsive hydrogels themselves could be used for biocatalyst immobilization as well as for in situ generation and immobilization of transition metal nanoparticles. Thus, interesting catalytic properties were obtained. The stimuli-responsive behaviour of the hydrogel matrix was utilized to control catalyst accessibility and activity.ReferencesD. Kuckling, A. Döring, F. Krahl and K.-F. Arndt, in Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference, ed. K. Matyjaszewski and M. Möller,  2012, vol. 8, p. 377 Search PubMed .T. Tanaka and D. J. Fillmore, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 70, 1214 CrossRef CAS .E. Cabane, X. Zhang, K. Langowska, C. G. Palivan and W. Meier, Biointerphases, 2012, 7, 9 CrossRef CAS .C. d. l. H. Alarcón, S. Pennadam and C. Alexander, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 276 RSC .P. Bawa, V. Pillay, Y. E. Choonara and L. C. du Toit, Biomed. Mater., 2009, 4, 022001 CrossRef .J. Hu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5933 RSC .O. Azzaroni, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 3225 CrossRef CAS .H. Kuroki, I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2012, 42, 343 CrossRef CAS .Topical issue on Facilitated Synthesis, Chem. Rev.,  2009, 109, issue no. 2.P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301 RSC .M. R. Buchmeiser, Polymeric Materials in Organic Synthesis and Catalysis, VCH-Wiley,  2003 Search PubMed .J. Lu and P. H. Toy, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 815 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Bergbreiter, J. Tian and C. Hongfa, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 530 CrossRef CAS .S. Ikegami and H. Hamamoto, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 583 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Bergbreiter, B. L. Case, Y.-S. Liu and J. W. Caraway, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 6053 CrossRef CAS .K. Haraguchi, Macromol. Symp., 2007, 256, 120 CrossRef CAS .K. Haraguchi, K. Murata and T. Takehisa, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 385 CrossRef CAS .B. Corain, K. Jerabek, P. Centomo and P. Canton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 959 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Mohan, K. Lee, T. Premkumar and K. E. Geckeler, Polymer, 2007, 48, 158 CrossRef CAS .K. Samba Sivudu, N. Mallikarjuna Reddy, M. Nagendra Prasad, K. Mohana Raju, Y. Murali Mohan, J. S. Yadav, G. Sabitha and D. Shailaja, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 295, 10 CrossRef .H. Hamamoto, Y. Suzuki, H. Takahashi and S. Ikegami, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 2685 CrossRef CAS .J. Yun, J. S. Im, A. Oh, D.-H. Jin, T.-S. Bae, Y.-S. Lee and H.-I. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 276 CrossRef CAS .N. Sahiner, O. Ozay, E. Inger and N. Aktas, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10105 CrossRef CAS .N. Sahiner, O. Ozay, N. Aktas, E. Inger and J. He, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15250 CrossRef CAS .N. Sahiner, H. Ozay, O. Ozay and N. Aktas, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 137 CrossRef CAS .F. Rodríguez-Llansola, B. Escuder and J. F. Miravet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11478 CrossRef .J. Araki and K. Ito, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1456 RSC .B. Léger, S. Menuel, A. Ponchel, F. Hapiot and E. Monflier, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 1269 CrossRef .D. Díaz Díaz, D. Kühbeck and R. J. Koopmans, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 427 RSC .R. A. Sheldon, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 1289 CrossRef CAS .J.-F. Lutz and H. G. Börner, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 1 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Shakya, H. Sami, A. Srivastava and A. Kumar, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 459 CrossRef CAS .A. Harada, K. Johnin, A. Kawamura and K. Kono, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 5942 CrossRef CAS .H. Wack, A. Nellesen, K. Schwarze-Benning and G. Deerberg, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 519 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, J. L. Mynar, M. Yoshida, E. Lee, M. Lee, K. Okuro, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Nature, 2010, 463, 339 CrossRef CAS .D. Wandera, S. R. Wickramasinghe and S. M. Husson, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 357, 6 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhao, S. Nie, M. Tang and S. Sun, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1499 CrossRef CAS .F. P. Nicoletta, D. Cupelli, P. Formoso, G. De Filpo, V. Coletta and A. Gugliuzza, Membranes, 2012, 2, 134 CrossRef CAS .D. Kuckling, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 881 CAS .Q. Yang, N. Adrus, F. Tomicki and M. Ulbricht, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2783 RSC .I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 241 CrossRef CAS .N. Bruns and J. C. Tiller, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 45 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Lu, J. Zhou and J. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3687 CrossRef CAS .R. Pelton and T. Hoare, Microgels and Their Synthesis: An Introduction, in Microgel Suspensions: Fundamentals and Applications, ed. A. Fernandez-Nieves, H. M. Wyss, J. Mattsson and D. A. Weitz, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2011 Search PubMed .A. Pich and W. Richtering, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 234, 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Mendrek, A. Mendrek, H.-J. Adler, A. Dworak and D. Kuckling, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9161 CrossRef CAS .M. Karg and T. Hellweg, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8714 RSC .M. Ballauff and Y. Lu, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1815 CrossRef CAS .S. Bhattacharya, F. Eckert, V. Boyko and A. Pich, Small, 2007, 3, 650 CrossRef CAS .A. Ferández-Barbero, I. J. Suárez, B. Sierra-Martín, A. Fernández-Nieves, F. Javier de las Nieves, M. Marquez, J. Rubio-Retama and E. López-Cabarcos, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 147–148, 88 CrossRef .J. B. Thorne, G. J. Vine and M. J. Snowdon, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 625 CAS .N. Welsch, M. Ballauff and Y. Lu, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 234, 129 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 767 CrossRef CAS .X. Jiang, D. Xiong, Y. An, P. Zheng, W. Zhang and L. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2812 CrossRef CAS .N. Sahiner, S. Butun and P. Ilgin, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 381, 74–84 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, J. Yuan, F. Polzer, M. Drechsler and J. Preussner, Nano, 2010, 4, 7078 CAS .K. Okeyoshi, D. Suzuki, A. Kishimura and R. Yoshida, Small, 2011, 7, 311 CrossRef CAS .K. Okeyoshi, D. Suzuki, A. Kishimura and R. Yoshida, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1539 CrossRef CAS .J. Xu, F. Zeng, S. Wu, X. Liu, C. Hou and Z. Tong, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 265704 CrossRef .D. Takahashi, T. Hamada and T. Izumi, Polym. Bull., 2012, 68, 1777 CrossRef CAS .S. Schachschal, H.-J. Adler, A. Pich, S. Wetzel, A. Matura and K.-H. van Pee, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 693 CAS .G. U. Marten, T. Gelbrich and A. M. Schmidt, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6, 922 CrossRef .Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, B. Tang, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 976 CrossRef CAS .A. Baeissa, N. Dave, B. D. Smith and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3594 CAS .E. Tian, J. Wang, Y. Zheng, Y. Song, L. Jianga and D. Zhua, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1116 RSC .R. Xuan, Q. Wu, Y. Yinb and J. Ge, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3672 RSC .Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Li, J. Xie, Y. Li, S. Liang, Z. Tian, C. Li, Z. Wang, T. Wang, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1264 RSC .Z. Pan, J. Ma, J. Yan, M. Zhou and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2018 RSC .V. Schulz, G. Gerlach, M. Guenther, J. J. Magda and F. Solzbacher, Tech. Mess., 2010, 77, 179 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, J. Markowski and J. Sabarinathan, Opt. Express, 2009, 21802 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Vasylevska, A. A. Karasyov, S. M. Borisov and C. Krause, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 387, 2131 CrossRef CAS .N. Griffete, H. Frederich, A. Maître, M. M. Chehimi, S. Ravaine and C. Mangeney, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13052 RSC .E. Kharlampieva, V. Kozlovskaya, O. Zavgorodnya, G. D. Lilly, N. A. Kotov and V. V. Tsukruk, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 800 RSC .Q. Luo, Y. Guan, Y. Zhang and M. Siddiq, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 4120 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Joseph, N. Dave and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 733 CAS .D. Arunbabu, A. Sannigrahi and T. Jana, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 2592 RSC .W. Hong, W. Li, X. Hu, B. Zhao, F. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17193 RSC .Z. E. Jacobi, L. Li and J. Liu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 704 RSC .H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, J. Shen, H. Bao, L. Peng, X. Yang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1051 RSC .N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668 CrossRef CAS .G. Lin, S. Chang, H. Hao, P. Tathireddy, M. Orthner, J. Magda and F. Solzbacher, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 332 CrossRef CAS .S. Tierney, S. Volden and B. T. Stokke, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2034 CrossRef CAS .W. Wu, T. Zhou, M. Aiello and S. Zhou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2603 CrossRef CAS .G. Ye and X. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 772 CrossRef CAS .G. Zenkl, T. Mayr and I. Klimant, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8, 146 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Ehrick, M. R. Luckett, S. Khatwani, Y. Wei, S. K. Deo, L. G. Bachas and S. Daunert, Macromol. Biosci., 2009, 9, 864 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Farooqi, A. Khan and M. Siddiq, Polym. Int., 2011, 60, 1481 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Heo, H. Shibata, T. Okitsu, T. Kawanishi and S. Takeuchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13399 CrossRef CAS .H. Shibata, Y. J. Heo, T. Okitsu, Y. Matsunaga, T. Kawanishi and S. Takeuchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17894 CrossRef CAS .S. Tierney, B. M. H. Falch, D. R. Hjelme and B. T. Stokke, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3630 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Sorrell and M. J. Serpe, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402, 2385 CrossRef CAS .B. Vilozny, A. Schiller, R. A. Wessling and B. Singaram, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7589 RSC .C. Ancla, V. Lapeyre, I. Gosse, B. Catargi and V. Ravaine, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12693 CrossRef CAS .M. Honda, K. Kataoka, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8349 CrossRef CAS .W. Wu, N. Mitra, E. C. Y. Yan and S. Zhou, Nano, 2010, 4, 4831 CAS .X. Zhang, Y. Guan and Y. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 92 CrossRef CAS .M. Guenther, D. Kuckling, C. Corten, G. Gerlach, J. Sorber, G. Suchaneck and K.-F. Arndt, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 97 CrossRef CAS .M. Guenther, G. Gerlach, C. Corten, D. Kuckling, J. Sorber and K.-F. Arndt, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 132, 471 CrossRef CAS .V. Sridhar and K. Takahata, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 155, 58 CrossRef CAS .A. Matsumoto, N. Sato, T. Sakata, R. Yoshida, K. Kataoka and Y. Miyahara, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4372 CrossRef CAS .S. Tierney, D. R. Hjelme and B. T. Stokke, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5086 CrossRef CAS .M. Zourob, K. G. Ong, K. Zeng, F. Mouffouk and C. A. Grimes, Analyst, 2007, 132, 338 RSC .G. Ye and X. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 707 CrossRef CAS .G. Ye, C. Yang and X. Wang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1332 CrossRef CAS .T. Endo, R. Ikeda, Y. Yanagida and T. Hatsuzawa, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 611, 205 CrossRef CAS .I. Tokarev, I. Tokareva, V. Gopishetty, E. Katz and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1412 CrossRef CAS .N. Griffete, H. Frederich, A. Maître, C. Schwob, S. Ravaine, B. Carbonnier, M. M. Chehimi and C. Mangeney, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 364, 18 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yuan, Z. Li, Y. Liu, J. Gao, Z. Pan and Y. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 303 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wu, X. Hu, C. Tao, Y. Li, J. Liu, C. Yang, D. Shen and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5452 RSC .X. Hu, G. Li, M. Li, J. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Gao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 575 CrossRef CAS .D. Ran, Y. Wang, X. Jia and C. Nie, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 723, 45 CrossRef CAS .N. Adrus and M. Ulbricht, Polymer, 2012, 53, 4359 CrossRef CAS .A. Richter, K.-F. Arndt, S. Howitz and D. Kuckling, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 99, 451 CrossRef CAS .D. Kuckling and A. Richter, Responsive Polymers in Microfuidic Devices, in Responsive Polymer Materials: Design and Application, ed. S. Minko, Blackwell, Ames,  2006, p. 147 Search PubMed .J. Hu, K. Hiwatashi, T. Kurokawa, S. M. Liang, Z. L. Wu and J. P. Gong, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7775 CrossRef CAS .A. Bin Imran, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, Polym. J., 2010, 42, 839 CrossRef CAS .J. M. G. Swann and A. J. Ryan, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 285 CrossRef CAS .L.-W. Xia, X.-J. Ju, J.-J. Liu, R. Xie and L.-Y. Chu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 349, 106 CrossRef CAS .S. Seiffert and D. A. Weitz, Polymer, 2010, 51, 5883 CrossRef CAS .T. Caykara, D. Yörük and S. Demirci, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 800 CrossRef CAS .S. Ghosh and T. Cai, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 415504 CrossRef .M. A. Hempenius, C. Cirmi, F. Lo Savio, J. Song and G. J. Vancso, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 772 CrossRef CAS .E. Carretti, M. Bonini, L. Dei, B. H. Berrie, L. V. Angelova, P. Baglioni and R. G. Weiss, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 751 CrossRef CAS .C.-W. Lo, D. Zhu and H. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5604 RSC .P. Techawanitchai, M. Ebara, N. Idota, T.-A. Asoh, A. Kikuchi and T. Aoyagi, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 2844 RSC .C. R. van den Brom, I. Anac, R. F. Roskamp, M. Retsch, U. Jonas, B. Menges and J. A. Preece, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4827 RSC .L. Hsu, C. Weder and S. J. Rowan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2812 RSC .P. Kim, L. D. Zarzar, X. He, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 15, 236 CrossRef CAS .L. D. Zarzar, P. Kim, M. Kolle, C. J. Brinker, J. Aizenberg and B. Kaehr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9356 CrossRef CAS .A. Sidorenko, T. Krupenkin and J. Aizenberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3841 RSC .L. D. Zarzar, P. Kim and J. Aizenberg, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1442 CrossRef CAS .P. Kim, L. D. Zarzar, X. Zhao, A. Sidorenko and J. Aizenberg, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 750 RSC .P. Kima, L. D. Zarzar, M. Khan, M. Aizenberg and J. Aizenberg, Proc. SPIE, 2011, 7927, 792705 CrossRef .Q. Yu, J. M. Bauer, J. S. Moore and D. J. Beebe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2589 CrossRef CAS .S. Chaterji, K. Kwon and K. Park, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1083 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Eddington and D. J. Beebe, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2004, 56, 199 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Sershen, G. A. Mensing, M. Ng, N. J. Halas, D. J. Beebe and J. L. West, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1366 CrossRef CAS .S. Lu and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2548 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Chu, Y. Li, J. H. Zhu, H. D. Wang and Y.-J. Liang, J. Controlled Release, 2004, 97, 43 CrossRef CAS .A. Richter, D. Kuckling, S. Howitz, T. Gehring and K.-F. Arndt, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2003, 12, 748 CrossRef .K. Al-Aribe and G. K. Knopf, Proc. SPIE, 2010, 7646, 764611 CrossRef .A. Li, A. Khosla, C. Drewbrook and B. L. Gray, Proc. SPIE, 2011, 7929, 79290G CrossRef .A. Richter, S. Klatt, G. Paschew and C. Klenke, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 613 RSC .Z. Xiong, X.-Z. Dong, W.-Q. Chen and X.-M. Duan, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 93, 447 CrossRef CAS .A. Richter and G. Paschew, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 979 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Prettyman and D. T. Eddington, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 722 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Agarwal, L. Dong, D. J. Beebe and H. Jiang, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 310 RSC .L. Dong and H. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1223 RSC .M. Allerdißen, R. Greiner and A. Richter, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2013, 81, 84 CrossRef .M. Zourob, J. E. Gough and R. V. Ulijn, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 655 CrossRef CAS .K. Gawel and B. T. Stokke, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4615 RSC .P. D. Thornton, R. J. Mart, S. J. Webb and R. V. Ulijn, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 821 RSC .T. O. McDonald, H. Qu, B. R. Saunders and R. V. Ulijn, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1728 RSC .Z. Sui, W. J. King and W. L. Murphy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1824 CrossRef CAS .I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3446 CrossRef CAS .D. P. Ferris, Y.-L. Zhao, N. M. Khashab, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1686 CrossRef CAS .A. Schlossbauer, S. Warncke, P. M. E. Gramlich, J. Kecht, A. Manetto, T. Carell and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4734 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim, M. J. Serpe and L. A. Lyon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1333 CrossRef CAS .C. Dorrer, O. Prucker and J. Rühe, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 456 CrossRef CAS .L. Dong, A. K. Agarwal, D. J. Beebe and H. Jiang, Nature, 2006, 442, 551 CrossRef CAS .X. Zeng and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 151101 CrossRef .X. Zeng and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 081111 CrossRef .N. Bassik, B. T. Abebe, K. E. Laflin and D. H. Gracias, Polymer, 2010, 51, 6093 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Esser-Kahn, S. A. Odom, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White and J. S. Moore, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5539 CrossRef CAS .L. Ionov, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 6786 RSC .J. H. Cho and D. H. Gracias, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4049 CrossRef CAS .G. Stoychev, S. Zakharchenko, S. Turcaud, J. W. C. Dunlop and L. Ionov, Nano, 2012, 5, 3925 Search PubMed .J. Madden, Science, 2007, 318, 1094 CrossRef CAS .F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 1930 CrossRef .X. Zhang, C. L. Pint, M. H. Lee, B. E. Schubert, A. Jamshidi, K. Takei, H. Ko, A. Gillies, R. Bardhan, J. J. Urban, M. Wu, R. Fearing and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3239 CrossRef CAS .P. Calvert, Polymer Gel Actuators: Fundamentals, in Biomedical Applications of Electroactive Polymer Actuators, ed. F. Carpi and E. Smela, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .K. Choe and K. J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 126, 165 CrossRef CAS .K. Choe, K. J. Kim, D. Kim, C. Manford, S. Heo and M. Shahinpoor, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2006, 17, 563 CrossRef CAS .A. Gestos, P. G. Whitten, G. G. Wallace and G. M. Spinks, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8082 RSC .B. Tondu, R. Emirkhanian, S. Mathé and A. Ricard, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 150, 124 CrossRef CAS .M. Bassil, M. Ibrahim and M. El Tahchi, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4833 RSC .J. A. Etches and I. P. Bond, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 045020 CrossRef .A. C. C. Rotzetter, C. M. Schumacher, S. B. Bubenhofer, R. N. Grass, L. C. Gerber, M. Zeltner and W. J. Stark, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5352 CrossRef CAS .S. Rahimi, E. H. Sarraf, G. K. Wong and K. Takahata, Biomed. Microdevices, 2011, 13, 267 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Z. Chen, M. Mauk, K.-S. Hong, M. Li, S. Yang and H. H. Bau, Biomed. Microdevices, 2005, 7, 313 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Eddington and D. J. Beebe, Biomed. Microdevices, 2005, 7, 223 CrossRef CAS .K. K. Westbrook and H. J. Qi, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2008, 19, 597 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, S. Kato and T. Anazawa, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, 2175 CrossRef CAS .G. Paschew, R. Körbitz and A. Richter, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2013, 82, 44 CrossRef CAS .R. Greiner, M. Allerdißen, A. Voigt and A. Richter, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 5034 RSC .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Artjom Döring	Artjom Doering is a scientific coworker in the research group of Prof. Kuckling at the University of Paderborn. He studied chemistry at the Dresden University of Technology and received his diploma in 2007. Afterwards he specialized in synthetic polymer chemistry by joining the group of Prof. Kuckling. He received his PhD degree from the University of Paderborn in 2012. His work is focused on the controlled synthesis of stimuli-responsive block copolymers for application in catalysis.
Wolfgang Birnbaum	Wolfgang Birnbaum currently works as a postdoctoral research fellow in the group of Prof. Kuckling. He studied chemistry at the Dresden University of Technology and obtained his diploma in polymer chemistry in 2007 followed by a PhD at the University of Paderborn under the supervision of Prof. Kuckling in 2011. The focus of his PhD thesis was on the preparation of functionalized stimuli-responsive polymers and their application in controlling the motility of motor proteins. His work involves the development of responsive polymers and hydrogels for applications in biotechnology and polymer resins for lightweight construction.
Dirk Kuckling	Dirk Kuckling is Professor of “Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry” at the Department of Chemistry of the University of Paderborn, Germany. He studied chemistry at Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany, and received his PhD degree in 1994 in the field of synthetic organic chemistry. In 1994 he joined the Institute for Macromolecular Chemistry of the Dresden University of Technology as a postdoc and started his own research group in 1995. From 2001–2002 he worked as a visiting assistant professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering at the Stanford University, USA. After his “Habilitation” in 2004 he was appointed in 2008 as a full professor at the University of Paderborn. The main focus of his work is the synthesis of novel functional polymers. For this purpose different polymerization techniques are used to prepare polymers with designed structure and functionality. Such polymers were applied as actuators and sensor materials for microfluidic and biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  TEM and histograms of 21.11 ± 4.60 (a) and 2.67 ± 0.97 nm Ag nanoparticles (b) in 4.50 and 13.00 mM MBA-cross-linked hydrogels, respectively. Reprinted from Y. M. Mohan, K. Lee, T. Premkumar and K. E. Geckeler, Polymer, 2007, 48, 158,19 Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  PNIPAAm–PW12O403− complex (upper left part); simplified structure of the PNIPAAm–inorganic complex network (upper right part); schematic representation of thermomorphic catalysis (lower part). Reprinted from H. Hamamoto, Y. Suzuki, H. Takahashi and S. Ikegami, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 2685,21 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM micrographs of TiO2/PVA/PAAc nanocomposite bulk hydrogel (left) and nanofibres (right), both with 3 wt% of TiO2. Reprinted from J. Yun, J. S. Im, A. Oh, D.-H. Jin, T.-S. Bae, Y.-S. Lee and H.-I. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2011, 176, 276,22 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photodegradation of CBB dye by the TiO2/PVA/PAAc bulk hydrogel (a) and nanofibre (b), both with 4 wt% of TiO2. Reprinted from J. Yun, J. S. Im, A. Oh, D.-H. Jin, T.-S. Bae, Y.-S. Lee and H.-I. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2011, 176, 276,22 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The removal of hydrogen-catalyst system during hydrolysis reaction by an external magnetic field, and (b) the control of H2 generation by an externally applied magnetic field on the hydrolysis of NaBH4. Reprinted from N. Sahiner, O. Ozay, E. Inger and N. Aktas, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10105,23 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic model for the reversible sol–gel transition of the L-proline functionalized low molecular weight gelator.26	 

 	Fig. 7  Polyrotaxane hydrogel-supported Ru nanoparticles as catalyst in the thermo-regulated hydrogenation of alkynes. Reprinted from B. Léger, S. Menuel, A. Ponchel, F. Hapiot and E. Monflier, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 1269,28 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Changes in equilibrium swelling degree of PNIPAAm gels containing different amounts of core–shell type bioconjugates (○ 0 μg, ● 80 μg, ▲ 150 μg, ■ 270 μg) (left); temperature dependence of enzymatic activity of core–shell type bioconjugates in PNIPAAm gels of different cross-linking density (● 2 mol%, ▲ 5 mol%, ■ 7 mol%) (right). Reprinted from A. Harada, K. Johnin, A. Kawamura and K. Kono, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 5942,33 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  SPM topography images (10 × 10 μm2) of an alginate membrane under water of pH > 5 (left) and pH < 4 (right). Reprinted from I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 241,41 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of the PNIPAAm–MWNT nanocomposite films (left part); schematic depiction of the reversible bioelectrocatalysis controlled by temperature (upper right part); CV spectra of NADH at the nanocomposite film modified Au electrode at 25 (curve a) and 45 °C (curve b) as well as temperature-induced changes of the oxidation peak current of NADH (lower right part). Reprinted from X. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Lu, J. Zhou and J. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3687,43 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of the PGMA-co-PNIPAAm microgel particles loaded with gold nanoparticles (upper part); high resolution TEM image of the microgel/gold composite (lower part a); conversion of 4-nitrophenole during the gold catalysed reduction with sodium borohydride at temperatures below and above LCST of the microgel (lower part b). Reprinted from X. Jiang, D. Xiong, Y. An, P. Zheng, W. Zhang and L. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2812,54 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Cryo-TEM images of the gold nanorods with platinum tips within the thermo-responsive core–shell microgels (upper part); rate constant for the reduction of 4-nitrophenole as a function of the surface area of the nanoparticles (lower left part); Arrhenius plot of the rate constant corresponding to the temperature-dependent hydrodynamic radius of the microgel (lower right part). Reprinted with permission from Y. Lu, J. Yuan, F. Polzer, M. Drechsler and J. Preussner, Nano, 2010, 4, 7078,56 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Positively charged nanogel structure enhancing the uptake of platinum nanoparticles stabilized by an anionic surfactant (S180A); interconnected catalysis cycles of the photo-induced hydrogen generation. Reprinted from K. Okeyoshi, D. Suzuki, A. Kishimura and R. Yoshida, Small, 2011, 7, 311,57 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Temperature dependence of the Michaelis–Menten constant for the particle-immobilized and the free trypsin (left); proposed mechanism for the enhanced catalytic activity of the immobilized trypsin after exceeding LCST of the shell. Reprinted from G. U. Marten, T. Gelbrich and A. M. Schmidt, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6, 922.62	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic cross-sectional view of the hydrogel-based piezoresistive pH microsensor in three different configurations: (a) a relatively thick hydrogel layer (100 μm range) is mechanically constrained at the bottom of the holder, (b) bimorph-configuration with a thin hydrogel film directly bound to the bending plate, (c) a hydrogel sheet is clamped between a rigid grate and the chip; 1 hydrogel, 2 piezoresistor, 3 Si-substrate, 4 Si pressure sensor chip, 5 socket, 6 fluidic channel for solution inlet–outlet, 7 electrical interconnect, 8 measuring solution, 9 backside clamp, 10 rigid grate, 11 fluidic channel (optional). Reprinted with permission from V. Schulz, G. Gerlach, M. Guenther, J. J. Magda and F. Solzbacher, Piezoresistive pH Microsensors Based on Stimuli-Sensitive Polyelectrolyte Hydrogels, Tech. Mess., 2010, 77, 179, Copyright, © 2010 Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH.69	 

 	Fig. 16  Fabrication of the gold nanocrescent array. (a) SEM micrograph of the fabricated gold nanocrescent array structure. (b) SEM micrograph at a tilted angle of the developed photoresist thin film coated with gold. (c) Schematic of the fabrication process of the gold nanocrescents. Reprinted with permission from H. Jiang, J. Markowski and J. Sabarinathan, Near-infrared optical response of thin film pH-sensitive hydrogel coated on a gold nanocrescent array, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 21802.70	 

 	Fig. 17  Sensor-sensitivity detected using a digital camera (A) and a fluorescence gel documentation system (B) and its quantification (C). (D) The gel-sensitivity using 50 mL samples (previously in 1 mL). (E) Selectivity test with 1 μM concentrations of various metal ions in 1 mL samples. Reprinted with permission from N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and Juewen Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668,80 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Reversible changes of the colour/stopband of the PC hydrogel with relative humidity. (a) Photographs of the colour change of the PC hydrogel. (b) Reversible conversion of the stopband position of the PC hydrogel by alternately exposing to increasing and decreasing relative humidity conditions between 20% and 100%. Reproduced from ref. 65.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Reflective spectra of a 1D PC in different solvents. (b) Shift of the photonic stopband of a 1D PC in different solvents. (c) Photographs of a 1D PC in different solvents. Reproduced from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 20  Bragg diffraction spectra and fluorescence spectra (inset) of the QD-encoded DNA-responsive hydrogel photonic beads. The fluorescence spectra are the coding of the beads and the Bragg diffraction spectra are used for DNA detection. The dashed lines and solid lines are the Bragg diffraction spectra of the beads before and after multiplex label-free DNA detection. Reprinted from Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, B. Tang, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 976,63 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  Change in optical length of 8 mol% 3-PBA and 10 mol% DMAPAAm hydrogel versus time induced by stepwise increasing and decreasing glucose concentrations in PBS at 37 °C, pH = 7.4, and ionic strength of 155 mM. The glucose concentrations are indicated at the determined equilibrium lengths of the hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from S. Tierney, B. M. H. Falch, D. R. Hjelme and B. T. Stokke, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3630,90 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  HAR structures can either be suspended in hydrogel (not attached to the substrate, bottom left) or attached to the substrate (bottom right) allowing for two different actuation systems (HAIRS-1 and HAIRS-2). Reprinted from P. Kim, L. D. Zarzar, X. He, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 15, 236,128 Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Sequences of the oligonucleotides integrated as cross-linkers in the hydrogel (A1 and A2) and probes (P1 and P2) used for inducing readjustment of swelling in a Boolean way. The A1–A2 pair is designed with base pair complementarity in two distinct regions (yellow). (B) Schematic illustration of interactions between oligonucleotide cross-links in A1–A2 hydrogel and complementary probes inducing readjustment of the hydrogel swelling monitored by the interferometric technique. Reproduced from ref. 151.	 

 	Fig. 24  Programmable cubes – a folding cube based on thermal-responsive actuators. (a) Fabrication scheme for folding cubes based on SWNT-PNIPAAm/LDPE bilayer actuators. (b) Cube folding by thermal actuation at 48 °C in water. (c) Cube reversibly unfolds by cooling down the water bath in which cube is immersed. Reprinted with permission from X. Zhang, C. L. Pint, M. H. Lee, B. E. Schubert, A. Jamshidi, K. Takei, H. Ko, A. Gillies, R. Bardhan, J. J. Urban, M. Wu, R. Fearing and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3239,170 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Thermo-responsive polymer sandwiched between a mechanical support layer (bottom, PVC foil) and a nanoporous top membrane. (b) Model houses with roofs covered with conventional (left) and thermo-responsive hydrogels (right). (c) Infrared pictures of the two houses taken during irradiation experiments modelling sub-tropic, dry conditions. The enhanced cooling is best visible at intermediate irradiation time (60 min). Reprinted from A. C. C. Rotzetter, C. M. Schumacher, S. B. Bubenhofer, R. N. Grass, L. C. Gerber, M. Zeltner and W. J. Stark, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5352,178 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
