Silicon based tandem cells: novel photocathodes for hydrogen production  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP55198A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP55198A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12043-12050Silicon based tandem cells: novel photocathodes for hydrogen production

        
          
            W. 
            Calvet
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            E. 
            Murugasen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Klett
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            B. 
            Kaiser
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            W. 
            Jaegermann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Finger
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Hoch
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Blug
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            J. 
            Busse
          
        
      c
aSurface Science Division, Department of Materials Science, Technical University Darmstadt, Jovanka-Bontschits-Straße 2, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail: kaiser@surface.tu-darmstadt.de
bForschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Institut für Energie- und Klimaforschung, 52425 Jülich, Germany
cEvonik Industries AG, Creavis Technologies & Innovation, Paul-Baumann-Straße 1, 45722 Marl, Germany
Received 
      9th December 2013
    , Accepted 11th March 2014First published on 12th March 2014AbstractA photovoltaic tandem cell made of amorphous silicon (a-Si) and microcrystalline silicon (μc-Si) was investigated as a photocathode for hydrogen evolution in a photoelectrochemical device. The electronic and electrochemical properties of the samples were characterized using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and cyclic voltammetry (CV), whereas the morphology of the surface in contact with the electrolyte was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The electric efficiency of the tandem cell was determined to be 5.2% in a photoelectrochemical (PEC) setup in acidic solution which is only about half of the photovoltaic efficiency of the tandem cell. A significant improvement in efficiency was achieved with platinum as a catalyst which was deposited by physical vapour deposition (PVD) under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions.
1. Introduction
Photoelectrochemistry plays a pivotal role in converting solar energy to storable fuels. In comparison to molecular systems the main advantage of using semi-conducting photoelectrodes for light absorption and charge carrier generation and separation is the high quantum efficiency over a wide spectral range. Since the pioneering work of Fujishima and Honda1 in the 1970s, there has been a long lasting research effort to develop efficient photo-electrodes which is even enforced nowadays due to the fact that the climate change has been recognized as a true danger for mankind. The Gibbs free energy change ΔG° of the net water splitting reaction is 237 kJ mol−1 and its corresponding electromotive force ΔE° is 1.23 V. Since water splitting is an energetic uphill reaction, a working photoelectrode has to supply a minimum photovoltage of 1.23 V in order to drive water splitting without an external bias. In practice, a much higher potential of at least 1.6 to 2.0 V is necessary to split water due to cathodic and anodic overpotentials or other losses.2,3 In this respect, single bandgap photoabsorbers like e.g. silicon or gallium arsenide do not provide enough photovoltage to drive the water splitting reaction because their bandgap is too small. On the other hand, semiconductors with a larger band gap especially oxides (EG > 2.5 eV)4 may provide increased electrochemical driving forces but they have limitations in accessing the lower wavelength part of the solar spectrum, which in turn leads to lower efficiencies as well. Another important point is the stability of the considered materials in contact with aqueous solutions. Often photocorrosion effects form non-conductive oxide layers, which then give rise to strongly increased charge transfer resistances suppressing the water splitting reaction. Moreover, a lot of materials dissolve or degrade in the presence of the electrolyte which means reduced long term stability. Additionally, the energetic band alignment of promising semiconductor materials with respect to the redox potentials of the considered species in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) or the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) or to suitable catalysts may be a limiting factor for an efficient water splitting process.5 For these reasons, the PEC devices investigated so far do not provide feasible solutions for efficient and economic H2 production.
In contrast to single band gap semiconductors, multiple band gap systems or tandem cells are able to suitably match the energetic requirements and effectively utilize the spectral distribution of the sun's light, which leads to higher efficiencies.5 Weber and Dignam calculated an efficiency of 10% to 18% for various tandem cell configurations.3 Gerischer predicted efficiencies up to 24% with tandem cells6 and Bolton even proposed 28% for a two photon system.2 In practice, Khaselev and Turner obtained 12.4% water splitting efficiency using a tandem cell made of p-GaInP and GaAs,7 whereas Licht and coworkers demonstrated a value of 18.3% with a tandem cell arrangement based on AlGaAs and Si.8 Recently, Reece and coworkers got efficiencies of 2.5% and 4.7% using silicon based triple cells in different geometries presented as an artificial leaf.9 In ref. 10 a comprehensive overview of the current status of tandem cells used for solar water splitting is given. However, none of the presented systems so far combine sufficient efficiency, reasonable stability and the use of inexpensive materials or device structures, which are developed towards technologically feasible solutions. In addition, the reported efficiencies are often not well defined or related to different measurement techniques (two-electrode or three-electrode geometry, supporting bias voltage from potentiostat, electric vs. fuel formation efficiencies).11,12
Herein, we report on a silicon based tandem cell structure as a photocathode for hydrogen evolution, which has been initially developed as a photovoltaic device and which may provide reasonable photovoltages. A possible arrangement and an energy diagram of a tandem device used as a photoelectrolysis cell are shown in Fig. 1. In this set-up dedicated catalysts for the HER and the OER are used to minimize losses of the photovoltage due to over-voltages. In addition, the semiconductor surfaces are in direct contact with the electrolyte which induces photocorrosion processes depending on the materials selection. In our case this problem is avoided by using a solar cell which is designed as a superstrate device13,14 and which is terminated by a silver layer acting as protecting back contact. Other approaches, where the semiconductor is in direct contact with the electrolyte, are based on special surface treatments as shown in ref. 15 using a Ni passivated Si photoanode. The tandem cell mainly consists of two p–i–n junctions made of a-Si and μc-Si, which are carefully adapted to each other in order to absorb most of the solar spectrum and in order to provide enough photovoltage without losing too much photocurrent. In general, photoelectrochemical devices based on thin film Si cells give the perspective to lead to a cost-effective and environmentally friendly technological solution. However, single absorber cells based on μc-Si (EG ∼ 1.1 eV) or a-Si (EG ∼ 1.7 eV)16 do not provide enough photovoltage for the water splitting reaction whereas triple cells with photovoltages beyond UPh > 2.0 V lose too much of the generated energy compared to ΔE° = 1.23 V which is needed for the water splitting reaction. As a consequence a-Si/μc-Si tandem cells with correctly adjusted photovoltages provide the most promising solution to achieve efficient and cost-effective photoelectrochemical devices.17–19
 Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of possible tandem cell device configurations: (a) wireless device. (b) Wired device, where an additional support voltage can be applied, similar to the setup presented in this paper. (c) Schematics of the light absorption in tandem cells adapted to two different wavelengths of the solar spectrum. The combined electrochemical potential difference Δμ should be larger than the free reaction enthalpy for water splitting of 1.23 eV. 
2. Experimental section
Aqueous solutions were prepared using deionized water from a Milli-Q (Millipore) system. All chemicals were purchased as analytical grade (Merck) and were used as received unless otherwise noted. Physical vapour deposition (PVD) of platinum (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) as a catalyst was done from a graphite crucible placed in an electron beam evaporator (EMF 3, Omicron/Focus GmbH), which was attached to a dedicated ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber located in the “Darmstadt Integrated System for Fundamental research (DAISY-FUN)”.20 The platinum deposition was accomplished at a growth rate of 0.05 Å min−1 (Sycon STM-100/MF) while the shutter was opened for 60 min under pressure conditions below 10−9 mbar. From these values the nominal thickness of the platinum layer was estimated to be 3 Å.
XPS analysis was done using a hemispherical analyser (Phoibos 150), which was operated together with a high-resolution monochromatic Al-Kα X-ray source at 1486.61 eV (SPECS GmbH). All photoelectron peaks were fitted by Gauss–Lorentz functions after subtraction of a Shirley-type background. For the evaluation of the spectra, a dedicated software package (CasaXPS, Casa Software Ltd.) was used with already built-in sensitivity factors for the quantitative analysis of the surface composition. The spectrometer itself was calibrated to the Fermi edge of a clean Ag foil assigned to a binding energy of 0 eV. The surface morphology was investigated using an SEM (Philips XL30 FEG).
Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed at room temperature utilizing a commercially available CIMPS-2 system (Zahner Elektrik GmbH), which combines a potentiostat, a light emitting diode (LED) light source and a modified PECC-2 cell as a specimen holder. The tandem cell was investigated as a photocathode in a three electrode arrangement with a 3 M Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a platinum counter electrode. Designed as a superstrate device, the reflecting back contact made of silver is in contact with the electrolyte consisting of 0.1 M H2SO4 solution. All potentials specified in the voltammograms of this work are referred to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). As a light source, a white light emitting LED with a power of 100 W m−2 was utilized and regulated by a feedback control system, which is based on a calibrated Si photodiode placed close to the working electrode. The illuminated sample area was 0.5 cm2 in size. In normal operation mode, the light source was switched on and off (chopped) with a frequency of 1 Hz while the scan rate for the polarisation was adjusted to a value of 20 mV s−1. In order to avoid disturbances from stray light, all photoelectrochemical experiments were carried out in a light blocking cabinet.
3. Results and discussion
A detailed description of the silicon based tandem cells acting as photovoltaic devices and which were used for this study is given elsewhere in the literature.21–23 The cells were used without any changes as described in the PVC research. A rough sketch of the device structure is shown in Fig. 2 for a better understanding of our experimental approach. The solar cell is illuminated from the left through the transparent glass substrate, which acts as the carrier of the complete tandem cell structure. The incoming light rays first transit the top cell, which consists of a p–i–n homojunction based on a-Si with a bandgap of 1.7 eV. They then reach the bottom cell consisting of a μc-Si based p–i–n structure, where remaining photons with hν > 1.1 eV are absorbed effectively. A highly reflective ZnO/Ag layer is used as back contact, which enhances the absorption probability further. The presented configuration, often called a superstrate tandem solar cell, provides a higher photo-voltage (∼1.3 V, see Fig. 3) than a single bandgap device. Due to a more effective capture of photons in two dedicated energy bands or wavelength regimes, the overall efficiency is also improved. As shown in the photocurrent–voltage (I–U) curve in Fig. 3 the photovoltaic efficiency of the tandem cell in the conversion of light into electric power reaches a value of η = 9.5 ± 0.1% under AM1.5 illumination (Lot Oriel GmbH).
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the tandem cell used as a photocathode. 
 Fig. 3  Photocurrent–voltage (I–U) curve of the tandem cell measured as a PV cell under AM1.5 conditions. The active area is 1 cm2. 
The cells used in our experiments provide stabilized efficiencies of about 9.5%; a typical PV current voltage curve is given in Fig. 3. We have used an arrangement for the photoelectrochemical studies as shown in Fig. 2.
Preliminary experiments were performed with ZnO or Ag terminated electrode surfaces which were modified with Pt layers either deposited by wet-chemical reduction of PtCl4 or by PVD (see the Experimental section). It was observed that within the preferential electrolyte (H2SO4) the Ag covered surfaces with Pt PVD deposits provide efficient devices so far.
The I–U curve of the tandem cell with a Ag surface layer under chopped light conditions is shown in Fig. 4a. The onset potential (Uoc) of the cathodic current starts at around 1.2 V versus NHE under illumination. This is equivalent to a reduction potential which is shifted by 1.2 V more positive with respect to the general onset potential of the hydrogen evolution taking place at a standard platinum electrode in the same solution. The measured short circuit current density (jsc) is −0.94 ± 0.05 mA cm−2. In the region from 1.2 V down to 0.5 V we observe severe spikes in the current transients as well as a slow increase of the photocurrent, which are assigned to surface trapping of charge carriers and slow charge carrier transfer at the electrolyte interface. The maximum power point (MPP) of the photovoltage is only around 0.46 ± 0.05 V vs. NHE indicating a loss of driving force of about 0.7 V in comparison to the photocurrent onset potential of 1.2 V in the PEC cell or UPh ∼ 1.3 V for the PV cell. The value of the maximum photocurrent in the PEC cell is close to the value measured for the PV cell (jsc = −9.77 ± 0.05 mA cm−2) as expected for the low light intensities under 1/10 AM1.5 conditions. The comparable photocurrents indicate that there is no further loss mechanism in the separation of charge carriers affecting the overall efficiency, and that the charge transfer resistance due to insufficient electrocatalysis is negligible. The calculated value for the efficiency of the presented tandem cell acting as a photocathode is 3.2 ± 0.1% at a maximum power point (MPP) of 0.46 V using (1)
 Fig. 4  Chopped light voltammogram of the silicon based tandem cells (a) without platinum and (b) with platinum using 0.1 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2. 
This formula represents the photon to electric power efficiency ηPEC of a light absorbing electrode which works as a PEC cell with the product of the values for photocurrent density jMPP and photovoltage UMPP at the MPP normalised by the incoming light power per area pLight.24 It is important to be aware that resistive losses e.g. at the counter electrode are not considered in the present case due to the fact that the experimental data used as the input for this calculation have been generated in three electrode configuration, thus neglecting potential relevant processes at the counter electrode. Furthermore, it has to be pointed out that the calculated efficiency is related only to the efficiency of a photoelectrochemical cell converting light energy into electrical energy thus not considering the conversion into chemical energy. Therefore, the only way to obtain a realistic value for the water splitting efficiency is to measure the current in two electrode configuration under short circuit conditions4 which however needs a higher photovoltage to drive the water splitting reaction.
Since Pt and noble metal containing materials have received more and more attention as electro-catalysts for hydrogen evolution in the last few years,25–29 pure platinum was deposited under UHV conditions onto the silver surface from an e-beam evaporator. The chopped light I–U curve of the platinum covered tandem cell is given in Fig. 4b. The onset potential (Uoc) of the hydrogen evolution is shifted to about 1.1 V versus NHE and the short circuit current density (jsc) is −0.86 ± 0.05 mA cm−2. Although these values are comparable to those of the tandem cell without platinum the photoelectric efficiency could be improved from 3.2 ± 0.1 to 4.8 ± 0.1% according to formula (1). This enhancement is mainly attributed to an increase in the fill factor (FF) shifting the MPP by 0.2 V to 0.64 ± 0.05 V. An overview of the electrode parameters with and without platinum compared to the pure PV performance is depicted in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of the tandem cell characteristics for various conditions




Tandem cell

p
Light [W m−2]
Uoc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
MPP [V]
FF [%]

η [%]




As PV device
1000
1.32
−9.77
1.15
74
9.5


As PEC without Pt
100
1.19
−0.94
0.46
29
3.2


As PEC with Pt
100
1.12
−0.86
0.64
49
4.8




However, these calculated values and their comparison must be handled with care in both PEC cases namely without and with platinum. The occurrence of spikes and a non-zero photocurrent indicate that the band edges of the device shift with applied potential leading to an additional potential drop across the electrochemical double layer induced by trapped non-equilibrium charge carriers. Such effects have been often observed for hindered charge transfer e.g. at metal chalcogenide photoelectrodes.30 Evidently, the performance of the silicon tandem cell as a photoelectrochemical cell is strongly determined by the (photo) electro-catalytic properties of the surface exposed to the electrolyte.
For this reason the surface composition of the Pt modified tandem cell was studied by XPS. Survey spectra of the tandem cell as depicted in Fig. 5 clearly show a Pt 4f line at about 70 eV after platinum deposition. The Pt peak itself is very small due to the little amount of Pt which was deposited. As expected the Ag 3d line dominates both spectra, but further to this there is only less oxygen and carbon visible on the pure tandem cell indicating a non-oxidized silver layer which is obviously kept in its metallic state. In order to get more information about the impact of platinum on silver, the Pt 4f and the Ag 3d lines were analysed with higher resolution.
 Fig. 5  X-ray photoelectron survey spectra of the tandem cells with and without Pt. 
In Fig. 6, Ag 3d spectra are presented before and after the Pt deposition. From the analysis of the Ag 3d 5/2 peak component by means of a best least square fit using a single Gauss–Lorentz function we obtain a binding energy value of 368.19 ± 0.05 eV and a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 0.69 ± 0.05 eV for the pure silver layer. With platinum these measurements are slightly changed to a binding energy value of 368.17 ± 0.05 eV, an intensity decrease of about 3% and a FWHM of 0.71 ± 0.05 eV. We conclude from these data that the silver layer is barely affected by the deposition of platinum, since the binding energy of both lines is more or less unchanged and that the Ag 3d 5/2 peak is only slightly damped due to the deposition of material on top of it. From the attenuation of the intensity the mean coverage of the silver layer by platinum can be calculated according to the following formula assuming a layered system31 (2)where d stands for the thickness of the deposited material in monolayers (ML), λD is the mean free path of electrons in the considered deposited material, IS(d) is the intensity of the substrate peak covered by the deposited material and I∞S is the intensity of the pure, infinite substrate. With a value of λD = 10 ± 2 ML at a kinetic energy of about 1118 eV (1486.61 eV − 368.2 eV = 1118.41 eV) for the Ag 3d emission under Al Kα excitation,32 we estimate a mean thickness of the platinum layer of about 0.4 ± 0.3 ML (equivalent to about 1 Å). This value is in the same range as the nominal thickness of 3 Å attained with the quartz microbalance but still too low. We assign this to the fact that in contrast to the assumption of a layered system there is evidently the formation of small Pt nano clusters (up to 100 nm in lateral size), which cover the silver surface thus leading to a shadowing effect with only a slightly reduced Ag 3d line intensity as a consequence. A rough calculation on the signal attenuation induced by the coverage of about 30 round shaped Pt nano clusters with a diameter of 100 nm as counted on an area of 4 μm2 (Fig. 6) reveals an intensity decrease of about 6.3% which is close to the 3% damping of the Ag 3d line. The assumption of the occurrence of Pt nano-clusters is also in accordance with the binding energies of the Ag 3d lines before and after Pt deposition with signals arising in both cases from the uncovered areas. In addition the formation of Pt nano-clusters would explain the underestimation of the mean thickness of the Pt layer in the layered model. The increase of the FWHM value might be attributed to an increased roughness after the Pt treatment.
 Fig. 6  XP spectra of the Ag 3d transitions before and after Pt deposition. 
The formation of Pt clusters is also supported by the XP spectrum of the Pt 4f doublet shown in Fig. 7 with its Pt 4f 7/2 and Pt 4f 5/2 line components. Best least square fits considering only the Pt 4f 7/2 component reveal two species at binding energies of 70.63 ± 0.05 eV and 71.61 ± 0.05 eV, respectively. We assume that the first component (I) located at 70.63 eV belongs to bulk like clusters20 whereas the second component (II) at 71.61 eV belongs to surface species which may be modified by adsorbed oxygen on platinum as reported by Kim et al.33 Both species differ in their intensity by a factor of two with an increased FWHM of the second component (II) compared to the first component (I). For a better comprehension a summary of all XPS results is given in Table 2. The shown values support the model of small Pt clusters covered by adsorbed oxygen. This would explain the higher intensity of the more surface related component (II) with more platinum atoms coupled to oxygen than in the bulk and the higher FWHM of this component which is addressed to a higher disorder at the surface of the small clusters. It is assumed that residual oxygen which was not removed by the wet-chemical cleaning treatment of the tandem cell prior to the XPS analysis is responsible for this effect. The fact that the binding energy value of 70.63 eV for the first component (I) is slightly below the value for bulk platinum34 may be attributed to size effects of the platinum clusters.35,36 However, the formation of a silver platinum alloy could not be proved by our measurements but it has to be pointed out that the data basis from the literature with regard to this behaviour is rather inconsistent. Therefore we cannot exclude the partial formation of a Pt–Ag alloy in the sub-monolayer regime. In summary, we propose the following picture of the Pt coated silver surface based on the obtained data. Bulk-like Pt clusters up to several hundred nanometres in lateral size are covering the microcrystalline Ag substrate in the range of 5 ± 2% acting as electro-catalytically active areas for an efficient charge carrier transfer into the electrolyte upon illumination (H2 evolution).
 Fig. 7  XP spectrum of the Pt 4f transition after Pt deposition. 
Table 2 Summary of the XPS results




Species
Binding energy [eV]
Intensity [counts]
FWHM [eV]




Ag 3d 5/2 without Pt
368.19
65650
0.69


Ag 3d 5/2 with Pt
368.17
63140
0.71


Pt–Pt 4f 7/2 I
70.63
1110
0.92


Pt–Pt 4f 7/2 II
71.61
2370
1.14




The surface morphology of the terminating Ag layer of the tandem cell is given in Fig. 8a. The picture shows an AFM image view, which reveals the surface of the polycrystalline material with grains up to 500 nm in lateral size and height differences of about 200 nm. For a detailed discussion on the morphology effects compare to the above discussion the PES.
 Fig. 8  AFM images of the Ag surface of the tandem cell (a) without platinum and (b) with PVD platinum. 
The surface with PVD deposited Pt was characterized again by AFM as depicted in Fig. 8b with a morphology similar to the one shown in Fig. 8a except the appearance of small protrusions, which are attributed to Pt clusters with an estimated size below 100 nm diameter. Altogether about 30 Pt cluster related objects are counted in an area of 4 μm2. Furthermore, the microscopic roughness of the surface is slightly increased.
4. Conclusions
We have shown in this paper that silicon based tandem solar cells have the potential to be used as efficient photocathodes for the hydrogen evolution reaction for photo-electrochemical water splitting. A remarkable enhancement of the efficiency of the photoelectrode was achieved by the deposition of platinum using a PVD process. Since platinum couples to the underlying silver metal surface by simple alignment of the Fermi level without affecting the energetic band alignment of the tandem cell, this procedure seems to be well suited for an enhancement of the overall efficiency. Besides the good electronic coupling of both metals to each other, the Ag layer plays an important role in protecting the underlying ZnO layer, which would be dissolved in contact with acid electrolytes suitable for water splitting. Even though the tandem cell produces enough photovoltage, an additional bias-voltage is still required to reach the maximum power point photovoltage and to split water.
In order to achieve bias-free water splitting in the future, a number of additional measures must be taken to improve these promising device arrangements further. First of all a tandem solar cell with adjusted photovoltages of UphOC of about 1.8 V and a UphMPP of about 1.6 V is needed. As already discussed above triple cells with strongly enlarged photovoltages beyond 2.5 V are not alternatives as they lead to large free energy losses. The counter electrode which consists of platinum so far has to be developed further and replaced e.g. by ruthenium oxide (RuO2) as anode material. In addition systematic experiments have to be performed on interface engineering at the photocathodes like e.g. the deposition of Pt as an electro-catalyst using different types of deposition processes, varying the Pt particle size and distribution as well as using different substrate surface/pretreatments to improve the PEC performance further.
In summary, first promising PEC results have been obtained by our group with a-Si:H tandem cells. Additional experiments are also necessary to deposit suitable hydrogen evolving catalysts onto the silver surface with specific size and particle distribution as alternatives to platinum in order to save costs and in order to improve our understanding of the water splitting process. The development of advanced HER or OER catalysts, which are designed on the basis of biomimetic principles, is of interest as they can be used as alternatives for precious metal materials for an efficient water splitting process using cheap and abundant transition metals as the primary catalytically active materials.
Acknowledgements
Partial financial support of this project by the DFG cluster of excellence “Smart Interfaces” and by the DFG priority program SPP 1613 as well as co-funding by Evonik Industries AG (part-financed by the State of North Rhine Westphalia and co-financed by the European Union “Investing in our Future, European Regional Development Fund”) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Limiting and realizable efficiencies of solar photolysis of water, Nature, 1985, 316, 495 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Weber and M. J. Dignam, Splitting water with semiconducting photoelectrodes—Efficiency considerations, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1986, 11, 225 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Van de Krol and M. Grèatzel, Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Springer, US,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. F. Weber and M. J. Dignam, Efficiency of Splitting Water with Semiconducting Photoelectrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Gerischer, in Solar photoelectrolysis with semiconductor electrodes in Solar Energy Conversion, ed. B. Seraphin, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1979, vol. 31, p. 115 Search PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, A Monolithic Photovoltaic-Photoelectrochemical Device for Hydrogen Production via Water Splitting, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, Efficient Solar Water Splitting, Exemplified by RuO2-Catalyzed AlGaAs/Si Photoelectrolysis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Wireless solar water splitting using silicon-based semiconductors and earth-abundant catalysts, Science, 2011, 334, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, Photoelectrochemical Tandem Cells for Solar Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879 Search PubMed .
G. Hodes, Photoelectrochemical Cell Measurements: Getting the Basics Right, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1208 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Appropriate strategies for determining the photoconversion efficiency of water photoelectrolysis cells: A review with examples using titania nanotube array photoanodes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Müller, B. Rech, J. Springer and M. Vanecek, TCO and light trapping in silicon thin film solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 917 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Shah, H. Schade, M. Vanecek, J. Meier, E. Vallat-Sauvain, N. Wyrsch, U. Kroll, C. Droz and J. Bailat, Thin-film Silicon Solar Cell Technology, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 113 CAS .
J. A. Turner, A Nickel Finish Protects Silicon Photoanodes for Water Splitting, Science, 2013, 342, 811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 41), Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1 Search PubMed .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, An analysis of the optimal band gaps of light absorbers in integrated tandem photoelectrochemical water-splitting systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984 CAS .
R. E. Rocheleau and E. L. Miller, Photoelectrochemical production of hydrogen: Engineering loss analysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 771 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lambertz, V. Smirnov, T. Merdzhanova, K. Ding, S. Haas, G. Jost, R. E. I. Schropp, F. Finger and U. Rau, Microcrystalline silicon–oxygen alloys for application in silicon solar cells and modules, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kaiser, D. Fertig, J. Ziegler, J. Klett, S. Hoch and W. Jaegermann, Solar Hydrogen Generation with Wide-Band-Gap Semiconductors: GaP(100) Photoelectrodes and Surface Modification, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, C. Ulbrich, A. M. Ermes, S. Schicho, A. Lambertz, R. Carius and U. Rau, Characterization and simulation of a-Si:H/μc-Si:H tandem solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gordijn, S. Schicho, S. Muthmann, T. Kilper, H. Zhu, E. Bunte and J. Hüpkes, Significantly decreased production times for a-Si/μc-Si tandem cells on texture-etched ZnO:Al, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schicho, D. Hrunski, R. van Aubel and A. Gordijn, High potential of thin (<1 μm) a-Si: H/μc-Si:H tandem solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 83 CAS .

          I. U. V. Pleskov, Solar Energy Conversion: A Photoelectrochemical Approach, Springer-Verlag,  1990 Search PubMed .
R. Tölle and A. Otto, Hydrogen-evolution and -oxidation on Ag(111) covered by Pt, Surf. Sci., 2005, 597, 110 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Aharon-Shalom and A. Heller, Efficient p-InP(Rh-H alloy) and p-InP(Re-H alloy) Hydrogen Evolving Photocathodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Aspnes and A. Heller, Photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution and water photolyzing semiconductor suspensions: properties of platinum group metal catalyst-semiconductor contacts in air and in hydrogen, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 4919 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, E. Aharon-Shalom, W. A. Bonner and B. Miller, Hydrogen-evolving semiconductor photocathodes: nature of the junction and function of the platinum group metal catalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 6942 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Xu, T. S. Zhao and Z. X. Liang, Synthesis of Active Platinum–Silver Alloy Electrocatalyst toward the Formic Acid Oxidation Reaction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17362 CAS .
W. Jaegermann and H. Tributsch, Interfacial properties of semiconducting transition metal chalcogenides, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1988, 29, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Lüth, Surfaces and interfaces of Solids, Springer, Berlin, 3rd edn,  1993 Search PubMed .
M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench, Quantitative electron spectroscopy of surfaces: A standard data base for electron inelastic mean free paths in solids, Surf. Interface Anal., 1979, 1, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, N. Winograd and R. E. Davis, Electron spectroscopy of platinum-oxygen surfaces and application to electrochemical studies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 6296 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lombardi, S. Marchionna, G. Zangari and S. Pizzini, Effect of Pt Particle Size and Distribution on Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Evolution by p-Si Photocathodes, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. V. Roy, P. Fayet, F. Patthey, W. D. Schneider, B. Delley and C. Massobrio, Evolution of the electronic and geometric structure of size-selected Pt and Pd clusters on Ag(110) observed by photoemission, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 5611 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barrett, C. Guillot, J. C. Bertolini, J. Massardier and B. C. Khanra, Bulk and surface core level binding energies in the Pt80Fe20(111) alloy, Surf. Sci., 1992, 260, L11 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic presentation of possible tandem cell device configurations: (a) wireless device. (b) Wired device, where an additional support voltage can be applied, similar to the setup presented in this paper. (c) Schematics of the light absorption in tandem cells adapted to two different wavelengths of the solar spectrum. The combined electrochemical potential difference Δμ should be larger than the free reaction enthalpy for water splitting of 1.23 eV.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the tandem cell used as a photocathode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocurrent–voltage (I–U) curve of the tandem cell measured as a PV cell under AM1.5 conditions. The active area is 1 cm2.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Chopped light voltammogram of the silicon based tandem cells (a) without platinum and (b) with platinum using 0.1 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2.	 

As PV device	1000	1.32	−9.77	1.15	74	9.5
As PEC without Pt	100	1.19	−0.94	0.46	29	3.2
As PEC with Pt	100	1.12	−0.86	0.64	49	4.8

 	Fig. 5  X-ray photoelectron survey spectra of the tandem cells with and without Pt.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  XP spectra of the Ag 3d transitions before and after Pt deposition.	 

 	Fig. 7  XP spectrum of the Pt 4f transition after Pt deposition.	 

Ag 3d 5/2 without Pt	368.19	65650	0.69
Ag 3d 5/2 with Pt	368.17	63140	0.71
Pt–Pt 4f 7/2 I	70.63	1110	0.92
Pt–Pt 4f 7/2 II	71.61	2370	1.14

 	Fig. 8  AFM images of the Ag surface of the tandem cell (a) without platinum and (b) with PVD platinum.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
