Self-trapped excitons in soft semiconductors  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR03935D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR03935D
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 16394-16414Self-trapped excitons in soft semiconductors

        
          
            Jianbin 
            Tan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Delong 
            Li
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Zhu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Han
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Youning 
            Gong
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yupeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P.R. China. E-mail: lidl@szu.edu.cn; ypzhang@szu.edu.cn
Received 
      18th July 2022
    , Accepted 19th October 2022First published on 19th October 2022AbstractSelf-trapped excitons (STEs) have attracted tremendous attention due to their intriguing properties and potential optoelectronic applications. STEs are formed from the lattice distortion induced by the strong electron (exciton)–phonon coupling in soft semiconductors upon photoexcitation, which features in broadband photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra with a large Stokes shift. Recently, significant progress has been achieved in this field but many remain challenges that need to be solved, including the understanding of the underlying physical mechanism, tuning of the performance, and device applications. Along these lines, for the first time, systematic experimental characterizations and advanced theoretical calculations are presented in this review to shed light on the physical mechanism. The possibility of tuning the STEs through multiple degrees of freedom is also presented, along with an overview of the STE-based emerged applications and future research perspectives.
1 Introduction
Exciton–phonon coupling (EPC), which originates from a combined action of the electron–hole and the electron–phonon interactions, plays a key role in determining the unique properties of solids.1,2 Typically, the EPC strength is not enough to cause lattice distortion in traditional semiconductors.3 Among the various kinds of semiconductors, soft semiconductors have a plethora of interesting properties and many applications that are defined by major features including their complexity and flexibility.4 Usually, soft semiconductors rely on weaker binding, large lattice constants, and small atom displacement energies, and are more mechanically malleable than the traditional crystalline semiconductors.4,5 As far as soft lattice semiconductors are concerned, the strong exciton–phonon coupling (EPC) may create a transient elastic lattice distortion surrounding the excited electron/hole pairs upon photoexcitation that could lead to the formation of a self-trapped state (STS).6–8 In the excited STS state, Frenkel-like self-trapped excitons (STEs) will form in a few hundred femtoseconds when the photogenerated electron/hole pairs are self-trapped in the STS.9,10
Although the STS is usually regarded as an energy state induced by transient defects or excited state defects, STEs show inherently different features as compared to the trapped excitons localized by intrinsic defects.11 Their different characteristics and properties can be distinguished by performing steady-state/time-resolved optical spectroscopy measurements. For example, the crystal defects normally exhibit sub-band absorption properties due to the formation of interband defect energy levels within the bandgap, while the STEs exhibit no sub-band absorption.12–14 In addition, the defect-related emission will be saturated at a relatively high excitation power density, while the STE-related emission shows a linear dependence on the excitation power density.14,15 By considering the transient absorption spectra, the STEs exhibit a sub-picosecond lifetime and a positive sub-band bleaching signal in the excited state, while the crystal defects exhibit a negative sub-band bleaching signal with lifetimes at the picosecond level.6,8,16,17
Unlike free exciton emissions, which are featured in narrow emissive bands with small Stokes shifts, the most significant characteristics of STE emission are the large Stokes shift and the broad emissive bands below the bandgap. Besides, the STE emission also exhibits a much higher photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) than the free exciton emission. As a result, the unique emission characteristics of STE emission have drawn widespread attention and rendered STE-related materials a large number of optoelectronic applications such as photodetectors, lasing, scintillators, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs).15,18–22
As was noted above, STEs are formed in excited soft lattice solids with strong EPC, where it can be noteworthy that the excited photogenerated charge carriers can be trapped through lattice distortion and lead to the fast transfer from the free excitons to the STEs.23 However, the excited STEs can quickly relax back to the ground state, accompanied by broadband emission with a large Stokes shift.23–25 The formation and relaxation processes are illustrated in Fig. 1A.26 The possible channels for the relaxation from free excitons to STEs are indicated, including direct relaxation, thermally assisted relaxation overcoming energy barriers, tunneling, and detrapping from STEs to free excitons. During a typical STEs emission process, the involved energy distribution can be described by the following equation:26 ESTE = Eg − Eb − Este − Ed(1)where ESTE is the STEs’ emission energy, Eg is the bandgap, Eb represents the exciton binding energy, Este refers to the self-trapping energy, and Ed is the lattice deformation energy. The Eg can be extracted from the absorption spectra, whereas by fitting the photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra, the Eb and ESTE energy values can be extracted. However, the Ed can be extracted from the low-temperature PL spectra by performing a linear fitting of vs., where IFE is the free exciton emission intensity, ISTE denotes the STEs emission intensity, and T represents the local temperature distribution, respectively.27
 Fig. 1  STEs-related energy transfer process. (A) Schematic diagram of the energy level structure of STE (GS, ground state; FE, free exciton state; FC, free carrier state; STS, self-trapping state; Eg, bandgap; Eb, exciton binding energy; Est, self-trapping energy; Ed, lattice deformation energy; ESTE, emission energy).26 A sketch of the free and STS at (B) high temperature and (C) low temperature (EB and WB are the height and width of the energy barrier separating the free and self-trapped excitonic states).25 (D) Schematic of the nonradiative recombination process for STE when S is large (orange circles represent excited electrons).26 
Usually, STE is considered essentially a system that involves the interaction of localized electrons, localized holes, and crystal lattice.28–30 STE formation has been thought to have a strong dependence on the dimensionality of the materials.11,23,31–33 It has been thought that lowering the dimension of a system lowers the deformation energy.31 In a three-dimensional (3D) system, the self-trapping process may be hindered by the formation of a large inherent potential barrier.34,35 However, the low-dimensional systems possess lower activation energy for self-trapping, which makes the STEs easier to be observed in low-dimensional systems.13,29,36 Recently, more studies have suggested that the STEs are related to the electronic dimensionality rather than the structural dimensionality.3,37–40 Wang et al. proposed that a low electronic dimensionality is a prerequisite for the formation of STE by density functional theory calculation.37 The experimental evidence for the STEs related to electronic dimensionality has also been widely reported.38,40,41 In the 3D materials, STEs also can be detected due to the soft lattice and low electronic dimensionality.41 Luo et al. realized the manipulation of the parity of the wavefunction of the STE and reduced the electronic dimensionality of the semiconductor by introducing Na+ alloying, which resulted in enhanced STEs emissions.38 Recent studies indicated that both low electronic dimensionality and a soft lattice are critical for the formation of STEs.24
The variety of the temperature-dependent STEs emission can be qualitatively illustrated by using the Franck–Condon principle-based model.25 The dynamic diagrams of the free excitons and the STEs are presented in Fig. 1B and C. As noted in Fig. 1A, there are four possible channels for the relaxation from free excitons to STEs. However, these channels can be distinguished by performing optical spectra measurements at low temperatures. The lattice distortion and the energy barrier separating the free excitonic state and self-trapping state exhibit synchronous decrease when the temperature decreases due to the thermal expansion effect.25 By performing a detailed analysis of the low-temperature optical spectra, the dominant relaxation channels can be determined. The temperature-dependent height and width of the energy barrier separating free excitons and STEs (shown in Fig. 1B and C) suggest the temperature-dependent behavior of STEs.25,42
STEs have been widely observed in soft lattice solids and artificial nanostructures.43,44 Even in some typical hard materials, their behavior may resemble that of soft materials in many aspects when their dimensions are reduced to the nanoscale or assembled with molecules.4 In these STE-related materials, the manifestation of a strong EPC is essential for tuning the properties of STEs. For example, Ma et al. tuned the STEs emission of nanocrystals composed of cesium lead halide perovskite by applying relatively high pressure.45 Li et al. realized the STEs emission in Cs2(Na, Ag)InCl6 by using the rare-earth doping approach.46 Although these studies have suggested that the strong EPC can trigger STEs, no absolute functional relationship between the value of S and the existence of STEs has been proposed. However, Gavartin et al. demonstrated the importance of the electron correlation in determining the properties of the STEs.47 More specifically, the potential-energy surface connecting free and localized states, which is related to the relevant atomic coordinates and the energy barrier of the free states and STS, was predicated (shown in Fig. 1D).26 The coordinate differences between the free excitons and STEs configurations exhibit a positive correlation with S, whereas a suitable value related to the physical component is essential for achieving efficient STEs emission.3,6
With the burst of research in the STE-related fields, a comprehensive review of the tuning, characterization, and optoelectronic application of STEs is considered of great importance to fully understand their fundamental properties, as well as to design new high-performance devices. The underlying formation mechanism and characterization techniques of STEs in soft semiconductors are first introduced, and then the tuning of STEs in soft semiconductors is highlighted through multiple degrees of freedom. The potential applications of STEs in various types of optoelectronic devices are also presented, and the challenges and future opportunities are thoroughly discussed and proposed.
2 Identifying STEs
Considering the unique properties and application potentials of STEs, it is quite essential to find some simple and efficient methods to identify and investigate the existence of STEs in solids and nanostructures. Since STEs only exist in the photoexcited state, their direct observation is challenging.48,49 However, STEs manifest themselves with a variety of unique properties and thus can be directly or indirectly probed with many experimental techniques. In the past few decades, various advanced characterization techniques have been developed to identify the existence and examine the formation, transition, and relaxation processes of STEs in soft semiconductors. Among them, PL spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and transient absorption spectroscopy are considered the most commonly used techniques to characterize the photophysical processes of the STEs in detail. Various unique characterization methods have also been developed to characterize the STEs in some specific material systems.
2.1 PL spectroscopy
PL has been regarded as one of the basic and important properties of semiconductors. For semiconductors with exciton-based PL emission properties, the exciton emission energy is normally slightly lower than the bandgap value due to the small exciton binding energy.50 However, as far as the PL emission originating from STEs is concerned, the emission energy is much smaller than the bandgap and a large Stokes shift can be observed. As can be ascertained from Fig. 1, the ground-state energy and the self-trapping energy are varied in the STE formation process due to the lattice distortion. The STEs emission spectra defined by the lattice deformation and the self-trapping energy values normally exhibit broadband (typically, large full width at half maxima ≥ 60 nm and large Stokes shift ≥ 100 nm) emission. These features make the PL spectra the most efficient and important method for characterizing the properties and the photophysical kinetics of STEs.
The typical steady-state PL emission/excitation spectra of STEs from the (C4H14N2)2In2Br10 perovskite structures are presented in Fig. 2A.51 The photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectrum exhibited a signal at 365 nm, which corroborates the negligible absorbance in the visible range. However, the acquired PL emission spectrum presented an intense emission peak centered at approximately 670 nm, from around 500 nm to the near-infrared (NIR) region. Analogous broadband emission peaks have been widely reported, which have been attributed to the STEs emission.3,52–59 To deeper understand the formation of STEs, it is essential to study the formation origins of the STEs emission peaks. As shown in Fig. 2B, when the CdSe nanoplatelet superlattice structures were excited by a 400 nm laser, both the free exciton emission and the STE emission peaks can be observed at the same time (Fig. 2B).52 However, when the CdSe nanoplatelet superlattice structures were excited by a below-bandgap laser (485 nm), no emission peaks were distinguished. Moreover, two discrete peaks were recorded from the steady-state absorption spectroscopy, consistent with the free excitons emission. This phenomenon has been widely proved in various STE-related materials,6,13,49,52,60 and suggests that both free excitons and STEs emissions share the same excited states.
 Fig. 2  PL spectral characteristics of the STE-related emission process. (A) PL excitation (monitored at 670 nm) and PL spectra (excited by a 365 nm laser) of C4H14N2In2Br10.51 (B) Absorption (black line) and PL spectra of CdSe nanoplatelet superlattices. The PL spectra were excited by a 400 nm laser (green line marked with blue arrow) and 485 nm laser (red line marked with red arrow), respectively.52 (C) Power-dependent PL intensity of the 2D/QD perovskite heterostructure at 78 K (ST1, XX, and FX represent the STEs emission peak, biexcitons emission peak, and free excitons emission peak of free excitons, respectively).7 (D) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the CsCu2I3 film from 10 K to 300 K. (E) Temperature-dependent FWHM of the PL spectra and integrated PL intensity (inset) corresponding to (E).39 (F) Room temperature time-resolved STEs (at 700 nm) and free exciton (at 525 nm) PL spectra of the Sn-doped 2D PEA2PbI4 excited by a 397 nm pulse laser.48 
It has been proved that the PL intensities of the STEs emission normally show a linear relationship with the excitation power density, which facilitates the distinguishing of the STE emission from permanent defect emissions.49 For example, in a perovskite heterostructure composed of 2D (iso-BA)2PbI4 (BA = C4H9NH3)/quantum dot (QDs) CsPbBrxI3−x, it was demonstrated from the power-dependent PL spectra that the PL intensity for each emission peak (including free excitons and STEs emission) was increased by enhancing the excitation power. A linear relationship of the integrated emission intensity against the provided excitation power can be extracted (Fig. 2C).7 Furthermore, the temperature-dependent PL spectra were normally obtained to quantify the EPC strength. By considering the CsCu2I3 perovskite as an example, the typical map of the extracted temperature-dependent PL spectra is presented in Fig. 2D.39 The thermal quenching behavior of the PL intensity was observed due to the thermally activated nonradiative recombination effect. Moreover, an abnormal blue shift of the STE emission peak was observed. This phenomenon was attributed to the thermal expansion of the lattice and the electron–phonon renormalization, which have been widely observed in various STE-related materials.38,61,62
There are also a set of well-known interrelated parameters that are usually used to quantify the EPC strength, including the Huang–Rhys factor (S), the dimensionless displacement (ΔQ), and the self-trapping energy (EST).52,63–65 By deeper analyzing the temperature-dependent PL spectra, these parameters can be calculated to clarify the underlying photophysical mechanism during the photophysical process of STE emission. Among these parameters, the Huang–Rhys factors play a dominant role in describing the STEs. It has been proposed that the relationship between the emission intensity and the temperature can be fitted by using the following empirical equation:66 (2)where I(T) is the emission intensity at temperature T K, I0 represents the emission intensity at 0 K, A is a proportional constant, and κB stands for the Boltzmann constant.
From the Arrhenius plots of the integrated PL intensity, the thermal quenching behavior can be fitted well. The free excitons binding energy and the Debye temperature can be also exported from the fitting curves. Moreover, the Huang–Rhys factors and the average phonon energy (hωphoton) can be calculated from the fitting of the temperature-dependent full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the emission peaks with the following equation:67 (3)
In Fig. 2D and E, the temperature-dependent PL intensity and the FWHMs of the STEs emission spectra were extracted. The free excitons binding energy, phonon energy, and Huang–Rhys factors of the CsCu2I3 thin film were calculated as 202.5 meV, 17.8 meV, and 38.4, respectively.39 From the temperature-dependent PL spectra, the thermal quenching and evolution of the STEs emission, as well as the free exciton emissions, can be well characterized.25,59,61
The emission lifetime is regarded as another crucial property of luminescence. The time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectrum is normally obtained to study the kinetics of energy transfer during the STE emission process. Due to the different trapped states of the excitons, the PL lifetime of the STEs emission is different from free excitons emission or defects-related emission. For example, Yu et al. studied the PL lifetime of Sn-doped 2D lead halide perovskites (shown in Fig. 2F).48 The Sn dopants initiated the localization of excitons and eventually led to the formation of STEs. The PL decay curves obtained from the photoexcited state showed that the PL lifetime of the free excitons was at the sub-nanosecond scale, while the evolution of the PL lifetime suggests that the fast energy transfer from free excitons to STEs was completed in the sub-nanosecond scale. Moreover, a longer lifetime of STEs can be observed. The emissive energy-dependent PL lifetime and the temperature-dependent PL lifetime of the free excitons and STEs from the 2D BEA2PbBr4 perovskites were also measured by Yu et al.68 The extracted lifetime values of free excitons and STEs (BE1) were about 100 ps and 150 ps, respectively. The background lifetime (τB) decreased from about 1.7 ns to 0.3 ns as a function of the excitation energy. The recorded variations reflected the evolution of the intrinsic lifetime of STE emission by increasing energy barriers. Moreover, the PL lifetime decreased with increasing the local temperature distribution, which was consistent with the attenuation of the nonradiative decay channels. However, the emissive energy-dependent PL lifetime almost exhibited an exponential dependence on the emitted photon energy at a certain temperature value. This phenomenon has also been reported in various reports, where PL from Si nanocrystals and hybrid perovskites were recorded.23,69 These effects were attributed to the nonradiative quenching of the STSs through the manifestation of a phonon-assisted tunneling mechanism. Lian et al. studied the temperature dependence of the TRPL dynamics from the (C16H36N)CuI2 structures.70 The microsecond decay lifetime of the emission spectra combined with the highly efficient and large Stokes shift indicated the strong STE emission under excited states. Liang et al. examined the physical origin of the sub-band gap STEs PL emission at two different surface facets of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper lead bromide perovskite, which correspond to the in-plane facets and perpendicular facets- of the 2D inorganic lattice layers, by using TRPL.71 The different PL lifetime and PL dynamic obtained from in-plane facets-and perpendicular facets indicated that free carriers at the in-plane facets can move freely. Moreover, this phenomenon implied the trapping by the intrinsic defects, while the STEs at the perpendicular facets were less mobile than the respective free carriers at the in-plane facets and thus were exempted from the intrinsic defect state trapping. As a result, it can be argued that the general photophysical picture can be well captured by conducting the TRPL spectra analysis.
2.2 Raman spectroscopy
Resonance Raman spectroscopy is considered one of the most useful methods for detecting the prevailing phonon modes, and it has been recognized as a powerful technique for studying the phonon modes in various STE configurations.30,72 Raman spectroscopy is a powerful technique for detecting the existence of EPC due to the exciton-enhanced Raman cross-section.73,74 The induced STSs from the lattice distortion and change in vibration modes upon photoexcitation can be directly observed by using Raman spectroscopy.30,57,75 As was reported by Perebeinos et al., a sequence of resonant multiphonon Raman scattering spectra and the absolute values of the multiphonon Raman cross-section tensors of STEs in LaMnO3 were predicted.74 In another interesting work presented by Iaru et al., the longitudinal optical phonon mode effectively defined the exciton–phonon scattering in CsPbBr3 by using the mutiphonon Raman scattering.76 The impact of STEs on the shift of the Raman spectra can be analyzed by conducting both the excited and nonexcited Raman spectra measurements. The lattice distortion upon photoexcitation can be further elucidated by analyzing the shift in the Raman peak, while the presence of STEs can be verified by analyzing the additional temperature-sensitive Raman peaks.30,77,78
In the study reported by Li et al., the Raman signals of the STEs in a layered PEA2PbI4 structure were directly observed by conducting excited Raman spectra measurements.79 The corresponding Raman spectra under unexcited (Fig. 3A) and excited states (Fig. 3B) are presented. Three prominent peaks were identified in both the excited and the nonexcited Raman spectra, which were assigned to the vibration of the Pb–I bond. Moreover, an additional peak that appeared under the excited states, ascribed to the Raman signal of STEs, was also observed. In Fig. 3B, the temperature-dependent Raman spectra under excited states exhibited unusual variations in the relative intensities compared with the nonexcited state Raman spectra. The Raman peaks originating from the Raman signals of STEs were rather sensitive to temperature values. In the nonstoichiometric M–In–S (M = Cu, Ag, Hg) quantum dots, the extracted intensity ratio of the I2LO/ILO exhibited a pronounced decreasing pattern when the temperature was increased, which originated from the weaker EPC of the longitudinal optical phonon modes under the excited electronic states.77 Moreover, a clear second-order Raman feature was observed (Fig. 3C) and their intensities were proportional to the strength of the electron-optical phonon coupling, which was described via the Fröhlich mechanism. Therefore, the presence of STE in the nonstoichiometric M–In–S (M = Cu, Ag, Hg) quantum dots can be determined.
 Fig. 3  Raman spectra of STE-related materials. Temperature-dependent Raman spectra of the 2D (PEA)2PbI4 (A) in a nonexcited state when excited by a 1.96 eV laser and (B) in the excited state when excited by a 2.33 eV laser.79 (C) Multipeak fitting of the Ag–In–S nanocrystals Raman spectrum allowed up to 11 components to be deconvoluted in the range of first-order phonons.77 (D) Low-temperature (5 K) Raman spectra of (BA)2PbBr4 flakes at two different orientations (depicted in the insets) under parallel (VV) and orthogonal (HV) configurations.80 
Besides the identification of STEs in solids, Raman spectra can also be employed to gain detailed insights for elucidating the underlying photophysical processes, which involve the self-trapping of excitons favored by lattice distortion and the coupling to phonons.80 By measuring the angle-resolved polarized Raman spectra (Fig. 3D), the directional symmetries of the various phonon modes of two-dimensional lead-halide layered perovskites were obtained by Lin et al.80 The authors demonstrated that the weak STEs band at low temperature was linked to the in-plane phonons from the combination of the angle-resolved polarized Raman spectra and the optical spectra. On the other hand, the strong efficient STEs emission at room temperature was linked to the more complex coupling of the several phonon modes with the out-of-plane phonons. These phenomena were quite different from the respective outcomes of 3D perovskites, where the STEs were assigned to strong longitudinal optical phonons.38,81 Additionally, in the CdSe nanoplatelet superlattices, the zone folded longitudinal acoustic phonon modes were detected by the low-frequency Raman spectroscopy.52 The peak values were well matched with the transient absorption results, which is of great importance for understanding the underlying origin of these phonon modes.
2.3 Transient absorption spectroscopy
Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy is regarded as a pump–probe spectroscopic technique for characterizing the excited state absorption and the associated lifetimes of various materials upon photoexcitation. For this reason, it has become the most powerful tool for studying the dynamic properties of nanostructures. As described above, STE-related materials normally exhibit strong STE emission and sub-band absorption properties. By using the steady-state or time-resolved optical measurements, the peak energy, the temperature-dependent evolution, and the PL lifetime of the STEs emission characteristics can be obtained. However, the origin of the STE formation and annihilation mechanisms, including the STE dynamics, determines the photocarrier transport, lifetime, and other important parameters that are relevant to the energy conversion efficiency, which remains controversial. Considering the different decay times that are involved in the localization state of free excitons and STEs, TA spectroscopy has become one of the most widely used techniques for studying the kinetics of STEs.82–88 By using the time-resolved TA spectroscopy, the real-time dynamic process of the photocarriers’ generation, transportation, and annihilation can be directly observed.89–92 In 1970, TA spectroscopy was utilized to study the dynamics of STEs by Fuller et al., where it was proved that the higher excited state in alkali halide crystals originated from the transition in the lowest triplet states of the STEs.93 Rao et al. also identified the vibrational modes that couple to excitons by carrying out femtosecond TA spectroscopy measurements.94
From the TA spectra, the dynamics of the formation and relaxation processes of STEs can be quantified, which can provide direct pieces of evidence for distinguishing between carriers that stem from free excitons and STEs. Since the early 21st century, some pioneer works have suggested that the TA spectra can also be used to characterize the properties of non-thermalized STEs by analyzing the photoinduced absorption bands in the TA spectra.92,95,96 The ultrafast decay that was attributed to the lattice relaxation from the free excitons state to the STEs state can now be observed directly. More specifically, in the work by Smith et al., a broad photoinduced absorption signal with sub-picosecond lifetime ranges was observed in the TA spectra pumped by the above bandgap excitation.11 Tang et al. also observed a broadband photoinduced absorption at energy values across the visible spectrum with an onset time of 500 fs in alloyed Cs2(Ag0.60Na0.40)InCl6 by collecting TA spectra with a 325 nm wavelength laser photoexcitation.38 The obtained ultrafast lifetime from the TA spectra indicated that the STEs are normally formed within sub-picosecond timeframes.
The fs-TA spectra of Cu doped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 and undoped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 perovskite structures upon excitation with a 365 nm fs-pulsed laser were measured by Cheng et al. and the results are presented in Fig. 4A and B.97 The recorded exciton bleaching decay signal exhibited an ultrafast component that was attributed to the free exciton self-trapping process. Interestingly, the additional positive photoinduced absorption in the probe region from 470 to 640 nm can interpret the formation of STEs in the crystal lattice directly.97 Compared with the undoped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 perovskites, the photoinduced absorption intensity was significantly enhanced, which was accompanied by an obvious blue shift of the measured TA signal. Cheng et al. suggested that the Cu+ doping could increase the density of the photo-generated STEs in the Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 crystals and thereby boost the STEs emission. This broad photoinduced absorption was also widely observed in multi-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals.17,38,39,48,49,51,54,98 However, these broad photoinduced signals may originate from the existence of several different mechanisms, such as hot-carrier relaxation, exciton–exciton interaction, as well as photoinduced absorption of STEs and free excitons.99–102 Since the broad photoinduced signals may originate from a combination of various possible mechanisms, TA spectra dependent on the pump fluence are usually recorded to distinguish the self-trapped recombination from the carrier recombination. Fig. 4C shows the pump fluence dependence of the exciton bleach signal and the slow component lifetime was obtained by fitting the TA bleach signal at the different pump fluences.16 Consequently, the ultrafast lifetime corresponds to the self-trapping process, the fast lifetime corresponds to the surface defect trapping process, and the slow lifetime corresponds to the geminate recombination of excitons and can be distinguished clearly. Furthermore, Tao et al. studied the characteristics of the momentarily trapped exciton polaron induced by lattice vibrations in two-dimensional CsPbBr3 perovskites by using steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopy.103 As shown in Fig. 4D, when the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals were excited with a low-energy pulse laser, a low-energy bleach peak ascribed to LE transition at Emax ∼ 2.83 eV occurred instantly upon photoexcitation. Moreover, the thermal equilibration time obtained from the TA spectra was about 0.4 ps, which was orders of magnitude faster than their respective recombination process.
 Fig. 4  Time-resolved TA spectra of STE-related materials. Temperature-dependent PL spectra of (A) un-doped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 and (B) Cu+-doped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 excited by a 365 nm laser.97 (C) Top: the pump fluence-dependent exciton bleach signal (at 360 nm) fitted by using Poisson statistics. Bottom: the variation of the slow component lifetime as a function of pump fluence deconvoluted from TA spectra.16 (D) 2D color plot of TA spectra under tail excitation; LE and FE represent localized excitons and free excitons.103 (E) 2D color plot of broadband TA spectra recorded in a transmission geometry (−ΔT/T) at 77 K with a 330 nm pump laser. Above 480 nm (dashed line), the color scale was modified as indicated to highlight the spectrally broad photoinduced absorption centered around 550 nm. (F) Photoinduced bleaching of the three excitonic transitions (X1, X2, and X3, blue dots) and photoinduced absorption of the subgap band (STE, red dots) in double logarithmic representation. All the data points correspond to the maximum signal obtained at different delays after the pump.104 
As an important supplementary technique, TA spectra can deeply reveal the origin of the different PL decay processes obtained by TRPL or steady PL spectroscopy. For example, Kastl et al. found a broad photoinduced absorption below the optical gap in the prototypical metal–organic chalcogenide [AgSePh]∞, which only occurred upon optical excitation.104 The bright and dark excitons with a large binding energy of 0.4 eV in [AgSePh]∞ were experimentally probed by performing temperature-dependent linear and nonlinear PL excitation spectroscopy measurements, while the origin of the fast PL decay was not determined.105 By performing low-temperature TA spectroscopy measurements, the excited state dynamics in the [AgSePh]∞ configurations were studied. In Fig. 4E, when the [AgSePh]∞ was excited with an excitation wavelength of 330 nm at 77 K, fast decay of the excitonic on intermediate time scales (t < 10 ps) and the emergence of a broad, subgap photoinduced absorption were observed. The density dependence of the dynamics by varying the pump fluence provided further insights into the exciton relaxation mechanism. As far as the excitonic features of photoinduced bleaching were concerned, a linear dependence relationship with the pump fluence was observed (Fig. 4F, blue dots), which was consistent with the ground state blocking. However, a sublinear dependence for the subgap-related photoinduced absorption was observed (Fig. 4F, red dots), which indicated a competing decay channel. The TA spectra of the metal–organic chalcogenides suggested the STE-related subgap absorption for the first time and proved that the carrier density dependence kinetics could be exclusively attributed to the extrinsic self-trapping.104 However, in other STE-related materials systems, the acquired TA spectra showed that the trapping rate would decrease and the exciton lifetime would increase at relatively large exciton densities.54
2.4 Other techniques
In addition to PL spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and TA spectroscopy, some other techniques have also been applied to identify and study the properties of STEs in nanostructures. More specifically, optical absorption spectra or reflectance spectra are usually used to characterize the properties of STEs combined with the PL spectra.70,106–108 The absorption spectra for the STE-related materials usually show a pronounced peak for the free excitons. However, no sub-band absorption was observed, which can distinguish them from the intrinsic crystal defects. Li et al. observed a weak reflection peak attributed to the STEs in the reflectance spectrum of the (BA)2PbI4 nanocrystal.15 In addition, photoconductivity measurements were also used to characterize the STEs. By conducting the polarization-resolved photoconductivity measurements, Li et al. studied the anisotropy of excitons within the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 2D perovskite nanostructure.106 The results indicated the existence of opposite polarization-dependent behaviors for the free excitons and STEs. Furthermore, angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, which is usually utilized to examine the band structure of semiconductors, has also been applied to study the relaxation process of STE-related materials.109–112 Lietard et al. observed an unusual type of vibronic-based relaxation towards the formation of STEs in nanometer-sized argon clusters by carrying out time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy measurements.113 Laru et al. clarified the dominant phonon mode of the Fröhlich coupling in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals by conducting THz time-domain spectroscopy and multiphonon Raman scattering measurements.76 By using these conventional or specific methods, the complex phonon and electronic states that participate in the EPC process can be well identified, as well as a detailed description of the photophysical process can be derived.
3 Tuning of STEs
STEs have been observed in a variety of materials, such as perovskite,3,24 Metal chalcogenides,43,114–117 van der Waals heterostructures,118 and two-dimensional organic semiconductors.119–122 Normally, the amorphization, disorder, and lattice expansion are ascribed to the formation of STEs.48,123 However, due to the different structure characteristics, the origins of the so-called lattice distortions are not the same. Especially in the perovskite structure, the torsional rotation and phase transition of the octahedra can also be ascribed to the formation of STEs.123,124 Recently, great achievements for tunable STEs in soft semiconductors have been reported. The fabrication procedures of nanostructures with tunable STEs characteristics are of particular importance for further studying their optoelectronic properties and applications. Since STEs can be affected by variable factors including composition, dimensions, crystal size, and crystal structure, a variety of efficient approaches have been developed for tuning the emissive properties of STEs. Generally, the approaches to tuning the STEs in nanostructures can be classified into the following three categories: compositional engineering, structure engineering, and external field engineering.
3.1 Compositional engineering
Since doping and alloying have been generally used as effective methods for improving or influencing the electronic and optical properties of functional materials, composite engineering has been regarded as the most efficient method for tuning the properties of STEs. Metal ionic doping and alloying are the predominant methods for tuning the properties of STEs, such as the emission spectral coverage and efficiency.125 In a pioneer work reported by Lee et al., the Te-doped ZnSe exhibited STE emission features at low temperatures due to the strong localization imposed by Te at the Te nearest neighbor sites.114 Recently, doping-triggered STEs in perovskite structures have drawn considerable attention and great achievements have been obtained.19,46,61 Yu et al. reported strong extrinsic STEs in the 2D PEA2PbI4 perovskite configuration by introducing Sn doping.48 Taking the Sn-doped 2D perovskite as an example, free excitons would bind to the Sn dopant and lead to the formation of STEs. Moreover, the STEs emission intensity was increased first and then decreased as the doping level exceeded the threshold value of 0.36% (Fig. 5A). The density functional theory (DFT) calculation results indicated that Sn dopants introduced subtle potential wells, which enabled impurities to localize excitons. Combined with the intrinsic soft lattice nature of perovskites, the localized excitons would induce lattice distortion, which resulted in the formation of STEs. The doping strategy has been widely used for the fabrication of various kinds of STE-related materials beyond perovskites, such as Dy3+-doped LaInO3,126 Ni-doped BaB2O4,127 and Cu+/Ag+-doped CdS and CdSe/CdS quantum dots.128,129 In addition, by alloying two different materials to fabricate composite compounds, high-performance STE-related materials can be obtained. For example, although no STE emission was observed in either the (F2CHCH2NH3)2CdBr4 perovskite or (F2CHCH2NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite due to the dipole forbidden transitions or the non-Jahn–Teller-like distortions of the STEs, it is interesting to note that the alloyed CdxPb1−xBr4 (x represents the feed ratio of Cd) perovskite exhibited intense white light emission with an increase in the PLQY from 1% to 32.5%.37,130,131 Lee et al. found unusual PL features in the ZnSe/ZnTe alloyed nanostructures.114 Luo et al. realized STEs emission in 2D (F2CHCH2NH3)2CdBr4 perovskite through Pb alloying.130 The doping/alloying favors the localization of charge carriers and breaks the section rules for dipole-forbidden transitions of STEs, thus enabling efficient broadband emission.38,83,130,132,133
 Fig. 5  Properties of doping and alloying-triggered STEs. (A) Intensity and peak position of the STE emission spectra as a function of the doping level in Sn-doped PEA2PbI4 (λex = 470 nm).48 (B) PLQY for a series of the Bi/Ln: double perovskites. The inset shows the proposed energy-transfer mechanism and emission process involving both STE recombination and Ln3+ 4f–4f transitions.140 (C) Temperature-dependent ln(IBE/INE) ratios for a series of (001) Pb–Br perovskites with different organic cations.63 Kubelka–Munk absorption/emission spectra (top) and schematic of the trapping/detrapping processes of STEs and free excitons (bottom) for (D) chloride, (E) bromide, and (F) iodide compounds.27 
Further development in the doped materials indicates that the properties of STEs can be further tuned by following the co-doping approach.60,134–137 Due to the different radii and electronic structure of the dopants, co-doping may induce a relatively larger lattice distortion or lead to the formation of a sub-band.50,60,138–140 Jin et al. fabricated a family of lanthanide (Ln3+) ions doped Bi: Cs2AgInCl6 double perovskite structures, which exhibited broadband PL spectra from the visible to the near-infrared range and high PLQY.140 The PLQY of the Ln3+ doped Cs2AgInCl6 double perovskite structure was presented in Fig. 5B. The Bi3+ doping can introduce different energy-transfer channels for STE emission and Ln3+ 4f–4f emissions. In this case, ultra-broadband luminescence covering the Vis and NIR spectral regions has been realized in the Bi3+/Ln3+ multidoping double-perovskite and the highest PLOY can be improved to 56.3%. On top of that, Arfin et al. achieved near-infrared STEs emission in Bi3+/Er3+ co-doped and Bi3+/Yb3+ co-doped Cs2AgInCl6 structure, as well as ultrahigh PL emission intensity compared to the Er3+ doped and Yb3+ doped Cs2AgInCl6 conFIGuration.135 Zhou et al. realized tunable blue and yellow emission in Sb3+/Bi3+ co-doped Cs2NaInCl6 double perovskite and the PLQY reached the value of 77%.141 The experimental measurements and DFT calculation results indicated that the blue emission was attributed to the limited Jahn–Teller deformation that was induced by Sb3+ doping, whereas the yellow emission originated from the Bi3+ doping-induced sub-band level. Liu et al. also realized tunable dual-emission covering of the white-light spectrum in the Cs2NalnCl6 perovskite successfully by utilizing Sb3+/Mn2+ co-doping.137 As a result, the intrinsic STE emission of Sb3+ doped Cs2NaInCl6 exhibit the best PLQE of 84% (blue emission), while the PLQE value of Sb3+/Mn2+ co-doped Cs2NaInCl6 can reach 24%. Zeng et al. realized triplet STE in Rb7Bi3Cl16 metal halides perovskite by introducing Sb3+ doping and the highest PLQY reached the value of 30.7%.141
In low-dimensional perovskite, molecular substitution, coordination number adjusting, and metal cation substitution are also widely used for tuning the STE properties.27,62,63,142–149 Smith et al. studied the STE emission of a series of 2D Pb–Br hybrid perovskites, which were fabricated by adjusting the organic cation.63 Broadband STEs emissions were commonly observed in 9 different types of Pb–Br perovskites, and the relative intensities of the STEs emission spectra were correlated with the increasing out-of-plane distortion and organic cations. In Fig. 5C, the temperature-dependent ln(IBE/INE) ratios for a series of (001) Pb–Br perovskites are presented.63 The temperature dependence relations of each perovskite were qualitatively similar but the absolute values were dispersed.
The tuning of STEs can also be realized by adjusting the type of anion.27,142,143,145–147 Gautier et al. systematically studied the impact of halogen (Cl–, Br– and I–) on the STEs.27 By comparing optical properties (PL spectra and absorbance spectra), it was demonstrated that the STE emission was more intense for the lighter halogen-based halides, as well as the decreasing of the bandgap for heavier halogen halides (Fig. 5D–F). The self-trapping depths were calculated based on the utilization of an empirical equation and followed the trend of Cl > Br > I.50,150,151 The trapping and detrapping energies of the halogen compositions were strongly related to the self-trapping depths, which were attributed to the evolution of the STEs emission. This trend was suggested to originate from the different lattice deformation potentials induced by the different M–X bonding (M represents metal ionic and X represents the halogens), including the strength and atomic species.132,146,152,153
3.2 Structure engineering
The manifestation of high degrees of structural freedom permit is attributed to unusual optoelectronic properties in solids. Along these lines, in this section, the crystal structure engineering (such as dimensionality engineering and lattice structure) and microstructure engineering (such as superlattice, van der Waals heterostructure, and core–shell structure) for tunable STEs are reviewed.
The development of van der Waals structures via the integration of two van der Waals materials enabled the fabrication of new platforms for unique optoelectronic properties. Recent studies indicated that strong EPC can be observed in various van der Waals structures, such as hBN/WSe2, WSe2/WS2, and MoS2/WS2.150,154–156 However, in 2D materials with soft lattices, the strong EPC could also trigger the formation of STEs.80,118,157–160 Deng et al. theoretically studied the properties of STS, which were imposed by the interlayer excitons in the MoS2/hBN van der Waals heterostructures with four different kinds of configurations.118 The interlayer excitons had three types due to the energy-shifting effect (Fig. 6A). Among these three types of interlayer excitons, there are two types of excitons related to the STSs, including type I with increasing binding energy and type II with decreasing binding energy. Both types of STSs can be effectively tuned by the structural parameters of the van der Waals heterostructure configurations. The formation of different interlayer exciton types originated from the different decay rates of the Coulomb potential correction (ΔEc), self-trapping energy (ΔEs), and the total correction of the binding energy (ΔEb) (shown in Fig. 6B);118 the STEs in van der Waals heterojunctions have already been experimentally proved.158,159 More specifically, in the epitaxial grown SnSe2/STO heterojunction, a nearly flat in-gap band that correlated with a significant charge modulation in real space was systematically observed by performing angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements (Fig. 6C and D).158 This unconventional interfacial phenomenon was ascribed to the presence of interfacial self-trapped small polarons. The charge accumulation and the electron–phonon coupling that occurred at the van der Waals interface of SnSe2 and STO were also attributed to the formation of interfacial self-trapped small polarons.
 Fig. 6  Structure engineering for tunable STEs. (A) Schematic diagrams of three types of interlayer exciton: free exciton state, STS with the increasing binding energy (type I), and STS with the decreasing binding energy (type II) in the MoS2/MoS2/h-BN structure. (B) The corrections of the self-trapping energy (ΔEs), Coulomb potential (ΔEc), and binding energy (ΔEb) of interlayer excitons in the MoS2/MoS2/h-BN structure as a function of h0 at D = 0.4 nm (h0 is the vertical distance between MoS2 and h-BN and D is the spatial distance between the electron and the hole).118(C) Schematic view of the geometric structure (bottom) and STM topographic image (top) of the SnSe2/STO. (D) The second derivative of the ARPES spectra taken on the SnSe2/STO along the Γ–M direction.158 (E) PL intensity trajectories of a single core–shell CdSe/CdS quantum dot (right) and PL intensity histograms as a function of CdS shell monolayer number (left).164 (F) Map of the TA profile of CdSe nanoplate superlattices and monodispersed CdSe nanoplates (inset).52 (G) Schematic structures of the (C4H9NH3I)2(CH3NH3I)n−1(PbI2)n perovskites. (H) Absorption (dotted) and fluorescence (solid) spectra of the 2D perovskite correspondence to (G). (I) Intensity ratio between PL emission from below-gap traps and that from band gap excitons as a function of temperature for 2D perovskite and 3D perovskites from PbI2.31 
Similarly, the development of heterostructures without van der Waals interfaces has also been proved to play a key role in obtaining high-performance STEs properties.161–163 In the ZnS–CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots core–shell nanoplates structures, the STE-related broad emission spectra were essential to the improvement of the PL quantum efficiency (PLQE).162 The synthesized multinary core–shell CdSe/CdS quantum dots exhibited size-dependent absorption characteristics and PL intermittency (Fig. 6E), which can be described by using the modified charge tunneling and self-trapping models.164 The CdSe/CdS core–shell nanoplatelets with strong and shell thickness-dependent exciton–phonon interactions were further examined by Achtstein et al. in 2018.161
Another important approach to obtaining high-performance STE-related materials is the fabrication of superlattices. The STEs in the SiOx/ZrO2 superlattices and ZnSe/(CdSe)m(ZnSe)n superlattices have been studied.43,165 However, these works mainly focused on the interpretation of the optical spectra phenomenon, while the underlying formation mechanism and applications of the STEs in superlattices remain unclear. In 2021, Sui et al. fabricated CdSe nanoplate superlattices by enforcing a simple self-assembly method (inset of Fig. 6F).52 Zone-folded longitudinal acoustic phonons in the CdSe nanoplate superlattices were formed because the bulk acoustic phonons folded into a mini-Brillouin zone, and the EPC strength was remarkably enhanced (Fig. 6F). As a result, STEs were generated via a strong coupling between the excitons and the zone-folded longitudinal acoustic phonons within ∼450 fs in the excited state. More importantly, these works provided new opportunities for generating and manipulating STEs by designing superlattice structures.
In low-dimensional perovskites (0D to 2D), engineering their crystal structures is also one of the predominant methods for tuning the PL-related properties of STEs, both in spectral coverage and PLQY. The crystal structures of (C4H9NH3I)2(CH3NH3I)n−1(PbI2)n (n = 1, 2, 3) perovskites are presented in Fig. 6G.31 By adjusting the degree of the stoichiometry of the inorganic layer (n), both the absorption spectra and the PL spectra exhibited an obvious shift as the n increased from 1 to 3 (shown in Fig. 6H). In addition, the STEs emission also can be tuned by controlling the effective ligand length.149 Moreover, as the dimension decreased from the 3D lead iodide perovskite to the 2D lead iodide perovskite, both the peak position and intensity of the recorded STEs emission spectra were varied (Fig. 6I).31 The varied STEs emission induced by the dimensional reduction have also been experimentally observed and theoretically predicted.36,145,166,167
3.3 Field modulation
The implementation of an external field has been also proved to greatly affect the optical and electronic properties of solids. According to recently reported works, the electric field, pressure, magnetic field, and optical field have a great impact on the EPC.168,169 Among the various kinds of fields, pressure can significantly tailor the electronic structure, bonding pattern and chemical behavior of materials.170,171 In the STE-related materials, external fields have also been applied to tune the STEs. Among the various kinds of fields, pressure has drawn the most attention for tuning the properties of STEs in semiconductors, which originated from the pressure-triggered structure phase transition and amorphization mechanisms.45,123,154,170,172–183 Usually, the pressure-induced STEs emissions are ascribed to the structural phase transition, which is accompanied by considerable structural distortion.45 For example, Wang et al. reported a 90% PLQY in the one-dimensional C4N2H14PbBr4 perovskite due to the pressure-induced STE emission.183 In addition, by using a symmetric diamond anvil cell, the 1D chains suffered a sliding along the c-axis. As a result, the soft lattice perovskite experienced a reversible structural phase transition between the orthorhombic phase (Imma) and the monoclinic phase (P21/n) upon compression (Fig. 7A). Interestingly, the bandgap, PL center wavelength, and the Stokes shift of the C4N2H14PbBr4 perovskites are highly sensitive to the applied pressure (Fig. 7B and C), which indicated the possibility of regulating STEs via high pressure.
 Fig. 7  External field-induced tunable STEs. (A) Crystal structure viewed along the 1D chain direction (b axis), which illustrates the orthorhombic to monoclinic phase transition at 2.8 GPa. Pressure-induced evolution of (B) bandgap/emission energy and (C) Stokes shift of C4N2H14PbBr4.183 (D) Pressure-dependent chromaticity coordinates of the STEs emission of Cs4PbBr6 nanocrystal.45 
Ma et al. also observed pressure-induced STEs emission in the Cs4PbBr6 perovskite as the pressure was higher than 3.01 GPa.45 The appeared STEs were believed to be associated with the structural phase transformation in the compressed perovskite, which was attributed to the large distortion and increased stiffness of the [PbBr6]4− octahedral upon compression. For the high-pressure phase, the electronic band structure was more seriously affected in the presence of lattice distortion, which ambiguously indicated the existence of a stronger electron–phonon coupling. The corresponding chromaticity coordinates of the STEs emission with high pressure from 3.01 to 18.23 GPa are recorded in Fig. 7D.45 The evolution of the luminescence colors also suggested the tunability of STEs from the applied pressure.45,170,182 Qin et al. demonstrated the existence of tunable STEs in a group of 2D [CnH2n+1NH3]2PbI4 (n = 4, 8, 12) perovskites via pressure.180 The ab initio molecular dynamics simulations and in situ optical measurements disclosed that the longer alkyl amine cations increased the complexity of the phase transition and amorphization procedures.
Fang et al. realized moisture-activated STEs in perovskite-related structures for the first time.184 More specifically, when the non-luminescent (t-BA)3Cu6I9 perovskite was exposed to moisture, a reversible transformation into the highly luminescent hydrate (t-BA)2Cu2I4·H2O configuration was formed. The PLQE of the moisture-induced STEs emission can reach the value of 59.4%. The moisture-regulated STEs emission was further proved by Kou et al.185 An unusual light emission variation from white to red (annealed at 383 K) and back to white (exposed to moist air) was also observed in metal halide powders. The dielectric confinement and the surface polarization introduced by the surface-absorbed H2O layer could lead to the formation of broadband white emission. From these studies, the great potential for developing tunable STEs by applying them to external fields is highlighted.
4 Application of STEs
The excellent optoelectronic properties and the feasible tuning of STEs enable a large range of STE-related optoelectronic applications. Although no commercial applications have been realized, STE-related materials have exhibited some potential, especially in fundamental studies. In this section, we mainly focus on the main advantages and research progress of STEs for potential applications related to optoelectronic devices, such as LEDs, photodetectors, and scintillators.
4.1 Light-emitting diodes
To date, the STE-related nanostructures have emerged as a highly promising class of light-emitting materials due to their broadband emission properties from STEs.135,182,186–190 The broadband sub-band emission PL spectra of the STE-related materials with large Stokes shifts, high quantum efficiency, and tunable center wavelength render them among of the most promising candidates for the development of high-efficiency LEDs with desirable light wavelengths. The development of LEDs from STE-related materials has drawn wide attention due to the high PLQE and feasible color tunability.62,70,188,191,192 However, LEDs based on the implementation of STE-related materials have developed rather slowly from their initial discovery stage due to the limited PLQE values and high excitation energy. The rapid development of the material synthesis techniques, as well as the great achievement of the STEs’ tuning methods, have significantly accelerated the development of STE materials in both the members of STE-related materials and those attaining enhanced PLQE. As a result, substantial progress has been achieved in STE-based LEDs in recent years.
In 2018, Wang et al. realized a bright white light emitter by coating STE-related materials composed of polar 2D hybrid perovskite onto a commercial LED lamp (Fig. 8A).193 Arfin et al. fabricated a co-doped Cs2AgInCl6 perovskite that showed intense NIR emission.135 A white LED was obtained by coating the co-doped Cs2AgInCl6 perovskite on a commercial ultraviolet (UV) LED. These initial achievements suggested the STE-induced light emission functionalities, which could be of great importance for the future development of LEDs with controlled colors. The first LED based on the utilization of STE-related Cs3Cu2I5 perovskite film was fabricated by Jun et al. in 2018.194 The current density–luminance–voltage characteristics for the fabricated LED devices are shown in Fig. 8B and the maximum luminance can reach about 10 cd cm−2. Moreover, Cs3Cu2I5 nanocrystals, which exhibited a much higher PLQE value of 87%, were synthesized.192 The fabricated electrically driven deep-blue LEDs (∼445 nm) exhibited a high external quantum efficiency of ∼1.12% and remarkable operating stability (T50 = 108 h). By fabricating the ternary CsCu2I3 perovskite, Ma et al. demonstrated a yellow LED with a maximum luminance of 47.5 cd m−2 and an external quantum efficiency of 0.17%.39
 Fig. 8  LEDs based on STE-related materials. (A) Photographs of UV–LED lamps (top) and the LED coated with a thin layer of (2meptH2)PbBr4 (bottom), in the off and on states.193 (B) Current–density–luminance–voltage characteristics of the blue LED using a Cs3Cu2I5 thin film as an emission layer, and (inset) its photograph.194 (C) Schematic diagram of the WLEDs with the α/δ-CsPbI3 heterophase. (D) Electroluminescence spectra (the inset shows the photograph) and (E) external quantum efficiency and current efficiency of the WLEDs are presented in (C). (F) The proposed carrier injection and recombination mechanism for WLEDs.19 (G) Schematic diagram of the top-emitting LEDs. (H) External quantum efficiency (EQE)–current density characteristics of top-emitting LEDs.189 
Although the intrinsic broadband spectral emissions from STEs permit the realization of white LED (WLED) with a single emitter,140,195,196 the recorded performances are far from commercial application. However, it was recently reported that the excellent properties of STE-related materials can be used for the development of LEDs with superior performance, in terms of high EQE, high color rendering index, robust stability, and tunable color emission center.3,182,190,196–198 More specifically, Jin et al. fabricated an ultra-broadband LED by coupling lanthanide-doped perovskites with a commercial UV chip.140 The proposed device can produce a relatively bright yellow light centered at around 600 nm and an intense NIR light centered at 1820 nm. Chen et al. demonstrated a highly efficient LED comprised of a mixed phase of α-CsPbI3 and δ-CsPbI3 perovskites.19 The schematic diagram (Fig. 8C) and image under the operation of the WLED (inset of Fig. 8D) are presented. In addition, from the corresponding EL spectrum in Fig. 8D, it was indicated that the emission covered the whole visible band and the color was close to the natural sunlight. The devices yielded a maximum EQE of 6.5%, as well as high current efficiency of 12.23 cd A−1 (Fig. 8E). As presented in Fig. 8F, the synergistic injection and combination at the α-CsPbI3/δ-CsPbI3 interface played a crucial role in achieving high-efficiency and high-brightness WLEDs. By taking full advantage of the broadband STE emission via the materials’ structure design, high-performance devices can be realized.
Besides these studies on the luminescence property optimization of the materials, recent studies have also proved that high-performance LEDs can be realized via a fine device architecture design.199–201 To further improve the efficiency and the color purity of STE-related LED devices, Sun et al. designed a top-emitting microcavity device with tunable dimensions by using a highly reflective anode Al and a semitransparent cathode (shown in Fig. 8G).189 As can be ascertained from Fig. 8H, the maximum EQE of the top-emitting microcavity device can reach the value of 2.12%. The 2-fold and 26% enhancements in forwarding brightness and EQE are realized due to the microcavity effect. Further studies suggested that the performance of the devices can be fine-tuned by adjusting the microcavity parameters.
The STE-emission materials are considered excellent candidates due to their suitable optoelectronic properties, and significant progress has been achieved especially in the luminescence property optimization. As the basic criterion for LED application, the PLQYs of STE-related materials have been greatly enhanced. Although the recent progress depicts a bright future for LED applications and these results are encouraging, there is still tremendous work to be done. Most of the reported works are devoted to luminescence property optimization, practical LED devices are rarely reported, and the performances of the devices still lag far behind practical applications.
4.2 Photodetectors
Since the main advantages of STEs seem to be attributed to their excellent emissive properties, the applications of STE-related materials are mainly focused on light emitters. Recent reports have proved that the STEs-triggered unique light–matter interaction could lead to specific photodetection performance.62,70,202–204 The TRPL lifetime and TA spectra indicate that the STEs exhibit a longer lifetime, which is beneficial for photogenerated carrier separation. As a result, the performance of the STE-based photodetectors may be enhanced due to the more efficient photogenerated carrier separation and collection rate.
In 2019, Li et al. designed an STE-enabled filterless narrowband photodetector by using a 2D layered perovskite for the first time.15 The photodetection performance of this photodetector can be continuously tuned from red to blue with all full-width at half-maximum <60 nm and especially <20 nm in the blue wavelength range. The mechanism of the narrowband spectral response was attributed to the synergistic effect of the charge collection narrowing concept and the STS.205 The reflection, absorption, PL, and photoconductivity spectra for the device indicated the possibility of sub-band absorption (Fig. 9a). Moreover, the appearance of the response peaks (denoted as Xt) in three different device configurations indicated that the narrowband response originated from the STS rather than the absorptions of free excitons (Fig. 9B).
 Fig. 9  Photodetection properties of STEs related materials. (A) Normalized photoconductivity (PC), photoluminescence (PL), reflectance, and absorption spectra of the (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 device. (B) Normalized external quantum efficiency spectra of the (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 devices with three different measurement configurations (the details of the configuration can be founded in Li et al.’ work).15 (C) Illustration of the deep energy levels of VO2+ defects in CST-ZnO and the external charge injection from PbS CQDs under IR irradiation. Electrons are trapped at VO2+ defects.206 (D) PL intensity of STE versus polarization angles. (E) Reflectance intensity of STE versus polarization angles. (F) Photocurrent intensity versus the polarization angle with a cosine-function fitting line in polar coordinates.212 
Inspired by this pioneering work, the development of STE-related photodetectors has drawn wide attention in the last few years. Besides the novel wavelength selection rules, the STEs are also beneficial for enhancing the device's efficiency.148,206 Bai et al. fabricated a highly sensitive photodetector with high responsivity and high external quantum efficiency.148 Xu et al. fabricated a PbS quantum dots-based infrared photodetector that exhibited a high responsivity of 77 A W−1 and high specific detectivity of 1.5 × 1011 Jones at 1550 nm.206 These excellent performances were mainly attributed to the interfacial electrical field and the large photo multiplication, which was induced by the photogenerated carriers’ self-trapping process. As shown in Fig. 9C, the ZnO film acts as a charge-self-trapped hole-blocking layer, and a large number of photogenerated carriers are self-trapped upon irradiation. On the other hand, the STE-induced sub-band light absorption could significantly extend the photoresponse range. For example, by using the STE-enabled upconversion mechanism, the below-bandgap absorption was realized and the broadband photoresponse in the range from ultraviolet to near-infrared was demonstrated.68 Pan et al. also revealed that the STE-induced sub-band energy levels can promote sub-band photon absorption, which further resulted in extending the photoresponse range.207 In the Ga2O3 Schottky photodetectors,208–210 the self-trapped holes resulted in an internal gain, which was attributed to the high responsivity of the photodetectors. In the Cs3Bi2Br9 perovskite, negative photoconductivity was demonstrated due to the hole self-trapping-induced external field.211
Furthermore, according to recent development, the fabrication of photodetectors based on STE-related materials can be further extended to realize polarized photodetection. More explicitly, Li et al. demonstrated a polarization-sensitive narrowband photodetector based on the 2D perovskite single crystals without using any additional optical components for the first time in 2019.201 By collecting the photocarriers within the in-plane direction by employing oblique incident configuration, excellent polarization-sensitive narrowband photodetection performances of the photodetectors were demonstrated. The STEs in this work were mainly attributed to the filterless narrowband photodetection, while the anisotropy structure was ascribed to the polarization photoresponse process. However, in the work by Zhou et al., excellent polarization-sensitive photodetectors in isotropy structures were achieved due to the STS that induced in-plane structure anisotropy.212 The lattice distortion induced by strong EPC was ascribed to the manifestation of the in-plane crystal isotropic and optical anisotropy, which were supported by the polarization-resolved PL (Fig. 9D) and the polarization-resolved reflection spectra (Fig. 9E). As a result, polarization-sensitive photoresponse was demonstrated (Fig. 9F).
In general, by considering the comparative advantages of the STEs, including the polarization-dependent absorption coefficient, long lifetime, and light absorption, high-performance photodetectors with adjustable parameters can be realized by using STE-related materials. More specifically, the photodetectors possess the ability to detect both the wavelength and the polarization of the incident light simultaneously.
4.3 Other applications
STE-related materials have a wide range of potential applications, such as in solar cells,213,214 luminescent solar concentrators,215,216 lasing,217,218 photocatalysts,219 sensors220 and scintillators.221 Scintillators based on STE-related nanostructures were reported and self-absorption characteristics from STE emission were attributed to the high light yield.61,221,222 Zhou et al. demonstrated the existence of an in situ transformation between the hydrated Cs2InBr5·H2O and dehydrated form, which was accompanied by a switchable dual emission from bright red PL to yellow PL.223 These phenomena may enable the utilization of hydrated Cs2InBr5 perovskite for high-performance light emitters and sensors. For a detailed discussion of the application of STEs related materials, the readers are encouraged to refer to the excellent reviews by Guo et al.3 and Luo et al.21
5 Conclusions
The unique properties of the STEs permit their integration into optoelectronic devices for the realization of high-performance optoelectronic devices. The most recent advancements in STEs, especially characterization methods and tuning methods, were reviewed in detail. Encouragingly, high-performance optoelectronic devices based on STE materials have been obtained in the last few years. Despite the rapid progress that has been achieved, many challenges remain in this field that should be figured out. To promote their further development, some major perspectives on the key challenges and the potential research directions are suggested as follows:
(1) To fulfill the demands of the fundamental studies, a comprehensive understanding of the physical mechanism of STEs that involves the formation and relaxation of the photophysical process is needed. Since the STEs exist only upon photoexcitation, it is difficult to directly observe the formation and relaxation process of STEs. Therefore, in situ and time-resolved characterization methods should be developed to investigate the excited states of STEs.
(2) The exploration of novel strategies for improved STEs is worthy of further study. The STEs are mainly introduced by doping and crystal structure engineering techniques. The recently developed engineering by fabricating a superlattice and van der Waals interface are very promising strategies for tuning the properties of STEs. However, the practical application of these strategies is significantly limited due to the relatively small number of materials systems and lack of understanding of the respective formation mechanisms. Recently, some achievements in the interlayer coupling and twisted angles triggered strong EPC in van der Waals structures have been reported.78,224,225 In the van der Waals structures, the twisted angle degree of freedom may permit the manifestation of some unique performance. The STEs in the soft lattice crystal assembled twisted van der Waals structure may enable more promising properties.
(3) The performance of the STE-related materials-based optoelectronic devices should be further improved. The efficiency of the STEs for LED applications has led to impressive improvements in the last few years but it is still far away from the commercial LED. To eventually realize commercial application, the stability and quantum efficiency should be further improved. As far as the photodetector's application is concerned, the STEs are promising for broadband and polarization photodetection. By overcoming the recombination and transport problems of the photogenerated carriers, the technical parameters of the STE-based photodetectors may be further enhanced.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, D. L. and Y. Z.; investigation, J. T. and J. Z.; resources, Y. Z.; writing—original draft preparation, J. T. N. H. and D. L.; writing—review and editing, D. L., Y. G. and Y. Z.; supervision, Y. Z.; project administration, D. L. and Y. Z.; funding acquisition, D. L. and Y. Z.; all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61975134 and 61905161), the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (JCYJ20190808142415003 and JCYJ20180305125345378), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020B1515020051), the Shenzhen Nanshan District Pilotage Team Program (LHTD20170006), and Open Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of Laser-Matter Interaction (SKLLIM1901).
References
D. Li, C. Trovatello, S. D. Conte, M. Nuss, G. Soavi, G. Wang, A. C. Ferrari, G. Cerullo and T. Brixner, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 954 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Antonius and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B, 2022, 105, 085111 CrossRef .
Q. Guo, X. Zhao, B. Song, J. Luo and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 2201008 CrossRef .
F. Cavallo and M. G. Lagally, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 439–455 RSC .
X. Liu and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900439 CrossRef .
M. Crespillo, J. Graham, F. Agulló-López, Y. Zhang and W. Weber, Crystals, 2019, 9, 95 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Hu, J. Ma, C. Jiang, S. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Hu, X. Liu, T. Wu and D. Li, ACS Photonics, 2022, 9, 2008–2014 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Yang, F. Su, J. Tan, Y. Luo and S. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Benin, D. N. Dirin, V. Morad, M. Worle, S. Yakunin, G. Raino, O. Nazarenko, M. Fischer, I. Infante and M. V. Kovalenko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11329–11333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kar, Y. Su, R. R. Nair and A. K. Sood, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12004–12010 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Smith and H. I. Karunadasa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 619–627 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Pastor, M. Sachs, S. Selim, J. R. Durrant, A. A. Bakulin and A. Walsh, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2022, 7, 503–521 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Wang and D. Li, Front. Optoelectron., 2020, 13, 225–234 CrossRef .
G. Wu, C. Zhou, W. Ming, D. Han, S. Chen, D. Yang, T. Besara, J. Neu, T. Siegrist, M.-H. Du, B. Ma and A. Dong, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1443–1449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Wang, J. Ma, H. Shen, L. Li, X. Duan and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 806 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, F. Hong, J. Chen, Y. Tang, L. Yang, Y. Sang, X. Xia, J. Guo, H. He, S. Yang, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2278–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Chen, F. Hong, X. Mao, K. Zheng, S. Yang, Y. Li, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12471–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Morad, Y. Shynkarenko, S. Yakunin, A. Brumberg, R. D. Schaller and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9764–9768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Wang, X. Xu, J. Li, J. Song, S. Lan, S. Liu, B. Cai, B. Han, J. T. Precht, D. Ginger and H. Zeng, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 15, 238–244 CrossRef .
Z. Qi, T. Yang, D. Li, H. Li, X. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Li, W. Zheng, P. Fan, X. Zhuang and A. Pan, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1474–1480 RSC .
J. Luo, M. Hu, G. Niu and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31575–31584 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38333–38340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, M. D. Smith, E. R. Dohner, M. J. Sher, X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, A. Fisher, J. Corbett, X. Y. Zhu, H. I. Karunadasa and A. M. Lindenberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2258–2263 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, H. Xiang, Y. Zou, S. Zhang, B. Cai, J. Zhang, L. Hou and H. Zeng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 10, 2101900 CrossRef .
Y. W. Zhang, Y. L. Fu, F. W. Tang and X. P. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 4509–4516 CrossRef .
S. Li, J. Luo, J. Liu and J. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1999–2007 CrossRef .
R. Gautier, M. Paris and F. Massuyeau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12619–12623 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-M. Lai, Y.-R. Xie and J. Zhang, Nano Res., 2020, 14, 1711–1733 CrossRef .
R. T. Williams and K. S. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1990, 51, 679–716 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanimura, T. Suzuki and N. Itoh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 635–638 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089–2096 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, Y. Wu, C. C. Stoumpos, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5210–5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, Y. Wu, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traore, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11956–11963 CrossRef CAS .
P. Han, X. Zhang, X. Mao, B. Yang, S. Yang, Z. Feng, D. Wei, W. Deng, T. Pullerits and K. Han, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1405–1413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Jing, J. Zhao, Q. Liu and Z. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, X. Jiang, H. P. Cai, K. Chen, X. Yao and Y. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 10472–10478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Meng, W. Liao, J. Wang, R. G. Xiong and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 501–506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao, Q. Dong, C. Zhao, M. Leng, F. Ma, W. Liang, L. Wang, S. Jin, J. Han, L. Zhang, J. Etheridge, J. Wang, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nature, 2018, 563, 541–545 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Z. Shi, C. Qin, M. Cui, D. Yang, X. Wang, L. Wang, X. Ji, X. Chen, J. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. J. Li, L. Zhang and C. Shan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4475–4486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Sun, J. Zhang, X. Gao, C. Yang, Q. Li, H. Jiang, J. Wang and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7587–7592 CrossRef CAS .
G. Volonakis, A. A. Haghighirad, R. L. Milot, W. H. Sio, M. R. Filip, B. Wenger, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 772–778 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mariano, A. Cretì, L. Carbone, A. Genco, S. D'Agostino, S. Carallo, G. Montagna, M. Lomascolo and M. Mazzeo, Commun. Phys., 2020, 3, 41 CrossRef CAS .
W.-z. Lin, W.-j. Peng, C. Xie, G. Xu, Z.-l. Peng and S.-x. Yuan, Chin. Phys. Lett., 1996, 13, 141–144 CrossRef .
T. Chlouba, F. Trojánek, V. Kopecký, J. Lopez-Vidrier, S. Hernaendez, D. Hiller, S. Gutsch, M. Zacharias and P. Malý, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126, 163101 CrossRef .
Z. W. Ma, Z. Liu, S. Y. Lu, L. R. Wang, X. L. Feng, D. W. Yang, K. Wang, G. J. Xiao, L. J. Zhang, S. A. T. Redfern and B. Zou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4506 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Hu, J. Luo, T. Jin, J. Liu, J. Li, Z. Tan, Y. Han, Z. Zheng, T. Zhai, H. Song, L. Gao, G. Niu and J. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 23 CrossRef .
J. L. Gavartin, P. V. Sushko and A. L. Shluger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035108 CrossRef .
J. Yu, J. Kong, W. Hao, X. Guo, H. He, W. R. Leow, Z. Liu, P. Cai, G. Qian, S. Li, X. Chen and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806385 Search PubMed .
l. Zhou, J. Liao, Y. Qin, X. Wang, J. Wei, M. Li, D. Kuang and R. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102654 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and Z. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2626–2662 RSC .
L. Zhou, J. F. Liao, Z. G. Huang, J. H. Wei, X. D. Wang, H. Y. Chen and D. B. Kuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15435–15440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sui, X. Gao, X. Wu, C. Li, X. Yang, W. Du, Z. Ding, S. Jin, K. Wu, T. C. Sum, P. Gao, J. Liu, X. Wei, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Tang and X. Liu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 4137–4144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Ramo, P. V. Sushko and A. L. Shluger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 024120 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Zheng, Z. Chen, W. Xu, W. Liu, Y. M. Yang, J. Zhao, T. Chen and H. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4540 CrossRef .
M. Matus, H. Kuzmany and E. Sohmen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 2822–2825 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dakshinamurthy and C. Sudakar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 433–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Zheng, F. Vitale, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Ji, Z. Liu, O. Ghaebi, C. T. Plass, R. Domes, T. Frosch, G. Soavi, E. Wendler, Y. Zhang and C. Ronning, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, Q. Li, Y. Wei, L. Zhang, B. Xu, X. Chang and Z. Quan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, Y. Zhu, W. Wang and W. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 3053–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, Z. Liu, S. Fang, H. Zhong, B. Tian, Y. Wang, H. Li, H. Hu and Y. Shi, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3343–3351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. M. Pina, F. Yuan, A. Johnston, D. Ma, B. Chen, Z. Li, A. Dumont, X. Li, Y. Liu, S. Hoogland, Z. Zajacz, Z. Lu and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4326–4330 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Li, W. W. Li, M. L. Xia, C. Liu, N. Li, Z. H. Shi, Y. S. Xu and X. H. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 5040–5047 CrossRef .
M. D. Smith, A. Jaffe, E. R. Dohner, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4497–4504 RSC .
S. Park, H. Wang, T. Schultz, D. Shin, R. Ovsyannikov, M. Zacharias, D. Maksimov, M. Meissner, Y. Hasegawa, T. Yamaguchi, S. Kera, A. Aljarb, M. Hakami, L.-J. Li, V. Tung, P. Amsalem, M. Rossi and N. Koch, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008677 CrossRef .
A. M. Lemos and J. J. Markham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1965, 26, 1837–1851 Search PubMed .
D. S. Jiang, H. Jung and K. Ploog, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 64, 1371–1377 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stadler, D. M. Hofmann, H. C. Alt, T. Muschik and B. K. Meyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 51, 10619–10630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Ren, J. Che, C. Mo, H. Liu, W. Zhao, J. Lu and Z. Ni, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 2200223,  DOI:10.1002/adom.202200223 .
A. Yangui, D. Garrot, J. S. Lauret, A. Lusson, G. Bouchez, E. Deleporte, S. Pillet, E. E. Bendeif, M. Castro, S. Triki, Y. Abid and K. Boukheddaden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23638–23647 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Lian, P. Zhang, G. J. Liang, S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, X. W. Zhang, J. B. Gao, D. L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. S. Song, R. Chen, X. Z. Lan, W. X. Liang, G. D. Niu, J. Tang and J. B. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22749–22756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, W. Lin, Q. Zhao, X. Zou, Z. Lan, J. Meng, Q. Shi, I. E. Castelli, S. E. Canton, T. Pullerits and K. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 4965–4971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Walter, J. M. Lupton, K. Becker, J. Feldmann, G. Gaefke and S. Hoger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 137401 CrossRef .
M. Yoshizawa, Y. Hattori and T. Kobayashi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994, 49, 13259–13262 CrossRef .
V. Perebeinos and P. B. Allen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 64, 085118 CrossRef .
T. Suzuki, K. Tanimura and N. Itoh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994, 49, 7233–7241 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Iaru, A. Brodu, N. J. J. van Hoof, S. E. T. Huurne, J. Buhot, F. Montanarella, S. Buhbut, P. C. M. Christianen, D. Vanmaekelbergh, C. M. Donega, J. G. Rivas, P. M. Koenraad and A. Y. Silov, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5844 CrossRef .
V. Dzhagan, O. Selyshchev, O. Raievska, O. Stroyuk, L. Hertling, N. Mazur, M. Y. Valakh and D. R. T. Zahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 15511–15522 CrossRef .
R. Shen, J. Y. Xu, X. Yao, Z. L. Guo, W. S. Yang and X. N. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 12336–12344 CrossRef .
J. Li, J. Hu, J. Ma, X. Wen and D. Li, Chinese Optics Letters, 2021, 19, 103001 CrossRef .
M. L. Lin, B. Dhanabalan, G. Biffi, Y. C. Leng, S. Kutkan, M. P. Arciniegas, P. H. Tan and R. Krahne, Small, 2022, 18, 2106759 CrossRef .
H. Peng, Y. Tian, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, T. Huang, T. Dong, Y. Xiao, J. Wang and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 20014–20021 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Fan, Y. M. Lin, K. Wang, K. H. L. Zhang and Y. Yang, Physical Review B, 2021, 103, 085206 Search PubMed .
M. Cong, B. Yang, F. Hong, T. Zheng, Y. Sang, J. Guo, S. Yang and K. Han, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1078–1084 CrossRef .
J. Edler, P. Hamm and A. C. Scott, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 067403 CrossRef .
J. Edler, R. Pfister, V. Pouthier, C. Falvo and P. Hamm, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 106405 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Kubler, H. Ehrke, R. Huber, R. Lopez, A. Halabica, R. F. Haglund Jr. and A. Leitenstorfer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 116401 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tokizaki, T. Makimura, H. Akiyama, A. Nakamura, K. Tanimura and N. Itoh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 67, 2701–2704 CrossRef .
R. V. Pisarev, A. S. Moskvin, A. M. Kalashnikova and T. Rasing, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 79, 235128 CrossRef .
R. Berera, R. van Grondelle and J. T. M. Kennis, Photosynth. Res., 2009, 101, 105–118 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Wolfson, S. W. Teitelbaum, T. Shin, I. Katayama, T. Kawano, J. Takeda and K. A. Nelson, Physical Review B, 2018, 98, 05411 Search PubMed .
S. Tomimoto, H. Nansei, S. Saito, T. Suemoto, J. Takeda and S. Kurita, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 417 CrossRef .
S. L. Dexheimer, A. D. Pelt, J. A. Brozik and B. I. Swanson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4425–4428 CrossRef PubMed .
R. G. Fuller, R. T. Williams and M. N. Kabler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1970, 25, 446–449 CrossRef .
L. Ni, U. Huynh, A. Cheminal, T. H. Thomas, R. Shivanna, T. F. Hinrichsen, S. Ahmad, A. Sadhanala and A. Rao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10834–10843 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wada, N. Matsushita and H. Haneda, J. Lumin., 2004, 108, 285–289 CrossRef .
A. Sugita, T. Saito, H. Kano, M. Yamashita and T. Kobayashi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 2158–2161 CrossRef PubMed .
X. W. Cheng, Z. Xie, W. Zheng, R. F. Li, Z. H. Deng, D. T. Tu, X. Y. Shang, J. Xu, Z. L. Gong, X. J. Li and X. Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2103724 CrossRef .
P. Han, C. Luo, S. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12709–12713 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Yang, F. Hong, L. Sun, P. Han, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5359–5363 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Makarov, S. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349–2362 CrossRef .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef .
H. Chung, S. I. Jung, H. J. Kim, W. Cha, E. Sim, D. Kim, W. K. Koh and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4160–4164 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tao, C. Zhang, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhao and H. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1400 CrossRef .
C. Kastl, A. M. Schwartzberg and L. Maserati, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3715–3722 CrossRef .
K. Yao, M. S. Collins, K. M. Nell, E. S. Barnard, N. J. Borys, T. Kuykendall, J. N. Hohman and P. J. Schuck, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4085–4092 CrossRef .
J. Li, J. Ma, Z. Liu, X. Cheng, Y. Chen and D. Li, Acs Nano, 2020, 14, 2156–2162 CrossRef .
T. Yago, Y. Tamaki, A. Furube and R. Katoh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4435–4441 RSC .
Y. K. Jung, S. Kim, Y. C. Kim and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 8447–8452 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Emori, M. Sugita, K. Ozawa and H. Sakama, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 85, 035129 CrossRef .
V. Cataudella, G. De Filippis, A. S. Mishchenko and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 226402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Rosch, O. Gunnarsson, X. J. Zhou, T. Yoshida, T. Sasagawa, A. Fujimori, Z. Hussain, Z. X. Shen and S. Uchida, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 227002 CrossRef PubMed .
N.-H. Ge, C. M. Wong, R. Lingle, J. D. McNeill, K. J. Gaffney and C. B. Harris, Science, 1998, 279, 202–205 CrossRef .
A. Lietard, G. Piani, M. Briant, M. A. Gaveau, S. Faisan, V. Mazet, B. Soep, J. M. Mestdagh and L. Poisson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11206–11214 RSC .
D. Lee, A. Mysyrowicz, A. V. Nurmikko and B. J. Fitzpatrick, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 1475–1478 CrossRef .
Q. Fu, D. Lee, A. V. Nurmikko, L. A. Kolodziejski and R. L. Gunshor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1989, 39, 3173–3177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Allen and V. Perebeinos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 4828–4831 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao, Y. Fan, Y. Lin, K. Wang, R. Li, X. Chen, K. H. L. Zhang and Y. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7867–7873 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Deng, H. J. Li, X. F. Ma, X. Y. Liu, Y. Cui, X. J. Ma, Z. Q. Li and Z. W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 3732–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, Y. Yang, L. Gao, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Z. Hu, J. Lu and Z. Ni, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 253103 CrossRef CAS .
V. Settels, A. Schubert, M. Tafipolski, W. Liu, V. Stehr, A. K. Topczak, J. Pflaum, C. Deibel, R. F. Fink, V. Engel and B. Engels, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9327–9337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. West, J. M. Womick, L. E. McNeil, K. J. Tan and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 5157–5167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Fink, J. Seibt, V. Engel, M. Renz, M. Kaupp, S. Lochbrunner, H.-M. Zhao, J. Pfister, F. Würthner and B. Engels, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12858–12859 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Fang, L. Sui, J. Yan, K. Wang, K. Yuan, W. L. Mao and B. Zou, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2975–2982 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghimire, K. Oldenburg, S. Bartling, R. Lesyuk and C. Klinke, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 975–983 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, L. Xia, W. Liu, J. Y. Xie, Z. M. Jiang, F. Xiong and W. B. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 13410–13419 RSC .
C. Babeela, M. A. Assiri and T. C. S. Girisun, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 4618–4631 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya, N. Gaponik, O. Selyshchev, V. Dzhagan, S. Schulze and D. R. T. Zahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10267–10277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, F. Massuyeau, N. Gautier, A. B. Kama, E. Faulques, F. Chen, Q. Shen, L. Zhang, M. Paris and R. Gautier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2802–2807 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Luo, D. Liang, S. Sun, Y. Xiao, X. Lian, X. Li, M. D. Li, X. C. Huang and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 199–205 CrossRef .
W. Z. Wang, C. L. Wang, Z. B. Su and L. Yu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 3550–3553 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Zeng, L. L. Zhang, Y. Xue, B. Ke, Z. Zhao, D. Huang, Q. L. Wei, W. C. Zhou and B. S. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2053–2061 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Nag, L. Manna and Z. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11592–11603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, P. P. Dang, G. D. Zhang, H. Z. Lian, G. G. Li and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 5903–5911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arfin, J. Kaur, T. Sheikh, S. Chakraborty and A. Nag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11307–11311 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Li, S. Gridin, K. B. Ucer, R. T. Williams, M. D. Ben, A. Canning, F. Moretti and E. Bourret, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 12, 014035 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Liu, X. Xu, B. Li, L. L. Yang, Q. Li, H. Jiang and D. S. Xu, Small, 2020, 16, 2002547 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi and S. Xiong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 84, 205210 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Xu, F. Liu, J. Qu, H. Shao, Z. Wang, Y. Cui, D. Ban and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31031–31037 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Jin, R. F. Li, H. Huang, N. Z. Jiang, J. D. Lin, S. X. Wang, Y. H. Zheng, X. Y. Chen and D. Q. Chen, Light: Sci. Appl., 2022, 11, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jun, Z. Y. Wang, R. S. Zeng and B. S. Zou, Acta Phys. Sin., 2021, 70, 247801 CrossRef .
V. Morad, S. Yakunin and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 845–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, T. Chang, R. Zeng, S. Cao, J. Zhao, X. Han, L. Wang and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 7091–7099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, S. A. Morris, X. Qiao, D. Zhao, T. Salim, B. Chen, E. E. M. Chia and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10301–10307 RSC .
S. Krishnamurthy, R. Naphade, W. J. Mir, S. Gosavi, S. Chakraborty, R. Vaidhyanathan and S. Ogale, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800751 CrossRef .
L. Lian, M. Zheng, P. Zhang, Z. Zheng, K. Du, W. Lei, J. Gao, G. Niu, D. Zhang, T. Zhai, S. Jin, J. Tang, X. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3462–3468 CrossRef .
M. Du, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 464–469 CrossRef .
T. Bai, B. Yang, J. Chen, D. Zheng, Z. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, R. Lu and K. Han, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Jing, J. Z. Li, T. Xu, K. Jiang, X. J. Zhao, Y. F. Wu, N. T. Xue, Z. H. Jing and X. W. Lei, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 292–298 RSC .
A. Matsui, K.-i. Mizuno, N. Tamai and I. Yamazaki, Chem. Phys., 1987, 113, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lao, Z. Yang, Z. Su, Z. Wang, H. Ye, M. Wang, X. Yao and S. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9949–9956 RSC .
G. M Espallargas, L. Brammer and P. Sherwood, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 435–440 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, M. Li, J. Zhao, M. S. Molokeev and Z. Xia, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901335 CrossRef .
P. Merkl, C.-K. Yong, M. Liebich, I. Hofmeister, G. Berghäuser, E. Malic and R. Huber, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1719 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Chow, H. Yu, A. M. Jones, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1194–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zhang and G. Lu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4631–4637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schwestka, H. Inani, M. Tripathi, A. Niggas, N. McEvoy, F. Libisch, F. Aumayr, J. Kotakoski and R. A. Wilhelm, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10536–10543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, X. Ma, D. Wu, C. Lin, H. Shan, X. Wu, J. Zhao, A. Zhao and B. Wang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8067–8073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Shanks, F. Mahdikhanysarvejahany, C. Muccianti, A. Alfrey, M. R. Koehler, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, H. Yu, B. J. LeRoy and J. R. Schaibley, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5641–5647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barati, T. B. Arp, S. Su, R. K. Lake, V. Aji, R. v. Grondelle, M. S. Rudner, J. C. W. Song and N. M. Gabor, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 5751–5758 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Achtstein, O. Marquardt, R. Scott, M. Ibrahim, T. Riedl, A. V. Prudnikau, A. Antanovich, N. Owschimikow, J. K. N. Lindner, M. Artemyev and U. Woggon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9476–9483 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Shim, M. J. Ko, S. Jeong, S. Y. Shin, S. M. Park, Y. R. Do and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 9965–9972 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shen, S. Cheng, Y. Gu, D. Ni, Y. Gao, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1964–1971 RSC .
A. A. E. Fisher and M. A. Osborne, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7829–7840 CrossRef .
A. F. Zatsepin, E. A. Buntov, D. A. Zatsepin, E. Z. Kurmaev, V. A. Pustovarov, A. V. Ershov, N. W. Johnson and A. Moewes, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 415301 CrossRef .
J.-C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traore, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe, J. Kono, S. Tretiak, S. A. Crooker, K. Claudine, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. J. Crochet, E. Jacky and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya, F. Spranger, O. Selyshchev, V. Dzhagan, S. Schulze, D. R. T. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13648–13658 CrossRef .
K. P. Loh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 837–838 CrossRef .
S. Jaziri, Solid State Commun., 1994, 91, 171–175 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, Z. Ma, D. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Cao, K. Wang, G. Xiao and B. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6504–6508 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Li, K. F. Bian, X. W. Zhou, P. Lu, S. Liu, I. Brener, M. Sinclair, T. Luk, H. Schunk, L. Alarid, P. G. Clem, Z. W. Wang and H. Y. Fan, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1602916 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Wang, Q. B. Shen, Y. S. Chen, N. Ali, Z. Y. Ren, G. Bi and H. Z. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 895, 162610 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Wukai and W. Bozou, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801628 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Paradisanos, G. Wang, E. M. Alexeev, A. R. Cadore, X. Marie, A. C. Ferrari, M. M. Glazov and B. Urbaszek, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 538 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Zhao, S. Q. Jiang, W. S. Cai, R. Li, Q. H. Mo, B. Q. Wang and Z. G. Zang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100585 CrossRef .
V. Vanecek, J. Paterek, R. Kral, M. Buryi, V. Babin, K. Zlouzeova, S. Kodama, S. Kurosawa, Y. Yokota, A. Yoshikawa and M. Nikl, J. Cryst. Growth, 2021, 573, 126307 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dave, W. T. Huang, A. Lazarowska, D. Jankowski, S. Mahlik and R. S. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 2026–2032 RSC .
Q. Li, Z. Chen, B. Yang, L. Tan, B. Xu, J. Han, Y. Zhao, J. Tang and Z. Quan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1786–1791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Zang, X. Huang, C. Tian, X. Wang and T. Cui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 8984–8991 CrossRef .
Y. Qin, Z. X. Lv, S. G. Chen, W. Li, X. Wu, L. Ye, N. Li and P. X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22491–22498 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, G. Xiao and L. Ding, J. Semicond., 2021, 42, 100203 CrossRef .
J. L. H. Clabel, G. Nicolodelli, G. C. Lozano, V. A. G. Rivera, S. O. Ferreira, A. H. Pinto, M. S. Li and E. Marega, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 18694–18706 RSC .
Y. Q. Wang, S. H. Guo, H. Luo, C. K. Zhou, H. R. Lin, X. D. Ma, Q. Y. Hu, M. H. Du, B. W. Ma, W. G. Yang and X. J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16001–16006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, B. Zhou, H. Li, H. Hu, H. Zhong, H. Li and Y. Shi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 2200605 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, Q. Wei, W. Jia, T. Chang, C. Peng, Y. Liang and B. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 6167–6179 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhang, V. Pinchetti, J. Zito, A. Ray, A. E. M. Melcherts, M. Ghini, A. Pianetti, I. Infante, S. Brovelli, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3952–3959 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, S. Yan, F. Yang, X. Liao, S. Lin, M. Liao, S. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Gong, K. B. Tom, Y. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Zhu and J. Yao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15544–15551 CrossRef .
L. Y. Lian, S. Wang, H. Y. Ding, G. J. Liang, Y. B. Zhao, H. S. Song, X. Z. Lan, J. B. Gao, R. Chen, D. L. Zhang and J. B. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2022, 10, 2101640 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, T. Liu, P. Ran, X. Chen, T. Jiang, W. Shen, X. Liu and Y. M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 3431–3437 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gong, W. Zheng, P. Huang, X. Cheng, W. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Han and X. Chen, Nano Today, 2022, 44, 101460 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Hu, G. D. Niu, Z. Zheng, S. R. Li, Y. A. Zhang, H. S. Song, T. Y. Zhai and J. Tang, Small, 2019, 15, 1903496 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Shi, Z. Ma, D. Yang, F. Zhang, X. Ji, M. Wang, X. Chen, G. Na, S. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Li, L. Zhang and C. Shan, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3568–3576 CrossRef .
S. S. Wang, Y. P. Yao, J. T. Kong, S. G. Zhao, Z. H. Sun, Z. Y. Wu, L. N. Li and J. H. Luo, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4053–4056 RSC .
T. Jun, K. Sim, S. Iimura, M. Sasase, H. Kamioka, J. Kim and H. Hosono, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804547 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-M. Yao, Q. Zhang, D. Wang, R.-l. Chen, Y.-C. Yin, J. Xia, H. Tang, W.-P. Xu and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2202894 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Yu, Y. He, Z. Chen, L. Xiao, J.-j. Shi, X. Guo, S. Wang and B. Qu, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2102895 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, Q. Li, J. Han, C. Ma, Z. Xu, H. J. Li, P. J. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Y. Cui, L. L. Gao, Z. W. Quan, S. Z. Liu and K. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102190 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, X. Zhao, M. Xia, G. Niu, Q. Guo, L. Gao and J. Tang, J. Semicond., 2020, 41, 052204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miao, L. Cheng, W. Zou, L. Gu, J. Zhang, Q. Guo, Q. Peng, M. Xu, Y. He, S. Zhang, Y. Cao, R. Li, N. Wang, W. Huang and J. Wang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 89 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zang, S. Liu, M. Xu, R. Wang, C. Cao, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Xie and C.-S. Lee, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. Li, J. Ma, S. Wang, W. Li and D. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900988 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishchenko, G. P. Lindberg, B. A. Weinstein and A. Reznik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 051912 CrossRef .
L. Q. Phuong, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4905–4910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Li, S. Lan, G. Lin, J. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Xuan, H. Luo and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4532–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, L. Ke, H. Dou, R. Xu, W. Zhou, Q. Wei, X. Sun, H. Wang, H. Wu, L. Li, J. Xue, B. Chen, T. C. Weng, L. Zheng, Y. Yu and Z. Ning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 14783–14790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Pan, H. L. Wang, X. G. Li, X. Zhang, F. C. Liu, M. Peng, Z. J. Shi, C. Y. Li, H. J. Zhang, Z. H. Weng, M. Gusain, H. B. Long, D. P. Li, J. Wang, Y. Q. Zhan and L. R. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3359–3366 RSC .
A. M. Armstrong, M. H. Crawford, A. Jayawardena, A. Ahyi and S. Dhar, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 103102 CrossRef .
B. R. Tak, M. Garg, S. Dewan, C. G. Torres-Castanedo, K. Li, G. Vinay, X. Li and R. Singh, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 144501 CrossRef .
M. I. P. Monroy, B. L. M. Borjas and M. A. Q. Lopez, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3358–3365 CrossRef .
N. K. Tailor, P. Maity and S. Satapathi, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 2473–2480 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, J. Li, C. Fang, J. Ma, L. Li and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 3387–3392 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wu, W. Ning, Q. Xu, M. Manjappa, M. Feng, S. Ye, J. Fu, S. Lie, T. Yin, F. Wang, T. W. Goh, P. C. Harikesh, Y. K. E. Tay, Z. X. Shen, F. Huang, R. J. Singh, G. F. Zhou, F. Gao and T. C. Sum, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd3160 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tantardini, S. Kokott, X. Gonze, S. V. Levchenko and W. A. Saidi, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101380 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and R. R. Lunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, F. Bruni and S. Brovelli, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Navadeh-Toupchi, F. Jabeen, D. Y. Oberli and M. T. Portella-Oberli, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2020, 14, 024055 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zeng, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, Z. Guo, X. Wu, M. Lu and S. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 1353–1363 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, 1703762 CrossRef .
S. Yakunin, B. M. Benin, Y. Shynkarenko, O. Nazarenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, D. N. Dirin, C. Hofer, S. Cattaneo and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 846–852 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, L. Yin, G. Niu, J. H. Yuan, K. H. Xue, Z. Tan, X. S. Miao, M. Niu, X. Du, H. Song, E. Lifshitz and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904711 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, M. Nikl, A. Beitlerova, R. Kucerkova, X. Du, G. Niu, Y. Jia, J. Tang, G. Ren and Y. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100460 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, J. F. Liao, Z. G. Huang, J. H. Wei, X. D. Wang, W. G. Li, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5277–5281 CrossRef .
E. Ergecen, B. Ilyas, D. Mao, H. C. Po, M. B. Yilmaz, J. Kim, J. G. Park, T. Senthil and N. Gedik, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 98 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Tan, H. Qu, Y. Li, Y. Gong, S. Zhang, H. Mao, Q. Bao, Y. Zhang and G. P. Wang, Matter, 2022, 5, 3452–3463 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
ESTE = Eg − Eb − Este − Ed	(1)

 	Fig. 1  STEs-related energy transfer process. (A) Schematic diagram of the energy level structure of STE (GS, ground state; FE, free exciton state; FC, free carrier state; STS, self-trapping state; Eg, bandgap; Eb, exciton binding energy; Est, self-trapping energy; Ed, lattice deformation energy; ESTE, emission energy).26 A sketch of the free and STS at (B) high temperature and (C) low temperature (EB and WB are the height and width of the energy barrier separating the free and self-trapped excitonic states).25 (D) Schematic of the nonradiative recombination process for STE when S is large (orange circles represent excited electrons).26	 

 	Fig. 2  PL spectral characteristics of the STE-related emission process. (A) PL excitation (monitored at 670 nm) and PL spectra (excited by a 365 nm laser) of C4H14N2In2Br10.51 (B) Absorption (black line) and PL spectra of CdSe nanoplatelet superlattices. The PL spectra were excited by a 400 nm laser (green line marked with blue arrow) and 485 nm laser (red line marked with red arrow), respectively.52 (C) Power-dependent PL intensity of the 2D/QD perovskite heterostructure at 78 K (ST1, XX, and FX represent the STEs emission peak, biexcitons emission peak, and free excitons emission peak of free excitons, respectively).7 (D) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the CsCu2I3 film from 10 K to 300 K. (E) Temperature-dependent FWHM of the PL spectra and integrated PL intensity (inset) corresponding to (E).39 (F) Room temperature time-resolved STEs (at 700 nm) and free exciton (at 525 nm) PL spectra of the Sn-doped 2D PEA2PbI4 excited by a 397 nm pulse laser.48	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectra of STE-related materials. Temperature-dependent Raman spectra of the 2D (PEA)2PbI4 (A) in a nonexcited state when excited by a 1.96 eV laser and (B) in the excited state when excited by a 2.33 eV laser.79 (C) Multipeak fitting of the Ag–In–S nanocrystals Raman spectrum allowed up to 11 components to be deconvoluted in the range of first-order phonons.77 (D) Low-temperature (5 K) Raman spectra of (BA)2PbBr4 flakes at two different orientations (depicted in the insets) under parallel (VV) and orthogonal (HV) configurations.80	 

 	Fig. 4  Time-resolved TA spectra of STE-related materials. Temperature-dependent PL spectra of (A) un-doped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 and (B) Cu+-doped Cs2(Ag/Na)InCl6 excited by a 365 nm laser.97 (C) Top: the pump fluence-dependent exciton bleach signal (at 360 nm) fitted by using Poisson statistics. Bottom: the variation of the slow component lifetime as a function of pump fluence deconvoluted from TA spectra.16 (D) 2D color plot of TA spectra under tail excitation; LE and FE represent localized excitons and free excitons.103 (E) 2D color plot of broadband TA spectra recorded in a transmission geometry (−ΔT/T) at 77 K with a 330 nm pump laser. Above 480 nm (dashed line), the color scale was modified as indicated to highlight the spectrally broad photoinduced absorption centered around 550 nm. (F) Photoinduced bleaching of the three excitonic transitions (X1, X2, and X3, blue dots) and photoinduced absorption of the subgap band (STE, red dots) in double logarithmic representation. All the data points correspond to the maximum signal obtained at different delays after the pump.104	 

 	Fig. 5  Properties of doping and alloying-triggered STEs. (A) Intensity and peak position of the STE emission spectra as a function of the doping level in Sn-doped PEA2PbI4 (λex = 470 nm).48 (B) PLQY for a series of the Bi/Ln: double perovskites. The inset shows the proposed energy-transfer mechanism and emission process involving both STE recombination and Ln3+ 4f–4f transitions.140 (C) Temperature-dependent ln(IBE/INE) ratios for a series of (001) Pb–Br perovskites with different organic cations.63 Kubelka–Munk absorption/emission spectra (top) and schematic of the trapping/detrapping processes of STEs and free excitons (bottom) for (D) chloride, (E) bromide, and (F) iodide compounds.27	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure engineering for tunable STEs. (A) Schematic diagrams of three types of interlayer exciton: free exciton state, STS with the increasing binding energy (type I), and STS with the decreasing binding energy (type II) in the MoS2/MoS2/h-BN structure. (B) The corrections of the self-trapping energy (ΔEs), Coulomb potential (ΔEc), and binding energy (ΔEb) of interlayer excitons in the MoS2/MoS2/h-BN structure as a function of h0 at D = 0.4 nm (h0 is the vertical distance between MoS2 and h-BN and D is the spatial distance between the electron and the hole).118(C) Schematic view of the geometric structure (bottom) and STM topographic image (top) of the SnSe2/STO. (D) The second derivative of the ARPES spectra taken on the SnSe2/STO along the Γ–M direction.158 (E) PL intensity trajectories of a single core–shell CdSe/CdS quantum dot (right) and PL intensity histograms as a function of CdS shell monolayer number (left).164 (F) Map of the TA profile of CdSe nanoplate superlattices and monodispersed CdSe nanoplates (inset).52 (G) Schematic structures of the (C4H9NH3I)2(CH3NH3I)n−1(PbI2)n perovskites. (H) Absorption (dotted) and fluorescence (solid) spectra of the 2D perovskite correspondence to (G). (I) Intensity ratio between PL emission from below-gap traps and that from band gap excitons as a function of temperature for 2D perovskite and 3D perovskites from PbI2.31	 

 	Fig. 7  External field-induced tunable STEs. (A) Crystal structure viewed along the 1D chain direction (b axis), which illustrates the orthorhombic to monoclinic phase transition at 2.8 GPa. Pressure-induced evolution of (B) bandgap/emission energy and (C) Stokes shift of C4N2H14PbBr4.183 (D) Pressure-dependent chromaticity coordinates of the STEs emission of Cs4PbBr6 nanocrystal.45	 

 	Fig. 8  LEDs based on STE-related materials. (A) Photographs of UV–LED lamps (top) and the LED coated with a thin layer of (2meptH2)PbBr4 (bottom), in the off and on states.193 (B) Current–density–luminance–voltage characteristics of the blue LED using a Cs3Cu2I5 thin film as an emission layer, and (inset) its photograph.194 (C) Schematic diagram of the WLEDs with the α/δ-CsPbI3 heterophase. (D) Electroluminescence spectra (the inset shows the photograph) and (E) external quantum efficiency and current efficiency of the WLEDs are presented in (C). (F) The proposed carrier injection and recombination mechanism for WLEDs.19 (G) Schematic diagram of the top-emitting LEDs. (H) External quantum efficiency (EQE)–current density characteristics of top-emitting LEDs.189	 

 	Fig. 9  Photodetection properties of STEs related materials. (A) Normalized photoconductivity (PC), photoluminescence (PL), reflectance, and absorption spectra of the (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 device. (B) Normalized external quantum efficiency spectra of the (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 devices with three different measurement configurations (the details of the configuration can be founded in Li et al.’ work).15 (C) Illustration of the deep energy levels of VO2+ defects in CST-ZnO and the external charge injection from PbS CQDs under IR irradiation. Electrons are trapped at VO2+ defects.206 (D) PL intensity of STE versus polarization angles. (E) Reflectance intensity of STE versus polarization angles. (F) Photocurrent intensity versus the polarization angle with a cosine-function fitting line in polar coordinates.212	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
