Wafer-scale single crystals: crystal growth mechanisms, fabrication methods, and functional applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01101D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01101D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 7829-7851Wafer-scale single crystals: crystal growth mechanisms, fabrication methods, and functional applications

        
          
            Changshuai 
            Ding†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hanyu 
            Jia†
a, 
      
        
          
            Qingqing 
            Sun
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huige 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wentao 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinchang 
            Pang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shisheng 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chuan 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Takeo 
            Minari
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinzhou 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuying 
            Liu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yanlin 
            Song
          
        
      d
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, The Key Laboratory of Material Processing and Mold of Ministry of Education, Henan Key Laboratory of Advanced Nylon Materials and Application, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China. E-mail: sunqingqing@zzu.edu.cn; liuxy@zzu.edu.cn
bResearch Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan
cState Key Lab of Opto-Electronic Materials & Technologies Guangdong Province Key Lab of Display Material and Technology School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangdong 510275, P. R. China
dKey Laboratory of Green Printing, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongguancun North First Street 2, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China
Received 
      9th March 2021
    , Accepted 12th May 2021First published on 19th May 2021AbstractWafer-scale single crystals, by virtue of their intrinsically high crystallinity and compatibility on a wafer-scale processing size, have been extensively studied and applied in various electronics and optoelectronics. In this review, we present relevant challenging issues on controllable preparation, additive patterning, and heterogeneous integration of functional single crystals with uniform morphology and unitary crystallographic orientation at the wafer scale. Furthermore, substantial efforts on wafer-scale fabrication of single-crystal films (or isolated single-crystal arrays) through innovative growth strategies are summarized, especially highlighting the impact of nucleation and the growth kinetics on crystal formation. We also outline the distinctive characteristics of single-crystal organic semiconductors, perovskites, and 2D semiconductors, rendering their various (opto)electronic applications. Finally, we discuss potential problems and the outlook of promising research directions of wafer-scale single crystals and their devices for next-generation (opto)electronics.
1. Introduction
Polycrystalline (or amorphous) semiconducting films have been widely used in the fields of amplification, switching, sensing, and energy conversion.1–3 Their performance, however, is severely impaired by mass defects existing at the bonding sites, or the interface of electrode and active layer as well as grain boundaries. For example, in the polycrystalline film, the formed defects (including pinholes, impurities, and grain boundaries) inevitably weaken the charge coupling and hinder the charge transport in the active layers, and thus degrade the charge carrier mobility, lifetime, and diffusion length.4 In contrast, single crystals have been widely employed to construct high-performance electronics and optoelectronics with excellent stability, primarily benefiting from fewer structural defects, more stable crystal structure, and better homogeneity.5–7 Besides, single crystals are particularly beneficial for efficient charge transport owing to their exclusive advantages of the absence of scattering impurities and defects, uniform crystal growth direction and/or regular molecular orientation, which provide an ideal stage for fundamental studies (e.g. ion migration, ambient stability, and hysteresis).5,8 Currently, a wide variety of larger-area single-crystal films have been exploited as a high-efficiency, low-consumption, and high-quality platform for the integration of optoelectronic devices with stable electrical performance and high reproducibility.9,10
To grow wafer-scale single-crystal thin films, whether inorganic or organic materials, two main principles are proposed, including (i) low nucleation density ensuring sufficient growth space, and (ii) controllable orientation growth to achieve defect-free single crystals.11,12 In terms of traditional inorganic semiconductors, both single-nucleation and multinucleation methods combined with chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique have been developed for single crystal growth.13,14 For the single-nucleation approach, suppressing nucleation density down to one nucleus is critical, and can be realized by passivating active sites through precursor design, substrate engineering, temperature and/or chamber pressure regulation and so on.15,16 In contrast, the multinucleation approach depends on desirable single-crystal substrates to epitaxially grow the multinucleation domains with uniform orientation and make them seamlessly coalesce into a wafer-scale single-crystal film. For example, the appropriate substrates involving Cu/Ni(111),17 GaN,18 Cu(111),19 and Au(111)20 have been demonstrated for graphene, MoS2, and hBN growth. Compared to the single nucleus growth, the multinucleation approach allows multiple crystal nuclei to grow simultaneously, which remarkably improves the growth efficiency of single-crystal films. Moreover, ultrafast growth rate is considered as a novel strategy to realize large-scale production of films by removing the reaction barrier during nucleation and growth.6 However, all the above approaches require high growth temperatures (∼600–1000 °C), inevitably suffering from high energy consumption and severe contamination.21 To address these issues, great efforts have been made to reduce the growth temperature by using more powerful catalytic substrates or surfactants.17 Unlike their inorganic counterparts, organic single crystals exhibit intrinsic advantages of low-temperature processing, high mechanical flexibility, low cost and disposability, and are good candidates for next-generation flexible and foldable organic electronics.22 To grow large-area highly aligned organic single-crystal domains, several simple, versatile and effective crystal-growth strategies have been developed so far, based on either solution-processing methods23–25 or vapor-processing methods.26 For the solution processing methods, controlling the solution fluidic flow dynamics during nucleation and growth processes becomes vitally important for obtaining highly uniform and unidirectionally aligned single-crystalline domains.24,27 Regarding the vapor-processing methods, it is crucial to precisely regulate the gas pressure and the temperature gradient during single crystal growth, since little disturbance may affect the stability of nucleation and crystal growth. However, one-sided discussions and partial perspectives are usually presented, in viewing the growth techniques and device applications of wafer-scale single crystals of limited single materials.28,29
The current advances are calling for more systematic and comprehensive discussions on various single-crystal growth techniques and the corresponding crystallization kinetics, electronic device applications, and future perspectives. Furthermore, the systematic understanding on the crystal nucleation and growth kinetics of the successful studies is helpful to precisely control the crystallization of future single-crystal semiconductors. Here, the inherent characteristics of various organic/inorganic single-crystal semiconductors are reviewed when considering their great potential in practical applications. As illustrated in Fig. 1, an overview of progress in terms of efficient strategies for yielding wafer-scale single-crystal films and their applications in multifunctional and integrated optoelectronic devices and circuits is presented. Moreover, the key strategies including solvent evaporation control, suppressing nucleation, and seamless stitching were summarized in detail toward the growth of wafer-scale single-crystal materials, and the related fundamental mechanisms are also discussed. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages of each approach based on the synthetic process, growth efficiency, and uniformity are compared and discussed to illustrate the applicability of various semiconductors and relative applications. Besides the overview, applications in electronics and optoelectronics enabled by large-area single-crystal materials are demonstrated. Furthermore, the key challenges and future prospects on the wafer-scale production of single-crystal materials and devices are proposed, offering guidelines and fundamental understanding for the development of high-performance devices and widening future practical applications.
 Fig. 1  Summary of materials, fabrication techniques, and their corresponding (opto)electronic applications of wafer-scale single crystals. 
2. Semiconducting single crystals
Semiconducting single crystals are an established part of the emerging fields of organic electronics, two-dimensional (2D) semiconductive devices, and perovskite-based electronics, which provide an ideal platform for studying the inherent physical properties of these particular semiconductive materials.30,31 Meanwhile, as a basic unit, the single crystal shows no grain boundaries and has negligible defects and traps, which are beneficial to understand the structure–property relationship and the charge transport mechanism for further guidance on high-performance semiconductor synthesis and device fabrication.32,33 Clarifying the nucleation and growth mechanism is the foundation of exploiting optimal fabrication strategies for the growth of large-area single-crystal semiconductors. According to the Gibbs–Curie–Wulff theorem, the equilibrium crystals take a form such that the total surface area times the surface free energy is at a minimum.34 The theorem states that in equilibrium the distances of the crystal faces from a point within the crystal (called a Wulff's point) are proportional to the corresponding specific surface free energies of these faces (Fig. 2A).35 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2A, Wulff's point is denoted by O. The distance from Wulff's point to the contact plane is denoted by hm. The distances h1 and h2 to the free surfaces remain the same as in a free polyhedron. The equilibrium shape in the absence of a foreign substrate is shown by the additional dashed line. According to this rule, we can predict equilibrium crystal shapes (Fig. 2B).36 Also, the growth mechanism and packing mode of crystals abide by the principle of the lowest total surface free energy, which contributes to the controllable growth of molecular crystals for various purposes such as the semiconductor industry and biological sciences.36 In this part, the inherent characteristics of several single-crystal organic semiconductors, perovskites, and 2D semiconductors are summarized as follows.
 Fig. 2  (A) Equilibrium shape of a crystal on a foreign substrate.35 (B) Equilibrium crystal shapes predicted by the Gibbs–Curie–Wulff theorem and the corresponding scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the crystals grown by a physical vapor transport (PVT) technique.36 Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
2.1 Organic semiconducting single crystals
Organic semiconducting single crystals (OSSCs), as an important branch of organic semiconductors, have attracted significant attention for extensive applications in flexible electronics such as displays, image sensors, and artificial skin.22,37–39 OSSCs not only show few grain boundaries, minimal defects and traps, but also have special advantages in flexibility, molecular diversity, and solution processability, ensuring excellent and adjustable electronic characteristics.40–43 Meanwhile, OSSCs with non-bonded interaction provide an opportunity to investigate the impact of intermolecular interaction on the structure–property relationship and study the intra- and inter-chain charge transport.44,45 Additionally, OSSCs have several typical crystal features; (i) several unique types of molecular packing motif exist in small molecules and conjugated polymer single crystals (e.g. herringbone, 1-D ‘slipped-stacked’, 2-D ‘bricklayer’, and face-on and edge-on modes) and the neighboring molecules are regularly stacked by weak noncovalent bonds;46 (ii) an oriented intermolecular arrangement results in anisotropy of the physicochemical properties, e.g. the exciton diffusion and charge transport;47,48 (iii) polymorphism and phase transition are common features of organic crystals due to weak interaction between adjacent molecules.49
Large-area OSSCs, especially at the wafer scale, can integrate more electronic components per unit area, which is suitable for practical integration applications. In particular, organic two-dimensional (2D) single crystals with intrinsic flexibility and elasticity are desired in large-area electronics.11,50 In addition, larger crystals especially oriented along their fast transport axis yield higher field-effect mobility.51 However, wafer-scale fabrication of organic single crystals is also challenging, because the necessary film transfer process, unavoidable crystalline boundaries or variable layer thicknesses of organic materials limits their use for large-scale electronic devices.52 Generally, the growth process of most organic single crystals starts from the formation of surface nucleation and the following 2D growth.36 Solvent evaporation is one of the most effective and convenient methods to grow OSSCs in the liquid phase of saturated or supersaturated solutions. Concretely, following the evaporation of solvents, the semiconductive organic molecules precipitate to form nuclei and then self-assemble into large crystals mainly driven by π–π stacking, which is the unique driving force to grow OSSCs. Therefore, growth parameters including the solvent, concentration, and atmosphere should be considered for growth of high-quality organic single crystals, which are also generally the conditions used when attempting to grow other semiconductor single crystals through solution-processing techniques.53 For the vapor-processing methods that are suitable for materials with poor solubility, the molecules with high kinetic energy will merge into the crystal lattice and gradually grow into large-size crystals by intermolecular interaction during the crystal growth process. The external driving force for organic crystal growth in physical vapor transport methods is the ratio between equilibrium vapor pressure and growth vapor pressure, which is also the universal principle for the growth of various semiconductor single crystals. Therefore, in order to grow wafer-scale organic single crystals, the controllable factors and those to be considered include the system pressure, temperature, the purity of the carrier gas and source materials.36,54
Theoretically, the lamellar stacking with enhanced π–π overlap of organic single crystals, where the conjugated planes are stacked along the charge transport channel, is favorable for highly-efficient charge carrier transport, making a 2D (i.e., the intra- and/or inter-molecular directions) charge transport framework possible. However, besides the intrinsic properties of the materials, the actual molecular packing modes are also influenced by various processing conditions during crystal growth. Therefore, rationally modifying the molecular structures and optimizing fabrication processes as mentioned above are critical in realizing controllable crystal growth for high-performance electrical devices.55
2.2 Perovskite single crystals
Perovskites, as an emerging photovoltaic material, exhibit excellent optoelectronic properties and have been exploited as the active layer in photovoltaics with a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 27%.56 In particular, grain-boundary-free single-crystal perovskites possess higher carrier mobilities, longer carrier lifetimes, and further carrier diffusion lengths, benefitting from the lower trap densities than their polycrystalline counterparts.57 Notably, though bulk single crystals have been successfully applied to perovskite-based optoelectronics, excessive thickness of single crystals still leads to unfavorable charge-recombination during carrier transport, and thus significantly hinders their development to solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and lasers based on perovskite thin films. Therefore, fabricating single-crystal perovskite films with controlled thickness is regarded as an effective strategy to further boost their potential applications.58
For organic–inorganic halide perovskite single crystals, adjacent perovskite sheets are packed by weak van der Waals and hydrogen-bonding interactions between bulky ammonium cations, which is also the inner driving force for crystalline growth,59 while for fully inorganic halide perovskite materials, the interlayer interaction is mainly held together by coulombic forces, which determine different crystal growth habits and corresponding processing strategies.60 To date, solution growth and vapor-phase epitaxial growth methods are the commonly adopted strategies for the fabrication of single-crystal perovskite films. Generally, the initial nucleation sites being generated in the supersaturated solution through the temperature and concentration regulation is the basic principle for solution-based growth of single-crystal thin films.61 To be specific, due to the abnormal solubility of metal-halide perovskites in particular organic solvents, the inverse temperature crystallization method, a unique growth method for perovskites, has been widely applied to synthesize single-crystal perovskite thin films.62 Thus, choosing an appropriate solvent is crucial to the growth of high-quality single crystals.63 As for vapor-phase epitaxial growth, this method requires high temperature, and excellent match of lattice constants and thermal expansion coefficients between perovskites and substrates, which dominates the growth of large-area continuous thin films with thicknesses in the monolayer level.64 Importantly, no matter what type of perovskite, charge transport along the inorganic components can be easily achieved. In contrast, charge transport across an organic cation in organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites may become more difficult because of weak van der Waals interactions, and thus, novel modifying strategies should be further developed to grow highly-oriented and dense perovskite single crystals to achieve higher electronic performance.
2.3 2D semiconducting single crystals
In comparison with the bulk materials, 2D layered semiconductors such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), bilayer graphene, and black phosphorus have attracted extensive academic and industrial interests owing to their dangling-bond-free surface, tailorable atomic-level thickness, direct bandgap, strong spin–orbit coupling, excellent thermal stability, good flexibility, high transparency, and other favorable electronic and mechanical properties, enabling great potential in high-end 2D devices.65–69 In particular, the absence of additional scattering centers in large-size 2D single-crystal semiconductors, usually caused by the defective grain boundaries, is critical for massive applications of highly integrated 2D devices.15,70–75 Besides, unlike traditional 3D semiconductor single crystal growth, the growth of 2D semiconducting single crystals must depend on the substrate due to its atomic layer thickness. Until now, the most practical method for the synthesis of high-quality 2D single-crystal thin films is the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique, which is especially suitable for conventional group IV, III–V, and II–VI semiconductors.76 To be more specific, after decomposition of the target precursors under high temperature, active adatoms would diffuse over the surface of substrates and agglomerate at the active sites to form nuclei, followed by domain ripening, lateral growth, and film coalescence processes that are driven by weak van der Waals interlayer interactions. Therefore, controlling the nucleation density, and domain orientation and suppressing the grain boundary formation on the substrate-surface or interface are critical issues in the growth of 2D single crystals. Generally, surface-mediated catalytic growth and edge-coupling-guided epitaxial growth are the two leading mechanisms for the production of wafer-scale single-crystal 2D monolayers. Moreover, flexible vertical heterostructures with customized lattice configurations and functional nanomaterials with controllable morphology could be also realized through the templating method of monolayer 2D single crystals.77
In a brief summary, three classes of semiconducting single crystals with different dominant intermolecular interaction forces, such as non-bonded π–π stacking, coulombic forces and covalent bonds have revealed different driving forces to grow specific single crystals. However, the types of large-size single crystal semiconductors that can be used in practical applications are still scarce. Therefore, more effort should be made to design new semiconductors via material synthesis and optimize preparation strategies to promote their practical applications in integrated circuits.
3. Single-crystal growth methods and kinetics
To fully unleash the potential and performance of wafer-scale organic crystals, a suitable fabrication method should be carefully considered and selected. The chemical structure of the individual molecule, and the intermolecular and molecule–substrate interaction determine the optimal fabrication method for a specific single crystal material. The solution process is preferred for organic molecules and hybrid lead halide perovskites, considering their good solubility in organic solvents, whereas the CVD technique is the optimal choice to prepare inorganic 2D single crystals over a large scale. Theoretically, there are two main requirements for the growth of wafer-scale single-crystal thin films: (i) low density of nuclei or even just a single nucleus,91,92 and (ii) unidirectional crystal growth mode of all stable nuclei.93–95 Accordingly, elaborative control of molecular crystallization dynamics through surface/interface engineering, fluid flow control or substrate design is of great importance.96 In general, the crystallization process occurs in two steps, nucleation and growth. The crystallization kinetics can be explained by the classical nucleation theory in which the nucleation rate J can be expressed by an Arrhenius-type equation:97 (1)where K depends on supersaturation, ΔG* is the nucleation energy barrier or the Gibbs free energy change for the nucleus formation, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is temperature. The nucleation seed begins to be formed only when the intermolecular interaction energy is enough to overcome the nucleation energy barrier ΔG*.
In this section, we will introduce these well-developed methods of single-crystal fabrication and discuss the related growth mechanisms. A summary of achievement in terms of various single-crystal growth methods, domain size and corresponding applications in multifunctional and integrated electronic/optoelectronic devices is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of materials, growth methods, domain size and applications of recently reported wafer-scale single crystals




Category
Semiconductive materials
Crystal growth method
Domain size
Application
Year
Ref.




Notes: APCVD: atmospheric pressure CVD; LPCVD: low pressure CVD.




Organic molecules
C6-DBTDT
Solution epitaxy
7 mm
OFETs
2016

11



Perylene
Space-confined assembly
17.3 cm3
—
2018

23



2,6-Diphenylanthracene
Channel-restricted meniscus self-assembly (CRMS)
>2 inch
OFETs
2018

78



Ph-BTBT-C6 and Ph-BTBT-C10
Blade-coating
100 cm2
OTFTs
2018

52



C8-DNBDT-NW
Edge casting
A few centimeters
Integrated circuit
2018

79



C10-BTBT
External-force-driven solution epitaxy
1.96 cm2
OFETs
2019

80



C9-DNBDT-NW
Edge-casting
4-inch
TFT arrays
2019

81







Perovskites
CH3NH3PbI3
Geometrically confined lateral crystal growth
3-inch
Solar cell
2017

82



(TMHD)BiBr5
Solution cooling
7.68 cm2
Photodetector
2018

83



(C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4
Surface-tension-controlled crystallization
36 mm (length)
Photodetector
2019

84



PbBr2
Solution self-assembly
1.4 cm (lateral size)
Laser array
2019

85



Cs2AgBiBr6
Capillary-assisted dip-coating
2.5 cm (lateral size)
—
2019

86



(PEA)2PbBr4
Seeded solution
1 cm (diagonal length)
Photodetector
2019

87







2D materials
Graphene
APCVD, Cu85Ni15 alloy
1.5-inch
—
2016

88





LPCVD, Copper foil
5 mm (diagonal length)
—
2017

89





APCVD, Cu90Ni10(111)
4-inch
Liquid-crystal microlens arrays
2019

15





APCVD, Cu/Ni(111)
6-inch
—
2019

17



Bi2O2Se
LPCVD, (La, Sr)(Al, Ta)O3
2-inch
FETs
2019

71



hBN
APCVD, Liquid Au
9 cm3
—
2018

74



hBN
LPCVD, Cu(110)
100 cm3
—
2019

90



hBN
LPCVD, Cu(111)
2-inch
—
2020

19



MoS2
APCVD, Au(111)
1-inch
—
2020

20





3.1 Epitaxial growth methods
Epitaxial growth refers to the growth of a single crystal layer with similar lattice constants and expansion coefficients to those of the single crystal substrate, as if the original crystal extends for a section. Additionally, this attractive epitaxial growth method can provide monolayer thickness semiconducting single-crystal films with high phase purity, a useful platform for fundamental studies of 2D materials and their combinations.64

3.1.1 Vapor-phase epitaxial growth of 2D semiconducting single crystals. 
The CVD-based epitaxial growth technique remains a general strategy in the synthesis of high-quality and wafer-scale 2D materials, benefitting from its excellent controllability and scalability.98–100 In terms of the single-nucleation approach, controlling the nucleation density as a lower level is the key to scalable epitaxial growth of continuous single-crystal films. For example, fine regulation of the amount of reactant and the flow rate of carrier gas can reduce the nucleation density from 105 to ∼25 nuclei cm−2, and then MoSe2 triangular single crystals with edge lengths greater than 1 mm can be obtained.101 However, a similar vapor-transport-mediated (growth thermodynamics/kinetics tuning) approach has not been generally applied to other 2D materials yet, mainly because of the extreme difficulty in the growth limitation and orientation modification of the nuclei. By contrast, the multinucleation approach allows the evolution of multinucleation sites on a lattice-matched substrate, enabling unidirectional epitaxial growth of the multiple domains and then seamless stitching into uniform wafer-scale 2D films free of grain boundaries. Tan et al.71 reported wafer-scale growth of the single-crystal 2D semiconductor Bi2O2Se (BOS) on insulating perovskite oxides for the first time (Fig. 3A). Taking advantage of the perfect symmetry/lattice matching between BOS and the perovskite substrate, the epitaxial growth of BOS aligns unidirectionally and merges seamlessly into wafer-scale single-crystal BOS thin film. Similarly, Liu et al.90 recently achieved van der Waals epitaxial growth of 100 cm2 SC-hBN film on the low-symmetry Cu(110) vicinal surface (Fig. 3B). The STM image in Fig. 3C clearly reveals that the zigzag edge direction of the hBN lattice was parallel to the atomic step edge along the 〈211〉 direction on the Cu(110) surface, realizing the unidirectionally aligned growth of hBN domains and seamless stitching into an intact piece of single-crystal monolayer film (Fig. 3C). Afterwards, Chen et al.19 successfully realized the epitaxial growth of a single-crystal hBN monolayer on a Cu(111) thin film assisted with a well-designed annealing approach. The energy-minimized hBN-Cu(111) configuration can be cut down to one set in the presence of the Cu(111) step edges, eliminating the twin grains on Cu(111) thin film and ensuring the mono-orientation growth of single-crystal hBN monolayers. Hence, the role of these atomic step edges should be carefully considered in guiding hBN growth, which is expected to be broadly applicable to the preparation of other large-size 2D single crystals.102 Lately, the epitaxial growth of wafer-scale, single-crystal MoS2 monolayers was reported on vicinal Au(111) substrates, as obtained by the melting and resolidifying technique (Fig. 3D and E).20 The step edges of the Au(111) surface were proposed to guide the nucleation of the MoS2 monolayer, leading to unidirectional alignment along the 〈110〉 step edges and subsequent seamless stitching into uniform and continuous film, due to the perfect lattice match between the Au(111) surface and MoS2 (Fig. 3F).
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration (top), HAADF-STEM image (bottom, left), and photograph (bottom, right) of typical epitaxial growth of wafer-size single-crystal 2D Bi2O2Se thin films on various perovskite oxides (STO, LAO, and LSAT).71 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) SEM image of unidirectionally aligned hBN domains grown on the Cu(110) surface. (C) LEED patterns of hBN domains (left) grown on the Cu(110) surface (middle) and STM image of a hBN covered Cu(110) terrace, showing that one zigzag edge of the hBN domain is parallel to the atomic step on the Cu surface (right).90 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. (D) Schematic illustration of the Au substrate annealing and MoS2 single crystal growth on Au(111). (E) LEED patterns of as-grown MoS2 domains (right) and the underlying Au(111) surface (left). (F) Photograph of 1 in. continuous single-crystal MoS2 monolayer transferred on the SiO2/Si wafer.20 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Briefly, aligning 2D domains with the same orientation is a crucial step to realize the perfect stitch of isolated 2D crystal domains into an intact single crystal. Thus, choosing a suitable substrate and rationally modifying the surface and interface between the material and the substrate are of importance to realize the controllable epitaxial growth of 2D semiconducting single crystals.


3.1.2 Vapor-phase epitaxial growth of graphene single crystals. 
Graphene, a single atomic layer of graphitic carbon, has attracted immense interest due to its intrinsic outstanding optical, electrical, mechanical and thermal properties, which show huge potential in various electronics and optoelectronics applications.103–105 The synthesis of large-area single-crystal graphene films effectively guarantees the perfect transplantation of exceptional properties and excellent performance from materials to devices. In view of this, van der Waals epitaxial growth was developed to enable the formation of unidirectionally aligned seeds on a certain single-crystal substrate, which then seamlessly join together and form uniform single-crystal graphene films without grain boundaries, which is of great importance for the growth of single-crystal graphene from multiple nucleation sites.74 By utilizing this method, wafer-scale single-crystal monolayer graphene was grown on a hydrogen-terminated germanium (110) surface.106 Specifically, the anisotropic twofold in-plane surface symmetry of the germanium (110) surface allowed unidirectional alignment of multiple graphene islands along the [110] direction, which were merged to uniform single-crystal graphene on an entire substrate (Fig. 4A). Recently, Jang et al.107 reported the scalable growth of single-crystalline graphene on polycrystalline metal foil through the micro-contact transfer and homo-epitaxy growth method (Fig. 4B). The seed transplantation produced arrays of graphene seeds with the same crystal orientation and subsequently initialized the homo-epitaxial growth from the transplanted seed edges. Unlike the solid gold, liquid substrates with their ultrasmooth and fluent surface are expected to be promising substrates for fabricating large-scale and high-quality 2D materials. For instance, wafer-scale single-crystal hBN monolayer films were successfully obtained on liquid Au via self-collimated grain formation.74 The liquid Au with high surface tension allows the limited solubility of B and N atoms to realize high surface diffusion on the Au surface and then the circular hBN domains are closely packed by self-collimation of B and N edges (Fig. 4C). Subsequently, electrostatic interaction among grains drives them to rotate in the same orientation, and finally seamlessly stitch into a single-crystal hBN film with a size of 3 × 3 cm2 (Fig. 4D).
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of the catalytic and epitaxial growth of single-crystal monolayer graphene from unidirectionally aligned multiple seeds.106 Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic illustration of the growth process of single-crystalline graphene using the micro-contact transfer (“Seed transplantation”) (top) and homo-epitaxy growth (“Seeded growth”) (bottom) method.107 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the SC-hBN film growth through the self-collimated method. (D) Photograph of a wafer-scale SC-hBN film on the SiO2–Si wafer.74 Copyright © 2018, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
To sum up, graphene seeds can be merged into uniform single-crystal graphene with a predefined orientation on a germanium (110) surface or metal surface under certain processing conditions. Therefore, designing an exclusive and suitable substrate is an effective way to obtain high-quality single-crystal graphene.
It is well known that crystal surface morphology is strongly affected by the high density of active sites of the substrates, such as impurity and point defects, which commonly results in small crystals and polycrystalline films.108 Thus, in addition to the reasonable substrate design discussed above, appropriately modifying the surface of the substrate should be taken into consideration.
So far, epitaxial growth assisted with numerous surface treatment methods, such as long-time annealing,109 electrochemical polish,110 melting–resolidification,111 and so on,112 have been attempted to reduce the number of active sites by removing the defects or impurities on a substrate, thereby ensuring graphene crystals grow into a large size. Apart from the direct pretreatments to the substrate, some exotic molecules were also used to further decrease the number of active sites on the surface of substrates. For example, Hao et al.113 reported the growth of centimeter-scale single-crystal graphene domains on oxidized copper (Cu) by decreasing the graphene nucleation density and the energy barrier of carbon feedstock decomposition through forming more stable hydroxyl species on the Cu surface (Fig. 5A). Recently, Wu et al.114 further studied the influence of oxygen concentration on the growth of large graphene single crystals on oxidized Cu foil. The dual roles of oxygen in the CVD growth of single-crystal graphene were reviewed as follows: (i) oxygen increased the size of the single crystal on a proper Cu oxide substrate; (ii) excess oxygen resulted in the generation of small-size graphene domains caused by edge-etching of the graphene, providing useful instruction to control the synthesis of large single-crystalline graphene. Moreover, similar phenomena of the active sites passivation and nucleation density limitation have been observed using a melamine pretreatment of a Cu surface.115 The presence of carbon-/nitrogen-containing species at the active sites induced by melamine pretreatments could form a strong interaction with Cu grain boundaries, and consequently preclude the graphene nucleation here (Fig. 5B and C).
 Fig. 5  (A) Logarithmic plots of the graphene growth rate as a function of temperature and schematic illustration of graphene edges grown on Cu substrates with or without oxygen as well as the corresponding DFT-calculated energies of hydrogen attachment.113 Copyright © 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic illustration of the growth behavior of graphene on Cu surfaces without (left) and with (right) melamine pretreatments. (C) Schematic illustration of the passivation effect on the stages of graphene growth by introducing melamine.115 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Energy profiles of CH4 decomposition with and without a substituted Ni atom on the Cu(100) surface. (E) Synthesis of 1.5-inch single-crystalline graphene on a Cu85Ni15 alloy substrate from a single nucleus.88 Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides, improving graphene growth rate is of equal significance to nucleation density control, because ultrafast growth of domains would further lower the appearance of new nuclei due to shorter growth time, which can be considered as another ideal method for the synthesis of large single-crystal graphene films.6 Wu et al.88 synthesized a ∼1.5 inch large graphene monolayer with a fast rate on an optimized Cu–Ni alloy substrate (Fig. 5E). As shown in Fig. 5D, the energy barriers for decomposing CH4 are greatly decreased by replacing a Cu atom with a Ni atom on the (001) surface, which substantially increases the concentrations of surface-active carbon species in the alloy, and thus boosts the graphene growth rate. In addition, the carbon supply also plays vital roles in the graphene growth process. Ethane has turned out to be an efficient carbon feedstock for the growth of large single-crystalline graphene with a remarkably high growth rate of 420 μm min−1, about four times faster than that of methane-produced graphene.89 By contrast with methane, ethane exhibits lower C–C bond energy and therefore leads to abundant carbon precursors, enabling graphene formation with a higher growth rate during the graphene growth process.
In short, appropriate substrate surface treatment methods can effectively reduce the number of active sites for growing large single crystals, and simultaneously play a positive role in improving crystal growth rate.


3.1.3 Solution-phase epitaxial growth of OSSCs. 
“Solution epitaxy” is a newly proposed epitaxy concept that draws on the concept of traditional vapor phase epitaxy, which has been considered as a facile and low-cost approach for the epitaxial growth of organic molecules on a solution surface into millimeter- and centimeter-size. For example, Xu et al.11 reported the solution epitaxial growth of 2D crystals of organic semiconductors (2DCOSs) with size up to ∼7 mm on the water surface (Fig. 6A). As shown in Fig. 6A, small-size 2DCOSs aggregated on the water surface are used as seed crystals, and subsequent epitaxial growth from the small 2DCOSs into large 2DCOSs will be derived by π–π molecular interactions when dropping new solution on them. Notably, good spreading of the solution is crucial to achieve epitaxial growth of wafer-scale 2DCOSs. With this in mind, Wang et al.23 further increased the crystal size up to the sub-centimeter scale by controlling the interfacial tension of the water/solution system with a phase transfer surfactant. Recently, another simple and effective method, namely the external-force-driven solution epitaxy (EFDSE) method, has been developed to grow centimeter-size 2DCOSs at the water surface (Fig. 6B).80 A solvent with suitable spreading coefficient (S) is vital for the formation of large-area 2DOSCs. S can be described as: S = γ1 − γ2 − γ12(2)where γ1, γ2, and γ12 are the surface tensions of water and solution and the interfacial surface tension of the two solutions, respectively. Therefore, only when S > 0 (e.g. dichloromethane), can the solution appropriately spread on the water surface, while, if S < 0 (e.g. chlorobenzene), the solution will stay at the joint without dispersion, as illustrated in Fig. 6C. The pulling force produced from the inserting glass slide drove the continuous epitaxial growth of the 2D structures along initially formed crystals toward large-area films. The 2DCOS-based OFETs showed carrier mobility of up to 13.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, suggesting high-quality crystal growth by virtue of a solution epitaxy method.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of epitaxially grown 2DCOSs with the employment of the “Solution-Epitaxy” method.11 Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication process of large-area 2D organic single crystals via an external-force-driven solution-epitaxy method. (C) The growth mechanism of large-area and highly aligned 2DCOSs.80 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. 
In a word, large scale and high quality organic single crystals can be obtained on a water surface through the epitaxy growth method, which provides a new idea for the fabrication of OSSCs.


3.1.4 Solution-phase epitaxial growth of perovskite single crystals. 
Solution-phase epitaxy strategies (e.g. seed-induced crystallization, and surface-tension driven nucleation) were also considered as an efficient nucleation and growth-controlling strategy to obtain well-oriented perovskite single-crystal films.84,116–118 For example, Wang et al.118 successfully developed an inch-scale quasi-2D perovskite single crystal membrane (quasi-2D PSCM) at the water–air interface where a monolayer of the spontaneously oriented alkyl ammonium cations acts as a soft template to direct the nucleation to form small-size crystals. Subsequent epitaxial growth from the small crystals gives large perovskite single crystal membranes (Fig. 7A and B). The crystal growth rate (Ψ) can be expressed as: (3)where Γ is a geometric factor, ν is an attempt frequency, ΔGc is the free energy difference between the initial state and the crystal, and ΔG′ is the free energy difference between the initial and activated state. In comparison to the bulk solution, lower nucleation energy is expected for the surface layer molecules because of the surface tension effect, which simultaneously leads to higher energy of the precursor molecules in the initial state, and thus a higher ΔGC,surface and smaller , rendering a higher growth rate (Fig. 7C–E). Therefore, combining low nucleation energy with a uniform orientational growth rate can achieve inch-scale quasi-2D PSCM (Fig. 7F). Similarly, Liu et al.84 recently fabricated high-quality 36 mm-size 2D (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 ((PEA)2PbI4) perovskite single crystals (PSCs) via a surface-tension-controlled inverse temperature crystallization method (Fig. 7G). During the crystallization, once crystal seeds are formed on the solution surface, epitaxial growth of the crystallites will occur rapidly and spontaneously evolve to a large size by inverse temperature crystallization. Likewise, through the combination of space-confined and seed-induced crystallization methods, Gao et al.117 obtained perovskite single-crystalline films with a diameter as large as 10 mm. Concretely, the advance-synthesized small perovskite wafer as the seed was added into the precursor solution, which triggered the epitaxial growth of single-crystalline perovskite by inducing the aggregation and orderly arrangement of perovskite segments.
 Fig. 7  (A) Molecular interaction between precursor molecules and water molecules during the crystal growth process. (B) Analytical diagram of the single crystal staying afloat on the solution surface. Graphic illustrations of (C) the lower nucleation barrier, (D) the larger free energy changes during crystal growth, and (E) the growth rate comparison of the precursor molecules at the water–air interface and in bulk solution. (F) Snapshots of the fast-lateral crystallization growth of quasi-2D perovskite SCMs.118 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (G) Photographs of the solution-grown (top) and the free-standing (PEA)2PbI4 PSCs (bottom) upon different growth temperatures.84 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
In summary, seed-crystal-mediated and subsequent epitaxy growth works effectively for obtaining large scale perovskite single crystals, which can further control thicknesses of crystals in combination with space-confined strategies.

3.2 Geometric space-confined strategy
Space-confined lateral crystal growth is a common approach that has traditionally been used to fabricate defect-free single-crystals.119 The geometric confined space can be easily constructed by two substrates and thus directly restricts the crystal growth direction, which ensures the lateral crystal growth and adjustable crystal thickness. As for single crystal-based electronic devices, appropriate thickness of the crystal can effectively avoid carrier loss and ensure sufficient light absorption, which is required to realize its exceptional charge transport property. Therefore, the space-confined method can meet the fabrication requirements of controlled crystal thickness by altering the geometric space.

3.2.1 Space-confined lateral growth of perovskite single crystals. 
In general, a space-confined method is often assisted with other strategies (e.g. inverse temperature crystallization,120 temperature-lowering crystallization,121 and anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization122) to prepare single-crystal perovskite thin films. For example, Huang et al.123 obtained millimeter-scale methylammonium lead tribromide (MAPbBr3) single-crystal thin films by a space-confined lateral crystal growth method assisted with an inverse solubility method (Fig. 8A). This approach takes advantage of the hydrophobic nature of PTAA and hence dramatically accelerates the precursor ion diffusion in the geometrical confinement gap, enabling unidirectional lateral growth of perovskite single crystals to a large area (Fig. 8B). Similarly, Lee et al.82 fabricated large-scale, single-crystal CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films on a heated substrate using a geometrically lateral crystal growth method (Fig. 8C). In this method, perovskite inks were transferred to the heated substrate via a channel-patterned roller to realize unidirectional crystal growth resulting from the instant crystallization and geometrical confinement (Fig. 8D). High power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.8% was achieved for the laterally constructed perovskite solar cells. Furthermore, using the same method, Park et al.124 achieved a record high PCE of 9.50% in a lateral single-crystal perovskite solar cell with the employment of interdigitated electrode units.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the correlation between ion diffusion rate and thin single-crystal growth in the confined gaps. (B) Schematic diagram of ion diffusion rates on hydrophilic (left) and hydrophobic (right) substrates.123 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (C) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of single-crystal perovskite patterned thin films using the geometrically confined lateral crystal growth (GC-LCG) method. (D) Photographic image of a 3 × 3 inch2 perovskite thin film and optical microscopy image of the perfectly aligned perovskite strip.82 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. 
In a word, the space-confined method is not only an effective way to fabricate perovskite crystal films with an adjustable thickness, but also allows us to optimize their size, quality and architecture through combining various modified strategies.


3.2.2 Space-confined growth of OSSCs. 
A space-confined method in association with meniscus-guided coating (MGC) (e.g., zone casting,125,126 dip coating,78,127 solution shearing,40,47,128 and edge casting81) can be used to grow highly crystalline films of organic molecules on large areas. They all rely on a unidirectional translation of the solution drop on the substrate surface by an external force, for example, mechanical shearing force or gravity in dip coating. Solvent evaporation violently occurs in the meniscus front region, where the nucleation and growth of organic crystals occur, resulting in solute supersaturation and precipitation.129 In this regard, precise control of the meniscus on solute/solvent systems, coating speed, and substrate temperature is vital to obtain uniform and high quality organic single-crystal films.130,131 For instance, Deng et al.78 reported a strategy combining microscale photoresist (PR) channels with the dip-coating technique to fabricate uniform and wafer-scale (>2 inch) organic semiconductor single-crystal (OSSC) arrays (Fig. 9A). As shown in Fig. 9B, with the micro-PR channel serving as a template, the confined meniscus profile follows this parabolic equation:132 h = A(R − r)2(4)where h is the height of the meniscus at r, A is a constant, and R and r are the distance of the edge of the meniscus from the bulk solution and the horizontal distance of the meniscus surface from the bulk solution, respectively. With solvent evaporation, outward convective flow is triggered and OSSCs form homogeneous nucleation at the meniscus front along the lateral sides of the PR strips, enabling the well-aligned growth of an OSSCs array with uniform morphology (Fig. 9C). Meanwhile, the dip-coating process ensures homogeneous molecular packing of the OSSCs, obtaining FETs with high mobility of over 30.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good uniformity. In addition, Takeya and co-workers carried out a series of studies on obtaining wafer-scale OSSCs (C8-DNBDT-NW) by optimizing the confined-meniscus-driven solution processing method. They demonstrated a wafer-size, layer-controlled organic single-crystal film composed of an organic semiconductor bimolecular layer with an excellent carrier mobility of 13 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an unprecedented low contact resistance of 46.9 Ω cm via a simple one-shot solution process as shown in Fig. 9D.79 Recently, they further developed a 4-inch size organic single-crystalline (C9-DNBDT-NW) wafer by a continuous edge-casting technique, allowing 1600 OFETs to be integrated on a SiO2/Si wafer with operation mobilities of up to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 9E and F). The key point of this method is to accurately balance the solvent evaporation rate and the substrate movement speed.81
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustrations of the channel-restricted meniscus self-assembly process for the fabrication of OSSC arrays. (B) The cross-polarized optical microscopy image of the DPA crystal arrays on a 2-inch SiO2/Si wafer. (C) The optical micrograph image of the confined meniscus profile (left) and a schematic image of the meniscus (right).78 Copyright © 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (D) Schematic diagram of the continuous edge casting crystal growth method and the cross-polarized optical microscopy images of the fabricated ultrathin C8-DNBDT-NW single-crystal films.79 Copyright © 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Schematic image of the continuous edge-casting crystal growth method. (F) Photograph of 1600 (40 × 40 matrix) OFET array.81 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. 
As shown above, great achievements have been made in the preparation of wafer-scale semiconducting single crystals. When choosing the most appropriate techniques, the following issues are addressed based on growth substrates and manufacturing strategies: uniform growth substrate surfaces with low density of active sites, and confinement space to obtain semiconducting films with thicknesses down to several-tens of nanometers. In addition, some manufacturing processes require high temperature and pressure, especially for CVD for fabrication of 2D materials. Therefore, lowering the temperature and reducing energy consumption of the fabrication process will be the main research topics.

4. Applications of wafer-scale single crystals in electronic devices
High-quality single-crystalline materials with fewer grain boundaries as well as minimal defects and traps are widely required in electrical applications. Over the last two decades, great achievements have been made in fundamental physics and functional devices of single crystals from the single-device level to more integrated optoelectronic systems. Moreover, novel single crystalline films fabricated with facile deposition techniques or unique patterning methods serve as indispensable elements in flexible electronics, wearable electronics and intelligent electronics. Therefore, comprehensive discussion and evaluation of the roles of single crystals on the performance of electronic devices enable us to deeply understand the challenging issues existing in materials science, interfacial engineering and device physics. In this section, we highlight the advances in functional devices based on single crystals, mainly focusing on photodetectors, image sensors, light-emitting devices and energy storage devices.
4.1 Photodetectors and image sensors
A photodetector is a basic photoelectric conversion device, in which photo-generated charge carriers and current gains can be obtained on the single-crystal semiconductor surface. High-purity SC materials exhibit much higher photosensitivity and photocurrent responses than multi-crystalline and amorphous candidates in optoelectronics and photovoltaics.83 In this section, we introduce the new progress on photodetectors and image sensors with dominant optoelectronic parameters and corresponding modulation mechanisms based on various single-crystal materials. In addition, the single-crystal nanowire arrays are mentioned as well for integrated systems, which may contribute to the development of future innovative integration strategies and circuit designs.

4.1.1 Photodetectors based on OSSCs. 
Unlike their inorganic counterparts, organic semiconductors with good mechanical softness and flexibility, low-temperature processability, and adjustable bandwidths have been widely favored in the field of optoelectronics. Recently, related research studies on photodetectors based on polycrystalline or amorphous organic films have reported improved figures of merit, with a detectivity range of 1011 to 1013 Jones, external quantum efficiency (EQE) below 105% and photosensitivity below 104.133–135 Owing to the low defect density, perfect molecular ordering, and rarely random grain boundaries, wafer-scale organic single crystals have greater advantages in organic electronic and optoelectronic devices than those of their polycrystalline or amorphous counterparts.136,137 Impressive achievements have recently been made in organic optoelectronics benefiting from rational design and synthesis of organic semiconductors as well as improvements in the preparation technology for crystals.138 For example, Wang et al.139 realized the 2D single crystal films of organic semiconductors (2DCOSs) in the millimeter scale by a drop-coating method on the surface of water (Fig. 10A). The near-infrared (NIR) phototransistors based on the n-type 2DCOS demonstrated an ultrahigh detectivity of 6 × 1014 Jones and EQE of 4 × 106%, which arise from the improved charge transport led by its intrinsic single-crystal nature and the extremely low dark current originating from its ultrathin structure (Fig. 10B and C). In addition, uniaxial organic single-crystalline microribbon arrays (OSCMAs) exhibit great potential on various optoelectronic applications due to the coincidence of π–π molecular packing directions with their long axes of the ribbons.40 For instance, Zhang et al.140 reported a thermally assisted self-assembly (TASA) strategy for the facile and efficient production of centimeter-sized uniaxial OSCMAs, which utilized the temperature gradient to drive the movement of semiconducting ink on the substrate to synergistically control a location-specific nucleation process and directional crystal growth. Correspondingly, OSCMA-based organic phototransistors showed further improvement of detectivity and photosensitivity to 1.98 × 1015 Jones and 1.36 × 108, respectively, which can be ascribed to the high crystallinity of the uniaxial OSCMAs with an extremely low Idark and long lifetime of hole carriers in the channel (Fig. 10D–F). Clearly, precise patterning of organic single-crystal nanowire arrays at desired locations can successfully obtain large-scale optoelectronic devices with excellent stability and repeatability.92,141 For example, Deng et al.142 realized precise patterning of small-molecule organic single-crystal nanowire (SMOSC NW) arrays at the wafer scale via a photolithography-assisted spin-coating method (Fig. 10G). The NW array-based FETs were constructed with a maximum mobility of up to 3.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, one order of magnitude higher than that of the amorphous film fabricated via vacuum evaporation (≈0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1), enabling the control of the switch of multicolored light-emitting diodes (Fig. 10H).
 Fig. 10  (A) Optical micrographs of micrometer-sized furan-thiophene quinoidal compound 2DCOS. (B) Schematic diagram of an ultrathin furan-thiophene quinoidal compound 2DCOS-based transistor under 808 nm laser illumination. (C) Photocurrent on/off ratio and specific detectivity as functions of laser intensities.139 Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. (D) 3D device schematic of the OPTs based on uniaxial OSCMAs. Photosensitivity (E) and responsivity and specific detectivity (F) as a function of laser intensities.140 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (G) Photograph and microscopy image of BPEA NW arrays fabricated on a 4-inch silicon wafer and circuit diagram of an NW array-OFET-LED system. (H) Photographs of the LEDs with different colors modulated by OFETs.142 Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
All in all, large-size OSSCs with ultrathin or uniaxial array architecture are highly desired for flexible integrated optoelectronics. However, further improvements on controllable precise preparation, charge carrier mobility and solid-state photoluminescence efficiency are expected for high performance organic single crystals at the wafer scale.


4.1.2 Photodetectors based on perovskite single crystals. 
With respect to the polycrystalline counterparts, PSCs with high purity and eliminated grain boundaries provide an ideal platform to investigate fundamental electrical properties and integrated optoelectronic device applications.143 As is known, response speed is an important parameter for photodetectors, indicating the efficiency of an optoelectronic device's response to a light illumination signal. Recently, the response speed of photodetectors based on single crystals has reached the order of microseconds, while the value of polycrystalline-based devices prepared under the same conditions is only in the order of milliseconds.144,145 For example, Ji et al.83 prepared high-quality inch-size single crystals of lead-free semiconducting (TMHD)BiBr5 (TMHD: N,N,N,N-tetramethyl-1,6-hexanediammonium) via a facile solution process. Furthermore, a planar array of photodetectors based on bulk lead-free (TMHD)BiBr5 single crystals showed a prominent photodetection performance with a fast response speed of ∼19.1 ms (Fig. 11A and B), attributed to high crystalline quality associated with low defect density and efficient charge transfer along the crystallographic α-axis in the hybrid single-crystalline perovskite architecture. Afterward, Gao et al.117 successfully achieved single-crystalline perovskite wafers with a size of up to 10 mm, and based on this, photodetectors were prepared that exhibited a stable and fast response with a response time of 770 μs by virtue of high crystalline quality with few grain boundaries and low trap state density (Fig. 11C). In contrast, the polycrystal-based photodetectors with the same device structure show an inferior response speed of only 2.699 ms. Recently, Liu et al.84 obtained a record response speed as fast as 58 μs based on inch-sized 2D (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 ((PEA)2PbI4) perovskite single crystals (PSCs) (Fig. 11D–F). This exceptional response was attributed to the low trap-state density and high photocarrier mobility in the high-quality PSCs, thus highlighting the importance of the high crystalline quality single crystals.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of a photodetector device based on a highly oriented (TMHD)BiBr5 single crystal. (B) On–off temporal responses of photocurrent in the (TMHD)BiBr5 single crystal.83 Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) The response time measurement of the prepared large single-crystal MAPbI3 wafer.117 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Image of a high-quality 36 × 6 × 6 mm3 bulk 2D (PEA)2PbI4 PSC. (E) Transient photocurrent response of the 2D (PEA)2PbI4 PSC photodetector. (F) Dark I–V plot used for calculating the trap density.84 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
In summary, perovskite single crystal devices retain the excellent photoelectric properties and extremely low defect density of single crystals, which is of great significance for the preparation of high-efficiency, stable, and high-purity perovskite photoelectric devices in the future. However, it is notable that many reported photodetectors are based on single-crystal perovskites with unfavorably thick films, even thicker than the carrier diffuse length in PSCs. Therefore, further studies on solution flow dynamics are still needed to obtain uniform deposition strategies for PSC arrays with suitable and controllable thickness.


4.1.3 Photodetectors and image sensors based on graphene single crystals. 
Owing to the high carrier mobility and large carrier drift velocity,104,105,146 graphene single crystals have garnered immense potential in electronics as well, such as integrated circuits147,148 and radio frequency identification.149 For instance, Habibpour et al.148 presented wafer-size millimeter-wave monolithic integrated circuits based on epitaxial graphene operating at unprecedented high frequencies (90 GHz), which is a huge step forward in the realization of high speed data communications. The highly crystalline graphene epitaxial growth on a silicon carbide (SiC) substrate exhibited a high carrier density with a low sheet resistance, which consequently reduced the channel resistance in graphene field effect transistors (G-FETs) and thus was beneficial for high data speed wireless systems. Furthermore, single-crystal graphene has been applied to fabricate complex radio frequency circuits with excellent electrical performance and high uniformity. For example, Tian et al.149 prepared large-area highly crystalline graphene films through a copper pocket-employing CVD method with the application in the radio-frequency (RF) regime (Fig. 12A). Concretely, the RF devices exhibit a record value of intrinsic fT × Lg and highly uniform RF characteristics across the whole wafer due to the high quality and uniform CVD-growth monolayer graphene film (Fig. 12B and C). In addition, single-crystal graphene also exhibits intriguing optoelectronic and plasmonic properties because of its high carrier mobility, broadband absorption and facile electrical tunability.150–153 Deng et al.15 demonstrated the potential of single-crystal graphene in liquid crystal optoelectronics. The highly-oriented single-crystal graphene films grown epitaxially on the CuNi(111) substrate exhibited high conductivity and identical lattice orientation, facilitating the ordered packing of liquid crystal and realizing highly tunable focal lengths under small driving voltages in liquid-crystal microlens arrays (LCMLAs) (Fig. 12D–F). Specifically, high uniformity over a large area was observed and controllable optical patterns through tuning the driving voltages were also realized in SC graphene devices (Fig. 12G and H).
 Fig. 12  (A) Optical image of a graphene device integrated on a 4-inch HfSiO/Si substrate. (B) fT × Lg mapping for the devices with different gate lengths. (C) The as-measured and intrinsic fT × Lgversus Lg.149 Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (D) Schematic of a liquid-crystal microlens array device based on a single-crystal graphene wafer. (E) Schematic of a SCGLCMLA device coupled with imaging sensors. (F) Focal length as a function of driving voltage (Inset: the focused PSF and intensity line profile of a microlen). (G) Point spread functions of microlens arrays on the entire wafer. (H) PSFs of an individual microlens under different driving voltages.15 Copyright © 2019, Science China Press. Published by Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press. 
In conclusion, single crystal graphene with the absence of grain boundaries has exceptional intrinsic properties, making it suitable for high-performance optoelectronics. However, scalable integration of graphene into practical circuits at the wafer scale is still challenging. An in-depth study on innovative integration strategies and circuit designs compatible with wafer-scale fabrication is necessary to further improve the competitiveness of graphene-based (opto)electronics.


4.1.4 Photodetectors based on 2D semiconductor single crystals. 
Recent progress of photodetectors based on polycrystalline or amorphous 2D semiconductors is limited due to inherent domain disorder, with responsivity below tens of A W−1 and a response time range of hundreds of milliseconds to tens of seconds.154,155 In contrast, 2D semiconductor single crystals except for graphene have become promising candidates towards next-generation (opto)electronic devices owing to their strong optical absorption and response, large exciton binding energy, strong luminescence emission, etc.156–158 For example, Lan et al.159 reported the wafer-scale growth of highly crystalline and homogeneous WS2 films via an enhanced CVD method and further integrated WS2 monolayers as typical photodetectors. The highly crystalline WS2 films show high optical absorption coefficients and large exciton binding energies that are beneficial to optical absorption and response. Thus, the WS2-based photodetector exhibited impressive photodetection performance with detectivity of 4.9 × 109 Jones and fast photoresponse (<560 μs). Furthermore, doping is a facile and effective way to regulate the functionality of 2D single-crystal semiconductors and enhance the corresponding electrical device performance. For instance, Kim et al.160 demonstrated wafer-scale uniform substitutional doping on monolayer MoS2 films by the employment of a gas-phase precursor and metal deposition technique (Fig. 13A and B). Upon incorporating these doped MoS2 into photodetectors, ultrahigh photoresponsivity of 5 × 105 A W−1 and fast response time of 5 ms were achieved, benefiting from the high current level and low contact resistance of single-crystalline doped MoS2 (Fig. 13C and D). Tin selenide (SnSe), with an orthorhombic lattice configuration similar to the distorted NaCl structure, has attracted great attention in thermoelectrics.161 Recently, wafer-scale growth of ultrathin SnSe films with high crystallization, which were deposited by magnetron sputtering, demonstrated their application as photodetectors (Fig. 13E and F).162 High crystallinity of the achieved uniform SnSe films greatly enhances the electrical transport of photoexcited carriers and induces more hole carriers in the channel, which is responsible for the ultrahigh responsivity of 277.3 A W−1 of the fabricated SnSe device (Fig. 13G). In addition, Chen et al.18 reported the wafer-scale growth of single-crystal MoSe2 films on a lattice-matched GaN semiconductive specific and confirmed their potential in electroluminescence and light harvesting (Fig. 13H). As shown in Fig. 13J, the device in operation displayed a uniform blueish color throughout the sample, which can be ascribed to ultrathin single-crystal MoSe2 films that ensure that the light propagates easily in a special direction (Fig. 13I).
 Fig. 13  (A) Photographic image of a uniform Nb-doped MoS2 film on a 2 inch SiO2/Si wafer. (B) Work function distribution over the whole sample divided into 100 regions to show the uniformity of doping in the MoS2 film. (C) Schematic illustration of the photodetector based on doped MoS2. (D) Transfer curves of photodetectors based on Nb-doped MoS2 under irradiation of 550 nm visible light with a power of 282 nW.160 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (E) Image of a SnSe photodetector array on the SiO2/Si wafer. (F) Schematic diagram of the fabricated SnSe photodetector under irradiation. (G) Real band alignment with local defect levels under an external bias with or without laser irradiation.162 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (H) Schematic of the device characterization of the MoSe2/GaN/sapphire heterojunction structure. (I) Band diagram of the MoSe2/p-GaN heterojunction. (J) Photographs of the electroluminescence (EL) properties of the device under different injection currents.18 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In short, compared with three-dimensional semiconductors, 2D single-crystal semiconducting materials with atomic-scale thickness and controllable band gap exhibit extraordinary optoelectronic performance. Although 2D materials have exhibited their unique advantages in various optoelectronic applications, the instability and limited response speed of devices are still big challenges. Thence, the development on novel materials, mechanisms and synthesis techniques towards wafer-scale, highly-crystalline and homogeneous films is urgent for high-performance electronics.

4.2 Light-emitting devices
In the past decades, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have been increasingly used in a variety of commercial applications, such as flat-panel display and solid-state lighting.163,164 As a prerequisite for high-performance LEDs, the materials need remarkable charge-transport characteristics and better electroluminescence properties. Thus, high-quality single-crystalline materials are extensively required in light-emitting functional devices. In this part, achievements including the currently optimal performance and its mechanistic explanation of single crystal-based LEDs are introduced. Specifically, the discussion centers around material design, device structure optimization and device fabrication strategy aspects to expound how they affect the performance of LEDs.

4.2.1 Light-emitting devices based on OSSCs. 
Compared with amorphous organic semiconductors, OSSCs with low impurity content and highly ordered molecular arrangement are endowed with higher emission efficiency and light amplification ability, exhibiting huge potential in organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs). So far, however, the performance of organic single-crystal based OLEDs is still far below the conventional amorphous OLEDs. The reason for this is that most organic semiconductor molecules are unipolar with an unbalanced hole-electron transport property, which results in the exciton recombination region close to the electrode and induces exciton quenching within the emissive layer.165 Additionally, the weak van der Waals force-induced poor contact and mismatched work functions between crystal and electrode lead to inefficient and unbalanced carrier injection. Therefore, unbalanced carrier injection that commonly exists in OSSCs impedes their practical applications. To solve these problems, many efforts have been implemented regarding material design, device structure optimization and device fabrication strategy. For example, Ding and co-workers166 applied a multilayered structure in OLEDs with an anodic buffer layer and an electron transport layer toward balanced carrier injection and transport by employing a template stripping method, leading to a maximum luminance and current efficiency of 820 cd cm−2 and 0.9 cd A−1, respectively. The significant improvement of performance is attributed to the better charge carrier balance and inherent long-range structural ordering of single crystals that effectively avoid exciton quenching under high current density. In addition, the utilization of ambipolar OSSCs in OLEDs is another feasible approach to realize balanced hole-electron transport. An et al.167 developed well-balanced ambipolar OSSCs by mixing of n-/p-type molecules to manipulate the intrinsic electrical properties, which is advantageous to both the efficient carrier injection and the exciton confinement within the emissive layer. As a result, a record performance for the doped ambipolar crystal OLEDs was achieved with the maximum luminance of 5467 cd m−2 and current efficiency of 2.82 cd A−1. In terms of white organic light-emitting devices (WOLEDs), color-rendering index (CRI) and efficiency are key parameters for their practical applications in solid-state lighting.168 Some luminophore-based organic single crystals have been used as active materials in WOLEDs with a novel device structure and molecular doping strategy.169 For example, double-doped white-emission organic single crystals were fabricated and employed for three-color-strategy WOLEDs by Ding and co-workers.170 The double-doped 1,4-bis(4-methylstyryl)-benzene (BSB-Me) crystals with ordered molecular arrangement exhibited high luminescence quantum efficiency, and thus the luminance and current efficiency of the fabricated WOLEDs reached up to 793 cd m−2 and 0.89 cd A−1, respectively (Fig. 14A and B). Moreover, using polarized photoluminescence (PL) spectrum measurements and first-principles calculations, the substitutional doping mechanism of the stacking mode between the guest and host molecules was clarified as well.169
 Fig. 14  (A) Optical photograph of the double-doped crystal under the UV light (left) and CIE coordinates varying with the increase of the driven current density (right). (B) Multilayered device structure of the double-doped crystal-based WOLEDs and relative energy level.170 Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) I–V characteristics (Inset: a microscopic optical image of the LED at 0 V) (left) and relative light emission intensity vs. time (right) of an LED at low temperature (Inset shows a microscopic image of the LED at t = 12 h).176 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) Prototype device of the SCA-PeLED display.179 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. 
In brief, given the above discussion, growth of the organic single crystals with multilayered structure, multicomponent mixture, molecular doping and maintained single-crystalline structures offers a reliable way to manipulate their intrinsic electrical properties and advances the practical applications of the organic single crystal-based OLEDs.


4.2.2 Light-emitting diodes based on perovskite single crystals. 
Halide perovskites have also been considered as an ideal emissive layer in light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes due to their excellent photoluminescence efficiency, weak Auger recombination, and high color purity.171 However, polycrystalline perovskite films often contain large amounts of defect states and randomly oriented crystal domains, resulting in adverse ion migration and coherent light-emission in the device, with luminance generally below 2000 cd m−2.172–175 With these considerations, well-aligned perovskite single crystals are necessary for the development of highly efficient electroluminescent (EL) devices. Instead of multilayered device structures, single-crystalline perovskite (MAPbBr3) LEDs with a simple structure of ITO/PVK/Au were firstly reported, in which a vertical p–i–n junction was formed in the single-crystalline perovskite emitter caused by ion migration under a certain electrical field, which facilitated to lower the energy barriers for efficient charge carrier injection.176 Meanwhile, single-crystalline perovskites with the highly oriented domains ensure strong coherent light-emission in the emissive layer. As a result, the fabricated LED exhibits an efficient and stable performance that turned-on at 1.8 V and sustained continuous operation for 54 hours with a degradation-free luminance of ∼5000 cd m−2 (Fig. 14C). In addition, owing to minimal defect states and favorable carrier transport, single-crystalline perovskites with array-type architecture exhibit excellent lasing features, which is highly desirable for high-resolution digital cameras and display applications.177,178 For example, Li et al.179 fabricated a well-aligned single-crystalline array of perovskite (CsPbBr3) light-emitting diode (SCA-PeLED) devices by a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) cylindrical-hole-template (CHT) method that well induced the nucleation and growth of CsPbBr3 in the confined space. In this approach, the prepared highly ordered self-assembled single-crystal perovskites guaranteed the ultralow threshold and widely tunable lasing emission wavelength of the LEDs. Eventually, by optimizing the preparation process, the device achieved a 99% working ratio in a 62 × 47 array (Fig. 14D).
In a word, using a single-crystalline perovskite emitter is feasible for achieving high-performance electroluminescent (EL) devices. Many studies to date have concentrated on single-crystalline LED devices; however, a universal and efficient large-area fabrication strategy for single-crystal perovskite still remains a challenge.

4.3 Energy harvesting devices
High electrical conductivity and lower defect densities endow single-crystal semiconductors excellent performance in photovoltaic applications.180 So far, the PCE of single-crystal perovskite solar cells, however, lags far behind that of polycrystalline perovskite solar cells. Rare attention was paid to single-crystal perovskite solar cells due to their relatively complex material synthesis and device integration. With gradual progress on single-crystal fabrication strategies, more and more researchers have started to explore the full potential of single-crystal perovskite solar cells.
Perovskite single crystals exhibit favorable optoelectronic properties and lower trap density over polycrystalline films, which allow easy collection of photo-generated carriers, thereby resulting in excellent photoinduced potential and PCE. In 2017, Chen et al.123 first broke the stereotype of low efficiency of single-crystal perovskite solar cells with a PCE reaching 17.8%. The ultrahigh efficiency is attributed to the use of below-bandgap absorption for broadening the photoresponse range of single-crystal perovskite solar cells, 20nm broader than that of the corresponding polycrystalline perovskite solar cells. A much longer carrier diffusion length also renders perovskite single crystals compatible with a thicker active layer, by virtue of decreasing the absorption coefficient of the below-bandgap transition. Furthermore, MAPbI3 single crystals, fabricated by a space-limited inverse-temperature crystal growth method, are pinhole- and grain boundary-free, resulting in a PCE of 21.09% for single crystal perovskite solar cells.181 The smooth surface of single-crystal active layers can effectively suppress parasitic nonradiative carrier recombination that often occurs in polycrystalline thin films. Afterwards, Alsalloum et al.182 further improved the PCE of perovskite solar cells up to 21.9%, achieved through surface modifications. Concretely, single-crystal MAPbI3 films were grown via solvent engineering at low temperature (<90 °C), realizing better film quality with longer carrier lifetimes and enabling higher open-circuit voltage. Since then, the highest PCE reported for single-crystal perovskite solar cells was 22.8%, achieved by composition engineering.183 In such technology, perovskite single crystals possess lower defect densities and longer charge carrier diffusion lengths over those of polycrystalline counterparts, which in turn, allows for thicker absorber layers in solar cells, thereby, significantly expanding the near infrared absorption range of perovskite solar cells.
In conclusion, although the PCE of single-crystal perovskite solar cells (∼22.8%) continues to approach the state-of-the-art record of their polycrystalline counterparts, it is still markedly lower than the theoretical Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit of 30.5% for single-junction solar cells based on MAPbI3. Therefore, more efforts are needed to further optimize interface engineering and device integration of single-crystal films, finally boosting solar cell performance to the theoretical limit.184
Moreover, perovskite solar cells with lateral configuration that can potentially increase the device operational stability relative to regular sandwich structures have drawn more attention. For example, Lee et al.82 successfully fabricated highly controlled unidirectionally aligned large-area single-crystal perovskite thin films for lateral perovskite solar cells via a one-step printing method. The highly oriented single-crystal perovskite films along the channel direction ensured the efficient carrier transport, resulting in the hole mobility of 45.64cm2 V−1 s−1. As a result, the fabricated perovskite solar cells show a PCE value of 4.83%, which is much higher than the value of 0.194% obtained from a lateral polycrystalline perovskite solar cell fabricated in the same way. Recently, Song et al.185 reported a record PCE of over 11% for lateral-structure perovskite single-crystal solar cells with excellent operational stability. This exceptional efficiency can be ascribed to the employment of methylammonium iodide (MAI) surface treatment, increasing the surface potential of the perovskite single crystal and leading to a better band alignment between the single crystal surface and electrode as well as a passivation effect.
In this section, the main progress in photodetectors, LEDs and solar cells based on single-crystal semiconductors including organic molecular materials, perovskite materials and 2D materials has been summarized and discussed. Although presenting a brilliant efficiency, it is still challenging to balance the effective charge carrier diffusion and stability for single-crystal semiconducting devices. Therefore, more attention should be paid to advancing the growth surface passivation techniques and novel device architecture, which are critical to realize the wide practical applications of single crystals to electronic devices.
5. Conclusions and prospects
In this review, we summarize the recent progress in wafer-scale semiconducting single crystals and discuss relative crystal growth mechanisms, fabrication methods, and functional device applications. The single-crystal semiconductors, such as organic small molecules, perovskites, and 2D materials with low trap densities and few defects are favorable for versatile high-performance optoelectronic devices. In addition, a vapor-/solution-epitaxy growth method and space-confined solution processing strategy allow the fabrication of large-size single crystals with controllable crystal orientation and optimal charge transport. Furthermore, photodetectors, LEDs, and energy harvesting devices based on semiconducting single crystals exhibit outstanding device performance, providing an ideal platform for both fundamental scientific investigation and practical applications.
However, many challenges still exist in further promoting the potential of large-area and high-quality semiconducting single crystals for high performance (opto)electronics. As for 2D semiconducting materials, only a few research studies have expanded the single-crystal 2D materials with sizes exceeding the sub-meter scale. Thus, selecting optimal growth substrates, combined with surface engineering to grow larger sized 2D single crystals will be the main research topics. Regarding metal halide perovskite materials, challenging issues are focused on film thicknesses and long-term stability of the single-crystal layer. Therefore, controllable crystal growth strategies and novel device structure design are still in great demand for high performance perovskite electronics. Large-size growth, high-throughput precise guiding, and patterning of organic crystals at desired locations are still difficult issues for OSSCs, which are highly desired for large-scale organic integrated circuits. Hence, more effort should be focused on the development of new fabrication strategies and solution flow dynamics to realize precise control of the crystal growth and alignment without impairing the device performance.
Briefly, with a gradually deeper understanding of crystal growth mechanisms and the corresponding preparation technologies, wafer-scale single crystals with unique photoelectric properties are promising for next-generation (opto)electronics with enhanced performances.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2018YFD0400700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61704155, 31900951 and 51772276), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M640682 and 2018M642793) and 111 project (D18023).
References
H. Wu, H. Iino and J. Hanna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29497–29504 CAS .
T. G. Novak, J. Kim, J. Kim, A. P. Tiwari and S. Jeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001760 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Li, J. Wu, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, J. J. Jasieniak and Q. Meng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902026 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fehr, P. Simon, T. Sontheimer, C. Leendertz, B. Gorka, A. Schnegg, B. Rech and K. Lips, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 123904 CrossRef .
M. A. Haque, J. Troughton and D. Baran, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902762 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Qiu, S. Wang, T. Wu, F. Ding, H. Peng and K. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700087 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, M. Zhuo, X. Wang and L. Liao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1080–1097 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Jiang, Y. Tong, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Ta, A. Bachmatiuk, R. G. Mendes, D. J. Perello, L. Zhao, B. Trzebicka, T. Gemming, S. V. Rotkin and M. H. Rümmeli, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, X. Wang, L. Huang, X. Jin, Z. Yang, Z. Zhou, H. Hu, Y.-Y. Zhang, H. Lu, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, X. Lin, L. Gu, Q. Dai, L. Bao, S. Du, W. Hofer, S. T. Pantelides and H.-J. Gao, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8584–8591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. He, J. Liu, A. Cui, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, W. Chen and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 9671–9675 CrossRef .
C. Liu, L. Wang, J. Qi and K. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Nguyen and Y. H. Lee, Small, 2015, 11, 3512–3528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, L. Li, G. Yu, D. Geng, X. Zhang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Deng, Z. Xin, R. Xue, S. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Gao, J. Tang, Y. Qi, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Sun, H. Wang, K. Liu, M. H. Rummeli, L.-T. Weng, Z. Luo, L. Tong, X. Zhang, C. Xie, Z. Liu and H. Peng, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 659–668 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kim, A. Hsu, M. H. Park, S. H. Chae, S. J. Yun, J. S. Lee, D. H. Cho, W. Fang, C. Lee and T. Palacios, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8662–8672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Wu, Q. Jiang, H. Wang, H. Zhu, Z. Chen, R. Jiang, T. Niu, Z. Li and Y. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805395 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, H. Liu, X. Chen, G. Chu, S. Chu and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20267–20273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Chen, C. P. Chuu, C. C. Tseng, C. K. Wen, H.-S. P. Wong, S. Pan, R. Li, T.-A. Chao, W.-C. Chueh, Y. Zhang, Q. Fu, B. I. Yakobson, W.-H. Chang and L. J. Li, Nature, 2020, 579, 219–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Zhang, S. Pan, B. Tang and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5036–5045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, H. C. Lee, S. B. Jo, H. Lee, N. S. Lee, C. G. Park, S. K. Lee, H. H. Kim, H. Bong and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Sun, C. Wang, F. Yang, X. Ren, X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1492–1530 RSC .
Q. Wang, F. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Lei, R. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5339–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, J. Jie, X. Xu, Y. Xiao and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908340–1908348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gu, Z. Huang, X. Hu, Y. Wang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22157–22162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yilmaz, M. Ozdemir, H. Erdogan, U. Tamer, U. Sen, A. Facchetti, H. Usta and G. Demirel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5669–5676 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, C. Liu, K. Sakamoto, T. Yasuda and P. Xiong, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e409–e416 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Lin, K. Jia, L. Sun, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801048 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Li, M. Li, Y. Cui, X. Son, Q. Wang, J. Jiang, M. Hua, Q. Xu, K. Zhao, H. Ye and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009457 CrossRef CAS .
S. Toso, D. Baranov, D. Altamura, F. Scattarella, J. Dahl, X. Wang, S. Marras, A. P. Alivisatos, A. Singer, C. Giannini and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6243–6256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, G. Li, R. Di Pietro, J. Huang, Y. Y. Noh, X. Liu and T. Minari, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8, 034020 CrossRef .
C. Liu, K. Huang, W.-T. Park, M. Li, T. Yang, X. Liu, L. Liang, T. Minari and Y.-Y. Noh, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 608–618 RSC .

          J. W. Mullin, Crystallization, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  2001 Search PubMed .

          M. V. Ivan, Crystal growth for beginners: fundamentals of nucleation, crystal growth and epitaxy, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd, Singapore,  1995 Search PubMed .
R. Li, X. Zhang, H. Dong, Q. Li, Z. Shuai and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1697–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Dong, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 422–500 RSC .
D. H. Kim, A. D’Aléo, X. K. Chen, A. D. S. Sandanayaka, D. Yao, L. Zhao, T. Komino, E. Zaborova, G. Canard and Y. Tsuchiya, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, B. Qian, K. Uto, J. Chen and X. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 119, 237–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giri, E. Verploegen, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. Atahan-Evrenk, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. A. Becerril, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nature, 2011, 480, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Ding, X. Li, H. Yang and J. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125499 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Feng, X. Jiang, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, B. Su and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6737–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lu, X. Li, Q. Sun, X. Pang, J. Chen, T. Minari, X. Liu and Y. Song, Mater. Horiz, 2021, 8, 447–470 RSC .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo and J. Jie, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600280 CrossRef .
T. Yang, Q. Wu, F. Dai, K. Huang and C. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1903889 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Sun, C. Wang, F. Yang, X. Ren, X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1492–1530 RSC .
Y. Diao, C. K. B. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, D. H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Irkhin and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 017402 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8342–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dai, X. Y. Liu, T. Yang, J. Qian, Y. Li, Y. Gao, P. Xiong, H. Ou, J. Wu and M. Kanehara, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7226–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jin-Oh, L. Jeong-Chan, K. Min-Ji, N. Hyunwoo, Y. Hye-In, K. J. Beom, L. T. Hoon, K. P. Sang-Hee, K. Dong-Pyo and P. Steve, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800647 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Arai, S. Inoue, T. Hamai, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707256 CrossRef PubMed .
P. He, Z. Tu, G. Zhao, Y. Zhen, H. Geng, Y. Yi, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Liu, X. Lu, X. Fu, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, D. Ji, L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 825–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Podzorov, S. E. Sysoev, E. Loginova, V. M. Pudalov and M. E. Gershenson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3504–3506 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, X. Fu, J. Liu, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6158–6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan and F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Li, J. Liao and D. Kuang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800294 CrossRef .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747–7753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Rao, W. G. Li, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602639 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, V. M. Burlakov, M. I. Saidaminov, A. Alofi, M. A. Haque, B. Turedi, B. Davaasure, I. Dursun, N. Cho and A. M. El-Zohry, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1782–1788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, G. Xin, J. Lian and J. Shi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 4741–4749 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han and G. H. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. C. Kim, R. J. Wu, J. Martinez, X. Song, J. Yang, F. Zhao, A. Mkhoyan, H. Y. Jeong and M. Chhowalla, Nature, 2019, 568, 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, 9439–9451 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, A. Abbas and C. Zhou, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700045 CrossRef .
S. Li, L. Yung-Chang, L. Xu-Ying, H. Zehua, W. Jing, N. Hideaki, L. Song, O. Toshiya, C. Wei, M. Takeo, S. Yoshiki, T. Kazuhito, S. Kazu, T. Takaaki and O. Minoru, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16122–16129 RSC .
D. Rhodes, S. H. Chae, R. Ribeiro-Palau and J. Hone, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 541–549 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, M. Tang, J. Wu, Y. Liu, T. Li, Y. Liang, B. Deng, Z. Tan, T. Tu and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2148–2153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Deng, Z. Pang, S. Chen, X. Li, C. Meng, J. Li, M. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Qi and W. Dang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12337–12345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Liu, T. Wei, S. Yang, Z. Dou, Y. Wang, H. Ci, H. Chang, Y. Qi and J. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807345 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. J. Yun, Y. I. Kim, S. Boandoh, J.-H. Park, B. G. Shin, H. Ko, S. H. Lee and Y.-M. Kim, Science, 2018, 362, 817–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Yazyev and Y. P. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 755–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yoon, S. Jo, I. S. Chun, I. Jung, H. S. Kim, M. Meitl, E. Menard, X. Li, J. J. Coleman and U. Paik, Nature, 2010, 465, 329–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Ma, P. Cai, R. Zhong and Y. Zhang, Nature, 2019, 575, 156–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, H. Dong, J. Jie, X. Xu, J. Liu, L. He, L. Xu, W. Hu and X. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2018, 24, 17 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamamura, S. Watanabe, M. Uno, M. Mitani, C. Mitsui, J. Tsurumi, N. Isahaya, Y. Kanaoka, T. Okamoto and J. Takeya, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 5758–5765 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Deng, W. Wang, R. Jia and X. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2796–2801 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumagai, A. Yamamura, T. Makita, J. Tsurumi and J. Takeya, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 15897–15904 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lee, J. Baek, K. S. Park, Y. E. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and M. M. Sung, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15882–15889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ji, P. Wang, Z. Wu, Z. Sun, L. Li, J. Zhang, W. Hu, M. Hong and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705467 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, H. Wu, G. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
J. Y. Zheng, H. G. Manning, Y. Zhang, J. J. Wang and J. F. Donegan, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 11738–11746 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiu, Y. Shao, L. Chen, Y. Feng, J. Dai, X. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, Y. Zheng, H. Pan, C. Liu, X. Shi, X. Cheng and Z. He, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 186–197 CrossRef .
C. Ge, W. Zhai, C. Tian, S. Zhao, T. Guo, S. Sun, W. Chen and G. Ran, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 16779–16783 RSC .
T. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Yuan, J. Xue, G. Lu, Z. Liu, H. Wang, H. Wang, F. Ding and Q. Yu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 43–47 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, L. Lin, L. Sun, J. Zhang, D. Rui, J. Li, M. Wang, C. Tan, N. Kang and D. Wei, Small, 2017, 14, 1702916 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Qiao, M. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Liang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Chen, X. Xie, J. Zong, Y. Shan, Y. Guo, M. Willinger, H. Wu, Q. Li, W. Wang, P. Gao, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, D. Yu, E. Wang, X. Bai, Z.-J. Wang, F. Ding and K. Liu, Nature, 2019, 570, 91–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Nature, 2011, 475, 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Scott Wilkinson, R. F. Norwood, J. M. McLellan, L. Rhys Lawson and D. L. Patrick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16468–16469 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Becerril, M. E. Roberts, Z. Liu, J. Locklin and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2588–2594 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Briseno, J. Aizenberg, Y. J. Han, R. A. Penkala, H. Moon, A. J. Lovinger, C. Kloc and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12164–12165 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Park, T. N. Jackson, J. E. Anthony and D. A. Mourey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 063514 CrossRef .
G. M. Pound, M. T. Simnad and L. Yang, J. Chem. Phys., 1954, 22, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, M. Hong, J. Shi, S. Chen, J. Shu, L. Zhao, S. Jiang and X. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 979 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, M. G. Sendeku, L. Yin, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Z. Wang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, P.-C. Shen, C. Su, A.-Y. Lu, M. Hempel, Y. Han, Q. Ji, Y. Lin, E. Shi and E. McVay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 3437–3442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, G. Ye, S. Lei, G. Shi, Y. He, J. Lin, X. Zhang, R. Vajtai, S. T. Pantelides and W. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2009–2015 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Bets, N. Gupta and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2027–2031 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal′ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, J. Liu and Z. Hua, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5979–6004 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
J.-H. Lee, E. K. Lee, W.-J. Joo, Y. Jang, B.-S. Kim, J. Y. Lim, S.-H. Choi, S. J. Ahn, J. R. Ahn, M.-H. Park, C.-W. Yang, B. L. Choi, S.-W. Hwang and D. Whang, Science, 2014, 344, 286–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Jang, J.-Y. Lim, S.-G. Kang, Y.-M. Seo, J.-Y. Moon, J.-H. Lee and D. Whang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3141–3149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-J. Chang, C.-H. Lee, M.-K. Lee, C.-W. Chen and C.-Y. Wen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2324–2329 RSC .
W. Hong, G. Wang, P. Bao, S. Yang, Z. Wei, X. Xing and W. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3627–3630 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, J. Lin, Z. Peng, Z. Sun, Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Xiang, E. L. Samuel, C. Kittrell and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9110–9117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeng, L. Tan, L. Wang, R. G. Mendes, Z. Qin, Y. Huang, T. Zhang, L. Fang, Y. Zhang and S. Yue, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7189–7196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Zhang, W. Zhu and G. Wang, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 5165–5171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, M. S. Bharathi, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, S. Nie, X. Wang, H. Chou, C. Tan, B. Fallahazad, H. Ramanarayan, C. W. Magnuson, E. Tutuc, B. I. Yakobson, K. F. McCarty, Y.-W. Zhang, P. Kim, J. Hone, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2013, 342, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, W. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Chen and Q. Yuan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4868–4874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, J. Li, H. Ren, A. L. Koh, N. Kang, H. Peng, H. Q. Xu and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2922–2929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Guanqi, Y. Peng, T. Qidong, Y. Anneng, C. Jiupeng, Z. Fangyuan, Z. Zhiwen, Z. Jiong, C. Paddy Kwok Leung and Y. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807689 Search PubMed .
J. Gao, Q. Liang, G. Li, T. Ji, Y. Liu, M. Fan, Y. Hao, S. (Frank) Liu, Y. Wu and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8357–8363 RSC .
K. Wang, C. Wu, D. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4919–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Herman, W. Richter and H. Sitter, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2004, 37, 845 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Yang, E. E. Benson, Z. Li, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther, Y. Yan, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7820–7823 RSC .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Q. Dong, Y. Liu, C. Bao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Xiao and Y. Bai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1890–1896 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, Y. E. Bak, L. Lee, H. Choi and M. M. Sung, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1882–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Bruevich, A. V. Glushkova, O. Yu. Poimanova, R. S. Fedorenko, Y. N. Luponosov, A. V. Bakirov, M. A. Shcherbina, S. N. Chvalun, A. Yu. Sosorev, L. Grodd, S. Grigorian, S. A. Ponomarenko and D. Yu. Paraschuk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6315–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, X. Gao, J. Liu, R. Xing and Y. Han, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14396–14404 RSC .
J. Jang, S. Nam, K. Im, J. Hur, S. N. Cha, J. Kim, H. B. Son, H. Suh, M. A. Loth and J. E. Anthony, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1005–1014 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Niazi, R. Li, M. Abdelsamie, K. Zhao, D. H. Anjum, M. M. Payne, J. Anthony, D. Smilgies and A. Amassian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2396 CrossRef CAS .

          A. E. S. Van Driessche, M. Kellermeier, L. G. Benning and D. Gebauer, New Perspectives on Mineral Nucleation and Growth, Springer, Cham,  2017 Search PubMed .
G. Giri, R. Li, D. M. Smilgies, E. Q. Li, Y. Diao, K. M. Lenn, M. Chiu, D. W. Lin, R. Allen and J. Reinspach, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3573–3580 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Smilgies, R. Li, G. Giri, K. W. Chou, Y. Diao, Z. Bao and A. Amassian, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, L. Shaw, K. Gu, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 534–549 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Lee, J. Vollbrecht, V. V. Brus and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1906027 CrossRef .
D. Yang and D. Ma, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800522 CrossRef .
H. Xu, J. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Zhou, N. Luo and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700975 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801048 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 1408–1428 Search PubMed .
P. Gu, Y. Yao, L. Feng, N. Shu Jie and H. Dong, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 7933–7944 RSC .
C. Wang, X. Ren, C. Xu, B. Fu, R. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Li, H. Li, H. Dong and Y. Zhen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706260 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhu, S. Yang, F. Zhai, F. Zhang, Z. Niu, Y. Feng, W. Feng, X. Zhang, L. Li, R. Li and W. Hu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12781–12787 RSC .
X. Liu, M. Kanehara, C. Liu, K. Sakamoto, T. Yasuda, J. Takeya and T. Minari, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6568–6573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, X. Zhang, L. Huang and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 27, 7305–7312 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Han, Y. Gu, D. Yu, J. Liu, D. Hu, X. Xu and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008684 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, Y. Wang, N. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Ren, H. Li, T. Lin, C. Li and J. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1847–1852 RSC .
Z. Du, D. Fu, T. Yang, Z. Fang, W. Liu, F. Gao, L. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Teng, H. Zhang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6287–6296 RSC .
R. S. Shishir and D. K. Ferry, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 344201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, S. J. Han, D. B. Farmer, I. Meric, V. Sun, Y. Wu, C. Dimitrakopoulos, A. Grill and P. Avouris, Science, 2011, 332, 1294–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Habibpour, Z. S. He, W. Strupinski, N. Rorsman and H. Zirath, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41828–41835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tian, B. Hu, H. Yang, C. Tang, M. Wang, Q. Gao, X. Xiong, Z. Zhang, T. Li and X. Li, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800711 CrossRef .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, Ph. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Romagnoli, V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, F. H. L. Koppens, C. Huyghebaert, D. Neumaier, P. Galli, W. Templ, A. D’Errico and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 392–414 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Muench, A. Ruocco, M. A. Giambra, V. Miseikis, D. Zhang, J. Wang, H. F. Y. Watson, G. C. Park, S. Akhavan and V. Sorianello, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7632–7644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, X. Zhou, X. Cheng, R. Qiao and Z. Liu, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 1–6 CrossRef .
W. Wang, A. Klots, D. Prasai, Y. Yang, K. I. Bolotin and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7440–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goswami, P. Dhandaria, S. Pal, R. McGee, F. Khan, Ž. Antić, R. Gaikwad, K. Prashanthi and T. Thundat, Nano Res., 2017, 3571–3584 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Jin, Y. Hu, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800224 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Yin, R. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Wen, T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhan and J. He, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6296–6341 RSC .
C. Lan, Z. Shi, R. Cao, C. Li and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11784–11807 RSC .
C. Lan, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhou, C. Li, L. Shu, L. Shen, D. Li, R. Dong, S. Yip and J. C. Ho, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3371–3384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, H. Bark, B. Kang and C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12613–12621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, S. H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2014, 508, 373–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hao, Y. Du, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, H. Xu, S. Dong, H. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Xue and Z. Han, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7358–7365 RSC .
R. Pode, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 133, 110043 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Yan, Z. Gao, Y. Du, H. Dong, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 870–876 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakamura, M. Ichikawa, R. Fushiki, T. Kamikawa, M. Inoue, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 92, L1367–L1369 CrossRef .
R. Ding, J. Feng, F. X. Dong, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. L. Zhang, X. P. Wang, H. H. Fang, B. Xu and X. B. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604659 CrossRef .
M.-H. An, R. Ding, Q.-C. Zhu, G.-D. Ye, H. Wang, M.-X. Du, S.-N. Chen, Y. Liu, M.-L. Xu, T. Xu, W. Wang, J. Feng and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2002422 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, G. Xie, M. Liu, D. Chen, X. Cai, J. Peng, Y. Cao and S. J. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4614–4619 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ding, X.-P. Wang, J. Feng, X.-B. Li, F.-X. Dong, W.-Q. Tian, J.-R. Du, H.-H. Fang, H.-Y. Wang, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801078 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ding, F. X. Dong, M. H. An, X. P. Wang, M. R. Wang, X. B. Li, J. Feng and H. B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807606 CrossRef .
F. Palazon, F. Di Stasio, Q. A. Akkerman, R. Krahne, M. Prato and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2902–2906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784–5790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, C. Zhou, M. Worku, X. Wang, Y. Ling, H. Gao, Y. Zhou, Y. Miao, J. Guan and B. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1870142 CrossRef .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, W. Wu, H. Dong, G. Li, K. Xi, G. Divitini, C. Ran, F. Yuan, M. Zhang, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800251 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, X. Shan, T. Geske, J. Li and Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6312–6318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Du, K. Wang, L. Zhao, C. Xue and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 2662–2670 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1500613–1500621 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, H. Ding, H. Cai, H. Zhao, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, Y. Jin, N. Pan and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 8275–8282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Handbook of photovoltaic science and engineering, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1258–1259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Alsalloum, B. Türedi, X. Zheng, S. Mitra and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 657–662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Alsalloum, B. Turedi, K. Almasabi, X. Zheng, R. Naphade, S. D. Stranks, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2263–2268 RSC .
B. Turedi, V. Yeddu, X. Zheng, D. Y. Kim, O. M. Bakr and M. I. Saidaminov, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 631–642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, W. Bi, A. Wang, X. Liu and Q. Dong, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 274–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Summary of materials, fabrication techniques, and their corresponding (opto)electronic applications of wafer-scale single crystals.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Equilibrium shape of a crystal on a foreign substrate.35 (B) Equilibrium crystal shapes predicted by the Gibbs–Curie–Wulff theorem and the corresponding scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the crystals grown by a physical vapor transport (PVT) technique.36 Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(1)


Organic molecules	C6-DBTDT	Solution epitaxy	7 mm	OFETs	2016	
11

Perylene	Space-confined assembly	17.3 cm3	—	2018	
23

2,6-Diphenylanthracene	Channel-restricted meniscus self-assembly (CRMS)	>2 inch	OFETs	2018	
78

Ph-BTBT-C6 and Ph-BTBT-C10	Blade-coating	100 cm2	OTFTs	2018	
52

C8-DNBDT-NW	Edge casting	A few centimeters	Integrated circuit	2018	
79

C10-BTBT	External-force-driven solution epitaxy	1.96 cm2	OFETs	2019	
80

C9-DNBDT-NW	Edge-casting	4-inch	TFT arrays	2019	
81



Perovskites	CH3NH3PbI3	Geometrically confined lateral crystal growth	3-inch	Solar cell	2017	
82

(TMHD)BiBr5	Solution cooling	7.68 cm2	Photodetector	2018	
83

(C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4	Surface-tension-controlled crystallization	36 mm (length)	Photodetector	2019	
84

PbBr2	Solution self-assembly	1.4 cm (lateral size)	Laser array	2019	
85

Cs2AgBiBr6	Capillary-assisted dip-coating	2.5 cm (lateral size)	—	2019	
86

(PEA)2PbBr4	Seeded solution	1 cm (diagonal length)	Photodetector	2019	
87



2D materials	Graphene	APCVD, Cu85Ni15 alloy	1.5-inch	—	2016	
88


	LPCVD, Copper foil	5 mm (diagonal length)	—	2017	
89


	APCVD, Cu90Ni10(111)	4-inch	Liquid-crystal microlens arrays	2019	
15


	APCVD, Cu/Ni(111)	6-inch	—	2019	
17

Bi2O2Se	LPCVD, (La, Sr)(Al, Ta)O3	2-inch	FETs	2019	
71

hBN	APCVD, Liquid Au	9 cm3	—	2018	
74

hBN	LPCVD, Cu(110)	100 cm3	—	2019	
90

hBN	LPCVD, Cu(111)	2-inch	—	2020	
19

MoS2	APCVD, Au(111)	1-inch	—	2020	
20


 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration (top), HAADF-STEM image (bottom, left), and photograph (bottom, right) of typical epitaxial growth of wafer-size single-crystal 2D Bi2O2Se thin films on various perovskite oxides (STO, LAO, and LSAT).71 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) SEM image of unidirectionally aligned hBN domains grown on the Cu(110) surface. (C) LEED patterns of hBN domains (left) grown on the Cu(110) surface (middle) and STM image of a hBN covered Cu(110) terrace, showing that one zigzag edge of the hBN domain is parallel to the atomic step on the Cu surface (right).90 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature. (D) Schematic illustration of the Au substrate annealing and MoS2 single crystal growth on Au(111). (E) LEED patterns of as-grown MoS2 domains (right) and the underlying Au(111) surface (left). (F) Photograph of 1 in. continuous single-crystal MoS2 monolayer transferred on the SiO2/Si wafer.20 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of the catalytic and epitaxial growth of single-crystal monolayer graphene from unidirectionally aligned multiple seeds.106 Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic illustration of the growth process of single-crystalline graphene using the micro-contact transfer (“Seed transplantation”) (top) and homo-epitaxy growth (“Seeded growth”) (bottom) method.107 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the SC-hBN film growth through the self-collimated method. (D) Photograph of a wafer-scale SC-hBN film on the SiO2–Si wafer.74 Copyright © 2018, the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Logarithmic plots of the graphene growth rate as a function of temperature and schematic illustration of graphene edges grown on Cu substrates with or without oxygen as well as the corresponding DFT-calculated energies of hydrogen attachment.113 Copyright © 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic illustration of the growth behavior of graphene on Cu surfaces without (left) and with (right) melamine pretreatments. (C) Schematic illustration of the passivation effect on the stages of graphene growth by introducing melamine.115 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (D) Energy profiles of CH4 decomposition with and without a substituted Ni atom on the Cu(100) surface. (E) Synthesis of 1.5-inch single-crystalline graphene on a Cu85Ni15 alloy substrate from a single nucleus.88 Copyright © 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 
S = γ1 − γ2 − γ12	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of epitaxially grown 2DCOSs with the employment of the “Solution-Epitaxy” method.11 Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH. (B) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication process of large-area 2D organic single crystals via an external-force-driven solution-epitaxy method. (C) The growth mechanism of large-area and highly aligned 2DCOSs.80 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  (A) Molecular interaction between precursor molecules and water molecules during the crystal growth process. (B) Analytical diagram of the single crystal staying afloat on the solution surface. Graphic illustrations of (C) the lower nucleation barrier, (D) the larger free energy changes during crystal growth, and (E) the growth rate comparison of the precursor molecules at the water–air interface and in bulk solution. (F) Snapshots of the fast-lateral crystallization growth of quasi-2D perovskite SCMs.118 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. (G) Photographs of the solution-grown (top) and the free-standing (PEA)2PbI4 PSCs (bottom) upon different growth temperatures.84 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the correlation between ion diffusion rate and thin single-crystal growth in the confined gaps. (B) Schematic diagram of ion diffusion rates on hydrophilic (left) and hydrophobic (right) substrates.123 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. (C) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of single-crystal perovskite patterned thin films using the geometrically confined lateral crystal growth (GC-LCG) method. (D) Photographic image of a 3 × 3 inch2 perovskite thin film and optical microscopy image of the perfectly aligned perovskite strip.82 Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature.	 
h = A(R − r)2	(4)

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustrations of the channel-restricted meniscus self-assembly process for the fabrication of OSSC arrays. (B) The cross-polarized optical microscopy image of the DPA crystal arrays on a 2-inch SiO2/Si wafer. (C) The optical micrograph image of the confined meniscus profile (left) and a schematic image of the meniscus (right).78 Copyright © 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (D) Schematic diagram of the continuous edge casting crystal growth method and the cross-polarized optical microscopy images of the fabricated ultrathin C8-DNBDT-NW single-crystal films.79 Copyright © 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (E) Schematic image of the continuous edge-casting crystal growth method. (F) Photograph of 1600 (40 × 40 matrix) OFET array.81 Copyright © 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Optical micrographs of micrometer-sized furan-thiophene quinoidal compound 2DCOS. (B) Schematic diagram of an ultrathin furan-thiophene quinoidal compound 2DCOS-based transistor under 808 nm laser illumination. (C) Photocurrent on/off ratio and specific detectivity as functions of laser intensities.139 Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. (D) 3D device schematic of the OPTs based on uniaxial OSCMAs. Photosensitivity (E) and responsivity and specific detectivity (F) as a function of laser intensities.140 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (G) Photograph and microscopy image of BPEA NW arrays fabricated on a 4-inch silicon wafer and circuit diagram of an NW array-OFET-LED system. (H) Photographs of the LEDs with different colors modulated by OFETs.142 Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of a photodetector device based on a highly oriented (TMHD)BiBr5 single crystal. (B) On–off temporal responses of photocurrent in the (TMHD)BiBr5 single crystal.83 Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) The response time measurement of the prepared large single-crystal MAPbI3 wafer.117 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Image of a high-quality 36 × 6 × 6 mm3 bulk 2D (PEA)2PbI4 PSC. (E) Transient photocurrent response of the 2D (PEA)2PbI4 PSC photodetector. (F) Dark I–V plot used for calculating the trap density.84 Copyright © 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Optical image of a graphene device integrated on a 4-inch HfSiO/Si substrate. (B) fT × Lg mapping for the devices with different gate lengths. (C) The as-measured and intrinsic fT × Lgversus Lg.149 Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (D) Schematic of a liquid-crystal microlens array device based on a single-crystal graphene wafer. (E) Schematic of a SCGLCMLA device coupled with imaging sensors. (F) Focal length as a function of driving voltage (Inset: the focused PSF and intensity line profile of a microlen). (G) Point spread functions of microlens arrays on the entire wafer. (H) PSFs of an individual microlens under different driving voltages.15 Copyright © 2019, Science China Press. Published by Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Photographic image of a uniform Nb-doped MoS2 film on a 2 inch SiO2/Si wafer. (B) Work function distribution over the whole sample divided into 100 regions to show the uniformity of doping in the MoS2 film. (C) Schematic illustration of the photodetector based on doped MoS2. (D) Transfer curves of photodetectors based on Nb-doped MoS2 under irradiation of 550 nm visible light with a power of 282 nW.160 Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. (E) Image of a SnSe photodetector array on the SiO2/Si wafer. (F) Schematic diagram of the fabricated SnSe photodetector under irradiation. (G) Real band alignment with local defect levels under an external bias with or without laser irradiation.162 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (H) Schematic of the device characterization of the MoSe2/GaN/sapphire heterojunction structure. (I) Band diagram of the MoSe2/p-GaN heterojunction. (J) Photographs of the electroluminescence (EL) properties of the device under different injection currents.18 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Optical photograph of the double-doped crystal under the UV light (left) and CIE coordinates varying with the increase of the driven current density (right). (B) Multilayered device structure of the double-doped crystal-based WOLEDs and relative energy level.170 Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) I–V characteristics (Inset: a microscopic optical image of the LED at 0 V) (left) and relative light emission intensity vs. time (right) of an LED at low temperature (Inset shows a microscopic image of the LED at t = 12 h).176 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) Prototype device of the SCA-PeLED display.179 Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
