Recent advances and strategies of electrocatalysts for large current density industrial hydrogen evolution reaction  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3QI00799E View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3QI00799E
(Review Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2023, Advance Article Recent advances and strategies of electrocatalysts for large current density industrial hydrogen evolution reaction
Tong Wua, 
Mingzi Suna, 
Hon Ho Wonga, 
Cheuk Hei Chana, 
Lu Lua, 
Qiuyang Lua, 
Baian Chena and 
Bolong Huang*ab
aDepartment of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: bhuang@polyu.edu.hk
bResearch Centre for Carbon-Strategic Catalysis, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China
Received 
30th April 2023
, Accepted 25th June 2023First published on 26th June 2023AbstractThe urgent demand for sustainable energy resources has boosted research into highly efficient electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). However, the majority of reported catalysts have only been evaluated under small current density (10 mA cm−2) and acidic conditions. In contrast, the industrial standard of HER requires a substantially higher current density (at least 1000 mA cm−2) and favors an alkaline medium. Therefore, increasing efforts on HER electrocatalysts have been shifted to fulfill the requirements for driving HER at large current density with extremely high durability under alkaline conditions, as well as the facile large-scale fabrication of the HER electrocatalysts and electrodes. This review will briefly introduce the features and challenges in industrial HER, including the requirements, benchmark protocols, and parameters, and distinguish the key differences from common lab-level evaluations. Afterward, the recent progress in industrial HER electrocatalysts will be presented, organized mainly by material selections, and will focus on the performance, durability, special fabrication techniques, and brief explanations of mechanisms. Finally, the future outlook and perspectives about industrial HER electrocatalysts are discussed. This review will supply significant insights into the future development of practical HER electrocatalysts.
Introduction
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from various human activities have become a global concern. The climate changes that arise from GHG threaten the lives of all living species on Earth. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to limiting the growing impact of GHG on the environment around the world. Meanwhile, there is an increasing demand for energy globally due to pressure from increasing populations, technological developments, and essential industrial production. Under these circumstances, it is necessary to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels, the major source of greenhouse gas, by developing sustainable energy resources. Moreover, the net-zero carbon emission by 2050 goal envisioned by the World Energy Outlook 2020 necessitates research on clean energy sources.
Hydrogen is a promising new clean energy candidate for a carbon-neutral future, due to its high abundance and widespread applications, and as it only generates heat and water when producing energy.1 However, current hydrogen production processes are mainly derived from fossil-fuel based thermochemical processes such as coal gasification, hydrocarbon reforming, plasma reforming, and hydrocarbon pyrolysis.1 Electrochemical water splitting powered by wind and solar energy has been proposed as a promising technology for the large-scale production of hydrogen because water is abundant, carbon-free, and sustainable. Nonetheless, the slow reaction kinetics of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) results in large energy consumption and hinders the practical applications of the electrosplitting of water.2
Although significant breakthroughs in HER electrocatalysts have been reported in recent decades, the majority of them were evaluated at low current densities of 10 to 100 mA cm−2.3–5 In contrast, the industrial criterion for hydrogen production requires the electrocatalysts to work at large current densities, larger than 1000 mA cm−2, and the durability of the electrocatalysts is also an important concern. Research focusing on the HER is also gradually shifting towards the design and synthesis of efficient, durable, and cost-friendly HER electrocatalysts under large current densities. Therefore, we first review the challenges for the development of industrial HER, especially highlighting the requirements, benchmark protocols, and parameters. To achieve the practical applications of the HER for hydrogen generation, we summarize the recent research advances in HER electrocatalyst design for high current density regarding performance, synthesis, and mechanisms. The outlook and perspectives for future developments are also proposed for the benefit of research in this field.
Features and challenges of industrial HER
Industrial water electrolyzers can be categorized by their electrolytes and temperature (Table 1). Proton-exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers and alkaline water electrolyzers (AWEs) are the main current water electrolyzer devices, while there is also the high-temperature solid oxide steam electrolyzer cell (SOEC), which has a promising theoretical performance but is less studied.6–8 The PEM electrolysis is conducted in an acidic condition, with the advantages of high current densities, high voltage efficiency, compactness, and flexible operation. However, the strong dependency on Pt and other noble metal-based electrocatalysts inevitably increases the expense and limits the large-scale and practical application of PEM thus far.7 The AWE has been well deployed in industrial water-splitting production, although it has significant drawbacks in efficiency, intensity, and flexibility compared with PEM electrolysis.6 Nevertheless, due to the alkaline nature of the medium, the expensive noble metal-based electrocatalysts can be avoided by using the non-noble metal-based alternatives. Therefore, the AWE has a better future in terms of cost control and long-term durability. Recently, neutral water electrolysis has also gained considerable research interest, since it can exploit the abundant natural water resources, such as seawater and recycled water, without adding extra acids or alkalis.9–11 Its more environmentally friendly nature is one of the largest selling points for neutral water electrolysis.
Table 1 Brief comparisons of common water electrolyzers for industrial applications




Electrolyzer
Electrolyte
Temperature




PEM
Acid
50–80 °C (ref. 7)


AWE
Alkaline
60–80 °C (ref. 7)


SOEC
8 mol% stabilized (YSZ)
Above 200 °C (ref. 8)




The pH of the electrolyte not only affects the choice of HER electrocatalysts but is also directly related to the working conditions and available sources of electrolytes. Compared with acidic or alkaline electrolytes, water splitting in neutral media is less explored currently, mainly due to the even more sluggish kinetics of water dissociation in neutral pH. However, if neutral water-splitting is realized, we will be able to utilize the more abundant and less corrosive saline water directly. This is conducive to massive and sustainable hydrogen fuel production.12 Moreover, the HER process is a gas-involved electrochemical reaction, and it has a liquid–solid–gas three-phase interface.13 Thus, the electron transfer and redistribution at a high current density will be rapidly changing during operation. The maintenance system to keep the pH of acidic or alkaline electrolytes steady could have a huge impact on the cost of practical devices. Considering the urgent need for massive and cost-friendly production of H2 fuel, neutral HER has to be further explored, and pH-universal HER catalysts have become the current research focus of many researchers.
Generally, considering the operational cost and efficiency, the industrial electrolysis of water requires the system to operate at a large current density (>500 mA cm−2) to produce a great amount of H2 and O2.14–16 The HER electrocatalysts should meet the following requirements to be practically applied in industry-level production: (i) high activity for HER; (ii) strong corrosion resistance in the case of large current; (iii) great electrochemical stability; (iv) low cost; and (v) exchanging reactants and products in time.17 At the same time, strong adhesion between the catalyst and support is important. On the one hand, it can effectively prevent the leaching or distortion of the active phase under the high current environment. On the other hand, it can avoid the use of binders, thereby reducing the impedance of the electrolytic system and increasing the overall efficiency.18 The performance of electrocatalysts at large current densities is critical for practical industrial uses. The current densities for many well-reported electrocatalysts are only 10 mA cm−2, even including the Pt/C. In contrast, in industrial production, the current densities are usually above 200 and can reach 1000 mA cm−2 in some cases for alkaline electrolyzers.19 Moreover, for PEM electrolyzers, the current densities are in the range of 1000–2000 mA cm−2.20
The previously reported promising HER electrocatalysts are usually examined under low current densities. However, the performance and durability of these electrocatalysts at high current densities (HCDs) might not be as good as expected. In summary, there are two major differences between high and low current density conditions (Fig. 1A and B).21 First, a high current density suggests that a large bias from the equilibrium potential is applied to the electrode and catalysts, resulting in extreme polarization conditions. Second, the electrochemical reactions become fast and violent, accompanied by rapid mass transfer of reactants and products near the catalyst surface. More specifically, current density has impacts on the following processes. (1) Electron transfer between catalyst and electrode may be changed due to charge accumulation and intermediate coverage on the surface. (2) Electron transfer between the catalyst–support interface; the effect of the intrinsic electrical resistance of the support would be amplified under HCD. (3) The mechanical and chemical stability of the catalyst is highly challenged by the vibrant electrochemical reaction taking place upon the catalyst's surface. Therefore, it is necessary to stress test the electrocatalysts under large current density if the aim is to meet industrial-level production.
 Fig. 1  Physical models of the electron and mass transfer processes under HCD conditions. Schematics show (A) electron transfer and (B) mass transfer processes at HCDs. Here, support denotes all the materials to load catalytic materials and delivery electrons, and catalyst denotes the catalytically active material or component for reactions. Reprinted with permission.21 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (C) Summary of key aspects to the differences between lab-level HER and industrial-level HER. 
Stability is another important factor to take into account for industrial production. Since the surfaces of the electrocatalysts must actively adsorb and dissociate from water, the active sites are challenged by the poisoning issue and destruction during the reactions. The intrinsic stability of the electrocatalysts is commonly tested by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronopotentiometry (CP; potential–time curve held at constant current level) or chronoamperometry (CA; current–time curve, a square-wave potential is applied to the working electrode).22 The CP and CA curves are mainly used for the commercially operating electrocatalysts, since high voltages or current densities are held during production.23–25 New methodologies allowing in situ and precise detection of catalyst dissolution are emerging, such as flow cell–inductively coupled plasma–mass spectrometry (FC-ICP-MS) and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS).26,27 These methods provide deep insights into the factors influencing stability and novel strategies to achieve the longevity of electrocatalysts.
As there are many key distinct factors and aspects to consider for the development of the industrial-level high current density electrocatalyst (Fig. 1C), the current research efforts should gradually be shifted to the large current density HER electrocatalysis to explore more possibilities and discover more potential novel materials. In the following section, the latest advances in noble metal-based and non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts will be introduced and discussed. The high current density HER performance, working pH conditions, and mechanisms of improved catalytic activity and durability will be emphasized.
Advances in noble metal-based HER catalysts for high current densities
Noble metals, especially Pt, have intrinsic advantages in HER catalytic performance over non-noble metals in terms of overpotentials, Tafel slopes, and exchange current densities.28 Therefore, when the research focus is shifted to high current density HER, the first candidates to consider are the noble metals. Pt has the best HER catalytic activity in an acidic medium, but it does not perform desirably in neutral and alkaline mediums due to an extra water-dissociation step.29 Ru, the cheapest noble metal, has been reported to have better HER activity than Pt in an alkaline medium.30–33 Nonetheless, the noble metal-based catalysts for high current density HER also have to face the challenges of cost control and durability maintenance to compete with the non-noble metal-based alternatives. Researchers have reported various strategies to produce noble metal-based high current density HER catalysts, e.g., combining with suitable substrates, controlling geometries, doping, on-site fabrication of electrodes, etc. The recent efforts in developing noble metal based electrocatalysts for high current density HER are presented and discussed as follows.
Pt-based HER electrocatalysts
Pt has been the state-of-the-art commercial electrocatalyst for acidic HER due to its conducive hydrogen adsorption free energy.34 However, Pt does not exhibit desirable HER catalytic activity when used in neutral and alkaline media, attributed to sluggish kinetics. Water electrolysis in neutral electrolytes is slower compared with that in acid electrolytes with an extra water-dissociation step.29 Durability under high current densities is also a serious concern for Pt-based HER electrocatalysts, particularly in non-acidic media. One of the promising strategies is the construction of self-supported electrodes, where the active catalysts are deposited on conductive materials with high surface areas.35 Many works highlighted the synergistic effect between electrocatalysts and heterostructures, which enhances electrocatalytic performance.36 The robust interaction between electrocatalysts and substrates endows efficient usage, reduced loading of active materials, and sufficient stability during fierce H2 evolution at large current densities.
A collaborative work of Jiang, He, and Parkin's teams reported a facile fabrication of self-standing electrodes, where blackberry-shaped Pt nanocrystals are loaded onto Cu foams (Pt@Cu) (Fig. 2A).35 The Pt@Cu has a small Pt loading of 0.3 mg cm−2. This loading has particularly excellent performance compared with either higher or lower Pt loading both in large current HER catalytic activity and durability. It exhibits low overpotentials of 35 and 438 mV to reach current densities of −10 and −1000 mA cm−2, respectively, in neutral media (Fig. 2B). The overpotential at −1000 mA cm−2 only increases from 438 mV to 470 mV after 1000 cycles of LSV, demonstrating the outstanding durability of the Pt@Cu self-standing electrodes. The strong interaction between Cu and Pt is predicted by charge density difference and confirmed by XPS analysis. This ensures high durability under large working current densities and in neutral media, and the porous structure facilitates the rapid release of generated H2. DFT calculation reveals the tuned hydrogen adsorption free energy on the Pt@Cu interface is close to zero, which realizes efficient proton adsorption as well as a fast release of molecular hydrogen. This study proposes a facile synthetic method to overcome the harsh conditions and difficulties in assembling self-standing electrode systems, and reports efficient, stable, and cost-effective HER electrocatalysts in neutral media and under high current densities.
 Fig. 2  (A) Fabrication schematic of Pt@Cu. Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for Pt nanocrystals on Cu foams. (B) 1000 cycles of LSV tests under a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 with iR correction of Pt/C@Cu-1 and Pt@Cu-0.3. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2021 The Authors. Advanced Functional Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (C) Schematic illustration for the synthetic process of Cu NWs@NiFe. (D) η500 and η1000 values of the Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir, Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt, Cu NWs@NiFe–Ir, Cu NWs@NiFe, Cu NWs, and Pt wire, respectively. (E) Chronopotentiometry curves of the tested electrocatalysts. (F) LSV curves and Nyquist plots of the Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir before and after the long-term stability test. Reprinted with permission.37 Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Yu's team reported the rational design and fabrication of a hierarchical and self-supported electrode, comprising Cu nanowires, NiFe nanosheets, and Pt3Ir alloy nanoparticles (Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir) (Fig. 2C).37 This material was in situ constructed and established as a highly active and robust HER electrocatalyst working at industrial current densities. The Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir demonstrates extremely low overpotentials of 210 and 239 mV to reach industrial current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH solution, respectively (Fig. 2D). The CuNWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir electrode also shows remarkable durability after consecutive tests for 7 days under 500 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2E), with only a slight increment of 8 mV for the required potential observed (Fig. 2F). The high HER catalytic activity and robust durability of CuNWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir result from the forest-like hierarchical structure, abundant active sites, and positive electronic interaction between NiFe and Pt3Ir. The reaction kinetics and electronic structure of the material were further studied by electrochemical tests and theoretical investigation. The deposited Pt3Ir alloy NPs on Cu NWs@NiFe promote electron migration and reactant delivery at the electrolyte/electrode interface, improving the reaction kinetics at large current densities dramatically. Meanwhile, DFT calculations reveal that the NiFe and Pt3Ir form a synergy effect to enhance the electron migrations after H adsorption, facilitating the subsequent proton reduction reaction with optimized H adsorption energy and H2 desorption energy. Yu's team's work provides valuable insights into the fabrication of self-supported electrodes with extraordinary activity and durability for industrial applications.
Ru-based HER electrocatalysts
Recent research has pointed out that metal Ru exhibits better HER electrocatalytic activity than Pt in an alkaline environment.30–32 Ru has a similar hydrogen binding energy to that of Pt, which opens various possibilities to integrate Ru into other HER-active material to further boost the HER activity. For example, transition metal oxides (TMOs) have been extensively investigated for their ability as bifunctional electrocatalysts for HER and OER, making them promising candidates in water electrolyzer systems. However, TMOs still require further HER activity activation to fulfill the requirements for industrial working conditions. It has been widely reported that doping with noble metal atoms in TMOs can effectively modulate the intrinsic electronic structure of the catalyst to reach better HER activity. In particular, Ru has a better cost-performance than other precious metals, at only 1/3 of the price of Pt.30,32,38 The main strategies to optimize Ru-based catalysts for HER activity are the following: (1) to increase the number of accessible active sites, usually by increasing the specific surface area of the catalyst;39,40 (2) to fine-tune the intrinsic activity of the material by modulation of electronic structures and construction of multiple active sites.41–45
Mu et al. explored the bifunctional electrocatalytic activities for HER and OER of Ru, by incorporating amorphous cobalt-based oxide on foamed nickel (CoOx/NF), where ultralow Ru is doped in CoOx/NF with rich electrochemical active sites (Ru–CoOx/NF) (Fig. 3A).38 The unique 3D network structures of foamed nickel enable the catalysts to eliminate the bubbles generated by HER and OER reactions and avoid active site poisoning. The amorphous CoOx provides a great number of exposed surfaces and defects, contributing more active sites compared with crystalline materials.46 As expected, Ru–CoOx/NF exhibits outstanding HER and OER electrocatalytic activity and stability in an alkaline environment as well as seawater. In 1 M KOH, the Ru–CoOx/NF only needs overpotentials of 370 and 252 mV for OER and HER at the current density of 1000 mA cm−2, respectively, with almost 100% Faraday efficiency (HER performance in Fig. 3B–E). The stability was tested by the multipotential stabilization method and 10000 cycles of high-speed CV scanning. The Ru–CoOx/NF stood all these tests with no significant changes in current density and LSV curve, demonstrating its excellent electrochemical stability toward high current density overall water-splitting (Fig. 3F). The outstanding stability of Ru–CoOx/NF could be ascribed to the firm interaction between Ru and CoOx and the unique structure of the nickel foam, which can reduce the bubbles generated by HER and OER reaction to avoid active site poisoning and minimize the physical impact on the electrode surfaces. The assembled water electrolyzer with Ru–CoOx/NF as electrocatalyst shows overpotentials of 630 mV (@100 mA cm−2) and 1390 mV (@1000 mA cm−2) in seawater, better than commercial electrocatalysts Pt/C/NF||RuO2/NF (760, 1530 mV corresponds to 100, 1000 mA cm−2). This demonstrates that Ru–CoOx/NF is a promising bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water-splitting in both alkaline and seawater media.
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Ru–CoOx/NF. (B) Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) polarization curve of Ru–CoOx/NF and other samples in 1 M KOH. (C) The overpotential diagram (@10 and 1000 mA cm−2) corresponding to the polarization curve of HER. (D) Tafel slope plot of HER. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) impedance spectrum of Ru–CoOx/NF and other samples. (F) 100 h constant current stability test chart of Ru–CoOx/NF. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (G) HER polarization curves of CNT, Mo2C@CNT, Ru@CNT, Pt/C, and Ru–Mo2C@CNT catalysts. (H) Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves in G. (I) Comparison of overpotential changes at 10 mA cm−2 and exchange current density. (J) In 1.0 M KOH solution, compared with the recently reported HER catalyst Tafel slope and overpotential at 10 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2021, The Author(s). (K) Electrocatalytic HER performance of Ru/Co–N–C-800 °C compared with Ru–N–C-800 °C, Co–N–C-800 °C, and commercial 20% Pt/C. HER polarization curves obtained at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in N2-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. (L) The corresponding Tafel plots in 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. (M) Comparison of overpotential at 10 mA cmgeo−2 and Tafel slope with previously reported HER catalysts in acid and alkaline conditions. (N) The chronopotentiometry curves of Ru/Co–N–C-800 °C and commercial Pt/C in 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission.48 Copyright 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Lai and Wang et al. collaboratively reported a Ru–Mo2C@CNT catalyst showing high electrochemical stability, structural stability and HER catalytic activity in high current densities (Fig. 3G and H).47 The catalyst was synthesized in a one-step method using a solvent-free microwave pyrolysis approach, which is simple, fast and environmentally friendly. In 1.0 M KOH, the overpotentials at current densities of 10, 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 are as low as 15, 56 and 78 mV, respectively, showing its promising potential for application in industrial alkaline water electrolyzers (Fig. 3I). The Tafel slope of this catalyst is superior to most of the recently reported advanced HER electrocatalysts, as shown in Fig. 3J. The current density and catalyst structure remain basically the same after a 1000 h long-term electrochemical test. According to a series of physical characterization and chemical tests, the extraordinary HER catalytic performance is due to the improved intrinsic activity of Ru, abundant active sites, stable structure, and superior electronic conductivity. The formation of heterojunction structures between Ru and Mo2C is the key to excellent HER performance. This work not only reports a novel effective HER electrocatalyst for large current density applications, but also provides a feasible design strategy and a facile synthesis approach for other large-scale production catalysts.
In recent years, single-atom catalysts (SACs) have received increasing interest because they exhibit improved catalytic activity, stability and remarkable atom utilization to achieve cost-effective catalysts.49–66 Therefore, Ru-based SACs have also been explored for HER to strike the balance between performance and cost. For example, Lou et al. implanted isolated Ru atoms into an edge-rich carbon matrix to achieve 9.6 times higher HER mass activity than that of a commercial Pt/C-20% catalyst at an overpotential of 100 mV.67 However, the simplicity of active sites in SACs also leads to concern about their catalytic performance in reactions involving multiple intermediates. To address this issue, the concept of atomically dispersed dual-site catalysts has been proposed, and the reported catalysts have demonstrated promising performance improvement.68,69 Following this idea, Zhao et al. reported a Ru/Co–N–C dual-site bifunctional catalyst for pH-universal OER and HER by pyrolyzing Ru/Co-codoped UiO-66-NH2 and subsequent acid etching.48 The RuN4 and CoN4 sites are isolated and well distributed on the nitrogen–carbon support. Benefiting from the unique atom-isolated structure and atomic-distance synergistic effect between Ru–N4 and Co–N4 moieties, the Ru/Co–N–C catalyst demonstrates superior OER and HER performance to the benchmark catalysts Pt/C and RuO2 (Fig. 3K–N). It requires overpotentials of only 13 and 23 mV for HER, 232 and 247 mV for OER to deliver a current density of 10 mA cmgeo−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH, respectively. More importantly, it has been applied in a proton exchange membrane water electrolyzer and operated at a high current density of 450 mA cmgeo−2 steadily for 330 h. Theoretical calculations further reveal the introduction of Co–N4 sites can increase the electron density of Ru–N4 sites, thereby improving the resistance of Ru–N4 to over-oxidation and corrosion. This work provides a new perspective for the design and synthesis of bifunctional single-atom electrocatalysts with bi- or multimetallic active sites for energy-related conversion technologies such as water splitting, CO2 reduction and nitrogen reductions and beyond.
Ir-based HER electrocatalysts
Besides optimizing the loading and catalytic activity of Pt, researchers are also interested in Ir, which possesses optimum performance for OER in alkaline electrolytes but has been barely studied for alkaline HER.70,71 Activating the HER activity of Ir is essential to enable alkaline water electrolyzers to produce H2 at high current densities above 500 mA cm−2, which is a current bottleneck due to the lack of ideal alkaline HER electrocatalysts.72,73 Chen et al. explored the HER activity activation and optimization of Ir-based catalysts with their IrFe/NC catalysts, where the IrFe nanoalloys are supported on N-doped carbon layers employing a MOFs-assisted protocol in fabrication.71 The HER activity was evaluated under both acidic and alkaline conditions. In particular, the IrFe/NC demonstrates superior HER catalytic activity in basic media compared with that of commercial Pt/C. It requires 850 mV to deliver a current density of 1000 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, which surpasses all previous documented electrocatalysts, including the state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C (1.17 V in 1.0 M KOH). The introduction of Fe atoms results in the modulation of surface electronic structures, which optimizes the H adsorption energy to near zero, leading to the significant HER activity activation of Ir. The durability test was conducted by continuous potential sweeps, and it withstood the test by showing only slight drops of current density after 5000 and 10000 continuous potential cycles. According to characterizations and electrochemical experiments, the durability can be explained by the substantial interaction of the ultrafine alloy particles with the N-doped carbon layers. As a result, the catalyst is able to withstand the effect of bubble formation and desorption at the electrode surface during the intense HER process. This work provided new insight into the facile synthesis of advanced catalysts and the development of future alkaline electrolyzers.
Guo et al. proposed and synthesized phosphated IrMo clusters (IrMoP) on nitrogen-doped carbon containing interconnected macropores (IrMoP/MNC) for the alkaline HER, which effectively decreases the Ir usage and improves the adsorption and desorption of reactants and products.74 The Ir atoms are atomically dispersed on Mo clusters that are embedded on the surface of macropores to maximize the utilization of Ir. P modulates the charge distribution between Ir and Mo and consequently facilitates the adsorption of H2O. P and Ir in clusters serve as the active sites for *H and *OH, respectively, which improves the H2O dissociation and fast desorption of OH−. The resulting IrMoP/MNC demonstrated excellent high current density performance, with a small overpotential of 340 mV at 1 A cm−2, superior to Pt/C. Long-term chronopotentiometry measurements of IrMoP/MNC were conducted at current densities of 10 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2. The IrMoP/MNC displayed a negligible decline in overpotential after 27 h of testing. The catalyst morphology did not change, and the clusters remained uniformly dispersed on the carbon support after the stability test at 100 mA cm−2. Furthermore, XPS results indicated no change in the electron state of the Ir, Mo and P after the stability test. These results confirmed the atomically dispersed Ir atoms establish a tight interaction with the Mo clusters, and the electronic structures and active sites are not subject to change during the HER process. This work provides a pathway to maximize the atomic efficiency of noble metal electrocatalysts through the integrated design of the spatial and electronic environments of noble metal atoms.
The capability of Ir-based HER electrocatalysts for high working current densities still requires further investigation and exploration. The research interest in Ir-based HER might be drawn away by other more appealing noble metals, e.g., Pt and Ru, and non-noble metal-based materials as well.
Advances in non-noble metal-based HER catalysts for high current densities
Currently, Pt-based metal/alloys have been regarded as state-of-the-art HER benchmarks, and Ir/Ru-based materials have also been reported as promising HER electrocatalyst candidates.75,76 Nevertheless, their stability at large current densities,77,78 high price and scarcity inevitably limit their widespread industrial application prospects.79–81 In comparison, transition metal-based materials have been identified as promising alternatives to noble metal catalysts due to their low cost and appropriate electronic structures. Although the intrinsic HER catalytic activities of non-noble metals are inferior to the noble metals, researchers have found that a variety of compounds and structures of non-noble metals exhibit promising HER activity and durability, even under large current density.82–93 Moreover, the non-noble metal-based materials have a broader choice of components, more possibilities to combine with non-metal substrates, and more novel structures by various physical/chemical engineering strategies.
Previously reported non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts usually only operate well only at small current densities (10 mA cm−2), but become inefficient and/or unstable to produce large current densities (above 1000 mA cm−2).94,95 As a result, exploiting non-noble metal-based catalysts that are Earth-abundant, low-cost, efficient and stable for HER under large current densities and at industrial working temperatures, is urgent and essential for the water-splitting industry in the future.
Self-supported electrode catalysts
Currently, conventional electrocatalysts are commonly challenged by efficiency degradation and instability at high current densities. The catalysts at high current densities might suffer from various structural deformations, such as collapse of nanostructures, irregular aggregation of catalysts, oxidative decompositions, precipitation of metal phases and catalyst shedding, which destroy the active sites and deactivate the catalysts.96 To this end, an effective strategy to improve the robustness of electrocatalysts is to construct self-supporting catalysts by anchoring active species on highly conductive substrates. The strong active site–substrate bonding prevents the catalysts from falling off the electrode during bubble release and facilitates rapid electron transfer.97,98 The absence of binder also exposes more active sites and promotes the electrocatalytic performance of self-supporting electrocatalysts.99
An in situ-grown cobalt–iron phosphide-based integrated electrode on cobalt foam (Fe2P–Co2P/CF) is reported by Liu et al.100 The catalyst is fabricated from a one-step preoxidation process, utilizing the Co foam as both the sole Co source and a conductive collector. The components of the Fe2P–Co2P/CF electrodes are seamlessly connected with one another by chemical bonds, constructing a versatile, effective and durable bifunctional catalyst for HER and OER in alkaline media. To reach current densities of 100, 500 and 1000 mA cm−2, it requires only 145, 208, and 254 mV for HER and 243, 291 and 317 mV for OER, respectively (Fig. 4A). The Tafel slopes and Nyquist plots demonstrate the excellent HER activity of Fe2P–Co2P/CF, comparable to the commercial Pt/C (Fig. 4B and C). The larger Cdl value of Fe2P–Co2P/CF suggested more enriched active sites on the surface (Fig. 4D). Notably, the water-splitting device with Fe2P–Co2P/CF as both the anode and cathode demonstrated low operating voltages of 1.87 and 1.71 V to reach 500 mA cm−2, at room temperature (25 °C) and quasi-industrial temperature (65 °C), respectively. Meanwhile, it showed excellent long-term durability for over 300 h (Fig. 4E). Moreover, the Fe2P–Co2P/CF electrode delivers 1000 mA cm−2 at a record low voltage of 1.86 V and maintains stability for over 120 h at 65 °C. No leaching is observed at the electrode surface after these durability tests. It is concluded that the heterojunction between Fe2P and Co2P modifies the overall electron distribution, optimizing the intrinsic activity for HER, and the one-step preoxidation allows the tight bonding between the catalyst and conductive collector, contributing to the remarkable durability in industrial working conditions.
 Fig. 4  (A) Polarization curves of Fe2P–Co2P/CF, Co2P/CF, Pt/C/CF, and CF for HER in 1 M KOH (inset: partial enlargement of the LSV curves). (B) Corresponding Tafel plots. (C) Nyquist plots. (D) Cdl obtained at 0.18 V vs. RHE. (E) Multistep chronopotentiometric curve of Fe2P–Co2P/CF under different current densities (from 10 to 1000 mA cm−2). Reprinted with permission.100 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (F) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the self-supported 3D Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP electrode, and highly porous nanowire arrays for HER. (G) Polarization curves of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP and other compared catalysts. (H) Current density at the overpotential of 300 mV, and (I) Tafel plots and calculated exchange current density (j0) of the electrodes. (J) Polarization curves of the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode before and after 5000 CV cycles. (K) Time dependence of the current density for the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode under constant potentials of −110, −170, and −220 mV. Reprinted with permission.101 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Yu et al. presented a theoretical and experimental study to demonstrate that ternary Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP porous nanowire arrays grown on Ni foam are a highly efficient and stable alkaline HER electrocatalyst under large current density (Fig. 4F).101 The Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP catalyst exhibits an excellent HER activity with low overpotentials of 72, 240, and 294 mV at current densities of 10, 500, and 1000 mA cm−2, respectively, along with superior stability in 1 M KOH (Fig. 4G–K). The self-supporting electrode built by integrating 1D nanowires into 3D hierarchical architectures on conductive substrates avoids the use of polymer binders and ensures robust contacts. This should explain the superior stability in experiments. Utilizing the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP in an electrolyzer, it is able to operate at 10 mA cm−2 at a voltage of 1.51 V, 100 mA cm−2 at 1.65 V, and 500 mA cm−2 at 1.82 V in 1 M KOH at room temperature, much better than the benchmark of IrO2/Pt. Theoretical investigation and physical characterization reveal that the 3D porous nanowire structures endow the catalyst with abundant active sites and open channels for gas release, and the good electrical conductivity of the bimetallic phosphide ensures fast electron transfer.
The development of pH-universal HER catalysts, though challenging, is highly promising for utilizing neutral and abundant water resources to produce hydrogen. For example, seawater, industrial wastewater and residential water are promising natural sources for hydrogen production with water-splitting, with different pH conditions. Therefore, besides the conventional alkaline HER electrocatalysts, pH-universal HER catalysts based on non-noble metals have been a growing research interest.
Chen et al. created a self-supporting electrode MoO3−x@CoP/NF, comprising oxygen-deficient molybdenum oxide (MoO3−x) and cobalt phosphide (CoP) on nickel foam (NF).102 It is a highly active pH-universal HER electrocatalyst at high current densities. The coupled hierarchical heterostructure of the catalyst is constructed via simple electrodeposition followed by sulfurization. The MoO3−x@CoP/NF delivers low overpotentials of 100 mV, 135 mV and 400 mV at a high current density of 1 A cm−2 in the electrolytes of 1 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4, and 1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS), and the HER performance remains stable after 3000 CV cycles and 10 h in both acidic and neutral conditions. The self-supporting hierarchical heterostructure results in synergistic advantages, including a large surface area with enriched active sites, oxygen vacancies, electronic interactions tuning the reaction kinetics for the HER, and robustness at high current densities in a wide range of pH conditions. This work provides a simple strategy to develop highly active and low-cost materials as pH universal electrodes for the large-scale production of hydrogen in a wide range of pH conditions.
Tong et al. developed a novel dual-modification strategy to optimize the electronic structure of Ni3S2 as pH-universal electrocatalysts for high current density HER.13 The Mo-modified Ni3S2 nanorods are grown on nickel foam and further modified by phosphating to become a self-supported P3–MNS3/NF catalyst. The Ni3S2 is a heazlewoodite mineral, which shows excellent conductivity and metallic properties because of the plentiful Ni–Ni bonds.103 The critical challenge of applying Ni3S2 to HER is it favors the adsorption of the proton but is not conducive to the desorption of final H2. The serial modification of Mo and P elements optimizes the electronic structure and forms a partial MoS2 layer on the surface of P/Mo-doped Ni3S2 nanorods as the active phases. As a result, the optimal P3–MNS3/NF electrode achieves excellent electrocatalytic performance under different pH conditions. At the current density of 1 A cm−2, it only requires overpotentials of 245 and 243 mV in 1 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4, respectively. Additionally, it only needs 360 mV to reach a current density of 500 mA cm−2 in the neutral 1 M PBS solution. The P3–MNS3/NF retains stable HER performance at 500 mA cm−2 in both acidic and neutral conditions. Detailed analysis reveals that the 3D configuration with a nanorod structure provides a large surface area and intimate interface contact of catalyst/electrolyte, ensuring abundant active sites, strong charge transfer ability and structural robustness. Moreover, the charge distribution on Ni and S sites is more accumulated, which contributes to faster electron transfer. Finally, the modification of P/Mo acts as new catalytic active sites to optimize the adsorption free energies of hydrogen/water intermediates, improving the overall catalytic performance for HER. This work provides a new method to guide the rational design of highly active HER electrocatalysts over a wide pH window.
Li et al. demonstrate a Co2P/Ni2P nanohybrid electrocatalyst with outstanding pH-universal HER catalytic activity.104 It features a highly porous structure which is established by in situ formation of Co2P/Ni2P nanohybrids with a nanometer size on a conductive CoNi foam. It demands extremely low overpotentials of 65.7 and 51 mV to yield 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M PBS (pH ∼ 6.5) and 1 M KOH (pH = 14) with exceptional durability. More importantly, this catalyst can offer large current densities up to 177, 1700 and 1000 mA cm−2 at the overpotential of 0.2 V in neutral, alkaline and acidic solutions, respectively. These HER catalytic performances outperform most of the non-noble metal electrocatalysts and match or even surpass Pt catalysts. The Co2P/Ni2P nanohybrid demonstrated superior durability by showing nearly no degradation of the chronopotentiometry curve measured at −50 mA cm−2 and retaining identical curves with the increase of cycles up to 1000 cycles in acidic, neutral and alkaline conditions. A series of experimental studies confirmed that the outstanding activity and stability of Co2P/Ni2P are mainly attributable to the cooperative effects from the large surface area, strong electrical connections and enhanced charge transfer from the support to the catalyst surface, and the strong synergistic effects between Co2P and Ni2P. This work contributes a new strategy for the development of non-noble electrocatalysts that suit large-scale hydrogen generation in both alkaline media and unfavorable neutral media.
In the noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts, alloying and nanoengineering strategies are usually adopted to optimize the intrinsic activity, enrich active site density, and strengthen the durability of the catalysts. In contrast, for non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts, researchers generally explore a variety of compounds and structures with unique physical/chemical properties, and design efficient and durable HER electrocatalysts upon them. For example, recently, enormous efforts have been applied to the development of non-noble metal-based catalysts, including transition metal sulfides,82–84 phosphates,85–87 carbides,88–90 alloys,91,92 and many other nonmetallic compounds.93 This suggests that there is still a lot of room for the development of non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts for large current density applications.
The recent advances in non-noble metal-based HER catalysts for high current densities will be demonstrated in this section. There are various strategies to activate the non-noble metal and enhance the durability of the catalyst, including self-supporting electrodes, element doping, heterojunction and novel structures. Meanwhile, the pH-universal HER non-noble metal-based electrocatalyst will also be emphasized, which is beneficial for neutral water-splitting devices.
Element doping
Metal phosphates, such as CoP,105 Ni2P,93 FeP,106 NiCoP,107 Ni2P/Fe2P,108 CoFe/Co2P,109 etc., have been extensively studied for alkaline HER electrocatalysts due to their excellent intrinsic activities. Nonetheless, most of them are in the powder state and usually operate at a small current density (<10 mA cm−2), therefore not fulfilling the requirements for practical industrial applications.101 Zhang et al. managed to overcome the above-mentioned limits of the metal phosphates by utilizing Fe foam as the anti-corrosive substrate and applying fluorine doping into cobalt–iron phosphide to optimize the catalytic activity and stability.110 The synthesized F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF catalyst showed superior HER catalytic activity in 1.0 M KOH, with low overpotentials of 229.8, 260.5, 292.2 and 304.4 mV to reach 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 5A). Moreover, the catalytic activity can be kept stable under a large current density for at least 10 h (Fig. 5B–E). Theoretical and experimental studies reveal that surface heteroatom (F) doping induces strong synergistic interactions among Co2P and Fe2P, and the Fe foam with 3D structure endows the catalyst with excellent conductivity, mechanical stability, and large surface area for the loading of the cobalt–iron phosphates.
 Fig. 5  (A) Over-potentials at current density of 100, 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 mA cm−2 of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF. (B) Stability tests: F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF for 1000 cyclic voltammetry cycles in 1 M KOH; (C) current density traces of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 1 M KOH; (D) LSV curves of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 1 M and 6 M KOH solutions; (E) current density traces of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 6 M KOH. Reprinted with permission.110 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (F) The scheme of the preparation process for the A-NiCo LDH nanosheet arrays supported on the nickel foam and corresponding photographs of bare NF (I), NiCo LDH/NF (II) and A-NiCo LDH/NF (III). (G) LSV polarization curves of HER in 1 M KOH; (H) i–t curves of A-NiCo LDH/NF for 72 h. Reprinted with permission.111 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
The element doping strategy is also an effective means to boost the activity of another important catalytic material, layered double hydroxide (LDH). Yang et al. reported that an amorphous B-doping nickel–cobalt LDH supported on nickel foam (A-NiCo LDH/NF) could afford large current densities at very small overpotentials with decent durability, surpassing commercial Pt (Fig. 5F).111 It showed 151, 286, and 381 mV at 100, 500, and 1000 mA cm−2 respectively, with durability maintained over 72 h in an alkaline medium (Fig. 5G and H). They claimed that the B-doping induces an amorphization of the NiCo LDH structure, which regulates the charge transfer ability and exposes more active sites. Additionally, this B-doping-induced amorphization strategy is versatile and can be easily extended to other TM LDHs (e.g. Ni LDH, Co LDH, and NiCoCu LDH), all exhibiting improved HER activity. This work may open up new possibilities for exploring low-cost and highly efficient HER electrocatalysts for practical water electrolysis.
Novel structures of non-precious metal compounds
Besides optimizing the electronic structures on the basis of the well-reported transition metal compounds and non-metallic compounds, novel structures of transition metal compounds have also been discovered and designed to activate the intrinsic HER catalytic activity of the metal centers and boost the kinetics of HER. Recently, it was reported that the surface reconfiguration processes induced by complex conditions of catalytic reactions would lead to greatly enhanced catalytic performance.114–118 Therefore, it is attractive that this electrochemical reconfiguration can be exploited to develop a new generation of electrocatalysts. Typically, OER electrocatalysts would undergo this process to form highly active metal oxides or (oxy)hydroxides under the reaction conditions, which have been confirmed as the real active phase.119,120 In contrast, a similar catalytic surface reconfiguration process rarely occurs during HER.121,122 The rational regulation of electrochemical reconfiguration could lead to improved active site utilization and catalytic activity, but is rather challenging. Wang et al. managed to explore the surface reconfiguration process for HER and reported a rapid complete reconfiguration strategy for the heterostructures of CoC2O4 coated by MXene nanosheets (CoC2O4@MXene).112 The nanotubular structure of the CoC2O4@MXene has high electronic accessibility and abundant electrolyte diffusion channels, favoring rapid complete reconfiguration. The actual catalytic active species of Co(OH)2 are transformed from CoC2O4, and coupled with MXene to facilitate charge transfer, leading to faster HER kinetics (Fig. 6A). As a result, the catalyst requires 28 and 216 mV at 10 and 1000 mA cm−2 in alkaline conditions and is also able to catalyze HER in neutral and alkaline seawater with decent stability (Fig. 6B–D). Comparison tests made with the classical Co(OH)2@MXene unveiled that the reconfigured components of CoC2O4@MXene not only act as the actual active species but also possess substantial stability against the HER working conditions. The water-splitting performance of the CoC2O4@MXene surpasses that of the state-of-the-art Pt/C and also the directly prepared Co(OH)2@MXene. This study provides an in-depth understanding of the complex in situ reconfiguration of electrocatalysts during HER and broadens the possibility of strategies for the optimization of electrocatalyst performance.
 Fig. 6  (A) Reconfiguration process schematic diagram from CoC2O4@MXene to R–CoC2O4@MXene. (B) The HER polarization curves. (C) The relationship between TOF and the tested potentials. (D) The ratios of Δη/Δlog|j|. Reprinted with permission.112 (E) Schematic diagram of preparation process and hyperfine microstructure of HEA/JMPA. (F) The linear sweep curves (LSV) of HEA/JMPA and other compared catalysts. (G) Comparison of overpotential (η10) and current density (at −0.18 V vs. RHE). (H) Chronopotentiometry result of HEA/JMPA at 10 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission.113 Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Janus nanoparticles and high-entropy alloys (HEAs) are novel structures that have demonstrated multifunctional catalytic performance and superior long-term durability. Luo et al. designed and prepared a bifunctional alkaline OER and HER electrocatalyst composed of a Janus multi-principal alloy (JMPA) and high-entropy nanoalloy of elements of Ni, Co, Fe, Cu, and Ag (HEA/JMPA) (Fig. 6E).113 Compared with AgPdCuAu and AgPdCuAu/NiFeCoAu, HEA/JMPA exhibits better HER catalytic performance, which is closest to that of Pt/C (Fig. 6F and G). Benefiting from the accelerated electron/optimized adsorption of the intermediate of JMPA-NPs and the nature of the high-entropy effect of HEA-NPs, the water electrolyzer with the HEA/JMPA as both the cathode and anode in 1.0 M KOH is able to reach 100 mA cm−2 at 1.75 V and 305 mA cm−2 at 1.9 V. HER stability of HEA/JMPA is also evaluated by chronopotentiometry testing during long-term operation at 10 mA cm−2. The potential of HEA/JMPA remains nearly constant for 108 h (Fig. 6H), indicating excellent HER stability, which can be ascribed to the unique physicochemical properties and high-entropy effect of HEA. This work demonstrated the potential for high-entropy alloys and Janus nanoparticles in catalyzing the water electrolysis process and explored the complex catalytic mechanism with both experimental and theoretical investigations.
Conclusions
H2 production is essential to the future of clean energy and sustainable development. In order to boost the large-scale and clean production of H2, current research into HER electrocatalysts and water electrolyzers should focus more on their catalytic performance and durability under current densities of at least 500 mA cm−2. This review introduces the features of current common industrial HER electrolyzers, and discusses the challenges that remain to be solved for practical large current density HER. The requirements for the electrocatalysts and water-splitting systems are summarized. The critical differences between high current density (>200 mA cm−2) and low current density (<10 mA cm−2) are demonstrated and briefly explained. It is noteworthy that catalysts that operate well at low current densities do not necessarily maintain their activity and stability when challenged by orders of magnitude larger current densities. Table 2 summarizes the large current HER performance and durability of the discussed noble metal-based and non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts, specifying the corresponding strategies and available pH conditions.
Table 2 A brief summary of discussed noble metal and non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts




Catalyst
Strategy
pH
Performance
Durability




Pt@Cu35
Self-supporting
Neutral
438 mV/1000 mA cm−2
1000 cycles of LSV


CuNWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir37
Self-supporting
Alkaline
239 mV/1000 mA cm−2
7 days@500 mA cm−2


Ru–CoOx/NF38
3D amorphous structure
Alkaline
252 mV/1000 mA cm−2
10000 CV cycles


Ru–Mo2C@CNT47
Heterojunction
Alkaline
78 mV/1000 mA cm−2
1000 h


Ru/Co–N–C48
Single-atom catalyst
Acidic
450 mA cmgeo−2 as PEM
330 h


IrFe/NC71
Ultrafine alloy nanoparticles
Alkaline
850 mV/1000 mA cm−2
Up to 10000 cycles


IrMoP/MNC74
Atomic cluster, doping
Alkaline
340 mV/1000 mA cm−2
27 h at 100 mA cm−2


Fe2P–Co2P/CF100
Self-supporting
Alkaline
254 mV@1000 mA cm−2
300 h


Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP101
Self-supporting
Alkaline
294 mV@1000 mA cm−2
70 h


MoO3−x@CoP/NF102
Self-supporting
Alkaline
100 mV@1000 mA cm−2
N/A


Hierarchical structure
Neutral
400 mV@1000 mA cm−2
3000 CV cycles, 10 h


 
Acidic
135 mV@1000 mA cm−2
3000 CV cycles, 10 h


P3–MNS3/NF13
Mo and P modification
Acidic
243 mV@1000 mA cm−2
Stable at 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h


 
Neutral
360 mV@500 mA cm−2
Stable at 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h


 
Alkaline
245 mV@1000 mA cm−2
N/A


Co2P/Ni2P104
Self-supported porous structure
Acidic
200 mV@1000 mA cm−2
1000 cycles of CP at 50 mA cm−2


 
Neutral
200 mV@177 mA cm−2
Same as above


 
Alkaline
200 mV@1700 mA cm−2
Same as above


F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF110
Fluorine doping
Alkaline
304.4 mV@3000 mA cm−2
>10 h


A-NiCo LDH/NF111
B-Doping induced amorphization
Alkaline
381 mV@1000 mA cm−2
>72 h


CoC2O@MXene112
Surface reconfiguration
Alkaline
216 mV@1000 mA cm−2
>100 h


HEA/JMPA113
High-entropy alloy
Alkaline
1.9 V@305 mA cm−2
28 h




Currently, researchers have stepped up to experiment with both noble metal and non-noble metal-based materials for large current density HER electrocatalysts. Noble metals have the advantages of intrinsic activity for HER and OER and thus the overall water-splitting devices or bifunctional catalysts are relatively easier to design. Due to their expensive cost and scarcity, the major research direction is to lower the usage of noble metals as much as possible while maintaining or even surpassing the traditional Pt/C electrocatalysts. Novel alloying, nanostructures, incorporation of non-noble metal-based active species and self-supporting electrode construction on highly conductive and porous substrates are the latest advances for noble metal-based high current density HER electrocatalysts. However, the cost and scarcity are inevitably the bottlenecks of noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts for large-scale applications in the future.
In terms of non-noble metal-based HER electrocatalysts, it has been shown that they have more degrees of freedom to tackle the challenges of activity optimization and kinetic performance, as well as durability of the electrocatalysts and electrode systems. Transition metal compounds and/or their compounds with non-metal elements are gradually being discovered and investigated, and a variety of them have been reported to have inferior but similar intrinsic catalytic activity for HER compared with state-of-the-art noble metal catalysts. They include transition metal sulfides, phosphates, carbides, alloys, and many other nonmetallic compounds. Similarly, self-supporting electrode construction is an efficient strategy to design highly active and durable HER electrocatalysts for high current densities. The strong bonding interactions between the active species and conductive supports guarantee stability during intensive gas product formation and removal. Moreover, element doping and other novel structures are also effective to modulate the intrinsic HER catalytic activity of the metal center. Notably, the surface reconfiguration processes during the catalytic reactions have been exploited to generate new effective electrocatalysts. This is a very inspiring breakthrough for exploring the possibility of dynamic control and optimization of the catalyst performance.
The energy crisis and global climate challenge have become a global concern and are threatening all creatures on the Earth. Large-scale hydrogen production from water electrolysis, if realized, would significantly contribute to the sustainable future of the Earth. The pH-universal electrocatalysts are beneficial for utilizing a broader range of daily water resources, for instance, seawater and wastewater from industrial plants. Although activation of the HER in neutral conditions remains very challenging, researchers have reported promising advances, as introduced in this review. It can be foreseen that the research focus on the HER and water-splitting will shift to the design and facile synthesis of electrocatalysts capable of working at large current densities with high durability.
Author contributions
B. H. proposed the concept and directed this project. T. W. wrote the manuscript draft. M. S., H. H. W., C. H. C., L. L., Q. L., B. C., and B. H. participated in manuscript revision and finalizations. All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1501101), the National Natural Science Foundation of China/Research Grant Council of Hong Kong Joint Research Scheme (N_PolyU502/21), National Natural Science Foundation of China/Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong Collaborative Research Scheme (CRS_PolyU504_22), the funding for Projects of Strategic Importance of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project Code: 1-ZE2V), Shenzhen Fundamental Research Scheme-General Program (JCYJ20220531090807017), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2023A1515012219) and Departmental General Research Fund (Project Code: ZVUL) from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. The authors also thank the support from Research Centre for Carbon-Strategic Catalysis (RC-CSC), Research Institute for Smart Energy (RISE), and Research Institute for Intelligent Wearable Systems (RI-IWEAR) of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
ReferencesM. Amin, H. H. Shah, A. G. Fareed, W. U. Khan, E. Chung, A. Zia, Z. U. R. Farooqi and C. Lee, Hydrogen production through renewable and non-renewable energy processes and their impact on climate change, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 33112–33134 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, C. Xu, M. Jaroniec, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Anomalous hydrogen evolution behavior in high-pH environment induced by locally generated hydronium ions, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Recent advances in electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution using nanoparticles, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 851–918 CrossRef PubMed .L. Wang, L. Song, Z. Yang, Y.-M. Chang, F. Hu, L. Li, L. Li, H.-Y. Chen and S. Peng, Electronic Modulation of Metal–Organic Frameworks by Interfacial Bridging for Efficient pH-Universal Hydrogen Evolution, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 33, 2210322 CrossRef CAS .T. Wang, X. Cao and L. Jiao, Ni2P/NiMoP heterostructure as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for energy-saving hydrogen production, eScience, 2021, 1, 69–74 CrossRef .C. Xiang, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, Principles and implementations of electrolysis systems for water splitting, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 169–173 RSC .M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, A comprehensive review on PEM water electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hao, D. Yu, S. Zhu, C.-H. Kuo, Y.-M. Chang, L. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, M. Shao and S. Peng, Methanol upgrading coupled with hydrogen product at large current density promoted by strong interfacial interactions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1100–1110 RSC .J. Miao, Z. Lang, X. Zhang, W. Kong, O. Peng, Y. Yang, S. Wang, J. Cheng, T. He, A. Amini, Q. Wu, Z. Zheng, Z. Tang and C. Cheng, Polyoxometalate-derived hexagonal molybdenum nitrides (MXenes) supported by boron, nitrogen codoped carbon nanotubes for efficient electrochemical hydrogen evolution from seawater, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1805893 CrossRef .X. Wu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Liu, W. Pei, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Engineering multifunctional collaborative catalytic interface enabling efficient hydrogen evolution in all pH range and seawater, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901333 CrossRef .Y.-Y. Ma, C.-X. Wu, X.-J. Feng, H.-Q. Tan, L.-K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang, E.-B. Wang and Y.-G. Li, Highly efficient hydrogen evolution from seawater by a low-cost and stable CoMoP@c electrocatalyst superior to Pt/c, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788–798 RSC .Y. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Huang and J. Fu, Recent advances in electrocatalysts for neutral and large-current-density water electrolysis, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105545 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tong, D. Feng and P. Chen, Dual modification strategy of nickel sulfide as pH-universal catalysts for hydrogen production at large current density, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 10601–10610 CrossRef CAS .L.-M. Cao, Y.-W. Hu, S.-F. Tang, A. Iljin, J.-W. Wang, Z.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Fe-CoP electrocatalyst derived from a bimetallic prussian blue analogue for large-current-density oxygen evolution and overall water splitting, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800949 CrossRef PubMed .H. Shin, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, In silico discovery of new dopants for fe-doped ni oxyhydroxide (Ni1−xFexOOH) catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6745–6748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhou, F. Yu, J. Sun, R. He, S. Chen, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Highly active catalyst derived from a 3D foam of fe(PO3)2/Ni2P for extremely efficient water oxidation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5607–5611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Che, Q. Li, Y. Tan, X. Chen, X. Xu and Y. Chen, One-step controllable synthesis of amorphous (ni-fe)s/NiFe(OH) hollow microtube/sphere films as superior bifunctional electrocatalysts for quasi-industrial water splitting at large-current-density, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liang, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and Y. Luo, Self-supported FeP nanorod arrays: A cost-effective 3D hydrogen evolution cathode with high catalytic activity, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4065–4069 CrossRef CAS .Y. Chen, G. Yu, W. Chen, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li, P. Zhu, Q. Tao, Q. Li, J. Liu, X. Shen, H. Li, X. Huang, D. Wang, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Highly active, nonprecious electrocatalyst comprising borophene subunits for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12370–12373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. F. Lagadec and A. Grimaud, Water electrolysers with closed and open electrochemical systems, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1140–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Luo, Z. Zhang, M. Chhowalla and B. Liu, Recent advances in design of electrocatalysts for high-current-density water splitting, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhai, Y. Ma, D. Chen, J. C. Ho, Z. Dai and Y. Qu, Recent progress on the long-term stability of hydrogen evolution reaction electrocatalysts, InfoMat, 2022, 4, 12357 CrossRef .S. Zhao, Y. Yang and Z. Tang, Insight into structural evolution, active sites, and stability of heterogeneous electrocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202110186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Hu and W.-X. Li, Sabatier principle of metal-support interaction for design of ultrastable metal nanocatalysts, Science, 2021, 374, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Cherevko, Stability and dissolution of electrocatalysts: Building the bridge between model and “real world” systems, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 8, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Abd-El-Latif, C. J. Bondue, S. Ernst, M. Hegemann, J. K. Kaul, M. Khodayari, E. Mostafa, A. Stefanova and H. Baltruschat, Insights into electrochemical reactions by differential electrochemical mass spectrometry, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2015, 70, 4–13 CrossRef CAS .S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J.-P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions on ru, RuO 2, ir, and IrO 2 thin film electrodes in acidic and alkaline electrolytes: A comparative study on activity and stability, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Trends in electrocatalysis on extended and nanoscale pt-bimetallic alloy surfaces, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C.-T. Dinh, A. Jain, F. P. G. de Arquer, P. D. Luna, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Cai, B. Z. Gregory, O. Voznyy, B. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sinton, E. J. Crumlin and E. H. Sargent, Multi-site
electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution in neutral media by destabilization of water molecules, Nat. Energy, 2018, 4, 107–114 CrossRef .J. Mahmood, F. Li, S.-M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S.-J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J.-B. Baek, An efficient and pH-universal ruthenium-based catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Ye, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, T. Wang, A. S. Jalilov, B. I. Yakobson, S.-H. Wei and J. M. Tour, High performance electrocatalytic reaction of hydrogen and oxygen on ruthenium nanoclusters, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3785–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, High electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of an anomalous ruthenium catalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16174–16181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Shi, N. Nie, H. Zhao, H. Miao, X. Chen, S. Li, J. Lai and L. Wang, Noble metal (pt, rh, pd, ir) doped ru/CNT ultra-small alloy for acidic hydrogen evolution at high current density, Small, 2021, 18, 2104559 CrossRef PubMed .D. Liu, X. Li, S. Chen, H. Yan, C. Wang, C. Wu, Y. A. Haleem, S. Duan, J. Lu, B. Ge, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Luo, J. Jiang and L. Song, Atomically dispersed platinum supported on curved carbon supports for efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tan, R. Xie, S. Zhao, X. Lu, L. Liu, F. Zhao, C. Li, H. Jiang, G. Chai, D. J. L. Brett, P. R. Shearing, G. He and I. P. Parkin, Facile fabrication of robust hydrogen evolution electrodes under high current densities via pt@cu interactions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105579 CrossRef CAS .L. Xiu, W. Pei, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Multilevel hollow MXene tailored low-pt catalyst for efficient hydrogen evolution in full-pH range and seawater, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910028 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ni, C. Luo, B. Cheng, P. Kuang, Y. Li and J. Yu, Construction of hierarchical and self-supported NiFe-Pt3Ir electrode for hydrogen production with industrial current density, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 321, 122072 CrossRef CAS .D. Wu, D. Chen, J. Zhu and S. Mu, Ultralow ru incorporated amorphous cobalt-based oxides for high-current-density overall water splitting in alkaline and seawater media, Small, 2021, 17, 2102777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C.-H. Chen, D. Wu, Z. Li, R. Zhang, C.-G. Kuai, X.-R. Zhao, C.-K. Dong, S.-Z. Qiao, H. Liu and X.-W. Du, Ruthenium-based single-atom alloy with high electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803913 CrossRef .J. Yu, Y. Guo, S. She, S. Miao, M. Ni, W. Zhou, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Bigger is surprisingly better: Agglomerates of larger RuP nanoparticles outperform benchmark pt nanocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800047 CrossRef PubMed .M. Cargnello, A. C. Johnston-Peck, B. T. Diroll, E. Wong, B. Datta, D. Damodhar, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, A. A. Herzing, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Substitutional doping in nanocrystal superlattices, Nature, 2015, 524, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, van der Waals heterostructures, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Huang, Z. Zhao, L. Cao, Y. Chen, E. Zhu, Z. Lin, M. Li, A. Yan, A. Zettl, Y. M. Wang, X. Duan, T. Mueller and Y. Huang, High-performance transition metaldoped Pt3Ni octahedra for oxygen reduction reaction, Science, 2015, 348, 1230–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Li, Y. Zhu and G. Zhang, Partially exposed RuP2 surface in hybrid structure endows its bifunctionality for hydrazine oxidation and hydrogen evolution catalysis, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, Z. Wei, S. Mao, H. Li and Y. Wang, Highly uniform ru nanoparticles over n-doped carbon: pH and temperature-universal hydrogen release from water reduction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 800–806 RSC .D. He, L. Zhang, D. He, G. Zhou, Y. Lin, Z. Deng, X. Hong, Y. Wu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Amorphous nickel boride membrane on a platinumnickel alloy surface for enhanced oxygen reduction reaction, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Han, T. Zhan, B. Yang, S. Li, J. Lai and L. Wang, Solvent-free microwave synthesis of ultra-small ru-Mo2C@CNT with strong metal-support interaction for industrial hydrogen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Rong, X. Shen, Y. Wang, L. Thomsen, T. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Lu, R. Amal and C. Zhao, Electronic structure engineering of single-atom ru sites via co N4 sites for bifunctional pH-universal water splitting, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. Cretu, A. V. Krasheninnikov, J. A. Rodriguez-Manzo, L. Sun, R. M. Nieminen and F. Banhart, Migration and localization of metal atoms on strained graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 196102 CrossRef PubMed .F. Dvorak, M. F. Camellone, A. Tovt, N.-D. Tran, F. R. Negreiros, M. Vorokhta, T. Skala, I. Matolinova, J. Myslivecek, V. Matolin and S. Fabris, Creating single-atom pt-ceria catalysts by surface step decoration, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Atomically isolated nickel species anchored on graphitized carbon for efficient hydrogen evolution electrocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jiménez, G. Ye, N. D. Kim, E. L. G. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Atomic cobalt on nitrogen-doped graphene for hydrogen generation, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 9668 Search PubMed .P. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Amghouz, M. Makkee, F. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. Dikhtiarenko, Y. Chen, X. Gu and X. Tang, Electronic metal-support interactions in single-atom catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3418–3421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. P. Herná ndez, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Thermally stable single-atom platinum-on-ceria catalysts via atom trapping, Science, 2016, 353, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Kyriakou, M. B. Boucher, A. D. Jewell, E. A. Lewis, T. J. Lawton, A. E. Baber, H. L. Tierney, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Isolated metal atom geometries as a strategy for selective heterogeneous hydrogenations, Science, 2012, 335, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss and S. Vajda, Increased silver activity for direct propylene epoxidation via subnanometer size effects, Science, 2010, 328, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, Catalysis by supported single metal atoms, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 34–59 CrossRef .P. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Qin, S. Mo, G. Chen, L. Gu, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, Q. Guo, D. Zang, B. Wu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Photochemical route for synthesizing atomically dispersed palladium catalysts, Science, 2016, 352, 797–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. X. Pei, X. Y. Liu, X. Yang, L. Zhang, A. Wang, L. Li, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Performance of cu-alloyed pd single-atom catalyst for semihydrogenation of acetylene under simulated front-end conditions, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysis of CO oxidation using Pt1/FeOx, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Nanoporous graphene with single-atom nickel dopants: An efficient and stable catalyst for electrochemical hydrogen production, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung and R. L. Garten, Strong metal-support interactions. Group 8 noble metals supported on titanium dioxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Thomas, Tens of thousands of atoms replaced by one, Nature, 2015, 525, 325–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, FeOx-supported platinum single-atom and pseudo-single-atom catalysts for chemoselective hydrogenation of functionalized nitroarenes, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6634 Search PubMed .X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Single-atom catalysts: A new frontier in heterogeneous catalysis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhang, T. Watanabe, M. Okumura, M. Haruta and N. Toshima, Catalytically highly active top gold atom on palladium nanocluster, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 49–52 CrossRef PubMed .H. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. F. Lu, T. Chen and X. W. (David) Lou, Implanting isolated ru atoms into edge-rich carbon matrix for efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000882 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, An isolated zinccobalt atomic pair for highly active and durable oxygen reduction, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 2648–2652 CrossRef .X. Zhu, D. Zhang, C.-J. Chen, Q. Zhang, R.-S. Liu, Z. Xia, L. Dai, R. Amal and X. Lu, Harnessing the interplay of feni atom pairs embedded in nitrogen-doped carbon for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104597 CrossRef CAS .Y. Pi, Q. Shao, P. Wang, J. Guo and X. Huang, General formation of monodisperse IrM (m = ni, co, fe) bimetallic nanoclusters as bifunctional electrocatalysts for acidic overall water splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700886 CrossRef .P. Jiang, H. Huang, J. Diao, S. Gong, S. Chen, J. Lu, C. Wang, Z. Sun, G. Xia, K. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Wei and Q. Chen, Improving electrocatalytic activity of iridium for hydrogen evolution at high current densities above 1000 mA cm−2, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117965 CrossRef CAS .J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Ruthenium-cobalt nanoalloys encapsulated in nitrogen-doped graphene as active electrocatalysts for producing hydrogen in alkaline media, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Zheng and X. Li, A highly efficient and stable biphasic nanocrystalline ni mon catalyst for hydrogen evolution in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .X. Guo, X. Wan, Q. Liu, Y. Li, W. Li and J. Shui, Phosphated IrMo bimetallic cluster for efficient hydrogen evolution reaction, eScience, 2022, 2, 304–310 CrossRef .J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Single platinum atoms immobilized on an MXene as an efficient catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Platinum single-atom and cluster catalysis of the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Urbain, R. Du, P. Tang, V. Smirnov, T. Andreu, F. Finger, N. J. Divins, J. Llorca, J. Arbiol, A. Cabot and J. R. Morante, Upscaling high activity oxygen evolution catalysts based on CoFe2O4 nanoparticles supported on nickel foam for power-to-gas electrochemical conversion with energy efficiencies above 80%, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118055 CrossRef CAS .L. Yu, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, D. Luo, L. Xie, F. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Li, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Hierarchical cu@CoFe layered double hydroxide core-shell nanoarchitectures as bifunctional electrocatalysts for efficient overall water splitting, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu, L. Xie, D. Li, R. Yang, D. Jiang and M. Chen, Engineering ni(OH)2 nanosheet on CoMoO4 nanoplate array as efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16086–16095 CrossRef CAS .W. Xie, T. Yu, Z. Ou, J. Zhang, R. Li, S. Song and Y. Wang, Self-supporting clusters constituted of nitrogen-doped CoMoO4 nanosheets for efficiently catalyzing the hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline media, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9070–9078 CrossRef CAS .G. Fu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Tang, J. B. Goodenough and J.-M. Lee, Exploring indium-based ternary thiospinel as conceivable high-potential air-cathode for rechargeable zn-air batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802263 CrossRef .M. P. Browne, F. Novotny, C. L. M. Palenzuela, J. Sturala, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, 2H and 2H/1T-transition metal dichalcogenide films prepared via powderless gas deposition for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16440–16449 CrossRef CAS .S. Deng, K. Zhang, D. Xie, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Wu, X. Wang, H. J. Fan, X. Xia and J. Tu, High-index-faceted Ni3S2 branch arrays as bifunctional electrocatalysts for efficient water splitting, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, D. Zhao, Y. Liu, P. Hu, X. Wu and H. Xia, Boosting energy storage and electrocatalytic performances by synergizing CoMoO4@MoZn22 core-shell structures, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 485–492 CrossRef CAS .H. Liu, D. Zhao, Y. Liu, P. Hu, X. Wu and H. Xia, Boosting energy storage and electrocatalytic performances by synergizing CoMoO4@MoZn22 core-shell structures, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 485–492 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, G. Cheng, S. Chen, W. Luo and Y. Yin, CoP-doped MOF-based electrocatalyst for pH-universal hydrogen evolution reaction, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 4727–4732 CrossRef .M. Wang, C. Zhang, T. Meng, Z. Pu, H. Jin, D. He, J. Zhang and S. Mu, Iron oxide and phosphide encapsulated within n,p-doped microporous carbon nanofibers as advanced tri-functional electrocatalyst toward oxygen reduction/evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions and zinc-air batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 413, 367–375 CrossRef CAS .J.-Q. Chi, M. Yang, Y.-M. Chai, Z. Yang, L. Wang and B. Dong, Design and modulation principles of molybdenum carbide-based materials for green hydrogen evolution, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 398–423 CrossRef .N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nitrogen-doped tungsten carbide nanoarray as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for water splitting in acid, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef PubMed .C. Lei, W. Zhou, Q. Feng, Y. Lei, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. Qin, Charge engineering of Mo2C@defect-rich n-doped carbon nanosheets for efficient electrocatalytic H2 evolution, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Cheng, F. Zheng, C. Zhang, C. Du, Z. Fang, Z. Zhang and W. Chen, High-efficiency bifunctional electrocatalyst based on 3D freestanding cu foam in situ armored CoNi alloy nanosheet arrays for overall water splitting, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .Q. Sun, M. Zhou, Y. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Li, X. Bo, Z. Wang and C. Zhao, Hierarchical nanoporous ni(cu) alloy anchored on amorphous NiFeP as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and hydrazine oxidation, J. Catal., 2019, 373, 180–189 CrossRef CAS .Q. Li, X. Zou, X. Ai, H. Chen, L. Sun and X. Zou, Revealing activity trends of metal diborides toward pH-universal hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts with pt-like activity, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1803369 CrossRef .L. Zhu, H. Lin, Y. Li, F. Liao, Y. Lifshitz, M. Sheng, S.-T. Lee and M. Shao, A rhodium/silicon co-electrocatalyst design concept to surpass platinum hydrogen evolution activity at high overpotentials, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Nanostructured hydrotreating catalysts for electrochemical hydrogen evolution, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555 RSC .D. Yu, Y. Hao, S. Han, S. Zhao, Q. Zhou, C.-H. Kuo, F. Hu, L. Li, H.-Y. Chen, J. Ren and S. Peng, Ultrafast combustion synthesis of robust and efficient electrocatalysts for high-current-density water oxidation, ACS Nano, 2023, 17, 1701–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhao, S. Wei, K. Pan, Z. Dong, B. Zhang, H.-H. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Lin and H. Pang, Self-supporting transition metal chalcogenides on metal substrates for catalytic water splitting, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129645 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhong, J. Wang, F. Meng and X. Zhang, In situ activating ubiquitous rust towards low-cost, efficient, free-standing, and recoverable oxygen evolution electrodes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9937–9941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Hu, D. Yu, M. Ye, H. Wang, Y. Hao, L. Wang, L. Li, X. Han and S. Peng, Lattice-matching formed mesoporous transition metal oxide heterostructures advance water splitting by active fe–o–cu bridges, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200067 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, Y. Yao, H. Zhang, L. Pan, C. Shi, X. Zhang, Z.-F. Huang and J.-J. Zou, In situ-grown cobaltiron phosphide-based integrated electrode for long-term water splitting under a large current density at the industrial electrolysis temperature, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 17828–17838 CrossRef CAS .L. Yu, I. K. Mishra, Y. Xie, H. Zhou, J. Sun, J. Zhou, Y. Ni, D. Luo, F. Yu, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Ternary Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP nanowire arrays toward efficient and stable hydrogen evolution electrocatalysis under large-current-density, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 492–500 CrossRef CAS .P. Chen, K. Li, Y. Ye, D. Wu and Y. Tong, Coupled MoO3−xCoP heterostructure as a pH-universal electrode for hydrogen generation at a high current density, Dalton Trans., 2023, 52, 2262–2271 RSC .H. Zhou, Y. Wang, R. He, F. Yu, J. Sun, F. Wang, Y. Lan, Z. Ren and S. Chen, One-step synthesis of self-supported porous NiSe2/ni hybrid foam: An efficient 3D electrode for hydrogen evolution reaction, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Li, L. L. Liao, H. Q. Zhou, Y. Zhao, F. M. Cai, J. S. Zeng, F. Liu, H. Wu, D. S. Tang and F. Yu, Highly active non-noble electrocatalyst from Co2P/Ni2P nanohybrids for pH-universal hydrogen evolution reaction, Mater. Today
Phys., 2021, 16, 100314 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Xie, Z.-Z. Liu, J. Li, L. Feng, M. Yang, Y. Ma, D.-P. Liu, L. Wang, Y.-M. Chai and B. Dong, Fe-doped CoP coreshell structure with open cages as efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 328–333 CrossRef .X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. (David) Lou, Highly crystalline ni-doped FeP/carbon hollow nanorods as all-pH efficient and durable hydrogen evolving electrocatalysts, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Hu, Y. Feng, J. Nai, D. Zhao, Y. Hu and X. W. (David) Lou, Construction of hierarchical nicop hollow nanobricks with oriented nanosheets for efficient overall water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 872–880 RSC .Y. Ge, P. Dong, S. R. Craig, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Transforming nickel hydroxide into 3D prussian blue analogue array to obtain Ni2P/Fe2P for efficient hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800484 CrossRef .Q. Shi, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Fang, Z. Liang, G. Shao, B. Tang, W. Yang, L. Qin and X. Fang, High-performance trifunctional electrocatalysts based on Ni2P/Fe2P hybrid nanoparticles for zincair battery and self-powered overall water splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903854 CrossRef CAS .X.-Y. Zhang, Y.-R. Zhu, Y. Chen, S.-Y. Dou, X.-Y. Chen, B. Dong, B.-Y. Guo, D.-P. Liu, C.-G. Liu and Y.-M. Chai, Hydrogen evolution under large-current-density based on fluorine-doped cobalt-iron phosphides, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125831 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang, Z. Chen, P. Guo, B. Fei and R. Wu, B-doping-induced amorphization of LDH for large-current-density hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118240 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, Y. Hao, L. Deng, F. Hu, S. Zhao, L. Li and S. Peng, Rapid complete reconfiguration induced actual active species for industrial hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Luo, Y. Wang, L. Luo, S. Gong, Y. Li and X. Gan, Constructing a bifunctional catalyst with both high entropy alloy nanoparticles and janus multi-principal alloy nanoparticles for high-performance overall water splitting, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 606, 154808 CrossRef CAS .H. Huang, D. Yu, F. Hu, S.-C. Huang, J. Song, H.-Y. Chen, L. L. Li and S. Peng, Clusters induced electron redistribution to tune oxygen reduction activity of transition metal single-atom for metalair batteries, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202116068 Search PubMed .J. Song, S. Qiu, F. Hu, Y. Ding, S. Han, L. Li, H.-Y. Chen, X. Han, C. Sun and S. Peng, Sub-2 nm thiophosphate nanosheets with heteroatom doping for enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100618 CrossRef CAS .T. Dai, X. Zhang, M. Sun, B. Huang, N. Zhang, P. Da, R. Yang, Z. He, W. Wang, P. Xi and C.-H. Yan, Uncovering the promotion of CeO2/CoS1.97 heterostructure with specific spatial architectures on oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liu, R. Guo, K. Ni, F. Xia, C. Niu, B. Wen, J. Meng, P. Wu, J. Wu, X. Wu and L. Mai, Reconstruction-determined
alkaline water electrolysis at industrial temperatures, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Du, Y. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Unveiling the in situ dissolution and polymerization of mo in Ni4Mo alloy for promoting the hydrogen evolution reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, S.-J. Kim, J. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Choi, J. Han, H. Shin, S. Jo, J. Kim, F. Ciucci, H. Kim, Q. Li, W. Yang, X. Long, S. Yang, S.-P. Cho, K. H. Chae, M. G. Kim, H. Kim and J. Lim, Redirecting dynamic surface restructuring of a layered transition metal oxide catalyst for superior water oxidation, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 212–222 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, R. Li, X. Chen, J. Wu, Y. Xie, X. Wang, K. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, A-site management prompts the dynamic reconstructed active phase of perovskite oxide OER catalysts, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003755 CrossRef CAS .L. He, W. Zhang, Q. Mo, W. Huang, L. Yang and Q. Gao, Molybdenum carbide-oxide heterostructures: In situ surface reconfiguration toward efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3544–3548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Li, L. Xiao, L. Zhou, Q. Xu, J. Weng, J. Xu and B. Liu, Adaptive bifunctional electrocatalyst of amorphous CoFe oxide @ 2D black phosphorus for overall water splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21106–21113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

PEM	Acid	50–80 °C (ref. 7)
AWE	Alkaline	60–80 °C (ref. 7)
SOEC	8 mol% stabilized (YSZ)	Above 200 °C (ref. 8)

 	Fig. 1  Physical models of the electron and mass transfer processes under HCD conditions. Schematics show (A) electron transfer and (B) mass transfer processes at HCDs. Here, support denotes all the materials to load catalytic materials and delivery electrons, and catalyst denotes the catalytically active material or component for reactions. Reprinted with permission.21 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (C) Summary of key aspects to the differences between lab-level HER and industrial-level HER.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Fabrication schematic of Pt@Cu. Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for Pt nanocrystals on Cu foams. (B) 1000 cycles of LSV tests under a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 with iR correction of Pt/C@Cu-1 and Pt@Cu-0.3. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2021 The Authors. Advanced Functional Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (C) Schematic illustration for the synthetic process of Cu NWs@NiFe. (D) η500 and η1000 values of the Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir, Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt, Cu NWs@NiFe–Ir, Cu NWs@NiFe, Cu NWs, and Pt wire, respectively. (E) Chronopotentiometry curves of the tested electrocatalysts. (F) LSV curves and Nyquist plots of the Cu NWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir before and after the long-term stability test. Reprinted with permission.37 Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Ru–CoOx/NF. (B) Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) polarization curve of Ru–CoOx/NF and other samples in 1 M KOH. (C) The overpotential diagram (@10 and 1000 mA cm−2) corresponding to the polarization curve of HER. (D) Tafel slope plot of HER. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) impedance spectrum of Ru–CoOx/NF and other samples. (F) 100 h constant current stability test chart of Ru–CoOx/NF. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (G) HER polarization curves of CNT, Mo2C@CNT, Ru@CNT, Pt/C, and Ru–Mo2C@CNT catalysts. (H) Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves in G. (I) Comparison of overpotential changes at 10 mA cm−2 and exchange current density. (J) In 1.0 M KOH solution, compared with the recently reported HER catalyst Tafel slope and overpotential at 10 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2021, The Author(s). (K) Electrocatalytic HER performance of Ru/Co–N–C-800 °C compared with Ru–N–C-800 °C, Co–N–C-800 °C, and commercial 20% Pt/C. HER polarization curves obtained at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in N2-saturated 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. (L) The corresponding Tafel plots in 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. (M) Comparison of overpotential at 10 mA cmgeo−2 and Tafel slope with previously reported HER catalysts in acid and alkaline conditions. (N) The chronopotentiometry curves of Ru/Co–N–C-800 °C and commercial Pt/C in 0.5 m H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission.48 Copyright 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Polarization curves of Fe2P–Co2P/CF, Co2P/CF, Pt/C/CF, and CF for HER in 1 M KOH (inset: partial enlargement of the LSV curves). (B) Corresponding Tafel plots. (C) Nyquist plots. (D) Cdl obtained at 0.18 V vs. RHE. (E) Multistep chronopotentiometric curve of Fe2P–Co2P/CF under different current densities (from 10 to 1000 mA cm−2). Reprinted with permission.100 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (F) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the self-supported 3D Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP electrode, and highly porous nanowire arrays for HER. (G) Polarization curves of Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP and other compared catalysts. (H) Current density at the overpotential of 300 mV, and (I) Tafel plots and calculated exchange current density (j0) of the electrodes. (J) Polarization curves of the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode before and after 5000 CV cycles. (K) Time dependence of the current density for the Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP/NF electrode under constant potentials of −110, −170, and −220 mV. Reprinted with permission.101 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Over-potentials at current density of 100, 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 mA cm−2 of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF. (B) Stability tests: F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF for 1000 cyclic voltammetry cycles in 1 M KOH; (C) current density traces of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 1 M KOH; (D) LSV curves of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 1 M and 6 M KOH solutions; (E) current density traces of F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF in 6 M KOH. Reprinted with permission.110 Copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (F) The scheme of the preparation process for the A-NiCo LDH nanosheet arrays supported on the nickel foam and corresponding photographs of bare NF (I), NiCo LDH/NF (II) and A-NiCo LDH/NF (III). (G) LSV polarization curves of HER in 1 M KOH; (H) i–t curves of A-NiCo LDH/NF for 72 h. Reprinted with permission.111 Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Reconfiguration process schematic diagram from CoC2O4@MXene to R–CoC2O4@MXene. (B) The HER polarization curves. (C) The relationship between TOF and the tested potentials. (D) The ratios of Δη/Δlog|j|. Reprinted with permission.112 (E) Schematic diagram of preparation process and hyperfine microstructure of HEA/JMPA. (F) The linear sweep curves (LSV) of HEA/JMPA and other compared catalysts. (G) Comparison of overpotential (η10) and current density (at −0.18 V vs. RHE). (H) Chronopotentiometry result of HEA/JMPA at 10 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission.113 Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

Pt@Cu35	Self-supporting	Neutral	438 mV/1000 mA cm−2	1000 cycles of LSV
CuNWs@NiFe–Pt3Ir37	Self-supporting	Alkaline	239 mV/1000 mA cm−2	7 days@500 mA cm−2
Ru–CoOx/NF38	3D amorphous structure	Alkaline	252 mV/1000 mA cm−2	10000 CV cycles
Ru–Mo2C@CNT47	Heterojunction	Alkaline	78 mV/1000 mA cm−2	1000 h
Ru/Co–N–C48	Single-atom catalyst	Acidic	450 mA cmgeo−2 as PEM	330 h
IrFe/NC71	Ultrafine alloy nanoparticles	Alkaline	850 mV/1000 mA cm−2	Up to 10000 cycles
IrMoP/MNC74	Atomic cluster, doping	Alkaline	340 mV/1000 mA cm−2	27 h at 100 mA cm−2
Fe2P–Co2P/CF100	Self-supporting	Alkaline	254 mV@1000 mA cm−2	300 h
Ni2(1−x)Mo2xP101	Self-supporting	Alkaline	294 mV@1000 mA cm−2	70 h
MoO3−x@CoP/NF102	Self-supporting	Alkaline	100 mV@1000 mA cm−2	N/A
Hierarchical structure	Neutral	400 mV@1000 mA cm−2	3000 CV cycles, 10 h
 	Acidic	135 mV@1000 mA cm−2	3000 CV cycles, 10 h
P3–MNS3/NF13	Mo and P modification	Acidic	243 mV@1000 mA cm−2	Stable at 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h
 	Neutral	360 mV@500 mA cm−2	Stable at 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h
 	Alkaline	245 mV@1000 mA cm−2	N/A
Co2P/Ni2P104	Self-supported porous structure	Acidic	200 mV@1000 mA cm−2	1000 cycles of CP at 50 mA cm−2
 	Neutral	200 mV@177 mA cm−2	Same as above
 	Alkaline	200 mV@1700 mA cm−2	Same as above
F–Co2P/Fe2P/IF110	Fluorine doping	Alkaline	304.4 mV@3000 mA cm−2	>10 h
A-NiCo LDH/NF111	B-Doping induced amorphization	Alkaline	381 mV@1000 mA cm−2	>72 h
CoC2O@MXene112	Surface reconfiguration	Alkaline	216 mV@1000 mA cm−2	>100 h
HEA/JMPA113	High-entropy alloy	Alkaline	1.9 V@305 mA cm−2	28 h

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
