Doping of wide-bandgap titanium-dioxide nanotubes: optical, electronic and magnetic properties   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR02417F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR02417F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10839-10849Doping of wide-bandgap titanium-dioxide nanotubes: optical, electronic and magnetic properties†

        
          
            Yahya 
            Alivov
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vivek 
            Singh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuchen 
            Ding
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Logan Jerome 
            Cerkovnik
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Prashant 
            Nagpal
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, USA. E-mail: y.alivov@colorado.edu; pnagpal@colorado.edu
bRenewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, USA
cMaterials Science and Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, USA
Received 
      5th May 2014
    , Accepted 7th July 2014First published on 12th August 2014AbstractDoping semiconductors is an important step for their technological application. While doping bulk semiconductors can be easily achieved, incorporating dopants in semiconductor nanostructures has proven difficult. Here, we report a facile synthesis method for doping titanium-dioxide (TiO2) nanotubes that was enabled by a new electrochemical cell design. A variety of optical, electronic and magnetic dopants were incorporated into the hollow nanotubes, and from detailed studies it is shown that the doping level can be easily tuned from low to heavily-doped semiconductors. Using desired dopants – electronic (p- or n-doped), optical (ultraviolet bandgap to infrared absorption in co-doped nanotubes), and magnetic (from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic) properties can be tailored, and these technologically important nanotubes can be useful for a variety of applications in photovoltaics, display technologies, photocatalysis, and spintronic applications.
Introduction
Titanium-dioxide (TiO2) is a wide-bandgap semiconductor that is a key component of devices like solar cells, photocatalytic reactors, photoelectrochemical cells, etc.1–4 While doping (electronic, optical, and magnetic) allows careful tuning of desired properties, oxygen vacancies formed during the synthesis are used as n-type dopants in these nominally “undoped” oxides. Since desired doping of these semiconductor nanostructures has proved challenging, most applications are focused on bulk semiconductor films.5–7 This can severely limit their applications and device architectures, like fabricating p-type oxide films or changing the doping level of n-type dopants for optimized configuration.1,3 Recent research in utilizing heavily-doped semiconductors for low-loss plasmonics8,9 has also been generating interest in doping of these TiO2 nanostructures, already used in thin film solar-cells, for enhanced light harvesting. Moreover, addition of desired dopants, like shallow or deep donors, can also lead to the formation of heavily-doped transparent oxide nanostructures, or co-doped photocatalysts10,11 which can absorb infrared light. Other efforts to improve the performance of TiO2 photocatalytic activity12–19 involves hybrid composites consisting of TiO2 and carbonaceous materials (carbon nanotubes, activated carbons, and graphene) which cause a red-shift in the absorption spectrum and increase electron mobility.20–23 Since doping can simultaneously tune the bandgap and increase charge conductivity, it can provide an important alternative. Therefore, desired doping of these wide-bandgap nanostructured films can provide important materials for a variety of applications in renewable energy, artificial displays, and other optoelectronic and magnetic processes.
One of the synthesis methods for the growth of TiO2 nanotubes is electrochemical oxidation, also termed as anodization.24–28 Since this synthesis provides a facile route towards large-scale fabrication of TiO2 nanotubes, simply incorporating desired dopants during the growth can provide an important method for the synthesis of doped wide-bandgap semiconductor nanostructures. However, simple addition of the desired concentration of precursors, especially cationic, does not lead to doping of nanotubes (see Experimental section). Therefore, we designed a new electrochemical cell that enables doping and co-doping of TiO2-nanotubes with desired cations and anions, and characterized their resulting optical, electronic and magnetic properties, to demonstrate the feasibility of this new method. Using detailed studies, we demonstrate that this method can provide an important route for the synthesis of doped wide-bandgap TiO2 semiconductor nanotubes.
Experimental
The method for TiO2 nanotube growth by anodization
In a regular setting of an electrochemical cell, a negative-biased platinum (Pt) electrode and positive-biased titanium (Ti) sheet are immersed in the electrolyte 2–3 cm apart.24–28 In this configuration negative ions in the electrolyte move toward the positive Ti sheet and positive ions move toward the negative Pt sheet. Addition of desired dopant metal cations into the electrolyte results in the repulsion of the positively charged ions from the positively biased Ti sheet (away from the growing TiO2 nanotubes). This prevents TiO2 nanotubes from doping with metal cations.
Replacing the DC power supply with AC can provide a solution. During the “negative” cycle (switched polarities) of the electrochemical growth, the desired cations are attracted by the Ti sheet, thus incorporating cationic dopants uniformly in the growing TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 1a). However, simple addition of cationic precursors in the growth solution leads to other problems. First, the added cations (especially in high doping concentrations) dramatically increase conductivity, making it impossible to apply high enough voltage to enable TiO2 nanotube growth (voltages higher than 5 V need to be applied to initiate nanotube growth24–28). Second, during the positive bias on the Ti sheet (negative bias on the Pt counter electrode), cations deposit on the Pt electrode, rapidly covering it with a reduced metal layer, quickly degrading its performance.
 Fig. 1  (a) A sketch showing the design of a new electrochemical cell developed in this work. It is divided into two parts separated with a porous membrane to prevent from high currents and cation deposition onto the Pt electrode. (b) Schematic illustrating rectangular shape AC signals with parameters employed for doping nanotubes. 
To overcome these problems we modified the electrochemical cell. The electrochemical cell was divided into two sections, separated by a porous membrane (Fig. 1a). One part of the cell contains the Pt electrode and is filled with an electrolyte free of the dopant precursor. The second part of the cell contains the Ti sheet and is filled with an electrolyte that contains the dopant precursor. The porous membrane provides a barrier for two different parts of the electrochemical cell to prevent from mixing, while still allowing a flow of the electrolyte. The resulting currents in this configuration are comparable to the currents in regular electrochemical cells with the DC power supply, ranging from 0.1–4.0 mA within the voltage range of 7–200 V. For the separating membrane, we used a hydrophilic polymer filter (pore size ∼0.1–0.4 μm). This membrane was attached in the middle of the container using epoxy. While the membrane provides a diffusion barrier, some cations move toward the Pt electrode and over time the conductivity of the dopant-free electrolyte will increase. The electrolyte should be changed if the resistivity decreases by 50%.
Using an AC voltage source, rectangular shaped power pulses were used in this present study. The shape of the AC voltage and its parameters are shown in schematic Fig. 1b. The period of AC voltage is characterized by the positive part V1, the negative part V2, and the frequency f, which is equal to , where t1 and t2 are durations for positive and negative parts of the cycle, respectively. These parameters – t1 and t2 control the growth and doping times, respectively. From a series of detailed experiments, it was found that the dopant level, or dopant concentration n, mostly depended on the negative bias V2, frequency f, t1/t2 ratio (see Fig. 1b), and dopant precursor amount b in the electrolyte. Our studies showed that the dependence of n on f and t1/t2 at fixed V2 and b is convoluted, depending on a number of factors. Therefore, we studied the dependence of doping (n) on each of these parameters separately, keeping the other parameters constant. The dependence of n on V2 (when other parameters were fixed) was more predictable; however, a strong sublinear relationship between these two parameters was observed. The dependence between n and the amount of precursor b in the electrolyte was nearly linear (see Discussion below). Therefore, variation of the dopant concentration was used for systematically controlling the doping level in fabricated TiO2 nanotubes.
The electrolyte used in electrochemical growth solution consisted of a solvent (glycerol or ethylene glycol) with 1% ammonium fluoride (NH3F), and 2% of water. As the starting material commercial Ti sheets of 99.99% purity were used. The growth rate of nanotubes in ethylene glycol was ∼4 μm per hour. All as-grown samples were amorphous and annealed at 500 °C for 1 hour in air, to convert to the anatase phase. Three main types of cationic dopants were used in this study – niobium (Nb), iron (Fe), and copper (Cu). Among the prominent anion dopants, we used nitrogen (N), while several combinations of co-doped anion and cation co-dopants were prepared. As precursors niobium(V) chloride, iron(III) chloride, and copper(II) sulfate were used. Nitrogen doping was performed by using hexamethylenetetramine in the electrolyte. The nitrogen doping level was controlled by changing the amount of the precursor (hexamethylenetetramine) in the electrolyte. While this method can be applied to any cation, we focused on Nb, Fe, and Cu due to their importance for a variety of applications. For example, Nb was shown to be a shallow donor for TiO2, and therefore, a good candidate for the growth transparent conducting oxide thin films.29–32 Fe is a good dopant for fabricating magnetic semiconductors.33–35 Cu and Nb co-doped TiO2 thin films with N have been shown to increase the photocatalytic activity of TiO2.36
The morphology of grown TiO2 nanotubes was examined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) JEOL 7401F. The crystal structures of doped and undoped TiO2 nanotube samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, using a Scintag XDS 2000 X-ray diffractometer. The measurements were performed using Cu Kα radiation at 45 kV and 40 mA. Compositional analysis was performed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) embedded in an FE-SEM JEOL 7401F instrument. The analysis was performed in different modes (2D mapping, point scan, etc.) to test for uniformity and possible secondary phases. The spatial resolution during EDS was limited by the focused spot size of the electron beam, which was ∼10 nm.

Electrical characterization. 

I–V and I–V–T characterizations were performed in two different ways: (1) from single nanotubes using CS-AFM; and (2) ensemble measurements using a Keithley source meter (Keithley 2612A, Tektronix Inc.). Temperature dependent current–voltage characterization (I–V–T) was performed in the temperature range of 20–300 K with 10 K temperature steps, using a closed loop Helium Cryostat (ARS-202AE with an ARS-2HW Helium compressor, Advanced Research Systems Inc.). The voltage for these measurements was varied in the range from −20 V to +20 V. Sheet resistance of nanotubes R was calculated from I–V measurements using Ohm's law . Then, resistivity ρ was calculated using the equation , where L is the nanotube length, and A – the total nanotube cross-section area. The cross-section area A was estimated using the density of nanotubes, thickness of the nanotube wall, and inner and outer diameters of the nanotube, which were measured using SEM images.


Photoresponse measurements. 
Spectral photo I–V measurements were performed in the wavelength range of 300 –1000 nm. Monochromatic light was obtained using a monochromator from a light source. Photocurrent was calibrated to the incident power of monochromatic light measured using an Si-based detector (NIST calibration). The intensity of monochromatic light was measured using an optical power meter (Newport, 1830-C).


STM and STS measurements. 
Scanning tunneling microscope images were obtained using a customized Molecular Imaging PicoScan 2500 setup (with a PicoSPM II controller). An STM nosecone (N9533A series, Agilent Technologies) was used for scanning and spectroscopy, using chemically etched Pt–Ir tips (80:20) purchased from Agilent Technologies, USA. The measurements were done at room temperature under atmospheric conditions. Tunneling junction parameters were set at tunneling currents ranging between 100 and 500 pA and a sample bias voltage between −5 and +5 V. Spectroscopy measurements were obtained at a scan rate of 1 V s−1. For STM measurements, the pre-amp sensitivity was set to 1 nA V−1. The tunneling current as a function of the applied bias voltage (STS) was recorded at multiple positions on the sample at room temperature and atmospheric pressure.


SQUID measurements. 
The magnetic properties were studied with a Superconducting Quantum Interference Device magnetometer (SQUID). Magnetization measurements were performed using a Quantum Design SQUID-VSM (Vibrating Sample Magnetometer), and magnetization (M) was measured as a function of the applied field (H) and temperature (T) in the magnetic field range from −7 to 7 Tesla and a temperature range of 1.8 to 300 K. Temperature dependent magnetization (M–T) measurement was performed at the applied magnetic field of 1000 Oe. TiO2 nanotube materials for SQUID studies were collected from the surface of a Ti sheet after the growth. The field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) magnetization measurements are performed from 5 to 300 K. TiO2 nanotube samples were scraped from the Ti sheet after the TiO2 nanotube growth. Therefore, the scraped sample was a mixture of randomly oriented nanotubes. As a result, induced magnetization of the TiO2 nanotube sample was averaged from all nanotube orientations, and therefore, it was isotropic with respect to the magnetic field direction. Extreme precautions were taken during these measurements to avoid any contamination of the samples with possible magnetic dopants. Magnetization of the sample holder was also measured and subtracted from that of TiO2 nanotube samples to calculate the pure magnetization of doped and undoped TiO2 nanotubes.


Photocatalysis – Gas-phase reduction of CO2 and H2O. 
Twenty to thirty mg of the catalyst was deposited in a rounded glass vial cut in half with a 0.64 cm2 cross-sectional area. The vial was then enclosed in a 48 mL reactor and purged for 45 minutes with CO2 (75 cm3 min−1) humidified in a bubbler filled with D.I. water. After purging, the reactor was closed and irradiated with 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2) through a transparent window using a solar simulator (ABET Technologies). One-milliliter samples were extracted from the reactor and injected into a gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and a flame ionization detector (FID) for measuring concentrations. Separation of the hydrocarbons was done with a Hayesep D column or with Silica-gel column. Reported data of the photocatalytic rate and quantum yield were calculated based on the electron flux (μmol cm−2 h−1) used to form H2, CH4, C2H6, hydrocarbons and others.

Results and discussion
SEM, XRD, STM, and absorption

Fig. 2 presents SEM images of doped TiO2 nanotubes fabricated using our new electrochemical cell. The electron micrographs clearly show that the tubular structure of these TiO2 nanotubes is well preserved after doping. Fig. S1 in the ESI† shows SEM images of different diameter nanotubes grown at different anodization voltages. XRD patterns of all doped samples shown in Fig. 3a present X-ray diffraction peaks corresponding to the anatase phase, with predominant peaks (101) and (200) at 2θ = 25.3° and 47.95°, respectively.37 The XRD pattern of samples does not change even with a heavy doping level up to 12%, demonstrating the uniform incorporation of dopants and the absence of secondary phases. At such high doping levels (>9%), they can also be regarded as solid solutions. As an illustration in Fig. S2a,† we show XRD patterns of Nb doped TiO2 nanotubes with a doping level up to 12%, which shows only reflection peaks corresponding to anatase TiO2 without any detectable secondary phase. No shift of diffraction peaks was observed with the increase of Nb concentration up to 12%, as shown in Fig. S2a.† This result could be explained by close ionic radii of Ti4+ and Nb5+, which are 0.605 Å and 0.64 Å, respectively.38 For such similar lattice parameters, no significant distortion of the crystal lattice was expected. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) confirmed the presence of doped elements in TiO2 nanotubes as shown in Fig. 3b. EDS analysis of undoped TiO2 nanotubes showed no detectable emission peaks from impurities (only Ti and O emission peaks were seen, Fig.3b, the red curve). This indicates that the impurity concentration was below the detection limit (<0.01%). The amount of incorporated dopants in TiO2 nanotubes follows a linear relationship with the concentration of the precursor in the electrolyte. To demonstrate this, we show EDS spectra of Nb doped samples at different NbCl5 wts% in the electrolyte (Fig. S2b†), from which a nearly linear relationship between the detected EDS Nb signal in TiO2 nanotubes and the wt% NbCl5 precursor is clearly seen (Fig. 3c). The R2 value of the linear fitting was calculated to be 0.995. Similar studies for other dopants (Nb, Fe, Cu, and N) also showed a linear relationship between the incorporated dopant and the dopant concentration in the electrolyte. The conductivity of Nb-doped TiO2 nanotubes increases (resistivity decreases) with the wt% NbCl5 precursor (Fig. 3c), confirming the incorporation of Nb into the TiO2 crystal. Nb is a well-known shallow donor in TiO2 used for creating transparent conducting thin films.39,40 EDS point scans were also taken from different points on individual doped TiO2 nanotubes. This scan was performed by pointing a focused electron beam onto the surface of a single nanotube (or mapping the elemental distribution over a large area). Fig. S3† presents results for Cu-doped samples. Highly pronounced Cu peaks seen at different points (we are showing two points for clarity) indicate Cu is uniformly incorporated in TiO2 nanotube crystals, rather than accumulating as clusters or secondary phase oxides. These data further demonstrate that dopants (Cu here) were uniformly incorporated in the TiO2 crystal lattice. Similar scans for all dopants (cations and anions) were performed to ensure uniform doping in TiO2 nanotubes.
 Fig. 2  Representative scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of TiO2 nanotube arrays grown by electrochemical anodization: (a) shows the top view of densely packed nanotubes, (b) shows the bottom view after removing nanotubes from the Ti metal, and the side view of the vertical, hollow, doped TiO2 nanotubes, and (c) and (d) show side profiles at different magnifications. 
 Fig. 3  (a). XRD patterns for undoped, Nb, Cu, Fe, and N doped, and Nb/N and Cu/N co-doped and undoped samples. Labels on the right guide to the corresponding samples. Only reflection peaks corresponding to the anatase TiO2 phase were detected in all samples indicating the lack of secondary phases. (b) Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) for undoped, Fe-doped, Cu-doped, Nb-doped, and N-doped, Nb and N co-doped, and Cu and N co-doped TiO2 nanotubes. Well pronounced characteristic X-ray emission peaks of dopants can be seen along with the TiO2 matrix (Ti and O peaks). These data prove the presence of desired dopants in TiO2 nanotube films; (c) Nb concentration (blue) and resistivity (red) of Nb doped TiO2 nanotubes, as a function of wt% NbCl5 in the electrolyte. 
Absorbance spectra, of undoped and different doped nanotubes are shown in Fig. 4a. The optical spectrum does not reveal either the nature of the dopant, or the direction of the shift of the Fermi-level (which was analyzed by Scanning Tunnelling Spectroscopy (STS), as shown in Fig. 4b) towards the conduction or valence band. But optical spectroscopy was used to monitor the semiconductor bandgap by changing the dopant and the concentration of the dopant in the TiO2 nanotube. Moreover, the electronic level of the dopant was also estimated, since the Fermi-level (and the effective optical bandgap) is also pinned at high dopant concentrations. However, this analysis is complicated by the indirect bandgap of the TiO2 semiconductor, large Rayleigh scattering (∝1/λ4) observed in the nanotubes (shown as a black dashed curve in Fig. 4a), and the presence of impurity donor states (below the bandgap) in undoped TiO2. The band gaps estimated from their respective optical spectra (after considering scattering) were 2.7 eV (due to impurity donors), 2.6 eV, 2.5 eV, 2.4 eV, 2.3 eV, 2.2 eV, and 2.0 eV for undoped, Nb, Cu, Fe, N, Nb–N, and Cu–N doped and co-doped samples, respectively (Fig. 4a). These bandgaps were in good agreement with the bandgaps derived from STS (Fig. 4b), which uses the fixed Fermi-level of the Pt–Ir tip (at 0 V) as a probe of the shift of the Fermi-level with doping. To further evaluate the role played by these dopants on optoelectronic properties, and to ensure that the dopants are properly incorporated in the TiO2 crystal (and not as recombination sites or traps on the surface), we evaluated the photoresponse of these doped nanotubes (Fig. 4c). We illuminated these films with a small flux of photons (to identify possible recombination from dopants as traps), and observed the change in current (from the dark) due to photogenerated charge carriers, normalized by the intensity of light. The photoresponse  for highly conductive samples (Fig. 4c) was within the error bar for the measurement, due to the high concentration of background electrons (photogenerated charge carriers are much less than equilibrium carrier concentrations). However, the acceptor dopants (Cu, N, and Cu–N) and undoped samples showed good transport for photogenerated charges in these devices, following exciton dissociation and charge transport in these doped nanotubes. Spectrally resolved normalized photocurrent (Fig. 4c) mimics the absorption spectra of the respective nanotubes, shown in Fig. 4a, with similar bandgaps. This was expected since the photocurrent is limited by the thin film absorption of incident light.
 Fig. 4  (a) STS spectrum of (a) undoped, (b) Cu-doped, (c) N-doped, (d) Nb-doped, (e) Nb–N co-doped, and (f) Cu–N co-doped samples. (b) Extinction spectra of undoped, monodoped and co-doped TiO2 samples. A clear change in the bandgap can be seen using the STS and the optical spectrum of these doped wide-bandgap semiconductor nanotubes. The dashed-black line represents the large Rayleigh scattering observed in these nanotubes, which makes exact determination of bandgaps difficult in these indirect bandgap semiconductors, using optical spectroscopy; (c) spectrally resolved photoresponse (photocurrent normalized by incident light intensity) for undoped (blue), Cu-doped (pink), N-doped (green), and Cu–N co-doped (red) TiO2 nanotubes. 

I–V, I–V–T, and photo-I–V
We also conducted current–voltage spectroscopy (I–V), on all undoped and doped nanotubes, using ensemble and single nanotube current sensing AFM (CS-AFM) measurements (Fig. 5a and 7). The dopant concentrations for all cations and anions were kept constant for all samples in Fig. 5a, such that the differences in the charge carrier concentrations (electrons or holes) arise from the number of ionized dopants (), which depends on the dopant electronic level Ei and the available energy at room temperature (kBT = 25 meV, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature). To further understand ionization of dopants to generate doped charge carriers, which determines the electronic property of doped semiconductors, temperature dependent I–V characteristics (I–V–T) of samples were measured. We plotted the conductivity σ = ln(I/V) as a function of temperature T (Fig. 5b), to measure the activation barrier for charge transport (or the energy required for ionizing charge carriers in a doped semiconductor). Activation energies (Ea) for undoped and Nb, Fe, and Cu doped samples were found to be 0.027 eV, 0.018 eV, 0.093 eV, and 0.502 eV, respectively (Fig. 5b and Table 1). The activation energy for Nb-doped TiO2 nanotubes was close to the reported ionization energy values for Nb donors in anatase TiO2 thin films and bulk crystals, which was in the range of 10–40 meV.39,40 These values are close to the values derived using Richardson plots (ln(I/T2) vs. 1/kT) (Fig. S5†). The mobility of electron doped TiO2 nanotubes – oxygen vacancies (undoped), Fe-doped, and Nb-doped; was very close with values 4.3, 2.7, and 3.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively (Table 1). In this case the differences in conductivity of donor doped samples can be accounted due to the difference in ionized donors. In the case of Cu, N, and Cu–N dopants a drastic drop in mobility was observed (Table 1) that can be explained by the contribution of holes to transport properties, since the hole mobility in TiO2 is lower than the electron mobility.41 These findings provide insights into charge conduction in these doped nanostructures, and further evidence for electronic doping of TiO2 wide-bandgap nanotubes using cationic and anionic dopants.
 Fig. 5  Electronic n- and p-type doping of TiO2 nanotubes: (a) room-temperature current–voltage (I–V) spectrum of TiO2 nanotubes doped with 1 wt% of (a) Copper (Cu), (b) Copper–Nitrogen (Cu–N) co-dopant, (c) Nitrogen (N), (d) Niobium–Nitrogen (Nb–N) co-dopant, (e) undoped, (f) Iron (Fe), and (g) Niobium (Nb); (b) Temperature dependent current–voltage characteristics presented in 3D mode; (b), conductance (I/V) of Nb-doped (curve 1), Fe-doped (curve 2), undoped (curve 3), and Cu-doped (curve 4) samples as a function of 1/kT. The slope at the higher temperature region (>160 K) revealed activation energies 0.018 eV, 0.037 eV, 0.093 eV, and 0.502 eV for Nb-doped, undoped, Fe-doped, and Cu-doped samples, respectively; (c) CS-AFM I–V curve and the corresponding ln(I)–V plot for undoped TiO2 nanotubes to illustrate the calculation method for carrier concentration; (d) STS spectra for Nb-doped and N-doped TiO2 nanotube; dashed line guides to the Fermi-level (constant for our Pt–Ir tip) which is located near the bottom of the conduction band for the Nb-doped sample (n-type), and near the top of the valence band for the nitrogen doped sample (p-type). 
Table 1 Summary of electrical parameters of doped TiO2 nanotubes






Undoped
Fe
Nb
Cu
N
Cu–N




Resistivity, ρ, Ω cm
6.92
2.97
0.201
906
2300
4.4 × 106


Carrier concentration, n, cm−3
8.9 × 1017
2.5 × 1018
5 × 1019
1.6 × 1016
2.8 × 1016
1.3 × 1015


Mobility, μ, cm2 V−1 s−1
4.3
2.7
3.8
0.3
0.097
0.002


Activation energy (eV)
0.027
0.093
0.014
0.502
0.14






We analyzed the transport properties of doped TiO2 nanotubes, such as carrier concentration (n) and mobility (μ) for these nanotubes, using single nanotube CS-AFM measurements. We used a conductive gold coated AFM tip (known cross-section of the contact), with a single nanotube (Schottky-barrier) and measured the current–voltage (I–V) curves from a number of nanotubes. We used the I–V curves (Fig. 5c) in the intermediate bias regime (where the reverse-biased Schottky barrier dominates the total current, Fig. S6, details in the ESI†):42 (1)where J is the current density, S is the contact area, E0 is a parameter depending on carrier concentration n, e is the elementary charge, k – the Boltzmann constant, and Js is a function of the applied bias (see ESI†). This logarithmic plot of the current I as a function of the bias V gives approximately a straight line, the slope of which is equal to e/(kT) − 1/E0. The electron mobility can be calculated using the relation μ = 1/(neρ), with ρ being the resistivity of the nanotubes. Table 1 summarizes the extracted values of resistivity, carrier concentration, and mobility for doped, co-doped, and undoped samples. The resistivity ρ of the samples was calculated using sheet resistance R determined using the Ohmic law (see Experimental section). There was a strong effect of dopants on electrical properties, and the resistivity ranged from 6 × 10−4 (Fig. 9a) to 3 × 106 Ω cm (Table 1). The resistivity of the undoped sample was 9.92 Ω cm. As-grown undoped TiO2 nanotubes were of the n-type conductivity due to oxygen vacancies acting as shallow donors.2,15 The n-type conductivity of as-grown TiO2 nanotubes is seen from the STM spectrum (Fig. 5d), where the density of states (DOS) is seen near the conduction band and the Fermi energy is also close to the conduction band. Nb doped samples revealed the lowest resistivity 0.2 Ω cm. The increased conductivity of Nb-doped TiO2 nanotubes can be explained by the replacement of Ti atoms by Nb atoms in the crystal lattice. Nb is known as a good shallow donor in the TiO2 crystal lattice, with the activation energy in the range of 10–50 meV.29–32 The presence of shallow donor states near the conduction band (CB) of Nb doped TiO2 nanotubes samples was also confirmed by the scanning tunneling spectrum, which showed a high density of states near the conduction band (Fig. 4b). The iron (Fe)-doped TiO2 sample also increased the conductivity, compared to the undoped sample, which indicates donor-like substitution of this dopant iron. This effect of Fe is less dramatic compared to Nb, which can be explained by the higher activation energy for Fe (0.097 eV) compared to Nb (0.018 eV). There have been few reports on electrical properties of Fe-doped TiO2 nanotubes and the available reports indicate that substitutional Fe produces n-type conductivity.43–45 Roldan et al. showed, using periodic density functional calculations, that the Fe-dopant stimulates the generation of oxygen vacancies that act like shallow donors.45 Nitrogen doped nanotubes revealed increased resistivity (Table 1). Similar to cation dopants, doping of N anions was also in good linear relationship with the added N precursor in the electrolyte, with an R2 fitting value of 0.988 (Fig. S7a†). Nitrogen is known as a good acceptor in TiO2, with an energy position of 0.14 eV above the top of the valence band.46 The acceptor nature of the nitrogen dopant in our samples is confirmed from STS studies, where the spectrum shows that the Fermi level shifts toward the valence band, indicating a p-type effect of these dopants (Fig. 5d). By contrast, the Fermi-level of Nb doped samples shifts towards the conduction band (compared with the Pt–Ir tip level at zero). The p-type behavior of nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotubes was also observed from electrical characterization, which showed a clear injection of holes, as opposed to the electron injection in n-type Nb-doped TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. S7b†). Since nominally undoped nanotubes behave as n-doped semiconductors, the addition of an increasing amount of p-type dopants (like nitrogen) in nanotubes first results in a decrease in n-type conductivity ((from 0 to 1 wt%, Fig. 6a), followed by conversion to the p-type and an increase in p-type conduction, as shown in Fig. 6a. The conductivity first decreases and then increases, with an increase of N concentration (m) in TiO2, reaching a minimum at m = 2%, as shown. These phenomena can be easily explained by the shift in the Fermi-level of the semiconductor with increasing N concentration, monitored by the tunneling spectra using Pt–Ir STM tips (the tip Fermi-level is fixed). A clear shift of the Fermi-level towards the valence band was observed with an increase in N concentration, indicating an increasing p-type character for doped TiO2 nanotubes shown in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  (a) Conductivity (green), carrier concentration (red), and mobility (blue) of N-doped samples as a function of N concentration. (b) Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) data for nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing a clear shift of the Fermi-level (at 0 eV) towards the valence band (p-type doping). 
While most dopants described so far have behaved as substitutional dopants, copper incorporated in the TiO2 nanotube lattice shows an interesting behavior. A copper dopant also behaves like an acceptor, leading to an enhancement of the initial resistivity of Cu doped TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 4a and b). The resistivity of copper (Cu) doped samples increases (Fig. 5a and Table 1), and can be explained by the creation of acceptor centers that compensate for background impurity donors in a nominally undoped sample. This behavior is surprising since the substitution of the titanium cation (Ti4+) with copper (Cu+ or Cu2+) is expected to show n-type doping.36 However, copper doped nanotubes show clear p-type conductivity (confirmed using STS spectra shown in Fig. 4b). This result can be explained by interstitial doping of copper in TiO2 nanotubes, since it has been shown that Cu atoms can act as deep acceptors when they are in interstitial positions in the crystal lattice.36 Therefore, Cu likely occupies interstitial positions in the TiO2 crystal lattice (interstitial dopant) in doped nanotubes fabricated using our electrochemical cell. I–V characteristics of Cu doped TiO2 nanotube samples at higher voltages showed a clear nonlinear behavior of the form I–V2 (Fig. 7a), which can be explained by the space-charge limited current model (SCLC).47 In this SCLC region the carrier concentration can be calculated using equation ,47 where ε is the dielectric constant, R- is the radius of the nanotubes, and Vc is the crossover voltage presenting a transition from Ohmic to SCLC regimes. Extracting charge carrier concentration using the SCLC model for Cu doped TiO2 nanotubes shows a concentration of 5 × 1015 cm−3, which is very close to the value of 1.3 × 1016 cm−3 that was calculated using eqn (1). The Cu-dopant (Cu2+ precursor) exists as the Cu2+ (thermodynamically stable) ion, as confirmed by the electronic measurements of the number of charge carriers added per dopant atom. To further evaluate the charge conduction mechanism, we developed a modified Fowler–Nordheim (F–N) plot for photogenerated charges. For identifying different regimes of the charge transport and acceptor (or donor) level below the bandgap, instead of the F–N plot of ln(I/V2) vs. 1/V, we plotted  as a function of photon energy (Fig. 7b), where Plight is the incident light intensity, and Abs is the absorption coefficient (for details, see ESI Fig. S8†). The data for copper doped nanotubes showed a photocurrent of ∼0.5–0.7 eV below the nominal TiO2 bandgap, indicating the deep acceptor level for copper. These measurements are consistent with the measurements for activation energy from I–V–T and STM measurements (Fig. 4b and 5). Moreover, this indicates that even at low fluence, photogenerated charges are not trapped at the copper dopant sites (interstitial acceptor). These measurements clearly show that the dopant atoms are likely to be incorporated in the lattice, and contribute towards imparting the desired optical and electronic properties to doped TiO2 nanotubes.
 Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristics of low conductivity Cu-doped (1 wt%) TiO2 nanotubes are well described by the typical space charge limited current (SCLC) model (I–V2 at higher bias). (b) Modified Fowler–Nordheim plot (explained in the text) for photogenerated electrons in Cu-doped TiO2 nanotubes. 
Magnetic properties
Magnetic properties of Fe-doped TiO2 nanotube samples were studied as Fe is frequently chosen as the magnetic dopant when pursuing magnetic semiconductors.34,35,48Fig. 8 presents the magnetization vs. magnetic field dependence (M–H) measured at 300 K after subtracting the diamagnetic background. The well-defined hysteresis loop is observed as typical to that of ferromagnetic materials. The saturation magnetization (Ms), coercive field (Hc), and remnant magnetization were extracted to be 0.22 emu g−1, 402 Oe, and 0.028 emu g−1, respectively. These values averaged along different nanotube orientations, as our sample was a mixture of randomly oriented nanotubes (see Experimental section), provide further evidence of the desired magnetic doping (it was shown previously that magnetization, coercive field, and remnant magnetization of magnetic nanotubes varied depending on whether the applied magnetic field was parallel or perpendicular to nanotube axes49). For comparison the M–H plot for undoped TiO2 nanotubes is also shown at 300 K, which shows nearly linear dependence indicating paramagnetic behavior of undoped samples. It was shown earlier that the paramagnetic behavior of undoped nanotubes did not change with cooling and stayed paramagnetic up to 1.8 K.50 The temperature dependence of magnetization (M–T) was measured, both under field cooled (FC) and zero field cooled (ZFC) conditions, in order to better understand the origin of ferromagnetism in Fe-doped TiO2 nanotubes.51–53 The FC results are obtained by measuring the magnetic moment of the sample in a magnetic field of 1000 Oe during cooling. The ZFC results are obtained by first cooling the sample to 5 K in zero fields and then warming it in the same field as that of the FC measurement. The ZFC and FC curves are separated below 300 K and ZFC magnetization shows stronger temperature dependence compared to the FC curve. The divergence between the FC and ZFC curves and the lack of blocking temperature peaks indicate intrinsic magnetism of TiO2 nanotubes resulting from the substitution of Ti atoms with Fe atoms, not from clusters of Fe atoms.51–53 As was mentioned above, XRD studies revealed no traces of secondary phases. Also it should be mentioned that the M–H and M–T dependence of our Fe-doped TiO2 nanotubes are similar to those in many other reports on Fe-doped TiO2 films, nanoparticles, and bulk crystals.34,35,48 These all together strongly suggest that the ferromagnetic signal from our Fe-doped TiO2 nanotube samples is intrinsic resulting from Fe atoms substituting Ti atoms. The mechanism of ferromagnetism in doped transition-metal oxides is still under debate. However, all existing models explaining ferromagnetism in oxide semiconductors (superexchange, double exchange, free-carrier-mediated exchange, and exchange through bound magnetic polarons) involve the substitutional nature of magnetic dopants replacing Ti atoms in the TiO2 crystal.54–58 In addition, it was shown from density functional theory (DFT) calculations that interstitial magnetic dopants destroy spin polarization.59 Furthermore, using electronic measurements of Fe-doped TiO2 nanotubes, the nanotubes show increased n-type conductivity (doping created additional ionized electrons, Fig. 5a), which can be expected by substitutional doping with Fe2+ ions (of Ti4+ ions) in the TiO2 lattice. However, interstitial doping with Fe2+ ions would have resulted in an opposite p-type electronic behavior. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that Fe2+ ions in our TiO2 nanotubes predominantly substitute Ti4+ ions in the crystal lattice.
 Fig. 8  (a) Room-temperature magnetization (M) vs. magnetic field (H) hysteresis loop for Fe-doped TiO2 nanotube samples; (b) magnetization–magnetic field loop for undoped TiO2 nanotube samples measured using SQUID, which show clear paramagnetic behavior; (c) presents zero-field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) temperature dependent magnetization curves for the Fe-doped sample, which demonstrates that the ferromagnetic behavior of Fe-doped nanotubes results from substitutional Fe magnetic dopants, rather than secondary phases. 
Applications

Metallic oxide nanotubes. 
By heavily doping TiO2 nanotubes with a shallow dopant Nb, we fabricated transparent nanotube films (UV-bandgap ∼3.1 eV). Two samples with two different concentrations of Nb were prepared – 1% and 10%. The resistivity TiO2 sample doped with 1% Nb (Ti0.99Nb0.01O2) increased with temperature, as a typical semiconductor (due to reduced carrier concentration), as shown in Fig. 9a, curve 2. However, the heavily doped Ti0.9Nb0.1O2 sample (10% Nb-doped TiO2), showed a reduced resistance to electron transport with temperature, typical for metals (due to reduced electron scattering), Fig. 9a, curve 1. Thus, these results show that Nb-doped TiO2 nanotubes can be excellent candidates for use as transparent conducting oxide nanotube films. At the high temperature region of 100–300 K, the ρ − T dependence is almost linear, similar to metals, and can be described by ρ = ρ0(1 + αΔT), where ρ0 is the residual resistivity approximately 9.15 × 10−4 Ω cm, α – is the temperature coefficient 4.7 × 10−4 Ω K−1, and ΔT – the temperature difference. The carrier concentration n was almost independent of temperature with only a slight decrease by ∼10% when the temperature decreased from 300 K to 20 K (Fig. S9†). Mobility, however, increased by a factor of 3.5 with a decrease of temperature within the same temperature range (from 2.9 to 10.3 cm2 V−1 s−1) which is explained by the reduction of phonon scattering at lower temperatures. We confirmed that the transmission obtained in these films is above 90% for the entire visible wavelength range (Fig. 9b), and demonstrate metal-like conductivity (Fig. 9a). The high transmittance of these nanotubes (>90% above the bandgap and 10 wt% Nb dopant) allows the demonstration of TCO nanotubes. The transmittance η was estimated from reflectivity measurements using the following equation: (2)where Rb, are measured signals from the blank Ti sheet, Rs – is the signal from the sample, and Rd – is the background signal.
 Fig. 9  (a) The resistivity for Nb doped nanotubes as a function of temperature with two different Nb doping levels – 1% (Ti0.99Nb0.01O2), curve 2, and 10% (Ti0.9Nb0.1O2), curve 1. Ti0.99Nb0.01O2 shows an increase of resistivity with temperature as typical to semiconductors. By contrast Ti0.99Nb0.1O2 shows a decrease of resistivity with temperature, revealing metallic behavior. (b) Transmittance of 10% Nb doped TNT samples. Transmittance above 90% was observed in the visible range for the 10% Nb doped TNT. 


Photocatalysis. 
Using suitable (deep and shallow) monodopants and co-dopants (Cu, N, Cu–N, and Nb–N), we fabricated photocatalysts with high absorption throughout the visible wavelengths (for enhanced light absorption, Fig. 10a). These photocatalysts can absorb much more light than the undoped wide-bandgap nanotubes. Besides the higher (infrared bandgap) absorption, we can easily tune the electronic levels in these doped wide-bandgap nanotubes, to match the desired redox reactions for CO2/H2O for selective photocatalysis60 (Fig. 10a and S11†). Photocatalytic reduction of carbon-dioxide, using simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation (Fig. S10†), was used to demonstrate the higher selectivity (see Table 2) and higher stability (Fig. 10b) of the doped TiO2 nanotubes, using nitrogen doping (see ESI†). While the apparent quantum yield (AQY) of these doped nanotubes decreases from 0.48% for undoped nanotubes to 0.3% for nitrogen-doped TiO2, the improved selectivity and stability can lead to important applications in the generation of solar fuels. Moreover, measurements of the electronic properties of these doped nanotubes reveal no charge trapping due to the addition of dopants, and high collection efficiency for photogenerated charge carriers (discussion on photo I–V, Fig. 7). Therefore, different light harvesting strategies and solar concentrators can also be used to further improve the quantum yield for fixing CO2 using sunlight as desired solar fuels.60 These results indicate the applicability of this new doping method for improving the absorption and selectivity of new TiO2 photocatalysts for applications in artificial photosynthesis, improved photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical cells, and other devices for harvesting incident solar energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) Co-doped TiO2 nanotubes (Cu–N and Nb–N) show infrared absorption of incident light, shown using small bandgaps determined by the STS spectrum. These photocatalysts can absorb much more light than the undoped wide-bandgap nanotubes. (b) Stability of undoped and nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotube catalysts. Undoped nanotubes show a strong drop in the catalytic activity, for CO2–H2O reduction (artificial photosynthesis), with time. However, nitrogen doped nanotubes show a relatively stable photocatalytic yield of selective high-value products, on illumination with simulated solar irradiation (AM1.5 spectrum). 
Table 2 Summary of photocatalytic reduction experiments for carbon-dioxide to demonstrate higher selectivity and higher stability for the doped TiO2 nanotubes




Production Rate (e μmol cm−2 h−1)


Sample
Methane
Ethane
Acetaldehyde
Selectivity




Undoped
0.014
0.023
0.088
70%


0.5 wt% nitrogen
0.003
0.006
0.060
87





Conclusions
We presented a new method for nanotube doping during electrochemical anodization using alternating current that was enabled by a new electrochemical cell design. A variety of optical, electronic and magnetic dopants were successfully incorporated into the hollow nanotubes leading to desired physical properties. Detailed investigations shown here prove that this versatile method is applicable for tailoring the dopant (cationic, anionic, mono and co-doping) and the doping level (from low doping to highly-doped semiconductors) over a wide range of materials and physical properties (semiconductor to metal-like transition). These results can have important implications for the development of new devices and device architectures for applications in the broad field of optoelectronics, catalysis, display technologies, and power electronics.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Zachary Fisk and Ted Grant from the University of California–Irvine for their assistance in magnetization measurements using SQUID. Financial support for this work was provided by start-up funds from the University of Colorado and NSF Career Award CBET-1351281.
References
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Nah, I. Paramasivam and P. Schmuki, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mocatta, G. Cohen, J. Schattner, O. Millo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Science, 2011, 332, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Erwin, L. J. Zu, M. I. Haftel, A. L. Efros, T. A. Kennedy and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2005, 436, 91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros and S. C. Erwin, Science, 2008, 319, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boltasseva and H. A. Atwater, Science, 2011, 331, 290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Gai, J. B. Li, S. S. Li, J. B. Xia and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 036402 CrossRef .
W. G. Zhu, X. F. Qiu, V. Iancu, X. Q. Chen, H. Pan, W. Wang, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh, H. M. Meyer, M. P. Paranthaman, G. M. Stocks, H. H. Weitering, B. H. Gu, G. Eres and Z. Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 226401 CrossRef .
T. H. Zhou, Y. H. Du, A. Borgna, J. D. Hong, Y. B. Wang, J. Y. Han, W. Zhang and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3229 CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1946 RSC .
X. Y. Pan, M. Q. Yang, X. Z. Fu, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601 RSC .
Q. J. Xiang and J. G. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753 CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 690 Search PubMed .
J. D. Hong, Y. S. Wang, Y. B. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. J. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/c3cs60425j .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lui, J. Y. Liao, A. S. Duan, Z. S. Zhang, M. Fowler and A. P. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12255 CAS .
W. J. Ong, M. M. Gui, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4505 RSC .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670 RSC .
Y. H. Hu, H. Wang and B. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451 RSC .
J. M. Macak, H. Hildebrand, U. Marten-Jahns and P. Schmuki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 621, 254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Alivov, M. Pandikunta, S. Nikishin and Z. Y. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 225602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjines, P. E. Schmid and F. Levy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Furubayashi, N. Yamada, Y. Hirose, Y. Yamamoto, M. Otani, T. Hitosugi, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093705 Search PubMed .
T. Hitosugi, A. Ueda, S. Nakao, N. Yamada, Y. Furubayashi, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 212106 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hitosugi, A. Ueda, Y. Furubayashi, Y. Hirose, S. Konuma, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2007, 46, L86 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Hong, J. Sakai, W. Prellier, A. Hassini, A. Ruyter and F. Gervais, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 195204 CrossRef .
F. Lin, D. M. Jiang, Y. Lin and X. M. Ma, Phys. B, 2008, 403, 2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. S. Chan and G. K. L. Goh, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 5582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401 Search PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, D. W. Gong, M. Paulose, C. A. Grimes and E. C. Dickey, J. Mater. Res., 2003, 18, 156 Search PubMed .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751 CrossRef .
Y. Furubayashi, T. Hitosugi, Y. Yamamoto, K. Inaba, G. Kinoda, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 252101 Search PubMed .
J. Osorio-Guillen, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 036601 Search PubMed .
P. Zawadzki, J. Rossmeisl and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 121203 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhang, C. H. Jin, X. L. Liang, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073102 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Wellia, Q. C. Xu, M. A. Sk, K. H. Lim, T. M. Lim and T. T. Y. Tan, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 401, 98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Bally, E. N. Korobeinikova, P. E. Schmid, F. Levy and F. Bussy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 1149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roldan, M. Boronat, A. Corma and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6511 CAS .
C. Di Valentin, E. Finazzi, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi, M. C. Paganini and E. Giamello, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Talin, F. Leonard, B. S. Swartzentruber, X. Wang and S. D. Hersee, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 076802 CrossRef .
N. H. Hong, J. Sakai, W. Prellier and A. Ruyter, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 816 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Prida, M. Hernandez-Velez, K. R. Pirota, A. Menendez and M. Vazquez, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Alivov, T. Grant, C. Capan, W. Iwamoto, P. G. Pagliuso and S. Molloi, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 275704 CrossRef PubMed .
G. J. Yang, D. Q. Gao, Z. H. Shi, Z. H. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. L. Zhang and D. S. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21989 CAS .
D. Y. Inamdar, A. D. Lad, A. K. Pathak, I. Dubenko, N. Ali and S. Mahamuni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1451 CAS .
A. Manivannan, P. Dutta, G. Glaspell and M. S. Seehra, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 08M110 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. F. Sluiter, Y. Kawazoe, P. Sharma, A. Inoue, A. R. Raju, C. Rout and U. V. Waghmare, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 187204 CrossRef .
J. M. D. Coey, A. P. Douvalis, C. B. Fitzgerald and M. Venkatesan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Tuan, J. D. Bryan, A. B. Pakhomov, V. Shutthanandan, S. Thevuthasan, D. E. McCready, D. Gaspar, M. H. Engelhard, J. W. Rogers, K. Krishnan, D. R. Gamelin and S. A. Chambers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 054424 CrossRef .
P. V. Radovanovic and D. R. Gamelin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 157202 Search PubMed .
M. S. Park, S. K. Kwon and B. I. Min, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 161201 CrossRef .
W. T. Geng and K. S. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 125203 CrossRef .
V. Singh, I. J. C. Beltran, J. C. Ribot and P. Nagpal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr02417fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A sketch showing the design of a new electrochemical cell developed in this work. It is divided into two parts separated with a porous membrane to prevent from high currents and cation deposition onto the Pt electrode. (b) Schematic illustrating rectangular shape AC signals with parameters employed for doping nanotubes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of TiO2 nanotube arrays grown by electrochemical anodization: (a) shows the top view of densely packed nanotubes, (b) shows the bottom view after removing nanotubes from the Ti metal, and the side view of the vertical, hollow, doped TiO2 nanotubes, and (c) and (d) show side profiles at different magnifications.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a). XRD patterns for undoped, Nb, Cu, Fe, and N doped, and Nb/N and Cu/N co-doped and undoped samples. Labels on the right guide to the corresponding samples. Only reflection peaks corresponding to the anatase TiO2 phase were detected in all samples indicating the lack of secondary phases. (b) Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) for undoped, Fe-doped, Cu-doped, Nb-doped, and N-doped, Nb and N co-doped, and Cu and N co-doped TiO2 nanotubes. Well pronounced characteristic X-ray emission peaks of dopants can be seen along with the TiO2 matrix (Ti and O peaks). These data prove the presence of desired dopants in TiO2 nanotube films; (c) Nb concentration (blue) and resistivity (red) of Nb doped TiO2 nanotubes, as a function of wt% NbCl5 in the electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) STS spectrum of (a) undoped, (b) Cu-doped, (c) N-doped, (d) Nb-doped, (e) Nb–N co-doped, and (f) Cu–N co-doped samples. (b) Extinction spectra of undoped, monodoped and co-doped TiO2 samples. A clear change in the bandgap can be seen using the STS and the optical spectrum of these doped wide-bandgap semiconductor nanotubes. The dashed-black line represents the large Rayleigh scattering observed in these nanotubes, which makes exact determination of bandgaps difficult in these indirect bandgap semiconductors, using optical spectroscopy; (c) spectrally resolved photoresponse (photocurrent normalized by incident light intensity) for undoped (blue), Cu-doped (pink), N-doped (green), and Cu–N co-doped (red) TiO2 nanotubes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electronic n- and p-type doping of TiO2 nanotubes: (a) room-temperature current–voltage (I–V) spectrum of TiO2 nanotubes doped with 1 wt% of (a) Copper (Cu), (b) Copper–Nitrogen (Cu–N) co-dopant, (c) Nitrogen (N), (d) Niobium–Nitrogen (Nb–N) co-dopant, (e) undoped, (f) Iron (Fe), and (g) Niobium (Nb); (b) Temperature dependent current–voltage characteristics presented in 3D mode; (b), conductance (I/V) of Nb-doped (curve 1), Fe-doped (curve 2), undoped (curve 3), and Cu-doped (curve 4) samples as a function of 1/kT. The slope at the higher temperature region (>160 K) revealed activation energies 0.018 eV, 0.037 eV, 0.093 eV, and 0.502 eV for Nb-doped, undoped, Fe-doped, and Cu-doped samples, respectively; (c) CS-AFM I–V curve and the corresponding ln(I)–V plot for undoped TiO2 nanotubes to illustrate the calculation method for carrier concentration; (d) STS spectra for Nb-doped and N-doped TiO2 nanotube; dashed line guides to the Fermi-level (constant for our Pt–Ir tip) which is located near the bottom of the conduction band for the Nb-doped sample (n-type), and near the top of the valence band for the nitrogen doped sample (p-type).	 

Resistivity, ρ, Ω cm	6.92	2.97	0.201	906	2300	4.4 × 106
Carrier concentration, n, cm−3	8.9 × 1017	2.5 × 1018	5 × 1019	1.6 × 1016	2.8 × 1016	1.3 × 1015
Mobility, μ, cm2 V−1 s−1	4.3	2.7	3.8	0.3	0.097	0.002
Activation energy (eV)	0.027	0.093	0.014	0.502	0.14	

	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Conductivity (green), carrier concentration (red), and mobility (blue) of N-doped samples as a function of N concentration. (b) Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) data for nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing a clear shift of the Fermi-level (at 0 eV) towards the valence band (p-type doping).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) I–V characteristics of low conductivity Cu-doped (1 wt%) TiO2 nanotubes are well described by the typical space charge limited current (SCLC) model (I–V2 at higher bias). (b) Modified Fowler–Nordheim plot (explained in the text) for photogenerated electrons in Cu-doped TiO2 nanotubes.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Room-temperature magnetization (M) vs. magnetic field (H) hysteresis loop for Fe-doped TiO2 nanotube samples; (b) magnetization–magnetic field loop for undoped TiO2 nanotube samples measured using SQUID, which show clear paramagnetic behavior; (c) presents zero-field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) temperature dependent magnetization curves for the Fe-doped sample, which demonstrates that the ferromagnetic behavior of Fe-doped nanotubes results from substitutional Fe magnetic dopants, rather than secondary phases.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  (a) The resistivity for Nb doped nanotubes as a function of temperature with two different Nb doping levels – 1% (Ti0.99Nb0.01O2), curve 2, and 10% (Ti0.9Nb0.1O2), curve 1. Ti0.99Nb0.01O2 shows an increase of resistivity with temperature as typical to semiconductors. By contrast Ti0.99Nb0.1O2 shows a decrease of resistivity with temperature, revealing metallic behavior. (b) Transmittance of 10% Nb doped TNT samples. Transmittance above 90% was observed in the visible range for the 10% Nb doped TNT.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Co-doped TiO2 nanotubes (Cu–N and Nb–N) show infrared absorption of incident light, shown using small bandgaps determined by the STS spectrum. These photocatalysts can absorb much more light than the undoped wide-bandgap nanotubes. (b) Stability of undoped and nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanotube catalysts. Undoped nanotubes show a strong drop in the catalytic activity, for CO2–H2O reduction (artificial photosynthesis), with time. However, nitrogen doped nanotubes show a relatively stable photocatalytic yield of selective high-value products, on illumination with simulated solar irradiation (AM1.5 spectrum).	 


Undoped	0.014	0.023	0.088	70%
0.5 wt% nitrogen	0.003	0.006	0.060	87
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr02417f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
