Optimizing surface plasmon resonance effects on finger electrodes to enhance the efficiency of silicon-based solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE24033E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE24033E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 935-942Show Chemical TermsOptimizing surface plasmon resonance effects on finger electrodes to enhance the efficiency of silicon-based solar cells

        
          
            Yi-Min 
            Chi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hsuen-Li 
            Chen
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Sheng 
            Lai
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Ho-Ming 
            Chang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yuan-Chen 
            Liao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chao-Chia 
            Cheng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Szu-Huang 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shao-Chin 
            Tseng
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Keng-Te 
            Lin
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. E-mail: hsuenlichen@ntu.edu.tw
bNational Nano Device Lab., Hsinchu, Taiwan. E-mail: yslai@ndl.org.tw
cDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Chung Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
dDepartment of Physics, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan
Received 
      30th May 2012
    , Accepted 21st December 2012First published on 21st December 2012AbstractIn this paper we demonstrate a technique for improving the conversion efficiency in conventional silicon solar cells by using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effects to harvest incident light energy over metal finger electrodes. According to three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) analysis, incident light covering a broad bandwidth of the solar spectrum can be transmitted through metallic hole array structures. Although the light absorption region beneath the metal finger electrodes cannot generate a photocurrent, in this study, we employ the extraordinary transmission (EOT) phenomenon, due to SPR effects, to dramatically increase the degree of light harvesting below the metal electrodes and, thereby, improve the efficiency of the entire solar cell. Experimental data reveal that the excess photocurrent density was approximately 190% of the normal current density of a standard solar cell. Therefore, the negative effect of covering the absorption area with opaque metal finger electrodes can be minimized or eliminated completely by taking advantage of the SPR effect of the metal electrodes.

Broader context
This study presents a useful technique to enhance photoelectric conversion efficiency of a conventional crystalline Si solar cell by using the surface plasma resonance (SPR) effect to harvest the incident light energy over the metal finger electrodes in a standard semiconductor process. According to the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) simulations, we prepared samples featuring metallic hole array structures on their metal finger electrodes with specific diameters and periods to stimulate the SPR phenomenon within both the visible and NIR regimes. Experimentally, we found that the excess photocurrent density of the optimized device was 190% times the normal current density of a standard solar cell; normalized external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements confirmed the enhanced efficiency. Therefore, the negative effect of covering the absorption area with an opaque metal finger electrode can be minimized by exploiting SPR effects on metal electrodes. In this study, using the SPR approach provided enhanced efficiency, not only breaking the tradeoff rule for metallic electrodes in conventional solar cells but also allowing additional harvesting of incident light energy over the surfaces of the metal finger electrodes.

1 Introduction
The development of highly efficient solar cells might be a solution to the problems of energy depletion and environmental destruction. Many kinds of solar cells have been investigated in terms of their efficiency, cost, duration, and reliability;1,2 Si-based solar cells are particularly strong candidates for future development because of their high internal quantum efficiencies and mature fabrication techniques. A key factor for improving the performance of Si-based solar cells would be to increase the external quantum efficiency (EQE) by increasing the degree of light harvesting. All semiconductor materials have high refractive indices in the regime from the visible to the near-infrared (NIR), resulting in high Fresnel reflection at their air–semiconductor interfaces.4,5 Therefore, one approach toward increasing the EQEs of Si-based solar cells would be to minimize interfacial reflection in their working-wavelength regime. Various methods and nanostructures have successfully demonstrated broad bandwidth of low reflectance on Si-based solar cells.6–15 Metal nanoparticles (NPs) exhibiting localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) properties have recently been used to enhance the optical absorption of Si-based solar cells;16–20 in that study, Au and Ag NPs were deposited on the surface of Si-based solar cells to scatter more light into the solar cells. In previous studies, transparent electrode materials such as indium tin oxide (ITO) and graphene have been used on Si-based solar cells.28 However, one of the main components of ITO is the rare earth element indium (In). ITO is also not the popular material in the mass production technique for silicon crystalline based solar cells. Furthermore, in recent study, graphene is a novel material for the transparent electrode on a solar cell.28 However, the efficiency of graphene electrode based solar cells is still very low.
Previous studies aimed at increasing the EQEs of Si-based solar cells were focused on decreasing the amount of reflected light and increasing the amount of scattered light on the surface of solar cells, using antireflective structures and metal NPs, respectively. In each case, however, a finger electrode must be placed on the surface of a Si crystalline solar cell. Typically, this opaque finger electrode would cover 5–20% of the surface area of the Si crystal solar cell—meaning that approximately 5–20% of the light would not reach the PN junction of the solar cell. Previous attempts at increasing the photocurrents of solar cells through modification of finger electrodes have concentrated on the electrode placement, design, or material process control.21–23 In this study, we took advantage of the extraordinary optical transmission (EOT) phenomenon, based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR), of finger electrodes to increase the EQEs of Si-based solar cells.
The EOT phenomenon of SPR has various applications in optoelectronic devices. It differs from the classical Bethe theory, which predicts that the transmission decreases as a function of the wavelength. Ebbesen et al. first reported that metal films featuring periodic hole arrays exhibit EOT as a result of SPR.1–4 The transmission in such systems is caused by incident light of certain wavelengths passing through the metal hole arrays at a specific hole diameter and period. This phenomenon is generally attributed to the coupling of light to the surface plasmon excitation on the surface of a periodic metal film.3 Periodic structures play an important role in the coupling of light to a surface plasmon wave; they provide an extra wave-vector between the surface plasmon wave and the light, as defined by the equation ksp = k0 sin θ ± mGx ± nGy(1)where ksp is the wave vector of the surface plasmon wave, k0 is the wave vector of the incident light, k0 sin θ is the projection of k0 onto the xy plane, Gx and Gy are grating momentums, and m and n are integers. Therefore, for a square array of period P, the location of λmax in a normal-incidence transmittance spectrum can be identified using the approximate dispersion relationship2 (2)where the indices i and j are scattering orders from the periodic structure, εm is the real part of the metal's dielectric constant, and εd is the dielectric constant of the neighboring dielectric material. Using this equation, we can fine-tune the EOT wavelength regime by controlling the period of the metallic hole array.2,24
In this study, we exploited the SPR-based EOT phenomenon on finger electrodes to increase the EQEs of Si-based solar cells. In contrast to previous reports, we wished the EOT phenomenon on solar cells to cover a broad bandwidth of the solar spectrum. For example, Si-based solar cells generally possess working wavelengths from at least 400 to 1000 nm. Therefore, we design and optimize metallic hole array structures on finger electrodes that possessed high transmission within this wavelength regime. Meanwhile, employing the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) method simulates the optical behavior of metallic hole array structures on finger electrodes having different periods and hole diameters. Based on these simulations, we used conventional semiconductor processes to fabricate metallic hole array structures, having different periods and hole diameters, onto finger electrodes. Measured device properties of solar cells incorporating the various finger electrodes can determine their optimal short circuit current densities (Jsc). We found that the efficiency (η%) of commercial solar cells increased significantly when they were associated with the SPR effect, even though the area ratio of the metal finger electrode was approximately 10–15%. These observations suggest that positioning metallic hole array structures onto the finger electrodes can improve the performance of conventional Si-based solar cells.
2 Experimental setup and simulation
Standard Si crystalline solar cell processes were used for fabrication. Each sample contained a typical solar cell and a specific metal hole array, prepared without altering any of the standard solar cell processes. Fig. 1(a) presents a schematic representation of a resultant device. Fabrication began with the formation of the n+–p junction through the implantation of n+ impurities and subsequent creation of the depletion region between the implanted n+ layer and the p-type substrate. The depletion region of the n+–p junction was necessary for light harvesting in the solar cell. Generally, a wider depletion region generates a greater photocurrent. The n+ implant dosage is usually greater than the concentration of the p-type substrate, thereby providing a wider depletion region for a greater photocurrent output. After formation of the junction, a SiO2 layer having a thickness of 20 nm was deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) and etched to form the contact area for current conduction.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a tested device. (a) Cross-sectional view of a device featuring a metal hole array, for the SPR effect, on the Al electrode. (b) Top view of a device for mimicking a conventional solar cell; (left) the opaque metal finger electrodes are colored gray; expanded inset (right): design of the electrode for the suggested SPR effect. 
Aluminum films having a thickness of 100 nm were deposited on the top of Si wafers, and then the metal fingers and holes were patterned by electron-beam lithography. Finally, the backside aluminum electrodes having a thickness of 150 nm were deposited on the back side of wafers. After metallization and patterning process, the device with metal hole arrays on a metal finger electrode and the device with a simple metal finger electrode were prepared to perceive a contrast between the solar cell presenting metallic hole arrays upon the metal finger regions [Fig. 1(b)] and that lacking any structure upon the metal finger regions.
Applying SPR phenomena to a conventional solar cell is a strategy toward increasing the photocurrent; specific metal hole arrays are readily created on the deposited metal film using the same lithographic process step as that for etching the top metal finger patterns. From the brief description of the process flow described above, it is obvious that the fabrication of solar cells with metallic hole arrays on the metal finger pattern is as straightforward as fabricating a conventional solar cell. Therefore, variation of the dimensions and periods of the metallic hole arrays upon the metal finger pattern was a relatively simple means of obtaining a variety of optical characteristics. The patterned metal films were imaged using a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, S-4000). For near-field optical analysis, the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) method was used to simulate the optical behavior of the transmission of light through the various structures of the thin metal films.
3 Results and discussion
3-1 Simulations
To determine the optimal structures of the metal hole arrays required to increase the degree of light harvesting of solar cells, we used the 3D-FDTD approach to investigate the optical behavior of metal hole arrays having various periods and hole diameters. 3D-FDTD simulations reveal the electromagnetic fields over the entire computational domain as they evolve over time, providing animated displays of the electric field's movement through the model to analyze the cavity effect on patterned metal hole arrays. As indicated in Fig. 2(a), we set plane waves propagating from 2 μm above metal hole arrays, having various periods and hole diameters, on Si substrates. To study the behavior of incident light through metal hole arrays, we set up three detectors: at the air–Al interface, 100 nm below the air–Al interface, and at the SiO2 film–Si interface, respectively. In the simulation, the thicknesses of the Al and SiO2 films are 300 nm and 200 nm, respectively. In a previous study, we found that a SiO2 film positioned between the metal hole arrays and the Si substrate acted as a refractive index matching layer that could increase the transmitted light power from the metal hole arrays.3,25
 Fig. 2  (a) Layout of the 3D-FDTD simulation, placing Detectors 1–3 at the air–Al interface, 100 nm below the air–Al interface, and at the SiO2–Si interface, respectively. (b)–(d) Calculated behavior of the H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08 devices, respectively, toward incident light passing through the metal hole arrays. The intensity at the transmitted peaks decreased from Detector 1 to Detector 3, but the transmitted intensity of light having wavelengths less than the transmitted peak wavelength remained almost unchanged. 
Furthermore, to increase the EQEs of Si-based solar cells, the spectral regime of the extraordinary transmittance in the metal hole arrays should meet the working wavelength regime of the cells. According to eqn (2), we chose metal hole arrays having periods of 400, 600, and 800 nm that possessed extraordinary transmittance wavelengths within the visible and NIR regimes. Moreover, to maintain the good conductance of the finger electrodes of the Si-based solar cells, we designed the metal hole arrays on the finger electrodes to have a duty ratio (hole diameter-to-period ratio) of 0.5. Therefore, the metal hole arrays having periods of 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8 μm possessed hole diameters of 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 μm, respectively; we named these structures H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08, respectively. Fig. 2(b) displays the transmitted spectra of the H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08 metal hole array structures at the air–Al interface (Detector 1). The transmitted peaks at wavelengths near 480, 650, and 850 nm corresponded to SPR phenomena of the H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08 hole array structures, respectively. Fig. 2(c) displays the transmitted spectra of the metal hole array structures recorded 100 nm below the air–Al interface (Detector 2). The transmitted power decreased slightly as the waves propagated into the cavity as a result of diffraction and cavity effects.3,26,27 Furthermore, Detector 3 at the SiO2–Si interface, used to monitor the light incident to the Si solar cell, revealed [Fig. 2(d)] that the transmitted power decreased further as the waves propagated through the cavity. The intensities of the transmitted peaks decreased upon proceeding from Detector 1 to Detector 3; the transmitted intensities of the light at wavelengths less than that of the transmitted peak slightly decreased from ca. 30% to ca. 20%. For example, in the H04P08 sample, the intensity of the transmitted peak at a wavelength of 850 nm decreased upon proceeding from Detector 1 to Detector 3, but the transmitted intensity of the light at wavelengths of less than 850 nm remained almost unchanged. Conversely, the transmitted intensity decreased rapidly for light having wavelengths larger than the transmitted peak wavelength. For example, the H02P04 structure featured a transmitted peak at a wavelength of 480 nm; the intensity of transmitted light having wavelengths longer than 480 nm decreased to almost zero upon proceeding from the surface to the bottom of the metallic hole arrays.

Fig. 3 displays the electric field distributions obtained after simulating incident light of various wavelengths passing through metallic hole arrays of various sizes. Fig. 3(a) displays the effect of incident light at a wavelength of 450 nm passing through the H02P04 structure. At this wavelength, which is near the SPR transmission peak of the H0204 structure, we observed an obvious transmittance of electric field intensity through the metallic hole arrays. When we increased the wavelength of incident light to 650 and 850 nm, the electric field intensity transmitting through the H02P04 structure decreased dramatically [Fig. 3(b) and (c), respectively], because these wavelengths of incident light were much larger than the diameter of the holes (200 nm) in the H0204 structure. Conversely, Fig. 3(f) displays the effect of incident light at a wavelength of 850 nm passing through H04P08; because this wavelength is near the SPR transmission peak of this structure, we observed an obvious transmittance of electric field intensity through the metallic hole arrays. When we decreased the wavelength of incident light to 450 and 650 nm, some of the electric field intensity remained passing through the H04P08 structure [Fig. 3(d) and (e), respectively]. Because the wavelengths (450 nm and 650 nm) of incident light are close to the sizes of the holes in the H0408 structure, the electric field intensity at each of these wavelengths could pass directly through the metallic hole arrays. Therefore, incident light in both the visible and NIR regimes could be transmitted through a metallic hole array structure having its SPR peak in the NIR regime. A larger structure might, therefore, be better suited for application in the electrodes of Si-based solar cells to cover a broader bandwidth of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 3  Calculated electric field distributions, determined using the FDTD layout setting in Fig. 2, after incident light had passed through the metallic hole arrays of (a)–(c) H02P04 and (d)–(f) H04P08 at wavelengths of (a and d) 450, (b and e) 650, and (c and f) 850 nm, respectively. The SPR phenomenon was more distinct for the metallic hole arrays of the H04P08 structure. Incident light from both the visible and NIR regimes could be transmitted through the metallic hole array structure of H04P08, providing an SPR peak in the NIR regime. 
3-2 Device characterization
Next, we characterized and verified the electrical and optical characteristics of Si solar cells prepared with and without metallic hole arrays distributed on the metal finger electrodes. We used a system comprising a Keithley 2400 source-and-measure unit and an AM 1.5 light source to measure the electrical and optical properties. Fig. 4 displays SEM images of metallic hole arrays of various diameters and periods uniformly distributed over the metal finger electrodes of the tested solar cells. Herein, we label the conventional solar cell device prepared without any hole arrays as “Test” and, for example, that featuring a hole array with a diameter of 0.2 μm and a period of 0.4 μm over the metal finger electrode as “H02P04.” The ratio of the diameter to the period in the metal hole array was set at 1:2 in the samples H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08. Fig. 5 displays the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of all of the samples in a dark environment. The similar behavior of the devices H02P04, H03P06, H04P08, and Test indicates that the presence of additional hole arrays on the metal finger electrodes had no impact on the device performance. Thus, all of the devices featured identical initial conditions in the absence of illumination.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the metallic hole arrays on the metal finger electrodes of devices (a) H02P04, (b) H03P06, and (c) H04P08. 
 Fig. 5  Current–voltage performances of devices H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08, measured in a dark environment. The behaviors of devices with different hole array structures were similar to that of the Test sample, indicating that the presence of hole arrays over the metal finger electrodes had no impact on performance. Furthermore, these hole arrays functioned poorly in the absence of illumination. 

Table 1 lists the constituent parts of the total photocurrent in all of the tested devices. In the Test sample (conventional solar cell), the major light absorption occurred in the detection region between the two metal finger electrodes, without any covering metal, denoted as the “normal detecting area”. Because the metal finger electrodes will reflect or absorb almost all of the incident light power, the light detection junction will typically be invalid as long as the junction is concealed beneath the metal. In the other samples, the irradiation energy could be absorbed in both the normal detecting area and the excess detecting area (the area of the entire sub-wavelength structure for SPR, described in Table 1) beneath the metal finger electrode. Therefore, a normal current and excess current components of the photocurrent were generated from the normal detecting area and the excess detecting area, respectively. The behavior of the devices in Table 1 was measured under a fixed incident light intensity, at an identical metal electrode width, with the same space between two electrodes, and in the absence of a biased voltage. These samples were identical except for the design of the metal hole arrays above their metal finger electrodes. In Table 1, all devices were designed in an identical area of 1 cm2. The area of the metal electrode and that of the hole-array are about 0.673 cm2 and 0.165 cm2, respectively. Therefore, the fractional area uncovered by holes in the entire device is 100% for the Test sample (without hole-array) and ca. 84% for samples H02P04, H03P6, and H04P08. The total photocurrent of the Test sample was the lowest among all of our measured devices. Each measured sample should have had the same normal current because it had the same device design and was subjected to consistent experimental conditions. We calculated the excess current in these samples by subtracting the normal current from the total photocurrent. This approach allowed us to determine the normal current density (Jnormal) and the excess current density (Jexcess), listed in Table 1. In the conventional solar cell (Test), we expected Jexcess to be zero. In this study, the value of Jexcess of the tested devices was significant in that it implied that the presence of the SPR structures enhanced the generated photocurrent, even though the light absorption region was beneath the metal finger electrode. We used the ratio of Jexcess to Jnormal as an index to verify whether the surface plasmons were generated by the metal hole arrays over the metal finger electrodes. If this ratio was equal to zero, no carriers were generated below the metal finger electrode, as in the conventional solar cell (Test). If not, two distinct cases emerged: one in which the ratio was near 1 (i.e., for H02P04), and the other in which the ratio was greater than 1 (i.e., for H03P06 and H04P08). For each of the samples H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08, the surface plasmons were certainly activated by the desired sub-wavelength optical structures (i.e., the metal hole arrays on the metal finger electrodes) to assist the incident light penetrating through the hole arrays and thereby generate additional photocurrent (Jexcess). The Jexcess-to-Jnormal ratio of sample H02P04 was less than those of H03P06 and H04P08 because the hole diameter (200 nm) of the former was much smaller than the working wavelength range of a Si-based solar cell.
Table 1 Performance of solar cells featuring different metal finger electrode designs. The photocurrent of the solar cell without metallic hole-array is defined as the “normal current”. The excess current is defined as the difference between total photocurrent and normal current. A ratio of Jexcess (excess current density) to Jnormal (normal current density) of greater than 1 means that the intensity ratio of the transmitted light via the sub-wavelength metallic hole arrays was greater than the effective area ratio. In particular, the values of Jexcess for H04P08 and H03P06 were 190% and 177% times, respectively, the value of Jnormal.






Test
H02P04
H03P06
H04P08




Normal detecting area (cm2)
0.327
0.327
0.327
0.327


Excess detecting area (cm2)
0.000
0.165
0.165
0.165


Total photocurrent (mA)
1.430
2.197
2.710
2.800


Normal current (mA)
1.430
1.430
1.430
1.430


Excess current (mA)
0.000
0.767
1.280
1.370


Normal current density, Jnormal (mA cm−2)
4.377
4.377
4.377
4.377


Excess current density, Jexcess (mA cm−2)
0.000
4.651
7.758
8.303


Percentage (=Jexcess/Jnormal)
0%
106%
177%
190%




Our experimentally measured results were in agreement with the simulated optical analyses in Fig. 2 and 3. In addition, we found that the values of Jexcess for samples H04P08 and H03P06 were 190% and 177% times, respectively, the value of Jnormal. Using the example of H04P08 in Table 1, although the excess detecting area was half of the normal detecting area, the value of Iexcess was 1.37 mA, quite close to that of Inormal (1.43 mA). Furthermore, once the spectral design of the appropriate SPR was optimized, the ratio of Jexcess to Jnormal was greater than 1, indicating that the photocurrent generation was more efficient within the unit area of the optical sub-wavelength structure on the metal finger electrode than it was in the normal detecting area of a conventional solar cell. In conventional solar cells, the photocurrent is produced directly only within the light detection area. Therefore, a tradeoff exists between the area of the metal finger electrodes and that of the light detection area. A larger light detection area implies a lower area for the metal finger electrodes, thereby increasing the possibility of recombination of the photo generated carriers as they drift toward the metal finger electrodes. Consequently, sub-wavelength optical structures such as H04P08 and H03P06 not only break the tradeoff rule for conventional solar cells but also allow the additional harvesting of incident light energy at the surface of metal finger electrodes.

Fig. 6 displays the distributions of the normal photocurrent densities Jnormal of the Test sample and excess photocurrent density Jexcess of H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08 (Table 1) under different biasing voltages. H02P04, H04P08, and H03P06 with various optical sub-wavelength structures (hole arrays) spread upon the metal finger electrodes; these devices featured an identical metal finger electrode design, an excess of the detecting area, and the absence of an anti-reflection coating, and were measured under a fixed illumination intensity. All of the samples could be operated at biasing voltages as low as 0 V and provided an explicit increase in the photocurrent density (Jexcess and Jnormal). The excess photocurrent densities (Jexcess) of H03P06 and H04P08 were uniformly higher than those of the H02P04 and Test devices at bias voltages ranging from +0.3 V to −0.5 V. The difference in the values of Jexcess between H03P06 (or H04P08) and H02P04 was independent of the supplied voltage as long as these devices were operated in the reverse-biased mode. The photocurrent densities of the Test and H02P04 samples were approximately equal, indicating that H02P04 could not provide a photocurrent output as effective as those of H03P06 and H04P08 in the AM 1.5 wavelength regime for a Si solar cell. These experimental results are in good agreement with of the modeled optical analyses in Fig. 2 and 3. To improve the photocurrent output, the transmission peak of the SPR can be designed to reside at a wavelength near 630 (H03P06) or 810 nm (H04P08) by providing a hole diameter larger than that of H02P04 to ensure coverage of a broader bandwidth of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 6  Distributions of the dark and photocurrent densities extracted under various biasing voltages, identical metal finger electrode areas, and a fixed illuminating intensity. The excess photocurrent densities (Jexcess) of the device with large hole arrays over their metal finger electrodes (i.e., H03P06 and H04P08) were higher than photocurrent densities of the Test (Jnormal) and H02P04 (Jexcess) devices. These results are consistent with those of the optical analyses in Fig. 2 and 3. To improve the photocurrent output, the spectral peak of the SPR can be positioned at a wavelength near 630 (H03P06) or 810 (H04P08) nm, rather than near 500 nm (H02P04), the maximum intensity of the solar spectrum. 
The difference between the decreasing electrode area and the SPR effect induced EOT phenomenon on the finger electrodes for enhancing the efficiency of solar cells could be further explained in the schematic diagram of Fig. 7(a). As displayed in (i) of Fig. 7(a), the metal electrode having an area of A, there will be no photocurrent generation underneath the opaque electrode. The photocurrent density JA should be zero. As displayed in (ii) of Fig. 7(a), then, we decreased the area of the metal electrode to (A – B). The photocurrent density would be increased by the open area B to induce the current density of JB. As displayed in (iii) of Fig. 7(a), we prepared the metallic hole arrays with identical single hole areas named C1, C2,…, Cn. The sum of individual hole areas (C1 + C2… + Cn), named total area C, was designed to be equal to the area B (i.e. the area C1 + C2… + Cn = B). The photocurrent density induced in area C is called Jc. Generally, the same light receiving area would provide the photocurrent equally. In this study, from the measured results, Jc is obviously larger than the JB under the condition of the identical light receiving area. Please see the measured result in Table 1. It is because of the Jc contributed from the EOT phenomenon induced by the SPR effect, and not only the contribution from the decreased area of the metal electrode. Moreover, when the incident light illuminated on the metal (opaque) region, the periodic hole-arrays would couple and collect the incident light into the SPP wave, and then the wave can propagate through the hole-array structure.2 Therefore, over 100% ratio of excess current density is possible in this study.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram for the explanation of the difference between photocurrent increased from decreasing metal electrode area and contributed from EOT phenomenon induced by the SPR effect. (b) Normalized EQEs calculated from eqn (3) to verify the contributions of metallic hole arrays within unit area of the simple metal finger electrode. “Meta Finger-Electrode without SPR” denotes the metal finger electrode operated without the SPR effect; it exhibited the lowest normalized EQE. When an SPR was induced by a metal hole array over the metal finger electrode, the normalized EQE (EQE per unit area) underwent a significant improvement, matching the ratio (enhancement factor) of the excess current density (Jexcess) to the normal current density (Jnormal) in Table 1. This approach, without employing a conventional optical anti-reflection coating, allows harvesting of EOT light through SPR excitation over the metal electrode, with distinctly improved EQEs over the solar spectrum. 

Fig. 7(b) displays the normalized EQEs determined using the equation: (3)where Isc is the short-circuit photocurrent; λ and Pin are the wavelength and power of the incident light, respectively; and AHole array and AIlluminated are the entire area of the metallic holes spread over the metal electrode and the overall illuminated area of the device, respectively. In short, the normalized EQE is the EQE per unit illuminated device area, allowing verification of the contributions of the hole arrays within the metal finger electrode. For characterizing the SPR effect on finger electrodes, the totally open area of different hole-array structures should be equal. Therefore, the difference between general EQE and normalized EQE equations is the normalization of total hole-area under the fixed illuminated area. Metal Finger-Electrode without SPR in Fig. 7(b) denotes the metal finger electrode without SPR; it provided the lowest normalized EQE because of the high optical reflection and absorption properties of the metal electrode. Our experimental results revealed that the spectral peaks of H03P06 and H04P08 appeared near 630 and 810 nm, respectively, consistent with the optical analyses of the SPR spectral peaks in Fig. 2 and providing peak values for the normalized EQEs of approximately 160 and 179%, respectively. Notably, in the high-intensity regime of the AM 1.5 spectrum (light wavelengths from 500 to 650 nm), both H03P06 and H04P08 exhibited significant normalized EQEs, as high as 150%, proving that additional photocurrent was generated through the SPR effect in the metal electrode region. Furthermore, as long as an appropriate SPR was induced by metal hole arrays over the metal finger electrodes, as in H03P06 and H04P08 (Fig. 2), the normalized EQE resulted in a significant EQE improvement, meeting the ratio (enhancement factor) of the excess current density (Jexcess) to the normal current density (Jnormal) in Table 1 (177% for H03P06; 190% for H04P08). Therefore, this approach, without employing an optical anti-reflection coating, of harvesting EOT light through SPR excitation over metal electrodes provides superior EQEs in AM 1.5 spectra.

Fig. 8 displays the measured efficiencies of solar cells featuring different metal electrode coverage, including variations in the metal electrode layout area and the presence or absence of metallic hole arrays over the electrodes. All devices were created using identical processing conditions. In general, a metal electrode having a larger area provided lower efficiency, due to the lower degree of absorption in the Si region. In the conventional solar cells that operated without the SPR effect, the percentage of the metal electrode area within the whole device was approximately 10–15%; we designed an electrode layout having an area similar to that of this “contrast device” to investigate the improvement in solar cell efficiency for the devices operated with the SPR effect. According to the experimental results in Fig. 8, for a fixed device area and an identical percentage of the metal electrode area (15%), the efficiency increased from 10.89% for the “contrast device” to 12.33% for the device operated with the SPR effect. Notably, when half of the device area was covered by the metal electrode (50% in Fig. 8), the efficiency of the SPR device was similar to that of the “contrast device” (15% metal electrode), implying that a portion of the metal electrode in the 50% metal electrode device was in effect invisible because of the SPR effect. We observed similar behavior when comparing the performance of the 50% metal electrode device without the SPR effect with that of the 80% metal electrode device with the SPR effect. Therefore, the negative effect of covering the absorption area of a Si solar cell with an opaque metal finger electrode can be minimized by exploiting the SPR effect. In this study, we verified, both theoretically and experimentally, that the efficiency of solar cells can be enhanced through increased harvesting of incident light energy over metal electrodes without the need for anti-reflection coatings.
 Fig. 8  Measured efficiencies of solar cells featuring various metal electrode arrangements (i.e., different metal electrode layout areas; electrodes with and without metallic hole arrays). Devices operating with and without SPR effects are marked with red and black symbols, respectively. A commercial solar cell operated without the SPR effect is denoted as the “contrast device”. For a fixed device area and an identical percentage of the metal electrode (15%), the efficiency increased from 10.89% for the “contrast device” to 12.33% for the SPR device and with about 13% enhancement of the efficiency. Notably, the efficiency of the SPR device featuring half of its area covered by the metal electrode was similar to that of the “contrast device” featuring a metal electrode coverage of only 15%, implying that a portion of the metal electrode in the 50%-coverage device was, in effect, invisible as a result of the SPR effect. 
4 Conclusions
The photoelectric conversion efficiency of a conventional crystalline Si solar cell can be improved by using the SPR effect to harvest the incident light energy over the metal finger electrodes. For this technique, we used standard semiconductor processing to prepare conventional Si solar cells featuring metallic hole array structures on their metal finger electrodes. We patterned metallic hole arrays with specific diameters and periods on the metal finger electrodes to stimulate the SPR phenomenon within both the visible and NIR regimes. 3D-FDTD simulations revealed that incident light within the visible and NIR regimes could be transmitted through the metallic hole array structures providing an SPR peak in the NIR regime. To improve the photocurrent output, the transmission peak of the SPR could be optimized through patterning with a larger hole diameter. For a typical conventional solar cell, the light absorption regions (the n+–p junction) that are covered by metal finger electrodes cannot generate a photocurrent; in this study, however, we took advantage of the EOT phenomenon introduced by the SPR effect to dramatically increase the degree of light harvesting beneath the metal electrodes, thereby improving the overall efficiency of the solar cell. Experimentally, we found that the excess photocurrent density of the optimized device was 190% times the normal current density of a standard solar cell; EQE measurements confirmed the enhanced efficiency. Therefore, the negative effect of covering the absorption area with an opaque metal finger electrode can be minimized or eliminated by exploiting SPR effects on metal electrodes. In this study, using the SPR approach provided enhanced efficiency, not only breaking the tradeoff rule for metallic electrodes in conventional solar cells but also allowing additional harvesting of incident light energy over the surfaces of the metal finger electrodes.
Notes and references
H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev., 1944, 66, 163 CrossRef .
T. W. Ebbesen and H. J. Lezec, Nature, 1998, 391, 12 CrossRef .
W. L. Barnes and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 14 CrossRef .
C. Genet and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2007, 445, 4 CrossRef .
L. Yin and V. K. Vlasko-Vlasov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3 Search PubMed .
S. R. Wenham, J. Zhao, X. Dai, A. Wang and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 377 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Selj, T. T. Mongstad, R. Søndena and E. S. Marstein, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2576 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. da Silva, A. D. S. Côrtes, M. H. Oliveira, Jr, E. F. Motta, G. A. Viana, P. R. Mei and F. C. Marques, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 043510 CrossRef .
J. Ko, D. Gong, K. Pillai, K. S. Lee, M. Ju, P. Choi, K. R. Kim, J. Yi and B. Choi, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 6887 CrossRef CAS .
L. Remache, E. Fourmond, A. Mahdjoub, J. Dupuis and M. Lemiti, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 17, 645 Search PubMed .
S. S. Lo, C. C. Chen, F. Garwe and T. Pertch, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 754 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Kuo, D. J. Poxson, Y. S. Kim, F. W. Mont, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert and S. Y. Lin, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33(issue 21), 2527 CrossRef .
J. Y. Chen, W. L. Chang, C. K. Huang and K. W. Sun, Opt. Express, 2011, 19(issue 15), 14411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, K. L. Ching, Q. Lin, S. F. Leung, D. Arcrossito and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(11), 929 Search PubMed .
M. A. Tsai, H. W. Han, Y. L. Tsai, P. C. Tseng, P. Yu, H. C. Kuo, C. H. Shen, J. M. Shieh and S. H. Lin, Opt. Express, 2011, 19(issue S4), A757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 182110 CrossRef .
W. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Geng, F. Yang and J. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 693 CrossRef CAS .
D. Derkacs, W. V. Chen, P. M. Matheu, S. H. Lim and P. K. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 091107 CrossRef .
Pillai, 
            et al.
          , J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093105 CrossRef .
K. R. Catchpole and S. Pillai, J. Lumin., 2006, 121, 315 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ebner, M. Radike, V. Schlosser and J. Summhammer, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2003, 11(1), 13 Search PubMed .
S. S. Georgiev, Solid-State Electron., 2007, 51, 376 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Kerschavery and G. Beaucarne, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14, 107 Search PubMed .
T. Thio, H. F. Ghaemi, H. J. Lezec, P. A. Wolff and T. W. Ebbesen, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1999, 16, 1743 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krishnan, T. Thio, T. Kim, J. H. J. Lezec, T. W. Ebbesen, P. A. Wolff, J. Pendry, L. M. Moreno and F. J. Garcia-Vidal, Opt. Commun., 2001, 200, 1 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Barnes, W. A. Murray, J. Dintinger, E. Devaux and T. W. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 107401 CrossRef CAS .
E. Popov, N. Bonod, M. Nevière, H. Rigneault, P. F. Lenne and P. Chaumet, Appl. Opt., 2005, 44(no. 12), 20 CrossRef .
C. C. Chen, M. Aykol, C. C. Chang, A. F. J. Levi and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
This study presents a useful technique to enhance photoelectric conversion efficiency of a conventional crystalline Si solar cell by using the surface plasma resonance (SPR) effect to harvest the incident light energy over the metal finger electrodes in a standard semiconductor process. According to the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D-FDTD) simulations, we prepared samples featuring metallic hole array structures on their metal finger electrodes with specific diameters and periods to stimulate the SPR phenomenon within both the visible and NIR regimes. Experimentally, we found that the excess photocurrent density of the optimized device was 190% times the normal current density of a standard solar cell; normalized external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements confirmed the enhanced efficiency. Therefore, the negative effect of covering the absorption area with an opaque metal finger electrode can be minimized by exploiting SPR effects on metal electrodes. In this study, using the SPR approach provided enhanced efficiency, not only breaking the tradeoff rule for metallic electrodes in conventional solar cells but also allowing additional harvesting of incident light energy over the surfaces of the metal finger electrodes.

ksp = k0 sin θ ± mGx ± nGy	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a tested device. (a) Cross-sectional view of a device featuring a metal hole array, for the SPR effect, on the Al electrode. (b) Top view of a device for mimicking a conventional solar cell; (left) the opaque metal finger electrodes are colored gray; expanded inset (right): design of the electrode for the suggested SPR effect.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Layout of the 3D-FDTD simulation, placing Detectors 1–3 at the air–Al interface, 100 nm below the air–Al interface, and at the SiO2–Si interface, respectively. (b)–(d) Calculated behavior of the H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08 devices, respectively, toward incident light passing through the metal hole arrays. The intensity at the transmitted peaks decreased from Detector 1 to Detector 3, but the transmitted intensity of light having wavelengths less than the transmitted peak wavelength remained almost unchanged.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated electric field distributions, determined using the FDTD layout setting in Fig. 2, after incident light had passed through the metallic hole arrays of (a)–(c) H02P04 and (d)–(f) H04P08 at wavelengths of (a and d) 450, (b and e) 650, and (c and f) 850 nm, respectively. The SPR phenomenon was more distinct for the metallic hole arrays of the H04P08 structure. Incident light from both the visible and NIR regimes could be transmitted through the metallic hole array structure of H04P08, providing an SPR peak in the NIR regime.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the metallic hole arrays on the metal finger electrodes of devices (a) H02P04, (b) H03P06, and (c) H04P08.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current–voltage performances of devices H02P04, H03P06, and H04P08, measured in a dark environment. The behaviors of devices with different hole array structures were similar to that of the Test sample, indicating that the presence of hole arrays over the metal finger electrodes had no impact on performance. Furthermore, these hole arrays functioned poorly in the absence of illumination.	 

Normal detecting area (cm2)	0.327	0.327	0.327	0.327
Excess detecting area (cm2)	0.000	0.165	0.165	0.165
Total photocurrent (mA)	1.430	2.197	2.710	2.800
Normal current (mA)	1.430	1.430	1.430	1.430
Excess current (mA)	0.000	0.767	1.280	1.370
Normal current density, Jnormal (mA cm−2)	4.377	4.377	4.377	4.377
Excess current density, Jexcess (mA cm−2)	0.000	4.651	7.758	8.303
Percentage (=Jexcess/Jnormal)	0%	106%	177%	190%

 	Fig. 6  Distributions of the dark and photocurrent densities extracted under various biasing voltages, identical metal finger electrode areas, and a fixed illuminating intensity. The excess photocurrent densities (Jexcess) of the device with large hole arrays over their metal finger electrodes (i.e., H03P06 and H04P08) were higher than photocurrent densities of the Test (Jnormal) and H02P04 (Jexcess) devices. These results are consistent with those of the optical analyses in Fig. 2 and 3. To improve the photocurrent output, the spectral peak of the SPR can be positioned at a wavelength near 630 (H03P06) or 810 (H04P08) nm, rather than near 500 nm (H02P04), the maximum intensity of the solar spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram for the explanation of the difference between photocurrent increased from decreasing metal electrode area and contributed from EOT phenomenon induced by the SPR effect. (b) Normalized EQEs calculated from eqn (3) to verify the contributions of metallic hole arrays within unit area of the simple metal finger electrode. “Meta Finger-Electrode without SPR” denotes the metal finger electrode operated without the SPR effect; it exhibited the lowest normalized EQE. When an SPR was induced by a metal hole array over the metal finger electrode, the normalized EQE (EQE per unit area) underwent a significant improvement, matching the ratio (enhancement factor) of the excess current density (Jexcess) to the normal current density (Jnormal) in Table 1. This approach, without employing a conventional optical anti-reflection coating, allows harvesting of EOT light through SPR excitation over the metal electrode, with distinctly improved EQEs over the solar spectrum.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Measured efficiencies of solar cells featuring various metal electrode arrangements (i.e., different metal electrode layout areas; electrodes with and without metallic hole arrays). Devices operating with and without SPR effects are marked with red and black symbols, respectively. A commercial solar cell operated without the SPR effect is denoted as the “contrast device”. For a fixed device area and an identical percentage of the metal electrode (15%), the efficiency increased from 10.89% for the “contrast device” to 12.33% for the SPR device and with about 13% enhancement of the efficiency. Notably, the efficiency of the SPR device featuring half of its area covered by the metal electrode was similar to that of the “contrast device” featuring a metal electrode coverage of only 15%, implying that a portion of the metal electrode in the 50%-coverage device was, in effect, invisible as a result of the SPR effect.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
