Catalytic water oxidation at single metal sites  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21494F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21494F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8134-8157Catalytic water oxidation at single metal sites

        
          
            Rui 
            Cao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Wenzhen 
            Lai
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Pingwu 
            Du
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 100872. E-mail: ruicao@ruc.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion & Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, Anhui, China 230026. E-mail: dupingwu@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      27th February 2012
    , Accepted 12th April 2012First published on 12th April 2012AbstractNature utilizes solar energy to extract electrons and release protons from water, a process called photosynthetic water oxidation or oxygen evolution. This sunlight-driven reaction is vital to the planet because it directly produces dioxygen and couples with photosystem I to generate the reducing equivalents for the reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates (also known as CO2 fixation). Inspired by this natural process, people are intensely interested in water splitting using sunlight to convert and store solar energy into chemical energy, which is believed to be able to ultimately solve the energy problem that we are facing. Water splitting can be separated into two half reactions, namely water oxidation and water reduction, and they can be studied individually. Catalysts are very helpful in both reactions. Recent progress in finding new highly efficient water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) has shed light on this complicated four-electron/four-proton reaction and made it possible to catalyze water oxidation using mononuclear metal complexes. This article focuses on molecular catalysts that are able to perform catalytic water oxidation at single metal sites. Different series of catalysts (or precatalysts) made of ruthenium, iridium and earth abundant elements (iron, cobalt, and manganese) that can be applied in chemical, electrochemical and photochemical (light-driven) water oxidation are summarized, and their catalytic mechanisms are discussed in detail. Finally, the future outlook and perspective to design and develop catalysts that are efficient, cheap and stable are presented.Rui CaoRui Cao is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Renmin University of China. His main research interests are in bioinorganic chemistry, catalysis including water oxidation and the activation of small molecules, and molecular self-assembly. He received his B.S. (2003) in chemistry from Peking University in Beijing, China and Ph.D. (2008) from Emory University in Atlanta, GA. He was the Dreyfus Postdoctoral Fellow from 2009 to 2011 at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the Department of Chemistry under the guidance of the Arthur Amos Noyes Professor Stephen J. Lippard.Wenzhen LaiWenzhen Lai received her B.Sc. (2002) in chemistry from Sichuan University in China. Under the supervision of Prof. Daiqian Xie, she obtained her M.Sc. (2005) in physical chemistry from Sichuan University and Ph.D. (2008) in theoretical and computational chemistry from Nanjing University. After postdoctoral research (2008–2011) at the Hebrew University in the group of Prof. Sason Shaik, she joined Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China as an associate professor and principal investigator. Her main research interests are theoretical studies of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis by metal-containing catalysts.Pingwu DuPingwu Du received a Ph.D. degree from University of Rochester (2009) under the direction of Professor Richard Eisenberg. He is a Director's Fellow at Argonne National Laboratory and just took a professorship at University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). His current research interests are in inorganic and organometallic chemistry and photochemistry related to water splitting and catalysis. He is a recipient of the Young Investigator Award (Inorganic Division, 2008) and Nobel Laureate Signature Award (2011) by the American Chemical Society.

Broader context
The globally increasing energy demand and environmental issues directly caused by anthropogenic greenhouse-gas emissions have been forcing people to find and use renewable, clean and environmentally benign energy resources to replace fossil fuels. Nuclear energy has some practical problems, including environmental risks from uranium mining, nuclear waste, and serious nuclear accidents, although it is contended to be sustainable. Fresh water shortage is another major concern for the use of nuclear power. Wind power and hydroelectric power, as alternatives of fossil fuels, are clean, plentiful and renewable; however, both have to use a large area of land and have many other recognized disadvantages. Solar energy, the origin of nearly all energy forms on the planet, is the most promising energy source for future consumption. In order to harvest solar energy, we need to first convert it to chemical energy and/or electricity and store it in a chemical form. Nature uses a sophisticated mechanism of photosynthesis to oxidize water by using solar light. The resulting dioxygen is released as a byproduct, while the protons and electrons extracted from water are brought into the reduction of carbon dioxide, a process storing light energy in chemical forms. Artificial photosynthesis is an attractive way for human beings to use solar energy. By splitting water with light to dioxygen, protons and electrons as nature does, followed by storing solar energy in hydrogen or other chemical forms (i.e. carbohydrates), we can make sustainable fuel sources on demand. Thus, photocatalytic water oxidation is the key step toward the conversion of solar energy to chemical energy. However, the oxidative reaction leading to O2 formation from water is challenging in both thermodynamic (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, ΔE = 1.23 V vs. NHE) and kinetic (significant molecular rearrangement) aspects. As a result, catalysts for water oxidation are crucial, and research to design and develop efficient water oxidation catalysts has been attracting significant attention from chemists and material scientists in the last three decades. A variety of water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) that are molecular complexes, supramolecular assemblies, nanostructured metal oxides, and devices made of active WOC species have been reported in the literature to perform this reaction chemically, electrochemically, and photochemically. These studies have greatly increased our understanding of water oxidation. This article presents an overview of molecular WOCs that contain only one metal center, which are proven to be as efficient as multinuclear WOCs but are considered to be a system more amenable to carry out mechanistic studies. We also draw an outlook for the design of efficient, cheap and stable catalysts.

1. Introduction
In 2010, eighty-one percent of the total global energy supply was from fossil fuels, including coal/peat, petroleum, and natural gas.1 The use of fossil fuels, however, has caused serious concerns. First and foremost, fossil fuels are formed by complicated natural processes over millions of years and are considered to be unsustainable and non-renewable. It is estimated that more than fifty percent of total reserves have been consumed since the industrial revolution. Despite the growth of non-fossil energy, the world energy supply from fossil fuels has remained relatively unchanged over the past three decades.1 In addition, the production and consumption of fossil fuels cause various environmental problems. For example, the emission of greenhouse gases, in particular carbon dioxide, possibly contributes to global warming with major adverse effects. A highlight from International Energy Agency (IEA) reported that the use of fossil fuels accounted for over eighty percent of the emissions of anthropogenic greenhouse gases in 2009.2 As a result, finding a clean, sustainable, and environmentally benign energy alternative has attracted major attention and has become an impending task for our society.
Solar energy is clean and sustainable. In consideration that other possible energy resources, including nuclear power, wind and hydroelectric power, all have their recognized disadvantages, solar energy is believed to be the most promising and attractive alternative for future uses. Direct conversion of solar radiation into electricity (known as solar cells, such as organic photovoltaic devices and dye-sensitized solar cells) and the conversion and storage of solar energy into chemical energy are the two major strategies to harvest light.3 Nature utilizes chlorophyll to capture light and convert it to chemical forms through a series of photochemical and chemical reactions together known as the Z-scheme of photosynthesis.4–6 The oxidation of water, occurring at the oxygen evolution center (OEC) of photosystem II (PS II), initiates this process and plays a crucial role in photosynthesis. In PS II, absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll P680 triggers proton coupled electron extraction from the Mn4Ca cluster at the OEC.5,7 The total of four turnovers provides four oxidizing equivalents stored at the Mn4Ca core to convert two water molecules into dioxygen. Four protons and four electrons are produced in this oxidative reaction, and this reducing power is ultimately stored in chemical bonds/forms as carbohydrates in subsequent carbon dioxide fixation. Water oxidation performed by the natural system is essential for the planet because it offers a way to harvest sunlight, evolve oxygen, and produce carbohydrates (and even fossil fuels) that are fundamental energy resources we are consuming.
By mimicking this natural system, artificial photosynthesis is designed to perform catalytic water oxidation using light and store the resulting reducing power in chemical forms, such as carbohydrates, as nature does or hydrogen (from generated protons and electrons). The storage of solar energy in chemical bonds of hydrogen meets the needs of future energy resources.8 As an energy carrier, hydrogen fuel is free of carbon and only produces water during chemical (internal combustion engine) or electrochemical (fuel cell) reaction with oxygen. Current industrial production of hydrogen is mainly from steam–methane reforming of natural gas, which requires high temperature and still emits carbon dioxide.9,10 Only a very small amount of current supply is contributed by direct water electrolysis. Thus, the design of efficient artificial photosynthesis systems for water splitting using solar energy has become one of the leading research objectives.
In principle, water splitting can be divided into two half reactions, namely water oxidation (to make O2) and water reduction (to make H2 fuel). Therefore, the two half reactions can be investigated independently. The evolution of hydrogen from protons and electrons is thermodynamically favorable once they are extracted from water. Catalysts for this reaction have been widely developed, and recent progress has been well summarized in several good review articles.11–16 On the other hand, water oxidation is thermodynamically unfavorable; and more seriously, it requires the removal of four protons and four electrons from two water molecules and the formation of an oxygen–oxygen bond, which collaboratively make this reaction highly challenging from a kinetic point of view. As a consequence, water oxidation is considered to be the limiting step in water splitting. Nature uses a Mn4Ca cluster to catalyze this reaction.17–20 The structure of the Mn4Ca core and its catalytic mechanism for water oxidation have been intensively studied and discussed.17–32 This natural occurrence as well as the experimental outcomes, before a very recent breakthrough in mononuclear WOCs, made people believe, for decades, that multinuclear metal centers were required for this catalysis.33 It is also broadly accepted that multimetal centers are able to facilitate the distribution of the total of four oxidizing equivalents accumulated for oxidizing water and as a result to stabilize WOC intermediates during catalysis. In this series, several notable WOCs that are molecular complexes and supramolecular assemblies34 have been well characterized—tetramanganese,35–38 dimanganese,39,40 tetracobalt,41 tetraruthenium42,43 and diruthenium complexes,44–49 to name a few. It is also noteworthy that a large number of heterogeneous catalysts made of nano-structured metal oxides (Mn, Co, Fe, Ru, and Ir) and electrocatalytic and photocatalytic devices employing active WOC species have been reported to split water efficiently.9,50–68 Because this research is beyond the scope of this review, and many excellent reviews on these topics are available in the literature, they will not be covered in this article.
During the course of developing new Ru-based WOCs and studying their reaction mechanisms, catalytic water oxidation was found to be able to take place at a single metal site.33,69,70 This result stimulated the research of mononuclear WOCs that are made of Ru and other metals, including Ir and earth-abundant elements (Fe, Co, and Mn). Besides the fact that mononuclear metal complexes are capable of catalyzing water oxidation as efficiently as multinuclear metal complexes, research on single site WOCs has attracted much attention recently possibly due to the following reasons, although some of them may be debatable.
• They meet the current need for atom economy, which is especially true for those WOCs made of rare and expensive noble metal elements.
• The ligand design, synthesis and characterization of the desired molecular metal complexes are straightforward.
• Ligand effects on both the efficiency and stability of catalysts can be thoroughly adjusted and tuned readily.
• The relationship between geometric and electronic structures of mononuclear WOCs and their catalytic activities can be systematically studied.
• It is amenable to perform mechanistic studies using mononuclear WOCs from both experimental and theoretical points of view. Kinetic studies using single-site WOCs are relatively simple based on their well-defined spectroscopic and electrochemical properties.
• It is feasible to incorporate the catalytic functions of one metal site and other properties, such as light absorption, in the same molecular assemblies to construct devices that are crucial for practical water oxidation.
In this article, we briefly review recent progress on WOCs made from single site metal complexes. Mononuclear Ru, Ir, Co, Fe, and Mn complexes are proven to be able to catalyze water oxidation with high rates and large turnover numbers. Chemical, electrochemical and photochemical water oxidation reactions in the presence of these WOCs are described, and their catalytic mechanisms are discussed, including the oxygen–oxygen bond formation. Ligand effects on both the efficiency and stability of catalysts are briefly introduced, which may contribute to the evolution of new single site WOCs in the future.
2. Chemical and electrochemical water oxidation using mononuclear catalysts
2.1. Ruthenium based catalysts for water oxidation
In 2005, Zong and Thummel first reported that mononuclear Ru complexes 1a–c (Scheme 1) with a tridentate ligand were able to catalyze the oxidation of water using Ce(IV) as an oxidant.69 The Ru-bound aqua group has a H-bonding interaction with an uncomplexed naphthyridine nitrogen, which helps to stabilize the aqua complex and prevents the formation of Cl-bridged dimers. Electrochemical studies showed that electron donors assist oxidation of Ru(II) to Ru(III) with 1a having the lowest potential at 0.91 V vs. SCE, a trend seen in previous dinuclear examples. Complex 1b, however, shows the highest catalytic activity probably because the dimethylamino group in 1a is protonated under reaction conditions (pH = 1.0) and thus behaves more like an electron acceptor than a donor group.
 Scheme 1 
The lack of detailed mechanistic studies in this communication raised three main questions: (1) is RuO2 produced by oxidative decomposition of the examined Ru complexes the real catalyst for water oxidation? (2) Does an oxo-bridged Ru–O–Ru dimer form upon the oxidation of Ru centers, and does this dimer complex instead of the monomer actually catalyze water oxidation? (3) What is a possible mechanism for this kind of mononuclear Ru complexes to oxidize water catalytically? In order to address these three questions and get more insights into catalytic water oxidation using mononuclear Ru complexes, Thummel and co-workers subsequently conducted a thorough mechanistic study. They synthesized 23 mononuclear Ru complexes, which can be divided into two classes of coordination spheres around Ru centers—N5Cl and N6.71 The electrochemical properties of these complexes were investigated, and their Ru(III)/Ru(II) reduction potentials ranged from 0.70 to 1.28 V vs. SCE. Complexes 2a–e (Scheme 1) were employed to study the ligand-electronegativity effect on catalytic activity. It was observed that a more electron-donating group will lower the Ru(III)/Ru(II) reduction potential and increase the initial rate of O2 evolution. Complex 3 having a 2-(pyrid-2′-yl)-1,8-naphthyridine (pynap) ligand (Scheme 1) showed the highest turnover number (TON = 1170) with a high initial rate (0.403 μmol min−1), probably due to a combination of delocalization and electronegativity in the bidentate pynap ligand.
The involvement of RuO2 during catalysis was not likely based on control experiments by substituting RuCl3, Ru(DMSO)4Cl2 and authentic RuO2 as the catalysts. In addition, the Ru complexes recovered after several turnovers showed unchanged behavior in 1H NMR, electronic absorption spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry, arguing against the oxidative decomposition of examined Ru complexes during catalysis. The dimerization of catalysts to give active oxo-bridged Ru–O–Ru species was also unlikely because the rates of oxygen evolution had a linear dependence on the catalyst concentration. As a further proof, complex 4 (Scheme 1), the structural analogue of 1b, was synthesized. The existence of two tert-butyl groups on each side would sterically prevent possible dimerization. Complexes 4 and 1b showed almost identical catalytic activity, a result strengthening the unimolecular nature of this process. Thummel and co-workers also conducted electronic structure calculations on possible reaction intermediates and proposed a tentative mechanism in which a seven-coordinate Ru(VI)O species was attacked by water to form the O–O bond; however, this scenario was not recommended by others (see below).
Another series of active mononuclear Ru(II) complexes reported in 2008 by Thummel and co-workers used a 1,10-phenanthroline backbone with additional ligating substitutions at 2,9-positions.72 These substitutions included 4-substituted pyrid-2-yl, quinolin-2-yl, 1,8-naphthyrid-2-yl, N-methyl imidazol-2-yl and N-methyl benzimidazol-2-yl groups. These ligands were designed in such a way that they coordinate a Ru(II) center in a tridentate way, while the other uncomplexed azaaromatic pendant could act as an internal base to assist the deprotonation of either the Ru-bound water or the water molecule attacking the RuO unit. However, crystallographic studies revealed that these ligands were able to distort considerably to bind a Ru(II) in a tetradentate equatorial plane with two axial positions occupied by 4-methylpyridine groups. Results from this work and previous studies further suggested that axial ligands had a stronger effect on the electronic absorption and redox properties of such complexes than equatorial ligands do. All these mononuclear N6-coordinate Ru(II) complexes presented moderate catalytic activities with TONs ranging from 146 to 416.
Masaoka and Sakai conducted a further study to compare the catalytic activity of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)Cl]+ (2a), first shown by Thummel to be active for water oxidation, and [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5) by substituting the chloro ligand in 2a with a water group.73 Examination showed that complex 5 was highly active and fairly stable as a WOC, and the unimolecular nature of this process was confirmed by kinetic studies showing a linear dependence of the initial rate of O2 evolution on catalyst concentrations. More importantly, four lines of evidence from this study suggested that 5 was the real catalyst while 2a was a precatalyst: the substitution of Cl by H2O in solution generated the active aqua species responsible for catalytic water oxidation. First, the aqua species 5 (TON = 178) was much more active than its chloro analogue 2a (TON = 87) under identical reaction conditions. Second, 2a had a long induction period (2–3 h), while 5 reached its maximum initial rate without any induction period. Third, the presence of NaCl (0.5 M) completely suppressed O2 evolution in an experiment using 2a as the catalyst because the Cl → H2O substitution was restrained, a result strongly arguing against the effectiveness of the chloro species for catalyzing water oxidation. Fourth, catalyst 5 could be recovered after several turnovers, as suggested by electronic absorption spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, while the same experiment using 2a could not have this important feature because of the substitution of the chloro species by water.
By using [Ru(tpy)(bpm)(OH2)]2+ (6) and [Ru(tpy)(bpz)(OH2)]2+ (7) (tpy is 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine; bpm is 2,2′-bipyrimidine; bpz is 2,2′-bipyrazine), Meyer and co-workers systematically investigated the catalytic water oxidation using single site Ru complexes and proposed a plausible mechanism (Scheme 2, black route) based on both thermodynamic and kinetic evidence.33 Intermediate [RuVO]3+ could be generated from [RuII–OH2]2+ electrochemically or chemically with addition of 3 equiv. of Ce(IV), and it rapidly reacted with water to give a peroxide complex, [RuIII–OOH]2+. Further one-electron oxidation of this peroxide species gave [RuIV(OO)]2+, which would have a seven-coordinate Ru center with an η2 bidentate peroxido ligand based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations and precedented [RuIV(OO)] structures. Subsequent decomposition of [RuIV(OO)]2+ to release O2 and regenerate [RuII–OH2]2+ was zero order in Ce(IV) and first order in the complex. Kinetic data showed that this decomposition of [RuIV(OO)]2+ was the rate-limiting step with k25 °C = 7.5 × 10−4 s−1. Importantly, intermediates [RuIVO]2+ (λmax = 430 (sh), 353 (sh), 336, and 324 nm) and [RuIV(OO)]2+ (λmax = 436, 358 (sh), 339 (sh), 316 (sh), and 286 nm) are fairly stable and can be detected spectroscopically. It was also shown in the work that the oxidation of water by [RuVO]3+ was thermodynamically more favorable than by [RuIVO]2+. For 6, the following equations exist at pH = 1.0. Similar results were observed for 7 except that the reactions were faster (k25 °C = 1.4 × 10−3 s−1 for the rate-limiting step). 2[RuVO]3+ + 3H2O → 2[RuII–OH2]2+ + 3/2O2 + 2H+, ΔG° = −0.90 eV(1) 2[RuIVO]2+ + 2H2O → 2[RuII–OH2]2+ + O2, ΔG° = +0.04 eV(2)
 Scheme 2  Water oxidation pathway established using single site Ru catalysts 6 and 7 (0.1 M HNO3, black route).33 An additional pathway determined using catalysts 6, 8 and 9 (1.0 M HNO3, red route).74 
In a subsequent study, Meyer and co-workers further investigated the mechanism of water oxidation catalyzed by 6.74 By using a combination of mixing and stopped-flow experiments, monitoring these processes with spectroscopic techniques and characterizing intermediates with chemical and physicochemical methods, two major improvements were made based on this work. First, an additional catalytic pathway was established (Scheme 2, red route) when the reaction was carried out under a more acidic condition. Instead of decomposing to give O2 and [RuII–OH2]2+, [RuIV(OO)]2+ was further oxidized by Ce(IV) to [RuV(OO)]3+, followed by rapid O2 evolution. This result is consistent with enhanced Ce(IV/III) oxidation potential at higher acid concentrations. Experimental rate constants involved in this scheme were obtained. Second, intermediate [RuIII–OOH]2+ was characterized by calculations and redox titrations with Fe(II). More importantly, by using analogues [Ru(Mebimpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (8) and [Ru(Mebimpy)(bpm)(OH2)]2+ (9), the resulting [RuIII–OOH]2+ species, [RuIII(Mebimpy)(bpy)(OOH)]2+ and [RuIII(Mebimpy)(bpm)(OOH)]2+, were now stable enough for spectroscopic and cyclic voltammetric (CV) studies.
In an independent study, Sakai and co-workers examined the catalytic properties of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5).75 Notably, they observed [RuVO]3+ spectroscopically with additional evidence from time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations. In addition to this significant result, they calculated the electronic structure of the highest-valence Ru intermediate. Their results showed that [RuVO]3+ did bear a substantial radical character on the oxygen atom: the Mulliken atomic spin density located over O is 0.61, and 0.40 over the Ru ion, and provided a possibility that a radical–radical coupling between [RuVO]3+ and HO–Ce(IV) might lead to the O–O bond formation (vide infra).
After establishing mechanistic details in single-Ru site water oxidation catalysis, Meyer and co-workers synthesized a series of mononuclear Ru polypyridyl complexes and examined their catalytic activities,76 with an aim to (1) see if water oxidation catalyzed by monomeric Ru complexes is a general phenomenon and (2) get more insights into the correlation between the molecular and electronic structure of the Ru complex and its catalytic efficiency. Screened Ru complexes are depicted in Scheme 3, and all are active toward Ce(IV)-based water oxidation. Complex trans-[Ru(tpy)(Mebim-py)(OH2)]2+ (10) is noteworthy as it is the first Ru–carbene derivative used for water oxidation catalysis. The structure of 10 was established by X-ray diffraction studies, which revealed a short Ru–C bond length of 1.943 Å and a long Ru–OH2 distance of 2.183 Å. The short Ru–C bond was an indication of multiple bonding characters and was consistent with a relatively large separation between Ru and its trans aqua group (Fig. 1). It is suggested by the authors that this structural feature might have an important effect on oxygen evolution as it could labilize its trans peroxido group (see below). Two main conclusions were drawn from this study. First, Ru polypyridyl aqua complexes with coordinated H2O molecules in general can catalyze water oxidation. Second, ligand environments around the Ru center have a strong influence on reaction rates and thermodynamics. For example, E° values of Ru(III)/Ru(II) 0.51–1.18 V, Ru(IV)/Ru(III) 0.74–1.54 V, and Ru(V)/Ru(IV) 1.40–1.72 V (vs. NHE) were observed in the entire series.
 Scheme 3 
 Fig. 1  X-Ray structure of complex trans-[Ru(tpy)(Mebim-py)(OH2)]2+ (10). 
The unique Ru–carbene complex 10 was shown to greatly advance electrocatalytic water oxidation in a subsequent work by the same group.77 They conducted detailed electrochemical studies on catalysts 10 and 8, and concluded that the catalytic mechanism of 10 was the same as 8. The enhanced reactivity of the Ru–carbene complex might be due to the strong trans effect of carbene, which could weaken the [RuVO]3+ bond and as a result assist its attack by water leading to the O–O bond formation. An experimentally observed H2O–D2O kinetic isotope effect for 10 (KIE = 3.6 at pH 1.0, and = 3.9 at pH 7.45) suggested that concerted atom–proton transfer (APT) (to a second water molecule or an added base) occurred to facilitate this O–O coupling step. This work is significant because it presents an example where the Ru–carbene species can remarkably advance catalytic water oxidation rates by affecting the electronic structure of the Ru center. Similar results were observed in Ir-based single site water oxidation catalysts by the introduction of Ir–carbene interactions (vide infra).
In addition to these seminal works by Meyer and co-workers, there are several representative studies addressing the effect of ligand electronic properties on the catalytic activity of Ru polypyridyl aqua complexes for water oxidation. Yagi and co-workers took the scaffold of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5) and synthesized a series of Ru(II) complexes [Ru(R-tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (11–14) with 4′-substituted tpy derivatives (Scheme 4).78 Complex 11 having a 4′-substituted ethoxy group on the tpy ligand is noteworthy because it shows the highest turnover frequency (TOF = 1.1 × 10−1 s−1), a number also comparable with high TOF values reported in the literature (i.e. 2.3 × 10−1 s−1 for complex [RuL(pic)3] where L = 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylate and pic = 4-picoline, see below). Crystallographic studies of 11 revealed that it had basically the same molecular structure as its parent complex 5, but the ethoxy group at the 4′-position of tpy considerably elongated the Ru–N and Ru–O bonds. The initial O2 evolution rates from Ce(IV) water oxidation catalyzed by complex [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ and its derivatives (11–14) are summarized in Table 1. A general trend can be deduced from this dataset, showing that stronger electron-donating groups such as ethoxy (EtO–) and methoxy (MeO–) are more effective in accelerating O2 evolution from water.
 Scheme 4 
Table 1 Summary of the initial rate of O2 evolution for catalysts 5, 11–14a




Compounds
Rtpy

ν
O2, nmol s−1





a Ce(IV) (0.1 M); [Ru(Rtpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (20 μM); pH = 1.0.






5

tpy
0.34



11

EtOtpy
4.4



12

MeOtpy
2.4



13

Metpy
0.61



14

Cltpy
0.43




Berlinguette and co-workers also used the scaffold of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5) to investigate how ligand properties could affect the electronic structure of the Ru center and as a consequence the catalytic activity of Ru polypyridyl aqua complexes.79 They installed a variety of substitutions, including both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups, at the tpy and/or bpy frameworks, and examined mononuclear Ru-catalyzed water oxidation in detail with emphasis on catalyst stability, activity and efficiency. Screened structures are shown in Scheme 5 and a general synthetic route toward these various Ru polypyridyl aqua complexes is drawn in Scheme 6. Four main conclusions were made from this work, which expands our understanding of the catalytic behavior of mononuclear Ru polypyridyl complexes.
 Scheme 5 
 Scheme 6 
• It is unlikely that RuO2, a potential oxidative decomposition product, is the real catalyst for Ce(IV)-based water oxidation because (a) authentic RuO2 and simple Ru complexes (i.e. Ru(ClO4)3, [Ru(tpy)(OH2)3](ClO4)3 and RuCl3) showed very low activity under identical reaction conditions; (b) catalysts could be recovered after catalysis; and (c) RuO2 would be oxidized to inactive RuO4 under the Ce–Ru molar ratio used in the current experiments.
• Chloro species are precatalysts and will convert to aqua species for catalysis. A seven-coordinate Ru intermediate retaining the Ru–Cl bond as initially suggested by Thummel is questionable. This assessment is based on the following: (a) chloro species had a long induction period, while aqua ones typically did not; (b) the catalytic activities of Ru–aqua complexes were significantly decreased in the presence of competing ligands, such as acetonitrile and chloride anion; (c) the oxidation states of Ru(IV) and Ru(V) were not accessible under catalytic conditions due to the lack of charge stabilization by proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes; and (d) the conversion of the chloro to the aqua species was observed by electronic absorption and NMR spectroscopies upon its dissolution in aqueous media.
• Dissociation of the bpy ligand accounts for catalyst decomposition under strong oxidative environments. The resulting 2,2′-bipyridine N,N′-dioxide was detected by 1H-NMR and mass spectrometry. Dissociation of tpy from the Ru site was not observed under current reaction conditions. In addition, the introduction of appropriate electron-withdrawing groups can diminish the possibility of this dissociation pathway.
• There is a strong correlation between the catalyst activity and stability and the position and identity of various substitutions on polypyridyl frameworks. In general, electron-donating groups can enhance the initial rate of O2 evolution but will decrease catalyst stability and thus turnover numbers. On the other hand, electron-withdrawing substitutions affect the catalysis in an opposite way: they can suppress catalytic activity but increase catalyst stability.
In their subsequent studies, Berlinguette and co-workers investigated the catalytic activities of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5) and its two derivatives, [Ru(tpy)(bpy-R)(OH2)]2+ (R = –OMe for 15 and –COOH for 16; bpy–OMe = 4,4′-dimethoxy-2,2′-bipyridine; and bpy–COOH = 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine, see Scheme 5).80 Substitutions on bpy ligands were selected because they showed stronger influences on the catalytic behavior than substitutions on tpy ligands did probably because one of the pyridyl rings of bpy locates trans to the Ru–O bond. Based on the observed results, Berlinguette and co-workers concluded that the electron density at metal sites and reaction conditions (i.e. pH, Ce(IV) concentration and anions) can affect catalyst activity and stability and change rate-determining steps, and more importantly, can make additional supplementary reaction pathways accessible in single site Ru-catalyzed water oxidation. These results will be presented in the following section of mechanistic studies.
Very recently, Thummel and co-workers studied a family of 28 mononuclear Ru(II) complexes as catalysts for water oxidation.81 All these complexes possess a tpy ligand or a tridentate ligand closely related to tpy; two coordination sites of the Ru(II) center are occupied by either one bpy-type bidentate ligand or two axial pic molecules; the remaining site is filled by a monodentate halogen (Br, Cl, or I) or a water molecule. This detailed structure–activity study uncovered several important features of Ce(IV) water oxidation catalyzed by this series of mononuclear Ru polypyridyl complexes. First, catalysts with two pic molecules are often more active than those containing a bpy-type bidentate ligand. Second, iodide-containing catalysts show first-order behavior. Unlike the bromo- and chloro-catalysts, they have unusually high initial rates, which may suggest that I–H2O exchanges do not take place. Third, the introduction of tert-butyl groups at the 4, 4′, and 4′′-positions of a tpy scaffold sometimes improves catalyst activity, although the effects of steric strain and hindrance around the metal center are still not very clear.
The role of an acid medium in affecting the catalysis of [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5) for Ce(IV)-based water oxidation was systematically studied by Berlinguette and co-workers.82 Four different acids, including H2SO4, CF3SO3H (HOTf), HClO4 and HNO3, were examined at two (1.0 and 0.1 M) different concentrations. The results showed that the O2 evolution rate catalyzed by 5 had a strong dependence on pH and also on the identity of the acid. The observed reaction rate gradually increased in the following order: H2SO4, CF3SO3H (HOTf), HClO4 and HNO3. It is well accepted that the formal oxidation potential of oxidant ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN) is pH dependent. However, it is found in this work that the oxidizing capacity of CAN is not very sensitive to the acid medium, although an acid anion can indeed affect the identity of CAN in solution and thus change the electron density on Ce(IV), and can play an important role in the light-driven decomposition of Ce(IV). More significantly, comprehensive kinetic studies confirmed that an acid medium had a considerable impact on single reaction steps in 5-catalyzed water oxidation, such as the stepwise oxidation of the catalyst, the formation of the O–O bond, and the release of O2, and, to some extent, changed the rate-limiting step for catalysis. The uniqueness of NO3− in these processes was attributed to its ability and relatively high basicity to: (1) enhance electron-transfer steps; (2) assist the O–O bond formation step through a concerted atom–proton transfer process (vide infra); and (3) accelerate the liberation of oxygen from the catalyst. This study highlights the fact that Ce(IV) water oxidation catalysis of this type is dependent on a number of experimental parameters.
Base-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer (APT) in O–O bond formation in single site Ru-catalyzed water oxidation was originally advanced and experimentally proved by Meyer and co-workers.83 By using [Ru(Mebimpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (8), they revealed that the formation of an O–O bond by the attack of a H2O molecule to [RuVO]3+, the rate-limiting step of this catalysis, could be significantly accelerated in such a way that O-atom transfer to the O atom of H2O was in concert with proton transfer to the added base. This base-caused enhancement was observed in solution with 8 and also on the surfaces of oxide electrodes having a phosphonated derivative of 8 attached ({Ru(Mebimpy)[4,4′-((HO)2OPCH2)2bpy](OH2)}2+, 8-PO3H2, Scheme 3, bottom left). It is worth noting here that previous studies clearly demonstrated that surface-bound single site Ru polypyridyl complexes, such as 8-PO3H2 and [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-PO3H2-bpy)]2+, preserve their chemical and physical properties, including their electrocatalytic abilities for water oxidation.84–86
The idea of base-assisted APT came from computational studies using the quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical-minimal free energy path (QM/MM-MFEP) method, which showed that a second water molecule participated to assist proton release during the O–O coupling step.83 This scenario could avoid the formation of a high energy hydrogen peroxide intermediate [RuIII(Mebimpy)(bpy)(OOH2)]3+. The new kO–O, the rate constant for the O–O bond formation, now contains two components: kO–O = kH2O + kB[B]; constants kB for different bases are summarized in Table 2. From this dataset, it can be easily calculated that for 0.1 M added HPO42−, the rate enhancement is about 1500 compared to H2O as the acceptor base. This result is significant in three aspects. First, it increases our understanding of single site Ru-catalyzed water oxidation, in particular the O–O bond formation step. Second, it provides a way to increase catalytic performance for water oxidation based on mechanistic insights. Third, it relates to the O2 evolution in the natural PS II system: neighboring amino acid residues in the OEC may function similarly as a base to facilitate H2O attacking on a MnO unit (see the following part of Mn-catalyzed water oxidation).
Table 2 Constants kB in the APT process for different bases




Base
pKa (HB)

k
B (M−1 s−1)




H2PO4−
2.15
3.8 ± 0.5


OAc−
4.75
10.3 ± 1


HPO42−
7.20
48 ± 5


H2O
−1.74

k
H2O = 3.5 × 10−3 s−1




Sun and co-workers reported another type of single site Ru-based catalysts for water oxidation. A very high TON of 2000 was achieved by using complex [RuL1(pic)3]2+ (17) with its molecular structure shown in Scheme 7.87 Kinetic studies revealed that 17 was a precatalyst: exchange between the pic ligands and solvent water molecules occurred to give [RuL1(pic)2(H2O)]2+ as the real catalyst for water oxidation. This assessment was based on the fact that catalysis by 17 had a long induction period (about 3 h), a phenomenon also observed in the case of a structural analogue [Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+.71 Other mononuclear Ru complexes by Sun were examined as photocatalysts for water oxidation and will be addressed in the next section.
 Scheme 7 
Above-mentioned examples are all polypyridyl-based mononuclear Ru complexes. The use of polypyridyl ligands is helpful to make robust Ru catalysts under strong oxidizing conditions (although oxidative decomposition of catalysts was still an issue in such systems) and to stabilize Ru high oxidation states. In addition, the modification of polypyridyl frameworks can be readily realized by installing various substitutions (either electron donors or acceptors) at different positions. This feature greatly enriches the library of single site Ru WOCs and makes it available for us to study the electronic effect of ligands on both catalyst activity and stability systematically. The use of phosphonated polypyridyl derivatives also provides a method to prepare surface-bound single site Ru WOCs.
In order to test whether water oxidation catalyzed by single site Ru complexes is a general phenomenon for other ligand systems, Sakai and co-workers first synthesized a series of mononuclear Ru complexes containing 1,4,7-triazacyclononane (tacn) ligands.88 Complexes [Ru(tmtacn)(R2bpy)(OH2)]2+ (tmtacn = 1,4,7-trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane; R2bpy = 4,4′-disubstituted-2,2′-bipyridines, R = H for 18a, Me for 18b, and OMe for 18c) all have a facially coordinated tmtacn ligand and a water site which is crucial for the catalytic activity as demonstrated in previous studies. The electrochemical properties of 18a–c were studied and were compared to their polypyridyl analogue [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (5). The oxidation potentials of Ru(III)/Ru(II) and Ru(IV)/Ru(III) couples of 18a–c are much lower than those of 5, which is consistent with the stronger σ-donating character and the lack of π-accepting ability of tmtacn in comparison with terpyridine. However, these features do not lower the overpotential for the electrocatalytic O2 evolution from water, probably because the tmtacn ligand has less influence on the oxidation potential of the [RuVO]3+/[RuIVO]2+ couple than the tpy ligand. The lowest oxidation potentials were observed in 18c because of the strong electron-donating methoxy groups on bpy. The catalytic activities of 18a–c for water oxidation were examined chemically using CAN as an oxidant. All three complexes were found to be active with moderate TONs (148–251), and the electron-donating group on bpy could enhance this catalytic activity. Importantly, 18a–c with tmtacn ligands are fairly stable under catalytic conditions as they could be quantitatively recovered after several turnovers.
Mononuclear Ru complexes made with the tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPA) ligand and its derivatives were proven to be active WOCs.89 Complexes [Ru(TPA)(H2O)2]2+ (19), [Ru(Me3TPA)(H2O)2]2+ (20) and [Ru(DPA-bpy)(H2O)]2+ (21) (Me3TPA = tris(6-methyl-2-pyridylmethyl)amine; DPA-bpy = N,N-bis(2-pyridinylmethyl)-2,2′-bipyridine-6-methanamine) were capable of catalyzing water oxidation chemically using Ce(IV) as an oxidant, although the highest TON of this series was 24. Oxidative decomposition of the catalysts was suggested due to the observation of CO2 during catalysis, which might account for the low efficiency of these three complexes.
Abnormal carbenes, such as triazolylidene ligands, were shown to afford highly active monomeric Ir WOCs (vide infra) because of their concurrent electron accepting and donating properties characterised by the unique mesoionic resonance. By employing these ligands, Albrecht and co-workers synthesized two series of competent single site Ru WOCs, namely 22a–d and 23a–d (Scheme 8).90 All these complexes were able to catalyze Ce(IV) water oxidation, and 23a was the most active WOC with both a high TON of 420 and TOF close to 7000 h−1. Catalysts 22a–d were not stable during catalysis as substantial amounts of CO2 were generated along with O2 evolution. This oxidative decomposition was attributed to the cymene moiety of 22a–d because 23a–c were stable under identical catalytic conditions. For 23a–c, O2 was released exclusively and no detectable CO2 was found in mass spectrometric analysis, confirming the oxidative stability of triazolylidene units. Complex 23d, however, produced a small amount of CO2 during reaction, which might be due to the cyclometalation of the N-bound phenyl group. Comparison of 23a with its structural analogue 24 (Scheme 8) containing a normal imidazol-2-ylidene NHC ligand is noteworthy. Unlike 23a, complex 24 was inefficient in catalyzing water oxidation chemically and produced significant quantities of CO2 in the reaction. This difference in catalytic water oxidation activity highlights the unique role of the abnormal triazolylidene scaffold.
 Scheme 8 
All inorganic polytungstate ligands are resistant to both oxidative and reductive decompositions, and their pronounced electron σ-donating and π-accepting abilities make them attractive inorganic ligands for WOCs. A number of competent WOCs, including tetracobalt41 and tetraruthenium42,43,91 species, have been synthesized using polytungstate ligands and have been demonstrated to catalyze water oxidation efficiently. Using these advantages, Fukuzumi and co-workers synthesized two mononuclear Ru complexes using Keggin ligands, [RuIII(H2O)(SiW11O39)]5− (25) and [RuIII(H2O)(GeW11O39)]5− (26),92 and showed that both were able to catalyze water oxidation with Ce(IV), a feature that Ru sources (i.e. RuCl3) and the free ligands did not have. Isotopic labeling experiments using 18O-enriched water confirmed that the oxygen atoms in evolved O2 were from water. The Ru(IV)–OH2 and Ru(V)O intermediates were detected in UV-visible spectral titrations with the addition of stoichiometric equivalents of CAN. In addition, the Ru(V) species was confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and resonance Raman measurements, with the Ru(v)O double bond stretching assigned to the bands at 800 cm−1 and 785 cm−1 in 18O-labeling experiments. Importantly, kinetic studies suggested that both complexes 25 and 26 catalyzed Ce(IV)-based water oxidation through the Ru(III) → Ru(v) → Ru(III) catalytic cycle, as advanced by Meyer and co-workers.
2.2. Iridium based catalysts for water oxidation
Mononuclear iridium complexes are another class of single site WOCs that have been extensively studied in the last four years. In 2008, Bernhard and co-workers firstly reported a series of cyclometalated iridium(III) aquo complexes 27–31 (Scheme 9) that were able to catalyze water oxidation.70 Chemical oxidation of water using CAN and Ce(OTf)4 illustrated that 27–31 were all efficient WOCs. The necessity of aquo coordination with Ir for their catalytic activities was suggested by the suppression of O2 evolution in the presence of ligating molecules or anions and was further confirmed by a control experiment using [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+, which was shown to be completely inactive towards water oxidation. Electrochemical studies showed that the Ir(IV)/Ir(III) oxidation waves of these five compounds had a range from 1.20 to 1.74 V vs. NHE. Importantly, a very high TON of 2760 was obtained when catalyst 30 was employed. As pointed out by the authors, there are several advantages in using monomeric cyclometalated Ir complexes for catalytic water oxidation, such as simple ligand design, straightforward synthesis, and the ease of tuning the electronic properties (hence the oxidative potentials) of the complexes through substitution on cyclometalated ligands.
 Scheme 9 
After confirming the results by Bernhard, Crabtree and co-workers also developed three highly active mononuclear iridium WOCs, namely [IrIII(Cp*)(ppy)Cl] (32a), [IrIII(Cp*)(ppy)(OTf)] (32b) (ppy = 2-phenylpyridine), and [IrIII(Cp*)(ppm)Cl] (33) (ppm = 2-phenylpyrimidine).93 The stronger electron donating Cp* ligand (pentamethyl–cyclopentadienyl) was used to improve the activity for water oxidation. It was found that 32a (TOF = 54 min−1), 32b (TOF = 12 min−1) and 33 (TOF = 17 min−1) were all competent WOCs and were significantly more active than the previous catalyst 27 (TOF = 3 min−1). There were several arguments, listed by the authors, against the formation of heterogeneous catalysts (i.e. IrO2) in this system: the catalyst could be recovered after catalysis; no induction period and no dark deposit were observed; O2 evolution was reproducible; the reaction was first order in catalysts; and authentic IrO2 showed very slow catalysis. Isotopic labeling experiments confirmed that the oxygen atoms of evolved O2 were from water. An Ir(V)O species was proposed as the key intermediate prior to the O–O bond formation. The formation of [IrV(O)(Cp*)(ppy)]+ was suggested by a two-electron oxidation of Ir(III) observed in electrochemical studies, and its existence was corroborated by DFT calculations. It is necessary to mention here that the dissociated Cl− ion from Ir may accelerate O2 evolution via its oxidation to ClO− or Cl2, but the Cl− ion is not required for catalysis because the Cl-free complex 32b is also very active in catalyzing water oxidation.
In order to get a better understanding of single site Ir WOCs and improve catalyst efficiency and stability, Crabtree and co-workers investigated the Ce(IV) water oxidation catalyzed by a series of half-sandwich Ir complexes and computationally studied the O–O bond formation step involved in this catalysis.94 Complexes of the types [Cp*Ir(N–C)Cl] (32a, 33), [Cp*Ir(N–N)Cl]Cl (34–37), and [CpIr(bpy)I]X (38, 39) with bidentate chelates as well as [CpIr(PPh3)(CO)I]I (40), [CpIr(PPh3)(CO)] (41), the tris-aqua complex [Cp*Ir(OH2)3](SO4) (42), and its dimer [(Cp*Ir)2(OH)3](OH) (43) (Scheme 10) were synthesized and examined for water oxidation.94 It was found that all these monomeric Ir complexes are competent WOCs and complex 34 has the highest activity. The following main conclusions are obtained from this work. First, the initial O2 evolution rate was dependent on Ir coordination environments, suggesting that the chelates did not dissociate upon reaction and considerably affected the rate of catalysis. Second, the possibility that the oxidation of chloride to ClO− or Cl2 might play a role in accelerating O2 evolution was unlikely because similar activities were observed using Cl-free catalysts and addition of chloride to Cl-free systems had no significant change in the rate of O2 evolution. Third, electrochemical studies revealed that these catalysts were more active in a basic environment. Catalytic water oxidation peaks were developed at 1.2 V vs. NHE in pH 12 aqueous solutions, while no oxidation took place up to 1.5 V in acidic solutions. Fourth, control experiments and different behaviors in the H/D kinetic isotope effect studies suggested that catalysis by these Ir complexes was homogeneous in the early stage and was distinct from catalysis by IrO2 nanoparticles, whose absence in catalytic solution was further confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examinations. Fifth, a plausible catalytic mechanism was proposed and a high valent Ir(V)O species was suggested to electrophilically attack a water molecule to make the O–O bond. This mechanism resembles that of monomeric Ru catalysis advanced by Meyer. A water-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer process was also preferred in calculations to illustrate this critical O–O bond formation step. The involvement of an additional water molecule makes this step exothermic by −11.1 kcal mol−1 and significantly lowers the energy of its transition state. Details regarding these calculations will be presented in the following subsection in mechanistic studies.
 Scheme 10 
In 2011, Crabtree and co-workers reported a method to probe electrodeposition of metal oxides degraded from molecular Ir WOCs using an electrochemical quartz crystal nanobalance (EQCN),95 which could monitor mass changes and other processes on the electrode surface with a sensitivity of nanograms per square centimeter. By measuring the electrode mass in real time with piezoelectric gravimetry, the decomposition of molecular Ir catalysts used in electrode-driven water oxidation can be followed; hence, this method can be used to distinguish homogeneous from heterogeneous catalysis for water oxidation. Three complexes [Cp*Ir(OH2)3](SO4) (42), [Cp*Ir(pyppl)Cl] (44) and [Cp*Ir(pyppl)(CF3COO)] (45) (pyppl = 2-(2′-pyridyl)-2-propanolate) were employed in this study. Complexes 44 and 45 lost their chloride and trifluoroacetate ligands and were essentially identical in aqueous solution, as suggested by UV-visible experiments. Complex 45 showed a catalytic water oxidation peak at 1.0 V vs. NHE at pH 7.0. Results from this work showed that 42 and 45 behaved differently in electrode-driven water oxidation under the same conditions: the tris–aqua complex 42 decomposed to give iridium oxides deposited onto an electrode surface, a finding observed earlier, while no electrodeposition of 45 or other degraded materials was detected. This method provides a way to test the stability of molecular Ir WOCs in electrode-driven water oxidation and to clarify the nature of these complexes in catalysis.
In order to increase the stability of organometallic Ir WOCs, a Cp*Ir complex bearing a C–C chelate was recently reported by Crabtree and co-workers.96 Complex [Cp*IrIII(NHC)Cl] (46, NHC = N-heterocyclic carbene, 1,3-diphenylimidazol-2-ylidene, Scheme 11) contains a NHC ligand, which belongs to a class of carbenes known to be able to tightly bind and stabilize high-valent metal centers due to the strong σ-donating character.97 The CV of 46 in acetonitrile showed a first quasi-reversible redox wave at E1/2 = 0.9 V vs. NHE, which was assigned to the Ir(IV)/Ir(III) couple, and a second irreversible peak at 1.5 V vs. NHE. This result is significant because it indicates that the one-electron oxidized species [Cp*IrIV(NHC)Cl]+ is relatively stable, which has never been observed in previous CV experiments with other Ir WOCs. The intermediate [Cp*IrIV(NHC)Cl]+ could be also generated chemically using the oxidant [RuIII(bpy)3]3+ (E1/2 = 1.25 V vs. NHE) because it was strong enough to promote the one-electron oxidation of 46 to the relatively stable Ir(IV) state (at 0.9 V vs. NHE as determined in CV) but could not oxidize it further to the unstable Ir(v) state (at 1.5 V vs. NHE with an irreversible feature). Importantly, the [Cp*IrIV(NHC)Cl]+ species was successfully detected in EPR experiments showing a rhombic signal with a center crossing point at g = 2.17. This work highlights the uniqueness of NHC ligands and the effect of ligand electronic properties on catalyst reactivity and stability. The preparation and detection of an Ir(IV) species support the sequential, one-electron oxidation process and shed light on the mechanism of water oxidation catalyzed by single site Ir WOCs.
 Scheme 11 
Another two NHC-based Ir WOCs were prepared and reported by Hetterscheid and Reek.98 Complexes [Cp*Ir(Me2NHC)Cl2] (47) and [Cp*Ir(Me2NHC)(OH)2] (48) (Me2NHC = 1,3-dimethylimidazolin-2-ylidene, Scheme 11) displayed both high TOF (1.5 s−1) and TON (>2000) in Ce(IV) water oxidation, suggesting that they are efficient and robust WOCs. Electrode-driven water oxidation experiments using 47 and 48 also strongly suggested that [Cp*Ir(NHC)]2+ scaffolds provided stable homogeneous catalysts since no deposition of iridium oxides occurred on the electrodes.
Abnormal N-heterocyclic carbenes with zwitterionic resonance forms have been considered to be able to assist the stabilization of different metal oxidation states.97 By taking this advantage, Albrecht and co-workers synthesized two monomeric Ir complexes 49 and 50 using a pyridinium-functionalized triazolium ligand (Scheme 11).99 Both complexes bear a bidentate C–C chelate coordination over the Ir center: 49 has two different abnormally bound NHC ligands (a triazolylidene and a 3-pyridylidene), while 50 contains an ylide and an abnormal triazolylidene bonding. Examination of 49 and 50 revealed that they are competent catalysts for water oxidation using CAN. An extremely high TON of 10000 was obtained for catalyst 49, and of 8350 for catalyst 50. The excellent catalytic activity of 49 and 50 is a result of the high electronic flexibility of the mesoionic abnormal NHC ligand.97 The involvement of the ligand in catalytic water oxidation was further suggested by electrochemical studies. In aqueous solutions, multiple oxidation processes were detected (0.76, 0.86, and 0.94 V for 49; 0.77, 0.86, and 0.96 V for 50vs. NHE), which argue against solely iridium-centered oxidations and indicate the participation of ligands through electron or charge distribution at high oxidation potentials.
In the course of developing new efficient and robust molecular WOCs, Macchioni and co-workers also contributed substantially to single site Ir catalysis. In 2010, the Macchioni group and the Crabtree group independently reported the tris–aqua complex [Cp*Ir(OH2)3]2+ (42) and also synthesized and studied a new monomeric Ir complex, [Cp*Ir(bzpy)(NO3)] (51, bzpy = 2-benzoylpyridine).100 Catalytic water oxidation experiments using CAN as the oxidant revealed that 51 had a TOF of 8.46 min−1, which was almost two times more active than [Cp*Ir(ppy)Cl] 32a (4.68 min−1). In a following study, Macchioni and co-workers studied in detail the activity and degradation of three mononuclear Ir catalysts (34, 42 and 51) for water oxidation.101 A high TOF of 50 min−1 and a TON of 4000 observed for these catalysts suggested that single site organometallic Ir complexes were competent for catalyzing water oxidation. Nevertheless, it was also demonstrated from this work that these Ir complexes underwent oxidative decomposition during catalysis. Based on the results from in situ NMR studies and DFT calculations, a possible pathway for the degradation of the Cp* ligand was proposed, which eventually led to the deactivation of molecular Ir catalysts and the formation of active colloidal IrO2and/or other materials responsible for further water oxidation.
The stability of catalysts has been a major concern in monomeric Ir WOCs as their oxidatively decomposed products, such as iridium oxides or other Ir-containing materials, are still active for water oxidation and may contribute to the observed activities. This problem has been pointed out in previous examples.93,99,101 However, control experiments using authentic IrO2 were typically carried out in these studies to argue for the homogeneity of catalysts; different behaviors of organometallic Ir complexes and IrO2 in catalytic water oxidation were commonly taken as evidence that no (or at least negligible) oxidative decomposition of molecular Ir complexes occurred in catalysis. Recent results by Fukuzumi and co-workers indicated that the use of IrO2 as control might not be appropriate.102 They studied Ce(IV) water oxidation with four Ir complexes [Cp*IrIII(R2bpy)(H2O)]2+ (52a–d, R2bpy = 4,4′-disubstituted-2,2′-bipyridines, R = OH, OMe, Me or COOH, respectively). Oxidative decomposition of Ir complexes was suggested by the evolution of CO2 and NMR measurements; insoluble particles formed in catalysis were confirmed by dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements and by centrifugation, separation and subsequent observation in TEM. TG/DTA and XPS measurements indicated that these insoluble particles were mainly composed of iridium hydroxide Ir(OH)3. Importantly, Ir(OH)3 nanoparticles exhibited a much higher catalytic water oxidation activity than IrO2. Therefore, this work demonstrated that Ir nanomaterials (i.e. Ir(OH)3) rather than IrO2 generated from decomposition of Ir precatalysts were highly active in catalyzing water oxidation and should be considered in water oxidation experiments.
Grotjahn and co-workers studied in detail catalytic water oxidation using CAN with several known Ir WOCs.103 By stepwise adding CAN to the solution of Ir complexes, decomposed species including ligand-oxidized complexes were identified by UV-visible and NMR spectroscopy and ESI mass spectrometry. The minimum amount of CAN needed for O2 evolution increased as the number of organic components increased, indicating that the ligands were not innocent in these processes: at the early stage of catalysis, ligands were first oxidized and decomposed, and Ir ions were released to generate active nanoparticles under strong oxidizing conditions; addition of more CAN then caused the oxidation of water catalyzed by those freshly generated Ir nanoparticles, which were also characterized by means of scanning tunneling electron microscopy (STEM), energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis and powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD). This work clearly showed the degradation of molecular Ir WOCs with even <15 equiv. of CAN and led to the request for gentle oxidation conditions and the improvement in ligand and catalyst design.
In order to avoid the use of organic ligands that undergo oxidative decomposition under harsh catalytic conditions, Hill and co-workers synthesized and reported an all-inorganic mononuclear Ir WOC using a polyoxometalate (POM) ligand [P2W20O72]14−.104 Lacunary POMs have been widely used as inorganic ligands because of their resistance to both hydrolytic and oxidative decompositions and also because of their good σ-donating and π-accepting characters that can facilitate the stabilization of high-valent metal centers. In addition, POMs have many chemical and structural features in common with the redox-active metal oxides used as supports in many important catalytic reactions and processes. Complex K14[(IrCl4)KP2W20O72] (53, Fig. 2) represents the first structurally characterized Ir-containing POM. Crystallographic studies revealed that an [IrCl4]− unit was linked to the POM ligand [P2W20O72]14− through two Ir–O(W) bonds. These two symmetry equivalent Ir–O bonds have a typical single covalent bond length of 2.01(2) Å. Electrochemical studies of 53 at neutral pH showed a catalytic water oxidation peak at 1.05 V vs. NHE, suggesting that a gentle oxidant [Ru(bpy)3]3+ (E1/2 = +1.26 V vs. NHE) could be used in water oxidation with 53. Examination results confirmed that 53 could catalyze the oxidation of water using oxidant [Ru(bpy)3]3+, a process that could be followed by the disappearance of [Ru(bpy)3]3+ and the evolution of O2. However, under unoptimized conditions, the yield of O2 was ∼30%. The low yield of O2 is consistent with the well-documented catalytic oxidation of bipyridine ligands in [Ru(bpy)3]3+. Kinetic studies further indicated that catalyst 53 was stable enough in the timescale of catalysis. These results and control experiments suggested that molecular catalyst 53 performed a homogeneous catalysis for water oxidation.
 Fig. 2  Polyhedral/ball-and-stick representation of 53.104 The 31P NMR spectrum shows two peaks, which is consistent with the symmetry of the molecule. 
2.3. Catalysts made of earth-abundant elements (Fe, Co, Mn) for water oxidation
Most available single site WOCs reported to date are made of noble metals Ru and Ir. In consideration of potential future applications in many aspects, catalysts made of earth-abundant elements are mandatory. Nature uses a Mn4Ca cluster to catalyze water oxidation driven by light energy. Biological and abiological studies on water oxidation have considerably enriched our understanding of the fundamental aspects in this complex four-electron four-proton reaction. Recent high-resolution X-ray crystallography studies on single crystals of PS II elucidated the 3D structure of its many subunits and the environment around the OEC.17–20 In the 3 + 1 arrangement of the tetramanganese cluster of the OEC, the fourth dangling Mn is proposed to undergo stepwise oxidation coupled with proton liberation. The formation of a Mn(V)O unit is also suggested for this dangling Mn atom, and water attack on this unit is responsible for the O–O bond formation.18 Despite the fact that enormous efforts have been made to synthesize Mn complexes for mimicking the natural system, only a few Mn WOCs have been developed. In 2007, Sun and co-workers reported that a mononuclear Mn corrole complex 54 was capable of catalyzing electrochemical water oxidation in basic solution.105 In order to get a better understanding of the role of this Mn–corrole system in water oxidation and to examine the possibility that an O–O bond can be formed by water attack on the Mn(V)O unit, they synthesized and studied a new Mn(III) corrole complex 55 (Scheme 12).106 Oxidation of 55 to a Mn(V) species with t-BuOOH and subsequent addition of an aqueous solution of (n-Bu)4N(OH) caused rapid O2 evolution. Intermediates proposed in the catalytic cycle (Scheme 12), including the Mn(V)O species generated from oxidation of 55 and the Mn(IV)–OO− intermediate from the nucleophilic attack of hydroxide on Mn(V)O, were all characterized and confirmed by means of electronic absorption measurements, high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS), and isotopic 18O-labeling experiments. Importantly, experiments using 18O-labeled water unambiguously determined that the oxygen atoms in evolved O2 were from water. This work is significant because it provides experimental evidence that O–O bond formation via nucleophilic attack of hydroxide on a Mn(V)O species is feasible and it sheds light on the mechanism of water oxidation to dioxygen occurring at the OEC in nature.
 Scheme 12 
By using a mononuclear non-porphyrinic six-coordinate Mn(II)–OH2 complex 56, Anxolabéhère-Mallart and co-workers carefully studied its sequential electrochemical oxidation to mononuclear Mn(III)–OH and Mn(IV)O species.107 Two redox waves were observed in CV experiments: E1/2 = +0.43 V vs. SCE for Mn(III)/Mn(II) and E1/2 = +1.05 V vs. SCE for Mn(IV)/Mn(III). Therefore, the final Mn(IV) complex could be generated through either sequential or direct electrochemical oxidation, and it was characterized by UV-visible, EPR, and XAS methods, and DFT calculations. These studies collaboratively provided strong evidence that this species was best described as a Mn(III)–O˙ complex. This work has certain relevance to the natural water oxidation system, although no catalytic water oxidation features of 56 are illustrated in this report.
Recently, Co-based homogeneous and heterogeneous materials have been shown to be highly efficient for catalyzing water oxidation.8,41,108–110 These materials contain multinuclear Co clusters that are able to store oxidizing equivalents required for this four-electron process. Despite these achievements, there are only two well-defined molecular single Co site WOCs known in the literature to date. In 2011, Berlinguette and co-workers prepared a mononuclear Co complex, [Co(Py5)(OH2)](ClO4)2 (57, Py5 = 2,6-(bis(bis-2-pyridyl)methoxymethane)pyridine).111 The oxidatively stable pentadentate ligand Py5 was used due to its potential ability to stabilize a high-valent Co center such as Co(IV) for oxidizing water. Electrochemical studies of 57 showed a reversible redox wave at +0.75 V vs. NHE at pH 2.2. The pH dependence of this peak further suggested that it was a Co-based PCET step corresponding to the [Co(III)–OH]2+/[Co(II)–OH2]2+ couple. A second catalytic redox wave was observed at +1.4 V vs. NHE over the pH range 7.6–10.3. The pH independence of this peak indicated that it was not a PCET step and was assigned to the [Co(IV)–OH]3+/[Co(III)–OH]2+ couple. Importantly, this peak became pH-dependent at pH > 10.3, a result consistent with the PCET step of the [Co(IV)O]2+/[Co(III)–OH]2+ couple. Control experiments and comparisons to the known Co-phosphate (Co-Pi) films suggested that the catalytic process at +1.4 V vs. NHE was attributed to homogeneous water oxidation catalyzed by 57. The attack of Co(IV)-hydroxy/oxo units by a water/hydroxide substrate was proposed for the O–O bond formation. Therefore, this report presents the first example of single site Co WOCs.
The other mononuclear Co catalyst for water oxidation was designed and reported by Nocera and co-workers in 2011.112 The Co(II) hangman porphyrin complex was first shown by the same group in a previous report to promote the 4e−/4H+ reduction of oxygen to water,113 which was the reverse reaction of water oxidation. They subsequently prepared Co(III) hangman corrole complexes 58 and 59 (Scheme 13) using a β-octafluoro hangman corrole ligand. Introduction of fluorinated phenyl groups and fluorination of the β-pyrrolic positions of the macrocycle were aimed at increasing the oxidizing power of the Co complex. Electrochemical studies of 59 revealed a catalytic water oxidation step at +1.25 V vs. Ag/AgCl at neutral pH. A Co(IV) species was postulated as the precatalytic state for water oxidation, although the exact electronic structure of the metal center and the corrole ligand remained unclear: either [Co(IV)–corrole] or [Co(III)–corrole+˙] was possible. Significantly, catalyst 59 was stable during electrochemical water oxidation based on evidence from UV-visible, LD-MS MALDI-TOF and HRMS measurements, and also that no CO2 was evolved in this process. The calculated TOF per Co atom for 59 is 0.81 s−1, comparable to other Co-based WOCs. The hanging group attached to hangman corrole units was suggested to play an important role in preorganizing water within the cleft for the critical O–O bond formation step.
 Scheme 13 
Iron is generally used in nature for the activation of O2; however, there are only a few reports illustrating the catalytic water oxidation features of Fe materials. In 2010, Bernhard and Collins reported a series of mononuclear Fe(III) complexes containing a tetraamido macrocyclic ligand and demonstrated that these Fe(III)–TAMLs were the first example of single site Fe WOCs.114 Complexes 60a–e (Scheme 14) were prepared and examined for Ce(IV) water oxidation. Complex 60a was catalytically inactive; on the other hand, 60b–e were able to catalyze fast O2 evolution. Electron-withdrawing characters of the ligand assisted this process as 60e showed the highest activity in this series with a high TOF of 1.3 s−1. In addition, 60e could catalyze water oxidation using NaIO4 as the oxidant, although the catalytic mechanism was unclear. The use of NaIO4 is beneficial because it is transparent in the visible spectrum and does not produce strong acidic media.
 Scheme 14 
Recently, Fillol and co-workers examined the catalytic water oxidation activities of a series of mononuclear Fe complexes bearing various N-based neutral tetradentate or pentadentate ligands.115 All these complexes were known in the literature, and their preparations were carried out following published methods. Results showed that Fe complexes 61–65 with two available coordination sites in a cis fashion were competent WOCs, while those with two trans sites (66) and with only one available site (67) were inactive for water oxidation (Scheme 15). Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements and nanoparticle-tracking analyses (NTAs) excluded the possibility that iron-oxide nanoparticles formed in reaction and then catalyzed water oxidation. UV-visible titration experiments using CAN indicated the formation of a Fe(IV)O species, whose existence was further confirmed by ESI-MS. This Fe(IV)O species was the catalyst resting state, and further oxidation with CAN generated a Fe(V)O intermediate followed by rapid subsequent attack of a water molecule to form the O–O bond. The high TON of 1000 obtained in this work indicated that this system was more active than any other first-row transition metal system under homogeneous conditions.
 Scheme 15 
3. Photochemical (light-driven) water oxidation using mononuclear catalysts
3.1. Ruthenium based catalysts for water oxidation
With the rapid growth of single site water oxidation catalysis, Sun and co-workers prepared a variety of mononuclear Ru WOCs and studied their photocatalytic abilities. Five Ru polypyridyl complexes, [Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+ (68), [Ru(Mebimpy)(pic)3]2+ (69), [Ru(bimpy)(pic)3] (70), trans-[Ru(tpy)(pic)2Cl]+ (71) and trans-[Ru(tpy)(pic)2(OH2)]2+ (72),116 were reported to be capable of catalyzing water oxidation in the presence of a photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)(dcb)2]2+ (dcb = 4,4′-dicarboxyethyl-2,2′-bipyridine, E1/2(RuIII/II) = 1.54 V vs. NHE) and a sacrificial electron acceptor (S2O82−). A strong oxidizing photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)(dcb)2]2+ is required because of high overpotentials of 68–72 for water oxidation. By using this three-component system, catalyst 72 gave the highest TON of 84. This relatively higher catalytic activity of 72 was also observed in chemical water oxidation using CAN, a result consistent with the fact that 72 was the real WOC, while 68–71 were precatalysts.
Another series of monomeric Ru polypyridyl photocatalysts were studied and reported by Llobet and co-workers.117 Complexes [Ru(tpy)(H3p)(OH2)]2+ (H3p = 2-(5-phenyl-1H-pyrazol-3-yl)pyridine, in-/out-73) and [Ru(tpy)(Hbpp)(OH2)]2+ (Hbpp = 2,2′-(1H-pyrazole-3,5-diyl)dipyridine, in-/out-74) were synthesized with both in- and out-isomers as pure products (Scheme 16). Crystallographic studies revealed that a stronger H-bonding interaction existed in the out-isomer and might play a role in stabilizing Ru intermediates. All these Ru complexes were photocatalytically active for water oxidation using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer and [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ as a sacrificial electron acceptor at pH 7.0 in a phosphate buffer. Complex in-74 had the highest activity with a TON of 4, a number much smaller than that of chemical oxidation. This result suggests that the photocatalytic system requires further improvements.
 Scheme 16 
Photoisomerization is an issue to be considered when monomeric Ru polypyridyl photocatalysts are employed. By using [Ru(tpy)(pynap)(OH2)]2+ (cis-/trans-75), Yagi and co-workers illustrated this stoichiometric trans-75 to cis-75 photoisomerization (Scheme 17),118 a process that could be followed by NMR spectroscopy, and they successfully isolated and structurally characterized both isomers by X-ray diffraction methods. The photoinduced isomerization was first order with respect to trans-75, and the rate constant increased linearly with the light intensity in pH 1–7 solutions. The hydroxyl species of trans-75 obtained in basic environments did not undergo this photoisomerization, which was consistent with the higher dissociation energy of the hydroxyl group compared to that of the aqua ligand to form a five-coordinate [Ru(tpy)(pynap)]2+ intermediate. The electrochemical features of trans-75 are different from cis-75: trans-75 has two discrete pH-dependent redox waves at 0.46 and 0.63 V (vs. SCE) assigned to Ru(III)–OH/Ru(II)–OH2 and Ru(IV)O/Ru(III)–OH redox couples, respectively, while cis-75 has only one two-proton coupled two-electron redox wave at 0.59 V (vs. SCE) assigned to the Ru(IV)O/Ru(II)–OH2 couple. In addition, the catalytic Ce(IV) water oxidation activities of trans-75 and cis-75 are also different: trans-75 (TOF = 3.8 × 10−3 s−1) is an order of magnitude more active than its cis isomer (TOF = 4.8 × 10−4 s−1). Similar results were reported by Fujita and co-workers independently showing that trans-75 was capable of catalyzing Ce(IV) water oxidation competently while its cis-isomer could not.119 The poor catalytic efficiency of cis-75 might be due to catalyst decomposition as CO2 was detected by mass spectrometry in the headspace during catalysis runs. These results highlight the importance of photoisomerization that is able to dramatically change the electrochemical and catalytic features of Ru polypyridyl complexes.
 Scheme 17 
Another example illustrating that two photoisomers of Ru polypyridyl complexes had dramatically different catalytic activities for water oxidation was reported by Llobet and co-workers.120 Complexes cis-/trans-[Ru(bpy)2(OH2)2]2+ (cis-/trans-76) were chosen to conduct this study for two main reasons. First, photoisomerization of [Ru(bpy)2(OH2)2]2+ has already been well documented by Meyer et al. in 1980.121 Second, complex 76 contained two Ru–OH2 bonds and could potentially lose four electrons and four protons to generate Ru bis-oxo species with a Ru(VI) formal oxidation state. The cis-isomer is of particular interest because the resulting cis-[Ru(bpy)2(O)2]2+ species is unique in providing valuable information about the critical O–O bond formation step in water oxidation catalysis. It was demonstrated in this work that cis-76 was much more efficient than its trans-isomer in catalysis, and cis to trans isomerization did not take place significantly in the absence of light under reaction conditions. Results from both 18O-labeling experiments and calculations also strongly indicated that the O–O bond was formed by the water attack on Ru(VI)O instead of intramolecular O–O bond closure. The two pathways and their corresponding free energies of activation are shown in Scheme 18. In addition, a second water molecule that acted as a base to assist the removal of a proton from the attacking water was suggested by these calculations. This result is consistent with the findings of Meyer and co-workers who advanced the concept of base-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer (APT) in the O–O bond formation in single site water oxidation.83 Details regarding the photoisomerization of cis-76 to its trans-76 isomer as well as the geometric and electronic structures of cis-76 and its higher oxidation state species determined by means of UV-visible, EPR and XAS (XANES and EXAFS) spectroscopy methods, as well as DFT and CASSCF/CASPT2 calculations, were presented in a subsequent report by Llobet and co-workers.122
 Scheme 18  Water attack vs. intramolecular O–O bond formation pathways with calculated free energies (kcal mol−1).120 
Catalysts bearing low overpotentials are crucial for photocatalytic water oxidation because the typically used photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (E1/2 = +1.26 V vs. NHE) has a much lower oxidation potential compared to CAN (E1/2 = +1.70 V vs. NHE) generally used in chemical water oxidation. It is well established that electron-donating characters can increase the electron density on the Ru center and as a result decrease its oxidation potential. By taking this trend, Sun and co-workers synthesized several monomeric Ru complexes using negatively charged ligands that have strong electron σ- and/or π-donating features to be able to stabilize high oxidation states of Ru ions. The first example is complex [RuIIL2(pic)2] (77) (H2L2 = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylic acid) containing a bis(carboxylato) ligand (Scheme 19).123 The Ru(III)/Ru(II) oxidation potential is very low (E1/2 = −0.06 V vs. Fc/Fc+), a result consistent with the dianionic character of ligand L2. Structural analysis of 77 revealed that the angle of O–Ru–O was 122.99°, having a possibility to coordinate a seventh aqua group. Interestingly, an intermediate 78 in Ce(IV) water oxidation was isolated and also structurally determined by using single crystal X-ray diffraction. It was a dimer of [RuIVL2(pic)2]2+ units linked by an [HOHOH]− group (Scheme 19). Three [PF6]− counterions and two solvent water molecules H-bonding to the [HOHOH]− group were located in the X-ray structure as well. The intermediate 78 was still active as proved in a separate water oxidation catalysis using Ce(IV). This result is significant because it shows the possibility for the involvement of a seven-coordinate Ru intermediate in catalytic water oxidation.
 Scheme 19 
Detailed electrochemical studies and photocatalytic water oxidation activities of 77 were presented in a following report.124 The CV of 77 in a pH 1.0 aqueous solution had two distinct redox waves at 0.86 (RuIII/II) and 1.11 (RuIV/III) V vs. NHE, and a catalytic water oxidation peak at 1.5 V, making 77 incompetent for water oxidation using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (E1/2 = 1.26 V vs. NHE) as the photosensitizer at pH 1.0. On the other hand, in a pH 7.0 aqueous solution, 77 had one wave at 0.72 V vs. NHE (RuIII/II) and a catalytic water oxidation peak at 0.98 V. These CV data suggested that 77 could be a potential photocatalytic WOC in a neutral solution. A three-component system composed of a photosensitizer, a sacrificial electron acceptor, and 77 was proven to be active for water oxidation. The photosensitizer could be either [Ru(bpy)3]2+ or even [Ru(dmbpy)3]2+ (E1/2 = 1.10 V vs. NHE, dmbpy = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine); the sacrificial electron acceptor could be either [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 or Na2S2O8. A high TOF (1250 h−1) was observed in the [Ru(bpy)3]2+–Na2S2O8 system. A series of control experiments were also carried out to confirm that 77 was the catalyst responsible for fast water oxidation. There are two issues worth noting here. First, 77 would be deactivated with acid; thus, the use of [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ as the sacrificial electron acceptor was favored because it could neutralize protons generated in water oxidation with its released NH3 molecules. Second, 77 would gradually decompose under catalytic conditions although it had good photostability. Results from mass spectrometry revealed that oxidative decomposition of organic frameworks was responsible for the deactivation of 77 in catalysis.
Complexes [RuIIL3(pic)3] (79) and [RuIIL3(bpy)(pic)] (80) (H2L3 = 2,6-pyridine-dicarboxylic acid) using a different dianionic ligand were reported by Sun and co-workers and were shown to be photocatalytically active toward water oxidation.125 Electrochemical studies indicated that (1) both 79 and 80 underwent ligand substitution upon dissolution in aqueous solution to give the real WOC and (2) [Ru(bpy)2(dcb)]2+ (E1/2 = +1.38 V vs. NHE) could be used as a photosensitizer to drive 79 and 80 to oxidize water. Another Ru complex [(RuIIIL4(pic)2)2I]+ (81) was synthesized using a trisphenolic ligand L4.126 Based on elemental analysis, the structure of 81 was suggested to consist of two Ru monomers linked by a bridging iodide anion (crystals suitable for X-ray crystallography could not be obtained). Mass spectrometric results indicated that this dimer dissociated in solution to give mononuclear Ru moieties. As a result, complex 81 is covered in this article as a potential single site Ru WOC. The CV of 81 in neutral aqueous solution showed a catalytic water oxidation peak at 1.2 V vs. NHE, which was lower than the oxidation potential of the photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)3]2+. Light-driven water oxidation using Ru catalyst 81, photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and S2O82− as a sacrificial electron acceptor gave a moderate TON of ca. 1.5 min−1. The substitution of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ by a stronger oxidizing photosensitizer, [Ru(bpy)2(deeb)]2+ (deeb = 4,4′-bis(ethoxycarbonyl)-2,2′-bipyridine), gave a higher TON of ca. 12.5 min−1.
A mononuclear Ru(II) complex bearing negatively charged carboxylate and phenolate donor groups has been recently designed and reported by Sun and co-workers in 2012, which could efficiently catalyze water oxidation either chemically with CAN (TOF = 0.32 s−1) or photochemically with various photosensitizers and persulfate as the sacrificial oxidant.127 By replacing one of the coordinated carboxylate ligands of 79 with a phenolate group, the authors aimed at further optimization of the Ru WOCs. The introduction of anionic O-donor ligands favors higher Ru oxidation states due to both the destabilization of the low-valent Ru center (dπ–pπ repulsion between the metal and oxygen atoms) and the stabilization of the high-valent Ru center through favorable interaction between the filled p orbitals of O atoms and empty d orbitals of the metal. Electrochemical studies revealed that the replacement of a carboxylate ligand with a phenolate group did lower the Ru(III)/Ru(II) reduction potential by 0.27 V and the catalytic overpotential by 0.21 V (pH 7.0) because of the better electron π-donating ability of the phenol group. These results suggest that anionic ligands play a key role in controlling the redox chemistry of the Ru core at both low-valent and high-valent states.
3.2. Iridium based catalysts for water oxidation
Photocatalytic water oxidation with mononuclear Ir WOCs is rare in the literature. In 2011, Crabtree and co-workers reported the preparation of a photoanode by deposition of a high-potential Zn porphyrin and an Ir WOC on TiO2 nanoparticles.128 As shown in Scheme 20, the introduction of carboxylic acid groups into both Zn porphyrin and Ir catalyst [Cp*Ir(ppy)Cl] 32a was aimed to the covalent attachment of these two components to TiO2 nanoparticles. Illumination studies revealed that these photoanodes in complete water-splitting cells had a light-induced activation of the catalyst, which led to enhanced and sustained photocurrent for electrodes in water. The CV of Zn porphyrin showed two reversible redox waves at 1.35 and 1.59 V vs. NHE, indicating that the oxidized porphyrin species was thermodynamically capable of oxidizing water. The CV of 32a deposited on a TiO2-sintered FTO working electrode indicated that immobilization of the catalyst onto the electrode surface did not change its catalytic activity for water oxidation. This work provides a method to prepare a bioinspired photochemical cell by attaching a high-potential Zn porphyrin and a single site Ir WOC onto the TiO2 surface. Photoexcitation promotes Zn porphyrin to its excited state. By injecting electrons into the conduction band of TiO2, a Zn porphyrin radical cation forms. This high potential oxidant is thermodynamically able to oxidize water. The co-deposited Ir complex 32a catalyzes this oxidation process and contributes to the enhanced and sustained photocurrent (∼30 μA cm−2).
 Scheme 20 
3.3. Single site catalysts for both water oxidation and reduction
Mononuclear metal complexes that are able to perform both water oxidation and reduction have also been developed. These systems are exceptionally significant because they meet the need to split water into H2 and O2 using light energy and without using any sacrificial reductant and oxidant. In 2009, Milstein and co-workers reported a dearomatized mononuclear Ru(II) pincer complex that could react with water and lead to the stoichiometric liberation of H2 and O2 in consecutive thermal- and light-driven steps and demonstrated the feasibility of unimolecular O–O bond formation at a single metal center.129,130 Reaction of one equiv. of water with the nonaromatic Ru(II) pincer complex 82a immediately led to ligand aromatization with quantitative formation of the trans hydrido–hydroxo complex 82b (Scheme 21), which was isolated and characterized by means of NMR (1H, 2H, 13C, 17O and 31P) and X-ray diffraction methods. Isotopic labeling experiments using D2O and H217O suggested that this reaction involves cooperation between the metal and the ligand. Refluxing complex 82b in water led to H2 evolution and the formation of cis dihydroxo complex 82c. Irradiation of 82c in inert atmosphere resulted in O2 evolution and the regeneration of 82b. Isotopic labeling experiments using 82c-18O18O and 82c-18O16O as well as crossover experiments involving photolysis of equimolar amounts of 82c-18O18O and 82c-16O16O confirmed that O2 was released from the dihydroxo complex intramolecularly over a single metal center.129,131 H2O2 was suggested to form upon photolysis of 82c and then disproportionated into O2 and water without scission of the O–O bond. This process was verified by experiments employing spin trap 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-1-oxide (DMPO) and enzyme catalase. This work is significant as (1) it illustrates a definite approach toward a complete cycle for H2 and O2 evolution from water catalyzed by a single mononuclear metal complex and (2) it shows that O–O bond formation driven by light can be intramolecular and does not necessarily involve bimolecular mechanisms, dinuclear complexes, and metal oxo intermediates.
 Scheme 21 
Kunkely and Vogler reported that the mononuclear Os complex osmocene (83a) could perform both photoinduced water oxidation and water reduction, representing the other example for both H2 and O2 evolution on a single metal site.132 As shown in Scheme 22, protonation of 83a generated a hydride complex 83b; subsequent irradiation led to H2 evolution and the formation of [Cp2OsIII–OsIIICp2]2+ (83c), a process with characteristic spectral changes. These two photolytic products were formed in a 1:1 molar ratio. A hydrogen-bonded dimer of the hydride complex 83b was suggested to be the intermediate prior to the release of H2. In the presence of water, the Os(III) dimer 83c underwent disproportionation to give 83a and an Os(IV) complex [Cp2OsIV(OH2)]2+ (83d), a process that could be accelerated by irradiation. The coordinating aqua of 83d could be readily replaced by other anions, such as I− and OH−, with the latter giving [Cp2OsIV(OH)]+ (83e). Irradiation of 83e led to O2 evolution and the formation of osmocene 83a with a molar ratio of 1:2. A possible mechanism involved first the deprotonation of 83e to give [Cp2OsIV(O)] (83f), followed by dimerization to give [Cp2Os(O2)OsCp2] (83g), and the final photolytic degradation to release O2 and regenerate osmocene 83a.
 Scheme 22 
4. Mechanistic insights and O–O bond formation pathways—experimental and theoretical evidence
Today considerable insights have been accumulated regarding the mechanistic nature of water oxidation over single metal sites through the interplay of experiments and theories. In this section, we start with the discussion of possible catalytic cycles involved in the widely studied Ru systems, and then those in other metal systems. Since the O–O bond formation is a key step in water oxidation and attracts significant attention, it is singled out for further discussion later.
4.1. Catalytic cycles involved in ruthenium systems
In the seminal report by Meyer and co-workers in 2010, a plausible catalytic cycle was proposed based on experimental and theoretical studies using mononuclear Ru complexes 6, 8 and 9.74 As shown in Scheme 2, the first step is a rapid two-electron oxidation of [RuII–OH2]2+ to [RuIVO]2+. Further oxidation leads to [RuVO]3+, followed by nucleophilic attack of water to generate [RuIII–OOH]2+. This intermediate can be characterized by redox titration with (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2. [RuIII–OOH]2+ can be oxidized to [RuIV(OO)]2+ with an η2 bidentate peroxo ligand, which is reasonably stable in solution and thermally degrades to release O2 and regenerate the [RuII–OH2]2+ with a rate constant of k4 = 7.5 × 10−4 s−1 in 0.1 M HNO3. The O2 evolution is the rate-determining step (RDS) in this cycle. This slow reaction may involve the conversion of singlet 1[RuIV-η2-(OO)]2+ to the triplet 3[RuIV-η1-(OO)]2+ state as a first step, followed by displacement of triplet O2 by a water molecule to form singlet [RuII–OH2]2+. On the other hand, in 1.0 M HNO3 solution, [RuIV(OO)]2+ can be further oxidized to [RuV(OO)]3+. Under these conditions the rate law becomes first order in [Ce(IV)] and first order in [RuIV(OO)2+]. Once formed, [RuV(OO)]3+ rapidly decomposes to release O2 and generate [RuIII–OH]2+. The additional oxidation of [RuIV(OO)]2+ apparently lowers the kinetic barrier for O2 release. As a result, another catalytic cycle is established: cycles through [RuIV(OO)]2+ and [RuII–OH2]2+ or through [RuV(OO)]3+ and [RuIII–OH]2+ with four equiv. of Ce(IV). Importantly, intermediates [RuIVO]2+, [RuVO]3+, [RuIII–OOH]2+ and [RuIV(OO)]2+ have been characterized by means of UV-visible, electrochemistry, chemical titration, ESI-MS, resonance Raman, 18O-labeling and theoretical calculations from this work and works by others.75,80,133
It is shown by Meyer and others in subsequent studies that the water oxidation mechanism and the RDS are dependent significantly on the nature of various monomeric Ru catalysts (i.e. the ligand environment and electron density on the metal center) and also many other reaction conditions, including pH, ionic strength, anion, oxidant, the molar ratio of oxidant and catalyst, and so on. For example, by using complex 1b, one of the first reported Ru-based mononuclear WOCs by Thummel, the missing oxidation state [RuIII–OH]2+ in Meyer's system was successfully obtained by Polyansky and co-workers.133 This one-electron oxidation has a rate constant of (2.8 ± 0.5) × 109 M−1 s−1 (with ionic strength 0.06 M). The intermediate [RuIII–OH]2+ is not stable and slowly disappears on the time scale of ca. 1 min (kdisp = (6.5 ± 0.5) × 103 M−1 s−1) through disproportionation to produce 1 equiv. of the starting material [RuII–OH2]2+ and 1 equiv. of the two-electron oxidized species [RuIVO]2+. In this system, [RuIVO]2+ is also shown to be stable in dilute acidic solutions in the time scale of several minutes; while in higher concentrations (above ca. 10−5 M), it reacts with water to form equal concentrations of [RuIV(OO)]2+ and [RuII–OH2]2+ in 2 h, which are identified by electronic absorption spectroscopy and ESI-MS analysis. This result provides another pathway for the formation of [RuIV(OO)]2+ through a direct reaction between [RuIVO]2+ and water (Scheme 23, blue route) in addition to the established sequence [RuIVO]2+ → [RuVO]3+ → [RuIII–OOH]3+ → [RuIV(OO)]2+. The net reaction (eqn (3)) is exothermic with ΔG° = −0.132 eV. 2[RuIVO]2+ + H2O → [RuIV(OO)]2+ + [RuII–OH2]2+, ΔG° = −0.132 eV(3)
 Scheme 23 
It is found that the formation of [RuVO]3+ under standard conditions (pH = 0) is more favorable compared to the direct pathway. However, in the high pH region the direct pathway becomes more energetically favorable since it is a proton-coupled electron transfer process.
As mentioned in the previous section, Berlinguette and co-workers investigated thoroughly the catalytic activities of Ru catalysts 5, 15 and 16, and established additional accessible reaction pathways in water oxidation with these catalysts (Scheme 23, orange routes),80 which strengthens the fact that electron density on metal sites and other reaction conditions can affect catalyst activity and stability and change RDS. Several key findings are listed below.
• [RuII–OH2]2+ can be first oxidized to [RuIII–OH2]3+ in a strong acidic medium; the second oxidation to form [RuIVO]2+ is accompanied by the loss of two protons. At higher pH levels, these two steps will be consecutive PCET processes.
• Intermediates [RuIVO]2+ and/or [RuIV(OO)]2+ are the dominant forms under catalytic conditions.
• Isotopic distribution of evolved O2 indicates an alternative reaction pathway for the formation of [RuIV(OO)]2+ which involves the O-atom abstraction from a NO3− anion of CAN. Further supports include the detection of NO2 and control experiments using mass spectroscopy. The high positive charge of Ce(IV) ion and the strong electrophilic property of [RuVO]3+ oxo may be critical for the activation of an N–O bond in nitrate.
• [RuIVO]2+ can disproportionate in solution to give [RuIII–OH]2+ and [RuVO]3+ or react with water to give [RuII–O2H2]2+, which is then oxidized to give [RuIII–OOH]2+, an intermediate in the main catalytic cycle. This latter process provides an example of the O–O bond formation at a Ru(IV) state for a single site Ru catalyst (resembling the blue route suggested by Polyansky mentioned above).
4.2. Catalytic cycles involved in other metal systems
For single Ir site water oxidation, a catalytic cycle similar to that of the Ru system is proposed based on kinetic studies and calculations (Scheme 24).93,94,101 Organometallic Ir(III)–aqua species can undergo PCET for charge stabilization. An [IrVO]3+ unit forms upon consecutive two-electron oxidation (chemical or electrochemical) and acts as the active species in the formation of an O–O bond through an electrophilic attack to water. The electrophilicity of the Ir(V)-oxo ligand is indicated by DFT calculations. The resulting end-on hydroperoxo intermediate [IrIII-η1-(OOH)]2+ can be further oxidized to give side-on peroxo [IrIV-η2-(OO)]2+ and then [IrV-η2-(OO)]3+, which yields the final O2 product and regenerates [IrIII–(OH2)]3+ by coordination with water. Ligand environments, electron densities on the metal center, and reaction conditions determine the catalyst activity and stability and also affect the RDS. By using complex 46 bearing a NHC carbene ligand, a stable Ir(IV) species [Cp*IrIV(NHC)Cl]+ is obtained and characterized by Crabtree and co-workers.96 This result supports the one-electron step in the catalytic cycle.
 Scheme 24 
A parallel water-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer (APT) in the O–O bond formation step is also suggested by Crabtree and co-workers for Ir systems based on DFT calculations.94 Three different mechanisms in terms of different proton acceptors are compared. As shown in Schemes 25–27, the introduction of an additional water molecule significantly assists the proton transfer by making the whole process exothermic and lowering the energy of the transition state.
 Scheme 25  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation with an intramolecular assistance (Pathway A in ref. 94). 
 Scheme 26  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation without assistance (Pathway B in ref. 94). 
 Scheme 27  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation with a water-assisted concerted APT process (Pathway C in ref. 94). 
For mononuclear WOCs made of Fe, Co, and Mn, similar high-valent metal-oxo species are postulated as the active form for O–O bond formation. The sequential proton-coupled electrochemical oxidation of Mn(II)–aqua complex 56 to Mn(III)–OH and Mn(IV)O is addressed,107 representing the activation of a water molecule over the Mn center. The high-valent Mn(V)O species is also synthesized and characterized and is proven to be able to produce O2 upon nucleophilic attack with hydroxide.106 The PCET sequence of [CoII–OH2]2+ → [CoIII–OH]2+ → [CoIV–OH]3+ → [CoIVO]2+ is established in complex 57 as well.111 The nucleophilic attack of a water molecule at the [CoIVO]2+ unit is responsible for the O–O bond formation to generate a Co-peroxido complex. Similarly, Fe(V)–oxo species are observed in the Fe–TAML system (60a–e),114 which exhibits a diverse and highly reactive chemistry. On the other hand, by using active WOCs 61–65, high-valent Fe(IV)O species are spectroscopically detected and confirmed by ESI-MS.115 High stability of this Fe(IV)O species clearly indicates that water oxidation does not take place at this stage. Further oxidation generates Fe(V)O which is the active species for water oxidation and O–O bond formation. There are two possible pathways for subsequent O2 release. First, the resulting Fe(III)–OOH is further oxidized to evolve O2, a process resembling the water oxidation at single Ru and Ir sites. Second, the Fe(III)–OOH unit is protonated to exclude H2O2, which undergoes fast and quantitative oxidation to give O2 by CAN. All these examples suggest that high-valent metal-oxo species form in the catalytic cycle and are the active forms for the O–O bond formation through water attack or other pathways discussed in the following two subsections.
4.3. O–O bond formation through the MO water pathway
Nucleophilic attack of high-valent metal-oxo by water represents the major O–O bond formation pathway in single site water oxidation. Both experimental and computational results suggest that a second water molecule is involved in this process to assist the proton release from the attacking water molecule. This scenario can avoid the formation of a high-energy H2O2-coordinated intermediate M–OOH2. In previous sections, the water-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer has been discussed in detail based on single site Ru134 and Ir WOCs. A base can play a parallel role in assisting the nucleophilic water attack on the highly electron deficient metal-oxo group. In 2010, Meyer and co-workers reported a critical observation that catalytic currents for water oxidation could be significantly enhanced in the presence of added inorganic bases (organic bases were excluded because of their oxidation either at the electrode or by high-valent Ru species).83 As illustrated in the original report, the catalytic current increases with increasing base concentration. This increase with added base is due to the existence of an additional base-dependent pathway for water oxidation. It is also illustrated that kB increases with increasing proton acceptor ability of the base. Significant H2O–D2O kinetic isotope effects (KIEs) are observed in water- or base-assisted concerted APT processes (KIE = 6.6 for H2O; 3.9 for H2PO4−, 3.4 for OAc−, and 2.3 for HPO42−). This decrease in KIE is consistent with the increase of base strength, which leads to the decrease of the proton transfer distance to the acceptor base in APT. The base catalysis may also play an important role in water oxidation in the OEC of PS II.
Nonaqueous catalytic water oxidation experiments show that this water attack on metal-oxo units can occur with a limited amount of water.135 Interestingly, water oxidation in nonaqueous solvents proceeds much faster than this reaction in water, and it fits first-order kinetics in [H2O]. Electrochemical studies reveal that the catalytic peak current for water oxidation increases linearly with [H2O]1/2 to the limit of miscibility. It is estimated that the rate of catalytic water oxidation by Ru catalyst 8 in 6% (3.3 M) H2O/propylene carbonate (kcat = 1 s−1) is ∼300 times faster than that of the same reaction by 8 in pH 1.0 aqueous solution (kcat = 3.1 × 10−3 s−1). The lack of significant KIE (<1.4) in water oxidation in nonaqueous solvents is also consistent with the absence of a water-assisted concerted APT process (KIE = 6.6 for the same reaction in water). These results together indicate that a different mechanism for the O–O bond formation takes place in nonaqueous solvents. The rate enhancements in nonaqueous solvents may be due to a higher activity for water and stability for the resulting [RuIII–(OOH2)]3+ in organic solvent environments.
4.4. O–O bond formation through other pathways
Besides the general water attack pathway, there are several other scenarios for the formation of the O–O bond in single site water oxidation. The first example is illustrated by Milstein and co-workers using the Ru(II) pincer complex 82a, in which the O–O bond is formed intramolecularly by the coupling of two hydroxyl groups on a Ru center followed by the liberation of a hydrogen peroxide molecule in a reductive elimination step.129,131 This mechanism has been addressed in the previous section.
Secondly, the radical coupling pathway between a high-valent metal-oxo and a hydroxyl group is illustrated by Sakai and co-workers using mononuclear Ru catalysts 5 and [Ru(tpzm)(R2bpy)(OH2)]2+ (tpzm = tris(1-pyrazolyl)methane; R2bpy = 4,4′-disubstituted-2,2′-bipyridines, R = H for 84a, Me for 84b, and OMe for 84c).136 There are four lines of evidence for this argument, as suggested by the authors. First, kinetic studies indicated that the rate of O2 evolution is first order on both [WOC] and [Ce(IV)]. This rate law suggested that [RuVO]3+ and Ce(IV) species formed an encounter complex at the transition state in RDS. Second, the oxygen in Ce(IV)–OH may possess a radical-like character, which is suggested by the precedent of complex [CeIII(C8H82−)(C8H8−˙)] (cerocene, where C8H82− = cyclooctatetraene dianion) with one spin on Ce (4f1) and the other one on a ligand. Spin calculations on [CeIV(OH)(NO3)5]2− showed that it had a singlet biradical ground state with the Mulliken atomic spin densities +0.89 at the O (hydroxyl) atom and −1.02 at the Ce atom. As a consequence, this anion is better described as [CeIII(˙OH)(NO3)5]2−. Third, DFT calculations on atomic charges gave +3.26 for the Ce atom and −0.20 for the O (hydroxyl) atom, which is consistent with the spin density distribution. Fourth, no oxygen evolved by replacing CAN with K2S2O8. This phenomenon indicated that Ce(IV) played a role as an oxidant and also as a radical. These results implied that a highly reactive hydroxyl radical (HO˙) on Ce(IV) provided an efficient path towards the radical–radical coupling. The high charge on the Ce(IV) atom may be necessary for the formation of such an O (hydroxyl) radical.
Radical coupling between two high-valent metal-oxo units to make an O–O bond is known in water oxidation with dinuclear Ru WOCs.137–139 On the other hand, this pathway is very rare in single site catalysis as the rates of O2 evolution typically have a linear dependence on the catalyst concentration. However, in Sakai's study, they observed that the rate of O2 evolution was quadratic to the catalyst concentration and independent of CAN with the use of mononuclear Ru WOCs, 18a–c.136 As pointed out by the authors, this quadratic dependence was seen for the first time in water oxidation with mononuclear aquaruthenium complexes. Based on kinetic results, an oxo–oxo radical coupling between two [RuVO]3+ units was suggested for the formation of the O–O bond in these systems, and this step was the RDS in catalysis. In addition, Privalov and co-workers gave another example for this intermolecular oxo–oxo coupling.140 They conducted computational studies on Ru intermediate 78, which was a dimer of [RuIVL2(pic)2]2+ linked by an [HOHOH]− group (Scheme 19). From calculations, the removal of one electron in 78 generated a Ru(IV)–O˙ and led to the pair [RuIV–OH⋯˙O–RuIV]. The removal of an additional electron produced the pair [RuIV–O˙⋯˙O–RuIV] stabilized by the H-bonding network between opposing carboxylate groups on ligand frameworks. There were two possible electronic configurations, namely low-spin antiferromagnetic, LS[AF], and low-spin ferromagnetic, LS[F]. These two states were degenerate when the O⋯O distance was larger than 2.5 Å, and the LS[AF] configuration became dominant when this distance was smaller than 2.0 Å. The oxo–oxo coupling in the LS[AF] configuration generated the peroxo species [RuIV–O2(2−)–RuIV]. A very recent report by Sun and co-workers shows that a similar O–O bond formation step was possible using a structural analogue of complex 77 (the monomer of 78).141 By replacing the two axial pic ligands in 77 with two isoquinoline units, the resulting mononuclear Ru complex showed high catalytic activity for water oxidation (TOF > 300 s−1), which was comparable to that of the natural system PS II. This binuclear pathway for O2 evolution was also suggested in the osmocene (83a) system.132 Upon photolysis, the hydroxo complex [Cp2OsIV(OH)]+ (83e) deprotonated first and then dimerized to form [Cp2Os(O2)OsCp2] (83g). The electronic structure of this dimer was not clear, but a peroxo complex [Cp2OsIII(O22−)OsIIICp2] was suggested.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Water oxidation is a critical process in water splitting and is the bottleneck in the design and development of competent artificial photosynthesis systems. In nature, the oxidation of water is driven by light energy to produce O2 and four protons and four electrons that are eventually utilized in carbon fixation. In other words, nature’s photosynthetic process not only provides O2 and carbohydrates for living systems but also converts solar energy to chemical energy and stores it in chemical bonds. Because of the increasing demand for energy, the limited reserves of fossil fuels and various environmental issues related to their use, new energy sources that are clean, renewable and sustainable, and environmentally benign are required. By mimicking the natural system, light-driven water splitting to H2 and O2 represents a very promising strategy. As a result, the research of its two half reactions, water oxidation and reduction, has attracted major attention. Catalysts are the key in this research. Great progress has been made to develop homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts for water oxidation and reduction in the past decades. Despite these achievements, catalysts that are cheap, highly efficient, and robust for practical use are still lacking, which is especially true for those of water oxidation. Therefore, it is one of the major tasks for synthetic chemists and material scientists to develop competent WOCs.
This article summarized recent breakthroughs in catalytic water oxidation using mononuclear metal complexes. Catalysts containing multinuclear metal clusters have long been thought to be necessary for water oxidation due to the nature of this thermodynamically unfavorable and dynamically complicated process. This judgment was changed in 2005 when Thummel reported the first example of water oxidation with single site Ru catalysts. The subsequent advance in this area was made in 2008: Meyer and co-workers conducted systematic studies on catalytic water oxidation using mononuclear Ru complexes and proposed a plausible catalytic mechanism by means of electronic absorption spectroscopy, electrochemistry, calculation, and detailed kinetic studies. This work shed light on single site WOCs. Since then, a variety of mononuclear metal complexes that are active for water oxidation have been prepared and carefully studied. This library now contains complexes made of Ru, Ir and earth-abundant elementals (Mn, Co, and Fe) with various coordinating frameworks, including polypyridyl ligands, polyamines, tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amines, phenylpyridines, carbenes, abnormal carbenes, cyclopentadienyl and pentamethylcyclopentadienyl ligands, corroles, TAMLs, pincer ligands, carboxylate ligands, and all-inorganic polyoxometalates.
Research using single site WOCs has several advantages. They meet the current need for atom economy; the ligand design and the synthesis of molecular complexes are straightforward; mononuclear complexes are amenable to systematic modification and comprehensive kinetic studies; and it is easy to integrate catalytic functions of one metal site with other properties in the same molecular assemblies to construct devices for water splitting. Thanks to the many mononuclear WOCs recently prepared and examined, we can get a better understanding on catalytic water oxidation over single metal sites, including the correlations between structures (geometric and electronic) and activities as well as stabilities, ligand effects, influences of pH, oxidant, ionic strength, anion, and so on, and more importantly, the catalytic mechanism in these processes. It is established that all these factors mentioned above have significant effects on catalyst efficiency and may change the rate-determining step in the catalytic cycle. As a result, it is necessary to optimize these parameters in water oxidation catalysis for practical use.
Catalyst activity and stability are two major parameters by which to judge whether the catalyst is competent or not. Typically, catalysts with high activities are not stable under catalytic conditions, and those robust complexes are in general not efficient in performing water oxidation. The balance between them has not been finely reached yet. However, recent results have greatly broadened our understanding on this chemistry. In addition to these two factors, several others shall be considered when we design and prepare novel molecular catalysts for water oxidation. First, aqueous solubility is a concern. Many of the organometallic WOCs reported to date have a limited solubility in aqueous solutions. The use of a mixture of water and organic solvents (i.e. acetonitrile) is usually seen in these systems. The introduction of carboxylic or sulfonic groups and the preparation of charged species are shown to be able to increase the aqueous solubility of catalysts. Second, the discrimination between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis is a major subject in water oxidation. Many metal oxides (i.e. ruthenium oxide, iridium oxide, cobalt oxide and manganese oxide), in particular their nanoparticles, have been shown to be active for catalytic water oxidation. It is crucial to distinguish whether the real WOC is the molecular metal complex or its decomposed colloid metal oxide under strong oxidative conditions. Third, the working potential for electrochemical water oxidation shall be close to the thermodynamic potential. The difference between the working potential and the required minimal potential is known as overpotential, which represents the energy loss during water oxidation using electronic energy. This term is also important in designing catalysts for light-driven water oxidation since most commonly used photosensitizers have a much lower oxidation potential than chemical oxidants, such as Ce(IV), IO4−, and so on. The use of negatively charged ligands that have strong σ- and/or π-donating characters is suggested to be able to considerably lower the overpotential of WOCs, although this is not always true as in some cases electron donating ligands make the removal of proton difficult and thus hinder the PCET process.127 Interestingly, mononuclear Co complex 57 bearing a neutral pentadentate ligand Py5 has an overpotential of 0.5 V, which appears to be one of the lowest values reported for molecular WOCs. Fourth, photoisomerization shall be considered in catalysis. Several examples have been reported in the literature that isomerization may take place in the presence of light under working conditions, and these isomers have remarkably different catalytic activities for water oxidation. This event is particularly important for light-driven water oxidation.
In addition to these single site WOCs, two fascinating mononuclear complexes that are able to perform both water oxidation and water reduction in consecutive steps have been realized. The first example is a dearomatized mononuclear Ru(II) pincer complex 82a reported by Milstein and co-workers. Upon reaction with water, 82a triggers the stoichiometric liberation of H2 and O2 in consecutive thermal- and light-driven steps. Importantly, isotopic labeling experiments using D2O, H218O and H217O as well as crossover experiments collaborated with many chemical and physicochemical methods have unambiguously illustrated that unimolecular O–O bond formation at a single metal center is possible. By successfully isolating and charactering intermediates, a plausible catalytic cycle for complete water splitting is proposed. The other example is a mononuclear Os(II) complex osmocene (83a) reported by Kunkely and Vogler. Photo-induced H2 evolution from a hydride complex [Cp2OsIV(H)]+ (83b) and O2 evolution from a hydroxo complex [Cp2OsIV(OH)]+ (83e) can be coupled in a consecutive manner over an Os center. These results provide an alternative way for splitting water.
This article aims to summarize recent progress in single site WOCs and also provide some essential information on the catalytic mechanism and O–O bond formation. In general, PCET is believed to avoid charge accumulation and thus lower the oxidation potential of intermediates. High-valent metal-oxo species are proposed as the active forms for the O–O bond formation in most systems. Importantly, a [RuVO]3+ unit and a [MnVO]3+ unit have been spectroscopically characterized using complexes 5 and 55, respectively. Nucleophilic water attack on high-valent metal-oxo units is responsible for the formation of the O–O bond. Water- or base-assisted concerted oxygen atom–proton transfer is suggested to occur in the O–O bond formation on a single metal site. Water attack can also take place in nonaqueous solvents with a limited amount of water, where this APT process is absent. In addition to nucleophilic water attack, radical coupling between a high-valent metal-oxo unit and a Ce-bound hydroxyl or between two metal-oxo units is suggested to give the O–O bond as well. These results certainly contribute to our understanding of water oxidation over single metal sites and of O2 evolution in artificial photosynthesis.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the support from the “Thousand Talents Program” in China and the National Science Foundation of China under grant no. 21101170.
References

Key World Energy Statistics, Statistics Report by International Energy Agency, Paris, France,  2011 Search PubMed.

Cabon Dioxide Emissions from Fuel Combustion, Statistics Report by International Energy Agency, Paris, France,  2011 Search PubMed.
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
R. Eisenberg and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1697–1699 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hankamer, J. Barber and E. J. Boekema, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol., 1997, 48, 641–671 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1861–1870 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hammarström and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2379–2388 Search PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Alvarez-Galván, J. A. V. de la Mano, S. M. Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865–1882 CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3952–3991 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef .
J. L. Dempsey, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1995–2004 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2245–2274 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4273–4303 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Sun, B. Åkermark and S. Ott, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1653–1663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zouni, H. T. Witt, J. Kern, P. Fromme, N. KrauB, W. Saenger and P. Orth, Nature, 2001, 409, 739–743 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS .
B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040–1044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano, J. Kern, K. Sauer, M. J. Latimer, Y. Pushkar, J. Biesiadka, B. Loll, W. Saenger, J. Messinger, A. Zouni and V. K. Yachandra, Science, 2006, 314, 821–825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pushkar, J. Yano, K. Sauer, A. Boussac and V. K. Yachandra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 1879–1884 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sauer and V. K. Yachandra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 8631–8636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano, J. Kern, K. D. Irrgang, M. J. Latimer, U. Bergmann, P. Glatzel, Y. Pushkar, J. Biesiadka, B. Loll, K. Sauer, J. Messinger, A. Zouni and V. K. Yachandra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 12047–12052 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano, Y. Pushkar, P. Glatzel, A. Lewis, K. Sauer, J. Messinger, U. Bergmann and V. Yachandra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14974–14975 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Carrell, A. M. Tyryshkin and G. C. Dismukes, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2002, 7, 2–22 CrossRef CAS .
H. Visser, C. E. Dubé, W. H. Armstrong, K. Sauer and V. K. Yachandra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11008–11017 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Robblee, J. Messinger, R. M. Cinco, K. L. McFarlane, C. Fernandez, S. A. Pizarro, K. Sauer and V. K. Yachandra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7459–7471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Messinger, J. H. A. Nugent and M. C. W. Evans, Biochemistry, 1997, 36, 11055–11060 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Kulik, B. Epel, W. Lubitz and J. Messinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2392–2393 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Kulik, B. Epel, W. Lubitz and J. Messinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13421–13435 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz, E. J. Reijerse and J. Messinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 15–31 CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462–16463 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Sun, L. Hammarström, B. Åkermark and S. Styring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 36–49 RSC .
W. Rüttinger and G. C. Dismukes, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1–24 CrossRef .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi, K. V. Wolf, P. J. Baesjou, S. L. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2925–2928 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353–10357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Beckmann, H. Uchtenhagen, G. Berggren, M. F. Anderlund, A. Thapper, J. Messinger, S. Styring and P. Kurz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 668–676 CAS .
Q. S. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kögerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, C. Besson, Y. Hou, Q. S. Yin, D. G. Musaev, D. Quiñonero, R. Cao, K. I. Hardcastle, A. Proust, P. Kögerler and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17360–17370 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. M. Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17632–17635 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, T. Cardolaccia, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1727–1752 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Binstead, C. W. Chronister, J. F. Ni, C. M. Hartshorn and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 8464–8473 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Lebeau, S. A. Adeyemi and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 6476–6484 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Schoonover, J. F. Ni, L. Roecker, P. S. Whiter and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 5885–5892 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, F. M. Toma, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5592–5603 CAS .
A. A. Boghossian, M. H. Ham, J. H. Choi and M. S. Strano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3834–3843 CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, L. Vayssieres, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang, B. R. Antoun and S. S. Mao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889–3899 CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 CAS .
M. Risch, V. Khare, I. Zaharieva, L. Gerencser, P. Chernev and H. Dau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6936–6937 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 CAS .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4138–4147 CAS .
T. K. Townsend, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4270–4275 CAS .
L. L. Duan, L. P. Tong, Y. H. Xu and L. C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296–3313 CAS .
N. K. Allam, C.-W. Yen, R. D. Near and M. A. El-Sayed, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2909–2914 CAS .
C. Herrero, A. Quaranta, W. Leibl, A. W. Rutherford and A. Aukauloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2353–2365 CAS .
E. R. Young, R. Costi, S. Paydavosi, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2058–2061 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 CAS .
D. Shevchenko, M. F. Anderlund, A. Thapper and S. Styring, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2011, 4, 1284–1287 CAS .
Y. Lee, J. H. Choi, H. J. Jeon, K. M. Choi, J. W. Lee and J. K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 914–920 CAS .
A. J. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reece and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499–504 CAS .
E. R. Young, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1726–1728 CAS .
G. H. Li, E. M. Sproviero, R. C. Snoeberger III, N. Iguchi, J. D. Blakemore, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 230–238 CAS .
R. F. Zong and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12802–12803 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. McDaniel, F. J. Coughlin, L. L. Tinker and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Tseng, R. F. Zong, J. T. Muckerman and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11763–11773 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, R. F. Zong, H. W. Tseng and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 990–998 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 182–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Tsai, J. T. Muckerman and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1545–1557 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kimoto, K. Yamauchi, M. Yoshida, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 239–241 RSC .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. R. Norris, Z. F. Chen, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1277–1279 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3789–3792 RSC .
M. Yagi, S. Tajima, M. Komi and H. Yamazaki, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3802–3804 RSC .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, B. D. Koivisto, M. A. Henderson and C. P. Berlinguette, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2202–2209 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, M. A. Henderson, B. D. Koivisto, H. D. Osthoff and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16094–16106 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kaveevivitchai, R. F. Zong, H. W. Tseng, R. Chitta and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 2930–2939 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, M. A. Henderson and C. P. Berlinguette, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3662–3672 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, X. Q. Hu, W. T. Yang, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 7225–7229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15580–15581 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, J. F. Hull, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6950–6952 RSC .
P. G. Hoertz, Z. F. Chen, C. A. Kent and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 8179–8181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, L. L. Duan, T. Åkermark, L. P. Tong, B. L. Lee, R. Zhang, B. Åkermark and L. C. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9520–9528 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 702–703 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radaram, J. A. Ivie, W. M. Singh, R. M. Grudzien, J. H. Reibenspies, C. E. Webster and X. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 10564–10571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bernet, R. Lalrempuia, W. Ghattas, H. Mueller-Bunz, L. Vigara, A. Llobet and M. Albrecht, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8058–8060 RSC .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522–7523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Murakami, D. C. Hong, T. Suenobu, S. Yamaguchi, T. Ogura and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11605–11613 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730–8731 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, D. Balcells, J. F. Hull, G. W. Olack, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16017–16029 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Schley, J. D. Blakemore, N. K. Subbaiyan, C. D. Incarvito, F. D'Souza, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10473–10481 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Brewster, J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, C. D. Incarvito, N. Hazari, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schuster, L. R. Yang, H. G. Raubenheimer and M. Albrecht, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 3445–3478 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. H. Hetterscheid and J. N. H. Reek, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2712–2714 RSC .
R. Lalrempuia, N. D. McDaniel, H. Müller-Bunz, S. Bernhard and M. Albrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9765–9768 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savini, G. Bellachioma, G. Ciancaleoni, C. Zuccaccia, D. Zuccaccia and A. Macchioni, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9218–9219 RSC .
A. Savini, P. Belanzoni, G. Bellachioma, C. Zuccaccia, D. Zuccaccia and A. Macchioni, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3360–3374 RSC .
D. C. Hong, M. Murakami, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5708–5716 CAS .
D. B. Grotjahn, D. B. Brown, J. K. Martin, D. C. Marelius, M. C. Abadjian, H. N. Tran, G. Kalyuzhny, K. S. Vecchio, Z. G. Specht, S. A. Cortes-Llamas, V. Miranda-Soto, C. van Niekerk, C. E. Moore and A. L. Rheingold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19024–19027 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, H. Y. Ma, Y. V. Geletii, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5596–5598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, J. H. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Na, B. Åkermark and L. C. Sun, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 1987–1994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. Åkermark, J. H. Liu, L. C. Sun and B. Åkermark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8726–8727 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lassalle-Kaiser, C. Hureau, D. A. Pantazis, Y. Pushkar, R. Guillot, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano, F. Neese and E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 924–938 CAS .
J. G. McAlpin, Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă, T. A. Stich, S. A. Stoian, W. H. Casey, D. G. Nocera and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6882–6883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, J. Borau-Garcia and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4249–4251 RSC .
D. K. Dogutan, R. McGuire Jr. and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9178–9180 CrossRef CAS .
R. McGuire Jr, D. K. Dogutan, T. S. Teets, J. Suntivich, Y. Shao-Horn and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 411–414 RSC .
W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990–10991 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Fillol, Z. Codolà, I. Garcia-Bosch, L. Gómez, J. J. Pla and M. Costas, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 807–813 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, L. P. Tong and L. C. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 238–244 CAS .
S. Roeser, P. Farràs, F. Bozoglian, M. Martínez-Belmonte, J. Benet-Buchholz and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 153–207 CrossRef .
H. Yamazaki, T. Hakamata, M. Komi and M. Yagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8846–8849 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Boyer, D. E. Polyansky, D. J. Szalda, R. F. Zong, R. P. Thummel and E. Fujita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12600–12604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, M. Z. Ertem, L. Vigara, T. K. Todorova, W. Z. Chen, R. C. Rocha, F. Aquilante, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7745–7747 CrossRef CAS .
B. Durham, S. R. Wilson, D. J. Hodgson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 600–607 CrossRef CAS .
N. Planas, L. Vigara, C. Cady, P. Miró, P. Huang, L. Hammarström, S. Styring, N. Leidel, H. Dau, M. Haumann, L. Gagliardi, C. J. Cramer and A. Llobet, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 11134–11142 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, A. Fischer, Y. H. Xu and L. C. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10397–10399 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, P. Zhang, M. Wang and L. C. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, M. Gorlov, L. P. Tong, S. Andersson and L. C. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4659–4668 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kärkäs, E. V. Johnston, E. A. Karlsson, B. L. Lee, T. Åkermark, M. Shariatgorji, L. Ilag, O. Hansson, J. E. Bäckvall and B. Åkermark, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 7953–7959 CrossRef .
L. P. Tong, Y. Wang, L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, X. Cheng, A. Fischer, M. S. G. Ahlquist and L. C. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 3388–3398 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H. E. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389–2392 CAS .
S. W. Kohl, L. Weiner, L. Schwartsburd, L. Konstantinovski, L. J. W. Shimon, Y. Ben-David, M. A. Iron and D. Milstein, Science, 2009, 324, 74–77 CrossRef CAS .
R. Eisenberg, Science, 2009, 324, 44–45 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Yang and M. B. Hall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 120–130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunkely and A. Vogler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1685–1687 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Polyansky, J. T. Muckerman, J. Rochford, R. F. Zong, R. P. Thummel and E. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14649–14665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944–1953 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, H. L. Luo, J. F. Hull, A. Paul and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17670–17673 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, S. Masaoka, J. Abe and K. Sakai, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 2369–2378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Romain, F. Bozoglian, X. Sala and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2768–2769 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozoglian, S. Romain, M. Z. Ertem, T. K. Todorova, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. Rodríguez, I. Romero, J. Benet-Buchholz, X. Fontrodona, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15176–15187 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Muckerman, D. E. Polyansky, T. Wada, K. Tanaka and E. Fujita, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1787–1802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nyhlén, L. L. Duan, B. Åkermark, L. C. Sun and T. Privalov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1773–1777 CrossRef .
L. L. Duan, F. Bozoglian, S. Mandal, B. Stewart, T. Privalov, A. Llobet and L. C. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 418–423 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Rui Cao	Rui Cao is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Renmin University of China. His main research interests are in bioinorganic chemistry, catalysis including water oxidation and the activation of small molecules, and molecular self-assembly. He received his B.S. (2003) in chemistry from Peking University in Beijing, China and Ph.D. (2008) from Emory University in Atlanta, GA. He was the Dreyfus Postdoctoral Fellow from 2009 to 2011 at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the Department of Chemistry under the guidance of the Arthur Amos Noyes Professor Stephen J. Lippard.
Wenzhen Lai	Wenzhen Lai received her B.Sc. (2002) in chemistry from Sichuan University in China. Under the supervision of Prof. Daiqian Xie, she obtained her M.Sc. (2005) in physical chemistry from Sichuan University and Ph.D. (2008) in theoretical and computational chemistry from Nanjing University. After postdoctoral research (2008–2011) at the Hebrew University in the group of Prof. Sason Shaik, she joined Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China as an associate professor and principal investigator. Her main research interests are theoretical studies of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis by metal-containing catalysts.
Pingwu Du	Pingwu Du received a Ph.D. degree from University of Rochester (2009) under the direction of Professor Richard Eisenberg. He is a Director's Fellow at Argonne National Laboratory and just took a professorship at University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). His current research interests are in inorganic and organometallic chemistry and photochemistry related to water splitting and catalysis. He is a recipient of the Young Investigator Award (Inorganic Division, 2008) and Nobel Laureate Signature Award (2011) by the American Chemical Society.

Broader context
The globally increasing energy demand and environmental issues directly caused by anthropogenic greenhouse-gas emissions have been forcing people to find and use renewable, clean and environmentally benign energy resources to replace fossil fuels. Nuclear energy has some practical problems, including environmental risks from uranium mining, nuclear waste, and serious nuclear accidents, although it is contended to be sustainable. Fresh water shortage is another major concern for the use of nuclear power. Wind power and hydroelectric power, as alternatives of fossil fuels, are clean, plentiful and renewable; however, both have to use a large area of land and have many other recognized disadvantages. Solar energy, the origin of nearly all energy forms on the planet, is the most promising energy source for future consumption. In order to harvest solar energy, we need to first convert it to chemical energy and/or electricity and store it in a chemical form. Nature uses a sophisticated mechanism of photosynthesis to oxidize water by using solar light. The resulting dioxygen is released as a byproduct, while the protons and electrons extracted from water are brought into the reduction of carbon dioxide, a process storing light energy in chemical forms. Artificial photosynthesis is an attractive way for human beings to use solar energy. By splitting water with light to dioxygen, protons and electrons as nature does, followed by storing solar energy in hydrogen or other chemical forms (i.e. carbohydrates), we can make sustainable fuel sources on demand. Thus, photocatalytic water oxidation is the key step toward the conversion of solar energy to chemical energy. However, the oxidative reaction leading to O2 formation from water is challenging in both thermodynamic (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, ΔE = 1.23 V vs. NHE) and kinetic (significant molecular rearrangement) aspects. As a result, catalysts for water oxidation are crucial, and research to design and develop efficient water oxidation catalysts has been attracting significant attention from chemists and material scientists in the last three decades. A variety of water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) that are molecular complexes, supramolecular assemblies, nanostructured metal oxides, and devices made of active WOC species have been reported in the literature to perform this reaction chemically, electrochemically, and photochemically. These studies have greatly increased our understanding of water oxidation. This article presents an overview of molecular WOCs that contain only one metal center, which are proven to be as efficient as multinuclear WOCs but are considered to be a system more amenable to carry out mechanistic studies. We also draw an outlook for the design of efficient, cheap and stable catalysts.


 	Scheme 1	 
2[RuVO]3+ + 3H2O → 2[RuII–OH2]2+ + 3/2O2 + 2H+, ΔG° = −0.90 eV	(1)
2[RuIVO]2+ + 2H2O → 2[RuII–OH2]2+ + O2, ΔG° = +0.04 eV	(2)

 	Scheme 2  Water oxidation pathway established using single site Ru catalysts 6 and 7 (0.1 M HNO3, black route).33 An additional pathway determined using catalysts 6, 8 and 9 (1.0 M HNO3, red route).74	 

 	Scheme 3	 

 	Fig. 1  X-Ray structure of complex trans-[Ru(tpy)(Mebim-py)(OH2)]2+ (10).	 

 	Scheme 4	 



5
	tpy	0.34

11
	EtOtpy	4.4

12
	MeOtpy	2.4

13
	Metpy	0.61

14
	Cltpy	0.43

 	Scheme 5	 

 	Scheme 6	 

H2PO4−	2.15	3.8 ± 0.5
OAc−	4.75	10.3 ± 1
HPO42−	7.20	48 ± 5
H2O	−1.74	
k
H2O = 3.5 × 10−3 s−1

 	Scheme 7	 

 	Scheme 8	 

 	Scheme 9	 

 	Scheme 10	 

 	Scheme 11	 

 	Fig. 2  Polyhedral/ball-and-stick representation of 53.104 The 31P NMR spectrum shows two peaks, which is consistent with the symmetry of the molecule.	 

 	Scheme 12	 

 	Scheme 13	 

 	Scheme 14	 

 	Scheme 15	 

 	Scheme 16	 

 	Scheme 17	 

 	Scheme 18  Water attack vs. intramolecular O–O bond formation pathways with calculated free energies (kcal mol−1).120	 

 	Scheme 19	 

 	Scheme 20	 

 	Scheme 21	 

 	Scheme 22	 
2[RuIVO]2+ + H2O → [RuIV(OO)]2+ + [RuII–OH2]2+, ΔG° = −0.132 eV	(3)

 	Scheme 23	 

 	Scheme 24	 

 	Scheme 25  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation with an intramolecular assistance (Pathway A in ref. 94).	 

 	Scheme 26  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation without assistance (Pathway B in ref. 94).	 

 	Scheme 27  Energy diagram (kcal mol−1) for O–O bond formation with a water-assisted concerted APT process (Pathway C in ref. 94).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
