Black phosphorus nanostructures: recent advances in hybridization, doping and functionalization  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00021A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00021A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3492-3509Black phosphorus nanostructures: recent advances in hybridization, doping and functionalization

        
          
            Wanying 
            Lei
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Minghua 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ace
aCAS Key Laboratory of Standardization and Measurement for Nanotechnology, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: liug@nanoctr.cn; liuminghua@nanoctr.cn
bAcademy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
cUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
dCenter for Nanochemistry, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices, State Key Laboratory for Structural Chemistry of Unstable and Stable Species, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: jinzhang@pku.edu.cn
eCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      12th January 2017
    First published on 24th April 2017AbstractOwing to its high charge-carrier mobility, tunable direct-bandgap and unique in-plane anisotropic structure, black phosphorus (BP), a rising star of post-graphene two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, has been intensively investigated since early 2014. To explore its full potential and push the limits, research into BP-based novel functional nanostructures (i.e., nanomaterials and nanodevices) by means of hybridization, doping, and functionalization is rapidly expanding. Indeed, the cutting-edge developments and applications of BP nanostructures have had a significant impact on a wide range of research areas, including field effect transistors, diodes, photodetectors, biomedicine, sodium-ion batteries, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, memory devices, and more. This tutorial review summarizes the recent advances of BP nanostructures and outlines the future challenges and opportunities.
Wanying Lei
Wanying Lei received her BS degree from the Department of Chemistry at China Agricultural University in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate at National Center for Nanoscience and Technology and Peking University under the direction of Prof. Gang Liu. Her ongoing research includes low-dimensional semiconducting materials (ceria, potassium niobate, hematite, black phosphorus, graphitic carbon nitride, etc.) and supported metal nanoparticles (gold, silver, etc.) applicable in pollutant degradation, water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.
Gang Liu
Gang Liu received his PhD degree in 2000 from Texas A&M University, USA. Then he did his postdoctoral work at Brookhaven National Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania and Temple University. He joined National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, in 2007 as an associate professor. His research interests lie in the characterization and properties of a variety of nanoscale materials (metal oxides, supported metal nanoparticles, two-dimensional layered semiconductors, etc.) important in environmental control and clean energy production. He has published more than 80 papers in peer-reviewed journals.
Jin Zhang
Jin Zhang received his PhD degree in 1997 from Lanzhou University, China. After a two-year postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Leeds, UK, he returned to Peking University where he was appointed as an Associate Professor (2000) and promoted to Full Professor in 2006. In 2013, he was appointed as Changjiang Professor. His research focuses on the controlled synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of carbon-based nanomaterials, black phosphorus and other related nanomaterials. Dr Zhang has published over 200 peer-reviewed journal articles. He is a Fellow of the RSC and the editor of Carbon.
Minghua Liu
Minghua Liu received his PhD degree in 1994 from Saitama University, Japan. He then joined the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) as a Special Postdoctoral Researcher from 1994 to 1997. He joined the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, CAS, in 1998 and then the Institute of Chemistry, CAS, in 1999. In June 2013, he moved to National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China. His research interests cover supramolecular chemistry and the chirality issues in self-assembled systems, soft organic nanomaterials, hybrid inorganic/organic nanomaterials and their photocatalytic applications. He is now on the advisory board of Advanced Science and Nanoscale Horizons. He has published more than 300 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.

Key learning points
(1) Attractive merits of black phosphorus in terms of high charge-carrier mobility, tunable direct-bandgap and unique in-plane anisotropic structure.
(2) Hybridization of black phosphorus with carbon materials, metals, semiconductors, etc. to form multi-functional nanostructures.
(3) Modulation of electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic properties of black phosphorus via metallic and non-metallic doping.
(4) Covalent, van der Waals and electrostatic functionalization of black phosphorus against degradation under ambient conditions.
(5) Future challenges and opportunities for the developments of black phosphorus-based novel functional nanostructures.

1. Introduction
Ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials are currently receiving a great deal of attention for both fundamental studies and practical applications owing to their unique properties such as large surface-to-volume ratio, mechanical flexibility, optical transparency, and quantum confinement in the direction perpendicular to the basal plane.1–4 The most notable prototype is graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms, which holds extraordinary electron mobility, thermal conductivity and mechanical strength that have led to a new generation of state-of-the-art devices. The ground-breaking discovery and successful applications of graphene and its related materials has inspired the developments of a wide array of atomically thin 2D materials,5 such as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), graphite carbon nitride (g-C3N4), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), etc.
As a member in group V of the periodic table, phosphorus (P) accounts for approximately 0.1% of the earth's crust volume. In general, P exists in the form of three major allotropes, i.e., white phosphorus (WP), red phosphorus (RP) and black phosphorus (BP), in which BP is nontoxic and the most thermodynamically stable at room temperature.6 Among the emerging post-graphene 2D layered nanomaterials, BP is a rising star and has been intensively investigated since early 2014 with substantial potential in electronics6,7 and optoelectronics,8,9etc. The unusual properties of BP are closely relevant to its unique geometric structure and electronic structure. Fig. 1 displays the schematic atomic structure of three-layer BP. Each P atom is covalently bonded with two adjacent intraplane P atoms and another P atom in a neighboring interplane via its p-orbitals, whereas individual BP layers are stacked through relatively weak van der Waals (vdW) interactions. In particular, BP features a slightly puckered honeycomb structure by sp3 orbital hybridization, with armchair- and zigzag-configurations along the x- and y-axial directions, respectively.10,11 At room temperature, bulk BP exhibits electron and hole mobilities of 220 and 350 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The highest hole mobility of few-layer BP is ∼1000 cm2 V−1 s−1,12 which is comparable with that of Si. In semiconducting materials, the bandgap is a key parameter that determines their electronic and optical properties. Bearing a direct-bandgap in nature, BP presents a layer-dependent bandgap that varies from 0.3 eV in the bulk to 1.5 eV in a monolayer, thereby holding a wide photon absorption window up to the mid-infrared regime of the solar spectrum.10 And the inherent direct-bandgap of BP favors strong light–matter interaction and large photon-to-electron quantum yields as well.5 Although graphene shows higher carrier mobility, it has a gapless Dirac cone band structure that is unfavorable for optoelectronic applications. Likewise, a relatively large indirect-bandgap in most TMDs13,14 hinders their electronic applications. To this end, BP serendipitously bridges the gap between graphene and TMDs in terms of high charge-carrier mobility, tunable direct-bandgap and unique in-plane anisotropic structure, which render it an indispensable versatile 2D material in electronics, optoelectronics, biomedicine, batteries, and catalysis, among others.
 Fig. 1  Schematic structure of three-layer BP. (a) 3D view. (b) Top view and (c) side view. Grey balls represent P atoms. 
It has been reported that few-layer BP, also known as phosphorene with a layer number less than 10 can be prepared via a top-down approach (e.g., mechanical and liquid exfoliation) from BP bulk crystal.6,8,10 Although pristine BP exhibits unusual characteristics, to explore its full potential and push the limits, research into BP-based nanostructures (i.e., nanomaterials and nanodevices) by means of hybridization, doping, and functionalization is rapidly expanding. First, hybridization of BP with carbon materials, metals, semiconductors, etc. via stacking and mixing allows for flexible integrating materials with complementary properties to form high-performance nanostructures. Second, the intrinsic electronic structure of BP could be altered by doping metallic and non-metallic species into the BP lattice and surface for particular applications. Third, functionalization via covalent, vdW and electrostatic interactions through surface modification with organic groups and inorganic layers could stabilize BP while at the same time retain and even promote its specificity for long-term applications. To date, the frontier research of BP-based nanostructures has led to significant advances in field effect transistors (FETs),15,16 diodes,17,18 photodetectors,19,20 biomedicine,21,22 sodium ion batteries,23 photocatalysis,24 electrocatalysis,25etc. Taking into account that research on BP-based novel functional nanostructures is a dynamic young and rapidly expanding area, we believe that a timely tutorial review will benefit the future developments of BP nanostructures. This tutorial review presents new and exciting advances of BP nanostructures that will appeal to the international research communities from various scientific disciplines, including materials science, chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering.
2. Hybridization
In spite of BP's unique physicochemical properties, its potential widespread applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy storage and solar-to-chemical energy conversion, etc. still remain largely unexplored. To this end, the hybridization of BP with dissimilar components offers the advantages to create novel functional nanostructures with integrated properties. This section will summarize and discuss very recent advances in the design and fabrication of BP hybrids and applications thereof (Table 1). The materials hybridized with BP may include carbon materials, metals, semiconductors, etc. In particular, atomically sharp nanostructures by stacking phosphorene with particular materials on top of each other via vdW interactions are appealing, in which the lattice match in the interface is not a prerequisite and a nearly arbitrary combination is possible.
Table 1 Summary of BP-based nanostructures by hybridization




Nanostructures
Methods
Applications
Properties
Ref.




BP/graphene
Self-assembly
Sodium-ion batteries
Specific capacity: 2440 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.05 A g−1; 83% capacity retention after 100 cycles operating in a range of 0–1.5 V

23



BP/MWCNTs
Ball milling
Sodium-ion batteries
Initial Coulombic efficiency (∼91.1%); specific capacity: 1000 mA h g−1 at a charge/discharge rate of 3 A g−1; 1700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a charge/discharge rate of 1.3 A g−1

26



BP/CNTs
Thermal-vaporization transformation
Electrocatalytic OER
Executed potential: 1.6 V at 10.0 mA cm−2

25



Au/BP
Photoreduction
Visible-light photocatalysis
Au NP formation rates: 40-fold enhancement for few-layer BP than multi-layer BP

28



Ag/BP
Chemical reduction
Visible-light photocatalysis
Maximum rate constant: 3.44 h−1 for RhB degradation

24



TiO2/BP
Impregnation
Visible-light photocatalysis and antibacterial activity
Apparent rate constants: 2.38 h−1 and 2.05 h−1 for RB5 and RhB degradation, respectively; retained ∼92% of the initial activity for RB5 after 15 cycles; 2.48 h−1 and 2.06 h−1 for Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively

29



BP/MoS2
Stacking
p–n diodes
Photoresponsivity: 3.54 A W−1 at Vd = +2 V and 418 mA W−1 at Vd = −2 V at λ = 633 nm; EQE: 0.3%

17



MoS2/BP
Stacking
Photodetectors
Current ratio: 1.5 × 103 at the gate bias of −60 V; photoresponsivity: 22.3 A W−1 at λ = 532 nm, 153.4 mA W−1 at λ = 1.55 μm; specific detectivity: 3.1 × 1011 Jones at λ = 532 nm, 2.13 × 109 Jones at λ = 1550 nm

31



BP/ZnO
Stacking
p–n diodes; junction FETs
ON/OFF ratio: 104; ideality factor: 1.3

18



BP/SrTiO3
Stacking
FETs
ON/OFF ratio: 105 at 50 K; photoresponsivity: 105 A W−1 at λ = 633 nm at 50 K; photocurrent: 1.8 μA, 120 nA and 25 nA under 633 nm, 532 nm, and 405 nm, respectively

20



BP/GaAs
Stacking
p–n diodes
Photoresponsivity: 37 mA W−1 at λ = 514 nm; effective ideality factor: 9.7 at 0.8 V; EQE: 10% without bias, 30% under a reverse bias of −2.5 V; fill factor: less than 0.3 at 514 nm

33



SnSe2/BP
Stacking
Esaki diodes
Peak-to valley ratio: 1.8 at 300 K and 2.8 at 80 K; photoresponsivity: 0.24 mA W−1 at λ = 488 nm

34



BP/BP suboxide
Focused laser-induced oxidation
Photodetectors
Photoresponsivity: 5.7 × 106 mA W−1 at λ = 532 nm

35



hBN/BP/hBN
Stacking
Photodetectors
THz frequency response; stable up to 7 months for electrical performance

36



PVP/BP
Impregnation
Memory devices
ON/OFF current ratio: 6.0 × 104 at a reading voltage of 0.2 V; stable after a 1.1 × 103 s test at 0.2 V

38



RP/BP
Ball milling
Visible-light photocatalysis
Apparent reaction rate: 4.14 h−1 for RhB degradation; retained 85% activity after three cycles

39





2.1 BP–carbon hybrids
As one of the potential alternatives to lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries are a promising candidate with greater abundance and lower costs.23,26 Ongoing research focuses on the design and fabrication of anodes for high-performance sodium-ion batteries. As aforementioned, BP exhibits strong in-plane structural anisotropy: the interlayer channel dimension (3.08 Å) along the zigzag (i.e., x axis) direction is much larger than that (1.16 Å) along the armchair (i.e., y axis) direction. Taking such characteristics along with sodium size (2.04 Å) into consideration, Cui and co-workers developed a phosphorene/graphene hybrid-like anode for sodium-ion batteries.23Fig. 2a displays a schematic illustration of the underlying sodiation process, which is confirmed by in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging (Fig. 2b–e). The time-resolved TEM images demonstrated that the transport of sodium ions along the zigzag direction simultaneously led to a volume expansion along the armchair. Phosphorene/graphene hybrids (Fig. 2f) were then self-assembled by intercalating phosphorene between graphene layers via mixing the graphene and phosphorene solutions. The stabilization of phosphorene/graphene sandwich-like hybrids was ascribed to the vdW interactions. The electrochemical performance of the as-prepared phosphorene/graphene hybrids with a phosphorene mass ratio of 48.3% was examined and the results are displayed in Fig. 2g. Remarkably, the specific capacity of phosphorene/graphene sandwich-like hybrids is shown to be 2440 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.05 A g−1. Additionally, the as-prepared phosphorene/graphene hybrids display durability with ∼83% capacity retention after 100 cycles operating in a range of 0–1.5 V. The improved performance and cycle stability were attributed to the cooperation between phosphorene and graphene. Graphene acted as an elastic buffer layer to accommodate the anisotropic volumetric expansion in the process of sodiation as well as an electric highway, whereas phosphorene offered a short diffusion distance along the zigzag direction for sodium ions. Multicomponent hybrids for the anode of sodium-ion batteries such as BP/Ketjenblack-multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were prepared through high-energy ball milling under an Ar atmosphere.26 Herein, the hybrids combined Ketjenblack with high surface area and conductivity, MWCNTs with conductivity and structurally stability, and nanosized BP. The mass ratio of BP, Ketjenblack, and MWCNTs was 7:2.5:0.5. The as-prepared hybrids showed a remarkable initial Coulombic efficiency (∼91.1%), great specific capacity (∼1000 mA h g−1) at a high charge/discharge rate of 3 A g−1, and long-term durability (∼1700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles) at a charge/discharge rate of 1.3 A g−1. The above studies pave the way for the construction of BP-based anodes for high-performance sodium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the typical sodiation process in BP, involving sodium-ion intercalation and Na3P alloy formation. (b–e) In situ time-resolved TEM images of the sodiation process. (f) Schematic diagram illustrating the structural evolution of phosphorene/graphene sandwich-like hybrids in the sodiation process. (g) Good cyclability evidenced by reversible desodiation capacity and corresponding Coulombic efficiency for 100 cycles under various currents with 48.3 wt% BP in the anode. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
By a thermal-vaporization transformation approach, Wang and co-workers prepared CNT supported BP hybrid electrocatalysts.25 In short, surface oxide-free RP and CNTs with a mass ratio of 10:1 were thoroughly mixed and ground. Subsequently, RP was vaporized into the CNT matrix at 450 °C and finally transformed into BP upon calcination at 650 °C under an Ar flow (5 cm3 min−1) for 5 h. Accordingly, BP particles were well dispersed in the network of CNTs that had large surface area, high conductivity and excellent adsorption properties. The BP/CNT hybrids showed superior electrocatalytic activity as well as stability towards the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). For example, at a current density of 10.0 mA cm−2, the executed potential for BP/CNTs was only 1.6 V, which was very close to that of typical commercial electrocatalysts like IrO2 (1.57 V) and RuO2 (1.59 V). And at a constant potential of 1.77 V, the current density of BP/CNTs was only decreased by 3.4% after operating for 10000 s.
2.2 BP–metal hybrids
Solar-driven heterogeneous photocatalysis is attractive to the search for renewable energy and new technologies for pollutant degradation, water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.27 Since the bandgap of BP lies in the range of 0.3–1.5 eV, it can efficiently absorb a broad range of solar wavelengths from visible to mid-infrared. And the relatively high charge-carrier mobility is an additional merit for BP applications in photocatalysis.10 In view of enhancing the photocatalytic performance by promoting the spatial separation of photoexcited charge carriers, the rational design and assembly of metal–semiconductor nanostructures is an essential approach. In general, noble metals like Au and Ag in the form of nanoparticles (NPs) are capable of absorbing and scattering photons with a high excitation cross-section in the visible regime and show prominent localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) arising from the collective excitation of conduction electrons, which could absorb a maximum amount of incident solar energy under resonance conditions. As mentioned above, BP holds a layer-dependent direct bandgap that is an inherent advantage for its bandgap engineering and maximizing solar-to-chemical energy conversion. Warren and co-workers deposited Au NPs onto BP surfaces via a photoredox-assisted process, in which two types of BP flakes in the form of few-layer (1–4 atomic layers) and multi-layer (30–60 atomic layers) were employed.28 In the case of few-layer BP flakes with a lateral size of 100–500 nm, chloro (triphenylphosphine) gold(I) (AuITPP) was bonded onto the BP surfaces to form an AuIBP complex. Upon illumination at 465 nm, triethylamine (TEA) was oxidized to TEA+ by the photogenerated holes and thus electrons were available to reduce AuIBP species to Au0 subsequently. Finally, metallic Au NPs of 20 nm size were formed on the BP surfaces. In the case of multi-layer BP flakes, Au NPs were only deposited on the step edges whose thickness was the thinnest. Remarkably, a 40-fold enhancement in the formation of Au/BP hybrids was observed when the BP thickness was reduced from multi- to few-layer, which was ascribed to the bandgap-mediated photocatalysis. Likewise, the bandgap- and local field-dependent photoactivity of Ag/BP hybrids was investigated recently.24 Herein, few- and multi-layer BP flakes (denoted as f- and m-BP, respectively) were exfoliated by sonication in cool water. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. 3a and b) show that the thickness of f- and m-BP flakes is ∼2 nm and ∼10 nm, respectively. Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)-scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images viewed along the [001] and [101] directions are displayed in Fig. 3c and d, respectively. Second, Ag/BP hybrids were synthesized by adding AgNO3 solution into the as-obtained BP flake suspensions and then NaBH4 was injected to reduce Ag+. Representative TEM images (Fig. 3e and f) illustrate that Ag NPs with ∼20 nm and 40 nm in size for respective 3 wt% and 5 wt% Ag/BP hybrids are well dispersed on BP surfaces. Besides, there exist Ag particle aggregates as shown in the insets of Fig. 3e and f. An annular bright-field (ABF)-STEM image in Fig. 3g displays a typical well-defined Ag–BP interface, which proves the intimate contact between Ag particles and BP flakes. The corresponding interatomic distance is shown in Fig. 3h and i. The immobilization of Ag NPs on BP surfaces was further confirmed by first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The results indicated the metallic nature of Ag adlayers with a thickness of more than one monolayer and Ag deposition onto BP surfaces was energetically favorable. Overall, the immobilization of Ag NPs on BP surfaces was achieved via Ag–P covalent bonds and Ag–Ag interactions. The photoactivity of the as-prepared samples was assessed towards aqueous rhodamine B (RhB) degradation under visible light as shown in Fig. 4a and b. The photoactivity can be independently tuned by either BP layer thickness or Ag particle size. As a result, the largest photoactivity of 5 wt% Ag/f-BP (3.44 h−1) is about 20-fold larger than that of m-BP (0.17 h−1). The observed photoactivity was corroborated by photocurrent measurements (Fig. 4c and d). The mechanistic insights were rationalized as follows. First, the bandgap is 1.5 eV and 0.3 eV for f-BP and m-BP, respectively. As a result, f-BP holds a lower VB maximum than m-BP, which is more favorable for RhB photodegradation. Second, the LSPR-induced electric field distribution using 3D finite-difference time domain (FDTD) simulations is shown to be Ag particle size- and BP thickness-dependent (Fig. 4e–h). The local-field amplification in the interparticle gap of Ag dimers is not only more intense than that of Ag monomers, but also increased with increasing monomer size. The resulting intense localized electric fields at the Ag–BP interface are expected to promote e−–h+ pair generation and thus photoactivity. This study exemplified that both the bandgap and local field were BP layer-dependent and can be tailored to promote solar-to-chemical energy conversion.
 Fig. 3  Morphology and structure of BP flakes and Ag/BP hybrids. AFM measurements of (a) f-BP and (b) m-BP. Atomically-resolved HAADF-STEM images of BP viewed along (c) [001] and (d) [101]. TEM images of (e) 5 wt% Ag/f-BP and (f) 5 wt% Ag/m-BP. Insets: the aggregation of Ag NPs (upper left) and the Ag particle size distribution (lower left). (g) Atomically-resolved ABF-STEM image of a typical Ag–BP interface. The interatomic distance determined by the line profiles of the image intensity along (h) a–a′ and (i) b–b′. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 4  Photoactivity of (a) f-BP flakes and Ag/f-BP hybrids, and (b) m-BP flakes and Ag/m-BP hybrids toward RhB degradation under visible light illumination. The as-measured photocurrent of (c) f-BP flakes and Ag/f-BP hybrids, and (d) m-BP flakes and Ag/m-BP hybrids. Calculated field distribution of a Ag dimer with an interparticle gap of 1 nm by FDTD at 500 nm. The individual Ag particle size is (e) 20 nm and (f) 40 nm supported on f-BP, and (g) 20 nm and (h) 40 nm supported on m-BP. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 BP–semiconductor hybrids
Lee and co-workers prepared TiO2/BP hybrid photocatalysts in an attempt to enhance both the photoactivity and photostability of BP.29 In an aqueous mixture containing few-layer BP flakes, adding titanium isopropoxide (Ti(O4C4H9)4) generated Ti(OH)4 species on the BP surfaces via rapid hydroxylation. Subsequently, Ti–OH aggregation led to the formation of Ti–O–Ti or Ti–O(H) bonds. Finally, substitutional TiO2 NPs were generated on the BP flakes under ultrasound irradiation. In the degradation of model organic dyes like reactive black 5 (RB 5) and RhB under visible light illumination, about 100-fold activity enhancement was achieved by the TiO2/BP hybrids as compared to pristine few-layer BP flakes. Further, the TiO2/BP hybrids showed remarkable antibacterial activity towards Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus under visible light. As for the long-term cycle stability, the TiO2/BP hybrids retained ∼92% of the initial activity after 15 cycles, whereas under identical experimental conditions BP flakes maintained only ∼3% after 7 cycles. The improved photostability of the TiO2/BP hybrids was tentatively ascribed to the substitutional Ti atoms at the P vacancies and the resulting TiO2 NPs with sizes of less than 5 nm on the BP surfaces. Further, the TiO2/BP hybrid photocatalysts exhibited superior performance compared to TiO2/MoS2, implying that BP was a promising alternative to MoS2 in photocatalysis.
Due to its mechanical flexibility, BP is a versatile platform for constructing a range of multi-functional nanostructures. For instance, vertical stacking n-type semiconductors with p-type BP in a controllable manner may provide building blocks for new electronic and optoelectronic devices. In many situations, the interactions between BP and a dissimilar material are vdW forces, which allow atomically abrupt vdW heterostructures to be created that are distinct from conventional p–n homojunctions formed by doping. Ye and co-workers first fabricated a gate-tunable p–n diode by vertically stacking few-layer BP on top of monolayer MoS2,17 a type-II heterostructure in nature. First, a MoS2 monolayer with 0.9 nm in thickness was synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) onto a SiO2/Si substrate. Second, mechanically exfoliated few-layer BP with 11 nm in thickness was deposited on MoS2. Third, the contact patterns were defined via electron beam lithography followed by deposition of Ni/Au as metal contacts. The as-prepared BP/MoS2 diode displayed strong current-rectifying and optoelectronic characteristics as a broadband photodetector. Under 633 nm He–Ne laser illumination, the BP/MoS2 diode showed a maximum responsivity of 3.54 A W−1 at Vd = +2 V and 418 mA W−1 at Vd = −2 V with 1 μW incident power, which was nearly two orders of magnitude and 4.8-fold larger than those of pristine BP and carbon nanotube/MoS2, respectively. Furthermore, the BP/MoS2 diode also functioned in photovoltaic energy conversion with a maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.3%. To summarize, the cooperation between BP and MoS2 resulted in remarkably enhanced performances. To address the underlying photocurrent generation mechanisms, the gate-, wavelength-, and polarization-mediated photocurrent response was studied.30 When only BP was illuminated by a 1550 nm laser, the photocurrent signals detected in the junction region were primarily ascribed to the direct-bandgap transition in BP. The maximum photocurrent was observed when the polarized excitation light was nearly perpendicular to the BP channel. Nevertheless, the inherent anisotropy of BP absorption did not play a dominant role in polarization-dependent photocurrent generation. In contrast, when both BP and MoS2 were simultaneously excited at 532 nm, the photocurrent was underpinned by competition between BP and MoS2 owing to the Fermi level alignment.30 Likewise, in an inverse stacking configuration with few-layer MoS2 supported on few-layer BP, the gate voltage-mediated current rectifying characteristics were shown to display a forward to reverse current ratio of 1.5 × 103 at the gate bias of −60 V.31 Further, the photoresponsivity could be tuned by varying the wavelength from visible to near-infrared. Under a power of 1 nW, the photoresponsivity was about 22.3 A W−1 at 532 nm and 153.4 mA W−1 at 1550 nm with a 15 μs response time. Moreover, the maximum specific detectivity was 3.1 × 1011 Jones at 532 nm and 2.13 × 109 Jones at 1550 nm, respectively. The studies described above proved that stacking phosphorene with specific 2D materials on top of each other via vdW interactions is a flexible approach to construct high-performance heterostructures. By using the time-domain DFT combined with nonadiabatic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, Fang and co-workers reported that nonradiative e−–h+ recombination occurred within several tens of picoseconds for bilayer phosphorene.32 Nevertheless, combining a single layer of MoS2 with a monolayer of BP significantly decreased the recombination as elaborated below. First, the bandgap of BP was enlarged from bilayer BP to BP/MoS2. Second, the overall strength of the electron–phonon coupling responsible for the e−–h+ recombination was weakened relative to bilayer BP. Accordingly, nonradiative e−–h+ recombination as well as electron–phonon energy losses in BP/MoS2 were decreased, leading to better photovoltaic performance of BP/MoS2 in comparison with bilayer BP. Overall, the rational design of BP-based vdW heterostructures could result in the long lifetime of the excited-state, which is beneficial for photovoltaic applications.
Apart from BP/MoS2, other BP–semiconductor nanostructures like BP/ZnO,18 BP/SrTiO3,20 BP/GaAs,33 SnSe2/BP,34 and BP/BP suboxide35 were also prepared. Hwang, Im and co-workers reported a mixed-dimensional heterodevice with a combination of 2D BP flakes with other low-dimensional semiconducting nanomaterials.18 Herein, 1D ZnO nanowires, a typical n-type semiconductor, were combined with BP to form a 2D–1D diode. Fig. 5a illustrates few-layer BP with 17 nm in thickness with mechanical flexibility stacked onto a ZnO nanowire with 85 nm in diameter. The cross-sectional STEM images and the corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns in Fig. 5b prove the well-defined BP–ZnO interface. The BP/ZnO diodes display a high on/off ratio of 104 and an ideality factor of about 1.3 in static rectification and feature kilohertz fast dynamic rectification under a few volts (Fig. 5c and d). Further, BP/ZnO heterostructures featured ZnO channel junction field effect transistors (JFETs) operated by BP gate switching in both electrostatics and kilohertz dynamics.18 The 2D–1D BP/ZnO is the first example of a BP-derived mixed-dimensional vdW heterostructure. Perovskite SrTiO3 is a widely used oxide substrate to construct multipurpose materials with unusual properties. Liu and co-workers reported the preparation and characterization of BP/SrTiO3 heterostructures.20 The ultrafast photoresponse behavior was evidenced with a responsivity of 105 A W−1 and a current on/off ratio of 105 at 50 K, which were much greater than those of counterparts based on other 2D materials like pristine BP, graphene, TMDs, and graphene/MoS2 heterostructures. Moreover, the photoresponsivity was shown to be excitation wavelength-dependent. The photocurrent was about 1.8 μA, 120 nA and 25 nA under 633 nm, 532 nm, and 405 nm, respectively. The observed superior performance was attributed to wavelength-dependent electron–hole generation and recombination processes mediated by optical absorption and inherent defects in SrTiO3. Also, a persistent photocurrent effect was realized without relaxation at on and off states at low temperatures. In the case of BP/GaAs, Te-doped n+-GaAs was used as a substrate.33 A typical rectification characteristic with a rectification ratio of 120 at 1 V was achieved. The EQE exhibited by BP/GaAs was about 10% without bias and increased to 30% under a greater reverse bias of −2.5 V due to the band bending in the interface. Nevertheless, the fill factor was shown to be less than 0.3 at 514 nm. It was suggested surface preservation of BP could further benefit the electrical contacts as well as device performance.33 As a type-III heterostructure, SnSe2/BP was fabricated as an Esaki tunnel diode operating at ambient temperature.34 Herein, SnSe2 is a n-type layered semiconductor which poses a broken-gap energy band offset with respect to p-type BP. Notably, owing to a thin insulating barrier in the interface between BP and SnSe2, a prominent robust negative differential resistance (NDR) was probed when the heterostructure was positively biased, with a peak to valley ratio of 1.8 and 2.8 at 300 K and 80 K, respectively. Both experimental and theoretical results suggested that electron tunneling from BP to SnSe2 was the dominant transport mechanism. Distinct from group-IV and III–V semiconductor heterostructures in which NDR could be observed, the existence of NDR in a SnSe2/BP 2D hybrid without chemical bonding in the interface may offer a new platform for future studies in this area. To fabricate a BP/BP suboxide hybrid, a scanning focused laser (power > 50 mW, beam spot ∼ 1 μm, wavelength ∼ 532 nm) was used, with the oxidation degree controlled by the laser power.35 The as-synthesized BP/BP suboxide hybrid is an in-plane heterostructure. Notably, the maximum photoresponsivity of the resulting optoelectronic device was 5.7 × 106 mA W−1, which was not only improved by ∼68% in comparison with that of pristine phosphorene, but even greater than that of TMDs-derived 2D photodetectors. Under illumination, a photovoltaic-like response was observed at the junction region. Additionally, the photocurrent distribution of the optoelectronic device could be modified by this type of junction. DFT calculations suggested that the enhancement was ascribed to the favorable Z-scheme electronic structure which promoted e−–h+ pair separation and a high photo-excited carrier density generated at the BP/BP suboxide interface. In summary, the results in this section have illustrated that the rational combination of BP with mixed-dimensional semiconductors is nearly arbitrary and provides a scaffold for building up entirely new vertical and in-plane heterodevices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a heterodevice with a 2D BP flake supported on a 1D ZnO nanowire. (b) A typical cross-sectional STEM image of the BP–ZnO interface. The corresponding Fourier transformation patterns for BP in the upper inset and ZnO nanowire in the lower inset, respectively. (c) I–V characteristics of BP and ZnO channels in a semilog scale. The measurement setup is displayed in the inset. (d) I–V characteristics of BP/ZnO diodes along different directions in a semilog scale. The measurement setup is shown in the inset. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Other BP-based hybrids
Other types of BP-based hybrids, such as hBN/BP,36,37 PVP/BPQDs38 and RP/BP39 were also reported. In the family of 2D crystals, hBN is an insulator and pretty stable under ambient conditions. Linear-scaling DFT calculations indicated that hBN passivation posed no impact on BP’s intrinsic properties in hBN/BP/hBN sandwich-like hybrids from the electronic structure point of view.37 Notably, in a reverse configuration like BP/hBN/BP, hBN counteracted the bandgap reduction in multilayer BP, improved the efficiency of BP-based optoelectronic devices in the near-IR range and allowed better control over light absorption frequencies by the thickness of BP. Moreover, the charge carrier separation of the BP/hBN/BP hybrids was tunable under electric fields, which was highly desirable in tunneling field effect transistors (TFETs). The conceptual new TFETs like BP/hBN/BP hybrids are potentially useful in low-power and ultrafast switching operations, in addition to the NDR behavior with huge peak-to-valley ratios on the basis of different operational modes. Photodetectors comprising hBN/BP/hBN hybrids functional in the terahertz (THz) frequency range were further fabricated.36 First, hBN flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto a SiO2/Si substrate. The length, width and height of the hBN flakes was 20 μm, 20 μm and 40 nm, respectively. Subsequently, BP flakes of 25 nm thickness were stacked onto the top of hBN flakes using a conventional dry transfer process. By this approach, an extremely clean interface between BP and hBN was formed. After electrical contacts were deposited, a second multilayer of hBN as a passivation film as well as a top-gate isolating dielectric was transferred onto BP to form hBN/BP/hBN hybrids by deterministic PVA methodology. Owing to the unique anisotropy characteristics of BP, hBN/BP/hBN sandwich-like photodetectors showed distinct frequency-dependent optical response in the respective frequency range of 265–375 GHz and 580–640 GHz at both low and room temperature, respectively. The interplay of thermoelectric, plasma-wave and bolometric effects accounted for the underlying origin. In the long-term stability test, the best electrical performance of the photodetectors remained almost intact up to 7 months. This work showed how to prevent BP degradation under ambient conditions and at the same time keep and even promote its functions. Owing to the prominent edge quantum confinement and edge effects, 0D quantum dots (QDs) derived from corresponding 2D nanomaterials, offer large surface-to-volume ratio, good solubility in solvents, great amenability to hybridize with other nanomaterials, etc. Zhang and co-workers first synthesized BPQDs by grinding BP powders in a mortar, followed by bath sonication in the presence of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP).38 The as-prepared BPQDs with a lateral size of (4.9 ± 1.6) nm and a thickness of (1.9 ± 0.9) nm were re-dispersed in tetrahydrofuran (THF) and subsequently mixed with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, MW = 130000) to form a mixture denoted as PVP/BPQDs. The PVP/BPQD-derived memory devices displayed a nonvolatile effect of memory with an on/off current ratio higher than 6.0 × 104, which was superior to that of PVP/C60 and PVP/MoS2. Upon a test with a retention-time of 1.1 × 103 s at a reading voltage of 0.2 V, the PVP/BPQD-derived memory devices still exhibit good stability. This study paved the way for diverse promising applications of BPQDs. In an attempt to develop earth-abundant, environmentally friendly and metal-free photocatalysts, Yu and co-workers synthesized a hybrid photocatalyst comprising BP and RP.39 In detail, RP/BP hybrids were prepared by ball milling RP with optimal rotation speed and time. During this process, BP was in situ generated under high pressure and temperature agitated by drastic clashing, which enabled a phase transformation from RP to BP. The complete mixing of BP in a RP matrix led to substantial interfacial contact between two dissimilar components and thereby facilitated efficient charge separation and transfer. Under visible light illumination, RP/BP with an optimal BP mass weight percentage of 50% exhibited remarkable photoactivity toward RhB degradation as comparable to that of cadmium sulfide (CdS), a typical high-performance photocatalyst. This study may have broad implications in developing a variety of metal free elemental photocatalysts.
3. Doping
As part of the ongoing efforts to achieve BP-based novel functional nanomaterials, doping with specific species is a new thrust. This section will summarize and discuss how the electronic structure of BP is altered by doping metallic or nonmetallic agents. Going beyond conventional substitutional and interstitial doping in a BP lattice, deposition onto BP surfaces with a specific atomic or molecular layer is a promising route to tune as well as optimize the electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic properties of BP for particular applications, as summarized in Table 2. It is worthwhile to establish a correlation between the physicochemical properties of doped BP and doping variables such as dopant compositions and concentrations. And exploring the general validity of such correlation is essential.
Table 2 Summary of BP-based nanostructures by doping




Nanostructures
Methods
Applications
Properties
Ref.




K/BP
Vacuum deposition


Modulated the bandgap of BP from a semiconductor to an anisotropic Dirac semimetal through the giant Stark effect

40



Cu/BP
Vacuum deposition
FETs
Bandgap: 0.09 eV and 0.32 eV for Cuad and Cuint, respectively; electron mobility: 380 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, 2140 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 7 K; gain: 46 at 2 V; performance maintained up to 10 days under vacuum at 330 K

41



AsxBP1−x
Mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation


Bandgap: 0.15 eV for As0.83BP0.17; potentially applicable in electronics and optoelectronics operated in the infrared regime

42



SexBP1−x
Mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation
Photodetectors
ON/OFF ratio: 105; hole mobility: 561 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 15.33 A W−1; EQE: 2993%

19



Cs2CO3/BP
Vacuum deposition
FETs; photodetectors
Electron mobility: 27 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 1.88 A W−1 under 405 nm; EQE: 576%

16



MoO3/BP
Vacuum deposition
FETs; photodetectors
Hole mobility: 200 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 1.88 A W−1 under 405 nm; EQE: 784%

16



F4-TCNQ/BP
Spin coating
FETs
On-state resistance: 3.2 Ω mm; field-effect mobility: 229 cm2 V−1 s−1; drain current: 532 mA mm−1

45





3.1 Metallic doping
Because alkali metals have relatively small electron affinities, they may transfer electrons to BP as dopants. Kim and co-workers deposited K onto few-layer BP using a conventional in situ surface doping technique.40 DFT calculations showed that the bandgap of phosphorene could be tuned by this type of electron doping as displayed in Fig. 6a–c. The experimental results of synchrotron-based angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) at low temperatures near EF are illustrated in Fig. 6d–g. The pristine phosphorene exhibited a VB maximum at 0.15 eV below EF. With increasing K coverage from 0.06 ML to 0.18 ML, VB was shifted down rapidly and the corresponding bandgap of phosphorene was gradually decreased. Further increasing the doping coverage of K coverage the minimum of CB below EF and the bandgap became zero. At this critical point, the bands dispersed linearly along the armchair direction, while they remained parabolic along the zigzag direction, indicating the formation of an anisotropic Dirac semimetal. The linear dispersion and critical point derived from high-resolution APRES and the corresponding simulations are illustrated in Fig. 7. As such, few-layer BP was completely transformed from a semiconductor to a band-inverted semimetal by K doping. It was found that with increasing K coverage from 0.1 to 0.6 ML, K dopants introduced an external vertical electric field via the giant Stark effect, which shifted the VB and CB space distribution of BP in opposite directions, thereby giving rise to the bandgap reduction of BP. Such a facile doping approach towards bandgap engineering is potentially applicable to other 2D vdW crystals, such as graphene, TMDs, etc. To tune the type of dominant charge carriers in BP, Cu was deposited onto BP surfaces or intercalated between BP layers.41 DFT calculations indicated that the bandgap of BP was decreased to 0.09 eV from 0.18 eV or increased to 0.32 eV, as shown in Fig. 8. Additionally, n-type doping was realized in both configurations. Experimental investigations showed that Cu adatoms deposited onto BP by sputtering and integrated into FETs resulted in a shift of threshold voltage. The BP channel was modulated from p-type (hole mobility of 690 cm2 V−1 s−1) to n-type (electron mobility of 380 cm2 V−1 s−1) at room temperature after Cu deposition. At 7 K, an unprecedented electron mobility of 2140 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved. Further, by integrating with hBN gate dielectric and graphite bottom gate, a BP-based 2D complementary inverter was fabricated. With an untreated p-channel and Cu doped n-channel, the as-prepared inverter displayed a high gain of 46 at 2 V with matched input and output voltages. Under vacuum at 330 K, the performance of the inverter was maintained up to 10 days. Notably, neither contact metals nor local electrostatic gating was needed.
 Fig. 6  Scheme of the electronic band structure of (a) pristine BP, (b) BP in the initial stage of K surface doping, and (c) BP upon transition to a zero-gap semimetal. The square marked in (a) with solid lines indicates the surface Brillouin zone with high symmetry points in red. (d–g) Corresponding band structure measured at 15 K near EF along kx as a function of K coverage. The photon energy is 104 eV for kz at the Z point of the bulk Brillouin zone. The fitted white line in VB (e) is based on the k·p perturbation formula. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 7  (a and b) High-resolution APRES derived-anisotropic Dirac semimetal state along the armchair direction at 15 K and corresponding simulated spectra. (c–f) Comparison of APRES intensity maps as a function of constant energy around the Dirac point ED. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic 3D atomic structure of Cu adsorbed onto BP surfaces (denoted as Cuad) and intercalated between BP interlayers (denoted as Cuint). (b) Charge density difference for Cu adatoms on BP. The red and blue areas present electron depletion (Δρ = −2 × 10−3 e a0−1) and accumulation (Δρ = +2 × 10−3 e a0−1), respectively. (c) DFT calculated electronic structure of pristine BP, Cuad–BP and Cuint–BP with 4-layer BP. Dashed line: Fermi level. Adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Nonmetallic doping
As-doped BP nanomaterials (denoted as AsxBP1−x, with x in a wide range of 0–0.83) were synthesized via mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation from RP in the presence of Sn and SnI4 mineralizers.42 The as-prepared AsxBP1−x nanomaterials had a unique honeycomb structure with As substitutionally and homogeneously distributed in the BP lattice. The bandgap of AsxBP1−x nanomaterials estimated by infrared absorption spectroscopy was decreased rapidly with increasing As content from 0 to 0.25, and further increasing the As content up to 0.83 led to a slight decrease in the bandgap. For instance, the bandgap of As0.83BP0.17 was 0.15 eV, about half of bulk BP. Compared to other 2D layered counterparts, AsxBP1−x presented an optical response in the far-infrared regime and anisotropic characteristics, which were crucial in areas such as light radar systems. Likewise, as a typical doping agent in group VI, Se was successfully doped into BP via a bottom-up process involving gas-phase transformation. The resulting Se-doped BP crystals were as large as ∼1 cm in size.19 Subsequently, few-layer Se-doped BP flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto a SiO2/Si substrate to fabricate FETs, which displayed p-type transport properties and an on/off current ratio up to ∼105 and a hole mobility of 561 cm2 V−1 s−1. Upon doping of 1.6 wt% Se, the responsivity and EQE of Se-doped BP photodetectors was enhanced up to 15.33 A W−1 and 2993%, which was about 20-fold greater than that of pristine BP. In addition, the photodetectors exhibited a high-speed photoresponse as compared to MoS2 and GaSe. The above studies has developed a new bottom-up approach to prepare BP bulk crystals with better control of doping agents and doping levels. Extension to doping more than one agent into BP might be possible by using this approach. Additionally, the effects of nonmetal doping in monolayer phosphorene have been examined using first principles calculations.43,44 The emphasis of these studies is on understanding how doping influences the physicochemical properties of phosphorene. Boukhvalov compared the structural, electronic and chemical activity of B- and N-doped phosphorene in a range of concentrations (1.4–37.5%) using DFT calculations.43 Remarkably, doping induced ordered structures in the lattice of phosphorene. In detail, N doping led to the formation of –N–P–P–P–N– and –P–N–P–N– lines across the chains of phosphorene. The bandgap of the N-doped one was increased to 3 eV with increasing N concentration. Nevertheless, the chemisorption of hydrogen was unfavorable in N-doped phosphorene. Conversely, –B–B– pairs and –P–P–B–B–P–P– patterns were formed in B-doped phosphorene. B dopants with low concentrations enabled BP to transform into a semimetal. Further, the chemical activity of B-doped phosphorene toward molecular hydrogen decomposition was enhanced. Dual-doping by B and N generated –B–N– pairs with flat bands, which could redistribute the charges and then be transformed into hexagonal BN lines and ribbons. A series of nonmetallic doping species like H, F, Cl, Br, I, B, C, Si, N, As, O, S and Se in single-layer phosphorene was assessed using DFT calculations.44 No magnetism was induced when doping neutral dopants such as H, F, Cl, Br, I, B, N, and Se and charged dopants such as C−, Si−, S+ and Se+. Only doping with C, Si, O, S or Se gave rise to a magnetic moment of 1.0 μB. C and Si presented an unpaired valence electron while a nonbonding 3p electron of the adjacent P atom around O, S and Se resulted in magnetism. The substitutional doping in monolayer phosphorene may be extended to few-layer BP.
Apart from the aforementioned elemental doping, chemical doping with inorganic non-metallic materials such as Cs2CO3 and MoO3 were reported as a facile approach to tune the ambipolar characteristics of BP-based transistors on the basis of interfacial charge transfer.16 Cs2CO3 with a low work function of ∼1.8 eV and MoO3 with a high work function of ∼6.8 eV were evaporated in situ from a Knudsen cell onto the BP-based FETs under high vacuum, respectively. Upon 10 nm Cs2CO3 doping, the electron mobility of BP was remarkably improved from ∼1.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 to ∼27 cm2 V−1 s−1, in which electron doping was ascribed to the interfacial charge transfer from Cs2CO3 to BP. In contrast, when MoO3 was doped on BP, interfacial electron transfer from BP to MoO3 occurred, generating a significant p-doping effect on BP and the hole mobility was ∼200 cm2 V−1 s−1 at a gate voltage of −30 V regardless of the thickness of MoO3 up to 12 nm. Moreover, a photodetector derived from the above electron- and hole-doped BP exhibited enhanced performance due to the modulation of the Schottky junction at the interface between BP and metal contacts. The responsivity was increased up to 2.56 A W−1 and 1.88 A W−1 by doping MoO3 and Cs2CO3 with a nominal thickness of 8.0 nm, respectively. In addition, capping BP FETs with 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) species was carried out via impregnation. The p-type doping transistors lowered the on-state resistance to 3.2 Ω mm and improved the extrinsic field-effect mobility to 229 cm2 V−1 s−1.45 More significantly, a high drain current of 532 mA mm−1 was obtained with a moderate channel length of 1.5 μm. In detail, the measured sheet resistance and contact resistance was reduced by 2.5- and 1.4-fold, respectively. The field-effect mobility was averagely increased by 1.7-fold. The studies described above potentially provide guidance to control the band structures of BP and realize high-performance 2D electronic devices. In particular, direct capping with selected agents could avoid complex device fabrication processes as well as possible damage to the underlying BP structure.
4. Functionalization
Despite tremendous progress made in the developments of BP-based nanostructures, a major barrier concerning the applications of BP is its degradation upon long-term exposure under ambient conditions. The origin of BP degradation is mainly attributed to POx species generated by the reaction between oxygen and the lone pair electrons perpendicular to the BP surfaces. To tackle this obstacle as well as regulate the performance of phosphorene, various strategies like covalent, vdW and electrostatic functionalization have been devised as shown in Table 3. Herein, covalent functionalization is mediated by bonding in which the lone pairs of BP surfaces interact with Lewis acids such as transition metal ions, organic molecules and alkali ions. vdW functionalization features the interactions between BP and a capping layer like graphene, hBN, and organic molecules. As for electrostatic functionalization, positively charged adsorbates may spontaneously interact with phosphorene modified via negatively charged species. Ideally, functionalization can enhance the stability of phosphorene while at the same time retain or promote its specificity for long-term applications.
Table 3 Summary of BP-based nanostructures by functionalization




Nanostructures
Methods
Applications
Properties
Ref.




TiL4/BPQDs
Impregnation
Photothermal agents
Stable in water after 72 h; effectively killed MCF7 cancer cells

46



4-NBD/BP; 4-MBD/BP
Impregnation
FETs
ON/OFF ratio: 106 for 4-NBD/BP; stable after 25-day ambient exposure

47



AlOx/BP
ALD
FETs
Retained an on/off ratio of ∼103 and a mobility of ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1 over 2 weeks

49



Graphene/BP; hBN/BP
Stacking
FETs
ON/OFF ratio: 105; hole mobility: 86 cm2 V−1 s−1; electron mobility: 62 cm2 V−1 s−1; stable after 2-day ambient exposure

15



TCNQ/BP; PDI/BP
Impregnation


Stable after 2-day ambient exposure for PDI/BP; potential applicable in optoelectronics, etc.

50



PEG/BPQDs
Impregnation
Photothermal agents
Stable in either water or physiological media; effectively killed C6 and MCF7 cancer cells

21



PLGA/BPQDs
Oil-in-water emulsion solvent evaporation
Photothermal agents
Stable in water after 8 days and in phosphate-buffered saline media in initial 24 h

22





4.1 Covalent functionalization
Wang, Yu, Chu and co-workers reported the surface coordination of BPQDs against degradation by a facile and efficient approach.46 As shown in Fig. 9a, a titanium sulfonic ligand (denoted as TiL4, while L represents the sulfonic ester group) was synthesized by a reaction between titanium tetraisopropoxide [Ti(OiPr)4] and p-toluenesulfonic acid in ethanol (EtOH) at 50 °C. Then BPQDs were coordinated with TiL4 species in NMP at room temperature to form TiL4/BPQDs as illustrated in Fig. 9b. Herein, Ti–P bonds were formed where the lone pairs of BP surfaces interact with the 3d empty orbital of Ti. Owing to the electrophilic effect of sulfonic ester, the Ti–P interactions were significantly strengthened and expected to enhance BP stability. In detail, the absorption spectra (Fig. 9c and d) show that upon 72 h of exposure in air, the TiL4/BPQDs still exhibit stability in water, while bare BP suffers severe degradation. In fact, POx formed in air can be transformed into PO43− in water. In addition, the absorbance intensity ratio (A/A0) of bare BP at 450 nm (Fig. 9e) is estimated to be dramatically decreased by 55% after 72 h in water. In contrast, the absorbance intensity ratio of TiL4/BPQDs is only slightly decreased by 5%. Moreover, better stability was found in other organic solvents such as EtOH and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) than in water for TiL4/BPQDs (Fig. 9f). Furthermore, the photothermal performance of TiL4/BPQDs was much more stable than that of bare BP. As for its biocompatibility, no cytotoxicity was detected for various types of cells in the presence of 200 ppm TiL4/BPQDs. Under 808 nm laser illumination, MCF7 cancer cells were disabled by 50 ppm TiL4/BPQDs. The results of this study demonstrated that the TiL4 surface coordination could effectively stabilize BP as well as maintain its excellent photothermal properties for biomedical applications. On the other hand, aryl diazonium-functionalized phosphorene was systematically investigated by Hersam and co-workers.47 Herein, a mechanically exfoliated phosphorene specimen was immersed into a solution containing either 4-nitrobenzene-diazonium (4-NBD) or 4-methoxylbenzene-diazonium (4-MBD), with the functionalization degree controlled by the reaction time. First-principles DFT calculations revealed that the formation of P–C covalent bonds on a supercell of 16 P atoms was thermodynamically favorable, as shown in Fig. 10a. AFM topographical images showed that the thickness of BP was increased from 7.0 to 8.3 nm after functionalization. Spectroscopic measurements by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in conjunction with Raman indicated that P–C covalent bonds were attributed to the chemisorption of aryl groups on BP. In detail, the interfacial electron transfer from BP to aryl diazonium ions occurred, which generated N2 species and then formed an aryl radical for covalent bonding. Because 4-NBD exhibits a relatively higher electrochemical reduction potential than 4-MBD, it facilitates underlying electron transfer that is the rate-limiting step for P–C bond formation. The as-functionalized BP exhibited good stability against ambient water and oxygen. Fig. 10b–d displays that the morphology of 4-NBD-functionalized BP flakes is intact upon 10 day exposure under ambient conditions. In contrast, pristine BP suffered significant degradation as manifested by both AFM imaging and surface roughness measurements in Fig. 10e–g. More remarkably, the morphology of 4-NBD-functionalized BP could be well retained even after 25 days of exposure. In agreement with the aforementioned charge transfer from BP to aryl diazonium ions, the functionalization is a p-type doping in nature. As for the performance of FETs composed of functionalized BP, low-level functionalization can improve both hole mobility and on/off current ratio. Nevertheless, high-level functionalization ultimately led to undesired electrical conduction loss of the device, although a higher on/off ratio of 106 was achieved. Overall, aryl diazonium-derived functionalization was shown to be an efficient route to tailor the physicochemical properties of BP, in particular its stability.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of TiL4 in the presence of Ti(OiPr)4 and p-toluenesulfonic acid in EtOH at 50 °C. (b) Schematic illustration of the surface coordination of BPQDs in NMP at room temperature to form TiL4/BPQDs. The optical absorbance of (c) bare BPQDs and (d) TiL4/BPQDs in water after air exposure for 0, 6, 24, 48, and 72 h, respectively. (e) Comparison of BP and TiL4/BPQDs in terms of absorption ratio at 450 nm as a function of time in water. (f) The absorption ratio of TiL4/BPQDs as a function of time in EtOH and DMF, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. The respective viability of (g) C6 and (h) MCF7 cancer cells as a function of BPQD concentration. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of few-layer BP flakes functionalized by aryl diazonium on a SiO2/Si wafer. Inset: the DFT-optimized structure of benzene-diazonium tetrafluoroborate derivatives chemisorbed on a supercell containing 16 P atoms. ΔE is the calculated adsorption energy per aryl group, which indicates that two aryl moieties are more energetically favorable than one. (b and c) AFM topographical images of BP flakes functionalized using 10 mM 4-NBD for 0.5 h and then after 10 days of exposure under ambient conditions, respectively. (d) Statistical analysis of BP surface roughness in (b and c). (e and f) AFM topographical images of fresh BP flakes and after 10 days of exposure under ambient conditions, respectively. Degradation-induced bubble-like protrusions are clearly resolved. (g) Statistical analysis of BP surface roughness in (e and f). Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
By means of a first-principles cluster expansion method, Bhowmick and co-workers48 studied the ground states of chemisorbed O and F atoms with various contents on the surfaces of single-layer phosphorene. Compared with F atoms, O atoms were more tightly bonded to P atoms. It was found that the electronic structure, bandgap, and anisotropic effective masses of electrons and holes could be modulated as well. Additionally, the thermal stability of functionalized phosphorene was studied by MD simulations in the range of 400–700 K. The major ground states were shown to be stable when the temperature was increased up to 700 K. However, fluorinated phosphorene was unstable up to 500 K when the coverage was larger than 0.75. In the case of monovalent-atom functionalization, the theoretical results proved that fluorinated phosphorene showed better stability in comparison with the hydrogenated one. These calculations showed that adsorbates with dangling bonds could directly interact with BP.
4.2 vdW functionalization
Within the context of introducing a protective layer on BP surfaces against ambient degradation, using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and H2O as precursors, Hersam and co-workers49 deposited a 30 nm thick AlOx film onto BP flakes by atomic layer deposition (ALD), which allowed for precisely controlling the thickness of the AlOx layer. The as-coated BP flakes displayed good stability under ambient conditions. Further, FETs passivated by these BP flakes maintained long-term stability, as manifested by retaining an on/off ratio of ∼103 and a mobility of ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1 over 2 weeks. The high exothermicity of ALD-derived AlOx surface reactions allows AlOx to be deposited onto BP at room temperature, aiming to protect BP from exposure to high-temperature oxygenated H2O. Likewise, depositing atomically thin graphene or hBN onto phosphorene was expected to passivate the BP flake surfaces while at the same time maintain their fundamental properties under ambient conditions.15 Uniquely, both a passivation process and associated device fabrication were conducted in an Ar-filled glovebox, in an attempt to avoid possible degradation during the preparation. Further, only part of the selected flake was covered with either graphene or hBN, while the rest of the same flake remained intact. Thus, the properties of the coated and uncoated regions can be directly compared under identical conditions. AFM imaging in conjunction with Raman spectroscopy demonstrated that under ambient conditions, the uncoated part displayed complete oxidation after 48 h, whereas the coated part exhibited strong stability. Distinct from few-layer pristine BP-based FETs with typical p-type transport behavior, FETs comprising BP coated with hBN showed n-type charge transport and the associated symmetric ambipolar characteristics that were essential for the fabrication of complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) digital logic elements. Unlike ALD, the dry transfer of BP under inert gas conditions does not involve chemical precursors or water exposure. Moreover, the method used for the passivation of BP can also be applied to other unstable 2D layered crystals, such as metallic TMDs. Using combined experimental and theoretical approaches, Hirsch and co-workers examined BP functionalization via organic molecules like 7,7,8,8-tetracyano-p-quinodimethane (TCNQ) and perylene bisimide (PDI).50 Owing to the strong electron-withdrawing power of TCNQ, significant electron transfer from BP to TCQN occurred. Nevertheless, the BP flakes functionalized by TCNQ still suffered edge degradation under ambient conditions due to a redox reaction between TCNQ and oxygen, confirmed by scanning Raman microscopy and STEM-electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS). Conversely, PDI represented an ideal candidate to functionalize BP, since its aromatic core could be strongly adsorbed on BP by vdW interactions. EELS revealed that very little oxygen was detected, indicating that PDI molecules could effectively prevent BP flake degradation.
4.3 Electrostatic functionalization
Yu, Zhang, Chu and co-workers synthesized ultrasmall BPQDs with a lateral size of (2.6 ± 1.8) nm and a thickness of (1.5 ± 0.6) nm via combining probe and bath sonication.21 Due to the negatively charged BPQDs with a zeta potential of −26 mV in water, the positively charged PEG–NH2 could readily interact with BPQDs through electrostatic interaction to form a composite denoted as PEG/BPQDs. Accordingly, the stability of BPQDs was significantly promoted in physiological media. The photothermal conversion efficiency of PEG/BPQDs was 28.4% at 808 nm, which was greater than that of gold nanoshells (13%) and nanorods (21%) regardless of the lower amount of PEG/BPQDs. As for its biocompatibility, no cytotoxicity was detected for different kinds of cells in the presence of 200 ppm PEG/BPQDs. As a near-infrared responsive photothermal agent, PEG/BPQDs can efficiently destroy C6 and MCF7 cancer cells as shown in Fig. 9g and h. Yu and co-workers also prepared poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)/BPQDs nanospheres via an oil-in-water emulsion solvent evaporation procedure.22 Herein, BPQDs with a lateral size of (3.1 ± 1.8) nm and a thickness of (1.8 ± 0.6) nm were encapsulated into a nanosphere and then shelled by hydrophobic PLGA. The as-prepared PLGA/BPQD nanospheres with a size of (102.8 ± 35.7) nm maintained photothermal performance not only in water after 8 days, but also in phosphate-buffered saline media (pH 7.4) in the initial 24 h. Afterwards, these nanospheres suffered complete biodegradation in the body upon undergoing the therapeutic processes. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments displayed the negligible toxicity as well as good biocompatibility of PLGA/BPQD nanospheres. In a series of control experiments, the best in vivo photothermal efficiency was achieved in PLGA/BPQD nanospheres due to their better stability in the process of body circulation and larger sizes suitable for targeting tumors compared to pristine BPQDs. The results outlined above illustrated the potential of functionalized BPQDs as an excellent biocompatible photothermal agent towards clinic cancer therapy.
5. Summary and outlook
In summary, the attractive properties of BP including high charge-carrier mobility, tunable direct-bandgap and unique in-plane anisotropic structure enable it to be a promising 2D platform for constructing multifunctional nanostructures with flexibility and versatility. In the last three years, the emerging research of BP-based nanostructures via hybridization, doping and functionalization has resulted in significant advances in electronics, optoelectronics, biomedicine, catalysis, batteries, etc. Nevertheless, the research on BP-based nanostructures is apparently in its infancy in comparison with other 2D counterparts like graphene and TMDs. Initial studies on BP-derived nanostructures have identified several major challenges as well as opportunities.
Despite successful hybridization of BP with various materials like carbon materials, metals, semiconductors, etc., there are also plenty of unexplored realms. First, few-layer BP is mechanically exfoliated from its bulk counterpart in most previous studies. To facilitate the fabrication and integration of nanodevices, the preparation of single- or few-layer BP with high quality and large size is highly desirable. CVD, which has been shown to be an efficient bottom-up approach to synthesize well-defined graphene and TMDs, is promising for scalable BP synthesis. Second, intimate interfacial contact is crucial for BP-based nanostructures to reduce electrical contact resistance as well as enhance functions and/or properties. Third, vertical or in-plane assembly opens up a new route for nearly arbitrary combination of materials with BP via vdW interactions. Exploring and exploiting more 2D functional materials are essential, including but not limited to: graphene family materials (e.g., graphene oxide, graphdiyne), TMD materials (e.g., WS2, WSe2), oxides (e.g., WO3, V2O5), layered metal hydroxides (LMHs), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and so on. In particular, both stacking sequence and stacking configuration may offer viable degrees of freedom to tailor the properties of BP-based heterostructures. Last but not least, the clean delamination transfer and damage-free device integration are critical. On the other hand, doping heterospecies (e.g., B, N) into BP could modulate its electronic structure, thereby creating new electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic properties. As a direct extension of single-component doping, dual- or multi-component doping strategies with controllable concentrations and distributions are highly desirable. Moreover, a complete understanding of the atomic structure of those nanomaterials is vital for insights into the correlations between structure and functions by using advanced techniques like aberration-corrected STEM, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), etc. State-of-the-art theoretical computation, such as first-principles DFT calculations and MD simulations, is a valid practical approach for studying fundamental phenomena of doped BP. It is not only useful for interpreting experimental results, but can also predict the structural, electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic properties of doped BP. Thus, it is highly desirable that advanced theoretical simulations will be performed in parallel with experimental studies, which may have tremendous impact on in-depth understanding of the physicochemical properties of modified BP. To date, a few effective strategies like covalent, vdW and electrostatic functionalization have been developed against BP degradation while maintaining and improving specificity under ambient conditions. Potential organic groups or inorganic layers may include hydroxyl (–OH), carboxyl (–COOH), amino (–NH2), LMHs, etc. In general, environmentally-friendly and inexpensive chemicals are desirable precursors for large-scale fabrication. Advanced techniques like low-temperature ALD are an attractive option to fabricate well-defined BP heterostructures with tailored properties. Moreover, a rational combination of hybridization, doping and functionalization may offer a promising new strategy for constructing multipurpose BP nanostructures in ways precluded utilizing other conventional methodologies. In spite of the progress made in the developments of BP nanostructures by means of hybridization, doping and functionalization, the available quantitative information about the factors that affect the performance of BP nanostructures is still limited. For instance, it is generally accepted that atomic defects play a more important role in low-dimensional nanomaterials. Vacancies, dislocations, and grain boundaries could influence the electronic, optical and mechanical properties of a given nanomaterial. In this regard, a fundamental understanding of various defects and their physicochemical ramifications in BP nanostructures is highly desirable.
It is envisaged that the emerging research of BP-based novel functional nanostructures will continue to expand. The information and insights garnered from the related frontier research such as field effect transistors, diodes, photodetectors, biomedicine, sodium-ion batteries, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, memory devices, etc. are of primary importance, with broad implications not only in 2D and other low-dimensional nanostructures, but at the interfaces of materials science, chemistry, physics, biology and engineering.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51272048, 91027042 and 21321063).
References
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. C. Lai, C. L. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Lai, Y. Chen, C. L. Tan, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, Chem, 2016, 1, 59–77 CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. C. Du, Y. X. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC  , and references therein.
J. S. Qiao, X. H. Kong, Z. X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CAS .
V. Eswaraiah, Q. S. Zeng, Y. Long and Z. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3480–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Mao, J. X. Wu, B. W. Han, J. J. Lin, L. M. Tong and J. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 2627–2633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 CAS .
N. N. Mao, J. Y. Tang, L. M. Xie, J. X. Wu, B. W. Han, J. J. Lin, S. B. Deng, W. Ji, H. Xu, K. H. Liu, L. M. Tong and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Li, Y. J. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Q. Ge, X. D. Ou, H. Wu, D. L. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. B. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Duan, C. Wang, A. L. Pan, R. Q. Yu and X. F. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Doganov, E. C. T. O'Farrell, S. P. Koenig, Y. T. Yeo, A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiang, C. Han, J. Wu, S. Zhong, Y. Y. Liu, J. D. Lin, X. A. Zhang, W. P. Hu, B. Özyilmaz, A. H. Castro Neto, A. T. S. Wee and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Jeon, Y. T. Lee, J. Y. Lim, J. S. Kim, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Xu, J. Yuan, L. F. Fei, X. L. Wang, Q. L. Bao, Y. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. G. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5000–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Liu, C. Zhu, L. You, S.-J. Liang, S. J. Zheng, J. D. Zhou, Q. D. Fu, Y. M. He, Q. S. Zeng, H. J. Fan, L. K. Ang, J. L. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7768–7773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Sun, H. H. Xie, S. Y. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. N. Guo, J. D. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Y. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 11688–11692 CrossRef .
J. D. Shao, H. H. Xie, H. Huang, Z. B. Li, Z. B. Sun, Y. H. Xu, Q. L. Xiao, X. F. Yu, Y. T. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Y. Wang and P. K. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H. W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. T. Yuan, G. Y. Zheng, Y. M. Sun, Y. Z. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Lei, T. T. Zhang, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, G. Liu and M. H. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8009–8020 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Jiang, L. Xu, N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. M. Dai and S. Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13849–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Xu, Z. H. Chen, G. M. Zhong, Y. Z. Liu, Y. Yang, T. Y. Ma, Y. Ren, X. B. Zuo, X. H. Wu, X. Y. Zhang and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3955–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. P. Lu, Y. F. Yu, Q. L. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, Z. K. Guo, P. E. Mcwilliams, J. E. Darges, D. L. Druffel, A. M. Moran and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 74–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Lee, S. C. Lee, J. Won, B. C. Son, S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, H. S. Kim, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hong, B. Chamlagain, T. J. Wang, H. J. Chuang, Z. X. Zhou and Y. Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18537–18541 RSC .
L. Ye, H. Li, Z. F. Chen and J. B. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 692–699 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, M. Guo, L. H. Liu and W. H. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1830–1835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gehring, R. Urcuyo, D. L. Duong, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233110 CrossRef .
R. S. Yan, S. Fathipour, Y. M. Han, B. Song, S. D. Xiao, M. D. Li, N. Ma, V. Protasenko, D. A. Muller, D. Jena and H. G. Xing, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5791–5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Lu, A. Carvalho, J. Wu, H. W. Liu, E. S. Tok, A. H. Neto, B. Özyilmaz and C. H. Sow, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4090–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Viti, J. Hu, D. Coquillat, A. Politano, C. Consejo, W. Knap and M. S. Vitiello, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7390–7396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Constantinescu and N. D. Hine, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2586–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. M. Xie, Z. D. Liu, C. L. Tan, Z. M. Luo, H. Li, J. D. Lin, L. Q. Sun, W. Chen, Z. C. Xu, L. H. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3653–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Shen, S. T. Sun, W. J. Wang, J. W. Liu, Z. F. Liu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3285–3288 CAS .
J. Kim, S. S. Baik, S. H. Ryu, Y. Sohn, S. Park, B.-G. Park, J. Denlinger, Y. Yi, H. J. Choi and K. S. Kim, Science, 2015, 349, 723–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, L. Seixas, A. Carvalho, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, N. Yakovlev, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Liu, M. Köpf, A. N. Abbas, X. M. Wang, Q. S. Guo, Y. C. Jia, F. N. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, H. Wang, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, M. Y. Ge, X. Fang, T. Nilges and C. W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Boukhvalov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 27210–27216 RSC .
H. L. Zheng, J. M. Zhang, B. S. Yang, X. B. Du and Y. Yan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16341–16350 RSC .
Y. C. Du, L. M. Yang, H. Zhou and P. D. Ye, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37, 429–432 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Zhao, H. Y. Wang, H. Huang, Q. L. Xiao, Y. H. Xu, Z. N. Guo, H. H. Xie, J. D. Shao, Z. B. Sun, W. J. Han, X. F. Yu, P. H. Li and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5003–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nahas, B. Ghosh, S. Bhowmick and A. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 165413 CrossRef .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K. S. Chen, E. K. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. L. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Abellán, V. Lloret, U. Mundloch, M. Marcia, C. Neiss, A. Görling, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14557–14562 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Wanying Lei
	Wanying Lei received her BS degree from the Department of Chemistry at China Agricultural University in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate at National Center for Nanoscience and Technology and Peking University under the direction of Prof. Gang Liu. Her ongoing research includes low-dimensional semiconducting materials (ceria, potassium niobate, hematite, black phosphorus, graphitic carbon nitride, etc.) and supported metal nanoparticles (gold, silver, etc.) applicable in pollutant degradation, water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.

Gang Liu
	Gang Liu received his PhD degree in 2000 from Texas A&M University, USA. Then he did his postdoctoral work at Brookhaven National Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania and Temple University. He joined National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, in 2007 as an associate professor. His research interests lie in the characterization and properties of a variety of nanoscale materials (metal oxides, supported metal nanoparticles, two-dimensional layered semiconductors, etc.) important in environmental control and clean energy production. He has published more than 80 papers in peer-reviewed journals.

Jin Zhang
	Jin Zhang received his PhD degree in 1997 from Lanzhou University, China. After a two-year postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Leeds, UK, he returned to Peking University where he was appointed as an Associate Professor (2000) and promoted to Full Professor in 2006. In 2013, he was appointed as Changjiang Professor. His research focuses on the controlled synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of carbon-based nanomaterials, black phosphorus and other related nanomaterials. Dr Zhang has published over 200 peer-reviewed journal articles. He is a Fellow of the RSC and the editor of Carbon.

Minghua Liu
	Minghua Liu received his PhD degree in 1994 from Saitama University, Japan. He then joined the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) as a Special Postdoctoral Researcher from 1994 to 1997. He joined the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, CAS, in 1998 and then the Institute of Chemistry, CAS, in 1999. In June 2013, he moved to National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China. His research interests cover supramolecular chemistry and the chirality issues in self-assembled systems, soft organic nanomaterials, hybrid inorganic/organic nanomaterials and their photocatalytic applications. He is now on the advisory board of Advanced Science and Nanoscale Horizons. He has published more than 300 papers in international peer-reviewed journals.

Key learning points
(1) Attractive merits of black phosphorus in terms of high charge-carrier mobility, tunable direct-bandgap and unique in-plane anisotropic structure.
(2) Hybridization of black phosphorus with carbon materials, metals, semiconductors, etc. to form multi-functional nanostructures.
(3) Modulation of electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic properties of black phosphorus via metallic and non-metallic doping.
(4) Covalent, van der Waals and electrostatic functionalization of black phosphorus against degradation under ambient conditions.
(5) Future challenges and opportunities for the developments of black phosphorus-based novel functional nanostructures.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic structure of three-layer BP. (a) 3D view. (b) Top view and (c) side view. Grey balls represent P atoms.	 

BP/graphene	Self-assembly	Sodium-ion batteries	Specific capacity: 2440 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.05 A g−1; 83% capacity retention after 100 cycles operating in a range of 0–1.5 V	
23

BP/MWCNTs	Ball milling	Sodium-ion batteries	Initial Coulombic efficiency (∼91.1%); specific capacity: 1000 mA h g−1 at a charge/discharge rate of 3 A g−1; 1700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a charge/discharge rate of 1.3 A g−1	
26

BP/CNTs	Thermal-vaporization transformation	Electrocatalytic OER	Executed potential: 1.6 V at 10.0 mA cm−2	
25

Au/BP	Photoreduction	Visible-light photocatalysis	Au NP formation rates: 40-fold enhancement for few-layer BP than multi-layer BP	
28

Ag/BP	Chemical reduction	Visible-light photocatalysis	Maximum rate constant: 3.44 h−1 for RhB degradation	
24

TiO2/BP	Impregnation	Visible-light photocatalysis and antibacterial activity	Apparent rate constants: 2.38 h−1 and 2.05 h−1 for RB5 and RhB degradation, respectively; retained ∼92% of the initial activity for RB5 after 15 cycles; 2.48 h−1 and 2.06 h−1 for Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively	
29

BP/MoS2	Stacking	p–n diodes	Photoresponsivity: 3.54 A W−1 at Vd = +2 V and 418 mA W−1 at Vd = −2 V at λ = 633 nm; EQE: 0.3%	
17

MoS2/BP	Stacking	Photodetectors	Current ratio: 1.5 × 103 at the gate bias of −60 V; photoresponsivity: 22.3 A W−1 at λ = 532 nm, 153.4 mA W−1 at λ = 1.55 μm; specific detectivity: 3.1 × 1011 Jones at λ = 532 nm, 2.13 × 109 Jones at λ = 1550 nm	
31

BP/ZnO	Stacking	p–n diodes; junction FETs	ON/OFF ratio: 104; ideality factor: 1.3	
18

BP/SrTiO3	Stacking	FETs	ON/OFF ratio: 105 at 50 K; photoresponsivity: 105 A W−1 at λ = 633 nm at 50 K; photocurrent: 1.8 μA, 120 nA and 25 nA under 633 nm, 532 nm, and 405 nm, respectively	
20

BP/GaAs	Stacking	p–n diodes	Photoresponsivity: 37 mA W−1 at λ = 514 nm; effective ideality factor: 9.7 at 0.8 V; EQE: 10% without bias, 30% under a reverse bias of −2.5 V; fill factor: less than 0.3 at 514 nm	
33

SnSe2/BP	Stacking	Esaki diodes	Peak-to valley ratio: 1.8 at 300 K and 2.8 at 80 K; photoresponsivity: 0.24 mA W−1 at λ = 488 nm	
34

BP/BP suboxide	Focused laser-induced oxidation	Photodetectors	Photoresponsivity: 5.7 × 106 mA W−1 at λ = 532 nm	
35

hBN/BP/hBN	Stacking	Photodetectors	THz frequency response; stable up to 7 months for electrical performance	
36

PVP/BP	Impregnation	Memory devices	ON/OFF current ratio: 6.0 × 104 at a reading voltage of 0.2 V; stable after a 1.1 × 103 s test at 0.2 V	
38

RP/BP	Ball milling	Visible-light photocatalysis	Apparent reaction rate: 4.14 h−1 for RhB degradation; retained 85% activity after three cycles	
39


 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the typical sodiation process in BP, involving sodium-ion intercalation and Na3P alloy formation. (b–e) In situ time-resolved TEM images of the sodiation process. (f) Schematic diagram illustrating the structural evolution of phosphorene/graphene sandwich-like hybrids in the sodiation process. (g) Good cyclability evidenced by reversible desodiation capacity and corresponding Coulombic efficiency for 100 cycles under various currents with 48.3 wt% BP in the anode. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphology and structure of BP flakes and Ag/BP hybrids. AFM measurements of (a) f-BP and (b) m-BP. Atomically-resolved HAADF-STEM images of BP viewed along (c) [001] and (d) [101]. TEM images of (e) 5 wt% Ag/f-BP and (f) 5 wt% Ag/m-BP. Insets: the aggregation of Ag NPs (upper left) and the Ag particle size distribution (lower left). (g) Atomically-resolved ABF-STEM image of a typical Ag–BP interface. The interatomic distance determined by the line profiles of the image intensity along (h) a–a′ and (i) b–b′. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoactivity of (a) f-BP flakes and Ag/f-BP hybrids, and (b) m-BP flakes and Ag/m-BP hybrids toward RhB degradation under visible light illumination. The as-measured photocurrent of (c) f-BP flakes and Ag/f-BP hybrids, and (d) m-BP flakes and Ag/m-BP hybrids. Calculated field distribution of a Ag dimer with an interparticle gap of 1 nm by FDTD at 500 nm. The individual Ag particle size is (e) 20 nm and (f) 40 nm supported on f-BP, and (g) 20 nm and (h) 40 nm supported on m-BP. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a heterodevice with a 2D BP flake supported on a 1D ZnO nanowire. (b) A typical cross-sectional STEM image of the BP–ZnO interface. The corresponding Fourier transformation patterns for BP in the upper inset and ZnO nanowire in the lower inset, respectively. (c) I–V characteristics of BP and ZnO channels in a semilog scale. The measurement setup is displayed in the inset. (d) I–V characteristics of BP/ZnO diodes along different directions in a semilog scale. The measurement setup is shown in the inset. Adapted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

K/BP	Vacuum deposition	
	Modulated the bandgap of BP from a semiconductor to an anisotropic Dirac semimetal through the giant Stark effect	
40

Cu/BP	Vacuum deposition	FETs	Bandgap: 0.09 eV and 0.32 eV for Cuad and Cuint, respectively; electron mobility: 380 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, 2140 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 7 K; gain: 46 at 2 V; performance maintained up to 10 days under vacuum at 330 K	
41

AsxBP1−x	Mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation	
	Bandgap: 0.15 eV for As0.83BP0.17; potentially applicable in electronics and optoelectronics operated in the infrared regime	
42

SexBP1−x	Mineralizer-assisted gas-phase transformation	Photodetectors	ON/OFF ratio: 105; hole mobility: 561 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 15.33 A W−1; EQE: 2993%	
19

Cs2CO3/BP	Vacuum deposition	FETs; photodetectors	Electron mobility: 27 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 1.88 A W−1 under 405 nm; EQE: 576%	
16

MoO3/BP	Vacuum deposition	FETs; photodetectors	Hole mobility: 200 cm2 V−1 s−1; photoresponsivity: 1.88 A W−1 under 405 nm; EQE: 784%	
16

F4-TCNQ/BP	Spin coating	FETs	On-state resistance: 3.2 Ω mm; field-effect mobility: 229 cm2 V−1 s−1; drain current: 532 mA mm−1	
45


 	Fig. 6  Scheme of the electronic band structure of (a) pristine BP, (b) BP in the initial stage of K surface doping, and (c) BP upon transition to a zero-gap semimetal. The square marked in (a) with solid lines indicates the surface Brillouin zone with high symmetry points in red. (d–g) Corresponding band structure measured at 15 K near EF along kx as a function of K coverage. The photon energy is 104 eV for kz at the Z point of the bulk Brillouin zone. The fitted white line in VB (e) is based on the k·p perturbation formula. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) High-resolution APRES derived-anisotropic Dirac semimetal state along the armchair direction at 15 K and corresponding simulated spectra. (c–f) Comparison of APRES intensity maps as a function of constant energy around the Dirac point ED. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic 3D atomic structure of Cu adsorbed onto BP surfaces (denoted as Cuad) and intercalated between BP interlayers (denoted as Cuint). (b) Charge density difference for Cu adatoms on BP. The red and blue areas present electron depletion (Δρ = −2 × 10−3 e a0−1) and accumulation (Δρ = +2 × 10−3 e a0−1), respectively. (c) DFT calculated electronic structure of pristine BP, Cuad–BP and Cuint–BP with 4-layer BP. Dashed line: Fermi level. Adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

TiL4/BPQDs	Impregnation	Photothermal agents	Stable in water after 72 h; effectively killed MCF7 cancer cells	
46

4-NBD/BP; 4-MBD/BP	Impregnation	FETs	ON/OFF ratio: 106 for 4-NBD/BP; stable after 25-day ambient exposure	
47

AlOx/BP	ALD	FETs	Retained an on/off ratio of ∼103 and a mobility of ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1 over 2 weeks	
49

Graphene/BP; hBN/BP	Stacking	FETs	ON/OFF ratio: 105; hole mobility: 86 cm2 V−1 s−1; electron mobility: 62 cm2 V−1 s−1; stable after 2-day ambient exposure	
15

TCNQ/BP; PDI/BP	Impregnation	
	Stable after 2-day ambient exposure for PDI/BP; potential applicable in optoelectronics, etc.	
50

PEG/BPQDs	Impregnation	Photothermal agents	Stable in either water or physiological media; effectively killed C6 and MCF7 cancer cells	
21

PLGA/BPQDs	Oil-in-water emulsion solvent evaporation	Photothermal agents	Stable in water after 8 days and in phosphate-buffered saline media in initial 24 h	
22


 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of TiL4 in the presence of Ti(OiPr)4 and p-toluenesulfonic acid in EtOH at 50 °C. (b) Schematic illustration of the surface coordination of BPQDs in NMP at room temperature to form TiL4/BPQDs. The optical absorbance of (c) bare BPQDs and (d) TiL4/BPQDs in water after air exposure for 0, 6, 24, 48, and 72 h, respectively. (e) Comparison of BP and TiL4/BPQDs in terms of absorption ratio at 450 nm as a function of time in water. (f) The absorption ratio of TiL4/BPQDs as a function of time in EtOH and DMF, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. The respective viability of (g) C6 and (h) MCF7 cancer cells as a function of BPQD concentration. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of few-layer BP flakes functionalized by aryl diazonium on a SiO2/Si wafer. Inset: the DFT-optimized structure of benzene-diazonium tetrafluoroborate derivatives chemisorbed on a supercell containing 16 P atoms. ΔE is the calculated adsorption energy per aryl group, which indicates that two aryl moieties are more energetically favorable than one. (b and c) AFM topographical images of BP flakes functionalized using 10 mM 4-NBD for 0.5 h and then after 10 days of exposure under ambient conditions, respectively. (d) Statistical analysis of BP surface roughness in (b and c). (e and f) AFM topographical images of fresh BP flakes and after 10 days of exposure under ambient conditions, respectively. Degradation-induced bubble-like protrusions are clearly resolved. (g) Statistical analysis of BP surface roughness in (e and f). Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
