Deterministic modelling of carbon nanotube near-infrared solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE01765J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01765J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3769-3781Deterministic modelling of carbon nanotube near-infrared solar cells†

        
          
            Darin O. 
            Bellisario
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rishabh M. 
            Jain
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zackary 
            Ulissi
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Michael S. 
            Strano
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. E-mail: strano@mit.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
Received 
      8th June 2014
    , Accepted 3rd September 2014First published on 4th September 2014AbstractPhotovoltaics (PVs) using single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as near-infrared photo-absorbers have progressed rapidly, offering promise for long-wavelength light harvesting devices. Despite this interest the fundamental design questions remain, such as optimal device thickness, nanotube orientation, density, and the impact of impurities. To address this challenge, we develop a deterministic model of SWNT PVs derived directly from SWNT photophysics using photon, exciton, and charge carrier population balances. The model accounts for arbitrary distributions of nanotube chiralities, lengths, orientations, defect types and concentrations, bundle fraction and size, and density. We show that feasible devices can achieve external quantum efficiencies above 60%. We reveal a sharply optimal device thickness that is a function of nanotube density, orientation, and quenching site concentration. This thickness stems from a tradeoff between exciton generation and diffusion to the electrodes, and is at a minimum at the limit of close-packed nanotube density. We show that this minimum characterizes a given device design and scales with mean nanotube length to exponent 0.4. The normalized difference between optimal thickness and this close-packed limit scales inversely with density to the 0.24 power. Practically, in-plane aligned nanotube configurations yield optimal thicknesses less than 10 nm, increasing to a range of 50 to 200 nm for vertical alignment. Due to weak inter-SWNT exciton transport relative to exceptional intra-SWNT diffusion, vertically-aligned films are unambiguously favored at densities above 3% of the close-packed limit; at lower densities however an optimum emerges at an intermediate angle to compensate for weaker light absorption of vertical nanotubes. Comparison to published experimental devices displays the model's utility for device design.

Broader context
Photovoltaic materials that absorb in the near-IR wavelength regime can complement existing silicon solar cells, which absorb at visible wavelengths, raising solar energy collection with the same footprint. Carbon nanotube networks offer an ideal material: being cheap to manufacture and solution-process-able, they can be coated on transparent electrodes to be placed on top of visible solar cells, overcoming the challenges of tandem photovoltaics (lattice and work function mismatch). This promise has spurred recent experimental investigations to produce proof-of-concept devices, but efficiencies remain low and the complexity of the nanoscopic material has limited empirical insight into design improvements. In this work, we derived a steady-state model of this nanostructured photovoltaic's operation from the basic nanotube photophysics. That allowed us to extract non-intuitive design principles, such as the optimal network alignment and film thickness for a given nanotube length distribution or defect level. These findings reveal what device structures are needed to substantially raise efficiency. More broadly, we show a method for deterministically describing a nanostructured material's optoelectronic behavior under experimentally-useful assumptions.

Introduction
Both cost and performance requirements make semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) attractive as photo-absorbers for near-infrared photovoltaic (nIR PV) applications.1–7 Their solution-process-ability (which can substantially reduce manufacturing costs), earth-abundant source materials, and recently scale-able fabrication and purification may yield low cost manufacture, a limitation with conventional solar cell (SC) designs.3,5,6,8–10 Furthermore, such devices can augment the photo-conversion efficiencies of conventional visible-PV systems by absorbing nIR wavelengths that comprise approximately 22% of the solar spectrum but fall within a typical PV bandgap. Here, low unit-operations costs particularly enable this application by making stacked independent PV layers (four-terminal SCs) feasible, versus the constraints of one-step fabrication (i.e. lattice, bandgap, and workfunction matching constraints) that have challenged tandem multi-junction (two-terminal) SCs.11 SWNT are also attractive relative to many other organic and inorganic PV materials through exceptional exciton and free carrier diffusivity and mobility, exceptional absorption cross-sections, and resistance to oxidation by water and oxygen.3,5,6,12–15 To date, single-walled nanotube (SWNT) SCs with 0.01–1.7% external quantum efficiency (EQE) have been developed employing single chiralities,2,4 mixed semiconducting chiralities,1,3 and mixed semiconducting and metal chiralities5,6 in bulk heterojunction3,7 and planar heterojunction1,2,4 configurations using polymers16 and fullerenes1–4 for exciton dissociation and/or co-photoabsorption. Despite this progress, even the most basic questions of suitable device properties, such as nanotube chirality, density, orientation, film thickness, etc., remain unanswered; there is currently no model describing steady-state SWNT PV operation for the selection of design variables. There are even conflicting proposals for optimal nanotube orientation.6 As with any nanostructured optoelectronics, complex dynamics and a huge space of design variables stymie both empirical studies and simple intuition. In this work, we address this gap by developing the first deterministic model of carbon nanotube photovoltaics. By analogy, we can note the impact that quasi-fermi-level transport models and the depletion zone approximation describing bulk semiconductor p–n junction PVs have had on cell design.17
The model, a set of integro-differential equations, is derived directly from the fundamental physics of SWNT light–matter interaction, exciton transport, and free carrier transport. We achieved this by adopting an approximation of macroscopic (O(100 nm)) homogeneity. This allowed us to treat relevant local (single-SWNT) properties as random variables, describing the network of nanotubes as a distribution of those properties. We focus on planar heterojunction devices. Our method applies to arbitrary networks in terms of chemical and structural properties – e.g. any distribution of nanotube chiralities, lengths, orientations, defect types and levels, bundle fraction and size, density, dielectric environment, or electrode combination. Rigorously, it is limited to densities above the percolation threshold, although it is quantitatively consistent with recent observations at lower densities in the literature.
We apply the model to elucidate the optimal device design as a function of nanotube orientation, packing density, defect density, and nanotube length. An optimal film thickness, T*, emerges that decreases with density, impurity concentration, and in-plane alignment component to balance light absorption with exciton diffusion length and exciton-electrode separation. We find that such devices are characterized by a minimum optimal thickness, T*CP, at close-packed density ρCP. Devices at lower nanotube densities have optimal thicknesses T* that scale with the normalized difference T* − T*CP; we capture that trend analytically with two constants. We also show that T*CP has a scaling with mean nanotube length to the 0.4 power.
Nanotube alignment angle (e.g. vertical, horizontal) balances much faster intra- versus inter-nanotube exciton diffusion with higher axial versus radial absorptivity. At sufficiently high densities (above 3% of close-packed) vertically aligned films are shown to be unambiguously favored to maximize exciton transport, but as density is lowered to below 10% of close-packed a second optimum emerges for some thicknesses at an intermediate angle – π/3 to π/4 from the vertical axis – to compensate for the decreasing light absorption. Of all film properties, density and alignment are most important in determining efficiency, with 10- to 100-fold performance improvements achieved through vertical alignment and increasing density above 10% of close-packed (O(1017 m m−3) length of SWNT per volume). The implications of these predictions are that next generation devices should focus on higher densities and vertical alignment, and thicknesses in the range of 40–100 nm depending on their other properties.
Model
For brevity only a summary of the derivation is produced here; a full derivation is presented in the ESI.† We consider a network of single-walled nanotubes (SWNT) sandwiched between two electrode semi-infinite plates separated by a distance T (Fig. 1). We define a Cartesian z axis in the propagation direction of the incident solar photon flux J0(ω) at z = 0. The back electrode has reflectance 0 ≤ R ≤ 1 which can in general be frequency dependent. A variety of conduction and valence band charge collecting electrode (type II exciton dissociation interface) configurations are possible, including those where an electrode also acts as a photoabsorbing layer (e.g. fullerenes1,2,7). We focus on the relatively general case of two dissociating electrodes, but the model applies generally.
 Fig. 1  Cartoon of model geometry, depicting the position rc, orientation  ≡ (θ,ϕ), and length l of nanotubes. The thickness of the film is T, and we take the z axis to be the propagation direction of incident irradiance J0(ω,ε). A point on a given tube is r′. (a–f) Cartoon representations of film geometries under consideration, side view (top) and cross-section (bottom). Vertically aligned films with densities ranging from sparse (a) to close-packed (b), horizontally aligned films at densities above the percolation threshold (c), aligned films at arbitrary angles with single-layer (d) and multi-layer (e) depositions (see text, ESI†), and isotropic films (f). 
We define an individual nanotube in our network, which we approximate as a rigid rod, as a set of parameters: position, length, orientation, and chirality.18 In the global coordinate system the center of each nanotube is located at rc relative to an arbitrary origin in the xy plane at z = 0. The length l and orientation  ≡ (θ,ϕ) of the tube form a spherical-coordinate vector l = (l,θ,ϕ). The ends of a single SWNT are therefore located, relative to the origin, at the ends of vectors . A point r′ along the central axis of the SWNT is then confined to the line segment between the ends. In describing intra-SWNT mechanics we will also consider the one-dimensional space along a nanotube axis, denoting that coordinate rl = αll, αl ∈ [0,1]. A nanotube also has a chirality c ≡ (n1,n2) where n1 and n2 are chiral indices.19 For convenience we index all chiralities present in the network by integer i (chirality ci) in order of increasing exciton (optical) band gap Ei+1 > Ei. Each chirality has an associated center–center diameter dc,c–c, and an outer diameter dc.
The properties {rC,l,c} completely define a given nanotube in our network. Our approach begins with treating these parameters as random variables, defining a given film by their distributions: (1)where vi is the number fraction of chirality i in the film. Our derivation is general for cases where any of these properties vary systematically with depth, i.e. p(rC,l,c|z), or are correlated with one another, but in most practical applications p(l) and p(ci) are spatially invariant and the variables are independent.
Solving the steady state operation of the illuminated film breaks into three distinct problems: light interaction, exciton transport, and free carrier transport. Beginning with treatment of the light field, At any given point r = (x,y,z) there is a total photon flux Jν(r) that is distributed over (as Jν(ω,ε,k|r); i.e. irradiance) frequency ω, linear polarization component ε = (θε, ϕε ), and propagation direction k = (θk,ϕk).
To a first approximation we treat absorption as the only light–matter interaction under consideration in the film, neglecting the weaker mechanisms of elastic scattering and photoluminescence (PL); see ESI† for discussion and justification. To treat attenuation of the field we derive the polarization- and frequency-dependent absorption cross-section of the film from the single-SWNT absorption behavior. By considering the dipole approximation in a perturbation theory treatment of light–matter interaction, we arrive at the absorption cross-section for a single nanotube of orientation  = (θ,ϕ), σ(ci,ε,,ω) = |ε·|2σ∥(ci,ω) + (1 − |ε·|)2σ⊥(ci,ω),(2)where σ∥ and σ⊥ are the absorption cross-sections for light polarized parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the SWNT longitudinal axis, reflecting the two anisotropic sets of optically active electronic transitions.20 Over all frequencies, the parallel absorption cross section is on average approximately six times greater than the perpendicular one due to depolarization effects.20 For later convenience we normalize the cross-section to per-unit-length, σl, rather than the more common per-carbon. Over our length-scales of interest (<1 μm) for SWNT material, we neglect phase shifts such as refraction that introduce circular polarization components to the light field.
From the perspective of the gradient in the light field, the diameter of the SWNT is negligible and the film is essentially homogenous (see ESI†). For irradiance Jν(ω,ε,k|r) the photon absorption rate per volume due to SWNT of chirality i oriented in  are Ni(ω,ε,k,|r) = vi·ρ〈l〉·σl(ε,,ω,ci)·Jν(ω,ε,k|r)(3)where ρ〈l〉 = ρ·〈l〉 is the length-normalized SWNT film density (ρ is the number density, 〈l〉 is the mean nanotube length). To get the total film absorption rate we must sum absorption terms (3) for nanotubes at each possible orientation  and chirality i, weighted by the relative populations of each. That is equivalent however to integrating over the distribution p() (and summing over chiralities), forming the crux of our methodology, (4)
In this manner, we can describe the light interaction behavior of the film by integrating the single-SWNT behavior over the distribution of independent single-SWNT properties; we will take the same approach to exciton and free carrier transport below.
A steady-state balance on the light intensity yields ∇·Jν(ω,ε,k|r) = −N(ω,ε,k|r).(5)
Two useful reductions then emerge. First, neglecting Rayleigh scattering and photoluminescence the k dependence drops out. Second, in the x and y dimensions where our film is infinite we take periodic solutions as trivial, making our boundary conditions in those dimensions uniformity, i.e. (6)
Our balance then simplifies to (7)
The linear differential eqn (7) can be solved for a transparent back electrode subject to the boundary condition of perpendicularly incident light unpolarized in the xy plane. (8)
We treat reflection off the back electrode without the propagation vector k by breaking the light field into approximately non-interfering ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ fluxes JF(ω,ε|z) and JR(ω,ε|z) (see ESI†), where the boundary condition of the latter is the reflection of the former at z = T.
In SWNT, optical electronic excitations result in exciton generation – bound carrier states – rather than free charges, due to one dimensional confinement resulting in a weak dielectric environment.21–24 To collect charges in a solar cell, excitons must be dissociated either at a type II interface or by an electric field imparting coulomb force greater than the binding energy. Examining the relevant physical quantities (see ESI†), we validate the approximation that nonradiative decay of hot excitons to the band gap is essentially instantaneous over our length scales of interest. This simplification allows us to treat the exciton generation rate at band gap energy Ei as the total photon absorption rate at all energies ħω > Ei for chirality i, Ni(z).
A single empirical diffusion coefficient describing exciton transport in a film would be limited to only a particular geometry and chemistry. Instead, we start with the intra-tube 1D exciton reaction–diffusion behavior, then deriving the contribution of a network of such systems to three-dimensional exciton transport, and finally coupling nanotubes via exciton hopping (EH), sometimes termed exciton energy transfer.
Along a single nanotube axis there is an exciton concentration profile n(rl). We construct a steady-state exciton population balance along rl including the generation rate N(rl) = N(r′), longitudinal diffusion, and relaxation due to localized impurities, exciton–exciton annihilation (EEA), radiative decay, and end-quenching. This yields the steady-state differential equation (see ESI†) (9)where Dl is the longitudinal diffusion coefficient, kΓ, kEEA, kim, and kend are, respectively, the radiative, EEA, impurity (of type im, e.g., oxidative agents, catalyst nanoparticles), and end-quenching rate constants, and nim is the number of impurity contacts per length of SWNT.
To determine the network behavior, we construct a three dimensional population balance subject to diffusion in one dimensional channels. Starting with a single chirality, the diffusion flux (not yet including SWNT–SWNT interactions) due to nanotubes of orientation  is (10)where c(r) is the 3D exciton density. This expression is arrived at by considering 1D channels penetrating the faces of a differential volume (see ESI†). Note that while eqn (10) has the form of what one would empirically intuit, there is the crucial difference that Dl is exactly the single-SWNT exciton diffusion coefficient, not a net film coefficient.
Next we extend film relaxation kinetics to 3D. We multiply the reaction rates per length of SWNT by ρ〈l〉 to convert to rate per volume network under an assumption of macroscopic homogeneity (see ESI†). The resulting quenching terms are (11)where cend(r) = p(rend = rC ± l|r) is the distribution of nanotube ends in the film (see ESI†). Note the value of our treatment in that all of {kim, kEEA, kend} are single-nanotube 1D rate constants, deducible experimentally or theoretically from individual SWNT physics.
Finally we consider exciton transport between nanotubes. The mechanisms of exciton transfer/hopping (EH) between nanotubes of the same and different chirality, as well as the mechanisms of type II exciton dissociation at donor–acceptor interfaces, remain under investigation and debate.1,3,25–27 Explicitly, in the model we treat EH as a tunneling process in bundles and at interconnects, neglecting admittedly vital phenomena such as exciton delocalization26,28 and Schottky barriers/band bending.27,29 As those physics are discovered, the new functional forms can be seamlessly introduced into our model using the same independent parameters.
We divide the film into two distinct microscopic environments: bundles and interconnects. The bundling coefficient, bc, we define as the length fraction of SWNT in bundles. Along with the mean number of SWNT in a bundle, Mb, we determine the diffusion coefficient in a bundle orthogonal to the longitudinal axis (see ESI†), (12)where X(Mb) is the mean number of nearest neighbors, ΔB is the inter-SWNT separation in a bundle, and kEH,b is the elastic exciton transition rate. Beginning with a monochiral film, this yields a film exciton flux due to bundling, (13)
At interconnects, we consider the number of intersections per length of a nanotube in a control volume around a nanotube, (14)
That yields a film exciton flux (still for a monochiral film), (15)where the orthogonal diffusivity at interconnects is (16)where ΔI is the inter-SWNT separation at contacts, kEH,I is the elastic transition rate, and λ is the co-alignment: λ ≡ |′·′′| = λ(θ′,θ′′,ϕ′,ϕ′′),(17)for an arbitrary pair of nanotubes, with a distribution extractable from p() (see ESI†).
Including all three diffusion mechanisms, we then have the volume balance for exciton transport in a monochiral network. We simplify that expression by again recognizing that periodic solutions in the xy plane are trivial for our purposes, reducing our steady state problem to a differential equation in z, (18)
Analogous to the light absorption problem, we have constructed a differential equation describing exciton transport due to nanotubes with orientation , but to get the total balance we must sum contributions from all possible orientations. Again, that weighted sum is equivalent to integrating (18) over the distribution p(). This treatment is only valid under our approximation of a homogenous film (see ESI†). That summarizes our method: treat single-nanotube chemical and geometric properties as random variables, derive the network behavior for given values of those parameters, and finally integrate the solution over their distribution. In the Results section we illustrate this process when we apply it to specific cases.
Note that eqn (18) has an intuitive reaction–diffusion form, but (A) the net diffusivity Dtot and several of the kinetic rate constants depend on the film properties (p(), ρ〈l〉, p(l)), and (B) by considering the distributions of single-SWNT parameters and the microscopic mechanisms of exciton transport and decay, we have been able to derive the dependence of network diffusion and reaction constants on film properties and fundamental single-exciton physical constants.
Multiple chiralities, including metallic SWNT (mSWNT), which quench excitons through rapid nonradiative decay, are then introduced. We construct volume balances for each chirality i analogous to the monochiral balance (18), but with additional quenching terms due to EH to mSWNT in bundles and at interconnects, and pairwise coupling terms to one another due to EH to lower-bandgap chiralities. This yields a system of ordinary differential equations: (19)where vm is the fraction of mSWNT in the film, and again we have indexed the chiralities as monotonically increasing in optical band gap (Ei+1 > Ei).
The system of ODEs (eqn (19)) can be integrated over the relevant distributions and solved at steady state subject to boundary conditions at the electrodes (z = 0, T). A variety of electrode configurations can be considered; here we focus on two electrodes that can drive type II exciton dissociation – one hole accepting and one electron accepting. For each electrode we therefore have Robin boundary conditions from the exciton splitting rate, (20)where kd0,i and kdT,i are the dissociation rate constants that in general could depend on the chirality i.
We add to the model the drift–diffusion transport of charge carriers resulting from exciton dissociation. In addition to the analogous geometric effects on film charge mobility and diffusivity, charge transfer at the interface of nanotubes, particularly of different chiralities, can block or trap charges.29 Asymmetric electron and hole generation (at the two electrodes) can lead to an electric field development that feeds back on the exciton dissociation problem, inhibiting dissociation and/or driving spontaneous in-film dissociation when the field strength exceeds the binding energy. Finally carrier densities can significantly impact mobility.30
In this work we do not seek to accurately describe free carrier transport in the SWNT film. Rather, we proceed under the simplification that performance will be limited by exciton diffusion, due to high longitudinal mobilities in any intrinsic electric field.30 This assumption reduces coupling between the free carrier and exciton problems to the exciton dissociation rate. We also continue to neglect any charge-transfer effects at inter-SWNT contacts, as those effects have been neither theoretically nor experimentally quantified. These rough assumptions allow, as we show, important results in the optimization of film performance, but prohibit accurate quantitative prediction of external quantum efficiency (EQE). In future work, we will seek to develop a more complete consideration of free carrier transport.
As an estimate, we attenuate single-SWNT electron and hole mobilities, μ*e and μ*h, by the network attenuation of single-SWNT exciton diffusivities. We then balance the non-equilibrium populations of conduction band carriers, fe(r), and valence band carriers, fh(r), which are coupled to one another and the electric field z(z). This yields population balances (21) (22)where De/h and μe/h are the conduction/valence band carrier network diffusivity and mobility, respectively, and ke–h is the electron–hole recombination rate constant. Eqn (21) and (22) are subject to generation boundary conditions from exciton dissociation at one electrode, and a Robin (reaction) boundary condition due to extraction at the opposite electrode (see ESI†). The electric field evolves in the z axis from the gradient in excess charge populations, (23)where ε is the mean permittivity of the film. The intrinsic bias across the film from mismatched electrode work function forms the boundary condition to (23).
Parameter estimation
We apply the model to monochiral (6,5) films with both isotropic (see ESI†) and aligned orientation distributions (Fig. 1). Relevant physical constants are determined from experimental measurement or through estimation (see ESI†). We took the intensity and frequency distribution of incident light to be the AM1.5 solar spectrum, which we fit by subtracting Gaussian curves from a blackbody spectrum. For the absorption cross-sections σ∥(ω) and σ⊥(ω) we normalized the absorption spectrum of a solid (6,5) film2 to the (6,5) absorption cross-section at S22 measured from single SWNT in ref. 31. We estimate exciton and free carrier diffusivity and quenching rate constants by analyzing the body of literature (see ESI†).
Model solution for aligned film
We assume a SWNT length distribution as log-normal32 We begin with mean length 〈l〉 = 400 nm and second moment 202 nm2. The fixed angle of alignment relative to the z axis we define as θ′, and we focus on the case of perfect alignment, (24)
In the xy plane all angles are equivalent in our semi-infinite film; we choose orientation along the x axis, p(ϕ) = δ(ϕ − 0).(25)
The film thickness, T, we will vary, but it can be limited by deposition morphology: if the aligned film is grown or stacked in a single ‘forest’ or ‘layer’ (Fig. 1d), T cannot exceed the height in z of that single layer, 〈l〉cosθ′; additionally the distribution of cend(z) will be heterogenous (log-normal). If instead the film is ‘sliced’ out of a network mixed in all dimensions, like a typical solution-processed horizontally aligned film,33 (Fig. 1e) any thickness is hypothetically permissible, and cend = 2ρ is homogenous. These two film types and our handling of them are discussed in the ESI.†
Beginning our calculation with the irradiance, the absorption cross-section polarization dependence is described as eqn (2) for our single chirality. We are in a position now to evaluate the dot product, ε·, by integrating the photon balance over p() (eqn (33)). That yields the absorption cross-section (see ESI†) (26)
Solving the photon balance (7) with no z dependence to ρ〈l〉 or σl, subject to the incident unpolarized solar flux boundary condition (8), and integrating over θε, our forward flux becomes (see ESI†), (27)
Note that except in the vertically-aligned case (θ′ = 0), there is an xy-plane linear polarization dependence to the field absorption. With a boundary condition of reflectance R off the back electrode we solve the reverse flux differential equation, again substituting in σl(ε,ω) and integrating over θε to yield (28)
The total light field gradient would then be Jν(ω,ϕε|z) = JR(ω,ϕε|z) + JF(ω,ϕε|z),(29)for example plotted in Fig. 2 for horizontally and vertically aligned films.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of vertically (green, θ′ = 0) and horizontally (blue, θ′ = π/2) aligned films at T = 40 nm, ρ〈l〉 = 0.8ρCP〈l〉, R = 1. (a) Irradiance per wavelength as light travels through the film. Note the more rapid attenuation in the horizontally aligned case. (b) Irradiance per linear polarization angle in the xy-plane as light travels through the film, showing the isotropic absorption of the vertically aligned film and induced linear polarization in the horizontally-aligned film. (c) Total irradiance with depth in the film, integrated over all wavelengths and polarization angles. (d) Total film absorbance as a function of wavelength. (e) Total film absorbance as a function of polarization angle. For exciton concentration gradients and the relative impact of each quenching mechanism, see ESI.† 
The exciton generation rate is the light absorption rate integrated over frequency and polarity, (30)
We then resolve the monochiral exciton balance (18) with the physical constants estimated in the ESI.† With an aligned film, our macroscopic homogeneity approximation limits the density space we can probe; for films with an in-plane (horizontal) orientation component, our treatment of exciton hopping is valid only at densities above the percolation threshold (ρ/ρCP > 0.65 for a horizontally-aligned film θ′ = π/2).34 Otherwise, we would be erroneously assuming in our orthogonal diffusion coefficient that percolation pathways uniformly exist. Above the threshold, we safely have a uniform orthogonal diffusivity (γI → 0). Integrating the balance (18) over p() ((24) and (25)), the net diffusion coefficient reduces to Dtot = Dl(cosθ′)2 + (1 − cosθ′)2DEH,b.(31)
With ΔB ≪ dc, eqn (12) yields DEH,b = 1.8 × 10−7 m2 s−1; note this diffusivity is 5 orders of magnitude lower than Dl (≅ 10−2 m2 s−1, see ESI†). We then numerically solve (18) at steady state, subject to electrode boundary conditions (20).
Aligned film results
We can first compare the two extreme cases, vertically (θ′ = 0) and horizontally (θ′ = π/2) aligned, at the same density, thickness, etc. (T = 40 nm, ρ〈l〉 = 0.8ρCP〈l〉, R = 1, 〈l〉 = 800 nm, no added impurities; Fig. 2). The vertical forest presents the incident light with only the perpendicular absorption cross-section (axial transition dipole), while the horizontal film can be excited along both the longitudinal and the axial transition dipoles, leading to anisotropic absorption (Fig. 2b). The higher parallel absorption cross-section makes a substantial difference in total absorptivity even at this high density and with the aligned-film diminishing returns of more rapidly depleting parallel-polarized irradiance (Fig. 2b). For these particular vertical and horizontal films, the total absorbances are 1.51 and 2.13 respectively. In absolute intensity absorption of visible light is higher than nIR (Fig. 2a) due to greater visible irradiance in the incident solar flux, but normalized for intensity nIR absorption is greater (Fig. 2d). As light travels through the film, the anisotropy of the horizontal network induces a linear polarization (Fig. 2b).
Despite the higher absorbance, the substantially lower diffusivity in the charge-collecting axis of the horizontally aligned film (Dtot = O(10−2 m2 s−1) versus O(10−7 m2 s−1)) greatly limits the efficiency – for these films EQEs are 64.6% and 2.7% respectively for vertically and horizontally aligned. In the horizontally aligned case a diffusion length of less than 10 nm is observed (see ESI†), consistent with experimental findings.1 With current experimental techniques however, horizontally aligned films can be made with substantially higher densities than vertically aligned films, which presently are grown as forests.2,35–37 To evaluate the impact of this limitation, we explored the density–thickness space at the two orientations.
Considering an idealized case where the nanotubes are infinitely long and there are no impurities of any kind (Fig. 3),38 one observes that performance is not monotonically increasing in the amount of light absorbed. Rather at a given density there is an optimal thickness that shifts lower with higher density (also observed in the case of finite length, see Fig. 4c). This result reflects the well-known trade-off with increasing thickness between greater total exciton generation (more light absorption) but greater mean distance a generated exciton has to travel to reach an electrode.39 The same tradeoff is reflected in the much lower optimal thickness of horizontal compared to vertical films; as noted, the diffusivity in the charge-collecting axis is several orders of magnitude lower in the horizontal film, leading to a diffusion length of order 10 nm. As a result, above a few tens of nanometers there are diminishing returns to greater absorption due to low exciton collection, consistent with recent experimental realization of higher performance in order-10 nm essentially-horizontal films versus previous order-100 nm films.4 In contrast, vertically aligned films, where exciton dissociation is driven in the axis parallel to longitudinal diffusion, shows optimal thicknesses two orders of magnitude larger than horizontal films. The enormous longitudinal SWNT diffusion coefficient further manifests as substantially higher performance of vertically aligned films versus horizontally aligned films above 1% CP density. The higher absorptivity of the horizontally aligned film (due primarily to depolarization) is not sufficient to compensate for the difference in diffusivity except at very low thicknesses and densities. In both cases, as density rises the optimal thickness shifts lower: higher density increases the light absorbed per thickness, shifting the optimum more towards favoring exciton transport (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  External quantum efficiency (EQE) (a and c) and total fraction of incident light absorbed (b and d) versus nanotube density (ρ/ρCP) and device thickness (T) for horizontally and vertically aligned films with infinitely long tubes and no impurities. For horizontal films, we look only at the density space above the percolation threshold (see text). R = 1. 
 Fig. 4  EQE versus thickness T and density for vertically-(a) and horizontally-(b) aligned films at different mean nanotube lengths (100, 400, and 800 nm). See ESI† for single-curve visualization of these calculations showing shift in optimal thickness. (c) Trend of optimal thickness T* with density at different fixed mean lengths (〈l〉 = 50, 400, 800, and 1200 nm) for vertically-aligned films. Circles are numerical result, solid lines are power law fits and dashed lines are biexponential fit (see text). Numerical results exhibit noise because of low sensitivity (O(10 nm)) of EQE to thickness close to the optimum. Inset: zoom showing the ‘cusp’ where dT*/dρ rapidly lowers and the biexponential trend is least accurate. See ESI† for fit parameters, more curves, plots of maximum efficiency (at T*) versus 〈l〉, EQE versus T at varying fixed densities illustrating the optimality-shift, and comparison of the exciton concentration gradients. 
We then examined the effect of introducing finite nanotube length to the network, permitting end-quenching of excitons (Fig. 4). We observed that not only does EQE across the parametric space drop (as we would expect), but that the lower exciton diffusion length has the effect of shifting the optimal thickness from the absorption–diffusion tradeoff lower, compressing the density–thickness trend in the T axis. At a fixed density, shorter tubes reduce the optimal thickness (Fig. 4c). This trend is analogous to the inverse relationship of density and optimal thickness: as exciton transport weakens (in this case due to quenching) relative to light absorption (exciton generation), the balance shifts to increase exciton diffusion by reducing the thickness.
Remarkably, the trends in T* with density are exactly captured by a power law relationship (Fig. 4c), with the power coefficients themselves inversely proportional to quenching site concentration (proportional to 〈l〉) (see ESI†).
We find that the optimal film thickness at maximum density (ρ/ρCP → 1), T*CP, is an important length scale for the device. T*CP depends on quenching site concentration, with lower 〈l〉 yielding lower optimal thickness due to reduced diffusion length, following a strict power law trend (Fig. 5 inset, ESI†): T*CP(〈l〉) = 52 nm0.6·〈l〉0.4.(32)
 Fig. 5  (a) Trend of optimal thickness numerical results with density, plotted relative to optimal thickness at close-packed density (see text). The data (black circles) includes results from devices with 〈l〉 = 10, 20, 50, 100, 250, 400, 800, 1000, and 1200 nm, showing that on this plot they all collapse to a single trend. The blue curve is a fit of eqn (33), showing perfect agreement (well within numerical result variation). (b) The trend of the optimal thickness at close-packed density (T*CP) with mean nanotube length (inverse impurity concentration) on a log–log scale, showing that they exhibit a strict power law relationship. 
Using this minimal device thickness, one finds that an appropriate dimensionless thickness for the device emerges as (T* − T*CP)/T*CP, which collapses all of the density versus thickness trends to a single curve (Fig. 5). The trend is described as a power law in normalized nanotube density: (33)
The values we get for the dimensionless coefficients, which are invariant with quenching site concentration, are a = 2.7 ± 0.1 and b = −0.241 ± 0.005. In this way, eqn (33) should find utility in device design as a single analytic equation describing the optimal device thickness as a function of density and quenching site concentration (32). We suspect that this tool will find utility among experimentalists, who can use it to calculate the optimal device thickness, which is one of the more feasible design parameters to control, given a film density and nanotube length (which can also be measured and controlled).
Next we introduced impurity scattering of excitons, providing varying concentrations of a generic local impurity that rapidly quenches excitons, choosing a representative 〈l〉 = 400 nm (Fig. 6). The same trend as end quenching emerged, with higher impurity concentrations lowering the diffusion length and both decreasing the mean performance and compressing the trend it in the T dimension.
 Fig. 6  Efficiency versus thickness and density for vertically and horizontally aligned films with 〈l〉 = 400 nm at different local quenching impurity concentrations (1, 5, and 20 per micron). 
Understanding that thickness and density play critical roles, we turned to examining the alignment angle choice. At a given density we look at the thickness-angle space (Fig. 7). Below 10% CP density, two local thickness-angle optima emerge, one at the extreme of vertical alignment, and the other at an intermediary angle. As thickness increases, the optimal alignment angle shifts gradually towards more vertical, compensating for the increased mean exciton-electrode separation with a higher z-diffusion coefficient (larger longitudinal intra-SWNT diffusion component, lower orthogonal inter-SWNT); also as thickness rises, the ratio of vertical performance to intermediate performance shifts towards vertical. As density rises, the intermediate peak more rapidly converges to the vertical with increasing T, and the ratio becomes more favorable across all T to vertical alignment. As a result, at low density (<3% CP) the intermediate peak is the global optimum of performance, while at high density the vertical is superior. In absolute efficiency, we again observe the strong impact of density (note scale bars in Fig. 7), particularly at lower densities. Again we can consider experimental results, and note that as existing SWNT SC devices have been made with primarily nanotubes in the xy plane at low concentrations (<1% CP density), the observed EQEs from 0.1% to 1% are quantitatively consistent with our predictions.1–4 Our results suggest that developing vertically aligned films above 10% the close-packed density would yield substantial EQE improvements. Films with high in-plane components, such as most to-date devices, are the worst possible configurations of nanotubes.
 Fig. 7  Performance and fraction of light absorbed versus device thickness T and aligned film nanotube orientation θ at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 100% close-packed density. θ = 0 is a vertical film, θ = π/2 is a horizontal film. 〈l〉 = 400 nm, nim = 2 × 106 m−1, R = 1. 
The optimal orientation results can be interpreted again by understanding the balance of light absorption and exciton diffusion constraints. Vertical alignment provides more rapid diffusion via the longitudinal SWNT axis, but absorbance is lower due to the depolarization effect. Horizontal alignment comes at the cost of much slower exciton-transfer-dependent diffusion, but provides more rapid light absorption, which to some extent mitigates the diffusion constraints by generating more excitons closer to the top electrode. Longitudinal diffusivity, O(10−2 m2 s−1), is so much greater than orthogonal diffusivity, O(10−7 m2 s−1), that in all but nearly-horizontal films it dominates the net diffusion coefficient. Because of the rapid exciton transport longitudinally between electrodes, absorptivity increases from somewhat non-vertical alignment at lower densities yield efficiency gains. Those gains are highest at low T where absorption is weakest and diminish (shifting the intermediate peak more vertical) with increasing thickness. At sufficiently high densities the absorption gains are unnecessary, leading to a global vertical-growth optimum. In general, the aligned film limits light absorption off of the parallel axis (Fig. 2e), reducing the efficacy of alignment.
Comparison to to-date experimental results
With these results we were able to consider the differences among to-date experimental SWNT SC observations. More closely examining the vertically- and horizontally-aligned film density trends (Fig. 6), we see that at low densities (<10% CP, where all devices have been) the increase in performance with density is rapid (Fig. 3 and 6);40 higher density increases absorption without decreasing the diffusion length (neglecting coherent delocalization of excitons between tubes, see limitations section), leading to substantial performance gains at low density. Comparison to currently published SWNT photovoltaics1–4 suggests (1) that experimentally observed EQE variations may be due to relatively low densities, and (2) that large gains can be realized in performance with higher density films. The caveat is a need to be reasonably close (0.5T* < T < 3T*) to the high-performance thickness regime. For example in primarily in-plane (‘horizontal’) films where the z diffusion length is short, density gains are negligible if the thickness is already limiting generated exciton collection significantly. With reasonable length and impurity terms, this is consistent with T* below 15 nm for horizontally aligned films, explaining the improvements in performance by reducing thickness in ref. 4. In general, the existence of a thickness optimum has been experimentally observed in both planar1 and bulk7 heterojunctions, albeit at densities below our cutoff of robust validity.
Model limitations
Several explicit and implicit approximations have been made in the derivation of the model. To encourage both application of the model and its further development, we would like to discuss some of the most significant limitations.
In both the exciton and free carrier transport problems, we neglect equilibrium charge transfer at the interface of nanotubes, particularly those of different chirality; in reality, Schottky barriers/band bending likely occurs at these contacts,29 which can greatly alter inter-SWNT transport. We expect this phenomenon to play a substantial role in free carrier transport in particular, which is one reason we adopted a simplified model of steady state charge distribution (see ESI†). Presently, experimental or theoretical examinations are necessary to elucidate the energetic and spatial character of the effect. A more accurate model should account for these interfacial interactions and local electric fields in the inter-SWNT coupling terms. Along the same lines, we have neglected the possibility of coherent delocalization of excitons in bundles, which recent experiments suggest to be the case;26 this effect could substantially raise orthogonal exciton diffusion lengths in bundles.
We have also neglected Rayleigh scattering and photoluminescence processes in the light–matter interaction. These assumptions simplified our application of the model tremendously (see ESI†), at the potential cost of accuracy. See the ESI† for a discussion of the implications of this approximation.
Finally, the validity of our integration over single-SWNT properties rests on an approximation of homogeneity. This limitation has significant implications for certain cases, particularly in-plane (‘horizontally’) aligned, low-density films. The conditions and implications of this error, including estimation of the impact, are discussed in depth in the ESI† section ‘Macroscopic heterogeneity.’ The homogeneity approximation also implies that we can only treat cases with SWNT densities above the percolation threshold.34
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have developed a deterministic model of a nIR absorbing single walled carbon nanotube photovoltaic cell based on exciton population balances that include generation, transport, recombination and charge separation. Available model inputs include arbitrary distributions of nanotube chiralities, lengths, orientations, defect types and concentration, bundle fraction and size, density, dielectric environment, and electrode combination. Several important findings include that a minimal, optimal thickness corresponding to the close packing limit of nanotubes at zero free volume provides an important scaling for the device thickness. This value is shown to scale with average nanotube length to the power 0.4. At lower densities, the normalized difference between optimal thickness and the close-packed limit scales inversely with density to the 0.24 power. Practically, the horizontally (in-plane) aligned nanotube configurations yield optimal thicknesses less than 10 nm but increase to a range of 50 to 200 nm for vertical alignment. Due to weak inter-SWNT exciton transport relative to exceptional intra-SWNT diffusion, vertically-aligned films are unambiguously favored at densities above 3% of the close-packed limit; at lower densities however an optimum emerges at an intermediate angle to compensate for weaker light absorption of vertical nanotubes. Despite the recent focus on horizontal alignment, we show that for solar energy applications horizontal alignment is the worst possible configuration. In depositing films for example, even adding inert features such as polystyrene beads to increase the out-of-plane component of nanotubes could improve performance despite the reduction in density. Based on these results we conclude that next generation devices should include higher densities and target vertical alignment, with thicknesses in the range of 40–100 nm depending on density, average SWNT length and estimated defect density.
Acknowledgements
DOB and RMJ were supported by the Department of Defense through the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship Program. RMJ also acknowledges support through the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program.
References
D. J. Bindl, M. J. Shea and M. S. Arnold, Enhancing extraction of photogenerated excitons from semiconducting carbon nanotube films as photocurrent, Chem. Phys., 2013, 413, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Jain, R. Howden, K. Tvrdy, S. Shimizu, A. J. Hilmer, T. P. McNicholas, K. K. Gleason and M. S. Strano, Polymer-Free Near-Infrared Photovoltaics with Single Chirality (6,5) Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Active Layers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(32), 4436–4439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, J. Lohrman, P. V. Kumar, A. Kirkeminde, N. Ferralis, J. C. Grossman and S. Q. Ren, Nanocarbon-Based Photovoltaics, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(10), 8896–8903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Shea and M. S. Arnold, 1% solar cells derived from ultrathin carbon nanotube photoabsorbing films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(24), 243101 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Liu, R. M. Konik, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Carbon nanotube-based heterostructures for solar energy applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(20), 8134–8156 RSC .
M. S. Arnold, J. Blackburn, J. Crochet, S. Doorn, J. Duque, A. Mohite and H. Telg, Recent Developments in the Photophysics of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes for Active and Passive Material Elements in Thin Film Photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 14896–14918 RSC .
Y. Ye, D. J. Bindl, R. M. Jacobberger, M.-Y. Wu, S. S. Roy and M. S. Arnold, Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Aerogel Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Small, 2014, 3299–3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, D. Nishide, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Large-scale single-chirality separation of single-wall carbon nanotubes by simple gel chromatography, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 309 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tvrdy, R. M. Jain, R. Han, A. J. Hilmer, T. P. McNicholas and M. S. Strano, A Kinetic Model for the Deterministic Prediction of Gel-Based Single-Chirality Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Separation, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(2), 1779–1789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Moshammer, F. Hennrich and M. Kappes, Selective suspension in aqueous sodium dodecyl sulfate according to electronic structure type allows simple separation of metallic from semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes, Nano Res., 2009, 2(8), 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Brown and M. A. Green, Limiting efficiency for current-constrained two-terminal tandem cell stacks, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2002, 10(5), 299–307 Search PubMed .
F. Schoppler, C. Mann, T. C. Hain, F. M. Neubauer, G. Privitera, F. Bonaccorso, D. P. Chu, A. C. Ferrari and T. Hertel, Molar Extinction Coefficient of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(30), 14682–14686 CAS .
A. V. Naumov, D. A. Tsyboulski, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, Length-dependent optical properties of single-walled carbon nanotube samples, Chem. Phys., 2013, 255–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Ruzicka, R. Wang, J. Lohrman, S. Q. Ren and H. Zhao, Exciton diffusion in semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes studied by transient absorption microscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86(20), 205417 CrossRef .
N. M. Gabor, Z. H. Zhong, K. Bosnick and P. L. McEuen, Ultrafast Photocurrent Measurement of the Escape Time of Electrons and Holes from Carbon Nanotube p-i-n Photodiodes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(8), 087404 CrossRef .
S. Q. Ren, M. Bernardi, R. R. Lunt, V. Bulovic, J. C. Grossman and S. Gradecak, Toward Efficient Carbon Nanotube/P3HT Solar Cells: Active Layer Morphology, Electrical, and Optical Properties, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(12), 5316–5321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The physics of solar cells, Imperial College Press, London,  2003, p xix, p. 363 Search PubMed .
More parameters can be introduced into the model in the same manner as we include these; see ESI.†.

          S. Reich; C. Thomsen and J. Maultzsch, Carbon nanotubes: basic concepts and physical properties, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Cambridge,  2004, p ix, p. 215 Search PubMed .
M. F. Islam, D. E. Milkie, C. L. Kane, A. G. Yodh and J. M. Kikkawa, Direct measurement of the polarized optical absorption cross section of single-wall carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93(3), 037404 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, G. Dukovic, L. E. Brus and T. F. Heinz, The optical resonances in carbon nanotubes arise from excitons, Science, 2005, 308(5723), 838–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Maultzsch, R. Pomraenke, S. Reich, E. Chang, D. Prezzi, A. Ruini, E. Molinari, M. S. Strano, C. Thomsen and C. Lienau, Exciton binding energies in carbon nanotubes from two-photon photoluminescence, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72(24), 241402 CrossRef .
G. Dukovic, F. Wang, D. H. Song, M. Y. Sfeir, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, Structural dependence of excitonic optical transitions and band-gap energies in carbon nanotubes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(11), 2314–2318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Avouris, M. Freitag and V. Perebeinos, Carbon-nanotube photonics and optoelectronics, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2(6), 341–350 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luer, J. Crochet, T. Hertel, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Ultrafast Excitation Energy Transfer in Small Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Aggregates, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(7), 4265–4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Crochet, J. D. Sau, J. G. Duque, S. K. Doorn and M. L. Cohen, Electrodynamic and Excitonic Intertube Interactions in Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Aggregates, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(4), 2611–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, T. Zifer, B. M. Wong, K. L. Krafcik, F. Léonard and A. L. Vance, Color Detection Using Chromophore-Nanotube Hybrid Devices, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(3), 1028–1033 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Delaney, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Broken symmetry and pseudogaps in ropes of carbon nanotubes, Nature, 1998, 391(6666), 466–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Topinka, M. W. Rowell, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Charge Transport in Interpenetrating Networks of Semiconducting and Metallic Carbon Nanotubes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(5), 1866–1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Liao and E. Pop, Multiband Mobility in Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2009, 30(10), 1078–1080 CrossRef .
L. Oudjedi, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, A. G. Godin, L. Cognet and B. Lounis, Metrological Investigation of the (6,5) Carbon Nanotube Absorption Cross Section, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(9), 1460–1464 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Liang, B. Wang and C. Zhang, Statistical characterization of single-wall carbon nanotube length distribution, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17(3), 634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, T. Chen, Z. Yang and H. Peng, The Alignment of Carbon Nanotubes: An Effective Route To Extend Their Excellent Properties to Macroscopic Scale, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46(2), 539–549 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Maillaud, C. Zakri, I. Ly, A. Pénicaud and P. Poulin, Conductivity of transparent electrodes made from interacting nanotubes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103(26), 263106 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D. Nessim, A. J. Hart, J. S. Kim, D. Acquaviva, J. Oh, C. D. Morgan, M. Seita, J. S. Leib and C. V. Thompson, Tuning of Vertically-Aligned Carbon Nanotube Diameter and Areal Density through Catalyst Pre-Treatment, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(11), 3587–3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Fischer, W. Zhou, J. Vavro, M. C. Llaguno, C. Guthy, R. Haggenmueller, M. J. Casavant, D. E. Walters and R. E. Smalley, Magnetically aligned single wall carbon nanotube films: Preferred orientation and anisotropic transport properties, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93(4), 2157–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, M.-W. Jang, G. Haugstad, S. A. Campbell and T. Cui, Well-aligned and suspended single-walled carbon nanotube film: Directed self-assembly, patterning, and characterization, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(26), 261903 CrossRef PubMed .
Note that while we do extract EQE, given the estimation of many parameters and the approximate consideration of charge transport we are not fixated on the absolute values of EQE; while they may be representative they are not fundamental, and are primarily valuable for comparing the differential impact of geometric and chemical parameters.
M. Y. Wu, R. M. Jacobberger and M. S. Arnold, Design length scales for carbon nanotube photoabsorber based photovoltaic materials and devices, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113(20), 204504 CrossRef PubMed .
To observe this effect in horizontal films, we must go below the percolation threshold, which is not shown here. Quantitatively our predictions in that regime match up with experimental devices, but because our approximation does not hold in that regime, we do not claim to reproduce that device performance.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The ESI contains a full derivation of the model, as well as analysis of several its tangential aspects, along with a table of variables. Notes on physical constant estimation and more results of the model application are also provided, as indicated above. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee01765jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Photovoltaic materials that absorb in the near-IR wavelength regime can complement existing silicon solar cells, which absorb at visible wavelengths, raising solar energy collection with the same footprint. Carbon nanotube networks offer an ideal material: being cheap to manufacture and solution-process-able, they can be coated on transparent electrodes to be placed on top of visible solar cells, overcoming the challenges of tandem photovoltaics (lattice and work function mismatch). This promise has spurred recent experimental investigations to produce proof-of-concept devices, but efficiencies remain low and the complexity of the nanoscopic material has limited empirical insight into design improvements. In this work, we derived a steady-state model of this nanostructured photovoltaic's operation from the basic nanotube photophysics. That allowed us to extract non-intuitive design principles, such as the optimal network alignment and film thickness for a given nanotube length distribution or defect level. These findings reveal what device structures are needed to substantially raise efficiency. More broadly, we show a method for deterministically describing a nanostructured material's optoelectronic behavior under experimentally-useful assumptions.


 	Fig. 1  Cartoon of model geometry, depicting the position rc, orientation  ≡ (θ,ϕ), and length l of nanotubes. The thickness of the film is T, and we take the z axis to be the propagation direction of incident irradiance J0(ω,ε). A point on a given tube is r′. (a–f) Cartoon representations of film geometries under consideration, side view (top) and cross-section (bottom). Vertically aligned films with densities ranging from sparse (a) to close-packed (b), horizontally aligned films at densities above the percolation threshold (c), aligned films at arbitrary angles with single-layer (d) and multi-layer (e) depositions (see text, ESI†), and isotropic films (f).	 
	(1)
σ(ci,ε,,ω) = |ε·|2σ∥(ci,ω) + (1 − |ε·|)2σ⊥(ci,ω),	(2)
Ni(ω,ε,k,|r) = vi·ρ〈l〉·σl(ε,,ω,ci)·Jν(ω,ε,k|r)	(3)
	(4)
∇·Jν(ω,ε,k|r) = −N(ω,ε,k|r).	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
λ ≡ |′·′′| = λ(θ′,θ′′,ϕ′,ϕ′′),	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
p(ϕ) = δ(ϕ − 0).	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
Jν(ω,ϕε|z) = JR(ω,ϕε|z) + JF(ω,ϕε|z),	(29)

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of vertically (green, θ′ = 0) and horizontally (blue, θ′ = π/2) aligned films at T = 40 nm, ρ〈l〉 = 0.8ρCP〈l〉, R = 1. (a) Irradiance per wavelength as light travels through the film. Note the more rapid attenuation in the horizontally aligned case. (b) Irradiance per linear polarization angle in the xy-plane as light travels through the film, showing the isotropic absorption of the vertically aligned film and induced linear polarization in the horizontally-aligned film. (c) Total irradiance with depth in the film, integrated over all wavelengths and polarization angles. (d) Total film absorbance as a function of wavelength. (e) Total film absorbance as a function of polarization angle. For exciton concentration gradients and the relative impact of each quenching mechanism, see ESI.†	 
	(30)
Dtot = Dl(cosθ′)2 + (1 − cosθ′)2DEH,b.	(31)

 	Fig. 3  External quantum efficiency (EQE) (a and c) and total fraction of incident light absorbed (b and d) versus nanotube density (ρ/ρCP) and device thickness (T) for horizontally and vertically aligned films with infinitely long tubes and no impurities. For horizontal films, we look only at the density space above the percolation threshold (see text). R = 1.	 

 	Fig. 4  EQE versus thickness T and density for vertically-(a) and horizontally-(b) aligned films at different mean nanotube lengths (100, 400, and 800 nm). See ESI† for single-curve visualization of these calculations showing shift in optimal thickness. (c) Trend of optimal thickness T* with density at different fixed mean lengths (〈l〉 = 50, 400, 800, and 1200 nm) for vertically-aligned films. Circles are numerical result, solid lines are power law fits and dashed lines are biexponential fit (see text). Numerical results exhibit noise because of low sensitivity (O(10 nm)) of EQE to thickness close to the optimum. Inset: zoom showing the ‘cusp’ where dT*/dρ rapidly lowers and the biexponential trend is least accurate. See ESI† for fit parameters, more curves, plots of maximum efficiency (at T*) versus 〈l〉, EQE versus T at varying fixed densities illustrating the optimality-shift, and comparison of the exciton concentration gradients.	 
T*CP(〈l〉) = 52 nm0.6·〈l〉0.4.	(32)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Trend of optimal thickness numerical results with density, plotted relative to optimal thickness at close-packed density (see text). The data (black circles) includes results from devices with 〈l〉 = 10, 20, 50, 100, 250, 400, 800, 1000, and 1200 nm, showing that on this plot they all collapse to a single trend. The blue curve is a fit of eqn (33), showing perfect agreement (well within numerical result variation). (b) The trend of the optimal thickness at close-packed density (T*CP) with mean nanotube length (inverse impurity concentration) on a log–log scale, showing that they exhibit a strict power law relationship.	 
	(33)

 	Fig. 6  Efficiency versus thickness and density for vertically and horizontally aligned films with 〈l〉 = 400 nm at different local quenching impurity concentrations (1, 5, and 20 per micron).	 

 	Fig. 7  Performance and fraction of light absorbed versus device thickness T and aligned film nanotube orientation θ at 1%, 5%, 10%, and 100% close-packed density. θ = 0 is a vertical film, θ = π/2 is a horizontal film. 〈l〉 = 400 nm, nim = 2 × 106 m−1, R = 1.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The ESI contains a full derivation of the model, as well as analysis of several its tangential aspects, along with a table of variables. Notes on physical constant estimation and more results of the model application are also provided, as indicated above. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee01765j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
