Advanced electrocatalysts based on two-dimensional transition metal hydroxides and their composites for alkaline oxygen reduction reaction  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR05072E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR05072E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 21479-21496Advanced electrocatalysts based on two-dimensional transition metal hydroxides and their composites for alkaline oxygen reduction reaction

        
          
            Hao 
            Wan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fashen 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohe 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Renzhi 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, PR China. E-mail: liuxiaohe@zzu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410083, P. R. China
cWorld Premier International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: MA.Renzhi@nims.go.jp
Received 
      7th July 2020
    , Accepted 5th October 2020First published on 5th October 2020AbstractThe electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a crucial part in developing high-efficiency fuel cells and metal–air batteries, which have been cherished as clean and sustainable energy conversion devices/systems to meet the ever-increasing energy demand. ORR electrocatalysts currently employed in the cathodes of fuel cells and metal–air batteries are mainly based on high-cost and scarce noble metal elements. It is thus of great importance to develop cheap and earth-abundant ORR electrocatalysts. In this aspect, redox-active transition metal hydroxides, a class of multifunctional inorganic layered materials, have been proposed as prospective candidates on account of their abundance and high ORR activities. In this article, the preparation and structural evolution of transition metal hydroxides, in particular their exfoliation into two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, as well as compositing/integrating with catalytic active and/or conductive components to overcome the insulating nature of hydroxides in alkaline ORR, are summarized. Recent advances have demonstrated that 2D transition metal hydroxides with carefully tuned compositions and elaborately designed nanoarchitectures can achieve both high activity and high pathway selectivity, as well as excellent stability comparable to those of commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts. To realize the dream of renewable electrochemical energy conversion, new strategies and insights into rational designing of 2D hydroxide-based nanostructures with further enhanced electrocatalytic performance are still to be vigorously pursued.Hao WanHao Wan is an assistant professor of the School of Chemical Engineering at Zhengzhou University. He received his BSs (2013) and PhD (2019) from Central South University. From September 2016 to September 2018, he studied as an exchange student at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His research topics focus on the design and synthesis of nanostructures for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.Xiaohe LiuXiaohe Liu is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University. He obtained his PhD degree at Central South University in 2005 supervised by Prof. Guanzhou Qiu, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering. His research interests include the functionalization and engineering of layered materials and mineral materials.Renzhi MaRenzhi Ma is a group leader at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). He received his BSc and PhD from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 1995 and 2000, respectively. Since 2000, he has worked for the NIMS. His recent research interests include developing advanced functional 2D nanomaterials and hybrids for energy-related applications.
1 Introduction
In recent decades, the excessive consumption of nonrenewable energy resources, in particular fossil fuels, has led to the exhaustion of these valuable resources and brought about severe environmental pollution or climate issues.1 In addition, growing industrialization and economic development increase the dependence on energy resources. Therefore, it is crucial to develop clean and sustainable energy storage and conversion devices and/or systems.2,3 Due to clean combustion and high energy density, reproducible hydrogen (H2) has been regarded as a promising alternative to traditional fossil fuels.4,5 Besides the conventional thermochemical generation method, H2 may be produced on an industrial scale through electrochemical and/or photochemical approaches under ambient conditions using renewable electricity or natural solar energy resources.6–8 For sustained H2-related energy source, fuel cells are highly regarded as high-efficiency electrochemical devices (2H2 + O2 → 2H2O), as depicted in Fig. 1a.9,10 Nowadays, commercially available proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells are primarily built based on acidic systems. It is inevitable to use noble metal-based catalysts (e.g. Pt/C composite) because of the severe etching issues. Despite the scarcity and high cost of noble metals, it is rather difficult to completely substitute them with much cheaper and earth-abundant transition metal-based materials, limiting the wide applications of fuel cells. With the rapid research progress made on anion exchange membranes (AEMs) with hydroxyl ion conductivity, alkaline fuel cells with a prospect of adopting efficient electrocatalysts based on low-cost and earth-abundant transition metal elements are of great research interest.11–14
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a typical (a) alkaline fuel cell and (b) aqueous metal–air battery. 
In addition, rechargeable aqueous metal–air batteries, as shown in Fig. 1b, another type of newly emerging energy conversion devices, also involve alkaline ORR. Specifically, pure metals are used as active anodes according to the reaction: M → Mx+ + xe, where M is the anode metal such as zinc (Zn), magnesium (Mg), iron (Fe), and aluminum (Al) and x+ refers to the oxidation state of the metal cation.15–17 To realize rapid and steady energy conversions in these advanced devices (or systems) for industrial-scale applications, electrochemical materials with low cost and high performance for oxygen reduction are in urgent demand.
Advanced compounds or materials based on non-precious transition metal elements (such as Fe, Co and Ni) with unique d electron configurations, exhibiting amazing physicochemical properties including high redox activity, have been widely applied in electrocatalysis, supercapacitance, fabrication of batteries, sewage treatments, etc.18–25 On the one hand, transition metal hydroxides have been demonstrated to show pronounced performance in oxygen evolution reaction (OER: 4OH− → 2H2O + O2 + 4e−), promising to replace commercial noble metal-based electrocatalysts (e.g. Ir/C, RuO2).26,27 On the other hand, the search for low-cost ORR electrocatalysts has been directed mainly toward transition metals and their alloys, phosphides, carbides, nitrides, etc.28–32 For transition metal hydroxides themselves, modest ORR activity and performance were reported, partly due to their insulating nature. If high performance in ORR can be achieved by developing low-dimensional transition metal hydroxides or compositing with other electronic conductive components (metals, carbon/graphene, etc.), they may serve as bifunctional OER and ORR catalysts for both metal–air batteries and alkaline fuel cells.
Up to date, there are some excellent review articles on the progress of ORR electrocatalysts focusing on noble metals and/or alloys, carbon-based materials (such as nitrogen-doped carbon nanostructures), oxides (spinel oxides in particular), and so on.33–40 Meanwhile, the reviews covering transition metal hydroxides are essentially dedicated to OER applications. In other words, few of them have paid sufficient attention to the structural evolution of transition metal hydroxides as well as the prospect particularly targeting for ORR applications.41–45 It is therefore necessary to systematically review the basic crystal structures/polymorphs of transition metal hydroxides, in particular two-dimensional (2D) nanostructures, as well as the recently emerged strategies and methodologies in developing highly efficient ORR electrocatalysts based on their composites. Herein, we first summarize the chemical preparation and structural evolution of transition metal hydroxides as well as their exfoliation/delamination into 2D nanosheets. With a brief introduction to the performance evaluation of ORR catalysts, we review the recent progress on advanced ORR electrocatalysts derived from transition metal hydroxides and their composites.
2 Preparation of transition metal hydroxides
2.1 Preparation and structural evolution of transition metal hydroxides
Transition metal hydroxides, a large collection of functional materials with layered structures, mainly consist of brucite-like and hydrotalcite-like polymorphs. The former ones are well-known β-type hydroxides with an interlayer spacing of ∼0.46 nm.46 When the metal atoms with the divalent metal cation (M2+) in the host layers are partially substituted by those of higher valence, to balance the positive charge, both various anions and water molecules enter into the interlayer gallery, forming the hydrotalcite-like structures, i.e., the so-called layered double hydroxides (LDHs) with a general formula of M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2Ax/nn−·mH2O, where M2+ stands for Co2+, Ni2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, etc., while M3+ represents Co3+, Al3+, Fe3+, etc., and An− can be Cl−, CO32−, ClO4−, or organic anions such as acetate (CH3COO−) and even long-chain dodecyl sulfate (C12H25SO4−, DS−) ions.47–50 The intercalated anions and water molecules yield an interlayer distance typically larger than 0.70 nm.51–53 Due to the relatively weak electrostatic binding of the anions to the charged host layers, they can be replaced by other moieties via an anion-exchange process, and such an exchange is generally highly reversible.54–58

Fig. 2a depicts the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of CoAl LDH products intercalated with different anions, indicating a basal interlayer distance of 0.78 nm for a typical Cl−-intercalated form. After being exchanged with NO3−, ClO4−, CH3COO−, lactate, DS− and oleate anions, the hydrotalcite-like structure was expanded and the spacing correspondingly increased to 0.89, 1.19, 1.27, 1.49, 2.51 and 3.02 nm, respectively.59 As a result, the expanded galleries were beneficial for the transportation of small molecules inside (such as water and oxygen), giving rise to the enhanced performance in electrocatalysis.42,60–63 Even intercalated with the same anion species (e.g. DS− ions), the interlayer spacing was still adjustable.64 As depicted in Fig. 2b, with the increase in the addition of DS− from 5 to 30 mmol during synthesis, the interlayer distance gradually expanded from 2.4 to 3.7 nm. In view of the host layer thickness of ∼0.46 nm and the length of an individual DS− ion (1.78 nm), plausible single- and double-layer grafting models were proposed, as shown in Fig. 2c. The single-layer grafting form with a slant angle of ∼53° corresponded to a spacing of 2.4 nm, while the double-layer grafting counterpart might be constituted when excessive DS− ions were provided. Meanwhile, the composition of LDH host slabs is also highly tunable. To maintain the layered gallery arrangement, the x value in the formula is typically in the range of 1/6–1/3.65–67 In this range, both M2+ and M3+ can be replaced by other equivalent metal ions, transforming into multi-metallic LDHs and thus modulating the electronic structures (i.e. the optimization of physicochemical properties).68–72
 Fig. 2  Preparation of transition metal hydroxides. (a) XRD patterns of LDHs with different interlayer ion species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) XRD traces of DS−-intercalated Co hydroxides prepared by using different DS− additive doses and (c) the corresponding plausible crystal models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) AFM image of CO32−-intercalated CoAl LDH nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) XRD patterns showing a spontaneous phase transformation in a CoCl2–NaCl–HMT system at 90 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM image of Zn hydroxide nanocones prepared using SDS as the directing agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Conventional brucite and hydrotalcite are based on Mg and/or Al. Over the past decade, diverse transition metal hydroxides such as CoAl LDHs, α-type Co hydroxide, brucite- and hydrotalcite-like CoFe hydroxides, and even rare earth metal counterparts have been successfully synthesized, offering a great possibility to expand the functionalities and applications.6,50,52,54,57–59,61,64,72,73–79 For example, homogeneous precipitation methods, using urea (CH4N2O) and/or hexamethylenetetramine (HMT, C6H12N4) in water bath, oil bath or hydrothermal processes, were generally used for the preparation of transition metal-containing hydroxides. Gradual hydrolysis of HMT or urea generated ammonia, making the solution alkaline and thus inducing homogeneous nucleation and subsequent crystallization. In these procedures, a low degree of supersaturation gave rise to a slow nucleation rate, positive for the growth of large crystals. CoAl LDHs, as depicted in Fig. 2d, consisted of nanoplates with a lateral size up to 3–4 μm and a less thickness of ∼60 nm.80 Compared with the samples obtained through conventional co-precipitation processes, this product was of high quality in terms of regular morphology, uniform size, and high crystallinity due to the slow growth rate. As shown in Fig. 2e, it was found that in the CoCl2–NaCl–HMT system, a spontaneous phase transformation from metastable α-type Co(OH)2 into the thermodynamically stable β-type counterpart occurred during the synthesis of β-type Co(OH)2 platelets. In addition, such a transformation could be delayed and/or even prevented via the addition of excess NaCl salt into the reaction feeds.81 Moreover, the additives were found to rationally control the morphology/structure of transition metal hydroxides.50,52,64 For instance, as evidenced in Fig. 2f, adding excess long-chain DS− anions as the directing agent in the synthetic procedure, Ma et al. have prepared Zn hydroxide with a unique rolled structure (i.e. nanocone morphology), unveiling the flexible features.82 This rolling-up phenomenon is similar to those of other 2D nanosheets such as graphenes, montmorillonite monolayers and manganese oxide nanosheets.83,84
An innovative topochemical approach was developed to realize the phase transformation from brucite-like polymorphs into hydrotalcite-like LDHs.54,72 As illustrated in Fig. 3a, when the redox-active metal elements in brucite-like CoFe hydroxide were partially oxidized by an oxidizing agent (such as iodine (I2)), the host layers showed a positive charge and thus anions (i.e. I−) entered into the interlayer gallery to balance the electric charge, giving rise to hydrotalcite-like CoFe LDHs,85 wherein the anions between two adjacent slabs were also exchangeable with other congeneric ions. Fig. 3b shows the XRD patterns of initial brucite-like crystals as well as the treated counterparts. The interlayer spacing increased from 0.46 to 0.83 nm after I2 treatment and further expanded to 9.2 nm after ClO4− ion exchange process. It should be noted that the nanoplate morphology was well maintained after the abovementioned treatments, as indicated in Fig. 3c and d. This topochemical conversion could also be extended for the preparation of other series of transition metal LDHs, such as Ni2+Fe3+ and Co2+Co3+.73,86
 Fig. 3  Topochemical transformation of brucite-like Co2+Fe2+ hydroxide. (a) Scheme of topochemical transformation and subsequent ion exchange, (b) XRD patterns of (i) brucite-like Co2+Fe2+ hydroxide, Co2+Fe3+ LDHs intercalated with (ii) I− and (iii) ClO4−, respectively. Elemental distribution of CoFe LDHs accommodating (c) I− and (d) ClO4−. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, the phase transformation of other metastable transition metal-containing precursors (such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and sulphides) via alkaline treatment is another popular way for the preparation of transition metal hydroxides.87,88 For instance, Zhang et al. have synthesized binary CoFe LDHs and trinary CoNiFe counterparts via the in situ conversion of the corresponding oxalate MOF predecessors in a concentrated KOH solution.89
2.2 Delamination and exfoliation for 2D nanosheets
Besides composition tuning, structural characteristics such as morphology, size, and crystallinity have been considered as the essential factors determining the physicochemical properties and, thus, the functionalities of transition metal hydroxides. For instance, when the thickness reduces to a molecular scale, the basic physicochemical nature including electrical conductivity will vary dramatically, different from that of the bulk counterparts.71,90 Meanwhile, other advantages such as accessibility to more catalytic sites and higher intrinsic activity are also created because of the extremely thin nanolayers, favorable for efficient electrocatalysis. The fine tuning of these abovementioned structural features can be realized via rationally regulating the experimental parameters in chemical synthetic procedures or an ingenious exfoliation/delamination process.
Because of the favourable physicochemical properties arising from the molecular-scale thin nanosheets, to date numerous attempts have been made for the exfoliation of various layered materials into 2D nanosheet counterparts. For transition metal hydroxides with suitably intercalated anions (e.g., NO3−, DS−, etc.), the universal exfoliation procedure is depicted in Fig. 4a.91 Typically, the dried LDH powder was homogeneously dispersed in polar solvents (e.g. formamide) under the protection of inert gases such as N2 and/or Ar. The swelling process in formamide was easily achieved for the expansion of layered galleries to weaken the interaction between two neighbouring host slabs. Then, delamination could be facilely achieved by mechanical shaking, ultrasound treatment or even aging of the suspension of bulk precursors under relatively mild temperature conditions (e.g. 40 °C). In addition, the colloidal suspension containing the as-exfoliated hydroxide nanosheets was obtained after the removal of the unexfoliated residue by a high-speed centrifugation process (such as 3000 rpm for 10 min).92Fig. 4b–d indicate the as-exfoliated unilaminar MgAl LDH nanosheets with monocrystalline nature.93 Similarly, CoAl LDHs, Zn hydroxide and CoNi hydroxides with tuneable Co/Ni molar ratios were also successfully exfoliated into their corresponding unilaminar nanosheet counterparts (as displayed in Fig. 4e–k).59,94,95 The clear Tyndall light scattering, as can be seen in the insets of Fig. 4g–k, demonstrated the presence of exfoliated monolayers, i.e., 2D nanosheets. Additionally, the obvious color change of the suspensions from brown to light green clearly indicated the gradual composition variation of exfoliated CoNi hydroxide nanosheets.
 Fig. 4  Exfoliation of LDHs and other layered hydroxides with suitable interlayer anions into 2D nanosheets. (a) Schematic of the exfoliation of layered hydroxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2006, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) AFM image, (c) TEM image and (d) selected-area electron diffraction spots of exfoliated MgAl LDH nanosheets. AFM images of (e) CoAl LDH, (f) Zn hydroxide, (g–k) CoNi hydroxides with different Co/Ni molar ratios. The insets in (g–k) are the corresponding unilaminar nanosheet suspensions showing clear Tyndall light scattering. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2005, (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2006, (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society while (g–h) reproduced with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
While for brucite-like precursors such as Co2+Fe2+ hydroxide nanoplates, the topochemical conversion into LDHs is needed before the exfoliation procedure. After transformation into Co2+Fe3+ LDHs, the typical ion-exchange and exfoliation process for conventional LDHs can be applied to the topochemically converted LDH products, as evidenced by the thickness of the as-exfoliated nanosheets as ∼0.8 nm (as depicted in Fig. 5a).85,96 In addition, as shown in Fig. 5b–d, Hu et al. have obtained a series of 2D nanosheets such as Co2+Co3+, Ni2+Co3+ and Ni2+Fe3+via the exfoliation of the corresponding LDHs prepared via topochemical transformation of the brucite-like precursors, respectively.71
 Fig. 5  Exfoliation of LDHs transformed from brucite-like hydroxides. (a) AFM image of Co2+Fe3+ LDH nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Photographs of suspension containing the as-exfoliated Co2+Co3+, Ni2+Co3+, and Ni2+Fe3+LDH nanosheets. (c) AFM image and (d) height profiles of Ni2+Co3+ LDH nanosheets. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
The “formamide method” is considered as a general strategy that is applicable to layered hydroxides with a variety of metal ions such as Co–Al, Ni–Al, and Co–Fe and/or counter ions, e.g. NO32−, ClO4−, DS−, acetate and lactate. Besides, exfoliation can be realized in other solvents; however, it is suggested that the degree of exfoliation severely depends on the interactions between hosts, anions and solvents.97 Very recently, Wang's group have proposed an innovative exfoliation approach using plasma that destroyed the bonds in the interlayers, resulting in the successful exfoliation of bulk LDHs into unilaminar nanosheets, as depicted in Fig. 6.98 Different from previous liquid-phase methods, it only involved solid LDH powder and plasma without any liquid solvents (referring to dry exfoliation), indicating a non-toxic procedure without the adsorption of solvent molecules on the surface of the as-exfoliated nanosheets. More importantly, during plasma etching, the covalent bonds in the host slabs were also partially damaged, resulting in the generation of both rich oxygen and metal vacancies, and thus contributing to high activity in electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 6  Exfoliation of LDH by plasma. (a) Schematic of a typical plasma exfoliation process. AFM images of (b) bulk LDH and (c) as-exfoliated nanosheets. (d) Height profiles of the lines in (b) and (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
2.3 Preparation of 2D nanosheets by direct synthesis
The abovementioned exfoliation routes, i.e. the structural evolution from bulk precursors to nanosheets, are the so-called “top-down” method. On the other hand, 2D nanosheets can also be prepared via a controlled growth process in solvents, i.e. the “bottom-up” approaches.
In the earlier years, reverse microemulsion methods have been developed for the direct preparation of hydroxide nanosheets. Typically, an aqueous solution containing metal salts and alkaline sources (e.g. urea) was introduced into the oil system such as hydrophobic isooctane to form water-in-oil microemulsion droplets surrounded by the surfactants, e.g. DS− anions. The droplets act as nanoreactors providing both finite space and feeds for the nucleation and growth of hydroxide nansheets. The lateral size and thickness can also be effectively controlled by regulating the ratio of water to surfactants. This “bottom-up” procedure has been expanded for the synthesis of MgAl LDHs, CoAl LDHs, etc.99,100
Until 2015, Yu et al. reported a facile one-step strategy to inhibit the growth and stacking of MgAl LDH nanosheets in z-axis via using a layer of formamide molecules as the inhibitor.101 Due to the possible strong interactions between the carbonyl groups of formamide and the hydroxyl groups on the surface of LDH slabs, the electrostatic interactions between the positively charged nanosheets and the oppositely charged counterions were weakened, which effectively prevented the formation of multilayers. In particular, a quick synthesis of only 10 min was realized for MgAl LDH nanosheets through this approach. Very recently, Zhang's group has expanded this synthetic approach to NiFe LDH monolayers, as can be seen from Fig. 7a.102 By improving the feed concentrations by one order of magnitude, fast nucleation together with the decomposition of the adsorbed formamide molecules on the surface of nanosheets was achieved, resulting in the irregular porous monolayers with a measured thickness of ∼0.85 nm, as evidenced by Fig. 7b–e. The porous structure provided rich defects as well as a high proportion of edge sites, beneficial for efficient electrocatalysis. It has also been reported that the lateral size could further be reduced to ∼2.3 nm when a continuous ultrasonic treatment was applied to the as-prepared LDH monolayers. The extended X-ray absorption fine structure analyses were employed to study metal coordination environments in the as-obtained ultrafine LDH nanosheets. The detected decreases in coordination number in both Ni–O and Ni–Ni/Fe shells indicated the existence of oxygen and metal vacancies in these two shells, respectively, and thus providing a piece of strong evidence for severe structural distortion. Theoretical calculations further showed that the cation and anion vacancies inducing structural distortion endowed the ultrafine nanosheets with semi-metallic features, favourable for the promoted electrocatalytic reactions.103 More detailed comparison of these direct and indirect preparation methods for 2D nanosheets is depicted in Table 1.
 Fig. 7  “Bottom-up” synthesis of 2D NiFe LDH nanosheets. (a) Schematic for the synthesis of NiFe LDH monolayers and porous counterparts. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images, (d) the corresponding FFT pattern and (e) AFM image of porous NiFe LDH monolayers. The inset in (b) is a photograph of the unilaminar NiFe LDH nanosheets dispersed in ethanol, showing a clear Tyndall light scattering phenomenon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Table 1 A comparison of synthetic methods for 2D hydroxide nanosheets




Methods
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Formamide methods

• A general strategy applicable to layered hydroxides with a variety of metal ions and/or counter ions.

• Formamide molecules are adsorbed on the surface of as-exfoliated nanosheets.

59, 85, 91, 94 and 95




• Delamination can be achieved under mild room temperature conditions with moderate shaking.



• Large-scale preparation of 2D nanosheets with the large lateral size (hundreds of nanometers to several micrometers)


 


Plasma method

• Rich vacancies are generated on nanosheets.

• At present, it may not be applicable to large scale preparation.

98




• No toxic liquid solvents are used.



• No organic molecules are adsorbed on the surface of nanosheets.



• Time-saving.


 


Reverse microemulsion methods

• The size of as-prepared nanosheets can be easily tuned by changing water/surfactant ratio.

• Heating (∼75 °C) is essential for the preparation.

99 and 100




• Time-consuming (such as 4 days for CoAl LDH nanosheets).



• The transition metal hydroxide nanosheets are usually more than 1 layer.


 


Direct preparation in formamide-water system

• Time-saving.

• The size of as-prepared nanosheets is very small, which may result in the low content when compositing them with other 2D materials with much larger lateral size according to an area-matching model.

101–103




• Small nanosheets with abundant distorted metal coordination and edges.

• Relative high-temperature reaction conditions (e.g. ∼80 °C) are needed.



• High yield.




3 ORR catalysts based on transition metal hydroxides
3.1 Performance evaluation of ORR catalysts
For ORR, the process may proceed via the following reactions:1,36,104 O2 + H2O + 2e → HO2− + OH−(1)
The produced H2O− can be further reduced to OH− by receiving another two electrons: HO2− + H2O + 2e → 3OH−(2)
The ideal complete conversion of O2 into OH− is expressed as follows: O2 + H2O + 4e → 4OH−(3)
The integration of reactions (1) and (2) provides the same outcome as reaction (3). The difference between the indirect and direct reaction pathways is whether the intermediate product HO2− is released into the electrolytes.
For evaluating an ORR catalyst, electron transfer number n has been considered as one of the most significant parameters, which not only provides the efficiency information of oxygen conversion but also reflects the reaction mechanism (i.e. pathway selectivity). It is generally accepted that n is in the scope of 2–4. A lower n value refers to the more generation of hydrogen peroxide H2O2 (in the form of H2O− in an alkaline electrolyte ambience).
Typically, the electrocatalytic performance of an ORR material is characterized in a three-electrode system including a reference electrode and a counter electrode (e.g. graphite rod), while the catalyst-loading disk electrode and/or ring-disk electrode acts as the working electrode, as depicted in Fig. 8a. Under the assumption of elementary reactions, two conventional methods, the Koutecký–Levich (K–L) method and the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) method, are widely adopted for the determination of n on the basis of the forced convection processes on a rotating disk electrode (RDE) or a RRDE, as depicted in Fig. 8b. The former one based on the K–L theory describes the current response on RDE and n is calculated using the following K–L equations:105,106 j−1 = jK−1 + jL−1 = jK−1 + B−1ω−1/2(4) B = 0.62nFCODO2/3ν−1/6(5)wherein j, jK and jL stand for the measured, kinetic-limiting and mass transportation-limiting current densities, respectively. B refers to the proportionality coefficient, ω represents the angular velocity of the working electrode, while F is Faraday's constant. CO and DO are the concentration and diffusion coefficients of O2, respectively. ν is the kinetic viscosity of the electrolyte. At a given potential, jK is presumed to be constant and thus n can be deduced from the slope of the linear plot of j−1versus ω−1/2, as can be seen in Fig. 8c and d.
 Fig. 8  Performance evaluation of the ORR catalyst. Schemes of (a) a typical three-electrode system with the electrons flowing from the electrochemical station to the working electrode and (b) ORR on RDE (left) and RRDE (right). (c) LSV curves at incremental rotation rates and (d) the corresponding K–L plot. (e) RRDE voltammogram and (f) the estimated transfer electron number. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In the RRDE method, as demonstrated in Fig. 8b, the produced intermediate HO2− on a glassy carbon disk electrode diffuses into the electrolyte and is directly measured by its electrochemical oxidation into O2 on the Pt (or Au) ring: HO2− + OH−–2e → O2 + H2O(6)
In view of the disk and ring currents (denoted as Idisk and Iring, respectively), the n value can also be estimated using the following equation (Fig. 8e and f): n = 4 × Idisk/(Idisk + Iring/N)(7)where N is the collection efficiency of the RRDE. Meanwhile, the ratio of generated HO2− (denoted as p), i.e. the fraction of O2 which was converted into HO2−, was calculated according to the following equation: p = 2 × Iring/(N × Idisk + Iring)(8)
For a practical ORR catalyst, it is rather difficult to achieve the n value as 4. In other words, it is inevitable for the generation of byproduct H2O2, which will damage the electrocatalysts by etching away their structures. Definitely, H2O2 is also an important industrial chemical, and nowadays, the two-electron reduction pathway has also been highly evaluated as one of the two important electrochemical approaches for its preparation (while the other way is the two-electron oxidation of water: 2H2O → H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e). For the applications in fuel cells, the expected goal is the conversion of more O2 into OH−.
In addition, the half-wave potential (E1/2, a potential at which the wave current reaches half of the diffusion current), onset potential, Tafel slope, durability, electrochemical and structural stabilities, etc., have also be adopted to describe the electrocatalytic performance of an ORR catalyst.
3.2 ORR catalysts based on transition metal hydroxides
In view of the facile and reversible conversion among the multiple valence states of transition metal elements in some external applied potential regions, the corresponding hydroxide forms have been developed as catalysts for electrochemical ORR in the past few years. For instance, Zhan et al. have prepared hexagonal Co(OH)2 nanoplates, which showed ORR activities comparable to CoO and RuO2 although inferior to the state-of-the-art Pt/C benchmark, as depicted in Fig. 9a–e.107 The calculated transfer number of ∼3.3 suggested a 4-electron transfer-dominated oxygen reduction process for the formation of OH−. The Tafel slope, 62 mV dec−1, was rather close to 60 mV dec−1 for Pt/C electrocatalysts. Such a value implied that the ORR catalyzed by Co(OH)2 nanoplates was rate-limited by the first electron-transfer process. Fig. 9f indicates that the as-prepared Co(OH)2 nanoplates exhibited a comparable electrocatalytic durability to the Pt/C electrocatalyst. It has been well demonstrated that the electronic structures of electrocatalysts may be considerably tuned via atomic substitution and therefore the physicochemical properties including the insulating nature can be effectively optimized. Many efforts are devoted to the atom-scale incorporation of metal elements into single-metal hydroxides. Fig. 9g–j shows the ternary NiCoFe LDHs for electrocatalytic ORR, wherein O–NiCoFe LDHs refer to the product prepared via general co-precipitation following a chemical pre-oxidation process.108 Compared with those in NiCoFe LDHs, Co atoms in the pre-oxidized counterpart possessed a higher valence state, contributing to improved conductivity. As a result, O–NiCoFe LDHs achieved higher cathodic current accompanied by an E1/2 value of 0.63 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) although it showed a similar onset potential to that of the NiCoFe LDH product, revealing higher ORR activities. In addition, the electron transfer number of 3.9, estimated based on the K–L plots, manifested that O–NiCoFe LDHs mostly involve a direct 4-electron pathway, outperforming that of 2.7 for NiCoFe LDHs. This high activity is also competitive with those of hydroxide-containing composites, which will be reviewed below. On the basis of these results, it may be concluded that compared with the pre-treated hydroxides, pristine counterparts generally show inferior performance. Thus, some modifications on hydroxides are essential for the improvement of catalytic performance.
 Fig. 9  Transition metal hydroxides for the ORR. (a) TEM image of Co(OH)2 nanoplates. (b) Polarization curves for Co-based materials, commercial RuO2 and Pt/C electrocatalysts. (c) LSV curves tested at an incremental rotation rate and (d) K–L plots at different potentials for Co(OH)2 nanoplates. (e) Tafel slopes and (f) i–t curves at 0.7 V for Co(OH)2 nanoplates and Pt/C composites. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) Synthetic scheme, (h) CV curves in 0.1 M KOH, (i) LSV curves of NiCoFe LDH and O–NiCoFe LDH, and (j) LSV curves of O–NiCoFe LDH electrocatalyst at incremental rotation rates, the inset is the corresponding K–L plots. (g–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
4 ORR catalysts based on transition metal hydroxide composites and derivatives
It is generally accepted that due to the inferior conductivity, transition metal hydroxides show a modest performance in ORR when compared with other species, e.g. carbides and metals.109,110 Some modifications such as composition tuning have been demonstrated to effectively optimize the properties of hydroxides and, thus, the ORR performance. Constructing heterostructures that consist of two or more fundamental pure phases is a powerful strategy to markedly improve the physicochemical properties. As a result of the intimately interconnected fundamental phases, heterostructured composites have demonstrated the advantages of not only inheriting the maternal physicochemical properties, but also creating strong electronic coupling interactions at the interfaces, which may tune the electronic configurations and thus optimize the adsorption/desorption of the reactant as well as the intermediates. In particular, compositing/integrating with conductive components has been regarded as an effective approach to overcome the insulating nature of hydroxides, contributing to high efficiency in alkaline ORR. As described below, several typical case investigations based on hydroxides for ORR will be reviewed. The representative performances of hydroxides and their composites as electrocatalysts for alkaline ORR are summarized in detail in Table 2.
Table 2 Performance comparison of advanced ORR catalysts based on transition metal hydroxides and their composites as well as derivatives




Catalysts
Electrolyte
Onset potential
Half-wave potential
Cathodic current density
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)

n

Ref.




All the potential values in the table are calibrated with respective to the RHE scale.





Hydroxides



Co(OH)2 platelets
0.1 M KOH
—
—
1.3 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V
62
3.3 at 0.60 V

117



4.2 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V


O–NiCoFe LDHs
0.1 M KOH
0.80 V
0.63 V
3.1 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
—
3.9 at 0.40 V

108




Hydroxide/oxide composites



NiFe LDH/CO3O4
0.1 M KOH
—
—
5.8 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
109.3
3.5 at 0.55 V

111




Hydroxide/metal composites



Ag@NiMn LDHs
1.0 M KOH
0.96 V
0.75 V
5.5 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
38.9
3.95 at 0.75 V

115



CoAl LDH/Ag
0.1 M KOH
—
—
5.5 mA cm−2 @ 0.20 V
109
3.90 at 0.50 V

119



NiRu LDH/Ag
0.1 M KOH
0.96 V
0.78 V
5.0 mA cm−2 @ 0.40 V
37
3.96 at 0.40 V

120




Hydroxide/carbon composites



NiFe LDH/NrGO
0.1 M KOH
0.91 V
0.75 V
4.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.50 V
—
3.88 at 0.75 V

127



CoNi-NS/rGO
1.0 M KOH
0.95 V
0.85 V
3.85 mA cm−2 @ 0.80 V
—
3.90 at 0.60 V

133



NiFe LDH/Fe–N–C
0.1 M KOH
—
—
5.0 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
—
3.97 at 0.60 V

134



NiFe LDH/Co, N–C
0.1 M KOH
0.893 V
0.79 V
4.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V
—
3.89 at 0.60 V

118



CoFe HO/NCNTs
0.1 M KOH
0.91 V
0.86 V
5.3 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
36
3.92 at 0.60 V

135



CoNiMn/Ppy/rGO
0.1 M KOH
0.88 V
0.77 V
4.81 mA cm−2 @ 0.50 V
62
3.97 at 0.50 V

136




Derivatives



Co–N/C
0.1 M KOH
0.95 V
0.84 V
5.8 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V
—
3.91 at 0.80 V

139



Co3O4
0.1 M KOH
—
—
4.4 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
108.1
3.89 at 0.40 V

140





4.1 Hydroxide/oxide composites
Transition metal oxides, another kind of commonly seen compounds, are also intrinsically active for electrocatalysis including ORR in alkaline electrolytes. The heterostructural integration of transition metal oxides and hydroxides may also trigger the advantages of composition tuning. Very recently, Guo and co-workers have prepared a NiFe LDH/CO3O4 core@shell-like composite for the ORR, as indicated in Fig. 10a and b.111 In the stage of growing LDHs, the growth time was used to modulate the electronic structure via adjusting the interfacial cation valences, which was effective to tune the surface chemistry environment of the composite and thus optimize the ORR activity (Fig. 10c and d). For instance, with the growth time increased, the bonding energy of the Co 2p3/2 orbit showed a continuous positive migration, indicating the chemical valence decrease of Co elements in the Co3O4 phase after combining with NiFe LDHs. On the other hand, an increasing trend was also found for the valences of Ni and Fe ions. These results revealed the gradual electron transfer from Ni and Fe atoms to Co ions with the prolongation of the growth time. The electronic structure modulation could also promote the improved OER activity, rendering an outstanding performance to the NiFe LDH/CO3O4 core@shell nanostructure as a bifunctional oxygen catalyst for flexible and quasi-solid-state Zn-air batteries. Additionally, Jiang et al. have verified the possibility of NiFe LDH/Co3O4 nanoflakes as an ORR electrocatalyst for microbial fuel cells, another emerging type of environmentally friendly cells using renewable biomass such as glucose (C6H12O6) as the energy resources.112
 Fig. 10  Core@shell-like NiFe LDH/Co3O4 composites for the ORR. (a) Synthetic scheme, (b) TEM image, (c) Co 2p spectra and (d) polarization curves of NiFe LDH/Co3O4 composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Hydroxide/metal composites
Some metals and their alloys, such as Ag, have been reported to be ORR-active.113,114 In hydroxide/metal composites, the metal content may not only act as a conductive matrix to promote the rapid electron immigration, but also catalyze the reaction itself. Moreover, the synergetic effect originating from the interactions between hydroxides and metal components may be favorable for the improved electrocatalytic performance. Fig. 11a–f shows a typical hydroxide/metal composite and a hierarchical Ag@NiMn LDH core@shell nanostructure, for electrocatalytic ORR.115 Generally, a well-designed hierarchical structure provides diverse advantages such as increased accessible site population, shortened diffusion pathway, promoted electron transfer due to the conductive support, and the so-called synergistic effects based on heterostructure coupling. As an example, Gao et al. have demonstrated that the hierarchical hollow microcuboids assembled by ultrafine one-dimensional nanowires provided a large active surface (e.g. abundant active sites accessible), promoting the diffusion of active species and thus facilitating high performance in electrocatalytic overall water splitting.116 In the current case, NiMn LDHs vertically grown on Ag nanowires with an open-pore structure and less structural restacking also offered numerous exposed surface area. Meanwhile, the intimate contact between the NiMn LDH shell and the Ag core created a strong coupling effect and was also beneficial to the fast electron transfer. Due to the synergy of the advantages, the Ag@NiMn LDH composite exhibited a higher ORR activity than both single-phase Ag nanowires and NiMn LDH laminae. It was also found that the composition of the Ag core and the NiMn LDH shell significantly influenced the cathodic current density, i.e. ORR activity. In addition, the exposed metal centers on the surface with distorted coordination symmetry and rich oxygen defects led to improved OER performance. As a result, the Ag@NiMn LDH composite showed an E1/2 value of 0.75 V vs. RHE, close to 0.83 V vs. RHE for Pt/C benchmark. Meanwhile, it also achieved a rather small voltage difference (ΔE) between the potential at 10 mA cm−2 for OER and the E1/2 value at −3 mA cm−2 for ORR, superior to most recently advanced bifunctional oxygen catalysts such as Co/N-doped carbon nanotubes and NiFe LDH/Co,N co-doped carbon (NiFe LDH/Co, N–C) composites.117,118 When the Ag@NiMn LDH composite was applied to both the cathode and the anode of a rechargeable Zn–air battery, a small charge–discharge voltage gap of ∼0.77 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is achieved, showing a promising rechargeability.
 Fig. 11  Hydroxide/metal composites for electrocatalytic ORR. (a) SEM image of Ag nanowires, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Ag@NiMn LDH core@shell nanostructure. (d) LSV curves and (e) comparison of ΔE between OER at 10 mA cm−2 and ORR at −3 mA cm−2. (f) A Zn–air battery using the Ag@NiMn LDH as the bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst and the mixture of 6 M KOH and 0.2 M ZnCl2 solution as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image of CoAl-TEOA-180, the inset is a magnification showing Ag nanoparticles clearly. Elemental mapping images at the areas (h) with and (i) without Ag nanoparticles. (j) EIS, (k) LSV curves, (l) Tafel slopes and (m) electron transfer number of ORR catalyzed by the as-prepared hydroxide products. CoAl–Ag stands for the product reduced by ethylene glycol only while CoAl-TEOA-30 and CoAl-TEOA-30 are the products reduced by the mixture of ethylene glycol and triethanolamine for 30 and 60 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, Ag nanoparticle-decorated CoAl LDH nanoplates were also reported for ORR, as displayed in Fig. 11g–m.119 As a result of combined merits of CoAl LDHs and Ag metal, CoAl-TEOA-180, referring to the product obtained via the solvothermal reduction of Ag(CN)2−-intercalated CoAl LDHs by the mixture of ethylene glycol and triethanolamine for 180 min, exhibited the most favorable ORR kinetics. A current density of up to 4.95 mA cm−2 was achieved at 0.4 V vs. RHE and the estimated electron transfer number was ∼3.9 in the potential range of 0.2–0.7 V vs. RHE, revealing a 4-electron pathway-governed reduction process.
Besides, other advanced hydroxide/metal composites, e.g. NiRu LDH/Ag composite by Hwang's group (see more details in Table 2),120 have been reported to show considerable ORR performance due to the metal modifications, which were even comparable to the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. The improved ORR performance induced by the interactions between hydroxides and metal phases may point out the future orientation for the design of alkaline ORR catalysts, offering a significant promise for alkaline fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
4.3 2D/2D hybrid composites
The abovementioned typical case investigations have demonstrated the advances in ORR performance by compositing hydroxides with other fundamental phases such as metals. On the other hand, on account of the 2D structural features of hydroxides, the integrations with other 2D materials may create more intimate interface contacts, greatly optimizing the electronic configurations and thus accelerating the ORR.
Among a variety of 2D materials, carbon materials have been considered as the most common adjuvant for hybrids to optimize the physicochemical properties. Actually, carbon-related materials are a large collection including single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, graphite, graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (rGO), graphene, and doped graphene.121–126 It has been extensively accepted that they can effectively accelerate the electron transfer due to their excellent electronic conductivity properties. Meanwhile, they are also intrinsically active for alkaline ORR, similar to metallic Ag. In addition, because of the confinement effect, they are often used to restrict the electrochemical materials, improving the stabilities. Recently, many transition metal hydroxide/carbon-related composites have been developed, e.g. hydroxide/carbon nanotubes and hydroxide/rGO. Fig. 12a indicates the hierarchical NiFe LDH/N-doped rGO nanostructure (denoted as NiFe LDH/NrGO). As depicted in Fig. 11b, a prominent cathodic peak at up to ∼0.84 V vs. RHE was detected in O2-saturated electrolyte. The current response at such a high potential indicated an excellent ORR activity for NiFe LDH/NrGO in alkaline media.127 As shown in Fig. 12c–e, due to the N content in rGO, NiFe LDH/NrGO exhibited a comparable activity to the 20% Pt/C catalyst, markedly surpassing both NiFe-LDHs and NiFe LDH/rGO. It is worth noting that the E1/2 value of NiFe LDH/NrGO, 0.75 V vs. RHE, was even 20 mV superior to that of the Pt/C benchmark. The RRDE measurements showed that the oxygen reduction process electrocatalyzed by hierarchical NiFe LDH/NrGO composite was a 4-electron pathway-dominant reaction with a HO2− yield less than 5%, suggesting the nearly complete conversion of O2 into OH− ions. Furthermore, the superior tolerance ability of the NiFe LDH/NrGO composite against methanol crossover, as displayed in Fig. 12f, markedly surpassed that of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. The considerably higher performance of NiFe LDH/NrGO than that of NiFe LDH/rGO may also offer a promising strategy to promote electrocatalysis by rational heteroatom doping.
 Fig. 12  NiFe LDH/NrGO composite for alkaline ORR. (a) HRTEM image, the inset is the TEM image of the composite. (b) LSV curves tested in O2- and N2-saturated KOH solution (0.1 M), respectively. (c) Polarization curves of NiFe LDH, NiFe LDH/rGO, NiFe LDH/NrGO and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts. (d) RRDE voltammogram, (e) estimated transfer electron number and HO2− yield, and (f) methanol tolerance characterization of the NiFe LDH/NrGO composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. 
Since the as-exfoliated unilaminar hydroxide nanosheets are positively charged, they may assemble on a molecular scale with other monolayer species (e.g. graphene) based on electrostatic attraction. Differing from routinely prepared composites, a superlattice-like heterostructure assembled by the molecular-scale alternate stacking of two kinds of unilaminar nanosheets with opposite charges can extremely tune the electronic configurations or even create a new electronic structure that is much different from those of both the bulk and nanosheet counterparts and thus may bring about many fantastic physicochemical properties including high performance in electrochemical energy storage and/or conversion. Meanwhile, due to the strong electrostatic interactions, each unilaminar nanosheet is well confined between two adjacent nanosheets of another species, contributing to a satisfactory structural stability as well as electrochemical performance in continuous electrocatalysis.128 This new type of artificial heterostructures offers a great promise in the design and preparation of high-efficiency electrocatalysts. Thus far, several typical superlattice-like heterostructures, e.g. NiFe LDH/rGO, NiAl LDH/1T-MoS2 and NiFe LDH/1T-MoS2, have been demonstrated showing outstanding performance in electrocatalytic water splitting, outperforming both LDHs and 1T-MoS2 monolayers.129–132 Particularly, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was achieved at an applied potential low to 1.57 V during overall water splitting electrocatalyzed by a NiFe LDH/1T-MoS2 superlattice. While for ORR, a CoNi hydroxide/rGO superlattice (labeled as CoNi-NS/rGO) has been reported by Li's group very recently, as indicated in Fig. 13.133 Positively charged CoNi hydroxide nanosheets (denoted as CoNi-NS) were prepared through the delamination of a NO3−-intercalated bulk counterpart, which was obtained via the topochemical conversion of brucite-like CoNi hydroxides (indicated as CoNi in Fig. 13a and b) and a sequential ion-exchange process, while negatively charged GO nanosheets were synthesized using a typical Hummers’ method. In view of the electrostatic interaction, CoNi-NS were flocculated with oppositely charged GO nanosheets according to an area-matching model, forming a superlattice-like heterostructure. After a calcination process at 200 °C, the metastable GO component was transformed into rGO and the hybrid was therefore converted into a CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice (as shown in Fig. 13c). With the combined merits of redox-active CoNi-NS and rGO nanosheets with both electroconductivity and ORR activity, CoNi-NS/rGO showed a comparable ORR activity to a commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst, superior to the CoNi hydroxide precursor, as indicated in Fig. 13d. Meanwhile, the ORR catalyzed by a CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice was rather close to a theoretical 4-electron pathway with a rather low HO2− yield (Fig. 13e). It should be noted that besides the considerable ORR performance, the CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice also exhibited an outstanding OER activity when compared with the commercial Ir/C electrocatalyst, as depicted in Fig. 13f. In view of the ORR and OER activities, a primary rechargeable Zn–air battery was built based on the as-assembled CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice, as can be seen in Fig. 13g and h. A current density of up to 170 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V was recorded and the maximum power density exceeded 300 mW cm−2, outperforming most previously reported Zn–air cells. In addition, an organic light-emitting diode (OLED) could be enlightened by two connected batteries, showing a great potential in practical applications. The molecular-scale 2D/2D heteroassembly may provide a prospective direction in developing high-performance bifunctional oxygen catalysts and/or even multifunctional electrocatalysts based on noble metal–free metal materials.
 Fig. 13  CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice via the molecular-scale assembly of 2D hydroxide nanosheets with oppositely charged graphene nanosheets as a bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst for the Zn–air battery. (a) Scheme for the preparation of CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice. SEM images of (b) pristine CoNi hydroxide (denoted as CoNi), (c) the CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice. (d) Polarization curves, (e) H2O− yield and electron transfer number of the ORR catalyzed by the commercial Pt/C catalyst, CoNi nanoplates and CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice, respectively. The data in both (d) and (e) were recorded on a typical RRDE in 1 M KOH electrolyte. (f) OER and ORR polarization curves of the electrocatalysts, which were loaded on a carbon fiber paper and tested in 6 M KOH solution. (g) Discharge polarization curves and related power density of Zn–air batteries using CoNi-NS/rGO or Pt/C as the bifunctional oxygen catalyst. (h) A picture of an OLED, which was lighted by two connected Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
Besides these superior 2D/2D hybrid composites, other multi-component composites based on transition metal hydroxides, such as NiFe LDH/single-atom Fe anchored on N-doped carbon hybrid (denoted as NiFe LDH/Fe–N–C), CoFe hydroxide/oxide/N-doped carbon nanotube heterostructure (labeled as CoFe HO/NCNTs) and CoNiMn LDH/polypyrrole/rGO (signed as CoNiMn LDH/Ppy/rGO),134–136 have also been demonstrated to show considerably optimized performance in electrocatalytic ORR (more detailed parameters are depicted in Table 2). The design and composition tuning of multi-component hybrids in future studies may offer great possibilities of partially and/or even completely substituting the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst via rationally compositing hydroxides with conductive and ORR-active components.
4.4 Derivatives of hydroxides
Besides hydroxides and their composites, their derivatives have also been studied as ORR catalysts in alkaline systems over past years.137,138 Actually, they are a large library of inorganic materials including pure metals, oxides, and sulfides. When compared with the hydroxide counterparts, these derivatives generally exhibit better conductivity, favorable for the rapid electron transfer. For instance, Wang et al. have prepared hollow Co-coordinating nitrogen-doped carbon (denoted as Co–N/C) spheres via carbonization of interlayered metanilic anions (C6H6NSO3−) in hierarchical CoAl LDH precursor at 900 °C and successive acid etching processes, as depicted in Fig. 14a–e.139 In this procedure, metanilic anions acted as C, S and N sources, while the derived Co sulfide and amorphous Al2O3 from LDHs after thermal treatment were removed by a concentrated acid solution, forming the Co–N/C catalyst. It has been demonstrated that the Co–N/C nanostructure exhibited an onset potential of up to 0.95 V vs. RHE with an E1/2 value of 0.84 V vs. RHE. Such a high activity was even comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Meanwhile, a low HO2− yield less than 5% corresponding to the n value of 3.91 was achieved by this derivative, indicating an efficient catalytic conversion of O2 into OH−.
 Fig. 14  Derivatives of transition metal hydroxides for the ORR. (a) Scheme for the preparation of hierarchical Co–N/C spheres. (b and c) TEM images of Co–N/C catalysts. (d) LSV curve, (e) n and HO2− yield catalyzed by Co–N/C in 0.1 M KOH. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (f) TEM image of β-Co(OH)2 precursor. (g) XRD patterns, (h–k) TEM images of calcined products at different temperatures, (l) LSV curves, (m) Tafel slopes and (n) jK of the β-Co(OH)2 precursor and the corresponding calcined products in 0.1 M KOH solution. (f–n) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
In addition, Tan and his co-workers have demonstrated cobalt oxides as ORR catalysts, which were derived from the corresponding hydroxide precursor via heating treatment, as shown in Fig. 14f–n.140 After being calcined under elevated temperature conditions (e.g. 200, 250, 350, 550 and/or 750 °C), β-type Co(OH)2 nanoplates were converted into Co3O4 counterparts and the as-obtained products were labelled as Co3O4-200, Co3O4-250, Co3O4-350, Co3O4-550 and Co3O4-750, respectively. It was found that too high temperature conditions (e.g. 750 °C) resulted in the oversintering phenomenon and thus made the calcined product tend to become agglomerated nanoparticles. As a result, Co3O4-200 showed the best ORR activity with a Tafel slope of 143.1 mV dec−1 and jK of 5.32 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, the current response for oxygen reduction showed a decay trend with the increase in heating temperature, indicating the activity decrease.
These derivative materials may exhibit considerable activities. However, for most of the transition metal compounds such as Mn oxides (MnOx),141 it is difficult to completely elude the irreversibly partial and/or complete phase change in alkaline ORR, which may result in rapid activity decay. Therefore, protective coatings should be greatly considered in future studies for the maintenance of the performance.
5 Conclusions and outlook
In summary, the fundamentals of electrocatalytic ORR as well the recent advances in developing high-performance electrocatalysts based on transition metal hydroxides and their composites towards ORR for potential applications in clean renewable fuel cells and metal–air batteries were reviewed. The crystal structure and preparation of layered transition metal hydroxides and their structural evolution into 2D nanosheets were also reviewed. In view of the unique laminar crystal gallery, a large family of functional hydroxide materials can be facilely prepared via topochemical conversion, interlayer-ion exchange, exfoliation of transition metal hydroxides, and molecular-scale self-assembly of 2D nanosheets, giving rise to abundant physicochemical functionalities. In particular, compositing/integrating hydroxides with conductive components (e.g. metals and/or carbon materials) has been evidenced to significantly overcome the insulating nature of hydroxides in alkaline ORR. One convincing example is that the CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice has showed remarkable performance in alkaline ORR by fully utilizing the advantages of two different kinds of nanosheets as 2D building blocks.
For other non-precious metal catalysts, e.g. metal chalcogenides, they are intrinsically unstable in alkaline solutions.142 In addition, due to the lack of ORR-associated ions and/or groups such as OH−, surface reconstruction is essential to promote the ORR, resulting in the irreversible phase change and thus the rapid activity decay. In contrast, abundant ORR-associated species exist on the surface of transition metal hydroxide materials, which may be favorable for the maintenance of both structural and electrochemical stabilities, making hydroxide catalysts stand out among the non-precious metal-based catalysts for alkaline ORR. In addition, layered transition metal hydroxides could be facilely prepared via various aforementioned relatively mild synthetic approaches, e.g. co-precipitation processes and oil-bath procedures, which may enable them to perform beyond other non-precious metal-based catalysts as promising candidates to commercial noble metal-based electrocatalysts for alkaline ORR.
For the early realization of industrial-scale applications in fuel cells and metal–air batteries towards clean energy conversions, the attention and efforts paid on ORR electrocatalysts made of transition metal hydroxides and their composites may need to be focused on the following aspects in the future research. (i) More performance enhancements towards high activity and pathway selectivity as well as outstanding durability are desired. The electronic structure is the essential factor to determine the physicochemical properties of electrocatalysts, directly influencing the electrocatalytic performance. Further composition tuning, vacancy and surface engineering, and structural exploration on 2D hydroxide nanosheets towards the electronic structure optimization for improved conductivity nature and more exposed active sites with higher intrinsic performance of each site should be conducted to achieve optimal performance. The composition and structure superiority of transition metal hydroxides may offer an ideal platform. It has been proved that low-symmetry coordination configurations can give rise to a stronger optimized adsorption nature. We consider that an appropriate surface coordination environment and a low-dimension morphology with a porous structure or rich edges are crucial for improving the catalytic performance. In addition, it has been previously demonstrated in the literature that the morphology, microstructure and surface chemical valence associated with coordination configurations and/or even the phase composition may vary during continuous alkaline ORR.141,143 It should therefore be greatly considered to introduce some advanced in situ and/or ex situ characterization techniques to monitor the real-time states and variations in electrocatalysts during continuous electrocatalysis, which is favorable for not only the in-depth understanding of the catalytic mechanisms but also the follow-up design of high-performance catalysts. (ii) Electrocatalysts capable of sustaining a wide working temperature range are demanded. In the practical working environments, the temperature may change rapidly, which may promote the etching away and/or deactivate the catalysts. Robust electrocatalysts for the elevated-temperature operating conditions are therefore urgently needed for fuel cells. (iii) Progress on other components of the alkaline fuel cells has also to be made. Conventional fuel cells employ Nafion® membranes for proton exchange,144 while for new-style alkaline counterparts, 2D hydroxides, evidenced to show incredibly high hydroxyl ion transport, are worthy of high expectations in membrane components.80,145 Once the advanced energy conversion devices based on alkaline media are achieved, it will be very prospective to replace the current commercial noble metal electrocatalysts with low-cost and earth-abundant transition metal hydroxides with excellent structural and electrochemical stabilities favorable for the applications on an industrial scale. In this regard, the clean energy storage and conversion technologies based on alkaline operating environments for practical use are of great promise.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support by National Natural Science Foundation of China (51874357, 51872333) and Innovative Research Group of Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2019JJ10006). X. L. acknowledges support from Shenghua Scholar Program of Central South University. R. M. acknowledges support from JSPS KAKENNHI (18H03869).
Notes and references
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Xue and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Ni and Z. X. Shen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 20 CrossRef .
Y. Peng and S. W. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 335 CrossRef .
G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .
C. N. R. Rao and S. Dey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 13385 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807001 CrossRef .
G. Chen, H. Wan, W. Ma, N. Zhang, Y. Cao, X. Liu, J. Wang and R. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902535 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Wu, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. F. R. Diaz, K. S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. C. Adroher, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Xiong, M. E. Holtz, X. Feng, R. Zeng, G. Chen, F. J. DiSalvo, D. A. Muller and H. D. Abruña, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 24425 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, M. Lv, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Cao, H. Wang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11841 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Liu, A. Yan, H. Wan, G. Chen, J. Pan, N. Zhang, T. Qiu, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Wang, S. Adimi, H. Shen, T. Thomas, R. Ma, J. P. Attfield and M. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 282 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, B. Huang, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, N. Zhang, T. Dai, P. Xi and C. H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9459 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Qiao, S. Wu, X. Lu, J. J. Zhu, J. R. Zhang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 144 RSC .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, X. Liu, H. Wang, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 789 RSC .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, H. Wan, D. Wu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Li, Y. Cao, G. Qiu and R. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7317 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, H. C. Chen, F. Yu, X. S. Zhao and H. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 545 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, J. Li, X. Deng, C. He, E. Liu, F. He, C. Shi and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605017 CrossRef .
C. Luo, A. Langrock, X. Fan, Y. Liang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18214 RSC .
M. Arshadi, F. Mousavinia, M. J. Amiri and A. R. Faraji, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 483, 118 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, R. Ma, X. Liu, J. Pan, H. Wang, S. Liang, G. Qiu and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Su, S. Gu, R. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Yan, J. Li and S. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 739 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y. Xia, L. Kuai, H. Sun, W. Cao, M. Huttula, A. P. Honkanen, M. Viljanen, S. Huotari and B. Geng, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2564 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, W. Gao, S. Dai, J. Gha, W. Xue, H. Sun, X. Duan, X. Pan, T. Mueller and Y. Huang, Matter, 2019, 1, 1567 CrossRef .
A. Qaseem, F. Chen, X. Wu and R. L. Johnston, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3317 RSC .
A. Parra-Puerto, K. L. Ng, K. Fahy, A. E. Goode, M. P. Ryan and A. Kucernak, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ratso, I. Kruusenberg, M. Käärik, M. Kook, R. Saar, P. Kanninen, T. Kallio, J. Leis and K. Tammeveski, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 29, 276 CrossRef .
G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Tang and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 77 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Shui, L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Liu, L. Dai and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804799 CrossRef .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Shan, M. Yang and J. Wang, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sui, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Su, S. Riffat and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1808 RSC .
M. Zhou, H. L. Wang and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273 RSC .
H. Osgood, S. V. Devaguptapu, H. Xu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8194 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, H. Fan, A. Ignaszak, L. Zhang, S. Shao, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, Z. Dong and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10595 RSC .
Z. Cai, X. Bu, P. Wang, J. C. Ho, J. Yang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5069 RSC .
L. Lv, Z. Yang, K. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803358 CrossRef .
X. Lu, H. Xue, H. Gong, M. Bai, D. Tang, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 86 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, D. Yan, S. E. Hankari, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800064 CrossRef .
X. Deng, J. Huang, H. Wan, F. Chen, Y. Lin, X. Xu, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 32, 93 CrossRef .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, Y. Ebina, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 3964 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Williams and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3065 RSC .
G. Mishra, B. Dash and S. Pandey, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 153, 172 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8253 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yuan, N. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Chen, X. Liu, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11188 RSC .
Y. Zhong, G. Chen, X. Liu, D. Zhang, N. Zhang, J. Li, S. Liang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8185 RSC .
J. Qu, Q. Zhang, X. Li, X. He and S. Song, Appl. Clay Sci., 2016, 119, 185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, R. Ma, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei and S. R. J. Oliver, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9066 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5082 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, R. Ma, T. C. Ozawa and T. Sasaki, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 248 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4292 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, M. Osada, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4872 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qin, H. Wan, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1744 RSC .
W. Ma, R. Ma, J. Wu, P. Sun, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10425 RSC .
J. A. Carrasco, R. Sanchis-Gual, A. S. D. Silva, G. Abellán and E. Coronado, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6798 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Z. Cai, Y. Bi, W. Tian, M. Luo, Q. Zhang, Q. Xie, J. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Kuang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1358 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2148 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parida and L. Mohapatra, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1173 RSC .
A. N. Ay, B. Zümreoglu-Karan and A. Temel, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 98, 1 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. M. Parida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16985 RSC .
C. Dong, L. Han, C. Zhang and Z. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16096 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, X. Liu, D. Wu, B. Qian, Z. Kou, Z. Pan, Y. Pang, L. Miao and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903879 CrossRef .
M. B. Stevens, L. J. Enman, E. H. Korkus, J. Zaffran, C. D. M. Trang, J. Asbury, M. G. Kast, M. C. Toroker and S. W. Boettcher, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2288 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, J. Liang, X. Liu and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19915 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, J. Liang, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 613 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, X. Liu, J. Liang, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, N. Iyi, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 861 CrossRef CAS .
F. Geng, H. Xin, Y. Matsushita, R. Ma, M. Tanaka, F. Izumi, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9255 CrossRef CAS .
F. Geng, Y. Matsushita, R. Ma, H. Xin, M. Tanaka, F. Izumi, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16344 CrossRef CAS .
F. Geng, Y. Matsushita, R. Ma, H. Xin, M. Tanaka, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6724 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, R. Ma, T. C. Ozawa and T. Sasaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3846 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, R. Ma, X. Bai, K. Wang, H. Zhu and T. Sasaki, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602629 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, M. Osada, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13869 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, R. Ma, J. Liang, C. Wang, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13870 RSC .
H. Wan, A. Yan, H. Xiong, G. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Cao and X. Liu, Appl. Clay Sci., 2020, 194, 105695 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2115 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, K. Takada, N. Iyi, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5257 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, N. Iyi, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 86 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, M. Liu and L. Y. S. Lee, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 81 CrossRef .
M. Lee, H. S. Oh, M. K. Cho, J. P. Ahn, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 130 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Zhang, H. Yu, T. Li, Q. T. Hu, Y. Gong, D. Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. T. Fu, H. Y. Zhu, X. Yan and Z. G. Gu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118532 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, X. Dou, J. Dai, X. An, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Tao, J. Zhao, W. Chu, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12465 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, L. Li, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3809 RSC .
S. Ida, D. Shiga, M. Koinuma and Y. Matsumoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14038 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4386 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Wan, N. Zhang, S. Liang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5869 CAS .
L. Jia, H. Wan, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, J. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Cao, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Liu, G. Chen, J. Pan, A. Yan, A. Li, X. Lu, D. Tang, N. Zhang, T. Qiu, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xie, S. Feng, D. Liu, M. Shao and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5867 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu and D. O'Hare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17808 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wang, Y. A. Wu, R. M. J. Jacobs, J. H. Warner, G. R. William and D. O'Hare, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, B. R. Martin, A. Clearfield, Z. Luo and L. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9448 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900881 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, X. Zhang, F. Zhan, Y. Tao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703585 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486 CAS .
R. Zhou, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4720 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. He, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Su, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, G. Du, S. Yang, C. Xu, M. Lu, Z. Liu and J. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12930 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Z. Lu, T. Xu, X. Wu, Y. Tian, Y. Li, Z. Huo, X. Sun and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500245 CrossRef .
M. Q. Wang, C. Ye, M. Wang, T. H. Li, Y. N. Yu and S. J. Bao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 112 CrossRef .
C. C. Yang, S. F. Zai, Y. T. Zhou, L. Du and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901949 CrossRef .
X. Guo, X. Hu, D. Wu, C. Jing, W. Liu, Z. Ren, Q. Zhao, X. Jiang, C. Xu, Y. Zhang and N. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Chen, D. Han, S. Chang, R. Yang, Y. An, Y. Liu and F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227877 CrossRef CAS .
J. An. H. Jeon, J. Lee and I. S. Chang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5441 CrossRef .
T. Van Cleve, E. Gibara and S. Linic, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 256 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Chala, M. C. Tsai, W. N. Su, K. B. Ibrahim, B. Thirumalraj, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee, H. Dai and B. J. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1770 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6398 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1694 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700467 CrossRef .
X. Deng, J. Huang, F. Chen, H. Wan, Y. Lin, X. Xu, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1084 RSC .
S. A. Chala, M. C. Tsai, W. N. Su, K. B. Ibrahim, A. D. Duma, M. H. Yeh, C. Y. Wen, C. H. Yu, T. S. Chan, H. Dai and B. J. Hwang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nadeem, A. U. Khan and S. T. Hussain, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 28945 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, X. Li, R. Ji, K. S. Teng, G. Tai, J. Ye, C. Wei and S. P. Lau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5676 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amiri, S. K. Konda and A. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 997 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, Z. Xing, C. Bommier, Z. Li and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501874 CrossRef .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhan, X. Liu, S. Lu and W. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 551 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, B. Sun, N. Sakai, R. Ma, T. Sasaki, S. Wang, J. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902654 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, R. Ma, C. Wang, J. Liang, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai, L. Nurdiwijayanto and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 997 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, X. Zhang, H. Wan, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, W. Gao, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 7, 4518 CrossRef .
M. S. Islam, M. Kim, X. Jin, S. M. Oh, N. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. J. Hwang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 952 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Cui, P. Ding, J. Deng, C. Zha, E. Coy and Y. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 24 CrossRef .
S. Dresp, F. Luo, R. Schmack, S. Kühl, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2020 RSC .
M. Wu, Q. Wei, G. Zhang, J. Qiao, M. Wu, J. Zhang, Q. Gong and S. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801836 CrossRef .
X. Jia, S. Gao, T. Liu, D. Li, P. Tang and Y. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 59 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Y. Deng, J. Zeng, H. Song and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5829 RSC .
Y. Yang, R. Zeng, Y. Xiong, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Li, X. Chen, Y. Lu, W. Yang and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2508 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, Z. Wu, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai and M. Ni, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 310, 86 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mantry, B. D. Mohapatra, N. Behera, P. Mishra, P. Parhi and K. S. K. Varadwaj, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 325, 134947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Orava, T. Wagner, M. Krbal, T. Kohoutek, M. Vlcek and M. Frumar, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2007, 353, 1441–1445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Béjar, L. Álvarez-Contreras, J. Ledesma-García, N. Arjona and L. G. Arriaga, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 847, 113190 CrossRef .
W. Li, A. Manthiram, M. D. Guiver and B. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 607 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, F. Chen, W. Zhou, X. Liu, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 2087 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Hao Wan	Hao Wan is an assistant professor of the School of Chemical Engineering at Zhengzhou University. He received his BSs (2013) and PhD (2019) from Central South University. From September 2016 to September 2018, he studied as an exchange student at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His research topics focus on the design and synthesis of nanostructures for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Xiaohe Liu	Xiaohe Liu is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University. He obtained his PhD degree at Central South University in 2005 supervised by Prof. Guanzhou Qiu, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering. His research interests include the functionalization and engineering of layered materials and mineral materials.
Renzhi Ma	Renzhi Ma is a group leader at the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS). He received his BSc and PhD from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 1995 and 2000, respectively. Since 2000, he has worked for the NIMS. His recent research interests include developing advanced functional 2D nanomaterials and hybrids for energy-related applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a typical (a) alkaline fuel cell and (b) aqueous metal–air battery.	 

 	Fig. 2  Preparation of transition metal hydroxides. (a) XRD patterns of LDHs with different interlayer ion species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) XRD traces of DS−-intercalated Co hydroxides prepared by using different DS− additive doses and (c) the corresponding plausible crystal models. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2012, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) AFM image of CO32−-intercalated CoAl LDH nanoplates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) XRD patterns showing a spontaneous phase transformation in a CoCl2–NaCl–HMT system at 90 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM image of Zn hydroxide nanocones prepared using SDS as the directing agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Topochemical transformation of brucite-like Co2+Fe2+ hydroxide. (a) Scheme of topochemical transformation and subsequent ion exchange, (b) XRD patterns of (i) brucite-like Co2+Fe2+ hydroxide, Co2+Fe3+ LDHs intercalated with (ii) I− and (iii) ClO4−, respectively. Elemental distribution of CoFe LDHs accommodating (c) I− and (d) ClO4−. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Exfoliation of LDHs and other layered hydroxides with suitable interlayer anions into 2D nanosheets. (a) Schematic of the exfoliation of layered hydroxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, Copyright 2006, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) AFM image, (c) TEM image and (d) selected-area electron diffraction spots of exfoliated MgAl LDH nanosheets. AFM images of (e) CoAl LDH, (f) Zn hydroxide, (g–k) CoNi hydroxides with different Co/Ni molar ratios. The insets in (g–k) are the corresponding unilaminar nanosheet suspensions showing clear Tyndall light scattering. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2005, (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2006, (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society while (g–h) reproduced with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Exfoliation of LDHs transformed from brucite-like hydroxides. (a) AFM image of Co2+Fe3+ LDH nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Photographs of suspension containing the as-exfoliated Co2+Co3+, Ni2+Co3+, and Ni2+Fe3+LDH nanosheets. (c) AFM image and (d) height profiles of Ni2+Co3+ LDH nanosheets. (b–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Exfoliation of LDH by plasma. (a) Schematic of a typical plasma exfoliation process. AFM images of (b) bulk LDH and (c) as-exfoliated nanosheets. (d) Height profiles of the lines in (b) and (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 7  “Bottom-up” synthesis of 2D NiFe LDH nanosheets. (a) Schematic for the synthesis of NiFe LDH monolayers and porous counterparts. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images, (d) the corresponding FFT pattern and (e) AFM image of porous NiFe LDH monolayers. The inset in (b) is a photograph of the unilaminar NiFe LDH nanosheets dispersed in ethanol, showing a clear Tyndall light scattering phenomenon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

Formamide methods	
• A general strategy applicable to layered hydroxides with a variety of metal ions and/or counter ions.	
• Formamide molecules are adsorbed on the surface of as-exfoliated nanosheets.	
59, 85, 91, 94 and 95


• Delamination can be achieved under mild room temperature conditions with moderate shaking.

• Large-scale preparation of 2D nanosheets with the large lateral size (hundreds of nanometers to several micrometers)
 
Plasma method	
• Rich vacancies are generated on nanosheets.	
• At present, it may not be applicable to large scale preparation.	
98


• No toxic liquid solvents are used.

• No organic molecules are adsorbed on the surface of nanosheets.

• Time-saving.
 
Reverse microemulsion methods	
• The size of as-prepared nanosheets can be easily tuned by changing water/surfactant ratio.	
• Heating (∼75 °C) is essential for the preparation.	
99 and 100


• Time-consuming (such as 4 days for CoAl LDH nanosheets).

• The transition metal hydroxide nanosheets are usually more than 1 layer.
 
Direct preparation in formamide-water system	
• Time-saving.	
• The size of as-prepared nanosheets is very small, which may result in the low content when compositing them with other 2D materials with much larger lateral size according to an area-matching model.	
101–103


• Small nanosheets with abundant distorted metal coordination and edges.	
• Relative high-temperature reaction conditions (e.g. ∼80 °C) are needed.

• High yield.
O2 + H2O + 2e → HO2− + OH−	(1)
HO2− + H2O + 2e → 3OH−	(2)
O2 + H2O + 4e → 4OH−	(3)
j−1 = jK−1 + jL−1 = jK−1 + B−1ω−1/2	(4)
B = 0.62nFCODO2/3ν−1/6	(5)

 	Fig. 8  Performance evaluation of the ORR catalyst. Schemes of (a) a typical three-electrode system with the electrons flowing from the electrochemical station to the working electrode and (b) ORR on RDE (left) and RRDE (right). (c) LSV curves at incremental rotation rates and (d) the corresponding K–L plot. (e) RRDE voltammogram and (f) the estimated transfer electron number. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
HO2− + OH−–2e → O2 + H2O	(6)
n = 4 × Idisk/(Idisk + Iring/N)	(7)
p = 2 × Iring/(N × Idisk + Iring)	(8)

 	Fig. 9  Transition metal hydroxides for the ORR. (a) TEM image of Co(OH)2 nanoplates. (b) Polarization curves for Co-based materials, commercial RuO2 and Pt/C electrocatalysts. (c) LSV curves tested at an incremental rotation rate and (d) K–L plots at different potentials for Co(OH)2 nanoplates. (e) Tafel slopes and (f) i–t curves at 0.7 V for Co(OH)2 nanoplates and Pt/C composites. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 107, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) Synthetic scheme, (h) CV curves in 0.1 M KOH, (i) LSV curves of NiCoFe LDH and O–NiCoFe LDH, and (j) LSV curves of O–NiCoFe LDH electrocatalyst at incremental rotation rates, the inset is the corresponding K–L plots. (g–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 



Hydroxides

Co(OH)2 platelets	0.1 M KOH	—	—	1.3 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V	62	3.3 at 0.60 V	
117

4.2 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V
O–NiCoFe LDHs	0.1 M KOH	0.80 V	0.63 V	3.1 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	—	3.9 at 0.40 V	
108


Hydroxide/oxide composites

NiFe LDH/CO3O4	0.1 M KOH	—	—	5.8 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	109.3	3.5 at 0.55 V	
111


Hydroxide/metal composites

Ag@NiMn LDHs	1.0 M KOH	0.96 V	0.75 V	5.5 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	38.9	3.95 at 0.75 V	
115

CoAl LDH/Ag	0.1 M KOH	—	—	5.5 mA cm−2 @ 0.20 V	109	3.90 at 0.50 V	
119

NiRu LDH/Ag	0.1 M KOH	0.96 V	0.78 V	5.0 mA cm−2 @ 0.40 V	37	3.96 at 0.40 V	
120


Hydroxide/carbon composites

NiFe LDH/NrGO	0.1 M KOH	0.91 V	0.75 V	4.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.50 V	—	3.88 at 0.75 V	
127

CoNi-NS/rGO	1.0 M KOH	0.95 V	0.85 V	3.85 mA cm−2 @ 0.80 V	—	3.90 at 0.60 V	
133

NiFe LDH/Fe–N–C	0.1 M KOH	—	—	5.0 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	—	3.97 at 0.60 V	
134

NiFe LDH/Co, N–C	0.1 M KOH	0.893 V	0.79 V	4.6 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V	—	3.89 at 0.60 V	
118

CoFe HO/NCNTs	0.1 M KOH	0.91 V	0.86 V	5.3 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	36	3.92 at 0.60 V	
135

CoNiMn/Ppy/rGO	0.1 M KOH	0.88 V	0.77 V	4.81 mA cm−2 @ 0.50 V	62	3.97 at 0.50 V	
136


Derivatives

Co–N/C	0.1 M KOH	0.95 V	0.84 V	5.8 mA cm−2 @ 0.70 V	—	3.91 at 0.80 V	
139

Co3O4	0.1 M KOH	—	—	4.4 mA cm−2 @ 0.60 V	108.1	3.89 at 0.40 V	
140


 	Fig. 10  Core@shell-like NiFe LDH/Co3O4 composites for the ORR. (a) Synthetic scheme, (b) TEM image, (c) Co 2p spectra and (d) polarization curves of NiFe LDH/Co3O4 composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Hydroxide/metal composites for electrocatalytic ORR. (a) SEM image of Ag nanowires, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Ag@NiMn LDH core@shell nanostructure. (d) LSV curves and (e) comparison of ΔE between OER at 10 mA cm−2 and ORR at −3 mA cm−2. (f) A Zn–air battery using the Ag@NiMn LDH as the bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst and the mixture of 6 M KOH and 0.2 M ZnCl2 solution as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) TEM image of CoAl-TEOA-180, the inset is a magnification showing Ag nanoparticles clearly. Elemental mapping images at the areas (h) with and (i) without Ag nanoparticles. (j) EIS, (k) LSV curves, (l) Tafel slopes and (m) electron transfer number of ORR catalyzed by the as-prepared hydroxide products. CoAl–Ag stands for the product reduced by ethylene glycol only while CoAl-TEOA-30 and CoAl-TEOA-30 are the products reduced by the mixture of ethylene glycol and triethanolamine for 30 and 60 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  NiFe LDH/NrGO composite for alkaline ORR. (a) HRTEM image, the inset is the TEM image of the composite. (b) LSV curves tested in O2- and N2-saturated KOH solution (0.1 M), respectively. (c) Polarization curves of NiFe LDH, NiFe LDH/rGO, NiFe LDH/NrGO and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts. (d) RRDE voltammogram, (e) estimated transfer electron number and HO2− yield, and (f) methanol tolerance characterization of the NiFe LDH/NrGO composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice via the molecular-scale assembly of 2D hydroxide nanosheets with oppositely charged graphene nanosheets as a bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst for the Zn–air battery. (a) Scheme for the preparation of CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice. SEM images of (b) pristine CoNi hydroxide (denoted as CoNi), (c) the CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice. (d) Polarization curves, (e) H2O− yield and electron transfer number of the ORR catalyzed by the commercial Pt/C catalyst, CoNi nanoplates and CoNi-NS/rGO superlattice, respectively. The data in both (d) and (e) were recorded on a typical RRDE in 1 M KOH electrolyte. (f) OER and ORR polarization curves of the electrocatalysts, which were loaded on a carbon fiber paper and tested in 6 M KOH solution. (g) Discharge polarization curves and related power density of Zn–air batteries using CoNi-NS/rGO or Pt/C as the bifunctional oxygen catalyst. (h) A picture of an OLED, which was lighted by two connected Zn–air batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  Derivatives of transition metal hydroxides for the ORR. (a) Scheme for the preparation of hierarchical Co–N/C spheres. (b and c) TEM images of Co–N/C catalysts. (d) LSV curve, (e) n and HO2− yield catalyzed by Co–N/C in 0.1 M KOH. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (f) TEM image of β-Co(OH)2 precursor. (g) XRD patterns, (h–k) TEM images of calcined products at different temperatures, (l) LSV curves, (m) Tafel slopes and (n) jK of the β-Co(OH)2 precursor and the corresponding calcined products in 0.1 M KOH solution. (f–n) Reproduced with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
