3D/4D printed tunable electrical metamaterials with more sophisticated structures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02588K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02588K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 12010-120363D/4D printed tunable electrical metamaterials with more sophisticated structures

        
          
            Dou 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Mei
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Yao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenqiang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongtao 
            Yao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Laifei 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Litong 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Konstantinos G. 
            Dassios
          
        
      c
aScience and Technology on Thermostructural Composite Materials Laboratory, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University Xi’an, Shaanxi 710072, P. R. China. E-mail: phdhuimei@yahoo.com
bNational Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environments, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, P. R. China
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, Patras 26504, Greece
Received 
      5th June 2021
    , Accepted 28th July 2021First published on 9th August 2021AbstractAs a novel and attractive advanced manufacturing technology, three-dimensional (3D) printing can realize the manufacturing of devices with more sophisticated structures. Metamaterials (MMs) are a novel material design idea based on the variation of physical structural designs, in order to break through apparent and intrinsic natural laws of matter, and eventually obtain extraordinary material functions. With the development of stealth technology, it has become a hot topic to seek and design radar absorbing materials to realize the high-performance requirements of “thin, light weight, wide and strong”. At this time, 3D-printed MMs with various sophisticated structures exhibit great application potential. Recent studies report the development of a wide variety of 3D-printed electromagnetic MMs (EMMs), which are attracting increasing scientific attention. To better advance the design of 3D-printed MMs, it is necessary to fully comprehend the advantages and disadvantages of various printing technologies, and fully understand the latest progress in printed EMMs. Four-dimensional (4D) printing is a combination of 3D printing and smart materials, which unfolds new opportunities for intelligent and customized development in aerospace and electronic devices. The present work reviews the research progress in electrical MMs printed using various 3D/4D printers. Emphasis is placed on the structural design of EMMs, selection of absorbing bases, category of absorbing materials, 3D printing types and EM absorption performance. As the demand for data grows rapidly, 5G wireless mode is developed. Technology from 100 GHz to 1.0 THz frequency bands has great potential in wireless communications for the upcoming 6G. 3D-printed electronic antennas and 5G/6G antennas fabricated by other processes are also briefly summarized. Meanwhile, the article discusses and looks forward to the potential future design and development of 3D/4D printed electrical AMMs for stealth and antenna applications.
Dou Yang
Dou Yang received her BS in physics in 2017 from Hebei Normal University (Shijiazhuang, China) and MS in physics in 2020 from Shaanxi Normal University (Xi’an, China). She is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under the supervision of Prof. Mei Hui. Her research interests focus on the preparation and optimization of novel 3D-printed electromagnetic materials.
Hui Mei
Hui Mei is currently a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University. He completed his PhD in Materials Science at Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research interests include the 3D printing of micro-/nanostructured composite materials and the construction of micro-/nanointerfaces.
Li Yao
Li Yao received his BS in material physics from Southwest University in 2012 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University in 2015. He is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under Professor Mei Hui. His research focuses on realizing radar-infrared compatible multiband stealth characteristics based on ceramic-based metamaterials.
Wenqiang Yang
Wenqiang Yang studied Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University and received his BS in 2020. He is currently pursuing a master's degree at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under the supervision of Prof. Mei Hui. His current research focuses on 3D printing of electromagnetic absorbing ceramics with novel metamaterial designs.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of contemporary microwave electronic technology and radar technology, the impact of EM wave radiation on the environment is growing along with scientific concerns. EM wave pollution has been listed by the World Health Organization as the fourth largest public hazard threatening human survival, after noise pollution, air pollution and water pollution.1 In order to limit and hopefully prevent the harmful effects of EM pollution, the utilization of materials absorbing EM waves has been proven to be an effective way to prevent EM pollution.2 At the same time, progress in detection technologies in the military field has highlighted the importance of absorbing materials towards the achievement of target stealth and the improvement of survivability of weapon systems. Absorbing materials are highly significant for the realization of stealth of weapons and equipment, and are also capable of greatly reducing the radar cross-section of the target, thereby improving its survival penetration capability and overall combat performance. Civil EM protection is also attracting increasing attention and together with the ever-improving military radar detection technology, it brings forward higher and higher requirements for absorbing materials.
Due to their high densities, excessive thickness and narrow bands, traditional absorbing materials, such as conducting polymers, Salisbury screens, nanomaterials and ferrites, cannot easily achieve light weight and high absorption.3–5 Reports show that the upper surface of the fifth-generation fighter is based on multi-layer heavy ferrite coating,6 with a large number of attached absorbing coatings. The zero reflection and zero transmission conditions for an EM wave, i.e., complete absorption, play a critical role in EM stealth, particularly in the GHz and THz frequency bands, which is the main spectrum used by radar. EMMs constitute a class of artificial composites composed of metal resonators at periodic arrangements lower than resonance frequency wavelengths.7,8
Electrical MMs have nothing special in composition compared to ordinary materials, and their peculiar properties stem from their precise geometry and size. The microstructure, whose size is smaller than the EM wavelength of its action, therefore exerts influence on the EM waves. They have special properties such as allowing EM waves to change their usual properties in ways that traditional materials cannot. The exotic properties of MMs endow them with broad applications in radar stealth, high receiver antenna to radar reflector cover or even earthquake warning. After Veselago reported negative refractive index materials in 1968,9 an increasing number of researchers were attracted by the potentially remarkable characteristics and singular phenomena of such materials, which were termed metamaterials. In general terms, the dielectric constant and permeability values of MMs are not necessarily negative, so they are structurally a broader material definition. It is worth noting that materials with negative refractive indices are anticipated to demonstrate exotic properties, providing extraordinary performance for select applications. Great scientific attention was attracted following Shelby et al.'s first proposal of a left-handed material with negative permittivity and permeability in 2001,10 novel characteristics unlike any natural material. Compared with traditional or natural materials, EMMs may demonstrate negative permittivity, negative permeability, negative refractive index, invisibility cloaking features, abnormal Doppler shift, anomalous Cherenkov radiation and reverse Goos–Hanchen shift, which unravel great potential for a wide field of applications such as EM equipment, communication and super lenses.9–18 MMs are special types of composite materials or structures with subwavelength structural arrangement characteristics, which facilitate the acquisition of supernormal physical properties by orderly designing the key physical dimensions of the material.19 MMs are currently one of the most cutting-edge and emerging topics of science and technology and have been widely applied in photonics, communications, semiconductors, microwaves, millimeter-waves, terahertz and even visible-light bands, owing to their customizable EM properties. As such, they have emerged as one of the more essential directions of materials science development in this century. In essence, MMs are a novel material design idea based on the variation of physical structural design, in order to break through apparent and intrinsic natural laws of matter, and eventually obtain extraordinary material functions.
Key to this technology is the selection, design and process of the material from hundreds of millions of different artificial complex microstructures to form a metamaterial device with special functions according to a reasonable arrangement.20–24 In 2008, Landy et al. first proposed the first perfect metamaterial absorber (MPA) with almost 100% absorption at 11.65 GHz, which was mainly derived from the contribution of the LC resonance of split ring resonators (SRRs).25 Subsequently, researchers designed an AMM with polarization insensitivity and wide angle of incidence.23,26
The absorption frequency bandwidth of the above-mentioned AMMs was relatively narrow, and does not meet the current demand for broadband absorption. On account of this issue, broadband AMMs have become a research hotspot. Resonant cascade technology with multiple approximate structures on the plane,27–30 active device loading technology such as resistors and capacitors,31,32 and magnetic dielectric substrate applications33 have been successively proposed. All these methods have extended the wide-band metamaterial absorber absorption bandwidth to varying degrees. Nevertheless, the thickness of novel AMMs reported in the above-mentioned studies is relatively large, while costs and processing of wide frequency wave absorption are considerable and complex, which is not conducive for large-scale applications.
For electrical property designs, AMMs exhibit more flexible and changeable characteristics than traditional absorbing materials. The absorption frequency band and position of MMs can be designed by adjusting the structural parameters of their units. For example, a double-sided sputtering copper laser ablation method was utilized to prepare a toroidal cross-shaped MM; however, the metal copper film may be oxidized at high temperatures and cause uneven thickness, with its resonance points above 15 GHz.34 Additionally, the existing processing methods of metal microstructures in MMs, such as photoresist, nanoimprinting and electrochemical deposition, are cumbersome in process, high in cost, long in processing duration, and demanding in technical requirements, especially in large curvatures, complex outer surface processing is very difficult, and the large-scale fabrication cost is high, which extraordinarily limit the large-scale application of MMs.
The emergence of 3D printing provides ideas for low-cost and simple manufacturing. 3D printing is essentially a material additive manufacturing (AM) technology, which can be simply defined as a rapid processing and manufacturing technology making use of simple or multiple materials to build up 3D components with a variety of sophisticated structures by stacking them layer by layer. It is regarded as one of the most promising novel technologies in AM with extremely great development potential and application prospects in many fields.35–41 At present, various 3D printing technologies have been applied to manufacture MMs for EM wave absorption, mainly including fused deposition modeling (FDM), stereolithography (SLA), digital light processing (DLP), laser sintering (selective laser sintering, SLS), laser selective laser melting (SLM), and other technologies.42–49 The main advantages and disadvantages of these several types of printing technologies are shown in Table 2.42–46,48–50
Composites play an important role in the aerospace industry and other fields because of their light weight in combination with superior thermal, mechanical and electrical properties. As a novel additive manufacturing technology, 3D printing provides an advanced tool for the preparation of composite materials, which makes the material composition design highly customizable while allowing for creative three-dimensional structural designs. Combining various 3D printing technologies with a vast selection of EM wave absorbing materials can unravel unprecedented potential for creating novel, finer structures and highly absorbing materials. Our team has fabricated an oblique honeycomb Al2O3/SiCw structure by combining SLA 3D printing and chemical vapor infiltration (CVI), which ultimately achieved more than 90% effective absorption in the whole X band.51 Arbaoui and co-workers unitized a fused deposition model to obtain ferromagnetic polyethylene/NiFe composites and studied their corresponding microwave applications.52 Zuo et al. proposed a novel double-layer composite absorber, with graphene/Li0.35Zn0.3Fe2.35O4/polymethyl methacrylate as the matching layer and graphene/carbonyl iron powder/polymethyl methacrylate as the absorption layer. This absorber achieved strong absorption within 4.0–17.8 GHz, at a total thickness of 2.0–6.0 mm,53 making the composite AMM highly advantageous for EM absorption.
After more than ten years of development, MM microwave absorption devices have gradually expanded from the original narrow band absorption to the high-frequency broadband absorption and the high absorption EM absorption performance of the full frequency band, accompanied by light weight and thin thickness. The conductivity of metals is very strong and can respond well to EM waves. However, they also have many disadvantages such as a heavy quality, non-corrosion resistance, and not being easy to manufacture and integrate. For the aerospace field, polymer materials cannot achieve high temperature resistance, and ceramic-based materials are the only ones that stand out.
Over the past decade, 3D printing of AMMs has attracted increasing interest in the industrial and academic fields. As illustrated in Fig. 1, 3D printing technologies for manufacturing AMMs can be divided into the following categories: FMD, SLM/SLS, SLA and DLP, which can quickly design complex patterns. Additionally, the structure is controllable, the absorbing ability is tunable and the structure and function are integrated by these technologies. There are several literature reviews on MM absorbers or 3D printing of different materials done by previous researchers. Nevertheless, most of the reviews only focus on the absorbing performance of MMs, while others focus on various materials by 3D printing. Kirstie R. Ryan and co-workers review the progress in research on 4D printable intelligent materials and their stimulus response capabilities, including shape memory materials, MMs, self-healing materials and their responses to heat, pH, moisture, and optical, magnetic, and electrical exposure.54 But they do not elaborate on various 4D printing MMs and potential MMs in radar stealth applications. Oliveri et al. summarize reconfigurable electromagnetics through MMs in detail.55 However, this review does not involve 3D-printed MMs. Ngo's group reviewed the main 3D printing methods, materials and their development trends.56 But this article lacks an induction of printed MMs. MM EM wave absorbers are reported by Watts et al.40 However, the focus is on MM perfect absorbers (MPA). Consequently, few authors look into the 3D/4D printing of AMMs by reviewing the literature, and few authors attempt to address broader aspects of 3D-printed electrical MMs and application fields. Moreover, available literature on 3D printing MMs has increased exponentially in the past few years, while many breakthroughs have been accomplished, a fact that proves the requirement to put forward new insights and research directions based on the latest development of existing knowledge. To this end, the present work reviews the currently available literature for the latest progress in 3D printing AMMs. It reviews research progress in 3D printing devices from the aspect of the structural design of EMMs, selection of absorbing base, category of absorbing materials, 3D printing types and EM absorption performance. It focuses on the field of 3D-printed AMMs for radar stealth applications. The working principle, advantages and disadvantages of various technologies are briefly summarized. Finally, the literature review summarizes and points out the current challenges and future prospects of MMs based on 3D/4D printing, and lays out future research directions.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of AMMs printed using various 3D printers. 
2. Metallic MMs
An MPA is composed of a special metal microstructure on the metasurface, a dielectric interlayer and a consecutive metal substrate. The suitable metal microstructure on the metasurface and the consecutive metal substrate with thickness greater than the skin depth can allow EM waves to enter the dielectric interlayer smoothly and be consumed perfectly in the metasurface and dielectric layer. In the MPA synthesized by Landy,25 the medial dielectric layer plays the role of regulating the input impedance, which perfectly matches the free space impedance. It is precisely the appropriate resonator microstructural design that can modulate the effective EM parameters such as split ring resonators, cross-shaped structures, flower-like structures, and reticular structures. In addition, composite structures can achieve multi-band or broadband resonance. At present, the strategies to achieve multi-band MPA can be summed up into four categories. The first is to combine resonators of different geometries. The second is to combine a variety of resonators with the same geometry but different sizes. The third is to combine resonators of the same size and geometry with a certain rotation arrangement. Fourth, different resonators are arranged vertically on different layers.
In 2014, Yang and co-workers produced an AMM with both broadband and polarization insensitivities, whose unit cell was made up of resistors mounted crosswire and a gradient split ring resonator (SRR) with a square metal patch (SMP) inside, accompanied by FR-4 coated with copper foil as the dielectric substrate (Fig. 2a).57 The absorptivity of the metal absorber was above 60% in the operating frequency range of 12.38–22.28 GHz. However, its absorption rate was too low. Luo's group put forward an almost perfect absorber with a multi-resonance sandwiched structure, which was composed of a square metal patch, dielectric substrate, and successive metal film (Fig. 2b).58 Liu et al. realized an AMM with a periodic array absorbing rate of up to 99.9% through a simple metal patch method (Fig. 2c).59 High narrowband absorption originated from strong EM resonance overlap and complete impedance matching with free space in a certain frequency range (z = 1). Zhirihin et al. successfully completed a two-angle perfect absorber for TM polarized EM waves, with a mushroom-type metasurface consisting of a lossy dielectric substrate and a through hole with complex impedance loading.60 The double-angle perfect absorption is a kind of narrow-band resonance effect. A practical double-layer printed circuit board meter was designed, which adopted a surface mounting element and a lumped element to realize double-angle perfect absorbers; a corresponding numerical study was carried out. An ultrathin triple-band AMM synthesized by Wang et al. consisted of a periodic array of three rotating square rings and a consecutive metallic film partitioned merely by a 1-mm dielectric substrate.61 Although perfect absorption was achieved, the absorption bandgap needed to be widened. In 2016, a multilayer AMM was fabricated by Long et al. for the realization of ultra-wideband absorption above 0.9 in the frequency range of 7–18 GHz.62 It is the printing of PAM on the antenna surface that contributed to the reduction of RCS, accompanied by good radiation properties.
 Fig. 2  (a) The plane view and stereogram of the gradient structural AMM.57 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (b) Diagram of the resonant unit of the AMM. (c) Scheme of the single unit cell and the AMM with a four-layer square patch structure.59 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
3. Metal–dielectric multilayer structures based on tapered hyperbolic MMs
Researchers were initially inspired by the tantalizing possibilities such as hyperlenses63 and photon funnels,64 which have no diffraction limits in such media, and Li et al. discovered new phenomena by studying hyperbolic MMs with their strange behavior in the density of states. The significant enhancement of light scattered from the interface defects and surface ripples of hyperbolic MMs is a broadband singularity originating from the density of states, and almost all incident light is absorbed into the propagation mode of the hyperbolic medium. Based on the broadband hypersingularity of the hyperbolic metamaterial density of states, Li et al. not only proposed a new method of radiation absorption system theoretically, but also confirmed this theory experimentally.65 They have opened up a whole new way for radiation absorbing materials and surfaces, which can be applied in the fields of solar energy collection to radar stealth technology.
One of the characteristics of MMs is that the required dielectric constant and permeability can be achieved by adjusting the geometric dimensions of the structure.66 This kind of design with customizable dielectric properties and tunable frequency response is a significant advantage of MMs. MMs are composed of artificially constructed microstructures, and their overall EM characteristics are described by equivalent dielectric constant and equivalent magnetic conductivity. The design of a subwavelength microstructure can effectively tune the equivalent EM parameters of MMs and then realize the controllable interaction between MMs and EM waves. By designing different microstructures, the relative equivalent dielectric constant and relative equivalent permeability of the metamaterial can be effectively regulated, so that the mode of EM wave propagation makes a difference fundamentally. In addition, by designing the basic material composition, periodic element shape and arrangement of MMs, the corresponding resonant characteristics can be obtained according to various requirements.66,67 Consequently, the application of MM technology to achieve high-efficiency EM wave absorption provides a new idea for the research field of absorbing materials. Table 1 summarizes the wave absorbing AMMs synthesized by various 3D printing technologies and their corresponding wave absorption performance.
Table 1 Wave absorbing metamaterials synthesized by various 3D printing technologies and their corresponding wave absorption performance




Materials
Structure
Thickness
AM
Performance
Ref.




Frequency-selective surface


Wrapping metal particles with brass filler wire
Circular
2.13 mm
FDM
For 10 GHz

72



Metal–dielectric multilayer structure


Electrified filament and an ABS-based commercial filament
Pyramidal
7.8 mm
FDM
Around 90% in 7.6–17.4 GHz

150



Polymer mesh as the sacrificial layer


PLA
Macroporous
1.4 mm
FDM
45 dB in 12–18 GHz (shielding)

74



ABS absorbent


Carbon-loaded ABS
Cylindrical
9.37 mm
FDM
3.9–12 GHz

77



Carbon-loaded ABS
Pyramidal
6.5 mm
FDM
5.3–18 GHz

78



CIP absorbent


Powder mixture of nylon and CIP
Multilayer square
1.89 mm
SLS
8–18 GHz

92



Powder mixture of nylon and CIP
Multilayer rectangular
4.7 mm
SLS
4–18 GHz

93



PLA absorbent


PLA
Stacked square
6 mm
DLP
For 1.9 GHz

97



PLA filament
Flat
11.55 mm
FDM
91% at 10.81 GHz

98



Graphene composite absorbent


PLA and RGO
Wooden pile
5.6 mm
FDM
4.5–40 GHz

100



Gradient index


Photosensitive resin, ferromagnetic rubber and aluminum alloy
Layered shell
62 mm
SLA
12–18 GHz

101



Liquid metal-filled absorber


Formlabs Clear, EGaIn and NaOH solution
Flat




Four tunable states (3–5 GHz)

102



PDMS and EGaIn
Channel


FDM
Moving from 18.5 to 18.65 GHz

103



PLA and GaInSn
Cylindrical


FDM
Single, dual-band switching

104



Wax-based composites


Verowhite, carbonized cotton and wax
Pyramidal
11 mm
SLA
7–40 and 75–110 GHz

105



Water-based absorber


UVlight photosensitive resin and distilled water
Cross channel
5.6 mm
SLA
8.1–22.9 GHz

107



VC810 transparent photopolymer and distilled water
Cylindrical
13 mm
SLA
8–18 GHz

108



Resin, PMAA and distilled water
Cylindrical + channel
5.6 mm
SLA
5.58–24.21 GHz

109



PLA and distilled water
Square cavity
4.6 mm
FDM
8.2–30 GHz

110



TPU and distilled water
Inlay groove
4 mm


5.9–25.6 GHz

75



Graphene oxide aqueous solution-based absorber


PTFE
Circular and cross




5.2–18 GHz

112



Honeycomb PLA-based absorber


PLA with resistor patches
Hexagonal
15.51 mm


3.53–24 GHz

113



Traditional ceramic-based composite absorber


Al2O3 and SiCw
Honeycomb
3.5 mm
SLA
8.2 to 12.4 GHz

51



Al2O3, CNT, SiCnw and SiOC
Twisted cross
3.2 mm
SLA
8.2 to 12.4 GHz

119



Polymer-derived ceramic absorber


SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Twelve coordination
3.2 mm
DLP
4.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41



SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Oblique honeycomb
2.8 mm
DLP
3.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41



SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Cross convex
3.0 mm
DLP
4.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41



SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Cross concave
2.8 mm
DLP
3.9 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41



SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Series
2.6 mm
DLP
3.3 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41



SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite
Parallel
3.0 mm
DLP
3.6 GHz bandwidth (X-band)

41





Table 2 Comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of printers that realize 3D printing of AMMs and the main contributions that have been made




Technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Main achievements




Fused deposition modeling
Low cost, fast speed and simple process
Layered appearance, poor surface quality, weak mechanical properties and limited extrusion temperature
A metasurface absorber with a metal-medium pyramidal structure;150 a macroporous structure with a polymer mesh as the sacrificial layer in the laminate;74 ABS polymer absorbers;77 a composite AMM structure made up of PLA polymer cavity and distilled water filling110


Selective laser sintering
Fine resolution and no need for supporting structures
Expensive, rough surface and slow printing
CIP-based composite AMM with an impedance conical structure;92 CIP-based three-layer broadband AMM with different cell sizes93


Stereolithography
High resolution, low cost, high efficieny, good surface quality and easy to process
Relatively slow speed and limited scope of printed materials
Gradient index AMM;101 water-injected all-dielectric ultra-wideband AMM;107 cylindrical–water–resonator-based ultra-broadband microwave absorber;109 honeycomb-structured Al2O3/SiCw composite AMM with different angles;51 alumina/carbon nanotubes/SiC nanowires/SiOC composites with distorted cross MM structures119


Digital light processing
High resolution, low cost, high efficieny, good surface quality and easy to process
Relatively fast speed and limited scope of printed materials
Parallel and series structures of PDCs–SiOC41




Ding et al.17 realized absorption in the bandwidth of 7.8–14.7 GHz on the basis of twenty dielectric layers by placing multiple resonators on one unit. It is composed of a periodic array of metal–dielectric multilayer quadrilateral frustum pyramids. Xiong et al.68 used the principle of reflection elimination to design AMMs with absorptivity of more than 90% in the range of 8.37–21 GHz based on Teflon and Rogers TMM4 models with a total of four layers. Not only does the design reduce the number of layers of the substrate, but also it broadens the absorption bandwidth.
For a pyramid structure, in this way, the reflectivity is minimal, and the EM waves can be gradually absorbed throughout the length of the geometry. A tapered hyperbolic metamaterial (HMM) consisting of a metal–dielectric multilayer structure has been documented to achieve the broadening of the EM wave absorption band of the material. In 2012, Ding and co-workers proposed an HMM that was tapered in both horizontal directions.69 It is the superposition of the multi-frequency resonant absorption modes of these pyramids that enables them to achieve higher than 90% absorption ranging from 7.8 to 14.7 GHz, and also exhibits polarization-independent characteristics. With the aim of further broadening the frequency band, Yin et al., in 2015, significantly eliminated the low absorption band between the high absorption bands by integrating two tapered HMM waveguides of different sizes in one unit cell,70 whose thickness was 11.52 mm. Then ultra-wideband polarization insensitivity and good incidence angle insensitivity were realized in the range of 2.3–40 GHz. Long's group also realized a thin multilayer broadband AMM with a total thickness of 4.36 mm by integrating the four pyramids into one unit cell and making full use of the advantages of the fundamental frequency and the excited TM210 harmonics on the diagonal line.71 The above-mentioned reports fully confirm the great advantage of HMM structures to achieve ultra-wideband characteristics. Nevertheless, the PCB etching process used to manufacture these structures has great limitations in manufacturing planar structures in addition to high costs.
The emergence of 3D printing provides ideas for low-cost and simple manufacturing. One frequency-selective surface (FSS) AMM was successfully fabricated in 2016 by Kronberger et al.72 using 3D printing, which constituted the first absorber of the type (Fig. 3a). This flat and thin structure is achieved by wrapping metal particles with brass filler wire, which was fully implemented by 3D printing. But its frequency response in the X band was very narrow. In 2020, Lleshi et al.73 first utilized a single-step 3D printing process, FDM, to fabricate a metasurface absorber with a metal-medium multilayer structure, consisting of a pyramidal shape unit cell (Fig. 3b), which achieved more than 90% absorption in the 7.6–17.4 GHz range.
 Fig. 3  (a) Structure of the 10 GHz FSS AMM. (b) Top and side views of a 3D-printed AMM. 
FSS, punches, multilayer structures, or pyramid structures are all effective ways to increase the bandwidth of radar absorbers. Therein, the impedance of the material of the pyramid structure decreases along the bottom layer of the structure toward the top layer, which yields a wide absorption bandwidth, but at the expense of increasing thickness of the entire model. Such structures satisfy the principle of progressive impedance matching.
4. 3D-printed polymer-based absorbents
Based on the design flexibility of MMs, Pendry et al. explained how to custom redirect EM fields and formulate a design strategy, which was demonstrated by the design of the singular lens and the shielding of objects in the EM field (Fig. 4a).19 To achieve EM inhibition, Mishra and co-workers fabricated macroporous structures of epoxy resin and bidirectional carbon fibers (CFs) by using the polymer mesh obtained by FDM as the sacrificial layer in the laminate (Fig. 4b).74 A hollow and lightweight epoxy carbon fiber laminate was successfully fabricated, which exhibited preeminent EM shielding performance, good flame retardance and heat resistance.
 Fig. 4  (a) A ray-tracing program has been utilized to obtain ray trajectories in the cloak and a point charge located near the cloaked sphere.19 Copyright 2006, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Diagram of a 3D printer and images of a PLA mesh printed by FDM and a scheme of fabrication of the laminate and etching of the polymer mesh.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
4.1 ABS-based absorbers
Conventional 3D-printed filaments, such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), polylactic acid (PLA), etc., generally have little attenuation capacity for incident EM waves,75,76 so it is difficult to make efficient absorbers directly. Therefore, loading conductive dielectrics in printed wires becomes an effective pathway for regulating the EM performance,72 namely, a higher dielectric constant, which enables the rapid shaping of an absorber.
Ren's team synthesized carbon-loaded ABS polymer absorbers using FDM, and ultimately obtained a microwave absorber with a 3.9–12 GHz of ultra-wideband dielectric resonator which covers the entire C band (4–8 GHz) and X band (8–12 GHz) (Fig. 5a).77 Such outstanding performance stems from the three modes of the non-basic dielectric resonator (DR) mode, the high-order dielectric resonator mode and the grating mode of the dielectric resonator. Chen and co-workers employed 3D printers to directly fabricate pyramidal absorption consisting of conductive ABS, commercial printing filaments, with a wave absorption rate of more than 90% from 5.3 to 18 GHz (Fig. 5b).78 Unlike the general multilayered metal–dielectric pyramid-type absorber, the pyramidal absorber in this study consisted of a loss-dielectric material. In other words, it is the material itself that also contributes greatly to the high absorption properties, in addition to the structural effects. The proposed pyramidal absorber has ultra-wideband and wide-angle absorption characteristics, which greatly outperforms the flat plate absorber and is attributed to the synergistic effect of the pyramidal structure and the absorbent on broadband absorption. It is revealed that the ultimate excellent wave absorption performance is attributed to the synergies of the absorbent itself and the geometrical structure.
 Fig. 5  (a) Prospective, side and top views of the absorber and diagram of the whole dielectric–resonator-based absorber.77 Copyright 2018, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (b) Perspective and front views of the structure of the pyramidal absorber and absorption comparison between flat conductive ABS and conductive ABS-based pyramidal absorbers; schematic diagram of the experimental equipment and the absorption spectrum.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
4.2 CIP-based composite absorbers
Current MM microstructure unit materials still mainly consist of metals such as copper, silver, aluminum and carbon-based resistive films. Metal MMs cannot be used in corrosive environments such as oceans due to their obvious corrosion tendency. The EM parameters of the microstructure unit of a carbon series resistance film are single, and the adjustable space of the MM is relatively limited. These limitations largely restrict the full development of MM technology in the field of EM wave modulation. Sun et al. prepared MM films with coated carbonyl iron as the microstructural material.79 By altering the content of the absorbing agent in the films, the EM parameters of metamaterial films were regulated, and the preparation of corrosion-resistant absorbing MMs was realized. The application of MM technology to achieve high-efficiency EM wave absorption provides a new idea for the research of absorbing materials.
Traditional magnetic absorbents have the disadvantages of low use temperatures and high densities. Microwave absorbers are widely used in microwave circuits, antennas and stealth applications, which can suppress EM interference, stray waves and radar cross-sections. The current research goal of a microwave absorber is to decrease weight, reduce thickness, broaden absorption bandwidth and enhance absorption intensity.80 For the same specimen thickness, the magnetic material will make the absorption bandwidth wider due to the increase of its permeability. It is the increased permeability that further improves the impedance matching of the system and produces multiple magnetic losses. Three kinds of magnetic metals, such as iron, cobalt and nickel, inherit the magnetic resonance effect to the absorber they participate in, due to their high saturation magnetization.81 Based on this, Itoh and co-workers effectively broadened the absorption bandwidth of magnetic coatings by allowing the concentration of the absorbent to change gradually.82 By combining non-planar MMs with magnetic absorbing materials, Li et al. successfully achieved 90% effective absorption in the broadband range of 2–18 GHz in 2014.83 However, its obvious disadvantage was the large sample thickness and structural complexity. Similarly, the current broadband absorber is yet to achieve a lighter goal, so as to improve its practical applicability.
As far as a thin absorber with sub-wavelength dimensions is concerned, its corresponding λ/4 resonance effect is to enhance the absorption with a weapon of force.84 Nevertheless, because this effect is particularly sensitive to the thickness of the material, the absorption enhancement induced by such resonance is limited to a narrow frequency segment. In addition, the edge diffraction effect can reduce EM wave reflection.85 Li and co-workers proposed a microwave absorber that can absorb more than 90% of EM waves in the ultra-wide band of 4–40 GHz, consisting of carbonyl iron wafers (CIFs) and epoxy resins.80 Among them, the multiple λ/4 resonance created a large reflection loss in the low-frequency band, while the edge diffraction effect promoted the loss in the high-frequency band. Moreover, it weighed as much as the corresponding 2-mm-thick plate absorber.
Because of its large permeability, carbonyl iron in magnetic metal powders can not only widen the absorption bandwidth to a certain extent, but also reduce the thickness effectively. Even if their permeability reaches the upper value of Snoek's limit,86 it is still difficult to achieve high absorption in the low-frequency band. This indicates that the absorption of such traditional absorbers at low frequencies, especially below 6 GHz, still requires more effort to break through.87 Metamaterial absorbers that have emerged in recent years are based on their unit cell structure, which can break through the limitations of traditional absorbers and exhibit perfect absorption at low frequencies.88 In addition they can also be used to achieve thin thickness and design flexibility.25 Multi-layer structures,89,90 multiple unit cells,29 non-planar structures,83 and tunable or adaptive metamaterial absorbers55 are all used to broaden the absorption bandwidth. However, due to the resonance absorption mechanism, the absorption bandwidth of the metamaterial absorber is still relatively small.40 This is because the operating frequency of the radio transmitter is narrowband,91 and the requirements for broadband generally come from various microwave sources with different operating frequency bands.
With the rapid development of low-frequency detection technology, the radar stealth capabilities of aircraft, missiles, ships and other weapons and equipment need to be improved urgently. Carbonyl iron powder (CIP) is a typical magnetic metal powder, which has the advantages of high permeability, high saturation magnetization and strong high temperature stability. It is widely used in the field of low-frequency wave absorption, but its disadvantages of easy oxidation, high density and poor matching resistance limit its low-frequency absorption effect.
A different structure of the multilayer broadband radar AMM (Fig. 6a), made from a powder mixture of nylon and CIP, with an absorption rate of above 90% in the range of 8–18 GHz, was made by the SLS method.92 This is an impedance conical structure, and the main loss originates from the central contribution of the underlying region. In 2018, Xiong et al.93 designed a three-layer broadband AMM using a mixture of nylon and CIP as the raw material and fabricated it through SLS (Fig. 6b). A periodic array structure with different cell sizes was used in the surface and middle layers of the structure, with the bottom layer being a wave absorbing plate structure. The total thickness of the optimized structure is only 4.7 mm. The reflectivity curve of the absorber showed that the broadband absorption peaks appeared at 5.3 and 14.1 GHz, respectively, and the superposition of these two peaks made the reflection loss of the absorber less than −10 dB in the range of 4–18 GHz. By using the s parameter inversion method, the equivalent EM parameters of each layer were calculated, and the theoretical reflectivity of the model was derived by using the multi-layer structure reflectivity formula, which was basically consistent with the measured results. By comparing the AMM model with one-layer flat newly built and two-layer models composed of top layers and middle layers, the reflectivity through simulation displayed that the absorption peak of the one-layer structure shifted to low frequency accompanied by only 1.2 GHz of bandwidth, and the frequency points of the two-layer structure were mainly around 14.1 GHz, which perfectly demonstrated that the broadband effect of the three-layer square matrix AMM was attributed to the superposition of the absorption bandwidth brought by the three-layer structure. However, the common disadvantage of several AMMs is their weak mechanical strength, which can be ascribed to the high porosity in the AMMs caused by the relatively small volume ratio of the binder nylon. Moreover, the bandwidth of this multi-layer structure required to be further broadened.
 Fig. 6  (a) Model of the AMM and geometry of the unit cell. (b) Model of the AMM with a three-layer square structure. (c) Equivalent multi-layer structure model (left) and effective model (right) of the AMM. 
4.3 PLA-based absorbers
For 3D printing, conductive patterns can be achieved by a variety of methods such as utilizing conductive fillers, spraying conductive materials, hybrid AM construction sequences, and metal printing.94–96 A miniaturized, low-cost 3D-printed AMM was proposed and realized in a Greek key shape situated on the top of conductive painting through silver ink and the stacking of two polylactic acid (PLA) blocks; the final cell size was 24 × 24 mm, corresponding to 0.15 × 0.15 λ at 1.9 GHz. (Fig. 7a).97 The AMM was of low cost owing to avoidance of lumped elements, composite magnetic materials and multilayer processes. Another type of metamaterial of reduced size with a circularly truncated cone 3D-printed absorber was also made, corresponding to the 21 × 21 mm cell size (Fig. 7b).98 The dielectric material supporting the truncated cone is a 3D-printed PLA filament, and the truncated cone conductor is formed by spraying silver-plated copper. Absorptivity at 10.81 GHz is 91% under normal incident conditions.
 Fig. 7  (a) Top, side and bird views of the unit cell model of the AMM; photograph of the fabricated specimen.97 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Top and side views of the unit cell; schematic diagram of the fabrication of AMM.98 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.4 Graphene-based composite absorbers with gradient MM structures
Because the use of carbon matrix composites can widely realize a variety of multifunctional structures, it is considered to be an ideal candidate for aerospace research. Notably, studies by Delfini et al. showed that composite ceramic/polymer structures can be used in spacecraft-specific subsystems to simultaneously guarantee extreme temperature tolerance and EM shielding properties.99 Not only the morphology and thermodynamics of the carbon/carbon (C/C) 3D shell prototypes were analyzed, but also the microwave properties of multi-layer carbon-filled micro/nano-composite plates were analyzed.
The combination of carbon-based materials (graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers), conductive polymers (polyaniline, polypyrrole, polythiophene), and magnetic oxides has attracted attention due to their potential EM wave absorption properties. The two strategies of absorbing materials to achieve better performance are to use the combination of different materials to improve impedance matching and microstructural design to tune EM wave loss. In particular, the matching layer plays a role in improving the impedance matching ability of the double-layer absorbing material, which is composed of the matching layer and the absorbing layer. At the same time, the absorbing layer depletes the EM wave. In addition, the matching layer can reduce the reflection of EM waves on the surface of the material, so that the EM waves can better enter the absorption layer and eventually run out in the absorption layer.
As the lightest material in the carbon family, graphene has excellent properties such as good electrical conductivity, high specific strength, good chemical stability, high thermal stability and high carrier migration rate, hence demonstrating good potential as a dielectric dissipation type AM with preeminent performance. The unique two-dimensional structure of RGO provides a larger specific surface area, which can promote the scattering and multiple reflections of EM waves, thus improving the wave absorption properties. The defects and residual oxygen-containing functional groups in a graphene sheet prepared through the reduction method are prone to polarization relaxation and electric dipole relaxation under an external electric field, increasing the dielectric loss. Due to their numerous characteristics contributing to the absorption and loss of EM waves, graphene-based absorbing composite materials can be extremely potential AMMs.
Meanwhile, graphene-based composite materials have huge application requirements in aerospace, electronic communications and other fields. With dielectric loss being the main mechanism of microwave absorption in graphene-based composites, the EM wave loss capacity of the material is enhanced with increasing graphene content, while the difference of wave impedance between the material and the air also increases. As a result, it is necessary to enhance the impedance matching within graphene-based composite AMs and air, thus diminishing the reflectivity of EM waves on the surface of composite materials. MMs extend the design of absorbing materials from studying the EM properties of EM wave absorbers to controlling the EM characteristics of materials through structural devising. Composite MM absorbing structures unravel the potential for integrated manufacturing of broadband and wide-angle EM wave absorbing materials.
By changing the RGO content and geometric parameters of the composite unit composed of PLA/RGO, Yin et al. realized the control of the characteristic impedance of each layer (Fig. 8a).100 Among them, the wooden pile unit consisted of two stacked rods, with the height, h, and side length, a, having the values of 0.8 mm and 1.6 mm, respectively, while the rod width, w, was variable. Eighteen structural units were made by combining six materials with different RGO contents and three-unit cells with different w. According to the design principle, the characteristic impedance was gradually increased from the bottom (near the metal backing) to the top (near the open end) layer, and six multilayer absorbers consisting of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 selected cell elements were ultimately obtained, with the gradually increasing total thickness. The number of layers directly affected the position of the absorption peak. Due to the quarter-wavelength matching mechanism, the resonance wavelength increased with thickness, so the position of the absorption peak shifted with the frequency range. As the number of layers increased, the absorption band with an RL of less than −10 dB expanded from a small value of 0 to a larger value. This is because the addition of the gradient index layer made the impedance gap between the absorber and the air smaller. The seven-layer absorbers reach more than 90% absorptivity in a wide band of 4.5–40 GHz. The widest absorption band of monolayer composites is only 4.4 GHz, which further proves that the 3D-printed seven-layer absorber can be selected as a design choice for future functional structures.
 Fig. 8  (a) Model of unit cells and photograph of the 3D-printed specimen; RL of the six specimens and 2D representation of RL for the composite AMM with an RGO content of 2 wt%.100 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Photographs of fabricated GRINRAS: top and local views of the ring GRIN AMM.101 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
4.5 Gradient index (GRIN) absorbers
In 2017, a gradient MM composed of a radar wave absorption composite structure synthesized via SLA was for the first time proposed by Yin and co-workers (Fig. 8b).101 This gradient index (GRIN) radar absorption structure was essentially a three-part layered shell composed of a GRIN refractor fabricated of photosensitive resin, an absorber fabricated of ferromagnetic rubber, and a reflector fabricated of aluminum alloy. Among them, the GRIN refractor consisted of an isotropic non-resonant wood pile material, designed based on the dielectric constant distribution equation of an electromagnetic black hole, and was used to bend and match the waves from the air to the structure. The absorber played the role of dissipating electromagnetic waves and ultimately converting them into heat. The function of the reflector was to reflect electromagnetic waves to the absorber to prevent electromagnetic waves from entering the internal space of the structure. Ultimately, this 3D-printed metamaterial achieved more than 90% effective absorption in the 12–18 GHz band. According to the study, the GRIN radar absorption structure can effectively control wave propagation.
5. 3D-printed polymer structures filled with different absorbents
5.1 Liquid metal
Xie et al.102 proposed a type of absorber composed of a 3D-printed Formlabs Clear substrate with a liquid metal [eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn)] droplet absorber at the center of the stage-shaped circular groove (Fig. 9a). The radius of the liquid metal can be tuned by the electrochemical method to realize the reconfigurable response of the absorber to EM waves. A wireless stretchable AMM was proposed by Kim et al. which consisted of three-layer polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates.103 Therein, the top layer was the top conductive pattern, the middle layer was flat PDMS and the bottom layer was curved to the ground (Fig. 9b). This MM successfully achieved stretchability by introducing PDMS elastomer materials and 3D printing microfluidic channels for EGaIn liquid metal injection. Therein, when the length of the absorber was stretched from the initial length of 5.2 to 6.4 cm, the absorption frequency shifted from 18.5 GHz to 18.65 GHz. In a recent research study, Chen's research group developed a switched 3D-printed absorber with a MM structure by mechanical rotation control,104 which successfully realized single-frequency and dual-frequency switching and three-frequency simultaneous absorption. The main body of the unit was composed of a 3D-printed cylindrical PLA, while the hollow interior was a hollow SRR structure filled with liquid metal, which effectively controlled EM wave absorption.
 Fig. 9  (a) Periodic structure of the tunable frequency selective absorber. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of AMM on PDMS.103 Copyright 2016, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
5.2 Wax-based composites
Mechanical soft and weak wax matrix composites, because of their fatal shortcomings, are not enough to be used in a large number of EM absorption fields. Song and co-workers105 proposed a novel solution to increase the robustness and durability of wax-based composites (Fig. 10) by the application of 3D-printed polymer patterned enclosures. The resultant mechanically robust and repairable metastructures used carbonized cotton/wax composites as filler materials and achieved excellent effective absorption in the ultra-wideband frequency range of 7–40 and 75–110 GHz.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of meta-structure. Photographs of (b) commercial cotton. (c) CC upon carbonization. (d) Mixture of CC/wax in a 400 mL beaker. (e) 3D-printed polymer patterned shell. (f) The meta-structure based on CC/wax and 3D-printed polymer patterned shell. (g) RL of the as-fabricated meta-structure.105 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Water-injected all-dielectric materials
When designing an AMM structure to increase the absorbing frequency width, it is often necessary to have very high requirements for the EM parameters of the materials used. Distilled water is an excellent microwave dielectric material with high dielectric constant and high dielectric loss, and has been widely studied in the field of EM because of its low cost, easy accessibility and small environmental fingerprint. It has been widely used in the design of different microwave antennas such as magnetic monopole antennas, reconfigurable antennas and dielectric patch antennas. Recently, water has also become a concern in the design of all-medium MMs, which can meet the requirements of AMM structural design by embedding into other dielectric materials in a wide range of equivalent impedance matching with air. Electrical resonance and/or magnetic resonance can be supported by adjusting the shape or direction of the dielectric resonator. The design source of water-based MMs comes from the closed-ring resonator (CRR) ring.106 In addition, due to the fluidity of water, it is easy to realize adjustable all-dielectric MMs. Unlike other microwave media, the imaginary part of the dielectric constant of water is larger in the microwave band, which makes it have a higher dielectric loss, so it is suitable to design EM wave absorbers with high absorptivity. At the same time, the real part of the dielectric constant has a strong dependence on the frequency, which makes it possible to obtain water-based microwave elements with ultra-wide operating bandwidths. However, a problem limiting the direct use of water as a microwave absorber is the impedance mismatch at the water–air interface, which will prevent EM waves from propagating into the liquid, leading to low absorption. In this context, predecessors have carried out a large number of studies to eliminate this mismatch. Consequently, distilled water is an excellent microwave dielectric material with a high dielectric constant and high dielectric loss, which can be embedded into other dielectric materials to achieve equivalent impedance matching with air in a wide frequency range, thereby satisfying the structural design requirements of AMMs.
In 2017, SLA was utilized for the fabrication of water-injected all-dielectric MMs.107 The absorption mechanism of this all-dielectric-based AMM involved the exploitation of the dispersion of water, which is different from the electrical and/or magnetic resonance of the traditional metal-dielectric-based AMMs. Therefore, the defects of narrow band and oblique incidence of metal dielectric-based AMMs are completely overcome. The favoured structure of model V was made of a UV-photosensitive resin substrate, and a cross water-flow channel with a width of 5 mm was dug out in the middle of the substrate. The side view of the absorber, with a lattice constant of each unit of 14 mm, shows the heights of the three layers (H1, H2, and H3) which are 2.2 mm, 2.0 mm and 1.4 mm, respectively (Fig. 11a). When the incident angle reaches 60°, more than 90% of the incident EM wave effectively absorbs the wide frequency range of 8.1–22.9 GHz and the relative bandwidth is 95.5%. The excellent absorption performance of this absorber shows its possible application in EM stealth, especially in the EM stealth of marine targets. Bradley et al. employed a VeroClear Fullcure 810 transparent photopolymer (VC810) to synthesize a printed all-dielectric water-based structure of 13 mm height which avoids the technical limitation of the traditional metal medium absorber structure (Fig. 11b).108 The phase interactions between the overlapping electric and magnetic dipoles of equal amplitude induced by solely all-dielectric structures highlight an interesting paradigm for manipulating EM energy. The absorption was over 90% in the 8–18 GHz range at the incident plane wave at 0–40 degrees. It is critical to rationally distribute dispersed soft water with a high dielectric constant into a low dielectric matrix to enhance wave absorption in a reduced length range. A cylindrical–water–resonator-based absorber has also been reported by Ren et al. in 2018 through SLA (Fig. 11c).109 For the absorber, each unit was made up of a cylinder situated between a cylindrical resin cap and a bottom spacer layer composed of polymethyl methacrylate (PAMM). To enable water injection into the container, two microchannels with a diameter of dci = 0.6 mm were added to the resin cover, which was much smaller than the working wavelength, so its influence could be inappreciable. Ultimately, the structure exhibited high absorptivity in a wide working range. In the entire frequency band from 5.58 to 24.21 GHz, the absorption rate exceeded 90%, and the relative bandwidth was as high as 125%. Good impedance matching initiatively guaranteed that energy entered into the proposed absorber, and then was completely absorbed by the water due to the high dielectric loss. In 2019, Guo et al. gave full play to the characteristics of the 3D printing technology of FDM that could straightforwardly print the cavity structure of the micro unit, and prepared the composite AMM structure made of PLA polymer cavity and distilled water filling, efficiently avoiding the negative impact of EM performance on the absorbing structure (Fig. 11d).110 They realized the equivalent impedance matching of the MM structure's equivalent parameters with that of air in a wide frequency range, which was conducive to the achievement of superior absorbing performance. The MM structure attained high-efficiency absorption of more than 90% of EM waves in the range of 8.2–30.0 GHz, of which the relative absorption bandwidth is 114.1%, which is significantly enhanced compared with the research of the same category. Moreover, the overall thickness of the structure was only 4.6 mm, which was less than one-tenth of the standard wavelength of the EM wave C-band of 50 mm. When the incident EM wave frequency changed, the distinguished dispersion characteristics of distilled water could well guarantee that the equivalent impedance of the MM structure fluctuated in a small range within a wide frequency range. This equivalent impedance matched well with the air impedance, hence ensuring that the MM maintained good EM absorption performance in a wide frequency band. In a recent study, Wu et al. fabricated an ultra-wideband flexible water-based AMM with a thickness of only 4 mm by 3D printing technology using distilled water as the absorbing material and flexible material thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) with a permittivity of approximately 2.8 to support the structure of water as a container (Fig. 11e).75 The high tensile strength and wide hardness of TPU promote water-based MMs with better toughness and elasticity.111 The absorber can achieve 90% absorption in the frequency band 5.9–25.6 GHz, being similarly insensitive to the incident angles. This liquid-type flexible broadband absorber has great research feasibility.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic and side view of the all-dielectric MM; absorption spectra of five different models. (b) The three-dimensional printed AMM structure on a 3D printer to a height of 13 mm; the geometry and makeup of the single unit cell; absorption performance over the bandwidth of 8–18 GHz for 0–40 degrees.108 Copyright 2018, Sci. Rep. (c) Exploded side and top views of the unit cell; diagram of the cylindrical–water–resonator-based absorber.109 Copyright 2018, Optical Society of America. (d) Model of the unit cell and wide-angle absorption characteristics.110 Copyright 2019, Chin. J. Mech. Eng. (e) The conceptual model of the water-based AMM and the structures of the unit cell of designed water-based MM called after Model III.75 Copyright 2019, The Japan Society of Applied Physics. 
5.4 Graphene-based materials
Nevertheless, there are still some concerns in the study, such as the low mechanical strength of the RGO/PLA composite and poor high-temperature of PLA as the base material, which remain to further research and resolve. In a recent report, Chen et al. proposed a metamaterial absorber comprising graphene oxide aqueous solution (GOAS) (Fig. 12a).112 The dielectric absorbent GOAS was filled in circular and cross channels of 3D-printed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) containers. GOAS circular M2 and cross-shaped M3 were built for comparison with the proposed metamaterial model M1. The result showed that the model, which includes both circle and cross, exhibits the optimal performance, and its absorption was greater than 90% throughout the 5.2–18 GHz range. While M2 could achieve relatively broadband absorption at 6.6–16 GHz frequencies, the absorption curve was similar to that of the M1, indicating that there was a very obvious resonance effect between the GOAS circles. However, M3 can only achieve more than 78% absorption. M1 metamaterial obtained by the combination of M2 and M3 exhibited a larger equivalent dielectric constant, which made its performance optimal.
 Fig. 12  (a) The diagram of the AMM and its cross-section. (b) The absorption spectrum of the fabricated MM based on GOAS. (c) MM with both GOAS circle and GOAS cross (M1), only GOAS circle (M2) and only GOAS cross (M3); the absorption spectrum of M1, M2, and M3.112 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
5.5 PLA-based materials with a honeycomb structure
Jiang et al. fabricated a three-dimensional AMM composed of a hexagonal honeycomb structure using PLA with resistor patches fastened onto its walls, and was set on a metal plate (Fig. 13a).113 This AMM achieved a reflectivity below −10 dB in the range of 3.53–24.00 GHz (Fig. 13b), indicating a relatively wide bandwidth of 20.47 GHz, which was certified by the simulation using CST and experiment in an anechoic microwave chamber. Moreover, for transverse magnetic (TM) radiation, the AMM can maintain a strong effective absorption in the 3.53–24.00 GHz range from 0° to 70° of the incident angle, indicating that the AMM exhibits outstanding large-angle absorption properties for TM waves. Additionally, the mechanical performance of the AMM was measured by pressing the compressive load on the 3D-printed honeycomb structure. The results showed that the compressive strength of the honeycomb structure could reach up to 10.7 MPa and its density was merely 254.91 kg m−3, coupled with an energy absorption per volume value of 4.37 × 103 kJ m−3 and an energy absorption per unit mass value of 17.14 kJ kg−1. In comparison with the metallic lattice core of the same density, the peak compressive strength and printed honeycomb energy absorption per unit mass were 2.2 and 3 times higher, respectively, demonstrating that the AMM consisted of a 3D-printed honeycomb structure which has superior mechanical characteristics than its counterparts. However, the research utilized the 3D printing process only in an auxiliary manner, i.e., the printed parts were mainly used as carries of the AMM; 3D printing was not used in the preparation of AMM with EM absorbing properties.
 Fig. 13  (a) Unit cell diagram, honeycomb sample for compressive test and specimen of the three-dimensional MMA. (b) Reflectivity results for vertical incident waves. (c) The compressive behaviors of a 3D-printed PLA honeycomb.113 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
6. MMs in the terahertz band
Wang's team116 produced models for the analysis of graphene-metasurface structures, demonstrating that the interaction between light and very high mobility graphene flakes is also weak and, more importantly, proposed solutions to these problems (Fig. 14a). Beyond that, perfect absorption and electrical tunability in the terahertz band is demonstrated in the large mobility range of 200–20000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which contains nearly the full room temperature mobility range reported in the literature. Their work is very instructive for the design of highly tunable absorbers without limiting the mobility of graphene. In 2017, Cheng and co-workers fabricated an ultra-thin six-band polarization insensitive terahertz MPA based on a metal cross-cave patch resonator, showing a higher Q factor (>65) (Fig. 14b).114 Compared with ordinary perfect metamaterial absorbers, this absorber had higher ordered multipolar plasmon resonance. In low mobility graphene, the weak interaction of light with matter is considered to be sufficient to hinder the performance of its optoelectronic devices. In 2013, an ultra-thin terahertz MM made of circular metal patches, polyimide substrates and metal films was designed by Wang's team117 with an absorptivity of 99.9% at 5.91 THz (Fig. 14c). High absorptivity was promoted by the strong magnetic resonance between the two metal layers and the perfect impedance matching with the free space at the resonance frequency. The absorption bandwidth was successfully improved by four patch assemblies. He's group fabricated a broadband, polarization-insensitive, wide-angle terahertz AMM by constructing metal dielectric layers of different sizes within the unit cell (Fig. 14d).115 Ultimately, the absorption reached more than 70% in the frequency range of 0.76–0.96 THz, and the half-maximum absorption width reached 28%.
 Fig. 14  (a) Diagram of the metasurface pattern with meandered slots. (b) 2D array, front view and perspective view of the designed six-band polarization-insensitive terahertz perfect AMM.114 Copyright 2017, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (c) Diagrams and geometric parameters of the MA unit cell, two patches, three patches and four patches. (d) Top and cross-sectional view of the unit cell structure and propagation direction for the terahertz AMM and polarization of EM waves. (e) Dependence of the absorption spectra on the size of the saw-shaped annular patch and metamaterial-layer number.115 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
7. Ceramic-based MMs
The conductivity of metals is very strong and can respond well to EM waves. However, it also has many disadvantages such as a heavy quality, non-corrosion resistance, and not being easy to manufacture and integrate. For the aerospace field, polymer materials are greatly limited on account of their poor high temperature resistance; at this time, ceramic-based materials stand out due to the high temperature resistance, high strength, small density, oxidation resistance, corrosion resistance and creep resistance.
SLA is currently the main technology of ceramic printing in the market, and it is also a relatively successful technology for commercialization. A kind of photo-solidifying adhesive made from a ceramic powder, photoinitiator and dispersant is used in this technology. The process itself is not much different from the current DLP printers. Some products will use special scraper smear methods to speed up the filling of materials in the molding process because of the high viscosity of light curing adhesive, but ultimately, the process principle is not different from that of ordinary resin molding. Up to now, SLA and DLP are the 3D printing technologies that have reached high standards in terms of model complexity and accuracy. They utilize raw materials, stable molding processes, high processing quality, high ceramic surface quality and high precision printing. A series of advantages such as complex shapes have been widely used in 3D printing ceramic devices.
7.1 Traditional ceramic-based composite MMs with different structures

7.1.1 Honeycomb structure. 
The authoring research group fabricated SiC nanowire/acrylic resin (SiCnw/ACR) composites which exhibited broadband electromagnetic absorption capability.118 At a 3 wt% SiCnw content, the thickness of the printing layer was 25–50 μm, and the SiC/ACR composite had a wide EAB and a high EM absorption efficiency, regardless of the evaluation of the C, X or Ku band. In 2019, the honeycomb-structured Al2O3 with different angles (30°, 45°, 60° and 75°) was printed by SLA, and at the same time, the surface of the channel and pores on the wall were filled with SiC whiskers (SiCw) through direct chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) (Fig. 15a).51 Remarkably, when the angle was 30°, the Al2O3/SiCw composite exhibited optimal absorption in the 4.2 GHz bandwidth of the X-band, while the value of RCmin reached up to −63.65 dB (99.9999%). The as-printed Al2O3/SiCw exhibited good impedance matching with air. Besides, not only could the incident EM waves be dissipated by the surface of SiCw, but they can also be further absorbed resulting from the interfacial polarization caused by Al2O3 and SiC. EM waves were reflected multiple times in the channel of the oblique honeycomb until it was absolutely absorbed by the structure.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the processing procedure for 3D-printed Al2O3/SiCw composites; results of the reflection coefficient of the specimen with best EM performance; comparison of EAB and RCmin at an optimal thickness between 3D-printed composites with varying angles.51 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Representative SEM images of the Al2O3/CNTs/SiCnw/SiOC composite with 5 wt% CNTs and pictures of 3D-printed twisted cross AMM and unit cells with different torsion angles. (c) Schematic for the EM wave absorption mechanisms of the composite with a twisted cross MM structure; the reflection coefficient of the composite AMM in the X-band with different contents of CNTs.119 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 


7.1.2 Twisted cross structures. 
Recently, our group utilized SLA and precursor infiltration and pyrolysis (PIP) methods to synthesize alumina/carbon nanotubes/SiC nanowires/SiOC composites with distorted cross MM structures (Fig. 15b).119 Al2O3 ceramics have low dielectric properties, are transparent for EM waves, and can act as SiCnw growth substrates. Two twisted cross metamaterial structures with a torsion angle of 0° and 90° were successfully designed. The structural unit consisted of the twisted cross of the upper layer and the cube of the lower layer. The reflection coefficient in the X band showed that the metamaterial with a torsion angle of 90° performed better than the metamaterial with a torsion angle of 0°, coupled with an excellent absorption performance with RC up to 48.56 dB and absorption bandwidth covering the whole X band. It is attributed to the better impedance matching characteristics of the former and the 90° torsion angle contributed to the increase of the propagation path, resulting in the absorption of more EM waves. The twisted cross structure at 90° had long edges of 1260 μm and short edges of 350 μm; both were much smaller than the X-band wavelength. The absorptivity of the composite to EM waves is as high as 99.999% at 12.2 GHz with a thickness of 2.8 mm; at a thickness of 3.2 mm, the effective absorption bandwidth (EAB) was 4.2 GHz, which covered the whole X-band.

7.2 Polymer-derived ceramic MMs
Insufficiently, traditional ceramics represented by ceramic powders are difficult to meet the requirements of various 3D printing. Pre-ceramic polymer, a special precursor, can be modified in the polymer stage, and can theoretically realize all the requirements of 3D printing. Otherwise, it is the editable and designable ability of preceramic polymer molecules that enables researchers to achieve various 3D printing of such material through molecular modification.
Direct ceramic SLA essentially constitutes the use of light curing adhesives and a large number of ceramic fillers, followed by thermal curing to achieve the final green ceramic body. For better light curing properties of the binder, ceramic particles with smaller particle size and better light scattering properties are preferred in this SLA method. Laser printing technology of nano-ceramic resin has also been studied while even polymer-derived ceramifiable monomers, such as silicon oxycarbide, can be 3D printed, polymerised by UV and then sintered at a high temperature to construct high-quality complex ceramic lattices. The schematic diagram in Fig. 16a demonstrates key PDC 3D printing methods.120 Compared to the use of ceramic fillings, the obvious advantage of the PDCs is that there is no post-processing to remove the organic adhesive, thus reducing the manufacturing time. This method can produce a very smooth surface.
 Fig. 16  (a) AM of PDCs: UV-curable preceramic monomers are mixed with photoinitiator; the resin is exposed to UV light in an SLA printer; a preceramic polymer part; pyrolysis converts the polymer into a ceramic.120 Copyright 2016, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Hydrolytic condensation of MK siloxane with silane coupling agent KH-570 and resin structure of ceramic precursor of siloxane after UV-curing; (c) pictures of 3D-printed porous structural PDCs–SiOC: twelve coordination and 45°-oblique honeycomb. (d) Pictures of 3D-printed PDCs–SiOC with double-layer impedance gradient structures: cross convex/flat structure and cross concave/flat structure. (e) Schematic diagram for the absorbing mechanisms of PDCs–SiOC with series and parallel structures.41 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photocurable and molded SiOC ceramic precursor resins were prepared by our team via the hydrolytic condensation method. Then, a complete set of synthetic formulations and printing parameters were successfully developed.41 Adhering to the principle of periodic macroscopic and microstructure designs to coordinate the EM absorption characteristics of ceramic-based composite materials, based on the DLP 3D-printed single-layer flat structure of PDC–SiOC, its microstructure was effectively adjusted with different temperature heat treatment. Besides, various sophisticated structures such as porous single-layer structures, double-layer impedance gradient structures and serial and parallel macrostructures were designed to realize the macrostructural regulation (Fig. 16c–e),41 thus achieving the effective control of permittivities and EM wave absorption properties of PDC–SiOC ceramics. Through the design of various artificial EM structures, we can conclude that the bilayer impedance gradient structures can not only effectively broaden the EAB, but also extensively improve the absorption intensity, while monolayer porous structures such as twelve coordination and 45° oblique honeycomb can achieve broadband absorption in the X-band. This is due to the structures of the former improving impedance matching and enhancing the dielectric loss capacity. Moreover, different surface structures in double-layer structures can vary the peak intensity and position of the absorbing waves while keeping their thickness consistent. Selective absorption of frequency was also realized by cross concave/flat structures. Therefore, it is PDC–SiOC with various sophisticated structures that are good candidates for absorbing materials in the stealth field. What's more, compared with the ordinary flat structure, all the designed MM structures can effectively improve the absorbing performance of materials. On the one hand, the size of the MM microstructure (cell) is smaller than the wavelength of the incident EM wave, which can affect the wave. In addition, the periodic structure of MMs promotes their absorption of EM waves. On the other hand, the multiple reflections and scatterings of the incident EM wave inside the sophisticated MM structure make the electromagnetic wave more likely to be dissipated.
8. Active/smart wave absorption
Currently available AMMs are all passive, i.e., once design and preparation are completed, their frequency response and absorption characteristics are fixed; such wave absorbers do not have tunability. Owing to Rozanov's effect limitations (the limit of bandwidth to thickness ratio),121 the performance of passive absorbers can hardly meet the requirements of future EM absorption applications. To this end, smart MMs have recently aroused the interest of the researcher community.122 Active/smart AMMs can break through the Rozanov limit, hence are expected to further broaden the application range of metamaterial absorbers. Active/smart wave absorption can be mainly achieved by the following four methods: (1) introduction of PIN diodes;123,124 (2) introduction of varactor diodes;125 (3) mechanical adjustment;126 (4) using the material itself to EM adjustable parameters.127–129 Tennant et al.123 chose PIN diode as a controllable element to design a bow tie-type active frequency selective surface radar absorber. The active FSS absorber has achieved adjustable absorption characteristics for vertically polarized plane waves within 9–13 GHz. The result mainly realizes the current control of reflectivity amplitude; nevertheless, the controllable migration effect of resonance points or absorption bands is not obvious. Xu et al.125 used semicircular and triangular combined microstructures to generate an absorption peak in the microwave segment, and realized the electrical regulation of the absorption peak position by embedding variable capacitance between the semicircle and triangle. However, defects in the design scheme made microwave absorption only effective for one polarization. Wang et al.127 added electrorheological fluid to the AMM, and realized the free regulation of the absorption frequency of the AMM by changing the intensity of the electric field applied by the electrorheological fluid. With the increase of electric field intensity, the absorption frequency of the absorber moves to the low frequency. However, this structure puts forward higher requirements for packaging, hence its use in practical applications remains a concern. Huang et al. introduced resistors and active varactor diodes into the MM structure to realize the dynamic adjustment of the absorption frequency band by rationally designing the type of microstructure and the connection between the microstructures. They hence obtained an adjustable ultra-thin radar absorber.
9. 4D printing of various materials
4D printing is a combination of 3D printing and smart materials. The 4th dimension refers to the ability of 3D-printed objects to undergo self-transformation of their physical characteristics and functions (structure, shape, size, etc.), over time and under specific environment and stimuli such as electricity, light, magnetism, water, heat and sound. 4D printing constitutes, essentially, the evolution and perfection of 3D printing. The objects processed by 3D printing are static and inanimate, while 4D printing adds a dimension of time on top of 3D printing; the resulting morphology and structure of the objects change dynamically with time, being no longer static and inanimate. The emergence of this technology has unfolded new opportunities for intelligent and customized development in the biomedical, aerospace, electronic devices and other fields in the world.
3D printing of intelligent materials is difficult and the driving mode is single, which makes the development of 4D printing relatively slow. To overcome this problem, a research team from the Harbin University of Technology, China, has recently realized 4D printing based on shape memory polymers (SMPs) and multifunctional nanocomposites, providing a new idea for the development of intelligent structures of 4D printing.
SMPs and shape memory alloy (SMAs) are the two major kinds of materials used for 4D printing. Due to the problems of complex material manufacturing, high cost, limited toxicity and recovery of SMAs, SMP materials with excellent shape recovery properties are increasingly favoured by researchers. An SMP is a smart material that has a specific initial shape and can recover its initial shape after deformation and fixation under certain conditions through the stimulation of external conditions such as heat, light, electricity and magnetism. Because of the active deformation behavior of SMP materials, it has become one of the key materials to realize 4D printing. In recent years, it has been widely studied and paid attention to by scholars at home and abroad.
The SMP of 4D printing is based on the commonly used 3D printing technology. At present, methods commonly used in 4D printing are mainly fused deposition technology, stereoscopic lithography molding technology, polymer injection technology and direct writing (DW) printing technology.130 Zarwk et al. utilized 3D printing to prepare shape memory objects with methacrylated macromonomers as raw materials, accompanied by great application potential in flexible and responsive circuits (Fig. 17a).131
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for fabrication of shape memory-based electrical devices by conductive ink printing.131 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of shape memory behaviour of polymer chains in the presence and absence of particles and EMI shielding mechanism of the multi-layered stack.132 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Electrical conductivity and multi-functionality of composite SMPs.133 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Origami and 4D printing of EDCs by DIW deformation heat treatment method: elastomeric lattices for origami by 3D printing; optical image of DIW of inks; origami of ceramic structures derived from 3D-printed elastomers; typical EDCs by 4D printing on prestretched precursors; ultimate ceramic structures annealed at 1300 °C.134 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic diagram of 4D active shape changes in building and ink performance; the process of limiting shape recovery triggered by an alternating magnetic field; potential applications.130 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) FDM printing process; wave-shaped and extended wave-shaped 4D printed primitives; 4D printed self-conforming device; MM lattice by 4D printing with self-folding capability.135 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) A periodic metastructure consisting of both active and passive components.137 Copyright 2020, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (h) Experimental and computational configurations of SMP meta-structures.138 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU), one of the polymer smart materials with shape memory characteristics, was employed by Menon et al. to realize microwave shielding by adding microwave active nanoparticles (Fig. 17b).132 However, the addition of high aspect ratio particles is expected to increase the stiffness and ultimately affect the shape memory performance. To improve this drawback, polyethylene glycol (PEG) was used as the pore-forming agent to adjust the concentration of PEG in the solution. The pore size of the porous polyurethane membrane was adjusted to 1–3 μm to promote the vacuum filtration of the nanoparticle aqueous solution through the porous structure. At a thickness of 400 μm, samples achieved a shielding effect of −32dB against EM waves, which can be applied to the self-expansion structure in the aerospace field owing to its shape memory characteristics.
An obvious disadvantage of SMPs is their relatively low resilience, resulting in relatively small form factors. Lightweight, micro-architecture composite SMPs can not only overcome this deficiency, but also offer functional properties like electrical conductivity with shape memory properties. In 2016, Jennifer et al. reported the development of thermosetting conductive SMP composite inks that can be 3D printed, as well as the addition of fiber-based fillers to enable functional changes in various shape state-induced devices and thermally driven shape changes (Fig. 17c).133
In 2018, Liu et al. converted elastomeric poly (dimethylsiloxane) matrix NCs into silicon oxycarbide matrix NCs, successfully realizing ceramic 4D-printed structures (Fig. 17d).134 Layered elastomer-derived ceramics (EDCs) could span length scales of three orders of magnitude from meters to centimeters. The research enabled high-resolution printing of complex and mechanically strong ceramics, which is of great breakthrough and epoch-making significance. 4D-printed EDCs can be applied in autonomous deformable structures, space exploration, aerospace propulsion components, electronic devices and high-temperature microelectromechanical systems.
The 4D active shape-changing structures based on shape memory polymers (SMPs) and shape memory nanocomposites (SMNC) can achieve not only spatial but also temporal changes, which has attracted more and more scientific attention. Wei et al. produced 4D active shape-changing structures with thermal and remote driving behaviors by DW printing using ultraviolet (UV) cross-linked polylactic acid-based inks as raw materials (Fig. 17e),130 which exhibited good shape memory performance and could realize mutual conversion between three-dimensional (3D) configurations of one dimensional (1D–3D), two-dimensional (2D–3D) and three dimensional (3D–3D)) configurations. More notably, the introduction of iron oxide enables the integration of 4D shape-changing objects with fast remote driving and magnetic guidance performances.
Adaptive MMs with performance-driven capabilities, which can be rendered straight to materials, were designed by Bodaghi et al. through FDM, by the exploitation of the thermodynamic properties of SMPs (Fig. 17f).135 By changing the parameters such as printing speed and liquefaction temperature, and controlling the hierarchical programming process and shape change, the realization of self-folding MMs was studied in detail; the method can be termed functional gradient 4D printing. The particular study is expected to promote the development of 4D printing technology, and open up the potential of design and development of functional structures with self-folding/coiling/conformity/deployment characteristics in a controlled way. Besides, Bodaghi's team introduced a direct approach in Abaqus's commercial finite element (FE) package to simulate the thermodynamic behavior of 4D printed adaptive composite structures. This computation method is not only simple but also with high accuracy.136 They also studied to design adaptive metastructures using 4D printing techniques, which can utilize resonant self-bending elements to filter vibration and noise and change the filtering range (Fig. 17g).137 Recently, a bimaterial-assisted meta-sandwich that can be applied in reversible energy absorption has also been developed and synthesized using FDM 4D printing (Fig. 17h).138
10. Novel antennas
10.1 3D printing of antennas
It is well known that high surface roughness seriously hinders the propagation of EM waves of metals. Garcia and co-workers successfully fabricated two horn antennas with Ku bands (12–15 GHz) by electron beam melting (EBM) 3D printing technology, with a surface finish of about 20–40 microns and good performance.
One all-metal antenna was synthesized by Zhang et al.139 using binder jetting/sintering and SLM with 316 L stainless steel and Cu-15Sn as raw materials, respectively (Fig. 18a). The antenna impedance bandwidth (|S11| < −20 dB) exhibits full band coverage. The antenna's gains in three bands, E-band from 60 to 90 GHz, D-band from 110 to 170 GHz, and H-band from 220 to 325 GHz, were greater than 22.5, 22 and 21.5 dBi, respectively. 3D printing technology is more environmentally friendly than metal horn antennas synthesized by traditional injection molding and micromachining methods; it offers lower costs and shorter turnaround times. 3D-printed antennas are further characterized by simpler processes and higher mechanical durability than their conventional metallic counterparts. Therefore, metal 3D printing technology has great potential in industrial batch production and prototype manufacturing. The dielectric lens can achieve high gains and wave velocity scanning in the millimeter-wave and terahertz regions due to extremely small feed loss. In 2015, Yi et al.140 3D-printed a type of dielectric lens with higher directivity by adding periodic anti-reflection structures for regulation (Fig. 18b). Finally, not only beam scanning in millimeter waves and terahertz region is realized, but also the possibility of lens working in other frequency ranges is provided. Wu's research group141 produced a new type of circularly polarized (CP) antenna that is different from the traditional Fresnel band planar antenna through 3D printing, whose lens is composed of sub-wavelength discrete dielectric cylinders located in the odd Fresnel region (Fig. 18c). This lens was made possible by the integration of dielectric anisotropic MMs, resulting in the realization of photonic radiation fed by its simple linear polarization (LP) open waveguide (OEWG) feed. The maximum gain of the modified antenna is 27.4 dBic, 0.9 dB larger than that of the traditional antenna. In 2018, Wu et al. proposed a 3D-printed dielectric reflection array of 40 × 40, whose cell contained a ground plan and a dielectric block (Fig. 18d).142 As a result, the maximum gain of the array is 31.3 dBi, accompanied by a 20.9% bandwidth gain. The significance of the study lies in the development of terahertz dielectric 3D-printed reflection arrays over the 220 GHz frequency. Nayeri et al. produced a low-loss, high-gain terahertz (THz) dielectric reflector antenna through polymer-injection 3D printing technology (Fig. 18e).143 The antenna featured dielectric elements of variable heights, which were suitable for low dielectric constant materials. Xu et al. achieved highly cost-effective antennas with complex and detailed designs in very short times by metal binder jetting (MBJ).144 A 10% bandwidth gain of 3 dB was realized, and the radiation efficiency was over 88%, in good agreement with the simulation results.
 Fig. 18  (a) Model of the SLM Cu-15Sn conical horn antenna. (b) Graphic model of lens phasing elements: without the antireflection structure and the boundary conditions in simulation. (b) With the antireflection structure. w = 2.5 mm, t = 0.95 mm, and g = 1.9 mm. (c) Diagram of the dielectric anisotropic MM and Formlabs suggested 3D printing method. (d) 3D printing reflectarray pattern. (e) The dielectric reflectarray elements. (f) Schematic diagram of an electrically small antenna with marked geometric parameters; optical profilometry scan and SEM image (inset).39 Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
Adams et al. proposed four novel electro-small antennas with different ka, working frequency and bending line size formed by conformal printing of concentrated silver nanoparticle inks on the outer (convex) or inner (concave) surfaces of hollow glass hemispheres (Fig. 18f).39 The challenges posed by surface substrates are greater than those of planar substrates, attributed to the constant variation of the normal of the curved surface. Therefore, in addition to the need for the deposition nozzle to be normal to the surface, the surface of the silver ink must also be strongly wet. As the nozzle diameter was reduced to 30 μm, the bending angle of the nozzle should be kept between 10 and 45°. After annealing, the printed sample exhibited a resistivity of 5 × 10−6 Ω cm. Besides, each antenna matches 50 Ω impedance at the operating frequency.
10.2 Application of MMs in novel antennas (5G/6G)

10.2.1 5G. 
In 2018, Li et al.145 fabricated dual-band S and K antennas based on metasurface aperture sharing, which allowed the two antennas to operate at the same aperture without interactions (Fig. 19a). After 3 × 3 metasurfaces being designed for the S band, the metasurfaces were discretized by the square ring subunit and the inner plate element for the barrier-free radiation of EM waves in the K band, ultimately exhibiting the function of frequency selection. The microstrip feed-groove-driven metasurface is utilized in the S band (3.2–4.05 GHz), and the 8 × 8 substrate integrated waveguide slot array antenna between the microstrip and metasurface was employed in the K band (25.22–26.46 GHz). The final S band and K band gains were 7.52 to 10.88 and 21.3 to 22.4 dBi, respectively. An improved aperture utilization in this study suggests great potential for 5G dual-frequency applications.
 Fig. 19  (a) Metasurface model and diagram of shared-aperture antenna. (b) Finalization and radiation pattern of a glide-symmetric metasurface: Luneburg lens with three ports. (c) Single printed bow-tie antenna loaded with H-shaped resonators, fed using a microstrip-to-SIW transition. (d) The exploded view of the antenna.144 Copyright 2020, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. (e) The diagram of the THz programming metasurface and control circuits; the metasurface is composed of a 24-element linear array, and each element is connected to a multichannel amplifier.148 Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. (f) General reflection array concept and graphene reflection unit.149 Copyright 2013, AIP Publishing. 
As the demand for data grows rapidly, the 5G wireless mode is developed. The corresponding data can only be achieved at higher frequency bands, where the spectra have not been used. When the free space attenuates and the operating frequency increases, directional antennas are required. These antennas can only be affordable if hardware-related circuits are reduced. That is, other circuits and phase shifters cannot be produced on a large scale. Traditional phase and active arrays are naturally not adopted. Because of the demand for high directional antennas with low circuit complexity based on 5G communications, lens and leakage antennas stand out. Oscar et al.146 elaborated on the work of the lens antenna and its interpretation from the optical and microwave aspects (Fig. 19b). Two innovative technologies, conversion optics and hypersurface, have great potential because of their ability to improve the work of traditional lens antennas. Conversion optics, also known as custom lenses, is used to improve the radiation performance of the entire antenna system; however, its cost is higher. Custom lenses can be fabricated by 3D printing with a low loss dielectric material as the raw material, thus reducing the cost obviously. Metasurfaces can not only be applied to low-cost two-dimensional lenses, but can also be used to produce all-metal lenses with lower losses than high-frequency media. This is critical for 5G communications, in the millimeter-wavelength region. Bandwidth is one of the disadvantages of the traditional metasurfaces, which can be improved by higher symmetry such as slip and torsion.
The substrate integrated waveguide (SIW)-fed butterfly antenna fabricated by Dadgarpour et al.147 consisted of a broken-line H-type electrical metamaterial resonator and a double-sided split-ring resonator (DSRR) (Fig. 19c). Ultimately, a single high gain antenna at 60 GHz was obtained. More notably, the eight components were combined into a high-gain 1 × 8 linear array SIW fed bow antenna loader and a magnetic resonator using a co-fed network feed. The reflection coefficient was less than 10 dB in the frequency range of 56–66 GHz. The maximum gain of the antenna array corresponded to 20.4 dBi at 62 GHz, significantly higher than that of a single antenna, 13.8 dBi. Within 56–65 GHz, the gain was relatively flat, exceeding 18 dBi. The maximum measured radiation efficiency of the antenna was 79%, accompanied by 87% maximum aperture efficiency.


10.2.2 6G. 
Technologies from 100 GHz to 1.0 THz have great potential in wireless communications for the upcoming 6G. Because carrier frequencies of this band can guarantee the transmission rate and channel capacity, increasing carrier frequencies is the key to ensure these two features. High gain antennas are the future trend; they can be used to compensate for the additional path loss and power limit caused by the large transmission loss of band in free space. To this end, 3D printing can achieve high precision, low cost and complex structure antenna manufacturing.
Xu's group proposed a resonant cavity antenna operating at 300 GHz based on a partially reflecting surface (PRS), where the radiation beam can be switched according to the operating frequency (Fig. 19d).144 In a recent study, Wu et al. designed a liquid crystal programmable metasurface that can dynamically control a terahertz beam with a maximum deflection angle of 32°,148 successfully realizing dynamic beam steering and beamforming at terahertz frequencies (Fig. 19e). This technique can be applied to terahertz wireless communications, computational imaging and target recognition. In 2013, Carrasco's group synthesized and tuned reflective array elements of square graphene sheets, which can regulate the terahertz phase (Fig. 19f).149 Also, the slow wave propagation supported by graphene greatly decreased the size of the unit, thus obtaining smaller inter-unit spacing, and finally, optimizing the performance of the array elements.

11. Summary and outlook
Compared to traditional manufacturing technologies, advanced 3D printing technologies exhibit high controllability, high sustainability and huge design flexibility, as well as the ability to form more sophisticated structures. 4D printing constitutes, essentially, the evolution and perfection of 3D printing, which unfolds new opportunities for intelligent and customized development in aerospace and electronic devices. MMs are special types of composite materials or structures with subwavelength structural arrangement characteristics, which facilitate the acquisition of supernormal physical properties by orderly designing the key physical dimensions of the material. In this review, we present the recent research progress in electrical MMs printed using 3D/4D printers in the fields of stealth and antennas. Emphasis is placed on the structural design of EMMs, selection of absorbing base, category of absorbing materials, 3D printing types and EM absorption performance. In addition, Table 1 analyses and summarizes the inherent advantages and disadvantages of the technologies and the main achievements in recent years. Among the many 3D techniques, FDM is commonly used, but the disadvantage is that it can only squeeze thermoplastic materials at high temperatures. SLS can utilize a variety of materials, such as polymers, nylon, metals, gypsum and other powder materials, but the printed devices have a rough surface, and cannot directly shape high-performance metal and ceramic parts. SLA and DLP are considered to be 3D printing techniques that reach higher standards in terms of model complexity and accuracy. Unlike being limited to a single spot like SLA, DLP can project and aggregate a whole layer with the whole layer formed at one time. However, these two printing technologies also have problems to be solved, namely, the limited scope of printed materials.
The main challenges of 3D printing for ceramics are the layer-by-layer appearance and limited material selection. So more printable materials need to be developed to provide more possibilities for making more devices with excellent electrical properties. Moreover, in many cases, on the basis of 3D printing macroscopic structures, the generation of wave absorbents through the regulation of micro-structures is realized. Compared with directly printing the MM structure with wave absorption performance, the collaborative design of the macrostructure and microstructure is obviously cumbersome. Therefore, developing more directly printable wave-absorbing MMs is an extremely promising direction.
While numerous improvements are still required before commercial applications, MM structures with sophisticated and porous 3D printing are particularly useful in EM absorption stealth. Considering the multiple reflections and scattering of electromagnetic waves in sophisticated structures, which can increase the chances of electromagnetic waves being dissipated by dielectric materials, more detailed sophisticated and porous MM structures as well as higher resolution 3D printing technology should be developed, to achieve a series of structural and functional breakthroughs.
The future recommendations for 3D/4D printed MMs for wave absorption and antennas are as follows: on the one hand, it is difficult for the existing 3D printing technologies to realize the manufacturing of sophisticated structures of multiple materials, so the synchronous printing production of two materials or more materials will integrate the advantages of different types of materials to achieve the large steps of printing electric metamaterial performance. For example, the synchronous printing process of dielectric and metallic materials helps in promoting the innovative design and realization of resonant MMs. On the other hand, at present, the printing MMs mainly take EM characteristic regulation as the main design goal, but its mechanical, thermal and other related properties are generally not considered in the structural design and in the printing process, which cannot meet the actual application requirements. Consequently, multi-functional coupling design and printing technology need to be developed to realize two-functional composite MM structures such as electric/EM, mechanical/EM, and thermal/EM double-function composite structures, electric/thermal/EM, electric/mechanical/EM, and mechanical/thermal/EM three-function composite MM structures, and electric/mechanical/thermal/EM multi-function composite MM structures. What's more, MM devices, which can react with the change of external environments, such as deformation and frequency modulation, put forward new requirements for structural performance. Therefore, with 4D printing technology, the manufacturing of smart materials is the forefront development direction of electrical MM manufacturing in the future.
Author contributions
Dou Yang: investigation, conceptualization, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing, and data curation. Hui Mei: conceptualization, methodology, and supervision. Li Yao: investigation and writing – review & editing. Wenqiang Yang: investigation and formal analysis. Yongtao Yao: funding acquisition. Laifei Cheng: validation and resources. Litong Zhang: validation and resources. Konstantinos G. Dassios: writing – original draft.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52072306), the Science Foundation of the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environments (6142905192509) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51772246). We would like to thank the Analytical & Testing Center of Northwestern Polytechnical University for SEM and TEM.
References
E. Calabrò, Sustainability, 2018, 10, 3326 CrossRef .
F. Wu, M. Sun, W. Jiang, K. Zhang, A. Xie, Y. Wang and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 82–88 RSC .
K. T. Sullivan, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, A. E. Gash, D. B. Kolesky, J. D. Kuntz, J. A. Lewis and C. M. Spadaccini, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1934–1939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, X. Xie, Y. Pang and S. Kobayashi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1727–1735 RSC .
B. Qu, C. Zhu, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3730–3735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Viaene, V. Ginis, J. Danckaert and P. Tassin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 085429 CrossRef .
S. W. Ren, H. Meng, F. X. Xin and T. J. Lu, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 014901 CrossRef .
N. Landy and D. R. Smith, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 25–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Veselago, Phys.-Usp., 1968, 10, 509–514 CrossRef .
R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Science, 2001, 292, 77–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Berman, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2002, 66, 067603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cho, Science, 2006, 314, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Seddon, Science, 2003, 302, 1537–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, P. Qi, X. Wang, Y. Lu, X. Li, R. Tu, S. Bangsaruntip, D. Mann, L. Zhang and H. Dai, Science, 2006, 314, 974–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 435–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schurig, J. J. Mock, B. J. Justice, S. A. Cummer, J. B. Pendry, A. F. Starr and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 314, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Y. Wen, H.-W. Zhang, Y.-S. Xie, Q.-H. Yang and Y.-L. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 241111 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, K. H. Fung, J. Xu, H. Ma, Y. Jin, S. He and N. X. Fang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1443–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Enoch, G. Tayeb, P. Sabouroux, N. Guerin and P. Vincent, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 213902 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-X. Wang, L.-L. Wang, G.-Z. Wang, W.-Q. Huang, X.-F. Li and X. Zhai, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 2014, 26, 111–114 Search PubMed .
L. Xin-Yan, X. Zhong-Yin, Z. Xiao-Xia, T. Jing-Yao and X. Kai-Kai, PIERS, 2016, 3084–3087 Search PubMed .
H. Tao, C. M. Bingham, A. C. Strikwerda, D. Pilon, D. Shrekenhamer, N. I. Landy, K. Fan, X. Zhang, W. J. Padilla and R. D. Averitt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 241103 CrossRef .
G. Chao, Q. Shao-Bo, P. Zhi-Bin, Z. Hang, X. Zhuo, B. Peng, P. Wei-Dong and L. Bao-Qin, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2010, 27, 117802 CrossRef .
N. I. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Landy, C. M. Bingham, T. Tyler, N. Jokerst, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 125104 CrossRef .
S. Bhattacharyya, S. Ghosh, D. Chaurasiya and K. V. Srivastava, IET Microw. Antennas Propag, 2015, 9, 1160–1166 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, S. Bhattacharyya, D. Chaurasiya and K. V. Srivastava, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2015, 14, 1172–1175 Search PubMed .
S. Bhattacharyya and K. Vaibhav Srivastava, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 064508 CrossRef .
J. Lee and S. Lim, Electron. Lett., 2011, 47, 8 CrossRef .
H. Wakatsuchi, J. Paul and C. Christopoulos, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2012, 60, 5743–5752 Search PubMed .
P. V. Tuong, J. W. Park, J. Y. Rhee, K. W. Kim, W. H. Jang, H. Cheong and Y. P. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 081122 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, Y. Nie and R. Gong, Opt. Laser Technol., 2013, 48, 415–421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Duan, W. Zhang, W. Wang and B. Zhang, Mater. Rev., 2016, 30, 157–161 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Mei, P. Chang and L. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10670–10694 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Mei, P. Chang, C. Chen, L. Cheng and K. G. Dassios, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 240–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, H. Mei, P. Chang, M. Lu and L. Cheng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chang, H. Mei, S. Zhou, K. G. Dassios and L. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4230–4258 RSC .
J. J. Adams, E. B. Duoss, T. F. Malkowski, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, R. G. Nuzzo, J. T. Bernhard and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1335–1340 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Watts, X. Liu and W. J. Padilla, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(OP98-120), OP181 Search PubMed .
H. Mei, D. Yang, L. Yao, W. Yang, X. Zhao, Y. Yao, L. Cheng, L. Zhang and K. G. Dassios, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 5411–5424 RSC .
J. S. Chohan, R. Singh, K. S. Boparai, R. Penna and F. Fraternali, Composites, Part B, 2017, 117, 138–149 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Mohamed, S. H. Masood and J. L. Bhowmik, Adv. Manuf., 2015, 3, 42–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Zhou, J. Gou and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2017, 110, 442–458 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Melchels, J. Feijen and D. W. Grijpma, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6121–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Travitzky, A. Bonet, B. Dermeik, T. Fey, I. Filbert-Demut, L. Schlier, T. Schlordt and P. Greil, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2014, 16, 729–754 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yap, C. K. Chua, Z. L. Dong, Z. H. Liu, D. Q. Zhang, L. E. Loh and S. L. Sing, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 041101 Search PubMed .
B. Utela, D. Storti, R. Anderson and M. Ganter, J. Manuf. Process., 2008, 10, 96–104 CrossRef .
H. Lee, C. H. J. Lim, M. J. Low, N. Tham, V. M. Murukeshan and Y.-J. Kim, Int. J. Precis Eng Manuf-Green Technol., 2017, 4, 307–322 CrossRef .
J. Z. Manapat, Q. Chen, P. Ye and R. C. Advincula, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1600553 CrossRef .
H. Mei, X. Zhao, S. Zhou, D. Han, S. Xiao and L. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 940–945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arbaoui, P. Agaciak, A. Chevalier, V. Laur, A. Maalouf, J. Ville, P. Roquefort, T. Aubry and P. Queffelec, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 4988–4996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zuo, X. Su, X. Li, Z. Yao, T. Yu, J. Zhou, J. Li, J. Lu and J. Ding, Carbon, 2020, 167, 62–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Ryan, M. P. Down and C. E. Banks, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126162 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oliveri, D. H. Werner and A. Massa, Proc. IEEE, 2015, 103, 1034–1056 CAS .
T. D. Ngo, A. Kashani, G. Imbalzano, K. T. Q. Nguyen and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2018, 143, 172–196 CrossRef CAS .
G.-H. Yang, X.-X. Liu, Y.-L. Lv, J.-H. Fu, Q. Wu and X. Gu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 17E523 CrossRef .
L. Lingyun, H. Changshou and G. Biao, Mater. Rev., 2008, 24, 1–3 Search PubMed .
H. Luo, X. Hu, Y. Qiu and P. Zhou, Solid State Commun., 2014, 188, 5–11 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhirihin, C. Simovski, P. Belov and S. Glybovski, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2017, 16, 2626–2629 Search PubMed .
G.-D. Wang, J.-F. Chen, X. Hu, Z.-Q. Chen and M. Liu, Prog. Electromagn. Res., 2014, 145, 175–183 CrossRef .
Y. Liu and X. Zhao, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2014, 13, 1473–1476 Search PubMed .
Z. Jacob, L. V. Alekseyev and E. Narimanov, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 8247–8256 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Govyadinov and V. A. Podolskiy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 155108 CrossRef .
E. Narimanov, M. A. Noginov, H. Li and Y. Barnakov, CLEOC, 2010, QPDA6 Search PubMed .
W. Tang, Z. Mei and T. Cui, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2015, 58, 127001 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Wu, L. Liang, G. Zhou, B. Jin and Y. Feng, Sci. China-Inf. Sci., 2014, 57, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Xiong, J.-S. Hong, C.-M. Luo and L.-L. Zhong, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 064109 CrossRef .
F. Ding, Y. Cui, X. Ge, Y. Jin and S. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 103506 CrossRef .
X. Yin, C. Long, J. Li, H. Zhu, L. Chen, J. Guan and X. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Long, S. Yin, W. Wang, W. Li, J. Zhu and J. Guan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kronberger and P. Soboll, Proc., Eur. Microwave Conf., 2016, 596–599 Search PubMed .

          X. Lleshi, R. Grelot, H. Thi Quynh Van, B. Loiseaux, D. Lippens and Ieee, Proc., Eur. Microwave Conf.,  2019, pp. 678–681 Search PubMed .
S. Mishra, P. Katti, S. Kumar and S. Bose, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 384–394 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, L. Heng, S. Wang and Y. Zou, Appl. Phys. Express, 2019, 12, 057003 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Heng, S. Wang, Y. Zou and Z. Tang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 285002 CrossRef .
J. Ren and J. Y. Yin, Materials, 2018, 11, 1249 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Zhang and Y. Zou, Opt. Laser Technol., 2020, 124, 105972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mingjuan, L. Guangxuan, Z. Shuyuan and L. Xue, Mater. Rep., 2019, 33, 613–616 Search PubMed .
W. Li, T. Wu, W. Wang, P. Zhai and J. Guan, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 044110 CrossRef .
A. N. Lagarkov and K. N. Rozanov, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2082–2092 CrossRef CAS .
M. Itoh, M. Terada, F. Shogano and K.-I. Machida, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 063911 CrossRef .
W. Li, T. Wu, W. Wang, J. Guan and P. Zhai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 022903 CrossRef .
B. Wang, J. Wei, L. Qiao, T. Wang and F. Li, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2012, 324, 761–765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang-Sung, R. Jung-Woong and S. Sang-Yung, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 1984, 32, 61–69 CrossRef .
O. Acher and S. Dubourg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 104440 CrossRef .
O. Acher and A. L. Adenot, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 11324–11327 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, F. Kang, C. Dong, Z. Zhou, X. Liu and H. Ding, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 115, 627–635 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharyya, S. Ghosh, D. Chaurasiya and K. V. Srivastava, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 118, 207–215 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Ma, W. Sun, F. Ding, Q. He, L. Zhou and Y. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 021102 CrossRef .
D. J. Jennings and J. P. McGeehan, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 1999, 47, 715–721 CrossRef .
D. Zhou, X. Huang and Z. Du, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2017, 16, 133–136 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Xiong, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, C. Q. Wang, X. Z. Huang, F. Zhang and D. Zhou, Acta Phys. Sin., 2018, 67, 8 Search PubMed .
J. Czyżewski, P. Burzyński, K. Gaweł and J. Meisner, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2009, 209, 5281–5285 CrossRef .
S. Sandron, B. Heery, V. Gupta, D. A. Collins, E. P. Nesterenko, P. N. Nesterenko, M. Talebi, S. Beirne, F. Thompson, G. G. Wallace, D. Brabazon, F. Regan and B. Paull, Analyst, 2014, 139, 6343–6347 RSC .
R. Yahiaoui, S. Tan, L. Cong, R. Singh, F. Yan and W. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 083103 CrossRef .
M. Kim, H. Jeong, D. Lim, S. Ghosh and S. Lim, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., 2019, 62, 1709–1715 CrossRef .
B. Suh and S. Jeon, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., 2018, 60, 1619–1622 CrossRef .
A. Delfini, M. Albano, A. Vricella, F. Santoni, G. Rubini, R. Pastore and M. Marchetti, Materials, 2018, 11, 1730 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yin, X. Tian, Z. Shang and D. Li, Mater. Lett., 2019, 239, 132–135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yin, J. Doyhamboure--Fouquet, X. Tian and D. Li, Composites, Part B, 2018, 132, 178–187 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, M. S. Tong, M. Wang and J. J. Adams, Prog. Electromagn. Res. Symp., 2019, 332–336 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, D. Lee, S. Eom and S. Lim, Sensors, 2016, 16, 521 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Lu, M. Chang, Y. Wei, Y. Fu, Q. Feng, L. Li and S. Zhuang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 305105 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Song, Z. Zhou, L. C. Wang, X. D. Cheng, M. Chen, R. He, H. Chen, Y. Yang and D. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43179–43187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hu, J. Cao, W. Li, C. Zhang, T. Wu, Q. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Wang and J. Guan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700109 CrossRef .
X. Huang, H. Yang, Z. Shen, J. Chen, H. Lin and Z. Yu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 385304 CrossRef .
P. J. Bradley, M. O. M. Torrico, C. Brennan and Y. Hao, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14490 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ren and J. Y. Yin, Opt. Mater. Express, 2018, 8, 2060 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Q. Liang, Z. Jiang, W. Zhou, T. Chen and D. Li, J. Mech. Eng., 2019, 55, 226–232 Search PubMed .
A. Frick and A. Rochman, Polym. Test., 2004, 23, 413–417 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Zhang and Y. Zou, Phys. E, 2020, 120, 114017 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, L. Yan, H. Ma, Y. Fan, J. Wang, M. Feng and S. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4817 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Z. Cheng, M. L. Huang, H. R. Chen, Z. Z. Guo, X. S. Mao and R. Z. Gong, Materials, 2017, 10, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-J. He, S.-T. Yan, Q.-X. Ma, Q.-F. Zhang, P. Jia, F.-M. Wu and J.-X. Jiang, Opt. Commun., 2015, 340, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and S. A. Tretyakov, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2019, 67, 2452–2461 Search PubMed .
G. D. Wang, M. H. Liu, X. W. Hu, L. H. Kong, L. L. Cheng and Z. Q. Chen, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2013, 86, 304 Search PubMed .
S. Xiao, H. Mei, D. Han and L. Cheng, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 11475–11483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mei, W. Yang, X. Zhao, L. Yao, Y. Yao, C. Chen and L. Cheng, Mater. Des., 2021, 197, 109271 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Saxton, K. E. Knockenhauer, R. L. Wolfson, L. Chantranupong, M. E. Pacold, T. Wang, T. U. Schwartz and D. M. Sabatini, Science, 2016, 351, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Rozanov, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2000, 48, 1230–1234 CrossRef .
Y. Xiang-long and Z. Ji, J. Mater. Eng., 2016, 44, 110–128 Search PubMed .
A. Tennant and B. Chambers, Smart Mater. Struct., 2004, 13, 122–125 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Hou and J. Chen, J. Beijing Univ. Aeronaut. Astronaut., 2015, 41, 1853–1858 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, Y. He, P. Kong, J. Li, H. Xu, L. Miao, S. Bie and J. Jiang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 184903 CrossRef .
F. Hu, Y. Qian, Z. Li, J. Niu, K. Nie, X. Xiong, W. Zhang and Z. Peng, J. Opt., 2013, 15, 055101 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Xia, Z. Lu and Q. Fu, J. Chongqing Norm. Univ., Nat. Sci. Ed., 2014, 37, 76–82 CAS .
H. Lv, Y. Guo, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, G. Ji and Z. J. Xu, Carbon, 2016, 110, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. D'Aloia, M. D'Amore and M. S. Sarto, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2016, 64, 2527–2531 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, Q. Zhang, Y. Yao, L. Liu, Y. Liu and J. Leng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 876–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zarek, M. Layani, I. Cooperstein, E. Sachyani, D. Cohn and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4449–4454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Menon, G. Madras and S. Bose, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 590–600 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Rodriguez, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, T. S. Wilson, C. M. Spadaccini and J. P. Lewicki, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27933 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Zhao, G. Wu and J. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bodaghi, A. R. Damanpack and W. H. Liao, Mater. Des., 2017, 135, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bodaghi, R. Noroozi, A. Zolfagharian, M. Fotouhi and S. Norouzi, Materials, 2019, 12, 1353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Noroozi, M. Bodaghi, H. Jafari, A. Zolfagharian and M. Fotouhi, Polymers, 2020, 12, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bodaghi, A. Serjouei, A. Zolfagharian, M. Fotouhi, H. Rahman and D. Durand, Int. J. Mech. Sci., 2020, 173, 105451 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, Z. Zhan, Y. Cao, H. Gulan, P. Linner, J. Sun, T. Zwick and H. Zirath, IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 592–600 CAS .
H. Yi, S.-W. Qu, K.-B. Ng, C. H. Chan and X. Bai, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2016, 64, 442–449 Search PubMed .
G.-B. Wu, Y.-S. Zeng, K. F. Chan, S.-W. Qu and C. H. Chan, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2019, 67, 4429–4437 Search PubMed .
M. D. Wu, B. Li, Y. Zhou, D. L. Guo, Y. Liu, F. Wei and X. Lv, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2018, 17, 2094–2098 Search PubMed .
P. Nayeri, M. Liang, R. A. Sabory-Garcia, M. Tuo, F. Yang, M. Gehm, H. Xin and A. Z. Elsherbeni, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2014, 62, 2000–2008 Search PubMed .
R. Xu, S. Gao, B. S. Izquierdo, C. Gu, P. Reynaert, A. Standaert, G. J. Gibbons, W. Bosch, M. E. Gadringer and D. Li, IEEE Access, 2020, 8, 57615–57629 Search PubMed .
T. Li and Z. N. Chen, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2018, 66, 6742–6750 Search PubMed .
O. Quevedo-Teruel, M. Ebrahimpouri and F. Ghasemifard, IEEE Commun. Mag., 2018, 56, 36–41 Search PubMed .
A. Dadgarpour, M. A. Antoniades, A. Sebak, A. A. Kishk, M. Sharifi Sorkherizi and T. A. Denidni, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2020, 68, 3673–3684 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Shen, S. Ge, B. Chen, Z. Shen, T. Wang, C. Zhang, W. Hu, K. Fan, W. Padilla, Y. Lu, B. Jin, J. Chen and P. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 131104 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carrasco, M. Tamagnone and J. Perruisseau-Carrier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 104103 CrossRef .
X. Lleshi, T. Q. Van Hoang, B. Loiseaux and D. Lippens, IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., 2021, 20, 28–32 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Dou Yang
	Dou Yang received her BS in physics in 2017 from Hebei Normal University (Shijiazhuang, China) and MS in physics in 2020 from Shaanxi Normal University (Xi’an, China). She is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under the supervision of Prof. Mei Hui. Her research interests focus on the preparation and optimization of novel 3D-printed electromagnetic materials.

Hui Mei
	Hui Mei is currently a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University. He completed his PhD in Materials Science at Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research interests include the 3D printing of micro-/nanostructured composite materials and the construction of micro-/nanointerfaces.

Li Yao
	Li Yao received his BS in material physics from Southwest University in 2012 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University in 2015. He is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under Professor Mei Hui. His research focuses on realizing radar-infrared compatible multiband stealth characteristics based on ceramic-based metamaterials.

Wenqiang Yang
	Wenqiang Yang studied Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University and received his BS in 2020. He is currently pursuing a master's degree at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University under the supervision of Prof. Mei Hui. His current research focuses on 3D printing of electromagnetic absorbing ceramics with novel metamaterial designs.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of AMMs printed using various 3D printers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The plane view and stereogram of the gradient structural AMM.57 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (b) Diagram of the resonant unit of the AMM. (c) Scheme of the single unit cell and the AMM with a four-layer square patch structure.59 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

Frequency-selective surface
Wrapping metal particles with brass filler wire	Circular	2.13 mm	FDM	For 10 GHz	
72

Metal–dielectric multilayer structure
Electrified filament and an ABS-based commercial filament	Pyramidal	7.8 mm	FDM	Around 90% in 7.6–17.4 GHz	
150

Polymer mesh as the sacrificial layer
PLA	Macroporous	1.4 mm	FDM	45 dB in 12–18 GHz (shielding)	
74

ABS absorbent
Carbon-loaded ABS	Cylindrical	9.37 mm	FDM	3.9–12 GHz	
77

Carbon-loaded ABS	Pyramidal	6.5 mm	FDM	5.3–18 GHz	
78

CIP absorbent
Powder mixture of nylon and CIP	Multilayer square	1.89 mm	SLS	8–18 GHz	
92

Powder mixture of nylon and CIP	Multilayer rectangular	4.7 mm	SLS	4–18 GHz	
93

PLA absorbent
PLA	Stacked square	6 mm	DLP	For 1.9 GHz	
97

PLA filament	Flat	11.55 mm	FDM	91% at 10.81 GHz	
98

Graphene composite absorbent
PLA and RGO	Wooden pile	5.6 mm	FDM	4.5–40 GHz	
100

Gradient index
Photosensitive resin, ferromagnetic rubber and aluminum alloy	Layered shell	62 mm	SLA	12–18 GHz	
101

Liquid metal-filled absorber
Formlabs Clear, EGaIn and NaOH solution	Flat	
	
	Four tunable states (3–5 GHz)	
102

PDMS and EGaIn	Channel	
	FDM	Moving from 18.5 to 18.65 GHz	
103

PLA and GaInSn	Cylindrical	
	FDM	Single, dual-band switching	
104

Wax-based composites
Verowhite, carbonized cotton and wax	Pyramidal	11 mm	SLA	7–40 and 75–110 GHz	
105

Water-based absorber
UVlight photosensitive resin and distilled water	Cross channel	5.6 mm	SLA	8.1–22.9 GHz	
107

VC810 transparent photopolymer and distilled water	Cylindrical	13 mm	SLA	8–18 GHz	
108

Resin, PMAA and distilled water	Cylindrical + channel	5.6 mm	SLA	5.58–24.21 GHz	
109

PLA and distilled water	Square cavity	4.6 mm	FDM	8.2–30 GHz	
110

TPU and distilled water	Inlay groove	4 mm	
	5.9–25.6 GHz	
75

Graphene oxide aqueous solution-based absorber
PTFE	Circular and cross	
	
	5.2–18 GHz	
112

Honeycomb PLA-based absorber
PLA with resistor patches	Hexagonal	15.51 mm	
	3.53–24 GHz	
113

Traditional ceramic-based composite absorber
Al2O3 and SiCw	Honeycomb	3.5 mm	SLA	8.2 to 12.4 GHz	
51

Al2O3, CNT, SiCnw and SiOC	Twisted cross	3.2 mm	SLA	8.2 to 12.4 GHz	
119

Polymer-derived ceramic absorber
SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Twelve coordination	3.2 mm	DLP	4.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41

SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Oblique honeycomb	2.8 mm	DLP	3.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41

SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Cross convex	3.0 mm	DLP	4.0 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41

SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Cross concave	2.8 mm	DLP	3.9 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41

SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Series	2.6 mm	DLP	3.3 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41

SiOC, β-SiC and nano-graphite	Parallel	3.0 mm	DLP	3.6 GHz bandwidth (X-band)	
41


Fused deposition modeling	Low cost, fast speed and simple process	Layered appearance, poor surface quality, weak mechanical properties and limited extrusion temperature	A metasurface absorber with a metal-medium pyramidal structure;150 a macroporous structure with a polymer mesh as the sacrificial layer in the laminate;74 ABS polymer absorbers;77 a composite AMM structure made up of PLA polymer cavity and distilled water filling110
Selective laser sintering	Fine resolution and no need for supporting structures	Expensive, rough surface and slow printing	CIP-based composite AMM with an impedance conical structure;92 CIP-based three-layer broadband AMM with different cell sizes93
Stereolithography	High resolution, low cost, high efficieny, good surface quality and easy to process	Relatively slow speed and limited scope of printed materials	Gradient index AMM;101 water-injected all-dielectric ultra-wideband AMM;107 cylindrical–water–resonator-based ultra-broadband microwave absorber;109 honeycomb-structured Al2O3/SiCw composite AMM with different angles;51 alumina/carbon nanotubes/SiC nanowires/SiOC composites with distorted cross MM structures119
Digital light processing	High resolution, low cost, high efficieny, good surface quality and easy to process	Relatively fast speed and limited scope of printed materials	Parallel and series structures of PDCs–SiOC41

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structure of the 10 GHz FSS AMM. (b) Top and side views of a 3D-printed AMM.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A ray-tracing program has been utilized to obtain ray trajectories in the cloak and a point charge located near the cloaked sphere.19 Copyright 2006, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Diagram of a 3D printer and images of a PLA mesh printed by FDM and a scheme of fabrication of the laminate and etching of the polymer mesh.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Prospective, side and top views of the absorber and diagram of the whole dielectric–resonator-based absorber.77 Copyright 2018, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (b) Perspective and front views of the structure of the pyramidal absorber and absorption comparison between flat conductive ABS and conductive ABS-based pyramidal absorbers; schematic diagram of the experimental equipment and the absorption spectrum.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Model of the AMM and geometry of the unit cell. (b) Model of the AMM with a three-layer square structure. (c) Equivalent multi-layer structure model (left) and effective model (right) of the AMM.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Top, side and bird views of the unit cell model of the AMM; photograph of the fabricated specimen.97 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Top and side views of the unit cell; schematic diagram of the fabrication of AMM.98 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Model of unit cells and photograph of the 3D-printed specimen; RL of the six specimens and 2D representation of RL for the composite AMM with an RGO content of 2 wt%.100 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Photographs of fabricated GRINRAS: top and local views of the ring GRIN AMM.101 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Periodic structure of the tunable frequency selective absorber. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of AMM on PDMS.103 Copyright 2016, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of meta-structure. Photographs of (b) commercial cotton. (c) CC upon carbonization. (d) Mixture of CC/wax in a 400 mL beaker. (e) 3D-printed polymer patterned shell. (f) The meta-structure based on CC/wax and 3D-printed polymer patterned shell. (g) RL of the as-fabricated meta-structure.105 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic and side view of the all-dielectric MM; absorption spectra of five different models. (b) The three-dimensional printed AMM structure on a 3D printer to a height of 13 mm; the geometry and makeup of the single unit cell; absorption performance over the bandwidth of 8–18 GHz for 0–40 degrees.108 Copyright 2018, Sci. Rep. (c) Exploded side and top views of the unit cell; diagram of the cylindrical–water–resonator-based absorber.109 Copyright 2018, Optical Society of America. (d) Model of the unit cell and wide-angle absorption characteristics.110 Copyright 2019, Chin. J. Mech. Eng. (e) The conceptual model of the water-based AMM and the structures of the unit cell of designed water-based MM called after Model III.75 Copyright 2019, The Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The diagram of the AMM and its cross-section. (b) The absorption spectrum of the fabricated MM based on GOAS. (c) MM with both GOAS circle and GOAS cross (M1), only GOAS circle (M2) and only GOAS cross (M3); the absorption spectrum of M1, M2, and M3.112 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Unit cell diagram, honeycomb sample for compressive test and specimen of the three-dimensional MMA. (b) Reflectivity results for vertical incident waves. (c) The compressive behaviors of a 3D-printed PLA honeycomb.113 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Diagram of the metasurface pattern with meandered slots. (b) 2D array, front view and perspective view of the designed six-band polarization-insensitive terahertz perfect AMM.114 Copyright 2017, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (c) Diagrams and geometric parameters of the MA unit cell, two patches, three patches and four patches. (d) Top and cross-sectional view of the unit cell structure and propagation direction for the terahertz AMM and polarization of EM waves. (e) Dependence of the absorption spectra on the size of the saw-shaped annular patch and metamaterial-layer number.115 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the processing procedure for 3D-printed Al2O3/SiCw composites; results of the reflection coefficient of the specimen with best EM performance; comparison of EAB and RCmin at an optimal thickness between 3D-printed composites with varying angles.51 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Representative SEM images of the Al2O3/CNTs/SiCnw/SiOC composite with 5 wt% CNTs and pictures of 3D-printed twisted cross AMM and unit cells with different torsion angles. (c) Schematic for the EM wave absorption mechanisms of the composite with a twisted cross MM structure; the reflection coefficient of the composite AMM in the X-band with different contents of CNTs.119 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) AM of PDCs: UV-curable preceramic monomers are mixed with photoinitiator; the resin is exposed to UV light in an SLA printer; a preceramic polymer part; pyrolysis converts the polymer into a ceramic.120 Copyright 2016, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Hydrolytic condensation of MK siloxane with silane coupling agent KH-570 and resin structure of ceramic precursor of siloxane after UV-curing; (c) pictures of 3D-printed porous structural PDCs–SiOC: twelve coordination and 45°-oblique honeycomb. (d) Pictures of 3D-printed PDCs–SiOC with double-layer impedance gradient structures: cross convex/flat structure and cross concave/flat structure. (e) Schematic diagram for the absorbing mechanisms of PDCs–SiOC with series and parallel structures.41 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for fabrication of shape memory-based electrical devices by conductive ink printing.131 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of shape memory behaviour of polymer chains in the presence and absence of particles and EMI shielding mechanism of the multi-layered stack.132 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Electrical conductivity and multi-functionality of composite SMPs.133 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Origami and 4D printing of EDCs by DIW deformation heat treatment method: elastomeric lattices for origami by 3D printing; optical image of DIW of inks; origami of ceramic structures derived from 3D-printed elastomers; typical EDCs by 4D printing on prestretched precursors; ultimate ceramic structures annealed at 1300 °C.134 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic diagram of 4D active shape changes in building and ink performance; the process of limiting shape recovery triggered by an alternating magnetic field; potential applications.130 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) FDM printing process; wave-shaped and extended wave-shaped 4D printed primitives; 4D printed self-conforming device; MM lattice by 4D printing with self-folding capability.135 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) A periodic metastructure consisting of both active and passive components.137 Copyright 2020, MDPI Open Access Publishing. (h) Experimental and computational configurations of SMP meta-structures.138 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Model of the SLM Cu-15Sn conical horn antenna. (b) Graphic model of lens phasing elements: without the antireflection structure and the boundary conditions in simulation. (b) With the antireflection structure. w = 2.5 mm, t = 0.95 mm, and g = 1.9 mm. (c) Diagram of the dielectric anisotropic MM and Formlabs suggested 3D printing method. (d) 3D printing reflectarray pattern. (e) The dielectric reflectarray elements. (f) Schematic diagram of an electrically small antenna with marked geometric parameters; optical profilometry scan and SEM image (inset).39 Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Metasurface model and diagram of shared-aperture antenna. (b) Finalization and radiation pattern of a glide-symmetric metasurface: Luneburg lens with three ports. (c) Single printed bow-tie antenna loaded with H-shaped resonators, fed using a microstrip-to-SIW transition. (d) The exploded view of the antenna.144 Copyright 2020, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. (e) The diagram of the THz programming metasurface and control circuits; the metasurface is composed of a 24-element linear array, and each element is connected to a multichannel amplifier.148 Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. (f) General reflection array concept and graphene reflection unit.149 Copyright 2013, AIP Publishing.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
