Development of advanced materials for cleaner energy generation through fuel cells  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NJ03746J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ03746J
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 19977-19995Development of advanced materials for cleaner energy generation through fuel cells

        
          
            Priscilla Hyacinth 
            Cyril
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Govindachetty 
            Saravanan
          
        
      *
      Chennai Zonal Centre, CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-NEERI), CSIR-Madras Complex, Taramani, Chennai-600 113, India. E-mail: g_saravanan@neeri.res.in
Received 
      24th July 2020
    , Accepted 26th October 2020First published on 27th October 2020AbstractAs per the new policy scenario on primary energy, it is anticipated that fossil fuels will continue to meet 74% of the required energy demands, which would emit greenhouse gases (GHG) into the environment. However, our dependence on fossil fuels can be reduced significantly through the adoption of sustainable goals to meet the energy demands, particularly in the transportation sector. The implementation of decarbonization technologies based on renewable energy resources in the transportation sector are vital to create zero emission zones. The use of fuel cells in the transportation sector holds promise as a sustainable option for the generation of cleaner energy along with cumulative lesser GHG emissions. In this article, the state-of-the-art and current advancements in the fuel cells pertinent to the production and purification methods of hydrogen (H2) and development of materials are discussed. In particular, the material developments and their performance as well as the limitations related to preferential oxidation of carbon monoxide, H2 separation membranes, electrolysis, photocatalytic water splitting for H2 production, storage, and transportation using liquid organics, fuel cell membranes, and catalysts for electrodes for the fuel cells are focused in detail.
Introduction
It has been widely accepted that the global average mean temperature increased between 0.8 and 1.2 °C compared with pre-industrial levels (1850–1900) due to greenhouse gases (GHG) emitted most likely from anthropogenic activities and it is anticipated that there could be a 0.1 to 0.3 °C increment in the global average temperature per every decade if the GHG emissions continue at this current rate. Humans from several parts of the world are largely affected by 2 °C warming due to extended droughts, floods, sea level raise, bio-diversity loss, etc.1 Efforts have been initiated globally to maintain the global average mean temperature below 1.5 °C as agreed at the Paris summit on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by achieving sustainable development goals.2 The adoption of renewable energies for various needs is one of the best possible ways to reduce the GHG emissions so as to decrease the global average temperature as scalable, cleaner energy options are available at affordable cost now, which enables the world to have a more resilient economy.3
Although there should be an increase of 3-fold in the installations based on the renewables than that used in current installations, the share of fossil fuels will be 74% due to the increased demand of world primary energy as predicted in the new policy scenario, which will be decreased to 60% with the adoption of sustainable development goals to meet the energy demand by 2040.4 It is anticipated that energy-related CO2 emissions will be reduced by 45% in 2040 due to the likely wide acceptance of decarbonization technologies that would reach 85% compared to current technologies. In 2040, the transportation sector will become the largest CO2 emission sector, followed by the industries and power sector even after the adoption of decarbonization technologies due to the demands of vehicles, which is expected to become double.4 Taking into account these factors, more emphasis is currently being laid on environment friendly technologies in the transportation sector to create zero emission zones by (i) the implementation of digital technologies to improve efficiency in the transport systems, (ii) introduction of alternative energy sources using biofuels, electricity, hydrogen (H2), synthetic fuels derived from the renewables, etc., and (iii) the promotion of zero emission vehicles. It should be noted that about 1.7% of the total global electricity is consumed solely by the transportation sector.4 The complete environmental benefits of electric vehicles could be realized, however, when the renewable energy sources are used solely for the generation of electricity. Renewable energy sources in the transportation sector are essential to minimize the impact of GHG emissions on climatic changes as well as health. However, they would require changes in vehicle fleet, infrastructure, carriers, etc., which would be largely dependent on the type of technologies (e.g., battery, electric, and biofuels) adopted in the transportation sectors. Electric vehicles (EVs) are quiet and have low maintenance cost, which can provide several environmental benefits compared to internal combustion vehicles (ICVs).
The usage of biofuels (e.g., biodiesel and ethanol) as alternative renewable energy resources will be increased by more than 2-times when the sustainable development goals are adopted in 2040, where 1.8 million barrel oil equivalent is being used per day for road transportation.4 These biofuels are extracted from edible plants, crops, etc., through the trans-esterification of the sugar units of biomass using bio-organisms, for instance, bacteria and yeast, and the hydrocracking of non-edible compounds. These biofuels can be used for transportation after the modification of engines of the existing ICVs as their performance as well as usage are almost similar to the ICVs. Ethanol as an additive is mixed with gasoline not only to increase its octane number but also to reduce GHG emissions from the exhaust. The major advantage of biofuels is the reduction in the GHG emissions up to 50% compared to traditional fossil fuels. The availability of sufficient sustainable feedstock and their production costs are serious limiting factors in their use as renewable resources. The need of fertilizers and their related GHG emissions for the production of sufficient feedstock should be taken into account to consider biofuels as renewables. Therefore, feedstock should be produced through a sustainable approach to use them for the production of biofuels and also to overcome the limitations of conventionally available feedstock in terms of the GHG emissions, competence with food production, and the requirement of agricultural land. The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources is currently implementing programmes on Chemical Sources of Energy, Hydrogen Energy, and Biofuels for surface transportation in India. Next generation biofuels have been prepared by the deconstruction of cellulose and hemicellulose at lower or higher temperatures and pressures under an inert atmosphere.5–7 The usage of vegetable oils (e.g., palm oil) is more economical than that of the other biomasses as they have higher crop yields. Waste oil, animal fats, lignocellulose-based materials from agricultural and forestry residues, municipal wastes, etc., are planned currently to use in order to overcome the limitations of the conventionally available feedstock for the biofuel production. Approximately 10 billion tons of lignocellulose-based biomass as sustainable feedstock will be available to produce biofuels.
EVs using batteries and fuel cells hold promise for reducing GHG emissions. Both batteries and fuel cells generate not only electrical energy by the conversion of chemical energy of a system but also generate heat energy as an additional product. Batteries hold a closed storage of energy, which has to be discarded or recharged upon the depletion of the stored energy using an external electricity to drive the reverse electrochemical reaction. However, fuel cells use external chemical energy and it can work continuously upon the supply of fuels and oxygen. There is no direct requirement of oil or gases derived from conventional fossil fuels for EVs. The battery vehicles require no fuels but relatively longer charging is essential, where it is being done mostly from non-renewables. It should be noted that the total cumulative CO2 emissions will not be changed significantly when battery-based vehicles are used for the transportation; however, the related CO2 emissions in line sources will be reduced significantly but their concentration at the point sources will increase steeply when the battery-based technology adopted for transportation due to the utilization of fossil fuels to generate electricity. Another serious limitation of battery vehicles is the smaller driving range compared to that of the vehicles based on IC engines. The driving range of battery vehicles can be increased by increasing the additional batteries in the electric vehicles; however, significant changes in the structure (e.g., heavier brakes, larger traction motor, etc.) of the vehicle, which certainly increases the capital cost of the vehicle. Batteries based on nickel–cadmium and nickel–metal hydride can develop memory effects due to their incomplete discharging behavior, which reduces longevity of the rechargeable battery significantly.8,9 It is estimated that the number of battery packs will increase from 1.4 million to 6.8 million by 2035 after their use for transportation.10 Currently, lithium (Li) ion batteries (LIBs) are preferred among other batteries due to their specific characteristics such as higher energy storage as well as voltage per cell, good discharge resistance, and easy rechargeability. In addition, they can run a number of regeneration cycles with a lesser environmental footprint. It is very important that the LIBs should be recycled after their use as they pose threats to health, environment, and minerals reserves. Only 3% of the LIBs is being recycled at present and it is anticipated that the Li demand will outstrip the supply by 2023. It has been recommended by a study (Toxicity Characteristics Leaching Procedure) using the LIBs that they should be considered as hazardous waste as their leachates contain excessive amounts of Pb, Co, Cu, Ni, etc.11,12 They may contaminate soil and groundwater when disposed in landfills or may release toxic gases when incinerated. The Li-recovery performance in terms of the amount as well as the rate needs to be improved significantly to meet the current demand in the automotive industries. However, it is not possible to develop a common solution for Li recovery due to difference in the chemical composition of the cathode materials, which is varied among manufacturers. The LIB Safety Act was implemented to focus on its safe manufacture, use, and transport in 2016.13
The use of H2 in transportation is a unique pathway to reduce GHG emissions since the fuel cell technology could be combined with battery-powered vehicles as a range extender. Unlike ICVs where the fuels are combusted to produce energy, the energy is generated through electrocatalytic-chemical reactions between oxygen (O2) and H2 in the case of the fuel cells, which are considered as one of the highly energy efficient options with the release of water as the final product. Fuel cells consist of a number of single cells that are comprised of anodes and cathodes as electrodes, which are generally coated with catalysts. The electrolytes (solid or liquid) placed between the electrodes can carry appropriate ions from one electrode to the other electrode during the fuel cell reaction. Fuel cell-based vehicles are considered to be better than battery-based vehicles due to their higher conversion efficiency as well as power density. Also, they occupy lesser space, are relatively low cost, require lesser well-wheel energy, and take much lesser time to refuel when compared with the battery-based vehicles. The weight of a fuel cell-based vehicle is lesser than that of the battery-based vehicles by 8–14 fold and extra weight required to increase the range is almost negligible when compared with the battery-based vehicles.14 The total cumulative GHG emissions from the fuel cell-based vehicles are far lesser than that of the battery-based vehicles. Unlike batteries, fuel cells show no memory effect on refueling. Their maintenance is also simple as they have few moving parts in the system. Fuel cells are not only used for the generation of power but also for decentralizing heat. Some of the fuel cells are designed to supply 1 kW of electricity and 2 kW of heat for household applications.15 In this article, various H2 production as well as purification methods via preferential carbon monoxide oxidation (CO-PROX) using advanced catalysts, H2 storage materials, transportation of H2via hydrogenation and dehydrogenation as well as catalytic development for both direct- and indirect-fuel cells to produce cleaner energy with a higher performance are discussed in detail.
Fuel cells are classified into direct- and indirect-fuel cell systems, where the electrochemical oxidation of the fuels occurs directly at the electrodes in the case of direct fuel system and a fuel processing subsystem is required to produce H2-rich fuels that can be fed at the electrodes for electrochemical oxidation in the case of indirect fuel cell systems. Proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC), which operates at 80 °C, is the most commonly used for transportation (e.g., road, rail, and marine) due to not only its higher efficiency but also power density, which are highly suitable for the transportation sector. Fuel cells can provide propulsive power to the vehicles.16 They can be considered as alternative potential options to meet the energy demand, particularly for urban areas, owing to their quiet operation as well as relatively lesser maintenance cost. H2 as a potential fuel has been considered for transportation applications.
Fuel cells can also be used for other portable and stationary applications. Portable fuel cells are used for power-generators and chargers focusing on light outdoor personal uses (e.g., laptops and mobiles), auxiliary power units for military-, leisure-, and education-related applications, where the batteries are used mostly for these applications at present. The following are the main drivers for using fuel cells in the portable applications: (i) off-grid operation, (ii) extended run-times compared to that of the batteries, (iii) fast recharging-as well as weight reduction-potentials, (iv) convenient, reliable, and lower operating costs. Stationary fuel cells are efficient, reliable off-grid power sources, which can produce electricity that can be used for homes, businesses, telecommunication networks, etc. They require a relatively lesser space compared with other cleaner energy options (e.g., solar and wind); therefore, they can be installed in most of the places. They provide on-site power to end-users without efficiency losses, which are very common in long-range grid transmission. PEMFC as the primary energy source is largely used for stationary applications, particularly for remote areas where the power grids cannot reach. They offer additional power to hybrid power systems, which comprise of photo-voltaics, batteries, capacitors, wind turbines, etc., as backup power. Larger stationary fuel cells with multi-megawatt units are also produced as the primary power sources in order to replace long-range power grids.
Hydrogen as a transportation fuel
H2, as a non-toxic, colourless, and odourless gas, is the most abundant among other elements. However, it is not found naturally on Earth; thus, it has to be extracted from other sources. It is one of the cleanest among any fuels and forms water as the final product upon burning in air. It possesses the highest energy content by weight compared with other fuels and three times higher heating value compared to that of petroleum. Therefore, it has been considered as the primary fuel for transportation applications with zero harmful emissions produced while operation of the vehicles. It can be produced from fossil fuels (e.g., natural gas, naphtha, hydrocarbons, and coal) through catalytic steam reforming or from renewable resources (e.g., water) through electrolysis or photocatalysis.17–20 It should be noted that the production of H2 from fossil fuels via reforming leads to harmful emissions; therefore, it sets off the benefits of H2 as the clean fuel. Although fuel cells using H2 are proven to be more efficient than that internal combustion engines, however, they require infrastructure development and more efficient storage space due to their low density. Therefore, the storage of H2 demands compression and/or cooling. Despite these limitations, it has been estimated that the cost of the fuel cells will be comparable to that of the combustion engines owing to the current technological advancements and also the necessity to generate cleaner energy so as to control GHG emissions in the future.
Hydrogen production methods

Thermochemical processes. 
These processes use heat, chemical reactions, catalysts, etc., to release H2 from organic materials (e.g., fossil fuels and biomass). The catalysts used for these processes can be categorized into two types: precious metals (Pt, Pd, Rh, etc.)21–23 and non-precious metals (e.g., Ni).24,25 The performance of conventional steam reformers based on pelletized catalysts is generally lesser than 5% as their mass- and/or heat-transfer kinetics are barely a limiting factor; hence, low cost Ni-based catalysts are generally used for industrial applications. It is a simpler route for the production of H2 as it needs no additional chemicals and can convert a variety of biomass-derived feedstocks. However, the thermodynamic boundaries limit the thermochemical process of water gas-shift reaction between H2 productivity and feedstock conversion.26

Purification of hydrogen
Gaseous products after reforming, water–gas shift reaction, etc., consist of H2, CO, and CO2. The concentration of CO in the H2-rich flue gases is generally more than 2%, which is poisonous to fuel cell catalysts and has to be removed below 10 ppm for the fuel cell applications, in particular PEMFC,27–29 where Pt is generally used as the fuel cell catalyst. H2 can be purified by pressure swing adsorption, cryogenic distillation, preferential oxidation of CO (CO-PROX), and membrane separation. The first two methods are not generally cost effective, and also require separation and purification of H2. In addition, they do not provide sufficient purity to the fuel cells using H2. The CO-PROX and membrane separation methods are currently considered as promising methods due to their energy efficiency, ease, continuous operation, lower capital cost, etc.
Catalytic CO-PROX reaction has been considered as one of the suitable methods for the purification of the H2-rich flue gases as it can remove higher concentration of CO at a lower temperature range under select catalysis conditions.30–33 Catalysts based on Pt group metals (PGM) (e.g., Pt, Pd, Rh, and Ir),34–37 Au,38 and oxides of Cu, Ce, Co, Zr, Zn, etc.,39–42 have been developed for the CO-PROX reaction. The CO-PROX performance of the Pt-based catalysts has been summarized in a mini review.43 Pt-Dispersed Cu NPs supported on Al2O3 as the catalyst was prepared to minimize the Pt consumption for the CO-PROX reaction via galvanic reaction, which showed durable catalytic performance at a lower temperature range compared to that of the commercial Pt/Al2O3 catalyst. CO was oxidized solely at a lower temperature range and no significant H2 conversion was observed when this catalyst was used for the CO-PROX reaction.44 Core–shell nanocatalysts using Ru, Rh, Ir, Pd, Au, etc., as the core and a few monolayers of Pt as the shell were developed and it was observed that the Ru@Pt catalyst showed the highest catalytic CO-PROX activity at 30 °C among other nanocatalysts. The CO-PROX performance was achieved through the H2 mediated pathway and also the availability of CO-free centers on the Pt surface, which is essential for O2 activation.45 Intermetallic Pt3Co catalyst was prepared on various supports (e.g., SiO2, Al2O3, MgO, CaO, and La2O3) and it was observed that the Pt3Co/MgO catalyst showed improved CO-PROX activity compared to that of other combinations. It was also observed that the dispersion as well as catalytic activity of the intermetallic catalysts are strongly depended on the nature of the support (e.g., acid–base properties).46 30-fold higher mass activity was achieved when iron hydroxide anchored on the surface of Pt NPs supported on SiO2 was tested in the broad temperature range of −75 to 106 °C compared to that of Pt on the iron oxide support for the CO-PROX reaction.47
Among several catalysts, the oxides, in particular Cu- and Ce-based catalysts, are preferred due to not only their low cost and availability but also their improved performance compared with that of PGM catalysts.48–50 Mesoporous Al2O3 supported Cu–Ce catalyst with a higher surface area as well as good stability was prepared via the sol–gel method for the CO-PROX reaction, which showed improved CO-PROX performance compared with that of the PGM catalysts. This CO-PROX performance was improved further when this catalyst was modified with Zr and Sn.51 Mixed oxides (CeO2-MnOx)-supported Ru showed CO-PROX activity, which was improved significantly further upon realization of bimetallic catalysts with Pd (RuPd), where these catalysts showed 60 and 75% CO-PROX activity at 100 and 120 °C, respectively.52 Single atoms of Au-dispersed CeO2 was prepared as the catalyst by an adsorption method, which showed stable, enhanced CO-PROX performance in the wide temperature range of 50–120 °C due to unavailability of active sites for the dissociation of H2 molecules on the catalyst surface; hence, selective CO oxidation was achieved.53 The availability of reducible copper species, surface lattice oxygen, and oxygen vacancies in the CeO2 support promote the CO-PROX performance when the hybrid catalyst is prepared using CuO and CeO2.54 The size dependence of catalytic centers over the CO-PROX performance was examined by the preparation of Au nanocrystals on the CeO2 support and it was observed that the Au nanocrystals (size: 2–5 nm) showed enhanced CO-PROX performance by increasing the interface sites between the Au NPs and the CeO2 support.55 The addition of Cu ions in a cobalt-substituted oxygen-deficient CeO2 increased the CO-PROX performance compared to that of Cu ion-free cobalt substituted CeO2.56 Selective CO oxidation was observed through the interface sites of Au and Cu when the Au nanoclusters were dispersed on the hybrid nanocatalysts of Cu and CeO2.57 The hybrid structure comprising of Au NP-deposited zinc stannate was prepared for the CO-PROX reaction, which showed enhanced CO oxidation performance due to the promotional effect of zinc stannate through the hydroxyl group-mediated pathway.58 The anchoring of Au NPs on the surface of CeO2 of the hybrid CeO2–CuO catalyst increased the catalytic CO-PROX activity by decreasing the activation energy at a lower temperature range as a result of the synergistic interaction between Au and the CeO2 support, which also relatively maintain the same oxidation state of the Cu moieties under the CO-PROX conditions.59 The hybrid catalyst of CeO2−x–Cu containing a very high concentration of oxygen vacancies at the interfaces showed almost 5-fold higher CO-PROX performance in the temperature range of 120–210 °C than that of the reference catalyst (CeO2–Cu) having the same composition, however, containing no oxygen vacancies. This catalyst also showed long-term CO-PROX performance for 100 h under the simulated CO-PROX conditions. The oxygen vacancies that are anchored at the nano-heterojunction on the surface play a vital role in the complete removal of CO.60 Although the CO-PROX performance was improved by the introduction of Cu species on NiO–CeO2 owing to the synergistic interaction between Cu and the surface oxygen vacancies of CeO2, the stability of the catalyst, however, decreased upon the addition of Cu.61 Hybrid nanocatalysts with various shapes (e.g., octahedraon, rod, cube, sphere, and spindle) using CuO and CeO2 were prepared by hydrothermal and impregnation methods. The catalysts with sphere or spindle shapes having {111} and {002} facets on their surface exhibited higher CO-PROX performance in a broader temperature range.62 Mixed oxides of Ce- and Fe-supported Au catalysts showed enhanced CO-PROX performance due to synergistic effects between these oxides and the performance can be controlled by controlling of the electronic properties as well as the structures of the support.63 The concentration of CO in the presence of H2 can be reduced to below 10 ppm by controlling the flow rate of the feed gases and the formation of a few layers of water on the Au surface.64
Hydrogen separation membrane
Membrane-based technologies are employed to separate H2 from H2-rich flue gases as products from the reforming, followed by water–gas shift reaction. The H2 separation membrane should have the following characteristics: (i) high permeability, (ii) high diffusivity or solubility, and (iii) stability at a higher working temperature. Higher H2 solubility and its related lower activation energy result in a higher permeation rate of H2 in the metallic membranes. Conversely, lower H2 permeation rate increases the formation enthalpies, which induces the formation of stable hydride, resulting in the embrittlement of the metallic membranes. Therefore, the periodic treatment of metallic membranes or their surface modification is necessary to use them for a longer time. Pt, Pd, V, Ta, Nb, etc., are used as metallic membranes to separate H2.65–69 In particular, Pd-based membranes have been explored extensively due to not only their capacity to catalyze the surface dissociation/re-association processes of the H2 molecules on the Pd surface but also their higher permeability characteristics. However, the performance of Pd membranes is affected by (i) the impurities (H2S, CO, thiophene, halogens, etc.) present in the H2-rich flue gases owing to their favorable interactions with Pd than that of H2, and (ii) their embrittlement.70,71
Pd-Based alloy membranes using transition metals (e.g., Ag, Cu, and Au) were prepared to overcome the embrittlement issues and also the cost due to the limited availability of Pd resources.72–77 Pd-Based intermetallic alloy membranes are the possible options to minimize the consumption of Pd for membrane-based technologies owing to the different electronic structure and robustness against passive compounds present in the H2-rich flue gases.78,79 In addition, the adsorption behavior of CO on the Pd-surfaces will be tuned due to the difference in their interatomic distances, bi-functional mechanism, etc.80,81 Crystalline alloys of Group IV (Zr, Ti, Hf), group V (V, Nb, Ta) metals, and other elements, for instance, Fe, Mn, Mo, Cu, Ni, Ga, Ge, Sn, Si, W, La, and Be, exhibited higher H2 permeation rates.82,83 The binary and ternary alloys of Co, Cr, and Al are also used for the H2 separation membrane.84 The alloys based on Cu, Ni, Ag, Fe, etc., were prepared to minimize the surface susceptibility of the gaseous impurities (e.g., H2S, CO, and H2O).85 Alloys with high volume boundaries due to the formation of small-sized grains result in more defects than that exhibited in typical diffusion mechanisms.86 Nano PdFe membranes showed improved H2 permeation fluxes compared to that of their large-sized, individual components.87 However, PdAg membranes showed an increase in the H2 permeation flux with the increase in the grain sizes. Enhanced H2 permeation was observed due to the increase in the He permeation in between the gaps of the grain boundaries.88
Amorphous-alloy membranes are also focused on to separate H2 from the flue gases as they exhibited favorable mechanical and structural properties without concerning of the growth of the defect-free film. These alloys also exhibited improved strength, durability, corrosive resistance, H2 solubility, etc.89–91 ZrNi alloys showed improved mechanical and thermal stability under the H2 separation conditions.92 The NiNbZr alloy membrane has also been developed for the H2 separation applications, which show comparable performance when compared with expensive Pd or PdAg alloy systems.93,94 Fe-Based amorphous alloys have also been prepared; however, their surface characteristics inhibit the adsorption/desorption of H2, thus reducing the permeation of H2 through the membrane dramatically.95
Membranes based on polymers (e.g., polybenzimidazole (PBI), polyimide (PI), and their derivatives) have also been developed to separate H2 as they can be manufactured readily at a cheaper cost.96,97 The gaseous molecules can permeate across the dense polymeric membranes through the solution diffusion mechanism. Although glassy polymers have a rigid framework that is developed for the H2 separation, their free volume dissemination behavior aids in the separation of H2 from the flue gases.98 In the presence of hydrocarbons even at a trace level, the selective skin layer of the glassy polymer was plasticized by acidic gases (e.g., CO2), which decreased the gas separation performance. Also, the performance of these membranes decreased at an earlier stage compared to that of inorganic- or metal-based membranes.99 Crosslinked polymers have also been developed to improve the efficiency of the polymer membranes; however, they show lower permeability than that of the untreated polymer membranes. Polymers with enhanced selectivity for gas separations have been demonstrated using mixed matrix membranes and polymer intrinsic microporosity membranes.100,101 Attention has also been given recently to textile rubber polymers for H2 separation applications.102
Electrolysis
H2 can also be generated from the splitting of water using electricity, where it is, however, mostly derived from the fossil fuel-based thermal power plants. 4% of H2 is produced at room temperature worldwide using this method. This process is ecologically clean, which would result in zero GHG emissions. However, the complete environmental benefits can be solely realized if electricity is derived through a sustainable approach. The energy efficiency of this process is in the range of 50–70%. The electrode materials for the generation of H2 through the electrolytic process should be available at a lower cost along with the vital characteristics, for instance, good corrosion resistance, high conductivity, and high catalytic properties. Although highly energy efficient solid oxide electrolysis cells have been developed, they pose challenges in terms of corrosion, seals, thermal cycling, chrome migration, etc.103 Polymer electrolyte membrane-based electrolyzers under acidic conditions are also efficient due to no or less corrosion and sealing issues compared to that under alkaline conditions; however, the initial capital cost is significantly higher in the case of acid-based electrolyzers. Therefore, the generation of electricity through the sustainable approach as well as reduction of the cost of the electrolyzer units are the main focuses in the generation of H2 for fuel cells.104
Sulfuric acid as an electrolyte has been employed mostly for H2 generation through electrolysis. Although Pt and Au are considered as electrodes among other metals due to their stability in the presence of sulfuric acid, their higher cost hinders their use for H2 generation through electrolysis at a larger scale. Stainless steel, brass, Pb, Fe, Al, etc., are also considered as low-cost electrode materials due to their lower over potentials, strength, etc. These materials are used as both cathode and anode, where they form rusts through the oxidation process at the anode side and the rusted materials are again re-converted to their original electrode material at the cathode side through the de-rusting process (i.e., reduction). However, these electrodes are associated with unavoidable demerits, for instance: (i) stainless steel releases toxic compounds upon the decaying process during electrolysis; (ii) Cu forms brass deposits at the cathode, which accelerates the rusting process of stainless steel; (iii) Al deteriorates rapidly under water electrolysis conditions. Al has also been considered for water electrolysis due to its characteristics such as high reactivity, softness, durability, light weight, and malleability with surface roughness. Al is oxidized in the presence of water to produce H2 and heat. Ag has also been considered for the water electrolysis due to not only its higher electrical and heat conductivity but also its lower contact resistance; however, it is soluble in mineral acids (e.g., nitric and sulfuric acid). Cu has been used for this purpose due to its higher thermal and electrical conductivity and it also slows down the growth of germs. Ni is considered as a better low-cost alternative cathode for water electrolysis due to its corrosion resistance under alkaline conditions.105 Carbon-based electrodes (e.g., graphite) are also considered as electrodes due to their low cost, purity, porous structures, good electrical and thermal conductivity, inert property under alkaline conditions compared to metals, etc. The porous structure of graphite aids in the adsorption of H2 molecules. More studies are, however, required to use carbon as an electrode for the H2 generation through electrolysis.106 It has been found that electrodes made from heterogeneous materials show better performance compared with that of homogeneous materials. The combination of bronze and pristine Cu has shown enhancement in the H2 flow efficiency with a relatively lower power consumption compared to that of its individual components.107 Al/Cu has shown better performance in terms of the H2 flow, lower power consumption among the other tested combinations, and also their individual electrodes (e.g., C, Pb, Al, and stainless steel).108 Alloys of Ni using Cu and Co (NiCu, NiCo, NiCoCu) have been developed as catalysts to improve the H2 evolution performance, which show enhanced catalytic activity compared with pure Ni, Cu, or Co. RANEY® Ni derived from the alloys of Ni and Al, Zn, Si, etc., has shown improved H2 evolution performance compared with its alloy form.109
Direct solar water splitting process
Water splitting using semiconductor photocatalysts in the presence of solar energy to form H2 and O2 has been considered as a potential method for producing cleaner energy at a larger scale. Although we shall not discuss about the water splitting in detail in this article, we discuss some important aspects about this briefly as several review papers have been published on this topic.110–119 Water splitting performance can be improved by the dispersion of a select cocatalyst on photocatalysts. Although the water splitting has potential, its activity suffers due to limited light absorption as well as poor quantum efficiency as a result of recombination of charge carriers. To increase the performance through the suppression of electron–hole recombination and to have a broad range optical absorption, improved photocatalysts, for instance, N-doped TiO2 and MgO that have local electric field polarization have been developed.120 The development of cocatalysts is essential for achieving higher water splitting performance. Dual cocatalysts are generally preferred for both oxidation and reduction reactions. For example, Pt–PdS/CdS photocatalyst was developed, where PdS and Pt serve as the oxidation and reduction cocatalysts, respectively, which showed enhanced photocatalytic H2 generation.121 The efficiency increased by more than 300-fold when CdS was added along with the catalyst and the corresponding apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) was 93% at 420 nm.122 The overall water splitting performance was improved when Rh/Cr2O3 as the reduction catalyst and Mn3O4 as the oxidation catalyst were deposited on GaN:ZnO as the photocatalyst.123 The water splitting performance increased through synergistic effects when the reduction (e.g., Pt, Pd, Rh, and Au) and oxidation (e.g., RuO2 and IrO2) cocatalysts were loaded on Zn2GeO4.124
Apart from the dual cocatalyst systems, photocatalyst systems having a cocatalyst have also proved to be efficient for overall water splitting. NiO-Dispersed La-doped NaTaO3 showed enhanced photocatalytic water splitting performance with the AQE of 56% at 270 nm due to the formation of a nano-step structure on their surface, which can separate the electrons and holes spatially.125 Zn-Doped Ga2O3 photocatalyst was developed using aqueous CaCl2 solution, which showed an AQE of 71% at 254 nm.126 Al-Doped SrTiO3 was prepared by SrCl2 flux treatment, which exhibited an AQE of 30% at 360 nm.127 Rh/Cr2O3 as the reduction cocatalyst was loaded on the surface of GaN:ZnO for water splitting, which showed an AQE of 5.9% at 420 nm.128
Apart from this, Z-scheme photocatalyst systems comprising of H2- and O2-evolution photocatalysts, electronic mediator, etc., have been developed. The photocatalysts of metal-doped SrTiO3 and Pt–WO3 exhibited excellent H2- and O2-evolution, respectively, under visible light. I−/IO3− was utilized as a mediator for the water splitting reaction.129 Similarly, Pt-dispersed ZrO2/TaON and WO3 were developed for both H2- and O2-evolution, which showed an AQE of 6.3% at 420 nm.130 The water splitting performance increased dramatically upon the addition of carbonate anions in water, where the Pt/TiO2 photocatalyst was used. The stoichiometric water splitting performance was improved solely when the water as a stream was subjected to the catalysts; however, no significant performance was observed when water was used as a liquid.131 The overall water splitting performance was not observed significantly when no additives or NaOH, NaCl, Na2SO4, Na3PO4, and Na2HPO4 are added to water. However, stoichiometric H2 and O2 evolution was observed upon the addition of Na2CO3, NaHCO3, and K2CO3.132 The combination of narrow band gap semiconductors (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO), which can absorb solely UV and visible light-active sensitizers, can facilitate the absorption in the entire visible light region of the solar spectrum.133 Incorporation of the photosensitizers (e.g., dyes and quantum dots) into TiO2 modifies the photocatalyst, which can absorb visible light predominantly.134 Although the absorption property of the quantum dots can be varied by tuning their size, the chemical- and photo-stability of the photocatalysts are the major concerns in their use at a larger scale.
Alloy PtNix NPs, prepared via the solvothermal method as a low-cost alternative to Pt, were dispersed on CdS to enhance the visible light catalytic water splitting, which showed enhanced H2 production rate compared with Pt-dispersed CdS.135 Ni in the PtNix alloy NPs accelerates the photoinduced electron transfer rate, which promotes H2 generation.136 The usage of alloy NPs reduces the consumption of Pt for the photocatalysts in order to split the water under light.137 Pre-synthesized alloy cocatalysts of P-doped Co–M (M = Cu and Ni) were deposited on graphene as a visible light active photocatalyst, which showed an enhancement in H2 generation owing to the partially-oxidized Co moieties.138 The H2 generation performance was examined by the doping of hetero atoms (e.g., Pt and Pd) in the Au clusters, which are loaded on BaNa4Ti4O15. It was observed that Au24Pt as the cocatalyst showed improved water splitting due to the location of Pt atoms at the interfaces. On the other hand, the cocatalyst of Au24Pd decreased the water splitting performance for H2 generation compared to that of undoped Au24 clusters loaded on the BaNa4Ti4O15 photocatalyst due to the presence of Pd on the surface. The H2 generation rate increased further when Cr2O3 was coated as a shell on the Pt surface of Au24Pt.139 Pt-Dispersed highly crystalline mixed valence Sn-oxide (Sn2Sn4+O4) prepared via the hydrothermal method showed higher water splitting compared to that of individual Sn2+O and Sn4+O catalysts due to the coexistence of Sn2+ and Sn4+, which favors desirable band-gap and edge position for the photoreduction of water.140 Amorphous transition metal borides as low-cost alternative cocatalysts to PGM-based cocatalysts were loaded on nanostructured CdS, which showed 36-fold higher H2 generation compared to that of CdS due to the trapping of electrons and higher adsorption of protons, which facilitates their conversion the molecular H2 on the surface under visible light.141 Plasmonic materials are being considered as visible light-active photocatalysts; however, their cost is one of the serious concerns in their adoption for overall water splitting.142
H2 can also be generated using light through water splitting via photobiological or photoelectrochemical processes. The photobiological process employs micro-organisms to convert water, biomass, etc., into H2, where it breaks down abundantly available biomass into H2 and other products.143 Although this process has the potential to produce H2, its conversion rate is comparatively low. The identification of suitable microbial strains, optimization of a reactor, sustainable feed stocks, etc., is required to improve the H2 production rate through the photobiological process. The photoelectrochemical process shows higher conversion efficiency at a low operating temperature range, which produces H2 at a relatively lower cost in the presence of sunlight with low to zero carbon emissions. TiO2, WO3, and α-Fe2O3 were developed as photoanodes, which showed promise for the generation of H2 from biomass-based derivatives and water through the photoelectrochemical reaction due to their good photoactivity, abundance, low cost, and eco-friendly nature.144 Hybrid photoactive electrodes based on nanostructured Fe2O3 films were developed for the generation of H2 through photoelectrochemical reaction.145 p-Type Si micro-pyramids showed enhanced H2 generation due to their improved light absorption behavior and suitable band gap. In addition, amorphous tungsten phosphosulfide nanosheets (WS2−xPxNSs) were developed on Si micropyramids for the solar-driven H2 evolution reaction, which showed enhanced photocurrent density and lower onset potential compared to that of tungsten disulphide due to the formation of effective sites at the edges upon the substitution of heteroatoms of P and S.146 These processes are only at the earlier stages and continued improvements in terms of efficiency, durability, cost, etc., should be worked out for these to become viable at a larger scale.
Hydrogen storage and delivery
H2 can be stored and/or delivered through (i) compressed gas tanks, which can tolerate a higher pressure range, (ii) cryogenic liquefaction of H2 (cooling followed by compression), which can be stored in a tank or a tank containing solid materials that can offer effective interactions with H2 (e.g., metal hydride, chemical H2 storage, and sorbent materials), and (iii) pipelines. H2 delivery through compression requires high operation and maintenance costs. Suitable tank materials, however, are essential to tolerate the high pressures that can increase the storage density. Appropriate insulation of the tanks is also required to control the evaporation of H2 from the tanks as external heat can be transmitted through conduction, radiation, or convection processes. Cryogenic, compressed tanks offer higher H2 energy density compared to that of regular, compressed H2 tanks per unit volume; the additional energy is required for cooling, which is costlier than that of the regular compressed tanks. However, they can deliver a larger volume of H2; thus, a reduction in the cost can be achieved. The transportation of H2 through pipelines is relatively cheaper among other noted options; however, its flammability and low ignition properties limit its storage and delivery through pipelines. In addition, the major problem with H2 is its low density under ambient conditions, which influences the storage capacity. Therefore, efforts have been made to identify technologies in order to increase the storage capacity of H2. Metal hydrides that can adsorb H2 through chemisorption have been used to increase the H2 storage capacity, where it forms interstitial compounds with metals. Molecular H2 is first adsorbed, followed by integration on the metallic surface, which forms elemental hydrogen under a select temperature range. Then, molecular H2 can be released again from the metal hydrides upon heating it. Although metal hydrides have advantages for H2 storage, they pose certain issues, for instance, heat management problems, low kinetics, and irreversibility. The development of metal hydrides is currently focused on the improvement of the volumetric and/or gravitational capacities, H2 adsorption and desorption kinetics, life cycle and reaction thermodynamics, regeneration behavior, etc. Pd, Mg, La, Al, etc., have been used for H2 storage materials.147–149 Intermetallic or alloy compounds of these metals have been developed in the form of nanostructures to overcome persistent limitations of the metal hydrides, which can increase the kinetics of hydrogenation and dehydrogenation.150 The PdCo alloy NPs dispersed graphitic carbon nitride were prepared as competent H2 storage materials. It was observed that H2 spillover was realized through the formation of the alloy phase of Co and Pd, which showed synergistic interaction between the alloy PdCo particles and the support.151 Materials that can offer higher H2 storage capacity solely through physisorption can be considered as alternatives to metal hydrides. Microporous organic framework compounds (MOFs), microporous crystalline aluminosilicates (zeolites), or microscopic small carbon nanotubes have been developed for H2 storage; however, the desired porosity and pore size, adsorption potentials, improved bulk densities of the materials, surface area, etc., so as to reach higher H2 adsorption capabilities are the remaining challenges in obtaining a viable technology at a larger scale.152,153 H2 can also be stored through encapsulation using a solid to form clathrates and the stored H2 can be released under select pressure and temperature conditions.154 The organic molecules of hydroquinone, crown ethers, calixarenes, etc., are currently under consideration for H2 uptake under ambient conditions.155
Hydrogen transportation using liquid organics
Liquid organic H2 carriers have proved to be efficient for H2 storage and transportation under ambient conditions, which would aid in the realization of the clean fuel concept in the future. However, the development of adequate catalysts is required for hydrogenation and dehydrogenation processes under ambient conditions. As per the energy balance calculations, the ratio between the energy transported and consumed was found to be 3.9, which can save about 345 tons of CO2 emissions in a year per delivery station.156 H2 was fixed with toluene in order to convert hydrogenated organics as liquid organic hydrogen carrier (LOHC), which was then dehydrogenated after transportation using catalysts. Several studies, for instance, methyl cyclohexane–toluene system, have been conducted for the storage and release of H2. The dehydrogenation reaction of methyl cyclohexane was performed for six potential cycles at 300–450 °C and 1–3 bar in order to identify the catalysts under the given conditions and γ-Al2O3-supported Pt with 1 wt% metal loading showed better dehydrogenation performance at 360 °C and 1.8 bar.157 It was also observed that the dehydrogenation performance decreased with the further addition of H2 in the feed gases. The decrease in the pressure and increase in the temperature exhibited higher dehydrogenation performance of methyl cyclohexane.158,159 The further optimization of the catalysts is required due to coking issues during the dehydrogenation reactions that deactivate the catalysts. Dibenzyltoluene and Pt/Al2O3 with 3 wt% metal loading were used as the liquid organic H2 carrier and catalyst, respectively, which showed 84.6% of H2 storage efficiency after five cycles. Hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions using dibenzyl toluene were performed at 140 and 270 °C, respectively, and complete hydrogenation was achieved at 350 min and 56–60% dehydrogenation was realized at approximately 3–5 h.160 Catalytic dehydrogenation reaction was performed using decalin as the liquid organic H2 carrier on the Pt surface, which was dispersed on the Al2O3 support, SiO2, and mesostructured silicates of SBA-15 and MCM-48. Pt-Dispersed MCM-48 as the catalyst showed better performance among the other catalysts and it can be considered as a potential catalyst for H2 storage and transportation applications.161
Activated carbon and Y2O3-supported bimetallic AgRh NPs were prepared by the polyol technique under microwave irradiation for the dehydrogenation of cyclohexane at 300 °C. AgRh NPs with 1:4 ratio supported on the Y2O3 support showed stable H2 evolution performance when cyclohexane was used for the dehydrogenation reactions. It was found that H2 evolution was significantly enhanced upon the addition of Rh into Ag through synergistic effects.162 Activated carbon cloth-supported bimetallic NiCu catalyst with 10 wt% total metal loading was developed for the dehydrogenation of methylcyclohexane. It was found that the presence of Cu amounts (2 wt%) enhance the dehydrogenation activity of Ni (8 wt%) through synergistic effects.163 Ag-Supported activated carbon cloth as the catalyst was developed for the catalytic dehydrogenation of cyclohexane, which will be converted to benzene for H2 storage and transportation applications. The H2 evolution rate of this catalyst was further enhanced by the addition of 1 wt% of PGM.164 3 wt% Pt-dispersed V2O5 and Y2O3 as active supports was developed to improve H2 evolution from methylhexane.165 Metal oxide- and perovskite-supported Pt were also developed for the dehydrogenation of methylcyclohexane and it was found that perovskite (La0.7Y0.3NiO3)-supported Pt exhibited higher dehydrogenation activity and selectivity.166
Current status of fuel cell membranes
More efficient, durable materials at lower cost compared to that of currently-existing materials are required for the fuel cell stack, which will be combined together in a series to produce cleaner energy at a larger scale.167–170 Membranes, bipolar plates, gas diffusion layer, electro-catalyst layer, etc., have an impact on the fuel cell stack performance. It will be influenced by (i) activation (kinetic), (ii) ohmic, and (iii) concentration (mass transport) losses due to limitation in the diffusion of reactant gases as a result of formation of water while working to block the channels. These losses occur in the fuel cells due to the relatively poor permeable behavior of the protons in the membranes and also the permeation of some amount of the H2 gases through the membrane, which reduces the performance.171–173 Efforts have been devoted to increase the proton conductivity of the membrane, electrical conductivity, mechanical stability, etc., of the components employed in the fuel cell stacks, and also to increase the working temperature range (>80 °C). Fluorinated, non-fluorinated, and acid-based composite membranes are employed in the fuel cells. Fluorinated membranes (e.g., Nafion) are the most popular among other membranes and it is a standard for PEM fuel cells. Although it is stable under oxidation and reduction conditions, it has certain limitations in terms of the working temperature range and lower mechanical as well as swelling properties. In addition, the proton conductivity as well as the water retention capability of the membranes need to be improved further to meet the desired PEM fuel cell performance. Nanocomposite membranes were prepared using Nafion and organic or inorganic materials (e.g., ZrO2, TiO2, TiSiO4, and SiO2) in order to increase their water retention capability. The physiochemical properties (e.g., elastic modulus, tensile strength, and hydrophobicity) of the modified membranes were improved significantly without affecting their proton conductivity.174–176 Nafion-SiO2 membranes at different amounts of SiO2 showed better performance compared with the pure Nafion membrane. The power density of the modified Nafion-SiO2 membrane (720 mW cm−2) is higher than the Nafion membrane alone, which showed the power density of 550 mW cm−2.177 The composite membranes were developed using Nafion and mesoporous zirconium phosphate, which showed much higher power density of 725 mW cm−2 compared to that of the Nafion membrane, which showed a power density of 655 mW cm−2.178 The developed composite membranes showed not only a wider operating temperature range above 95 °C but also the cell voltage increased by 11%, which is suitable for automobile industries. The overall fuel cell performance increased by 17% when dry H2 gas was used for the fuel cells.179 Investigations are now underway to increase the proton conductivity of the membranes so as to reduce the Pt amount for a catalyst layer. Efforts were further made to replace the Nafion-based membrane in the fuel cells with non-fluorinated membranes without compromising their proton conductivity, higher water uptake, as well as H2 permeability at a lower cost. Non-fluorinated membranes using polystyrene, poly(arylene ether sulfonate), poly(arylene ether ketone), acid-doped polybenzimidazole, poly(vinyl chloride), etc., were developed as alternatives for fuel cells and their suitability as membranes is now under investigation for fuel cell stacks.180–182
Catalysts used for fuel cells
Catalysts have been used to overcome the sluggish kinetics-related issues in the fuel cells as they require high activation energy in order to break the bonds of a molecule. Pt-Based catalysts are widely used in fuel cells due to the following reasons: (i) they are stable under harsh electric potential conditions as they do not form any passive materials and (ii) no or less detrimental effects with supports. Although they show superior catalytic activity, it is necessary to find alternative catalysts with lesser or no Pt amounts not only due to its higher cost but also its limited minerals as they are available in select regions (e.g., South Africa and Russia) of the world to make the fuel cells a viable technology at a larger scale for cleaner energy generation.183 South Africa alone contributes to about 80% of the world's Pt resources. Pt loaded at both the cathodes and anodes contributes solely about 10–15% of the total cost of the fuel cell stack. The estimated amount of Pt for a fuel cell-based vehicle is 30–80 g, which is significantly higher than the cost of a gasoline engine.184 Therefore, various methods have been considered to enhance the catalytic activity as well as the durability with minimum amounts of Pt so as to reduce the cost. One such strategy is the development of Pt-based alloys or intermetallic phases using transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Au, Ni, Mn, Cu, Cr, V, Cd, Hg, and Ti).185–194 Intermetallic alloys have intrinsic unique surface and bulk structures, for instance, catalytic, electronic, and optical properties, compared with usual alloys or their component metals, which are used for super-conductivity, catalysis, H2 storage, etc.195 Intermetallic alloy phase with transition metals showed improved catalytic activity (i.e., lower onset electric potential with higher current density) and extended stability under select catalytic conditions compared with pure Pt.196,197 Zirconium nitride-supported PtCo catalyst containing very low amounts of Pt as the alternative to pristine Pt was developed for fuel cells in order to minimize the Pt loading for fuel cells.198 Recently, binary, ternary, and quaternary alloy catalysts were also prepared to reduce the amounts of Pt. Binary alloy catalysts, for instance, PtRu, PtW, PtNi, PtSn, PtMo, PtPd, PtFe, and PtCr, were developed for fuel cells, which showed enhanced performance compared with Pt. The ternary (e.g., PtRuW, PtRuMo, and PtRuV) and quaternary (e.g., PtRuRhNi and PtRuSnW) alloys were also developed as catalytic centers for fuel cell applications.199–201 Intermetallic alloy phase of Pt and Cu was developed for several catalytic applications not only due to its enhanced catalytic activity compared to that of Pt but also the presence of Cu minerals at various regions across the world. Intermetallic PtCu as cathode and anode catalysts were prepared for PEMFC applications.202 Intermetallic core–shell and alloy PtSn NPs were developed through a wet-chemical route and their H2 oxidation activity was examined in the presence of CO, which showed CO-tolerant H2 oxidation activity compared with Pt and bimetallic PtRu catalysts.203
Carbon-supported alloy anode catalyst of PdPt (Pd96Pt4) and cathode catalyst of PdPtCo (Pd96Pt47Co4) were developed for PEMFC, which showed enhanced fuel cell performance compared to that of the catalyst based on its individual components.204 Pt alloy nanocrystals with polyhedron structures were developed for the cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), which exhibited improved electrochemical activity by the formation of electrocatalytically active high index crystal facets via the combination of three dimensional structures and polyhedrons. In addition, these structures can be converted in to nanoframe or nanocage structures by the preparation of pore- or hollow-controlled polyhedral structures, which exhibited higher electrocatalytic performance owing to the increase in the surface area to volume ratio with lesser amounts of Pt. Although improved catalytic performance was achieved, their structural stability, scale up, etc., are major concerns to use them for viable PEMFC applications.205
The catalytic activity of Pt has been maximized by tweaking its shape so as to increase the availability of its catalytic sites. A few layers of Pt atoms were covered on the CoPt alloy to form a core–shell structure, which showed excellent fuel cell ORR performance (i.e., high voltage and current density) due to synergistic effects.206 Electrocatalysts were prepared using Co or bimetallic CoZn along with a lower amount of Pt for the ORR reaction and these catalysts showed stable ORR performance for 3000 voltage cycles.207 The interaction between PtCo NPs and PGM-free sites was attributed to enhanced ORR performance as well as the durability.208 The shape-controlled nano Pt and its alloy structures, for instance, nanopolyhedra, nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods, and nanoframe porous architectures, showed enhanced mass activity as well as durability compared with conventional Pt. These unique shapes control not only the surface reactivity of the Pt sites by providing more contact area and stronger metal–support interactions (i.e., prevention of particle detachment that results in lesser agglomeration) but also Ostwald ripening. Improved interaction between the Pt shapes and support showed resistance towards the oxidation of the support. Pt with nanoframe- and nanocage-type structures showed enhanced catalytic activity along with excellent stability due to the formation of uniform crystal surfaces that offer maximum utilization of Pt as well as three-dimensional molecular accessibility. Although these different shapes showed initial promising performance, some important challenges need to be addressed in the future, in particular, the performance of MEA containing the shape-controlled Pt.209
Alcohol-based direct fuel cells also showed promise for the decentralized power sources, for instance, stationary and portable applications as alcohols possesses high energy density, and exist as liquids under ambient conditions. Methanol has been preferred as a fuel for direct fuel cells due to the favorable kinetics of complete oxidation, the ability to transfer maximum number of electrons, ease of refueling, as well as operation under ambient environment, relative lesser emissions, etc. Therefore, direct methanol fuel cell is considered as one of the potential power sources for next-generation portable electronics. Although direct methanol fuel cells have several advantages, they pose some technical issues, for instance, miscibility with water, cross-over behavior through membranes, and toxicity.
Concave PtxCuy NPs were developed using KNO3 and LiNO3, which showed improved catalytic performance towards the oxidation of methanol and formic acid.210 Structurally-ordered Pt3Ti and Pt3V NPs were prepared using KCl matrix under air-free conditions for the catalytic oxidation of methanol. These catalysts exhibited significant enhancement in the activity as well as the durability compared with Pt. It was suggested that the developed strategy can be extended to prepare a wide variety of ordered intermetallics.211 Highly monodisperse, intermetallic Pt3Zn nanocrystals were prepared using the PtZn alloy by annealing for direct methanol fuel cells, which showed improved activity compared with the PtZn alloy.212 These intermetallic Pt3Zn nanocrystals showed excellent poisoning tolerance compared with the Pt catalysts.213 Although Pt or Pt-based intermetallic or alloy compounds showed superior performance for the oxidation of C1 or C2-based fuels via the dissociation of the C–H bond under acidic conditions, deactivation of the Pt-sites occurred through the adsorption of CO intermediate moieties (e.g., COads and CHOads) that are formed during oxidation, which restricts the continuous oxidation of the C1 or C2 fuels for the continuous generation of electricity. These adsorbed CO intermediate moieties can be oxidized completely through the adsorption of OH ions derived from the dissociation of the water and hence the counterpart metal is needed to increase the OH species on the electrode surface. Ru has been reported for the dehydrogenation of water, which aids in realizing the complete oxidation of methanol.214
Ethanol is also the choice of the fuel as an alternative to methanol owing to its relatively lower toxicity, higher density, and less crossover rate in the membranes compared with methanol. It provides an alternate path for the power resources by the generation of electricity with a higher thermodynamic efficiency (>97%) through the electrochemical oxidation of ethanol under alkaline conditions. Moreover, ethanol is considered as one of the renewable energy sources for cleaner energy generation as it can be produced at a larger scale through the fermentation of agricultural biomass (e.g., sugar or cellulose). Fuel cells that work under alkaline conditions have several advantages compared to that of acidic conditions not due to only their faster kinetics for alcohol oxidation but also their lesser overpotential. The usage of alkaline anion exchange membrane as the electrolyte in the alcohol-based fuel cells protects the electrodes against carbonate formation as no free OH ions will be available in the solution during electricity generation; therefore, the problems with CO2 can be smoothly eliminated. Moreover, direct alcohol fuel cells can effectively work even in the absence of non-Pt catalysts as Pd-based catalysts are active among other PGM for the oxidation of ethanol under alkaline conditions.215
Binary and ternary alloys or intermetallic catalysts are more efficient for the oxidation of ethanol. PtSn binary alloy and its de-alloyed catalysts were developed under acidic conditions for fuel cell applications.216 The ternary PtSnRu alloy catalysts with Ru/Sn atomic ratio <1 showed enhanced catalytic activity for direct ethanol fuel cells.217 Finely-dispersed PtAu alloy NPs on porous Bi2O3 microspheres as the support were prepared for the electrooxidation of ethanol. Porous Bi2O3 support acts as the support, and scavenges and supplies OH ions to the alloy PtAu NPs. This catalyst exhibited remarkable stability towards the electrooxidation of ethanol compared with the Pt/C catalyst. The overall catalytic activity was enhanced further when this catalyst was mixed with graphene oxide and carbon nanotubes. Au and Bi2O3 clean the surface of the PtAu NPs by the oxidation of COad on the active Pt sites through co-operative or ligand effects.218 Intermetallic Pt2In3 NP-supported In2O3 as the catalyst was prepared by a facile solvothermal method, which showed specific activity of 3.2- and 2.3-fold higher for the electrooxidation of methanol and ethanol, respectively, compared to commercial Pt/C. This intermetallic catalyst showed ameliorated stability compared to Pt/C and the improved performance was attributed to promotional effects of In, which alter the electronic clouds of Pt upon the formation of alloy phase between Pt and In.219 Pd2Ge NPs were synthesized by chemical reduction using super hydride through the solvothermal method. The particle size was controlled by changing the reaction time without using any surfactant or size-controlling agents. It was found that these intermetallic catalysts were catalytically active for the oxidation of ethanol under alkaline conditions.220 TaPt3 intermetallic NPs were synthesized through a wet-chemical route, which showed enhanced catalytic oxidation of ethanol by the cleaving of C–C bonds of ethanol at lower electric potentials than the reference Pt3Sn and Pt catalysts.221 The tuning of cubic intermetallic Pt3Zr structure into the hexagonal Pt3Zr structure was achieved by changing the annealing conditions to stimulate the catalytic performance for the electrooxidation of ethanol. The observed enhanced performance was attributed to the increased surface energy of the intermetallic structure.222 Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning tolerance of PtPb, PtBi, Pt3Ti, Pt3Zr, Pt3Ta, Pt2Ta, etc., was compared with polycrystalline Pt and it was found that PtPb and PtBi possess superior tolerance towards CO poisoning among other intermetallic catalysts.223
The formation of carbonaceous moieties at the anode side during the operation of the fuel cells can poison the Pt surface, which will reduce the fuel cell performance; therefore, the amounts of Pt need to be increased for continuous operation over a longer time. The addition of metals with PGM can enhance their catalytic activity and stability significantly. The observed activity is due to (i) the bi-functional effect of the counterpart element in the alloy system, which promotes CO oxidation by the activation of water molecules at a lower potential; (ii) the ligand effect where the addition of the counterpart elements in the alloys modifies the Pt work function, i.e., lowering of d-band center, which facilitates higher filling up of its anti-bonding orbital, which would result in the weakening of the bond between Pt and CO; (iii) transition metals in the alloys aid in the oxidation of carbonaceous moieties interacting on the active sites of Pt by the adsorption of OH ions under alkaline conditions; (iv) dilution of the Pt surface atoms that influences the adsorption of reactant molecules. This will alter the reaction pathways, which avoids the formation of intermediate poisoning species during fuel oxidation.
Platinum-based alloys with various shapes were prepared as hollow mesoporous PtNi, nanowire PtRu, and nanodendritic PtRh as such designed catalysts showed enhanced electrocatalytic activity.224 Metal-core Pt-shell with a few layer thickness as the catalyst was prepared to minimize the Pt-consumption as the catalyst surface plays a crucial role in heterogeneous catalytic applications.225 Intermetallic PtNi hollow nanospheres with nearly mono-dispersion were prepared by the wet chemical route under ambient conditions, which showed ethylene glycol oxidation with comparable performance to commercial Pt/C catalysts.226 Hollow single crystalline intermetallic PtBi catalyst formed through non-Kirkendall mechanism was prepared by the sequential reduction of Pt and Bi in ethylene glycol under microwave irradiation, which assist in the formation of the intermetallic phase rapidly, which exhibited improved electrocatalytic activity towards formic acid oxidation.227
Larger amounts of Pt are required for cathodic ORR due to its sluggish reaction.228 The alloy catalyst based on PtNi was developed for ORR, which showed enhanced activity compared with Pt. The activity was improved through the formation of catalytically active Pt-rich outer shell and Ni-rich core by the de-alloying process, which removes Ni on the surface.229 Nanoparticulate zirconium nitride as the replacement catalyst to Pt was developed to enhance the ORR activity. Although both zirconium nitride and Pt exhibited same half-wave potential, the former showed higher stability compared with the Pt/C catalyst after 1000 ORR cycles under alkaline conditions.230 Intermetallic Pt3Ti NPs were developed to increase the ORR performance compared with the pure Pt catalysts.231 The surface strains of intermetallic PtFe nanoparticles were controlled either through compression or stretch, which is important for nano-catalysis reaction. These surface-strained NPs showed higher catalytic ORR activity. Achieving surface-strained structures opened a new path not only for the ORR but also for various other chemical reactions.232 Pt–M (M = Fe, Co, Cr) alloy catalysts were developed on the carbon via the polyol reduction method. Approximately 1.5-fold higher activity than the Pt catalyst was found towards ORR. The developed catalysts also showed good stability compared to the Pt catalysts.233 PtAu alloy catalysts with various compositions were synthesized by the co-deposition of Pt and Au NPs on the carbon support for ORR along with methanol tolerance for direct methanol fuel cells.234 Ordered Pt3Cr NPs with 5 nm size were prepared for ORR, which showed superior kinetics compared to the disordered PtCr alloy phase and the commercial Pt/C. The higher stability and activity of these catalysts showed promise as cathode catalysts for fuel cells.235 Intermetallic PtFe catalyst with smaller particle size was prepared through two-stage synthesis by the formation of disordered particles, followed by calcination at a set temperature for ORR. The PtFe catalyst showed enhanced catalytic activity and the Pt3Fe catalyst showed stability compared to commercial Pt.236 Ordered ternary Pt-based intermetallics (Pt2M′M′′, M = Fe, Co, Ni) (particle size: 3–5 nm) were prepared through co-reduction for ORR applications. These ternary intermetallics showed improved mass and specific ORR activity compared to commercial Pt/C.237 The Pt-skin on the AuCu surface was realized to increase Pt utilization for the fuel cells and was tested for the ORR activity. Density functional theory suggests that the skin structure of Pt on the AuCu(111) substrate can reduce the oxygen affinity compared with the Pt(111) surface. The developed catalysts showed enhanced catalytic ORR activity compared with the Pt-catalysts.238 Ordered Pt3Co cores with 2–3 atomic layer thickness of the Pt shell were prepared to enhance the performance and durability for ORR applications, which showed 200% increase in the mass activity compared to that of disordered Pt3Co. The observed superior performance was attributed to the Pt shell and the formation of intermetallic Pt3Co structures.239
Another strategy is the selection of suitable supporting materials, which can improve the catalytic performance, stability, and prevention of agglomeration of the catalytic centers during synthesis. Pt-Based catalytic centers were dispersed on the supports for the fuel cells. Two kinds of supporting materials were used for the preparation of the catalysts, namely, carbon support (graphene and its oxide, carbon nanotubes, activated carbon, carbon black, multiwall carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibres, conductive polymer, etc.) and non-carbon support (metal oxide and mixed metal oxides). The most feasible catalyst support for the fuel cell reaction in the acidic medium is carbon having a higher surface area. However, it is corroded under the select operating conditions, which reduces the catalyst performance. The supports based on metal oxides improve the catalytic activity of the metallic catalytic centers through the supporting materials effect, which can oxidize the CO moieties at the interfaces. The usage of oxide supports is for stabilizing the catalytic centers through strong interaction between the metals and the support. Corrosive resistance, higher surface area, conductivity, surface graphicity index, etc., should be considered for the selection of non-carbon-based supports. A large number of oxides based on Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Ti, W, Ru, Ce, In, Sn, etc., as the supports were used to prepare the fuel cell catalysts not only due to their high thermodynamic stability but also good stability under both acidic and alkaline conditions.240–245 It was found that CdS, g-C3N4, ZnO, TiO2, WO3, etc., are promising supports due to their thermal as well as chemical stability, metal–support interaction, and co-catalytic performance.246–248
Modified Ti-based oxides exhibited good electrical conductivity and chemical stability under the ambient conditions. The stability of these modified Ti-oxides is very high and they also do not form hydrides in the presence of H2. Pt-Dispersed TiO2 nanosheets that are grafted on hierarchical carbon nano-tubes showed higher electrocatalytic activity by 2-fold and improved stability by 3-fold compared to that of the Pt-dispersed CNT or carbon black.249 Ru-Doped TiO2 (Ru0.7Ti0.3O2) as the support for the deposition of Pt NPs was prepared by the hydrazine reduction method, which exhibited improved catalytic activity for ORR under acidic conditions compared with the commercial Pt/C due to the strong catalyst-support interactions.250 Ta and Nb-doped Ti-oxide-based supports were prepared to increase the conductivity through colloidal and sol–gel methods. Ta-Doped TiO2 synthesized by the sulphite complex method showed promising ORR activity as well as stability.251 Intermetallic PtPb NPs supported on TiO2 as the catalyst was synthesized via a wet-chemical reduction route for ORR. This catalyst showed enhanced durable ORR performance and the PtPb NPs were not agglomerated after cyclic treatments under electric potential conditions owing to strong interactions between the metals and supports.252 MoO2-Supported Pt nanocatalysts were prepared through the formation of hydrogen molybdenum bronze, which showed improved ORR activity due to synergistic and promotional effects between MoO2 and Pt.253
Undoped SnO2 semiconductor has a band gap of ∼3.6 eV, and its resistance varies between 10 and 106 Ω cm, which depends on the temperature and stoichiometry, which can be decreased up to 10−3–10−4 Ω cm by the doping of Sb5+. Electrodes coated with the SnO2 thin film were fabricated by reactive magnetron sputtering and their electrochemical properties were examined. It was observed that the SnO2 support showed better stability between 0.05 and 1.00 V and showed no redox properties in this potential range. Pt was dispersed by sputtering on the SnO2 support and the corresponding catalytic activity was determined by rotating disc electrode measurements. 20 μg cm−2 of Pt was dispersed further by magnetic sputtering on these electrodes, which showed 2-fold higher ORR performance compared with Pt/C.254 Nano Pt was deposited electrochemically on the surface of SnO2 nanowires, which were coated on carbon fibers. The modified electrode exhibited both higher ORR electrocatalytic activity as well as the oxidation of methanol compared to that of Pt due to the interaction between Pt and SnO2. The electrocatalytic performance of the Pt-deposited Sb-doped SnO2 NPs for the oxidation of methanol and ethanol was investigated, which showed enhanced performance compared to that of Pt/C due to the effects of SnO2 adjacent to Pt via bifunctional or electronic effects.255
W-Based materials as catalysts, co-catalysts, supports, electrolytes, etc., play an important role in fuel cells, and they are considered as carbon-alternative support and Nafion-alternative electrolyte operating at intermediate temperatures due to their stability. Pt-Dispersed WO3 at various loadings on the carbon support was prepared to examine its ORR activity as well as the sulfur resistance under electrochemical conditions. The developed catalyst showed higher catalytic ORR activity after it was poisoned by SOx. It was observed that the number of electrons involved was four in the case of the W-modified catalyst during catalytic reaction but only two electrons were transferred in the case of Pt/C. The electronic interaction between Pt and WOx was also confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, which is a crucial factor for the enhanced ORR performance. Pt/W18O49 exhibited higher catalytic performance, anti-poisoning behavior, and stability compared to that of the reference catalysts not only due to the promotional effect of the WO3 support but also the strong interactions between WO3 and Pt.256
Other PGM-based catalysts, for instance, Pd was also explored as an alternative to the Pt catalysts owing to not only its relative abundance of minerals but also its higher CO tolerance compared with the Pt catalysts.257 Its higher CO-tolerance behavior reduces the need of an active surface area; therefore, the desired catalytic activity can be achieved with little amounts of Pd, and thus, the overall cost of the fuel cells can be reduced. Although the activity of Pd is relatively lower than that of Pt, the alloy form of Pd (e.g., PdNi, PdCu, and PdSn) can improve the catalytic activity, which is comparable with that of pure Pt.258,259 The Pd catalysts showed improved catalytic performance for ethanol oxidation and tolerance towards poisonous moieties formed under alkaline conditions. The activity of Pd was enhanced upon the addition of a smaller amount of Pt and the PdPt catalyst showed tolerance for CO poisoning.260 The ORR performance of Pd was improved further compared to that of Pt upon the addition of Co or Fe with Pd.261 Similarly, the H2 oxidation reaction (HOR) performance of Pd was also improved by the addition of a very smaller amount of Pt (5%), whereas HOR performance is, however, lower in its pure form.262 The PdPt binary alloy catalyst showed more resistivity towards sulfur poisoning due to its improved structural and electronic effects compared to that of its counterparts.263 Although PtPd showed comparable activity for methanol oxidation compared with Pt, it showed enhanced catalytic formic acid oxidation due to its ability for complete oxidation without the formation of any intermediates, which yield CO2 as the final end product directly.264 From the compositional effect of PdSn alloy, it has been concluded that the Pd86Sn14 alloy showed the best activity for ethanol oxidation.265 Cu in PdSn can also enhance the electrochemical activity for the oxidation of ethanol and stability. The ordered intermetallic Pd1.87Cu0.11Sn ternary catalyst was synthesized at a lower temperature of 220 °C, which showed 4.62- and 2.9-fold greater specific and mass activities, respectively, towards ethanol oxidation reaction compared to Pd/C. The improved performance is due to the surroundings of the Pd centers as a result of the formation of ordered intermetallic structures. It was found that this catalyst is more stable by about 2.7-fold than the commercial Pd/C.266 Nitrogen-doped, reduced graphene oxide-supported Pd3Co alloy nanocomposite was developed for ORR, which showed 1.6-fold higher mass activity compared to that of Pd through the four electron transfer mechanism, where Pd loading on the substrate is 0.5 mg cm−2.267 It was observed that Pt catalysts are active under acidic conditions; however, they are sluggish under alkaline conditions when compared with the Pd catalysts, which limits the Pt usage as catalysts under alkaline conditions. Therefore, Pt-based catalysts with higher catalytic performance need to be developed to use them as catalysts under alkaline conditions.268
Stable Pt-free catalysts along with superior catalytic activity are essential for the commercialization of fuel cell-based vehicles at a larger scale. Nitrogen-doped reduced graphene-supported alloy PdCo catalyst was developed, which showed improved ORR mass activity compared with the Pd catalyst via the four-electron transfer mechanism.269 Oxide based catalysts (e.g., transition metal oxides and perovskites) have been employed recently for PEMFC applications due to their excellent oxidation activity, high thermal stability, lower price, availability of minerals, variable oxidation states, etc.270 The research and developments on these oxides for their possible use in PEMFC applications are still under progress. Mixed metal oxides based on Co, Cu, Mn, Fe, etc., showed better ORR performance due to their enhanced electrical conductivity, favorable size and morphology, compared to that of their individual oxides. It was observed, in particular, that the presence of Co2+ increased the ORR activity.271 The carbon composite-containing ZnO particles with a larger surface area was developed for the oxidation of methanol, which showed improved catalytic activity along with the stability. It was found that the addition of ZnO increased the resistance for the corrosion of carbon during the fuel cell reaction.272 Despite some initial developments, efforts are needed to identify promising Pt-free catalysts for viable fuel cell technology in the future.
Conclusions
The utilization of H2 and other small organic C1- or C2-molecules in fuel cells for transportation and other decentralized applications will reduce the GHG emissions significantly in the environment. Although the fuel cells showed promise as a potentially cleaner energy option, the H2 production methods and the essential components of the fuel cells, for instance, electrodes and membranes, need to be developed to create them as a viable technology at a larger scale in the future. In this article, the H2 production methods through thermochemical process, photocatalytic water splitting, electrolysis, etc., and material developments for the purification of H2 using separation membrane, catalyst development for preferential oxidation of CO, etc., are discussed in detail. The use of materials for H2 storage and transportation and their limitations are also discussed. More emphasis on the current advancements in material developments based on alloy or intermetallic catalysts using platinum and non-platinum group metals for both cathode and anode electrodes, membrane, etc., in PEMFC and direct fuel cells is also laid in this article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology, Govt. of India for the financial support (EMR/20l6/006063). KRC No.: CSIR-NEERI/KRC/2020/JULY/CZC/1.
Notes and references
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report, Global warming of 1.5 °C, Summary for Policymakers, 2018.
United Nations Climate Change, The Paris Agreement, 2015, https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement.
International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Investment, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2018.
International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Outlook, Paris https://webstore.iea.org/world-energy-outlook-2018.
B. Satari, K. Karimi and R. Kumar, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 11–62 RSC .
P. J. Smith, H.-T. Wang, W. S. York, M. J. Peña and B. R. Urbanowicz, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2017, 286, 1–14 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, R. Yan, H. Chen, D. H. Lee and C. Zheng, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1781–1788 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sasaki, Y. Ukyo and P. Novák, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 569–575 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Huggins, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2643–2646 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Standridge and M. M. Hasan, J. Ind. Eng. Manage., 2015, 8, 823–839 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Li, E. Fan, Q. Xue, Y. Bian, F. Wu and R. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7239–7302 RSC .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef .
G. Harper, R. Sommerville, E. Kendrick, L. Driscoll, P. Slater, R. Stolkin, A. Walton, P. Christensen, O. Heidrich, S. Lambert, A. Abbott, K. Ryder, L. Gaines and P. Anderson, Nature, 2019, 575, 75–86 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fleury, J. Jayaraj, Y. C. Kim, H. K. Seok, K. Y. Kim and K. B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. M. Ehteshami and S. H. Chan, Energy Policy, 2014, 73, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dalvi and M. Guay, Control. Eng. Pract., 2009, 17, 924–938 CrossRef .
A. Veziroglu and R. Macario, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 25–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Swesi, D. Ronze, I. Pitault, R. Dittmeyer and F. Heurtaux, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 5059–5066 CrossRef CAS .
A. Midilli and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 511–524 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Garland, D. C. Papageorgopoulos and J. M. Stanford, Energy Procedia, 2012, 28, 2–11 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dou, H. Zhang, Y. Song, L. Zhao, B. Jiang, M. He, C. Ruan, H. Chen and Y. Xu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 314–342 RSC .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Al-Hamamre, S. Voß and D. Trimis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 827–832,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.10.085 .
A. G. Oshchepkov, G. Braesch, S. Ould-Amara, G. Rostamikia, G. Maranzana, A. Bonnefont, V. Papaefthimiou, M. J. Janik, M. Chatenet and E. R. Savinova, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8520–8528 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dekel, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 158–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alesker, M. Page, M. Shviro, Y. Paska, G. Gershinsky, D. R. Dekel and D. Zitoun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
R. Khobragade, D. Yearwar, N. Labhsetwar and G. Saravanan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28757–28768 CrossRef CAS .
E. Moretti, M. Lenarda, L. Storaro, A. Talon, R. Frattini, S. Polizzi, E. R. Castellon and A. Jimenez-Lopez, Appl. Catal., 2007, 72, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Woods, P. Gawade, B. Tan and U. S. Ozkan, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 97, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
V. Recupero, L. Pino, A. Vita, F. Cipitı, M. Cordaro and M. Lagana, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 963–971 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lakshmanan, J. E. Park and E. D. Park, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2014, 18, 75–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, X. Lin, R. Jin, Y. Dai and G. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 554–563 RSC .
N. K. Soliman, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 2395–2407 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. S. Queiroz, A. P. Machado, A. R. N. Paiva, R. M. Antoniassi, J. M. Vaz and E. V. Spinacé, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 8, 1–8 Search PubMed .
O. Pozdnyakova, D. Teschner, A. Wootsch, J. Kröhnert, B. Steinhauer, H. Sauer, L. Toth, F. C. Jentoft, A. Knop-Gericke, Z. Paál and R. Schlögl, J. Catal., 2006, 237, 17–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. Galletti, S. Specchia, G. Saracco and V. Specchia, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 5304–5312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, A. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Huang, X. Wang, J. Shen and T. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 758–766 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. S. Veras, T. S. Mozer, D. D. C. R. M. D. Santos and A. D. S. Cesar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2018–2033 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Quek, D. A. J. M. Ligthart, M. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Q. Yang and E. J. M. Hensen, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Quinonero, M. Navlani-García, D. Lozano-Castello, A. Bueno-López and J. A. Anderson, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1723–1731 CrossRef .
Z. Zhaoa, R. Jina, T. Baoa, X. Lina and G. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 154–163 CrossRef .
A. L. Camara, V. C. Corberan, L. Barrio, G. Zhou, R. Si, J. C. Hanson, M. Monte, J. C. Conesa, J. A. Rodriguez and A. Martínez-Arias, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9030–9041 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, A. Wang and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1165–1178 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grzybek, K. Ciura, J. Grybos, P. Indyka, A. Davo-Quinonero, D. Lozano-Castello, A. Bueno-Lopez, A. Kotarba and Z. Sojka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 20221–20232 CrossRef .
A. U. Nilekar, S. Alayoglu, B. Eichhorn and M. Mavrikakis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7418–7428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furukawa, K. Ehara and T. Komatsu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1642 RSC .
J. Saavedra, T. Whittaker, Z. Chen, C. J. Pursell, R. M. Rioux and B. D. Chandler, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 RSC .
Y. He, S. Liu, C. Priest, Q. Shi and G. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3484–3524 RSC .
X. Ren, Q. Lv, L. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Liu and G. Wu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 4, 15–30 RSC .
P. S. Barbato, S. Colussi, A. D. Benedetto, G. Landi, L. Lisi, J. Llorca and A. Trovarelli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13039–13048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, J. Luo, M. Meng, G. Wang and J. He, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 3743–3754 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, J. Liu, Y. G. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Liu, A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6249–6254 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, T. Ding, W. Gao, K. Ma, Y. Tian and X. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 17457–17465 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Cortright, R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, Nature, 2010, 418, 289–292 Search PubMed .
T. Cwele, N. Mahadevaiah, S. Singh and H. B. Friedrich, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Papavasiliou, Catal. Today, 2020, 357, 684–693 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leelavathi, N. Ravishankar and G. Madras, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14430–14436 RSC .
G. Jing, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Wu, Q. Wang, G. Wu, L. Yana and S. Zeng, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 363–371 RSC .
S. Chen, L. Li, W. Hu, X. Huang, Q. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Zuo and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22999–23007 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Chagas, E. F. Souza, R. L. Manfro, S. M. Landi, M. M. V. M. Souza and M. Schmal, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, J. Wu, G. Jing, H. Zhang, S. Zeng, X. Tian, X. Zou, J. Wen, H. Su, C. Zhong and P. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 665–676 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Reina, S. Ivanova, V. Idakiev, T. Tabakova, M. A. Centeno, Q. F. Deng, Z. Y. Yuan and J. A. Odriozola, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 414, 62–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saavedra, T. Whittaker, Z. Chen, C. J. Pursell, R. M. Rioux and B. D. Chandler, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Phair and S. P. S. Badwal, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2006, 7, 792–805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mazloomi and C. Gomes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3024–3033 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari and S. Fernando, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, C. Huang, N. Muradov and A. T-Raissi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4710–4715 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Cai, H. Ren, Y. Wei, Z. Xu, H. Liu and Y. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 12605–12612 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liguori, K. Kian, N. Buggy, B. H. Anzelmo and J. Wilcox, Prog. Energy Combust., 2020, 80, 100851 CrossRef .
S. Yun and S. T. Oyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 375, 28–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tosti, C. Cavezza, M. Fabbricino, L. Pontoni, V. Palma and C. Ruocco, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 275, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Dolan, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 362, 12–28 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Al-Mufachi, N. V. Rees and R. Steinberger-Wilkens, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 47, 540–551 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, A. Caravella and H. Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14069–14094 RSC .
M. Sarwar, J. L. Gavartin, A. M. Bonastre, S. G. Lopez, D. Thompsett, S. C. Ball, A. Krzystala, G. Goldbeck and S. A. French, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 5902–5914 RSC .
M. Sarwar, J. L. Gavartin, A. M. Bonastre, S. G. Lopez, D. Thompsett, S. C. Ball, A. Krzystala, G. Goldbeck and S. A. French, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11999–12044 CrossRef .
B. D. Adams and A. Chen, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bianchini and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4183–4206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Q. Yuan, B. Ni, T. He, S. Zhang, Y. Long, L. Gu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3702,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-06043-1 .
K. Jiang, H. Zhang, S. Zou and W. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20360–20376 RSC .
N. W. Ockwig and T. M. Nenoff, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4078–4110 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Phair and R. Donelson, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 5657–5674 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, J. Zhang, K. Hongsirikarn and J. G. Goodwin Jr, Chem. Rev., 2013, 55, 255–288 CAS .
P. Boldrin, E. Ruiz-Trejo, J. Mermelstein, J. M. B. Menéndez, T. Reina and N. P. Brandon, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13633–13684 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. Su, Y. Wu, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 8104–8151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soszko, M. Łukaszewski, Z. Mianowska and A. Czerwin'ski, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3513–3522 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tosti, L. Bettinali and V. Violante, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25, 319–325 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hara, N. Hatakeyama, N. Itoh, H.-M. Kimura and A. Inoue, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 211, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Dolan, N. C. Dave, A. Y. Ilyushechkin, L. D. Morpeth and K. G. McLennan, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 285, 30–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayalakshmi, V. S. Vasantha, E. Fleury and M. Gupta, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Paglieri, N. K. Pal, M. D. Dolan, S. Kim, W. Chien, J. Lamb, D. Chandra, K. M. Hubbard and D. P. Moore, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 378, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, D. Chandra, N. K. Pal, M. D. Dolan, W. Chien, A. Talekar, J. Lamb, S. N. Paglieri and T. B. Flanagan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3904–3913 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarker, D. Chandra, M. Hirscher, M. Dolan, D. Isheim, J. Wermer, D. Viano, M. Baricco, T. J. Udovic, D. Grant, O. Palumbo, A. Paolone and R. Cantelli, Appl. Phys. A, 2016, 122, 168 CrossRef .
E. A. Evard, A. A. Kurdumov, F. N. Berseneva and I. E. Gabis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2780–2832 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Pan, J. O. Jensen, P. Noye and N. J. Bjerrum, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 350–352 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Sanders, Z. P. Smith, R. Guo, L. M. Robeson, J. E. McGrath, D. R. Paul and B. D. Freeman, Polymer, 2013, 54, 4729–4761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu and T. P. Lodge, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1732–1736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Wang and T. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 189, 231–239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Atkinson, S. Barnett, R. J. Gorte, J. T. S. Irvine, A. J. Mcevoy, M. Mogensen, S. C. Singhal and J. Vohs, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 213–223 CrossRef .
P. Sapkota, C. Boyer, R. Dutta, C. Cazorla and K. Aguey-Zinsou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 439–468 RSC .
C. Acar and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lund, Energy, 2007, 32, 912–919 CrossRef .
F. M. Langer, E. Tzimas, M. Kaltschmitt and S. Peteves, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3797–3810 CrossRef .
L. D. S. Munoz, A. Bergel, D. Feron and R. Basseguy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8561–8568 CrossRef .
P. Hidalgo-Manrique1, X. Lei, R. Xu, M. Zhou, I. A. Kinloch and R. J. Young, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 12236–12289 CrossRef .
S. H. Jensen, P. H. Larsen and M. Mogensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3253–3257 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pletcher and X. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15089–15104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L. D. Koh, S. Liu, C. P. Teng and M. Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef .
C. Acar, I. Dincer and G. F. Naterer, Int. J. Energy Res., 2016, 40, 1449–1473 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fajrina and M. Tahir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 44, 540–577 CrossRef .
Y. Inoue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 364–386 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. K. Peng, L. Hu, J. Zheng, D. Prabhakaran, S. Wu, T. J. Puchtler, M. Li, K. Y. Wong, R. A. Taylor and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4421,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-12385-1 .
J. Yang, H. Yan, X. Wang, F. Wen, Z. Wang, D. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, R. Chong, F. Zhang, Q. Xu, S. Shen, H. Han and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17734–17742 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, K. Toda, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20504–20510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, F. Wen, H. Jiang, J. Yang, P. Ying and C. Li, Catal. Lett., 2010, 134, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakata, T. Hayashi, R. Yasunaga, N. Yanaga and H. Imamura, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12935–12938 RSC .
T. H. Chiang, H. Lyu, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2782–2788 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, L. Bai, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 134, 8254–8259 CrossRef .
A. Kudo, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li and C. Li, Adv. Catal., 2017, 60, 1–57 CAS .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1801294, 1–15 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Rev., 2020 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00840 .
X. Zhou, H. Sun, H. Zhang and W. Tu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11199–11205 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bi, R. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Lin, D. Wang, X. Zou and T. Xie, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15137–15145 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, Q. Ba, S. Liu, X. Jia, H. Liu, W. Chen and X. Li, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 31529–31537 RSC .
W. Zhen, Y. Guo, Y. Wu and G. Lu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 13804–13811 RSC .
W. Kurashige, R. Hayashi, K. Wakamatsu, Y. Kataoka, S. Hossain, A. Iwase, A. Kudo, S. Yamazoe and Y. Negishi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4175–4187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manikandan, T. Tanabe, P. Li, S. Ueda, G. V. Ramesh, R. Kodiyath, J. Wang, T. Hara, A. Dakshanamoorthy, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga, J. Ye, N. Umezawa and H. Abe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3790–3793 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Deng, L. Yu, Z. Lin, W. Wang and G. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, F. del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35–54 RSC .
X. Lu, S. Xie, H. Yang, Y. Tong and H. Ji, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7581–7593 RSC .
C. Yu, Q. Jia, H. Zhang, W. Liu, X. Yu and X. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 527–532 RSC .
V. Veeramani, H. C. Yu, S. Hu and R. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17280–17286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Andersson and S. Gronkvist, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11901–11919 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moradi and K. M. Groth, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 12254–12269 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Allendorf, Z. Hulvey, T. Gennett, A. Ahmed, T. Autrey, J. Camp, E. S. Cho, H. Furukawa, M. Haranczyk, M. Head-Gordon, S. Jeong, A. Karkamkar, D. Liu, J. R. Long, K. R. Meihaus, I. H. Nayyar, R. Nazarov, D. J. Siegel, V. Stavila, J. J. Urban, S. P. Veccham and B. C. Wood, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2784–2812 RSC .
P. T. Aakko-Saksa, M. Vehkamaki, M. Kemell, L. Keskivali, P. Simell, M. Reinikainen, U. Tapper and T. Repo, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1657–1660 RSC .
E. Ogungbemi, O. Ijaodola, F. N. Khatib, T. Wilberforce, Z. E. Hassan, J. Thompson, M. Ramadan and A. G. Olabi, Energy, 2019, 172, 155–172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunowsky, J. P. Marco-Lózar and A. Linares-Solano, J. Renewable Energy, 2013, 878329, 1–16 Search PubMed .
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office: Materials – Based Hydrogen Storage, https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/materials-based-hydrogen-storage, (accessed June 2020).
P. K. Chattaraj, S. Bandaru and S. Mondal, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. C. Berg and C. O. Arean, Chem. Commun., 2008, 668–681 RSC .
A. U. Pradhan, A. Shukla, J. V. Pande, S. Karmarkar and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 680–688 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alhumaidan, D. Tsakiris, D. Cresswell and A. Garforth, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14010–14026 CrossRef CAS .
D. Teichmann, W. Arlt and P. Wasserscheid, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18118–18132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okada, E. Sasaki, E. Watanabe, S. Hyodo and H. Nishijima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1348–1356 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, S. Qi, J. Qu, T. Che, C. Yi and B. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 5345–5354 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Martynenko, Al. A. Pimerzin, A. A. Savinov, S. P. Verevkin and A. A. Pimerzin, Top. Catal., 2020, 63, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Pande, A. B. Bindwal, Y. B. Pakade and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 7411–7423 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Patil, J. V. Pande and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 5233–5241 Search PubMed .
J. V. Pande, A. Shukla and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6756–6763 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shukla, J. V. Pande and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3350–3357 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Shukla, P. V. Gosavi, J. V. Pande, V. P. Kumar, K. V. R. Chary and R. B. Biniwale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4020–4026 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wilberforce, Z. El-Hassan, F. N. Khatib, A. Al Makky, J. Mooney, A. Barouaji, J. G. Carton and A. Olabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 25663–25685 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Carton and A. G. Olabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5726–5738 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wilberforce, Z. El-Hassan, F. N. Khatib, A. Al Makky, A. Baroutaji, J. G. Carton and A. G. Olabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 25695–25734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biyikoglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 1181–1212 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arvay, E. Y. Rantala, C. H. Liu, X. H. Peng, P. Koski, L. Cindrella, P. Kauranen, P. M. Wilde and A. M. Kannan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 317–337 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Martinson, G. V. Schoor, K. R. Uren and D. Bessarabov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20865–20878 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Abdin, C. J. Webb and E. M. A. Gray, Energy, 2016, 116, 1131–1144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roziere and D. J. Jones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2003, 33, 503–555 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barbir and T. Gomez, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 1027–1037 CrossRef CAS .
M. Emery, M. Frey, M. Guerra, G. Haugen, K. Hintzer, K. H. Lochhaas, P. Pham, D. Pierpont, M. Schaberg, A. Thaler, M. Yandrasits and S. Hamrock, ECS Trans., 2007, 11, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hosseinpour, M. Sahoo, M. Perez-Page, S. R. Baylis, F. Patel and S. M. Holmes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 30409–30419 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sahu, S. Pitchumani, P. Sridhar and A. K. Shukla, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2009, 32, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sandstrom, A. Annamalai, N. Boulanger, J. Ekspong, A. Talyzin, I. Muhlbacher and T. Wagberg, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1790–1798 RSC .
Y. Ye, J. Rick and B. Hwa, Polymers, 2012, 4, 913–963 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyahara, T. Hayano, S. Matsuno, M. Watanabe and K. Miyatake, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2881–2884 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gunji, T. Tanabe, A. J. Jeevagan, S. Usui, T. Tsuda, S. Kaneko, G. Saravanan, H. Abe and F. Matsumoto, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 990–998 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, N. Zhao, B. Fang, H. Li, X. T. Bi and H. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3433–3467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Lin, J. Mater.
Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4631–4641 RSC .
C. Wang, M. Chi, D. Li, D. V. D. Vliet, G. Wang, Q. Lin, J. F. Mitchell, K. L. More, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2011, 10, 1355–1359 CrossRef .
J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 810–815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, G. Lan, Y. Jiang, Y. Xu, W. Zhu, C. Jin and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 1480–1496 CrossRef .
J. B. Xu, T. S. Zhao and Z. X. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17362–17367 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. C. Ramli and S. K. Kamarudin, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 410 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Chi, D. Li, D. Strmcnik, D. Vliet, G. Wang, V. Komanicky, K. Chang, A. P. Paulikas, D. Tripkovic, J. Pearson, K. L. More, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14396–14403 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Hassan, J. Fuel Chem. Technol., 2009, 37, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirscher and V. A. Yartys, 
            et al.
          , J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 827, 153548 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Miracle and O. N. Senkov, Acta Mater., 2016, 122, 448–511 CrossRef .
S. Jana, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 18692–18717 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
T. Ioroi, T. Akita, M. Asahi, S. Yamazaki, Z. Siroma, N. Fujiwara and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tseng, S. Loa, S. Lo and P. P. Chu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 100, 385–390 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
G. Saravanan, R. Khobragade, L. C. Nagar and N. Labhsetwar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85634–85642 RSC .
C. Sealy, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, S. C. Zignani, S. F. Santos and E. R. Gonzalez, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2299–2305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Long, L. Wang, R. Yuan, A. Ignaszak, B. Fang and D. P. Wilkinson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 258–275 RSC .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, J. Zhang, K. Hongsirikarn and J. G. Goodwin Jr., Catal. Rev., 2013, 55, 255–288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zang, F. Wang, Q. Cheng, G. Wang, L. Ma, C. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Zou, D. Xie and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3686–3691 RSC .
L. Chong, J. Wen, J. Kubal, F. G. Sen, J. Zou, J. Greeley, M. Chan, H. Barkholtz, W. Ding and D. Liu, Science, 2018, 362, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh, E. B. Tetteh, H. Lee, T. Kang and J. Yu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8622–8645 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thounthong, S. Raël and B. Davat, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 376–385 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, J. B. Pyo, X. Ye, T. R. Gordon and C. B. Murray, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5642–5647 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, I.-G. Ali Ossufo, H. Ye, Y. Huang, S. Ge, Z. Xiang, Y. Cui and R. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6031–6038 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jana and S. C. Peter, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 242, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jana, S. Dhiman and S. C. Peter, Mater. Res. Exp., 2016, 3, 084001 CrossRef .
M. A. F. Akhairi and S. K. Kamarudin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4214–4228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chu and Y. G. Shul, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11261–11270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, R. Jana, H. Vadlamani, S. Ramani, D. Mumbaraddi and S. C. Peter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15373–15382 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Patil, J. S. Jadhav and S. T. Sankpal, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 11808 RSC .
S. Sarkar, R. Jana, S. Prasad, U. V. Waghmare, B. Thapa, S. Sampath and S. C. Peter, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7459–7467 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kodiyath, G. V. Ramesh, E. Koudelkova, T. Tanabe, M. Ito, M. Manikandan, S. Ueda, T. Fujita, N. Umezawa, H. Noguchi, K. Ariga and H. Abe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1685–1689 RSC .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B.-Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
N. Santos-Álvarez, L. R. Alden, E. Rus, H. Wang, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 626, 14–22 CrossRef .
J. Zeng and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2005, 140, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
A. Shan, Z. Chen, B. Li, C. Chen and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1031–1036 RSC .
A. Arvay, E. Y. Rantala, C. H. Liu, X. H. Peng, P. Koski, L. Cindrella, P. Kauranen, P. M. Wilde and A. M. Kannan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 317–337 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sui, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Su, S. Riffat and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem.
A, 2017, 5, 1808–1825 RSC .
N. Travitsky, T. Ripenbein, D. Golodnitsky, Y. Rosenberg, L. Burshtein and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 782–789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Wang, S. Adimi, H. Shen, T. Thomas, R. Ma, J. P. Attfield and M. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abe, F. Matsumoto, L. R. Alden, S. C. Warren, H. D. Abruña and F. J. DiSalvo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5452–5458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wilberforce, A. Alaswad, A. Palumbo, M. Dassisti and A. G. Olabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16509–16522 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, Z. Shi, N. Glass, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Song, Z. S. Liu, H. Wang and J. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 739–756 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Brandon and D. Hart, An Introduction to Fuel Cell Technology and Economics, Centre for Energy Policy and Technology (ICCEPT), London,  1999 Search PubMed .
Z. Cui, H. Chen, W. Zhou, M. Zhao and F. J. DiSalvo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7538–7545 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
X. X. Du, Y. He, X. X. Wang and J. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2623–2632 RSC .
N. Labhasetwar, G. Saravanan, S. K. Megarajan, N. Manwar, R. Khobragade, P. Doggali and F. Grasset, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 036002 CrossRef .
A. Alaswad, A. Baroutaji, H. Achour, J. Carton, A. A. Makky and A. G. Olabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16499–16508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Samad, K. S. Loh, W. Y. Wong, T. K. Lee, J. Sunarso, S. T. Chong and W. R. W. Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 7823–7854 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, Z. Shi, N. Glass, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Song, Z. Liu, H. Wang and J. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 739–756 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Qiao, L. Yang and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301523 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, S. Du and R. Steinberger-Wilckens, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 389–395 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mansor, A. B. Jorge, F. Cora, C. Gibbs, R. Jervis, P. F. McMillan, X. Wang and D. J. L. Brett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6831–6838 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Chen, J. Y. Lee and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2588–2589 RSC .
N. Chaisubanan, N. Chanlek, Y. Puarporn, W. Limphirat, P. Piumsomboon, K. Pruksathorn and M. Hunsom, Renewable Energy, 2019, 139, 679–687 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5063–5074 RSC .
F. Dong, Z. Zhao, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, W. Zhang, Y. Sun and W. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11392–11401 CrossRef CAS .
N. Abdullah and S. K. Kamarudin, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 109–118 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Elezovic, V. R. Radmilovic and N. V. Krstajic, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 6788–6801 RSC .
S. Siracusano, A. Stassi, E. Modica, V. Baglio and A. S. Arico, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11600–11608 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gunji, K. Sakai, Y. Suzuki, S. Kaneko, T. Tanabe and F. Matsumoto, Catal. Commun., 2015, 61, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vellacheri, S. M. Unni, S. Nahire, U. K. Kharul and S. Kurungot, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rabis, E. Fabbri, A. Foelske, M. Horisberger, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 9–17 CrossRef .
M. S. Saha, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2229–2234 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, H. Gong, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Liu, S. Wang and C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20154–20163 RSC .
Z. Yin, L. Lin and D. Ma, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 4116–4128 RSC .
J. Kim, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 999–1002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Sarkar and A. Manthiram, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1756–1765 CrossRef CAS .
O. Muneeb, E. Do, D. Boyd, J. Perez and J. L. Haan, Appl. Energy, 2019, 235, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 915–931 RSC .
J. Ohyama, K. Okubo, K. Ishikawa, T. Saida, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arai and A. Satsuma, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1854–1859 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, H. Yang, R. Hawkins and Z. Ring, Catal. Today, 2007, 125, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alcaide, G. Alvarez, P. L. Cabot, O. Miguel and A. Querejeta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11634–11641 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, J. Xie, Q. Dong, G. Yu and H. Chen, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 19242–19252 RSC .
A. R. Rajamani, P. C. Ashly, L. Dheer, S. C. Sarma, S. Sarkar, D. Bagchi, U. V. Waghmare and S. C. Peter, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(10), 7132–7141 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, Y. Zheng, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13179 RSC .
S. Ramani, S. Sarkar, V. Vemuri and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11572–11576 RSC .
P. Chandran, A. Ghosh and S. Ramaprabhu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3591 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8194–8209 RSC .
X. Ge, A. Sumboja, D. Wuu, T. An, B. Li, F. W. T. Goh, T. S. A. Hor, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4643–4667 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, F. J. Perez-Alonso, F. Calle-Vallejo, L. Bech, T. P. Johansson, A. K. Jepsen, R. Frydendal, B. P. Knudsen, J. Rossmeisl and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5485–5491 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
