A sustainable approach for lignin valorization by heterogeneous photocatalysis  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5GC02109J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5GC02109J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594-607A sustainable approach for lignin valorization by heterogeneous photocatalysis

        
          
            Shao-Hai 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Siqi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Juan Carlos 
            Colmenares
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350002, P. R. China. E-mail: yjxu@fzu.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, New Campus, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350108, P. R. China
cInstitute of Physical Chemistry of the Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224, Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: jcarloscolmenares@ichf.edu.pl
Received 
      7th September 2015
    , Accepted 28th October 2015First published on 30th October 2015AbstractThe depletion of the Earth's fossil fuel reserves and the rapid increase in the emission of greenhouse gases and other environmental pollutants are driving the development of renewable energy technologies. Lignin is one of the three main subcomponents of lignocellulosic biomass in terrestrial ecosystems and makes up nearly 30% of the organic carbon sequestered in the biosphere. As a result of its rich content of aromatic carbon, lignin has the potential to be decomposed to yield valuable chemicals and alternatives to fossil fuels. However, the complex and stable chemical bonds of lignin make the depolymerization of lignin a difficult challenge with regard to its valorization. In this review, we highlight recent advances in the selective decomposition of lignin-based compounds via photocatalysis into other value-added chemicals and the treatment of waste water containing lignin. The photocatalytic transformation of lignin under mild conditions is particularly promising.Shao-Hai LiShao-Hai Li received his BS in chemistry from China University of Petroleum, P. R. China in 2011. He is now pursing his Master degree under the supervision of Professor Yi-Jun Xu at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China.Siqi LiuSiqi Liu is now pursing his PhD degree with the supervision of Professor Yi-Jun Xu at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the fabrication of one-dimension based nanostructures and graphene-based composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.Juan Carlos ColmenaresProfessor Juan Carlos Colmenares Q. is a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Fellow and now a research staff at Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland. His interests range from materials science, nanotechnology and heterogeneous catalysis to biomass/CO2 valorization, biofuels, sonication, photocatalysis and water–air purification.Yi-Jun XuYi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of semiconductor based nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based, one dimension-based, and core–shell structure-based composite photocatalysts, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
As a result of the depletion of fossil fuel reserves, coupled with the worldwide increase in the demand for fuels, concerns about the effects of burning fossil fuels on the Earth's climate and political commitment, focus has recently turned towards the improved utilization of renewable energy resources. Scientists have been encouraged to develop alternative energy sources that use technologies with low environmental impacts and greener methodologies, but which still have efficiencies comparable with current energy resources.1 Moving society's dependence away from petroleum to renewable biomass resources is generally viewed as an important contribution to the development of a sustainable industrial society and the effective management of greenhouse gas emissions.2 Biomass is an abundant and carbon-neutral renewable energy resource that can be used to produce biofuels and valuable chemicals. The organic oil fraction (pyrolysis oil, bio-oil) obtained by thermal pyrolysis converts up to 75% of the initial energy content of the biomass to an intermediate material suitable for upgrading to motor fuel.3 Energy production from biomass produces smaller amounts of greenhouse gases than the burning of fossil fuels. The carbon dioxide generated during the conversion of biomass is consumed during the subsequent regrowth of more biomass. Lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose are the three main subcomponents of lignocellulosic biomass in terrestrial ecosystems. Lignin makes up nearly 30% of the organic carbon sequestered in the biosphere, but is under-utilized. As a result of its rich content of aromatic carbon, it has the potential to be decomposed to yield valuable chemicals and alternatives to fossil fuels.
Lignin is a complex polymer and plays a number of important roles in plant cells. Lignin reinforces the strength of crystalline cellulose in the cell wall and middle lamellae, enabling plants to grow vertically upwards. The hydrophobic character of lignin facilitates the transmission of water and nutrients. It also acts as a barrier to attack from microorganisms and other pathogens. The content of lignin varies enormously between plant species.4,5 For example, in softwood conifers lignin represents 25–40% of the dry weight of the plant, whereas the lignin content in hardwoods is 18–25% and decreases to 10–20% of the dry weight of grasses and agricultural crops. The utilization of lignin as a raw material for valuable organic chemicals has been extensively studied, but without notable success due to its complex structure. Lignocellulosic residues are a highly promising (and currently largely under-utilized) feedstock with the potential to be converted into useful end-products. The valorization of lignin into chemical feedstocks is challenging in terms of both sustainability and environmental protection. The extraction of higher value products from lignin is increasingly recognized as crucial to the economic viability of integrated biorefineries.
Solar energy is an ideal renewable energy source as an alternative to fossil fuels. The amount of solar energy that reaches the Earth every hour (1.4 × 1030 J) is larger than all the energy consumed by humans over a whole year.6 With its renewable, non-toxic and sustainable characteristics, the utilization of solar radiation has been attracting increasing attention. Solar energy can be used in a number of applications, including solar thermal energy, photovoltaic generation, natural/artificial photosynthesis (including carbon dioxide, nitrogen fixation) and photocatalysis.7–11 Photocatalysis was first used in the 1970s after the discovery of water photolysis on a TiO2 electrode.12 Much research has been conducted in the field of photocatalysis using semiconductors. Photocatalysis is increasingly important in many environmental and energy applications. It is considered as a clean, effective, energy-saving, technologically simple and ecologically benign process with low costs. Its applications include a variety of chemical processes, such as oxidation, reduction, substitution, isomerization and polymerization. For example, it has been reported13,14 that lignin can power solar-induced hybrid fuel cell as a natural polymeric biomass feedstock. Photosynthesis is the fundamental life process on Earth and is also crucial in maintaining the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Biomass resources are derived from solar energy, which is viewed as an important contributor to the development of a sustainable industrial society and the effective management of greenhouse gas emissions. The concept of utilizing solar energy via photocatalysis under mild conditions is a promising strategy to tackle the current energy and environmental crises.
In 1998, green chemistry was defined by Anastas15 and Warner as the design of chemical products and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances. If we could obtain valuable products from natural resources using environmentally friendly methods (Fig. 1), then this could be regarded as a good example of green chemistry. According to preliminary studies, although the pre-treatment and transformation of lignin for the production of renewable chemicals has been extensively investigated,16,17 the photocatalytic transformation of lignin has only recently emerged as a promising alternative technique for the production of valuable chemicals and fuels. The use of photocatalysis in the valorization of cellulose to give to value-added chemicals has been reviewed elsewhere at a model/molecular level.18 However, the practical utilization of photochemical processes to valorize lignin has received less attention due to its complex and stable chemical bonds. Lignin is currently regarded as a by-product of the pulp and paper industries, wood hydrolysis industries, and the pre-treatment technologies used to obtain cellulosic ethanol and biodiesel. Lignin and its derivatives also cause the dark brown coloration of the effluent from pulp factories.
 Fig. 1  Utilization of biomass photosynthesis and photocatalysis. 
This review begins by briefly highlighting the structural properties of lignin and the different pre-treatment methods used to further elucidate how photocatalytic oxidation can be used to selectively valorize lignin substrates and lignin-based compounds. Recent advances in the selective photocatalytic decomposition of lignin-based compounds into other value-added chemicals and the treatment of waste water containing lignin are then summarized. We give an overview of photocatalysis combined with other technologies as an integrated strategy in the depolymerization of lignin. This provides new practical opportunities to efficiently convert lignin and lignin-based compounds into value-added aromatic chemicals. Finally, we demonstrate the challenges and promising scope of the photocatalytic transformation of lignin under mild conditions. Future prospects and works in progress in this field are also emphasized.
2. Fundamentals of lignin biomass and semiconductor photocatalysis
2.1. Structural properties of lignin
Lignin is the most recalcitrant of the three components of lignocellulosic biomass (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin; Fig. 2A).19 Lignin is treated as a waste product in the pulp and paper industries, where it is burned to supply energy and to recover the pulping chemicals used in paper mills. Lignin lacks steric regularity and monomer chirality as a result of its complex structure. The structure of lignin follows from the mechanism of lignin biosynthesis, in which three p-hydroxycinnamyl alcohols, including coniferyl, sinapyl and coumaryl alcohols20,21 (Fig. 2B), are dehydrogenated to form phenoxy radicals. These radicals spontaneously polymerize, for example, to construct the sectional structure of softwood lignin (Fig. 2C).22 As a consequence, the selective cleavage of the aromatic carbon–oxygen (C–O) bonds in aryl ethers is very important in facilitating the depolymerization of oxygen-rich lignin by breaking down the C–O–C linkages, and for the hydrodeoxygenation of lignin-derived phenolic dimer fragments to give deoxygenated biofuels. However, the structure of lignin varies between materials, with softwoods and hardwoods having distinctive proportions of the monomer. This variability in composition means that the incidence of different types of bonds in lignin varies from one plant to another. For example, grass lignin has additional phenolic acids bound to the polymer by ester bonds. Thus an accurate understanding of different types of lignin is fundamental for its optimized use.
 Fig. 2  (A) Three-dimensional illustration of lignocellulose meshwork and its major components, including cellulose fibres (blue), lignin molecules (red), and hemicellulose (light green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Three monomers of lignin. (C) Section of softwood lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
2.2. Pre-treatment of lignin and valuable products obtained from lignin
Depolymerization is an important starting point for subsequent lignin valorization strategies because it can generate valuable aromatic chemicals and/or provide a source of low molecular mass feedstocks suitable for downstream processing. Commercial precedents show that certain types of lignin (lignosulphonates) may be converted into vanillin and other marketable products, but new technologies are needed to enhance the lignin value chain.23,24 The complex, irregular structure of lignin complicates chemical conversion and known depolymerization methods typically result in ill-defined products at low yields (<10–20 wt%).25 Valuable products can potentially be obtained from lignin with further development and the integration of new and current technologies.17

Fig. 3 shows the main pre-treatment methods used for the depolymerization of lignin; these methods isolate the principal components of the biomass and related materials and degrade the extended polymer into smaller compounds.16 However, the complex structure of the plant cell wall and the high crystallinity of cellulose makes it difficult to separate the feedstock into its components. This is one of the major challenges in the efficient fractionation of biomass. The structure of the isolated lignin stream is dependent on the pre-treatment method used. Consequently, different separation/pre-treatment methods will give different types of lignin with specific qualities and levels of purity.
 Fig. 3  Main methods used for the pre-treatment and depolymerization of lignin. 

2.2.1. Physical pre-treatment of lignin. 
The physical pre-treatment of lignin is fundamentally important and is used along with other technologies. Ball-milling is commonly used to reduce the particle size and can loosen the inner structure of the biomass,26 which promotes the efficiency of other pre-treatment methods. The use of ultrasound on the lignocellulosic biomass increases the extraction yield of lignin and the degradation of the lignin components, especially through cleavage of the lignin–hemicellulose linkages.27,28 The magnitudes of these effects are altered when the ultrasonic field is influenced by parameters such as the solvent used, the ultrasonic frequency, and the reactor geometry and type. This technology has been mainly applied in the production of low-value chemicals such as biodiesel, or as a simple method for pre-treatment or extraction. The additional energy required for ultrasound presents a limitation for the scale-up process.19,29
The O3 generated in a plasma fed with dry air (or oxygen-enriched dry air) has been used for the degradation of lignin at atmospheric pressure and room temperature.30 O3 is predicted to oxidatively degrade the unsaturated organic compounds in lignin, whereas saturated compounds such as carbohydrates are only attacked to a minor extent.31 Microwave irradiation (MWI) has been used as a heat source for the pre-treatment of lignocellulose since the advent of commercial microwave ovens in the 1970s.32 Compared with conventional heating techniques, such as heating with a hotplate, MWI has several advantages: it reduces the reaction time remarkably; it enables more rapid product formation; and it lowers the activation energy of reactions. Li et al.33 showed that lignin pre-treated by MWI could be feasibly and efficiently transformed into bio-oil, phenol, acetovanillone and other phenolic compounds. However, pre-treatment by MWI faces some obstacles in the scale-up to industrial use: the high cost of pre-treatment; a shortage of large-scale equipment; the development of highly efficient microwave absorbents; and the controversial non-thermal effects in pre-treatment. The described methods could be used to separate lignocellulosic material into cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin with the aim of facilitating the production of high-value by-products from cellulose-based bioethanol production.


2.2.2. Solvent pre-treatment of lignin. 
A liquid mixture containing sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide, ethanol and water can be used as a chemical pre-treatment to extract lignin.34 The pulp and paper industry has commonly employed the kraft process to remove lignin. Base-catalysed depolymerization with sodium hydroxide, using boric acid and phenol as capping agents, has been studied to valorize lignin into monomeric phenolic compounds, focusing on avoiding the polymerization phenomenon.35 However, the kraft process is performed using sodium hydroxide and sulfur compounds at a high temperature under high pressure.36 The disadvantages associated with kraft pulping include pollution, odour and high water usage, with subsequent problems of waste water treatment. Pre-treatment with ionic liquids not only disrupts the plant cell wall and separates the cellulosic, hemicellulosic and lignin components, but also can oxidize the lignin biomass to value-added aromatic chemicals.37–40 However, the separation of sugar alcohols from such solvents and the recycling of the catalysts and solvents remains challenging. From the environmental and economic viewpoints, a solvent-less, low temperature delignification method is desirable.
Inorganic and organic acids have been applied to decompose and separate lignin biomass under mild conditions. Deuss et al.41 reported that a catalytic amount of triflic acid was effective in cleaving the β-O-4 linkage of a model compound. The aldehyde intermediates played a significant role in these processes. When the intermediates were captured by reaction with diols and in situ catalytic hydrogenation or decarbonylation, the processes led to three distinct groups of aromatic compounds in high yields (acetal, ethanolic and ethyl aromatics, and methyl aromatics) and the formation of higher molecular weight side-products was markedly suppressed. The same products were obtained when these approaches were extended to treat walnut dioxosolv-lignin. Rahimi et al.25 evaluated the depolymerization of oxidized lignin under mild conditions in aqueous formic acid. The application of the C–O cleavage method to the depolymerization of aspen lignin and mechanistic insights into the reaction resulted in a more than 60 wt% yield of low molecular mass aromatics (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (A) Depolymerization of oxidized aspen lignin. (B) Identification, quantification and distribution of products obtained from the depolymerization of oxidized lignin (left) compared with those from native lignin (right). Modified with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Liu et al.42 have demonstrated the use of a mixed phosphate and methyl-isobutylketone solution as a reusable medium; the desired products were separated during the reaction, which avoided oxidation of the products and significantly improved the conversion of lignin and the yield of aromatic aldehydes. Compared with the traditional solvent of an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, this process has some advantages, including easy product separation and purification, and the recyclability of the solvent. The primary drawback is the corrosiveness of the acids; the process has other limitations, such as a high energy consumption and low solvent recovery.43,44


2.2.3. Catalytic pre-treatment of lignin. 
Hydrothermal pre-treatment catalysed by AlCl3 provides a more effective approach for biomass pre-treatment.45 The molecular weight of the dissolved lignin has been shown to be reduced by a catalytic process to valorize lignin using a mixture of cheap, bio-renewable ethanol and water as the solvent. Ethanol/water mixtures readily solubilize lignin at moderate temperatures and pressures with little residual solid. The use of liquid-phase reforming of the solubilized lignin over a Pt/Al2O3 catalyst at 498 K and 58 bar has been introduced to give up to a 17% combined yield of monomeric aromatic oxygenated compounds, such as guaiacol and substituted guaiacols, generating hydrogen as a useful by-product. The reduction of the lignin dissolved in ethanol/water using a supported transition metal catalyst at 473 K and 30 bar hydrogen yielded up to 6% cyclic hydrocarbons and aromatics.46 Hydrogenolysis reactions offer a promising possibility for future biorefinery concepts. These reactions result in the cleavage of C–C and C–O bonds by hydrogen and allow direct access to valuable platform chemicals already integrated in current value chains. However, the use of H2 and difficulties in recycling the catalyst as a result of the sintering and leaching of metals are some of the drawbacks of this method.47–54


2.2.4. Biological pre-treatment of lignin. 
Processes that use enzymes and microorganisms are being developed to explore the potential of biotechnology.55 White-rot fungi are the microorganisms that most efficiently degrade lignin from wood. Enzymes act as low molecular weight mediators to degrade lignin. Enzymes are divided into lignin oxidases and degrading auxiliary enzymes, corresponding to their direct or indirect participation in lignin degradation, respectively.56 Although the physical conditions of the reaction are less severe than other pre-treatment techniques, the yields of biological processes are relatively low. In addition, the biodegradation of lignin only occurs under low levels of nitrogen and thus lignin is not degraded under the normal conditions of ethanol fermentation or biogas production.57


2.2.5. Discussion of pre-treatment methods. 
The pre-treatment of lignin could supply valuable aromatic chemicals and/or a source of low molecular mass feedstocks suitable for downstream processing. Photocatalysis has recently emerged as a potentially useful alternative or constituent of integrated techniques to induce the selective oxidation of a source of low molecular mass feedstock via pre-treatment processing (or model compounds) into different valuable fine chemicals. Photocatalytic processes show unique advantages at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, in contrast with conventional heterogeneously catalysed processes. In practice, the photocatalytic selective transformation of simple structured lignin to high-added-value products and of lignin residues for waste water treatment are due to its strong oxidizing power. The control and utilization of the oxidation power of photocatalysis is the key to specific target transformations.

2.3. Mechanism of semiconductor photocatalysis
The photochemical process is initiated when the semiconductor is illuminated with photons, the energy of which is equal to or greater than its band gap energy (Eg). An electron is excited from the valence band (VB) into the conduction band (CB), leaving behind a hole (Scheme 1). The excited electrons and holes then migrate to the semiconductor surface. Electrons and holes can act as reductants and oxidants to react with A as electron acceptors to A− and D as electron donors to D+ adsorbed on the semiconductor surface or within the surrounding electrical double layer of the charged particles, respectively. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) A− and D+ form during photocatalysis and play a vital role in the mineralization of organic compounds. The highly reactive ROS can oxidize a large variety of organic materials by photocatalysis. The ˙OH radical (redox potential +2.81 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE) can be produced from the oxidation of surface hydroxyl groups or adsorbed water. Superoxide anions, ˙O2− (redox potential +0.89 V vs. SHE), are readily generated from molecular oxygen by capturing photoinduced electrons.58–60
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of photocatalysis. 
The holes generated in photocatalysis have a high potential to oxidize organic species, either directly, or indirectly by forming the ˙OH radical to mineralize the target materials. The oxidation potential of the ˙O2− radical is relatively weaker than that of ˙OH. As a consequence, the mineralization products (permineralization or partial mineralization) or the intermediates could be different depending on the reaction conditions due to different ROS. Fig. 5 shows an example of the mechanism for the oxidative degradation of lignin under a TiO2/UV catalyst system. The photodegradation of phenolic compounds by TiO2 begins with the ˙OH radical attacking the phenyl rings and producing catechol, resorcinol and hydroquinone. The phenyl rings in these compounds then break up, first giving malonic acid and then short-chain organic acids (e.g. maleic, oxalic, acetic and formic acid), before finally yielding CO2. The reactions also yield some organic acids (e.g. succinic, palmitic and acetic acid). This implies that the phenolic compounds in the lignin molecule are decomposed in this reaction.61
 Fig. 5  Mechanism for the oxidative degradation of lignin under a TiO2/UV catalyst system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
3. Recent advances in the semiconductor photocatalytic oxidation of lignin
3.1. Photocatalytic oxidation of lignin in waste water and of natural and synthetic lignin into valuable chemicals
Lignin is separated from cellulose in pulp and paper mills and most of the extracted lignin is only used as a fuel. Lignin and its derivatives cause the dark brown coloration of the pulp factory effluent and its chemical or biological degradation is required for environmental reasons. Lignin wastewater is considered to be closely related to humic compounds because it is dark in colour, contains phenols, and shares some of the properties of humic compounds. The traditional water treatment technologies used in paper mills (such as dissolved air flotation or biological treatment) find it difficult to remove recalcitrant contaminants due to the complicated constitution of lignin waste water, which is highly dependent on the raw materials used in the mills.
Photocatalytic oxidation as advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are now included in industrial wastewater treatment chains with the aim of either improving the biodegradability in water or its final quality. Dissolved organic carbon (DOC), chemical oxygen demand (COD), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), the American Dye Manufacture Institute value (ADMI), colour and reducing A254 (the absorption at a wavelength of 254 nm) are used to evaluate the photocatalytic oxidation behaviour.
Various strategies have been developed to improve the photocatalytic transformation of lignin, including: (i) the design of hetero-nanostructures by combining semiconductors with other materials – this is based on the synergistic effect between the different materials, such as implantation of metal ions, doping of non-metal atoms and combination with other components (secondary semiconductors, noble metals, carbon materials, dyes or sensitizers); and (ii) optimizing the structure/topology of the photocatalysts based on the fact that the size, shape, facet and defect of the photocatalysts have significant impacts on the performance of photocatalyts.58,62–64
It is well known that the oxidation of lignin waste water is a non-selective process (Table 1); however, it will depend on the future development of separation and purification techniques. The fine control of the selectivity, conversion and separation processes provides an opportunity for further research, which would contribute to practical applications. Although the direct photocatalytic oxidation of the complicated structure of natural lignin without pre-treatment is difficult, some attempts have been made to photocatalytically depolymerize some natural and synthetic lignin with simpler structures into valuable products (Table 2). The role of ˙OH and ˙O2− radicals generated in the photocatalytic oxidation process in the valorization of lignin has been identified.
Table 1 Photocatalytic systems for oxidation of lignin in waste water treatment




Catalyst system
Lignin substrate
Photocatalytic behaviour
Active radical
Ref.




UV/TiO2
Commercial lignin powder
Catalyst system at pH 3 achieved the maximum removal of colour (99%). Under neutral conditions, 10 g L−1 of TiO2 was the optimum dose used to achieve the maximum ADMI removal, A254 and DOC reduction
˙OH radical

66





Olive mill waste water
BOD5/COD ratio of the biodegradability test is about 0.19. The BOD5/COD ratios of photocatalytic UV/TiO2 were increased to 0.66
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

67,68



UV/Pt/TiO2
Commercial lignin powder
System at pH 7, 1 g L−1 for 30 min can remove 46% DOC and 47% ADMI
˙OH radical

69



UV/[CeO2,La2O3,C] nanotubes/TiO2
Lignin
The catalyst system can reach 56.9% degradation in 25 min
˙O2− radicals

70



UV/TiO2 supported sepiolite catalysts/H2O2
Olive mill waste water
All pollutants could be removed under high pH (pH 11), 30 ml L−1 H2O2 and 24 h at rates of 80–100%
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

71,72



UV/TiO2/activated carbon fibres
Paper mill effluent
Reached a high COD removal in a short reaction time without any decline in photocatalytic activity during reuse
—

73



UV/Ag3PO4/TiO2 fibres
Black liquor
TOC removal (%) of Ag3PO4 (5 wt%)/TiO2 fibres is higher than those of other Ag3PO4/TiO2 fibres under ambient conditions.
˙OH radical

74



UV/TiO2/RuxSey
Effluent
High removal efficiency of chlorophenolic compounds, microbial counts and COD
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

75



UV/TiO2/ZnO
Wheat straw kraft digestion
Initial rate of photodegradation increased with increase in catalyst dose up to an optimum loading. Further increase in catalyst dose showed no effect
˙OH radical

76



UV/ZnO
Effluent
After 24 h of treatment, C and E1 effluents showed degradation of 53.1 and 43%, respectively, with 2.5 g L−1 ZnO dose at pH 8 under solar irradiation
—

77





Table 2 Photocatalytic oxidation of natural and synthetic lignin into valuable chemicals




Catalyst system
Lignin substrate
Valuable chemicals
Active radicals
Ref.




UV/TiO2
Kraft lignin
Acetic acid, malonic acid, succinic acid, butylated hydroxytoluene, vanillin, veratric acid and palmitic acid
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

61





Black liquor
Phenolic compounds, vanillin and vanillic acid
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

78,79



UV/TiO2/H2O2
Rice husk
Alkanes, aldehydes and ketones
˙OH radical

80



UV/TiO2/ferrous ions
Synthetic solutions of lignin
Aldehydes
˙OH and ˙O2− radicals

81



UV/TiO2/FGP
Alkaline lignin
Aldehydes
˙OH radical

82



UV/TiO2/polyethylene oxide
Wood flour
Vanillin
˙OH radical

83



UV/TiO2/polyethylene oxide/methyl linoleate
Herbaceous lignin
Vanillin guaiacol
˙OH radical

84



Visible light/Ag-doped ZnO
Lignin–sulfate
Benzenoid compounds
—

85



UV/Ag–AgCl/ZnO
Lignin (alkali)
Vanillin syringaldehyde
˙OH radical

86



UV-visible light/C, N, S-doped ZnO/ZnS
Sodium salt of lignosulfonate
1-phenyl-3-buten-1-ol
˙OH radical

87





The photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen using solar energy to give a clean and renewable energy resource is a challenging area of research. Compared with the energy-consuming thermochemical processes, which require harsh reaction conditions (e.g. high temperatures and/or pressures) and, consequently, are of high cost with potential safety hazards, photocatalysis driven by solar radiation may be a promising alternative at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. One of the major obstacles to the photocatalytic production of hydrogen via water splitting is the low quantum efficiency of the process, which results from the high probability of recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Methanol and other organic compounds have been used as sacrificial hole scavengers in the photocatalysis process. These compounds are able to combine with photogenerated VB holes and contribute to the splitting of water for hydrogen production. If lignocellulosic biomass-derived compounds could also serve as sacrificial agents (electron donors) to reduce the rate of charge carrier recombination, waste water treatment could be combined with the production of hydrogen as an energy carrier in the absence of oxygen. Evidence of the photocatalytic degradation of olive mill waste water with the simultaneous production of hydrogen was reported by Badawy et al.65 These researchers determined the influence of the catalyst dose on the degradation of organic pollutants in waste water and on the amount of evolved hydrogen (Fig. 6). The optimized amount of evolved hydrogen at a TiO2 dose of 2 g L−1 in a pH 3 solution was 851 mL H2 (38 mmol) after 2 h of reaction; the COD was reduced by 92% in their statistical study.
 Fig. 6  Experimental setup of the photocatalytic production of hydrogen from olive mill waste and the influence of the catalyst dose on the degradation of organic pollutants in waste water (vent b) and on the amount of evolved hydrogen (vent a). Modified with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
3.2. Photocatalysis for the selective chemical transformation of model lignin compounds into valuable products
Studies have been conducted on model compounds selected on the basis of representing structural motifs present in lignocellulose.18 Aromatic aldehydes and carboxylic acids are formed as the main products from the oxidative degradation of lignin. Vanillin has been obtained as a major valuable product in the oxidative deconstruction of lignin, with yields in the range 5–15 wt% with respect to the lignin source.16 Vanillin is widely used as a flavouring agent in the food, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and fine chemical industries, which makes vanillin one of the most important aromas and has driven a large amount of research on the improvement of production processes. Currently, almost all vanillin is produced by chemical synthesis. However, these processes are not environmentally safe and the obtained vanillin is usually considered to be of lower quality than the natural product due to the lack of the many trace components that contribute to the flavour of the natural product. Natural vanilla extract is a mixture of several hundred different compounds in addition to vanillin. Artificial vanilla flavouring is often a solution of pure vanillin, usually of synthetic origin. Because of the scarcity and expense of natural vanilla extract, many researchers have investigated the possibility of producing vanillin through a green biotechnological route. In the vanilla orchid, vanillin is derived biosynthetically from phenylalanine. This biosynthetic product cannot be produced cost-effectively compared with that produced by chemical synthesis.88 In fact, even with future improvements, the proposed biotechnology methods have some limitations such as relatively high costs, long production times, difficult purification and the need for selected strains of microorganisms. In this regard, alternative protocols to selectively produce vanillin are in demand.
Augugliaro et al.89 have reported the photocatalytic production of vanillin in an aqueous medium starting from trans-ferulic acid, isoeugenol and eugenol or vanillyl alcohol (Fig. 7) using both commercial and laboratory-prepared TiO2 samples as photocatalysts and batch Pyrex photoreactors. The photo-oxidation of these compounds at room temperature produced vanillin with a selectivity ranging from 1.4 to 21 mol% with respect to the converted substrate. The most important intermediates were homovanillic acid, vanillyl mandelic acid, trans-caffeic acid, formic acid, acetic acid and oxalic acid. The carbon mass balance, including CO2 derived from mineralization, was determined for all the substrates at irradiation times corresponding to the highest selectivity to vanillin. High closure of the carbon balance was obtained with vanillyl alcohol (ca. 90%) and trans-ferulic acid (ca. 80%).89
 Fig. 7  Vanillin from the photo-oxidation of model compounds. Modified with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. Some representative aromatic alcohols and derivatives are used as model lignin compounds in selective photocatalytic oxidation. 
Benzaldehyde is the second most important aromatic molecule (after vanillin) used in the cosmetics, flavour and perfumery industries. Synthetic benzaldehyde is produced industrially via benzyl chloride hydrolysis derived from the chlorination of toluene or through toluene oxidation. Although most research on the selective production of benzaldehyde has been reported via heterogeneously catalysed protocols, aromatic alcohols (Fig. 7) have been used as model lignin compounds for conversion into various compounds via photocatalytic processing. Among the selective oxidation processes for alcohols, the conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde is particularly attractive. The commonly used semiconductor photocatalyst TiO2 only works in the ultraviolet region as a result of its wide band gap, which accounts for only 4% of the solar energy reaching the Earth's surface.90 The design of hetero-nanostructures by combining TiO2 with other materials is a popular method to extend the range of light absorption of semiconductor TiO2. Yan et al.91 reported that the activity of the as-prepared Nb2O5/TiO2 heterojunctions is more efficient than pure rutile TiO2 in the photocatalytic oxidation of aromatic alcohols and methanol reforming under irradiation with UV-visible light. The photocatalytic oxidation of phenethylol to the corresponding aldehydes can be achieved with a selectivity of >95%. The photocatalytic activity of Nb2O5/TiO2 heterojunctions is dependent on the Nb/Ti ratio and the optimum activity with the highest separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs was obtained at Nb/Ti = 0.12. The as-prepared Nb2O5/TiO2 heterojunctions system is suitable for the photocatalytic oxidation of alcohols as a result of the relative position of the conduction and valance bands of the two components.
We proposed that a synergistic strategy involving oxygen vacancy (OV) generation and noble metal deposition could be developed to improve the performance of the photocatalytic oxidation of alcohols over TiO2 under irradiation with visible light.92 The resulting M–TiO2–OV (M = Ag, Pt, and Pd) nanocomposites were used as visible light-driven photocatalysts for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol. Compared with TiO2–OV, the noble metal particles acting as an electron reservoir enhanced the photoactivity by prolonging the lifetime of the photogenerated charge carriers.
Our group has also synthesized graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites with intimate interfacial contacts. These composites have unique structural and electronic properties, including an atom-thick two-dimensional structure, theoretically high surface area, excellent electron conductivity and high chemical stability, which can extend the absorption of light into the visible region. The selective oxidation of a range of benzylic alcohols with various substituent groups and allylic alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes (90–100% selectivity) was obtained under visible light irradiation.93
We have also reported a facile and green template-free hydrothermal approach to synthesize Pt@CeO2 nanocomposites in an aqueous phase with tunable core–shell and yolk–shell structures (Fig. 8A and B), which can be used for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol under visible light irradiation.94 The Pt core traps/stores electrons to prolong the lifetime of the charge carriers, hence improving the efficiency of the photocatalytic oxidation process. The benzyl alcohol adsorbed on the catalyst surface interacts with the holes to form the corresponding radical cation. Further reaction with oxygen or superoxide radical species will give rise to the production of benzyl aldehyde (Fig. 8C). The core–shell Pt@CeO2 exhibited the best visible light photocatalytic performance in the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzyl aldehyde. The photocatalytic activity of core–shell Pt@CeO2 is ca. 9 and 27 times higher than that of nanosized CeO2 and blank-CeO2, respectively. Because the interfacial contact between the Pt core and CeO2 shell is fairly loose rather than spatially dense as in the core–shell Pt@CeO2, the yolk–shell Pt@CeO2 exhibits much lower photoactivity (Fig. 8D).
 Fig. 8  (A, B) TEM images of as-synthesized core–shell and yolk–shell Pt@CeO2 nanoparticles. (C) Proposed mechanism for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzyl aldehyde by the core–shell Pt@CeO2 structure. (D) Photoactivity corresponding to different catalyst systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Photocatalysis combined with other methods as an integrated strategy in the scale-up of the valorization of lignin
Photocatalytic oxidation has both advantages and disadvantages. Despite recent research showing the potential of photocatalysis for the conversion of lignin by various strategies, the selective photocatalytic transformation of lignin is still challenging as a result of the complex structure of lignocellulose, particularly the highly recalcitrant lignin fraction. If the catalyst system uses synergistic effects obtained by the combination of different technical advantages in the context of green chemistry, it may be able to achieve better results with respect to both the economy and the environment. Many workers have tried to combine photocatalysis technology with other methods as an integrated strategy to scale up the valorization of lignin.
4.1. Template/supporter for further applications
A study by Portjanskaja et al. showed that TiO2 attached to a floating glass plate had a superior photocatalytic oxidation (PCO) efficiency over other catalysts and the maximum PCO efficiency was observed at a depth of 7 mm.82
The highest PCO efficiency for lignin was observed in neutral and slightly basic media with the photocatalyst attached to the glass plates; a 3.5 times higher efficiency in the oxidation of lignin was obtained than with the photocatalyst attached to buoyant hollow glass microspheres. The difference in the method of attachment of TiO2 to the glass plates affects the PCO efficiency: attachment via spraying appeared to be more effective than attachment via submersion. However, under acidic conditions, the TiO2 applied by spraying was washed off in presence of lignin.81 Sattler et al.95 reported the results of testing different photocatalysts and oxidizing agents in the degradation process for use in an industrial application. They also carried out experiments using lamp reactors as well as solar reactors (Fig. 9) to determine the influence of the reactor on the degradation. Spasiano et al.96 reported that various aromatic alcohols (e.g. benzyl alcohol) could be converted in a liquid phase solar pilot plant reactor using a TiO2/Cu(II) photocatalyst. A maximum yield of 53.3% for benzaldehyde was obtained with respect to initial benzyl alcohol concentration (approx. 63% selectivity after 6 h) at 38 °C.
 Fig. 9  A compound parabolic collector type solar reactor at DLR Cologne. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2004 Elsevier. 
4.2. Photocatalyst-assisted ammonia pre-treatment for enzymatic hydrolysis of pre-treated biomass
Photocatalyst-assisted UV treatment could further improve the effectiveness of ammonia pre-treatment in removing lignin from biomass, as reported by Yoo et al.97 As a result, higher enzymatic digestibility and fermentability could be obtained. As reported previously with an ammonia–TiO2-treated corn stover under optimum conditions (12.5% ammonium hydroxide, 60 °C, 24 h, solid:liquid 1:20, photocatalyst:biomass 01:10, oxygen supply), 85% glucan digestibility and 75% xylan digestibility were obtained using 15 filter paper units per g glucan of cellulase and 30 cellobiase units per g glucan of β-glucosidase. Photocatalyst-assisted UV treatment in conjunction with ammonia soaking can shorten the time needed for pre-treatment and potentially lead to a significant reduction in energy consumption. Niu et al.98 found that the photocatalyst dose and photocatalysis time under UV irradiation were both important in the efficiency of pre-treatment (optimized at 2 g L−1 and 1 h in this experiment). With the removal of most of the lignin and hemicellulose, the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis of the pre-treated rice straw was significantly enhanced. The results of these investigations indicated that the photocatalyst-assisted alkali pre-treatment process could remove lignin and hemicellulose more effectively, which favours the reduction of biological resistance during the enzymatic hydrolysis process.
4.3. Combined photochemical and biological process for the treatment of raft effluents and lignin degradation
Photochemistry is an important technique to remediate pollution problems in the pulp and paper industry. Reyes et al.99 reported that the time required for 50% biological decontamination of kraft effluents was halved by applying a short irradiation time (10 min). When ZnO was immobilized on sand, the process was twice as fast. The combined photochemical bio-bleaching contributed to the mineralization of the effluent.99 Olive mill waste water is a major environmental problem as a result of its high COD and total phenolic content, which contribute to its high toxicity and recalcitrant nature. Nogueira et al.100 investigated the treatability of olive mill waste by the combination of PCO using two nanomaterials (TiO2 and Fe2O3) as photocatalysts with biological degradation by fungi. Chemical treatment with the system TiO2/H2O2/UV promoted reductions of 43, 14, 38 and 31% in colour, aromatic content, COD and TPC, respectively. However, no reduction in toxicity was observed. Through this combination with biological treatment, the reduction in the COD and TPC as well as toxicity was increased. As cost is a major hurdle in the industrial applicability of AOPs, it is suggested that AOPs under solar irradiation could be used in conjunction with existing biological treatments for the enhanced degradation of recalcitrant contaminants in bleach mill effluents.77 Kamwilaisak and Wright61 demonstrated that the combined biocatalytic and photocatalytic processes were more efficient for lignin degradation when laccase from Trametes versicolor served as the biocatalyst and TiO2 served as the photocatalyst under UV irradiation. GC–MS analyses were used to identify and quantify the breakdown products of lignin, which included succinic and malonic acids. These by-products of the main reaction have the potential to be used to produce a variety of useful chemicals. It is evident that the coupling of solar-assisted AOPs–biological treatment processes makes sense in the treatment of waste water and the production of valuable chemicals.
4.4. Integration of photocatalytic and electrochemical oxidation for the modification and degradation of kraft lignin
Tian et al.101 have demonstrated a novel approach to the integration of photochemical and electrochemical oxidation methods for lignin modification and oxidation. A Ta2O5–IrO2 thin film was used as the electrocatalyst and TiO2 nanotube arrays were used as the photocatalyst. When a photocatalyst is combined with an electrocatalyst, the applied potential not only effectively suppresses the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes on the photocatalyst face, but also drives electrochemical oxidation on the electrocatalyst (Fig. 10). The lignin solution became lighter with increasing oxidation time, indicating that it was being oxidized. To determine the amount of lignin remaining and the by-products, lignin was precipitated by acidification with HCl to pH 3.0. FTIR and NMR spectrometry were used to characterize the lignin before and after the 12 h photochemical-electrochemical oxidation. The band at 1710 cm−1 is due to carbonyl stretching in unconjugated ketones. The appearance of a new band at 1735 cm−1 after the oxidation revealed that a new group was produced during the combination of photochemical and electrochemical oxidation. The formation of carbonyl functionality was also confirmed by the 13C-NMR spectra. The two primary intermediates, vanillin and vanillic acid, were further confirmed and characterized by HPLC and GC–MS.
 Fig. 10  (A) Relationship between ln(C/Co) and the time of for lignin compound under different catalyst systems. (B) Photographs taken before (upper) and after (lower) precipitation of lignin during photoelectrocatalytic oxidation of 500 ppm lignin at different times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
5. Challenges and prospects
As a result of the potential future energy crisis and environment pollution, there is increasing interest in clean, renewable sources of energy. The concept of utilizing solar energy at room temperature and atmospheric pressure to selectively convert lignin to important aromatic chemicals and value-added products via photocatalysis and for the treatment of waste water polluted with lignin is a highly innovative approach. Such integrated techniques can bring benefits from both energy and environmental viewpoints. At present, lignin is a by-product of the pulp and paper and wood hydrolysis industries, and pre-treatment technologies are used to obtain cellulosic ethanol and biodiesel, which have no commercial value other than as a heat source. Many lignin valorization strategies, including photocatalysis, have only been developed at the laboratory scale for relatively restricted applications. Hence there are still a number of areas of research that are worth exploring further.
The need to understand and manipulate lignin – from its assembly within plant cell walls to its extraction and processing into value-added products – aligns with the aim of obtaining a deeper understanding of complex biological structures. This is especially true because the valorization of lignin cannot come at the expense of the effective utilization of other biopolymers, such as cellulose and hemicellulose.102 Considerable efforts are still required to develop separation and advanced analytical techniques for the product streams derived from biomass.
Although solar energy is abundant and free, it is still a challenge to efficiently harvest solar energy using cheaply manufactured devices.103 A disadvantage of solar energy is the daily, seasonal and regional variability in its intensity. The conversion efficiency, selectivity and stability of photocatalytic systems using solar energy could constrain the valorization of lignin. From a chemical industry perspective, cost-effective production on an industrial scale is needed to create a future energy value chain.
Substantial progress in lignin valorization by heterogeneous photocatalysis has been made at the laboratory scale under relatively simple reaction conditions and using model compounds that do not represent the complexity of the lignin structure. It is important to use more complex compounds with similar functional groups to natural lignin for proper comparisons in terms of activity and selectivity. There are as yet no criteria on which to evaluate research results due to the use of different substrates and pre-treatments.
To be commercially viable and confront these challenges, future research should focus on the in-depth understanding of lignin conversion pathways and the development of an integrated strategy based on the following criteria.
(1) Close collaboration between academic (universities, research agencies) and industrial research, on which innovation depends, as is happening in the frame of COST Action FP1306.1
(2) Interdisciplinary pursuits with new research developments at the interface between chemistry, physics, engineering sciences, biology, humanities and social sciences. Currently, this integration is limited, but it might be strengthened through both updated scientific training programmes and major public investment at the national, continental and global levels.104
(3) International collaboration avoiding unnecessary competition. Governments should attach importance to this research with more support and investment. In the near future, integrated systems of simultaneous photocatalyst-mediated chemical synthesis and water purification may be possible. These processes could then be efficiently coupled to scaled-up facilities (e.g. solar plants) that are able to provide continuous flow equipment and large reactors for important advances in the field.
(4) Actions from advances in genetics, biotechnology, process chemistry, engineering, and the design of novel nanotechnology and nanomaterials are leading to a new manufacturing concept for the future preparation of well-defined heterogeneous photocatalysts with highly controllable, efficient and desirable properties for use in converting renewable biomass to valuable chemicals/fuels and the treatment of waste water containing lignin.
Abbreviations

AAcceptor

A
254
Absorption at the wavelength of 254 nm
ADMIAmerican dye manufacture institute value
AOPsAdvanced oxidation processes
BOD5Biochemical oxygen demand
CBConduction band
CBUCellobiase units
C–OCarbon–oxygen
CODChemical oxygen demand
DOCDissolved organic carbon
DDonor
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FGPFloating glass plate
GC–MSGas chromatography–mass spectrometer
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatography
MWIMicrowave irradiation
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
OVOxygen vacancy
PCOPhotocatalytic oxidation
ROSReactive oxygen species
SHEStandard hydrogen electrode
TPCTotal phenolic content
UV-VisUltraviolet-visible
VBValence band

Acknowledgements
Support from the Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1463204), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20903023 and 21173045), the Award Program for Minjiang Scholar Professorship, the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province for Distinguished Young Investigator Grant (2012J06003), the Independent Research Project of State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment (No. 2014A05) and the Program for Returned High-Level Overseas Chinese Scholars of Fujian province is kindly acknowledged. Professor Colmenares acknowledges the COST Association (Action FP1306) for supporting the dissemination of this work.
References

          http://www.cost.eu/COST_Actions/fps/Actions/FP1306
         (accessed August, 2015).
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Carpenter, T. L. Westover, S. Czernik and W. Jablonski, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 384–406 RSC .
V. K. Thakur and M. K. Thakur, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 72, 834–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Cheng and G. R. Timilsina, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 3541–3549 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gray, A. Lennartson, P. Ratanalert, K. Borjesson and K. Moth-Poulsen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5330–5332 RSC .
R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014, 10, 492–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Arnon, Nature, 1959, 184, 10–21 CAS .
Y.-W. Su, W.-H. Lin, Y.-J. Hsu and K.-H. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 4426–4426 CrossRef .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, W. Mu, M. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Cai and Y. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3208 Search PubMed .
R. B. Lima, R. Raza, H. Qin, J. Li, M. E. Lindstrom and B. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5083–5089 RSC .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .
C. Xu, R. A. D. Arancon, J. Labidi and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7485–7500 RSC .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. L. Jongerius and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3552–3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
G. Chatel, K. De Oliveira Vigier and F. Jérôme, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2774–2787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, B. S. Matsuura and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1218–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sannigrahi, Y. Pu and A. Ragauskas, Curr. Opin. Env. Sust, 2010, 2, 383–393 CrossRef .

          E. Windeisen and G. Wegener, in Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference, ed. K. M. Möller, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2012, ch. 15, vol. 10, pp. 255–265 Search PubMed .
J. S. Lupoi, S. Singh, R. Parthasarathi, B. A. Simmons and R. J. Henry, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 49, 871–906 CrossRef CAS .
P. Azadi, O. R. Inderwildi, R. Farnood and D. A. King, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 506–523 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahimi, A. Ulbrich, J. J. Coon and S. S. Stahl, Nature, 2014, 515, 249–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. D. Silva, M. Couturier, J.-G. Berrin, A. Buléon and X. Rouau, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 103, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sun and J. Tomkinson, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2002, 9, 85–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-F. Li, S.-N. Sun, F. Xu and R.-C. Sun, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2012, 19, 243–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Bussemaker and D. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 3563–3580 CrossRef CAS .
N. Schultz-Jensen, Z. Kádár, A. Thomsen, H. Bindslev and F. Leipold, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2011, 165, 1010–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Schultz-Jensen, F. Leipold, H. Bindslev and A. Thomsen, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2011, 163, 558–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, S. Chang and J. Xu, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 199, 34–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Li, Y. Qu and J. Xu, in Production of Biofuels and Chemicals with Microwave, ed. Z. Fang, J. R. L. Smith and X. Qi, Springer, Netherlands,  2015, ch. 4, vol. 3, pp. 61–82 Search PubMed .
Z. Yuan, J. Long, T. Wang, R. Shu, Q. Zhang and L. Ma, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 101, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Toledano, L. Serrano and J. Labidi, Fuel, 2014, 116, 617–624 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Calvo-Flores and J. A. Dobado, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1227–1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stark, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 19–32 CAS .
W. Ji, Z. Ding, J. Liu, Q. Song, X. Xia, H. Gao, H. Wang and W. Gu, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 6393–6403 CrossRef CAS .
P. Langan, S. Gnanakaran, K. D. Rector, N. Pawley, D. T. Fox, D. W. Cho and K. E. Hammel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3820–3833 CAS .
G. Chatel and R. D. Rogers, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 322–339 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Deuss, M. Scott, F. Tran, N. J. Westwood, J. G. de Vries and K. Barta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7456–7467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, C. Zhang, L. Li, S. Yu, C. Xie, F. Liu and Z. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 19370–19374 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dapía, V. Santos and J. C. Parajó, Biomass Bioenergy, 2002, 22, 213–221 CrossRef .
M. A. Harmer, A. Fan, A. Liauw and R. K. Kumar, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6610–6612 RSC .
M. Wu, D. Zhao, J. Pang, X. Zhang, M. Li, F. Xu and R. Sun, Ind. Crop. Prod., 2015, 66, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zakzeski, A. L. Jongerius, P. C. A. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1602–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Palkovits, K. Tajvidi, J. Procelewska, R. Rinaldi and A. Ruppert, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 972–978 RSC .
C. Zhao and J. A. Lercher, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lin and G. W. Huber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 68–80 CAS .
T. Yoshikawa, T. Yagi, S. Shinohara, T. Fukunaga, Y. Nakasaka, T. Tago and T. Masuda, Fuel Process. Technol., 2013, 108, 69–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Horáček, F. Homola, I. Kubičková and D. Kubička, Catal. Today, 2012, 179, 191–198 CrossRef .
Q. Song, F. Wang, J. Cai, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Yu and J. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 994–1007 CAS .
S. Dutta, K. C. W. Wu and B. Saha, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3785–3799 CAS .
M. Zaheer and R. Kempe, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1675–1684 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez, J. Muñoz-Dorado, T. de la Rubia and J. Martínez, Int. Microbiol., 2002, 5, 53–63 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gasser, G. Hommes, A. Schäffer and P. X. Corvini, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 95, 1115–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tonucci, F. Coccia, M. Bressan and N. d'Alessandro, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2012, 3, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Zhang, M.-Q. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC ; 
  (d) N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792–5813 RSC .
B. J. P. A. Cornish, L. A. Lawton and P. K. J. Robertson, Appl. Catal., B, 2000, 25, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
U. G. Akpan and B. H. Hameed, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 170, 520–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamwilaisak and P. C. Wright, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2400–2406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
S. Liu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 540–556 CrossRef CAS .
E. O. Oseghe, S. Maddila, P. G. Ndungu and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 288–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Badawy, M. Y. Ghaly and M. E. M. Ali, Desalination, 2011, 267, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Chang, Y. S. Ma, G. C. Fang, A. C. Chao, M. C. Tsai and H. F. Sung, Chemosphere, 2004, 56, 1011–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. El Hajouji, F. Barje, E. Pinelli, J. R. Bailly, C. Richard, P. Winterton, J. C. Revel and M. Hafidi, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 7264–7269 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Badawy, F. E. Gohary, M. Y. Ghaly and M. E. M. Ali, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 169, 673–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Ma, C.-N. Chang, Y.-P. Chiang, H.-F. Sung and A. C. Chao, Chemosphere, 2008, 71, 998–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rangel, G. J. Lopez Mercado, P. Bartolo-Perez and R. Garcia, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2012, 4, 573–578 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ugurlu and M. H. Karaoglu, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 166, 859–867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ugurlu and M. H. Karaoglu, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2011, 30, 326–336 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuan, R. Guan, P. Liu and J. Zheng, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 293, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, Q. Long and C. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 319, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Pedroza, R. Mosqueda, N. Alonso-Vante and R. Rodriguez-Vazquez, Chemosphere, 2007, 67, 793–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kansal, M. Singh and D. Sud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 153, 412–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhir, N. T. Prakash and D. Sud, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2012, 19, 3906–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prado, X. Erdocia and J. Labidi, Chemosphere, 2013, 91, 1355–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ksibi, S. Ben Amor, S. Cherif, E. Elaloui, A. Houas and M. Elaloui, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 154, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X.-Y. Wei, Z. Wen, H.-B. Chen, Y.-C. Lu, Z.-M. Zong, J.-P. Cao, S.-C. Qi, S.-Z. Wang, L.-C. Yu, W. Zhao, X. Fan and Y.-P. Zhao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 117, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
E. Portjanskaja, S. Preis and J. Kallas, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2006, 2006, 85927 CrossRef .
E. Portjanskaja, K. Stepanova, D. Klauson and S. Preis, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, K. Miyazaki, M. Miura, Y. Shimotori, M. Aoyama and H. Nakatani, J. Polym. Environ., 2013, 21, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyazaki, H. Sato, T. Watanabe and H. Nakatani, J. Polym. Environ., 2014, 22, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. K. Gouvea, F. Wypych, S. G. Moraes, N. Duran and P. Peralta-Zamora, Chemosphere, 2000, 40, 427–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Lei, C. Liu, Z. Zhang and B. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 175, 494–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kadam, V. R. Mate, R. P. Panmand, L. K. Nikam, M. V. Kulkarni, R. S. Sonawane and B. B. Kale, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 60626–60635 RSC .

          R. A. Dixon, in Handbook of Vanilla Science and Technology, ed. F. C. B. Daphna Havkin-Frenkel, Wiley-Blackwell,  2010, ch. 18, pp. 293–298 Search PubMed .
V. Augugliaro, G. Camera-Roda, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano, F. Parrino and M. A. Puma, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 555–561 CrossRef .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, G. Wu, N. Guan and L. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 280–288 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17996–18005 CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8152–8158 RSC .
C. Sattler, L. de Oliveira, M. Tzschirner and A. E. H. Machado, Energy, 2004, 29, 835–843 CrossRef CAS .
D. Spasiano, L. del Pilar Prieto Rodriguez, J. C. Olleros, S. Malato, R. Marotta and R. Andreozzi, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136–137, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Yoo, C. Wang, C. Yu and T. H. Kim, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2013, 169, 1648–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Niu, P. Chen, X. Zhang and W.-S. Tan, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2009, 84, 1240–1245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Reyes, M. Dezotti, H. Mansilla, J. Villasenor, E. Esposito and N. Duran, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 15, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nogueira, I. Lopes, A. C. Freitas, T. A. P. Rocha-Santos, F. Gonçalves, A. C. Duarte and R. Pereira, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2015, 115, 234–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tian, J. Wen, D. MacDonald, R. M. Asmussen and A. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 527–530 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ragauskas, G. T. Beckham, M. J. Biddy, R. Chandra, F. Chen, M. F. Davis, B. H. Davison, R. A. Dixon, P. Gilna, M. Keller, P. Langan, A. K. Naskar, J. N. Saddler, T. J. Tschaplinski, G. A. Tuskan and C. E. Wyman, Science, 2014, 344, 1246843 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103–125 CAS .
M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2–4 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Shao-Hai Li	Shao-Hai Li received his BS in chemistry from China University of Petroleum, P. R. China in 2011. He is now pursing his Master degree under the supervision of Professor Yi-Jun Xu at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China.
Siqi Liu	Siqi Liu is now pursing his PhD degree with the supervision of Professor Yi-Jun Xu at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the fabrication of one-dimension based nanostructures and graphene-based composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Juan Carlos Colmenares	Professor Juan Carlos Colmenares Q. is a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Fellow and now a research staff at Institute of Physical Chemistry of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland. His interests range from materials science, nanotechnology and heterogeneous catalysis to biomass/CO2 valorization, biofuels, sonication, photocatalysis and water–air purification.
Yi-Jun Xu	Yi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of semiconductor based nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based, one dimension-based, and core–shell structure-based composite photocatalysts, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Utilization of biomass photosynthesis and photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Three-dimensional illustration of lignocellulose meshwork and its major components, including cellulose fibres (blue), lignin molecules (red), and hemicellulose (light green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Three monomers of lignin. (C) Section of softwood lignin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Main methods used for the pre-treatment and depolymerization of lignin.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Depolymerization of oxidized aspen lignin. (B) Identification, quantification and distribution of products obtained from the depolymerization of oxidized lignin (left) compared with those from native lignin (right). Modified with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 5  Mechanism for the oxidative degradation of lignin under a TiO2/UV catalyst system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

UV/TiO2	Commercial lignin powder	Catalyst system at pH 3 achieved the maximum removal of colour (99%). Under neutral conditions, 10 g L−1 of TiO2 was the optimum dose used to achieve the maximum ADMI removal, A254 and DOC reduction	˙OH radical	
66


	Olive mill waste water	BOD5/COD ratio of the biodegradability test is about 0.19. The BOD5/COD ratios of photocatalytic UV/TiO2 were increased to 0.66	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
67,68

UV/Pt/TiO2	Commercial lignin powder	System at pH 7, 1 g L−1 for 30 min can remove 46% DOC and 47% ADMI	˙OH radical	
69

UV/[CeO2,La2O3,C] nanotubes/TiO2	Lignin	The catalyst system can reach 56.9% degradation in 25 min	˙O2− radicals	
70

UV/TiO2 supported sepiolite catalysts/H2O2	Olive mill waste water	All pollutants could be removed under high pH (pH 11), 30 ml L−1 H2O2 and 24 h at rates of 80–100%	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
71,72

UV/TiO2/activated carbon fibres	Paper mill effluent	Reached a high COD removal in a short reaction time without any decline in photocatalytic activity during reuse	—	
73

UV/Ag3PO4/TiO2 fibres	Black liquor	TOC removal (%) of Ag3PO4 (5 wt%)/TiO2 fibres is higher than those of other Ag3PO4/TiO2 fibres under ambient conditions.	˙OH radical	
74

UV/TiO2/RuxSey	Effluent	High removal efficiency of chlorophenolic compounds, microbial counts and COD	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
75

UV/TiO2/ZnO	Wheat straw kraft digestion	Initial rate of photodegradation increased with increase in catalyst dose up to an optimum loading. Further increase in catalyst dose showed no effect	˙OH radical	
76

UV/ZnO	Effluent	After 24 h of treatment, C and E1 effluents showed degradation of 53.1 and 43%, respectively, with 2.5 g L−1 ZnO dose at pH 8 under solar irradiation	—	
77


UV/TiO2	Kraft lignin	Acetic acid, malonic acid, succinic acid, butylated hydroxytoluene, vanillin, veratric acid and palmitic acid	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
61


	Black liquor	Phenolic compounds, vanillin and vanillic acid	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
78,79

UV/TiO2/H2O2	Rice husk	Alkanes, aldehydes and ketones	˙OH radical	
80

UV/TiO2/ferrous ions	Synthetic solutions of lignin	Aldehydes	˙OH and ˙O2− radicals	
81

UV/TiO2/FGP	Alkaline lignin	Aldehydes	˙OH radical	
82

UV/TiO2/polyethylene oxide	Wood flour	Vanillin	˙OH radical	
83

UV/TiO2/polyethylene oxide/methyl linoleate	Herbaceous lignin	Vanillin guaiacol	˙OH radical	
84

Visible light/Ag-doped ZnO	Lignin–sulfate	Benzenoid compounds	—	
85

UV/Ag–AgCl/ZnO	Lignin (alkali)	Vanillin syringaldehyde	˙OH radical	
86

UV-visible light/C, N, S-doped ZnO/ZnS	Sodium salt of lignosulfonate	1-phenyl-3-buten-1-ol	˙OH radical	
87


 	Fig. 6  Experimental setup of the photocatalytic production of hydrogen from olive mill waste and the influence of the catalyst dose on the degradation of organic pollutants in waste water (vent b) and on the amount of evolved hydrogen (vent a). Modified with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Vanillin from the photo-oxidation of model compounds. Modified with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. Some representative aromatic alcohols and derivatives are used as model lignin compounds in selective photocatalytic oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A, B) TEM images of as-synthesized core–shell and yolk–shell Pt@CeO2 nanoparticles. (C) Proposed mechanism for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzyl aldehyde by the core–shell Pt@CeO2 structure. (D) Photoactivity corresponding to different catalyst systems. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  A compound parabolic collector type solar reactor at DLR Cologne. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Relationship between ln(C/Co) and the time of for lignin compound under different catalyst systems. (B) Photographs taken before (upper) and after (lower) precipitation of lignin during photoelectrocatalytic oxidation of 500 ppm lignin at different times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 
A	Acceptor

A
254
	Absorption at the wavelength of 254 nm
ADMI	American dye manufacture institute value
AOPs	Advanced oxidation processes
BOD5	Biochemical oxygen demand
CB	Conduction band
CBU	Cellobiase units
C–O	Carbon–oxygen
COD	Chemical oxygen demand
DOC	Dissolved organic carbon
D	Donor
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FGP	Floating glass plate
GC–MS	Gas chromatography–mass spectrometer
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
MWI	Microwave irradiation
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
OV	Oxygen vacancy
PCO	Photocatalytic oxidation
ROS	Reactive oxygen species
SHE	Standard hydrogen electrode
TPC	Total phenolic content
UV-Vis	Ultraviolet-visible
VB	Valence band

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
