Recent advances in micro-/nano-structured hollow spheres for energy applications: From simple to complex systems  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02426D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02426D
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604-5618Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances in micro-/nano-structured hollow spheres for energy applications: From simple to complex systems

        
          
            Xiaoyong 
            Lai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jonathan E. 
            Halpert
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Multi-phase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. E-mail: danwang@mail.ipe.ac.cn;  Fax: +86 10 62533616;   Tel: +86 10 62631141
bAcademy of Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150080, China
Received 
      21st August 2011
    , Accepted 24th October 2011First published on 22nd November 2011AbstractHollow micro-/nano-structured materials are now playing an important role in cutting edge innovations for energy conversion and storage technologies such as solar cells, fuel cells, lithium ion batteries and super capacitors. These materials show great promise in addressing growing environmental concerns for cleaner power sources at a time of increasing global demand for energy. In this perspective, we show that complex multi-shelled micro-/nano-materials show significant material advantages in many applications over conventional simple hollow structures. We also summarize the vast array of synthetic strategies used to create multi-shelled hollow structures, and discuss the possible application of these novel materials for power generation and storage. Finally, the emergent challenges and future developments of multi-shelled hollow structures are further discussed.Xiaoyong LaiXiaoyong Lai received his BE degree (2004) and PhD degree (2009) in the department of Materials and Science at Jilin University. Then, he moved to the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) and joined Prof. Dan Wang's group. His research interests focuses on the preparation of hollow and porous materials as well as their application to photocatalysis, DSSCs and sensors.Jonathan E. HalpertDr Jonathan E. Halpert received his BS in ACS Chemistry in 2003 from Tufts University, Medford, MA (USA). He received his PhD in 2008 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), in Cambridge, MA, where he worked in the group of Prof. Moungi Bawendi. He has worked in the energy industry in the US for two years, and is currently a Visiting Fellow in Prof. Dan Wang’s group at the Institute for Process Engineering (IPE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research is focused on synthesizing new nanocrystalline materials for photovoltaic applications using non-toxic and earth-abundant materials.Dan WangProf. Dan Wang received his BS and MS at Jilin University (1994 and 1997) and PhD at Yamanashi University (2001). In 2004, he was awarded the Hundred Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and took his current position as a Principal Investigator at the State Key Laboratory of Multi-phase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include inorganic material chemistry, surface and colloidal chemistry, hydrothermal chemistry, sol–gel chemistry and self-assembly processes, with focus on the design and synthesis of micro-/nanostructured functional inorganic materials and their applications in energy conversion and storage, photocatalysis and sensors.

Broader context
In order to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels and the environmental issues related to global warming, more and more efforts have been made to develop new renewable, highly efficient technologies for creating and storing energy without damaging the environment. The efficiency of many of the new technologies strongly depends on the availability of new advanced functional materials. Here, hollow spheres are a class of materials that could be expected to play a key role due to their unique structures as well as their inherited properties such as high surface-to-volume ratio and reduced transport lengths for both mass and charge transport. The designing and fabrication of complex hollow structures with multiple shells is expected to further tune the properties of materials by manipulating the structure of hollow materials on the micro- and nano-scale. This perspective provides an overview of recent progress in synthetic methodologies for complex multi-shelled hollow structures and discusses the most promising applications of these novel materials, including solar cells, fuel cells, lithium ion batteries and super capacitors.

1. Introduction
The global energy crisis is considered one of biggest challenges facing humanity today due to significant increases in population and industrial activity worldwide. The imminent shortage of fossil fuels and current fear of global warming are driving scientists and engineers to develop renewable, highly efficient methods of creating and storing energy without damaging the environment. This has inspired recent advances in such technologies as solar cells, fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors.1–6 However, there are many drawbacks in both the production and application of current energy conversion and storage systems, e.g., low efficiency, high cost or considerable environmental damage through inefficient energy use and use of toxic materials. In order to solve these problems, it is important to make greater efforts in the design and engineering of novel materials for sustainable energy.7
Hollow micro-/nano-structured materials have been recognized as one type of promising material for applications in energy-related systems. Their unique structure provides an enhanced surface-to-volume ratio and reduced transport lengths for both mass and charge transport. Examples of this include the use of hollow spheres of metal or metal oxides as photoanodes, as counter electrodes in solar cells and electrocatalysts, as support materials in fuel cells, and as high-performance electrodes in lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors.8–14 However, currently only simple single shelled materials are available for most of these applications. For both technical and environmental reasons, complex hollow structures with multiple shells are highly desirable, and can be expected to further tune the properties of materials by manipulating the structure of hollow materials on the micro- and nano-scale. Recent advances in this direction have made it possible to prepare various complex multi-shelled hollow structures based on advanced materials using non-toxic and commonly available materials. These improvements hold great promise to break several lingering bottlenecks in the development of clean and renewable energy sources and storage technologies.
Too much has been written on hollow structures for us to cover all aspects of this field and well written reviews are available for a general introduction to the field.15–19 In this perspective we will focus on the design and fabrication of complex spherical multi-shelled hollow structures as a replacement to simple hollow counterparts and their potential applications for energy generation and storage.
2. Synthetic methodologies for hollow structures
Three distinct types of synthetic methods are generally used to create hollow and multi-shelled hollow materials. Hard templating methods make use of “rigid” materials as templates; soft templating makes use of liquid droplets or micelles, and template free methods which allow materials to self-assemble into the desired structures. Of these, hard and soft templating are generally the most costly, yet yield inherent advantages of defining the size and shape of the desired hollow material prior to synthesis. The template free method, on the other hand is the simplest method, yet requires that the desired material have the ability to self-assemble under practical conditions. As we will show, hard templating methods can be surprisingly generalized and may represent the best path forward for the production of multiple shelled hollow structures of various materials.
2.1 Hard templating methods
Hard template methods have been widely adopted for the preparation of hollow materials since they are straightforward to apply and have obvious advantages for controlling the size, shape and structure of products.20–24 Generally speaking, these techniques involve coating precursor materials onto the surface of a solid sphere to form a core–shell structure composed of the target material and the solid template, and subsequently removing the template particle, generating a single-shelled hollow structure (see Fig. 1a).25–28 In principle, it is possible to extend hard template methods to the preparation of multi-shelled hollow structures: (1) After forming the targeted shell, template materials could be partially removed, while the remainder becomes the template for generating another shell, leading to formation of a double-shell hollow structure (see Fig. 1b). Similarly, this method can be further used to create a multi-shelled hollow structure through a series of sequential solid-template processes (see Fig. 1c). (2) A single-shelled hollow sphere rather than the solid core can also be used as the template, where the precursors are coated inside and outside, and then the hollow template is removed to produce hollow structures with double shells (see Fig. 1d). Similarly, quadruple-shelled hollow structures can be generated by using a double-shelled hollow sphere as the template (see Fig. 1e). (3) A combined solid and hollow template method could be suggested for preparation of multi-shelled hollow structures by using a core–shell hollow template (see Fig. 1f). More complex multi-shelled hollow structures may be obtained by using specific templates with complex geometries, such as multi-shelled hollow spheres with and without solid cores. However, it should be noted that all these strategies for creating multi-shelled hollow structures require effective coating of the precursors on the inner surfaces of the templates. In reality this can be very difficult, since it requires either that the shell contain transverse channels, allowing the precursors to penetrate, or that the template itself provides the source of the target materials.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of formation of hollow structure via (a), (b), (c) solid templating; (d), (e) hollow templating; and (f) combined solid and hollow templating method. 
For example, Xie et al. reported the synthesis of VOOH hollow spheres using V(OH)2NH2 solid spheres as the template via a programmed reaction temperature process (see Fig. 2).29 They were able to stop the hollowing process by decreasing the reaction-temperature after the first outer shell was formed, and then restarted this process to form a second shell by increasing the reaction temperature again after a short pause. If the cycle of decrease and increase of reaction temperature is repeated, multi-shelled hollow structures will be achieved via a shell-in-shell process (Fig. 2a-c-e-g). The solid precursor sphere plays the bi-functional role, the template and vanadium source. Similarly, Qian et al. synthesized double-shelled Mn2O3 hollow microspheres using a MnCO3 solid sphere as the precursor template.30 Xie et al. synthesized double-shelled MnO2 hollow microspheres templated from a MnCO3 solid sphere and transformed them to LiMn2O4 by further reacting with LiOH.31 Lou et al. synthesized nonspherical double-shelled Fe(OH)x hollow nanoboxes by using Cu2O solid nanocubes as both the template and precursor agents.32
 Fig. 2  The schematic outline of the transformation of solid templates to single-shelled (a–b), double-shelled (a–c–d), triple-shelled (a–c–e–f), and multi-shelled (a–c–e–g) hollow spheres. Inset is a typical multi-shelled hollow sphere, where dt is the shell-thickness size and ds is the neighboring shell-to-shell distance. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission. 
The above methods using solid cores as both the templates and precursors are facile methods for producing hollow micro-/nano-structures. However, they require the precursors to form well-defined micro-/nano-templates, a mechanism which is not universally applicable for different types of materials. Recently, our group reported a general sequential templating approach to multi-shelled hollow metal oxide microspheres by utilizing solid carbonaceous microspheres as the templates to adsorb metal ions followed by a one-step heating process (see Fig. 3).33 A series of multi-shelled hollow microspheres of metal oxides such as α-Fe2O3, Co3O4, NiO, CuO, and ZnO have been successfully synthesized (see Fig. 4). Furthermore, binary metal oxide (ZnFe2O4) and heterogeneous metal oxide (ZnO@ZnO/ZnFe2O4@ZnO/ZnFe2O4) multi-shelled hollow microspheres, which could not be obtained using the previous techniques, were also prepared by the simultaneous or successive use of different metal ions. The number of shells was controlled from two to four by altering the concentration of metal ions in the loading solution. The process is generally applicable for a wide range of metal oxide materials since most metal ions can be adsorbed by carbonaceous microspheres through simple electrostatic attraction. It should be noted that the utilization of carbonaceous spheres for production of single-shelled hollow structures was the subject of a pioneering investigation by Li, Thomas and other researchers,26,27,34,35 though these, somewhat reasonably, assumed that metal ions were mainly adsorbed on the exterior of carbonaceous microsphere. Thus the sequential template removal would give rise to a single-shelled hollow structure of metal oxides. Our findings demonstrated that metal ions could diffuse into the interior of carbonaceous particles, in addition to adsorption on the surface, when a sufficiently high concentration of metal salts was used.36 When heated in air, carbon in the exterior of carbonaceous microspheres is combusted and the metal ions gradually turn to metal oxides, forming shells. However, metal ions in the interior do not join in the construction of the outer shell because they are still stuck within the carbonaceous template. Further heating processes result in the separation of the outer metal oxide shell and the inner core due to different rates of contraction of the materials. If there are enough metal ions in the interior, more shells are created via a similar templating process. Thus, carbonaceous microspheres act as the multiple and sequential solid templates in the formation of multi-shelled hollow spheres. Based on a similar carbonaceous microsphere templating processes, Xu et al. prepared double-shelled α-Fe2O3 and triple-shelled NiO hollow spheres,37 and Chen et al. prepared multi-shelled Mn-doped ZnO hollow spheres as well,38 further indicating the generality of this method.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the sequential templating approach to multi-shelled hollow metal oxide microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission. 
 Fig. 4  
            TEM images of (a) double-shelled, (b) triple-shelled, and (c) quadruple-shelled α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres; (d) TEM image of quadruple-shelled NiO hollow microspheres; (e) STEM image and (f) EDS line scanning of triple-shelled NiO hollow microspheres; TEM images of other multi-shelled hollow microsphere of (g) Co3O4,h) CuO, (i) ZnO, (j) ZnFe2O4 and (k) ZnO@ZnO/ZnFe2O4@ZnO/ZnFe2O4. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission. 
Beside carbonaceous microspheres, Cho et al. also reported synthesis of multi-shelled hollow metal oxide microspheres with tuneable composition by using coordination polymer microspheres as the template and combining cation exchange and controlled thermal treatment (see Fig. 5).39 They first synthesized spherical coordinating polymer particles (CPPs) containing zinc or cobalt ions via a precipitation method, then introduced second metal ions (such as copper and nickel ions) through a cation exchange reaction, and finally obtained multi-shelled hollow spheres of hybrid metal oxides. By eliminating the cation exchange step, multi-shelled hollow spheres of pure ZnO or Co3O4 were also produced. Zeng et al. successfully synthesized multi-shelled TiO2 hollow spheres by controllably heating porous polystyrene-divinylbenzene (PS-DVB) spheres that were penetrated by titania colloids.40 Guan et al. reported the synthesis of γ-Fe2O3 hollow spheres with controllable interior structures varied from single-shelled, core-in-single-shelled, double-shelled and even core-in-double-shelled structures by using the gel microspheres containing iron citrate and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as templates and iron sources via a non-equilibrium heat-treatment process.41 Interestingly, they also synthesized γ-Fe2O3 fiber-in-tube and tube-in-tube nanostructures by using gel fibers containing iron citrate and PVP as templates and iron sources, further extending this strategy to non-spherical template systems.42
 Fig. 5  Scheme of preparation of multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission. 
As a hollow templating method, there are few successful examples due to the limited templates available. Yang et al. reported synthesis of double-shelled hollow microspheres of TiO2 and Fe3O4 by using sulfonated polystyrene (PS) hollow spheres as templates and their inter-shell distances could be adjusted by changing the shell thickness of hollow templates.43,44 Xu et al. synthesized double-shelled BaTiO3 hollow microspheres by taking advantage of sulfonated PS hollow spheres as the templates.45 One should note that the hollow templates used in these examples are unusual in that they possess transverse channels allowing the precursors to reach the inner surface across the shell. The key to this method is to find suitable hollow templates for efficient coating on both inner and outer surface of shell. This can be difficult to achieve if the available hollow spheres template materials happen to lack transverse channels.
2.2 Soft templating methods
Soft templating methods for hollow structures typically involve the formation of relatively flexible structures such as emulsion droplets, supramolecular micelles, polymer aggregates/vesicles, and gas bubbles. Shell growth of the targeted material then proceeds along the interfacial region during removal of the template.46–55 However, these flexible structures, especially complex multi-layered structures, are thermodynamically metastable and sensitive to many parameters such as pH value, temperature, solvent, ionic strength, concentration of organic templates and inorganic additives, such that the conditions of shell growth must be compatible with these parameters.56–59 It is a great challenge to develop a simple and effective method for complex multi-shelled hollow structures based on the soft templating route. Nevertheless, much effort has been devoted to this area due to the intrinsic advantages of soft templating methods including large-scale production, low-cost and low energy consumption. Some successful examples have been reported. Wang et al. prepared novel multi-shelled Cu2O hollow spheres with a single-crystalline shell structure via a simple cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) vesicle templating route in aqueous solution.56 Depending on the concentration of CTAB in the range of 0.1–0.15 M, as-formed vesicles with different structures could template formation of Cu2O hollow spheres with varying structures from single-, double-, triple-, to quadruple-shelled (see Fig. 6 and Fig. 7). Recently, they modified the method and synthesized double-shelled Cu2O hollow spheres at room temperature.60 Similarly, Liu et al. prepared multi-shelled mesoporous silica hollow nanospheres with a tuneable shell number of 1–4 shells, further demonstrating the feasibility of synthesis of the inorganic multi-shelled hollow spheres through a vesicle template approach.61 Moreover, Xie et al. reported synthesis of double-shelled ferrihydrite hollow spheres via a twice-gas-bubble template method (see Fig. 8),62 in which sodium nitroprusside (SNP, Na2[Fe(CN)5NO]·2H2O) and sodium dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4·2H2O) dissolved in water were utilized as starting materials. Under hydrothermal conditions, ferrihydrite clusters were generated through the hydrolysis of SNP accompanied by the simultaneous release of NO gas, which functioned as gas-bubble templates and aggregation centers for formation of single-shelled hollow spheres. The HCOO− ions on the surface of single-shelled hollow spheres were further hydrolyzed into HCOOH, and CO gas was then released from the decomposition of HCOOH at elevated temperature, which served as the second gas template for the growth of the outer shell of the double-shelled hollow spheres (see Fig. 9). The above mentioned processes have certainly shown some success in producing complex multi-shelled structures. However, a generalizable means of producing arbitrary materials in well-formed structures remains elusive. Given the attractive design characteristics and expected scalability of many soft templating methods, many groups are still working towards improving these methods to make them more generally applicable with equivalent uniformity and size control as current methods using hard templates.
 Fig. 6  Formation of different Cu2O hollow structures in the presence of a CTAB template: (a) micelle; (b) single-lamellar vesicle; (c) multi-lamellar vesicle. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission. 
 Fig. 7  
            TEM images of Cu2O hollow structures: (a) single-shelled; (b) double-shelled; (c) triple-shelled; and (d) quadruple-shelled. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission. 
 Fig. 8  (a), (b) TEM and (c), (d) FESEM images of ferrihydrite double-shelled hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. 
 Fig. 9  Proposed growth process of double-shelled ferrihydrite hollow spheres by using a twice-gas-bubble approach. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. 
2.3 Template-free methods
Although template-assisted methods have been proven to be very effective and versatile for the synthesis of hollow structures, they do have disadvantages. Specifically the high cost of template materials and the necessity of complex multi-step synthetic procedures have driven scientists to explore template-free methods for preparation of hollow structures.63–70 Chen et al. successfully synthesized multi-shelled hollow microspheres by using a very simple self-assembly approach (see Fig. 10).71
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatially periodic precipitation mechanism of the shell construction process; (b) optical microscopy image of the triple-shelled hollow microsphere. Scale bar of (b) is 10 mm. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission. 

          Azithromycin ethanol solutions were slowly added into deionized water under magnetic stirring, and after continuous stirring for 10 s the static solution was stored for several minutes in order to form multi-shelled azithromycin hollow microspheres. The shell number could be easily adjusted by changing the starting concentration of the azithromycin ethanol solution. Amphiphilic azithromycin is soluble in ethanol but only slightly soluble in water, and therefore forms a suspension of numerous vesicles when the azithromycin ethanol solution is added to water. Due to the concentration gradient, azithromycin molecules tend to diffuse outward from the interior of vesicles (step 1 of Fig. 10a). When the concentration of azithromycin molecules on the interface reaches a certain critical value, the azithromycin will precipitate (step 2 of Fig. 10a) to form the first shell. However, the formation of the first shell does not completely counteract the concentration gradient and thus azithromycin molecules enveloped within the microsphere continue to diffuse outward (step 3 of Fig. 10a), inducing another precipitation step (step 4 of Fig. 10a). Such spatially periodic precipitations could thus allow for a generation of multi-shelled hollow microspheres in a shell-by-shell multi-step process. Recently, Zhang et al. also reported synthesis of multi-shelled Cu2O hollow microspheres via a hierarchical self-assembly process.72 Template free methods represent the simplest and most expedient multi-shelled synthesis. Yet, because they require the specific properties of the target material to support their self assembly, this class of syntheses may be the least likely to produce a generalized, scalable, low-cost method of producing multi-shelled hollow materials for specific energy applications.
3. Applications of hollow sphere in energy related systems
3.1 
          Dye-sensitized solar cells

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are a class of photovoltaic devices based on nanocrystalline porous films with dye molecules adsorbed on the surface. The dye serves as a working electrode for light harvesting and conversion of photons to photoexcited electrons.73–81 In a typical DSSC, TiO2 nanoparticles of ∼20 nm in diameter are deposited on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) electrode as a nanoporous layer with a thickness of 10–15 μm. Unfortunately, the TiO2 nanoparticle layer scatters light only weakly, and considerable light could not be sufficiently utilized.82–86 In particular, photons in the red and near-infrared region, which constitute over 60% of the AM 1.5 solar power spectrum, could not be efficiently absorbed. In order to enhance light scattering in films and improve light harvesting, many scientists have devoted their efforts to the rational design and tailoring of photoanodes at a micro-nanoscale level. Hollow spheres at the submicrometer scale are considered to be a promising photoanode material for DSSCs. This is because, in addition to providing large surfaces for adsorbing more dye molecules, they can also effectively enhance light harvesting by simultaneously increasing the diffractions on the hollow spheres and the reflections on the shell structure. Awaga et al., among others, have shown this by preparing submicron-scale hollow particles of anatase TiO2 using a polystyrene-bead template (see Fig. 11).87 They demonstrated that the per-weight efficiency of a DSSC based on hollow TiO2 spheres was 2.5 times higher than those of conventional DSSCs based on nanocrystalline TiO2 porous films. However, the per-area efficiency was rather low (1.26%) because of a low area density of TiO2 hollow spheres on the electrode. Similar results have also been reported.88–90 One strategy to solve this problem is to use the advantages of hollow submicrospheres to scatter and reflect light while at the same time compensating for the disadvantage of a low area density. Koo et al. prepared nano-embossed hollow spherical TiO2 particles and combined them with TiO2 nanoparticles to form a bilayer film as the photoanode (see Fig. 12).91 The DSSC based on the bilayer structure exhibited a high energy-conversion efficiency of 10.34%, confirming the twofold advantage of hollow spherical TiO2 particles in dye-sensitized solar cells provide an increase in light scattering and the generation of photo-excited electrons. Lu et al. synthesized TiO2 spheres with chamber structures tuneable from solid to core–shell, and single shell spheres. They found that the photocatalytic activity of the “semi-hollow” core–shell structured TiO2 increased compared with that of the “fully-hollow” structured TiO2. This suggests that the multiple reflections of the incident light within the interior cavity of the multi-shelled hollow structure may result in an enhanced light harvesting efficiency.92 Moreover, Zeng et al. also reported that multi-shelled TiO2 hollow spheres exhibited higher photocatalytic activity compared with those simple single-shelled hollow spheres, further indicating the advantages of complex multi-shelled hollow structures in enhancing light harvesting efficiency.40 Wu et al. have prepared double-shelled TiO2 hollow spheres by templating carbonaceous microspheres and investigated their performance when used in DSSCs.93 The efficiency of DSSCs based on an 11 μm-thick film consisting of double-shelled TiO2 hollow spheres is up to 5.65%. This is higher than those of cells based on single-shelled TiO2 spheres but still lower than those of DSSCs based TiO2 nanocrystalline particles. This latter effect is likely due to lower dye loading. However, a higher overall energy-conversion efficiency of 9.1% was achieved when a bilayer film based hollow sphere and nanocrystalline particles were used (see Fig. 13). Qian and coworkers have prepared SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres (MHSs), coated with TiO2 on their surfaces, to obtain TiO2-coated SnO2 composite hollow microspheres (see Fig. 14).94Fig. 15 shows the characteristic current (I)–voltage (V) curves of these DSSCs. The amount of dye absorption on the TiO2–SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microsphere (MHSs) is very similar to those of TiO2–nano-SnO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles. The increased JSC value for the TiO2–SnO2 MHSs is most likely due to enhanced light harvesting from multiple light reflections and scattering in-between the hierarchical spherical shells of the TiO2–SnO2 MHSs, rather than an increased surface area (see Fig. 15).
 Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of multiple diffractions and reflections on the hollow spheres; (b) SEM images of the PS particles; (c) the titania-coated PS particles; and (d) the TiO2 hollow spheres; (e) TEM image of the TiO2 hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission. 
 Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a bilayer structure showing the nanocrystalline TiO2 underlayer and the TiO2 nano-embossed hollow sphere overlayer. (b), (c) Surface SEM images for each layer. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission. 
 Fig. 13  J–V curve of an optimized DSSC based on the film consisted of double-shelled hollow spheres as the light scattering layer (5 mm) over the P25 under-layer (11 mm) under AM-1.5G one sun intensity. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission. 
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM and (b) high-resolution (HR) TEM images of SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres. (c) SEM and (d) HRTEM images of TiO2–SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission. 
 Fig. 15  
I–V characteristics of DSSCs with the photoelectrode films of TiO2–SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres (MHS), TiO2–nano-SnO2, SnO2 MHSs, nano-SnO2, and TiO2 (P25) nanoparticles. The inset illustrates the multiple reflecting and scattering of light in the multilayered hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission. 
Besides TiO2, Zinc oxide (ZnO), is another semiconductor that has been investigated as a candidate for the photoelectrode in DSSCs. This is because ZnO possesses similar energy levels but has higher electron mobility than TiO2. Kuang et al. reported a synthesis of ZnO hollow spheres by a sonochemical process, involving the ultrasonication treatment of a solution containing zinc acetate, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and water (see Fig. 16).95 DSSCs using ZnO hollow spheres had a reported efficiency of 4.33%. Such a value is approximately 20% lower than the 5.4% obtained for the ZnO disordered aggregates,77,78,96 probably due to the expected decrease in the internal surface area in a hollow structure as compared to aggregate material. However, compared to the ZnO nanoparticles, the ZnO hollow spheres still presented a higher conversion efficiency, found to be 4.33% for ZnO hollow spheres vs. 3.12% for ZnO nanoparticles, in spite of a lower amount of dye adsorption, found to be 6.81 × 108 mol cm−2 for the ZnO hollow spheres vs. 9.781 × 08 mol cm−2 for the ZnO nanoparticles. This data adds evidence to the assertion that the light scattering effect arising from the hollow spheres plays a significant role in increasing the optical absorption of the photoanode. Similarly to TiO2, it can be expected that if the multi-shelled ZnO hollow spheres are used as photoanodes in DSSCs, both dye adsorption and light scattering will be further increased, leading to remarkable performance improvement.
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM and (b)–(d) TEM images of hierarchical ZnO hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission. 
All the above-mentioned results well demonstrated the effect of multiple light reflections and scattering in-between hollow spheres on improving light harvesting and its further enhance with increasing shell number. However, the reflection and scattering occurring on the respective shells should be related to the shell size, thickness and inter-shell distance, and gradually weaken with the light adsorption of dyes from the outer to inner shell. Moreover, too many shells may result in prolonging the distance of the photogenerated electrons to the collecting electrode and increasing the charge recombination. One could predict a breakthrough in DSSC efficiency after comprehensively considering those factors in the design and fabrication of the photoelectrode.
3.2 
          Fuel
          cells
        

Fuel
          cells represent another promising alternative energy conversion technology for hollow micro- and nano-structured materials. These cells typically generate current by the electrochemical catalytic oxidation of a fuel, such as hydrogen, methanol or ethanol, at the cell cathodes. This technology boasts both high energy efficiency and cleanliness, in addition to several other key advantages including reusability of exhaust heat, fuel diversity, modularity, low CO2 emissions, quietness and good power quality.97–99 The performance of fuel cells mainly depends on their electrode materials. However, conventional carbon-supported metal electrode catalysts are too expensive for the widespread application and commercialization of fuel cells. For this reason, extensive research has focused on decreasing or even eliminating use of precious metal catalysts without compromising high catalytic performance and energy efficiency.98 Hollow nanospheres are considered to be a promising catalytic electrode material for fuel cells because they possess different catalytic activities from their solid counterparts yet have the same advantages of high surface area, low density, low mass requirement and thus similar reduction in costs.
It was Liang et al. who first reported that hollow Pt spheres showed enhanced catalytic activity.100 The remarkably high oxidation current for the hollow-sphere catalysts was directly related to the high surface area, which was twice that of the same loading fraction of solid Pt nanoclusters (see Fig. 17). Since Pt hollow nanospheres were coreless, a larger number of Pt nanospheres were obtained relative to the same mass of solid Pt nanoclusters. Each individual Pt nanosphere (diameter ca. 24 nm) was composed of a porous 2 nm diameter shell of Pt. These incomplete hollow nanospheres provide an interior surface for the catalytic reaction which contributes to the high catalytic activity and efficient methanol electrooxidation. Liu et al. also reported the high catalytic activity of hollow Pt nanospheres templated when compared to silver nanospheres.101 Xing et al. prepared Pd hollow nanospheres with controllable particle sizes and investigated its catalytic activity for direct formic acid fuel cell catalysts.102 Chen et al. reported synthesis of a hollow Co-Pt alloy nanosphere with a tuneable shell composition.103 The bimetallic Co-Pt hollow sphere catalysts exhibited superior electrocatalytic activity toward the methanol oxidation reaction at the same Pt loading over that of Co-Pt and pure Pt nanoparticles (see Fig. 18). Huang et al. reported the synthesized of lychee-like double-shelled CeO2 microspheres and their higher catalytic activity of CO oxidation in hydrogen fuel cells than the porous or solid counterparts.104
 Fig. 17  
            Cyclic voltammograms of Pt solid nanoclusters (dashed line) and hollow nanospheres (solid line) on a glass carbon disk electrode in H2SO4 (0.5 M) and methanol (0.6 M). The same loading of nanospheres and solid nanoclusters was applied to the electrodes (0.0175 mg cm−2). Scan rate = 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission. 
 Fig. 18  
            cyclic voltammograms of Co-Pt hollow spheres (Co32Pt68), Co28Pt72 nanoparticles, and Pt nanoparticles in 0.5 M H2SO4 containing 1 M methanol. Scan rate 200 mV s−1. Pt loading 5 μg. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission. 
Recently, hollow carbon materials have been widely investigated as catalyst supports in fuel cell applications due to their low density and high surface area. Hyeon et al. reported fabrication of hollow graphitic nanoparticles (30–40 nm) through heat treatment of a mixture containing a polymer and a metal salt. The hollow graphitic nanoparticles they produced showed a higher current density and power density than existing commercial catalysts when used as catalytic support electrodes.105Liet al. prepared hollow carbonaceous microspheres through a facile hydrothermal method using glucose as the carbon source then converting them to hollow carbon microspheres by high-temperature thermal treatment under nitrogen. Pt was directly deposited on the surface of the hollow carbon spheres using the incipient wetness method. The Pt/hollow carbon sphere electrodes showed significantly higher electrocatalytic activity and more stability for methanol oxidation compared with Pt supported carbon microspheres (Pt/CMs) and commercial carbon (Pt/XC-72) electrodes. This is due to the high dispersion of platinum catalysts, high conductivity (ionic or electronic), and the reduction of the liquid sealing effect in the unique hollow structures of the hollow carbon spheres.10 Song et al. reported the large-scale synthesis of Pt/carbon hollow nanospheres by a one- step pyrolysis of polystyrene spheres adsorbed with platinum and carbon precursors. The Pt/carbon hollow nanospheres obtained had a high specific surface area of 380 m2 g−1 and good electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of methanol.106 Yu et al. also reported the synthesis of hollow carbon spheres with mesoporous shells, whose larger specific surface area and pore volume enabled them to support high loading (i.e. 60 wt%) of Pt nanoparticles with a smaller particle size and more uniform dispersion for significantly improving the performance of fuel cells.107 Although multi-shelled hollow materials have yet to be widely applied in fuel cells due to the limited progress in materials synthesis, apparent advantages in providing more surface area for increasing reactive sites and better mechanical stability than their simple hollow counterparts, will make them uniquely suited for next-generation advances.
3.3 
          Li-ion batteries
Due to their high energy density and low self-discharge rates, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used in portable consumer electronics today. They are also considered one of the most promising energy storage technologies for electric and hybrid vehicles as well as renewable energy systems operating on intermittent energy sources such as wind and solar.108–110 However, with the development of electronic devices, there is increasing demand for batteries with higher capacity and better performance. Unfortunately, there are a limited number of possible improvements using the current generation of electrodes. In order to meet the demand for even higher energy density and performance, scientists need to develop new electrode materials.111–116 Of the proposed candidates, hollow structured materials have received much attention, due to their high surface area and short path length for Li transport. A shorter Li path length can reduce the overpotential and rapid capacity fading resulting from volume changes and allow better reaction kinetics at the electrode surface and extra Li-ion storage in the inner cavities, resulting in improved performance. For these same reasons, multi-shelled materials may provide even greater performance improvements.
Lou et al. reported high initial reversible charge capacity of 1140 mA h g−1 and improved cycling performance for hollow SnO2 nanospheres.117 The ultrahigh lithium storage capacity originated from to the ability of the nanopores in the shells and interior cavities of hollow nanospheres to provide greater surface area for Li storage. The cycling performance was substantially improved compared to that of pristine SnO2 nanoparticles and that of simple SnO2 hollow spheres synthesized using a templating method. The capacity of SnO2 hollow nanospheres was reported to be 69% of the initial reversible charge capacity, and close to the theoretical capacity of SnO2 (790 mA h g−1) even after more than 30 cycles. Later on, the same group prepared SnO2/C double-shelled hollow spheres by diffusing a glucose-derived carbon-rich polysaccharide into the spaces between the SnO2 shell and the template core. These materials were found to further improve the cycling performance. After the capacity decays gradually over the first 30 cycles, the capacity could stabilize around 73 and 82% of the initial reversible charge capacity (630 mA h−1) for more than 100 cycles at the current rate of 0.8 and 0.32 C respectively. This improvement of the cycling performance was attributed to the ability of carbon to provide a physical buffering layer for the large volume change and increase the electrical conductivity of particle–particle contacts (see Fig. 19).118 Recently, Lou et al. also prepared double-shelled hollow spheres of SnO2 using shell-by-shell hydrothermal deposition onto a silica nanosphere template.119 Such double-shelled hollow structures could not only provide high gravimetric energy densities and good cycling performance, but also exhibited higher volumetric energy densities than their single-shelled counterparts. Xue et al. successfully prepared SnO2–V2O5 double-shelled hollow nanospheres by a combination of both inward and outward Ostwald ripening.12,120 Detailed structural investigation revealed that tiny SnO2 nanocrystals were homogeneously distributed in a V2O5 double shell matrix (see Fig. 20). Fig. 21 shows the charge–discharge curves of the initial 50 cycles for these SnO2–V2O5 nanocomposites at a current density of 250 mA g−1 in 0.01–3 V. The first discharge capacity was measured to be up to 947 mA h g−1. After 50 cycles, the reversible discharge capacity was maintained at 673 mA h g−1 without obvious capacity fading (see Fig. 21). Importantly, they demonstrated that the reversible discharge capacity also increased with the active SnO2 component, from 10 wt% to 15 wt%. More recently, Yang and coworkers reported the synthesis of triple-shelled SnO2 hollow microspheres by chemically induced self-assembly in the hydrothermal environment (see Fig. 22).121 The as-prepared materials had a high initial discharge capacity of 764 mA h g−1, close to its theoretical specific capacity, indicating a full utilization of all the SnO2 crystallites. The discharge capacity of this material remained near 520 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles, exhibiting a good capacity retention (see Fig. 22c). Wang et al. prepared various hollow cobalt glycolate nanospheres with single-, double-, and triple-shelled structures by using poly(vinyl-pyrrolidone) (PVP) as a soft template (see Fig. 23) and then converting them to Co3O4 by thermal treatment.122 The first discharge capacities of single-, double-, and triple-shelled Co3O4 hollow nanospheres were about 1.199, 1.013 and 1.528 mA h g−1, respectively. The capacity could remain as 680, 866, and 611 mA h g−1, respectively, even after 50 cycles (see Fig. 24). All these results clearly show the suitability of multi-shelled hollow materials for Li ion battery applications. However the most promising developments may lie in the future as newer materials and structures continue to be developed and deployed for this application.
 Fig. 19  (a) C–V of SnO2@carbon coaxial hollow spheres showing the first two cycles between 3 V and 5 mV at a scan rate of 0.05 mV s−1. (b) Capacities versus cycle number between 2 V and 5 mV at a 0.8 C rate (C = 625 mA g−1). (c) Cycling performance of the same cell at various rates after cycled for 100 cycles shown in (b). Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission. 
 Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of V2O5–SnO2 double-shelled nanospheres. Inset shows the schematic structure of these double-shelled nanospheres. The red spheres represent SnO2 nanocrystals and the green double shells represent the V2O5 matrix; (b) low-magnification TEM images; (c), (d) high-magnification TEM images indicate that the porous shell consists of nanocrystals with the thickness of R1 ≈ R2 = 90 nm; (e)–(g) HRTEM images revealing the lattice planes of V2O5 matrix and SnO2 nanocrystals; (h) SAED pattern taken from individual nanospheres which shows that these nanospheres are polycrystalline. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission. 
 Fig. 21  Anode performance of as-prepared V2O5-based nanocomposites with 10 wt% SnO2. (a) First two cycles of charge/discharge curves at a current density of 250 mVs−1. (b) First two cycles of CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mVs−1. (c) Charge–discharge curves at different current densities. (d) Capacity (left) and efficiency (right) versus cycle number at a current density of 250 mA g−1, showing the charge and discharge capacity. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission. 
 Fig. 22  (a), (b) TEM images and (c) the cycling performance of triple-shelled SnO2 hollow microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission. 
 Fig. 23  
            TEM images of hollow cobalt glycolate microspheres: (a) single-shelled, (b) double-shelled, and (c) triple-shelled. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission. 
 Fig. 24  Charge capacities versus cycle number and Coulombic efficiency of single-shelled (S–Co), double-shelled (D-Co), triple-shelled (T-Co) Co3O4 hollow spheres and commercial Co3O4 products (C-Co) at a current rate of C/5 (178 mA g−1) between 3 V and 10 mV. Reproduced from ref. 12 & 20 with permission. 
3.4 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are a class of electrochemical energy storage devices that have a high power density, a moderate energy density and a significantly longer cycling life than most batteries.97 These properties make them either perfect replacements for, or complements to, fuel cells or Li-ion batteries in applications such as communications, transportation, consumer electronics and aviation.123 The capacitance of supercapacitors comes from the electrostatic charge accumulation at the interface of electrodes and electrolytes, and is related to the effective specific surface area of electrode materials. Recent trends in supercapacitors involve development of high-surface-area electrodes to optimize the performance in terms of capacitance or the introduction of pseudo-capacitive species (such as heteroatom-containing surface functional groups, transition-metal oxides, or electrically conducting polymers) on the electrode to increase energy density.
The high surface areas of hollow micro-/nano-structured materials are especially advantageous for supercapacitors. Zhao et al. prepared hollow carbon spheres (HCS) by chemical vapour deposition with ferrocene as the carbon precursor and colloidal silica spheres as the template (see Fig. 25).124 The hollow carbon spheres had a uniform shell structure with a shell thickness of 30 nm, a specific surface area of 2239 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 3.56 cm3 g−1. As a result, the specific capacitance of hollow carbon spheres was measured to be 268 F g−1, which was much higher than that of a conventional carbon electrode in an aqueous electrolyte. Furthermore, a layer of polyaniline (PANI) as a pseudo-capacitive species was deposited on the external surface of the hollow carbon spheres, leading to an enhanced specific capacitance of the composites, with a maximum value of 525 F g−1. The asymmetric supercapacitor constructed with HCS and HCS-PANI composite electrode materials showed good electrochemical stability, with 73% of the capacitance, 75% of the energy density, and almost 100% of the power density preserved after 1000 cycles at a high current density of 1.0 A g−1.
 Fig. 25  (a, (b) SEM and (c, (d) TEM images of hollow carbon spheres of different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission. 
Cao et al. reported synthesis of a flowerlike NiO hollow nanosphere by calcining its hollow nanosphere precursor obtained from a microwave-assisted gas/liquid interfacial discharge method (see Fig. 26).125 The flowerlike hollow sphere was composed of twisted NiO nanosheets that intercalated with each other and had high surface area of 176 m2 g−1. Electrochemical properties exhibited a high specific capacitance of 585 F g−1 at a current of 5 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability. Zhu et al. also prepared flower-like β-Ni(OH)2 hollow spheres and in situ thermally converted them to NiO.126 Xu et al. reported preparation of hollow α-MnO2 microspheres, which possessed a highly loose, and mesoporous cluster structure consisting of thin plates or nanowires and showed the enhanced rate capacity and cyclability.127 Tang et al. also prepared hollow spheres of birnessite-type manganese oxide with a chemical composition of Na0.38MnO2.14·13H2O by templating silica colloid microspheres and the prepared materials exhibited a high specific surface area of 253 m2 g−1, an ideal capacitive behavior and good cycling stability in a neutral electrolyte system. The initial capacitance value was reported to be 299 F g−1.128 Although multi-shelled materials have yet to be introduced here, the benefit of tuning the nano- and microstructure of the material is apparent. Since the effectiveness of new material sets here is dependent on surface area and control of material deposition within each shell, multi-shelled hollow materials are uniquely suited to supply next generation advancements. It remains to be seen however whether multi-shelled materials may have an equivalent impact for supercapacitors, as they have for other energy storage technologies.
 Fig. 26  (a) XRD pattern, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image (inset: SAED pattern), and (d) HRTEM image of the flowerlike NiO hollow nanospheres. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have summarized the recent progress in the field of preparation of complex multi-shelled hollow spheres and their applications in energy-related systems. The breakthrough of synthetic methodologies for complex multi-shelled hollow structures has provided opportunities to tune their mechanical, optical, electrical, chemical, and other application specific properties. These advances have correspondingly catalyzed exploration in a growing list of applications including those in energy-related systems. In these up-to-date cases, complex multi-shelled hollow structures have already shown exciting promise for a diverse array of energy applications. However, the study on complex multi-shelled hollow nano-/micro-structures is still in its early stages, with a number of challenges to overcome in the years ahead. Synthetically, it is still difficult today to fabricate high-quality multi-shelled hollow materials that satisfy all the requirements of a specific application, e.g., non-agglomerated state, uniform shape, controlled shell size and thickness, tuneable inter-shell distances and versatile shell composition. Furthermore, high-speed, large-scale and low-cost syntheses of these materials are still highly desirable and difficult to attain. Regarding applications of these materials, all the previously reported results on improvement of energy device performances are based on individual experimental observations. A comprehensive and deep understanding of the relationship between the structures and functionalities of the multi-shelled hollow micro-/nano-structures has not yet been achieved. Therefore, it is urgent to not only develop standard and reliable methods to evaluate device efficiency based on the multi-shelled hollow materials, but also establish theoretical models to direct rational design and fabricate future materials and devices. Nevertheless, we are optimistic that sustained and dedicated research efforts in this promising area will provide us with a potentially transformative approach to producing advanced energy materials. As such, complex multi-shelled hollow structures can be expected in future to be a critical component in breaking many of the current bottlenecks to clean and renewable energy sources and storage.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful for financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21031005, 20971125, 21006116, 91122014, 51172235 and 21050110428), Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (No. 2082022) and the Foundation for State Key Laboratory of Multi-phase Complex Systems (No. MPCS-2011-D-15) and State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering (No. 2010KF-09). J. E. H. thanks the CAS Research Fellowship for International Young Scientists (No. 2010Y1GB5).
Notes and references
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
R. Devanathan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 101–119 CAS .
C. J. Zhong, J. Luo, P. N. Njoki, D. Mott, B. Wanjala, R. Loukrakpam, S. Lim, L. Y. Wang, B. Fang and Z. C. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 454–466 CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243 CAS .
B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun and Y. K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3287,  10.1039/c1ee01388b .
I. Hadjipaschalis, A. Poullikkas and V. Efthimiou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 1513–1522 CrossRef .
D. Allen, Mater. World, 2008, 16, 28–30 Search PubMed .
H. Qin, S. Wenger, M. Xu, F. Gao, X. Jing, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gra tzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9202–9203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Fan, B. Fang, J. H. Kim, J. J. Kim, J. S. Yu and J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 063501 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wen, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1867–1872 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Shen, F. P. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 61–66 CrossRef .
J. Liu and D. F. Xue, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1525–1534 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4867–4874 RSC .
C. Y. Cao, W. Guo, Z. M. Cui, W. G. Song and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem., 2011 Search PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3621–3638 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. S. Wang, J. Goebl and Y. D. Yin, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 494–507 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7511–7526 RSC .
G. Büchel, K. K. Unger, A. Matsumoto and K. Tsutsumi, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1036–1038 CrossRef .
S. B. Yoon, K. Sohn, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Shin, J. S. Yu and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 19–21 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhong, Y. Yin, B. Gates and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Yang, H. Li, X. P. Qiu and L. Q. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4083–4090 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, T. J. Lou, X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 5442–5449 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Mohwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111–1114 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3827–3831 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Sun, J. F. Liu and Y. D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2039–2047 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, Z. Li, D. Wang, X. Lai, C. Xing, M. Yang and X. Xing, Scr. Mater., 2010, 63, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Wu, X. D. Zhang, B. Ning, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6044–6054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Y. C. Zhu, L. Shi, L. L. Zhu, K. Y. Bao, S. Z. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Ding, X.-B. Zhao, J. Xie, G.-S. Cao, T.-J. Zhu, H.-M. Yu and C.-Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9475–9479 RSC .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, C. M. Li, F. B. Su, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16271–16277 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lai, J. Li, B. A. Korgel, Z. H. Dong, Z. M. Li, F. B. Su, J. Du and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2738–2741 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3808–3812 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Zheng, J. M. Cao, Y. P. Chen, X. J. Ma, S. G. Deng and J. Tao, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1174–1175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Li, X. Y. Lai, H. Wang, D. Mao, C. J. Xing and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2792–2797 CAS .
H. S. Qian, G. F. Lin, Y. X. Zhang, P. Gunawan and R. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18 Search PubMed .
R. S. Yelamanchili, Y. Lu, T. Lunkenbein, N. Miyajima, L. T. Yan, M. Ballauff and J. Breu, Small, 2009, 5, 1326–1333 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1720–1723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, X. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Dong, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4312–4314 RSC .
N. N. Guan, Y. T. Wang, D. J. Sun and J. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20 Search PubMed .
F. Z. Mou, J. G. Guan, W. D. Shi, Z. G. Sun and S. H. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15580–15585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, J. Ma, Z. Niu, X. Dong, H. Xu, Z. Meng, Z. Jin, Y. Lu, Z. Hu and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, J. Ma, C. L. Zhang, Z. Z. Yang and Y. F. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6727–6730 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Xu, H. J. Zhang, J. W. Song and B. L. Gao, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 233–235, 1981–1984 CAS .
C. Zimmermann, C. Feldmann, M. Wanner and D. Gerthsen, Small, 2007, 3, 1347–1349 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. M. Buchold and C. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3489–3492 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, S. Wang, H. Gan, J. Li, N. Wang, X. He and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3639–3643 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Y. Hu, X. Jiang, L. Zhang and C. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6369–6372 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Fendler, Acc. Chem. Res., 1980, 13, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Fendler, Science, 1984, 223, 888–894 CAS .
H. P. Cong and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1814–1820 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Y. Gao, X. Bai, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 1643–1648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Lai, C. Xing and D. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 7707–7710 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Xu, J. H. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. W. Tan, H. B. Su, K. L. Chan and H. Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8426–8430 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Xu and W. Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kim, W. Z. Zhang and T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1998, 282, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. H. Yu, L. Zhu, X. F. Zhou, Q. F. Zhao, H. X. Li and C. Z. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6238–6243 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gu, H. Bongard, Y. Deng, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Y. Fang, J. Mao, B. Tu, F. Schüth and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Wang, Y. Tu, P. C. Zhang and G. L. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1838–1842 RSC .
J. Liu, S. B. Hartono, Y. G. Jin, Z. Li, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4595–4601 RSC .
Z. C. Wu, M. Zhang, K. Yu, S. D. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5346–5352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang and J. J. Zhu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 256, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Li, Y. Xie, M. Jing, G. X. Rong, Y. C. Tang and G. Z. Zhang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9380–9385 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4391–4395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mo, J. C. Yu, L. Zhang and S. K. A. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 756–760 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Guo, Y. Cao, S. H. Xie, W. L. Dai and K. N. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2003, 700–701 RSC .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Small, 2005, 1, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15839–15847 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, Z. Li, D. Wang, C. Xing, X. Lai and X. Xing, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2009, 25, 963–965 CAS .
H. Zhao, J. F. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang, J. W. Sun and J. Yun, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3682–3686 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Chen, W. P. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. W. Han and X. H. Bao, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2007, 18, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Doshi, N. K. Huesing, M. C. Lu, H. Y. Fan, Y. F. Lu, K. Simmons-Potter, B. G. Potter, A. J. Hurd and C. J. Brinker, Science, 2000, 290, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, K. Murakoshi, T. Kitamura, S. Yoshida, M. Haruki, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12809–12815 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 CAS .
M. Saito and S. Fujihara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 280–283 CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087–4108 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6769–6774 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakatani, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, G. Soler-Illia and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1049–1056 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. A. Lee, N. M. Abrams, P. G. Hoertz, G. D. Barber, L. I. Halaoui and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14415–14421 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, K. Park, D. W. Liu, X. Y. Zhou, Y. H. Jeong and G. Z. Cao, J. Nanophotonics, 2010, 4 Search PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tetreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Y. Lai, J. E. Halpert, Y. Yang and D. Wang, Sci. China Chem., 2011, 54, 930–935 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kondo, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga, M. Murayama, T. Mori, K. Sunada, S. Bandow and S. Iijima, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yang, D. J. Yang, J. Kim, J. M. Hong, H. G. Kim, I. D. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chigane, M. Watanabe, M. Izaki, I. Yamaguchi and T. Shinagawa, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, E5–E8 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, J. J. Fan and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 597–602 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Li, Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3565 CAS .
J.f. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y.l. Cao, X.p. Ai and H.x. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. He, B. X. Lei, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su, Y. P. Fang and D. B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757–8761 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1654–1660 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 CAS .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, D. Marrero-Lopez, M. Galvez-Sanchez, J. Canales-Vazquez, C. Savaniu and S. N. Savvin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1670–1681 CAS .
H. P. Liang, H. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, L. J. Wan and C. L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1540–1543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Xu, G. Weinberg, X. Liu, O. Timpe, R. Schlogl and D. S. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3613–3619 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, W. Xing, X. Xue, C. Liu, T. Lu and J. Liao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17305–17310 CAS .
G. Chen, D. G. Xia, Z. R. Nie, Z. Y. Wang, L. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1840–1844 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ma, K. Qian, W. X. Huang, Y. H. Zhu and Q. Yang, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 83, 1455–1461 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Han, Y. K. Yun, K. W. Park, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1922–1925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Song, Y. Li and X. H. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Fang, J. H. Kim, M. Kim, M. Kim and J. S. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1380–1387 RSC .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 939–954 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818–837 CAS .
F. Su, X. S. Zhao, Y. Wang, L. Wang and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4413–4419 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Lai, W. Xia, R. Yu, D. Mao, C. Xing, J. Yao, D. Wang and X. Li, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2008, 24, 383–384 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, W. Xia, W. Q. Meng, R. B. Yu, X. R. Xing, Y. F. Chen and M. Takano, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 656–657 CrossRef .
F. Jiao, K. M. Shaju and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6550–6553 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, T. Wang, C. Z. Yu, B. Tu, Z. Y. Jiang and D. Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ning, Q. Q. Dai, T. Jiang, K. K. Men, D. H. Liu, N. R. Xiao, C. Y. Li, D. M. Li, B. B. Liu, B. Zou, G. T. Zou and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1818–1821 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. L. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. M. Li and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2536–2539 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Small, 2007, 3, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Xia, D. F. Xue and L. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12086–12087 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Yang, J. F. Qian, Z. X. Chen, X. P. Ai and Y. L. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14067–14071 CAS .
X. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, Y. T. Zhong, X. Q. Cao, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1680–1686 CrossRef CAS .
C. Abbey and G. Joos, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2007, 43, 769–776 CrossRef .
X. S. Zhao, Z. B. Lei and Z. W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19867–19874 Search PubMed .
W. G. Song, C. Y. Cao, W. Guo, Z. M. Cui and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3204–3209 RSC .
L. P. Zhu, G. H. Liao, Y. Yang, H. M. Xiao, J. F. Wang and S. Y. Fu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 550–557 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Xu, L. B. Kong, W. J. Zhou and H. L. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19141–19147 CAS .
Z. H. Liu, X. H. Tang, C. X. Zhang, Z. P. Yang and Z. L. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 939–943 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Xiaoyong Lai	Xiaoyong Lai received his BE degree (2004) and PhD degree (2009) in the department of Materials and Science at Jilin University. Then, he moved to the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) and joined Prof. Dan Wang's group. His research interests focuses on the preparation of hollow and porous materials as well as their application to photocatalysis, DSSCs and sensors.
Jonathan E. Halpert	Dr Jonathan E. Halpert received his BS in ACS Chemistry in 2003 from Tufts University, Medford, MA (USA). He received his PhD in 2008 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), in Cambridge, MA, where he worked in the group of Prof. Moungi Bawendi. He has worked in the energy industry in the US for two years, and is currently a Visiting Fellow in Prof. Dan Wang’s group at the Institute for Process Engineering (IPE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research is focused on synthesizing new nanocrystalline materials for photovoltaic applications using non-toxic and earth-abundant materials.
Dan Wang	Prof. Dan Wang received his BS and MS at Jilin University (1994 and 1997) and PhD at Yamanashi University (2001). In 2004, he was awarded the Hundred Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and took his current position as a Principal Investigator at the State Key Laboratory of Multi-phase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include inorganic material chemistry, surface and colloidal chemistry, hydrothermal chemistry, sol–gel chemistry and self-assembly processes, with focus on the design and synthesis of micro-/nanostructured functional inorganic materials and their applications in energy conversion and storage, photocatalysis and sensors.

Broader context
In order to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels and the environmental issues related to global warming, more and more efforts have been made to develop new renewable, highly efficient technologies for creating and storing energy without damaging the environment. The efficiency of many of the new technologies strongly depends on the availability of new advanced functional materials. Here, hollow spheres are a class of materials that could be expected to play a key role due to their unique structures as well as their inherited properties such as high surface-to-volume ratio and reduced transport lengths for both mass and charge transport. The designing and fabrication of complex hollow structures with multiple shells is expected to further tune the properties of materials by manipulating the structure of hollow materials on the micro- and nano-scale. This perspective provides an overview of recent progress in synthetic methodologies for complex multi-shelled hollow structures and discusses the most promising applications of these novel materials, including solar cells, fuel cells, lithium ion batteries and super capacitors.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of formation of hollow structure via (a), (b), (c) solid templating; (d), (e) hollow templating; and (f) combined solid and hollow templating method.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic outline of the transformation of solid templates to single-shelled (a–b), double-shelled (a–c–d), triple-shelled (a–c–e–f), and multi-shelled (a–c–e–g) hollow spheres. Inset is a typical multi-shelled hollow sphere, where dt is the shell-thickness size and ds is the neighboring shell-to-shell distance. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the sequential templating approach to multi-shelled hollow metal oxide microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  
            TEM images of (a) double-shelled, (b) triple-shelled, and (c) quadruple-shelled α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres; (d) TEM image of quadruple-shelled NiO hollow microspheres; (e) STEM image and (f) EDS line scanning of triple-shelled NiO hollow microspheres; TEM images of other multi-shelled hollow microsphere of (g) Co3O4,h) CuO, (i) ZnO, (j) ZnFe2O4 and (k) ZnO@ZnO/ZnFe2O4@ZnO/ZnFe2O4. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of preparation of multi ball-in-ball hybrid metal oxides. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  Formation of different Cu2O hollow structures in the presence of a CTAB template: (a) micelle; (b) single-lamellar vesicle; (c) multi-lamellar vesicle. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  
            TEM images of Cu2O hollow structures: (a) single-shelled; (b) double-shelled; (c) triple-shelled; and (d) quadruple-shelled. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a), (b) TEM and (c), (d) FESEM images of ferrihydrite double-shelled hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed growth process of double-shelled ferrihydrite hollow spheres by using a twice-gas-bubble approach. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatially periodic precipitation mechanism of the shell construction process; (b) optical microscopy image of the triple-shelled hollow microsphere. Scale bar of (b) is 10 mm. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of multiple diffractions and reflections on the hollow spheres; (b) SEM images of the PS particles; (c) the titania-coated PS particles; and (d) the TiO2 hollow spheres; (e) TEM image of the TiO2 hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a bilayer structure showing the nanocrystalline TiO2 underlayer and the TiO2 nano-embossed hollow sphere overlayer. (b), (c) Surface SEM images for each layer. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 13  J–V curve of an optimized DSSC based on the film consisted of double-shelled hollow spheres as the light scattering layer (5 mm) over the P25 under-layer (11 mm) under AM-1.5G one sun intensity. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM and (b) high-resolution (HR) TEM images of SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres. (c) SEM and (d) HRTEM images of TiO2–SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 15  
I–V characteristics of DSSCs with the photoelectrode films of TiO2–SnO2 multi-shelled hollow microspheres (MHS), TiO2–nano-SnO2, SnO2 MHSs, nano-SnO2, and TiO2 (P25) nanoparticles. The inset illustrates the multiple reflecting and scattering of light in the multilayered hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM and (b)–(d) TEM images of hierarchical ZnO hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 17  
            Cyclic voltammograms of Pt solid nanoclusters (dashed line) and hollow nanospheres (solid line) on a glass carbon disk electrode in H2SO4 (0.5 M) and methanol (0.6 M). The same loading of nanospheres and solid nanoclusters was applied to the electrodes (0.0175 mg cm−2). Scan rate = 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 18  
            cyclic voltammograms of Co-Pt hollow spheres (Co32Pt68), Co28Pt72 nanoparticles, and Pt nanoparticles in 0.5 M H2SO4 containing 1 M methanol. Scan rate 200 mV s−1. Pt loading 5 μg. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) C–V of SnO2@carbon coaxial hollow spheres showing the first two cycles between 3 V and 5 mV at a scan rate of 0.05 mV s−1. (b) Capacities versus cycle number between 2 V and 5 mV at a 0.8 C rate (C = 625 mA g−1). (c) Cycling performance of the same cell at various rates after cycled for 100 cycles shown in (b). Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of V2O5–SnO2 double-shelled nanospheres. Inset shows the schematic structure of these double-shelled nanospheres. The red spheres represent SnO2 nanocrystals and the green double shells represent the V2O5 matrix; (b) low-magnification TEM images; (c), (d) high-magnification TEM images indicate that the porous shell consists of nanocrystals with the thickness of R1 ≈ R2 = 90 nm; (e)–(g) HRTEM images revealing the lattice planes of V2O5 matrix and SnO2 nanocrystals; (h) SAED pattern taken from individual nanospheres which shows that these nanospheres are polycrystalline. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 21  Anode performance of as-prepared V2O5-based nanocomposites with 10 wt% SnO2. (a) First two cycles of charge/discharge curves at a current density of 250 mVs−1. (b) First two cycles of CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mVs−1. (c) Charge–discharge curves at different current densities. (d) Capacity (left) and efficiency (right) versus cycle number at a current density of 250 mA g−1, showing the charge and discharge capacity. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a), (b) TEM images and (c) the cycling performance of triple-shelled SnO2 hollow microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 23  
            TEM images of hollow cobalt glycolate microspheres: (a) single-shelled, (b) double-shelled, and (c) triple-shelled. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 24  Charge capacities versus cycle number and Coulombic efficiency of single-shelled (S–Co), double-shelled (D-Co), triple-shelled (T-Co) Co3O4 hollow spheres and commercial Co3O4 products (C-Co) at a current rate of C/5 (178 mA g−1) between 3 V and 10 mV. Reproduced from ref. 12 & 20 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a, (b) SEM and (c, (d) TEM images of hollow carbon spheres of different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) XRD pattern, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image (inset: SAED pattern), and (d) HRTEM image of the flowerlike NiO hollow nanospheres. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
