Enzymes and bio-inspired electrocatalysts in solar fuel devices  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21471G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21471G
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7470-7490Enzymes and bio-inspired electrocatalysts in solar fuel devices

        
          
            Thomas W. 
            Woolerton
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sally 
            Sheard
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yatendra S. 
            Chaudhary
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Fraser A. 
            Armstrong
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QR, UK. E-mail: fraser.armstrong@chem.ox.ac.uk
Received 
      23rd February 2012
    , Accepted 16th April 2012First published on 2nd May 2012AbstractThe development of robust systems for the conversion of solar energy into chemical fuels is an important subject in renewable energy research. Key aspects are efficient and rapid catalysis of both fuel production (reduction of H2O or CO2), and water oxidation. Enzymes often have extraordinary and unique capabilities as electrocatalysts, and in this Perspective we consider the role that these molecules can play through their incorporation into model systems for solar fuel production, or as inspiration for synthetic catalysts.Thomas W. WoolertonThomas Woolerton graduated with an MChem from Christ Church, University of Oxford, in 2008, and is now completing his DPhil with Fraser Armstrong. His main research interests are in the application of enzymes as electrocatalysts in proof-of-concept systems for fuel production, particularly solar-driven devices.Sally SheardSally Sheard graduated with an MChem from St. Hilda's College, University of Oxford, in 2010. Her main research interest is in the incorporation of water oxidation catalysts into model solar fuel devices, to produce a fully integrated device for oxygenic artificial photosynthesis.Yatendra S. ChaudharyYatendra S. Chaudhary earned his Ph.D for work on nanostructured semiconducting photocatalysts at Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra in 2004. After postdoctoral research at the TATA institute in Mumbai he joined IMMT (CSIR) in 2008 as an independent scientist to undertake research in materials chemistry. He is currently a Marie Curie Research Fellow in Fraser Armstrong's group at Oxford, working on the design of bio-hybrid photo/electro-catalysts for solar fuel generation. In 2011 he was recipient of a Green Talent-2011 Award from BMBF Germany. His research interests lie in functional nanomaterials, development of artificial photosynthesis systems and multi-ferroelectric nanostructures.Fraser A. ArmstrongFraser Armstrong is Professor of Chemistry at Oxford University and a Fellow of St. John's College. His interests are in biological redox chemistry, in particular in applications of dynamic electrochemical techniques to study complex electron-transfer and catalytic reactions in enzymes, and in the mechanisms and exploitation of biological H2 cycling and CO2 reduction. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2008.
Introduction
Due to a rapidly growing human population and rising economic expectations, one of the greatest challenges currently facing humankind is the increasing demand for energy. Coal, oil and natural gas (fossil fuels) are finite, and although supply predictions vary considerably,1–3 it is clear that we must eventually have technologies to harness alternative sources of energy that are plentiful and, ideally, inexhaustible. The drive for research in this field is boosted by rising atmospheric CO2 levels (and associated climate change) owing to the ongoing exploitation of remaining fossil fuel reserves. The focus is therefore largely on exploiting carbon-neutral technologies, such as wind, tidal, nuclear and solar.
Solar energy and its conversion into fuels
The Sun provides energy to the Earth's surface at an average rate of 120000 TW, far exceeding the global human power requirement (∼16 TW in 2009),4 and it is a practically inexhaustible source. Silicon-based photovoltaics are already well established, and ‘third generation’ dye-sensitised solar cells (‘Grätzel cells’)5,6 are the focus of ongoing intensive research as they promise a cheaper solution for solar-to-electrical conversion. However, human energy requirements are largely incompatible with both the temporal nature of sunlight and its uneven geographic distribution: consequently, whilst photovoltaics are well suited for many situations, there remains an unquestionable requirement for technologies that provide overall solar-to-chemical energy conversion; i.e. produce a storable and transportable ‘solar fuel’. Batteries are suited for portability and convenience but their energy density is low. Biological photosynthesis has evolved to harness the Sun's power to convert CO2 into energy-rich organic molecules: accordingly scientists now aim to mimic this process synthetically, or at least draw inspiration from the principles of the intricate natural system, to create industrially viable solar fuel systems (‘artificial photosynthesis’). An obvious goal is hydrogen (H2) from the reduction of water (Haq+), an Earth-abundant resource. Once H2 is produced (as the primary fuel) it can be used to synthesise more convenient and energy-dense hydrocarbon fuels (see below). One solar fuel solution, using existing technology, is a two-step process combining photovoltaic electricity generation and water electrolysis to form hydrogen. In the long term, a more elegant (and potentially more cost effective) target is direct, single-reactor solar fuel production in which sunlight is converted directly into chemical energy. Aside from production of H2, a second target is the reduction of concentrated CO2 to various organic molecules (not only C1 compounds). In theory, the latter concept has the potential to enable ‘loop-closing’ carbon sequestration schemes in which, for example, flue gas is captured and converted back to useable fuel by solar-powered means. The most synthetically valuable CO2 reduction product is arguably CO since it is gaseous and a raw material for two large-scale industrial processes: it is used as a reductant to produce H2 from water (the water–gas shift reaction) and in reaction with H2 to produce hydrocarbons (the Fischer–Tropsch processes).
In the natural system,7 three core components are electrically connected. In component 1, an ‘antenna’ absorbs photons, inducing formation of high-energy electron-hole pairs (‘excitons’); the charge carriers then migrate to appropriate reaction sites - electrons to a reduction catalyst (component 2) for the fuel-forming reaction, and holes to an oxidation catalyst (component 3) at which they are quenched by a reductant. Currently, most artificial systems use sacrificial agents as the electron source, thereby allowing sole focus on the investigation and development of fuel-forming catalysts. The ultimate target, however, is the incorporation of a water oxidation catalyst that would provide ‘cold’ electrons from what is a virtually limitless resource. Artificial light-harvesting components (e.g. doped semiconductors8–11 and synthetic dye molecules12–14) are reasonably advanced, with research in this area having been accelerated by the development of photovoltaics. However, there is a need to ensure that benign, Earth-abundant elements such as Si or Fe are used rather than Cd and other heavy metals, and also that processing costs are low (it is difficult to match biology's continuous production of organic light-harvesting pigments!). A current scientific bottleneck is the development of effective catalysts, and it is here that biology provides unique inspiration because redox enzymes are emerging as superb electrocatalysts.15 It is now appropriate to broaden the definition of electrocatalysts, traditionally adopted for catalytically active entities on the surface of an electrode, to include molecules that are attached to an electrode or other energisable electronic material such as a light-harvesting particle: the important point is that they are catalysts for electrochemical half-cell reactions, i.e. they link interfacial electron transfers with chemical reactions. In this Perspective, we discuss the scope for enzymes as specific electrocatalysts in model solar fuel systems and other applications, and the lessons that such devices can provide in terms of a general approach to much bigger technology. From a practical viewpoint, solar fuel producers must have long lifetimes and be scalable – ideally to industrial levels, or (as a minimum requirement) to ‘micro-generation’ levels. While the engineering challenges will follow, the focus for now remains largely on the chemistry. Although this is still bench-level science, the selection of materials is crucial, since precious metals are unlikely to be part of any large scale solution. Again, enzymes are remarkable in this aspect, as they achieve high rates at active sites that are invariably composed solely from Earth-abundant elements. In short, although they are expensive to produce in large amounts, enzymes inspire the development of future catalysts composed of viable (scalable) materials.
Thermodynamics of fuel-forming reactions

Fig. 1 shows Frost diagrams at pH 7 (the approximate proton activity of most natural waters) for carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. The plots can be interpreted as standard reaction Gibbs energy (proportional to nE, where n is the number of electrons transferred) against oxidation number N, with the most stable oxidation states of an element positioned lowest on the vertical axis. The inset indicates the relative positions of different types of species: reduced and oxidised products of combustion lie lower down, with high energy fuels and oxidants higher up – fuels towards the left (reduced) side, oxidants to the right. The gradient of a line joining two species is equal to the reduction potential of that couple, with steeper climbs corresponding to greater energy input requirement. From the Frost diagram for carbon, we see that the one-electron reduction of CO2 to form CO2˙− is an incredibly ‘uphill’ process. In comparison, direct two-electron reduction to form CO or formate is a much more favourable first step. Reductions of CO2 as far as HCHO are the most energetically costly steps in the production of reduced carbon compounds. The decreasing gradients seen upon crossing from CO2 to CH4 show that later reduction steps serve mainly to ‘store’ equivalents of H2 (for example, biology stores H2 as carbohydrate – CH2O).
 Fig. 1  Frost diagram showing the redox reactions of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen species at pH 7. The inset summarises the positions at which different types of species are found on Frost diagrams. Potential values taken from ref. 15–18. The diagram also indicates the overpotential requirements that might arise in reactions occurring in a step-wise manner and involving free intermediate species. For example η represents the minimal overpotential that would be required for the reduction of CO2 to CO via the free CO2˙− radical (see main text). 
The concept of overpotential requirement is represented on Frost diagrams as the angular difference between the line joining a reactant to final product and the potential that is actually required to drive the reaction. The overpotential requirement is influenced by the stability of intermediates that a suitable catalyst can stabilise. As an example, the angle marked η in Fig. 1 represents the large, albeit minimal overpotential that would be required for the aforementioned reduction of CO2 to CO to proceed via a free one-electron reduced CO2˙− intermediate. We shall see later that substrate-specific enzymes are able to avoid such high-energy intermediates by facilitating multiple, proton-coupled electron transfer (often abbreviated PCET) reactions through stabilised intermediates, and they are therefore able to operate with high efficiencies.
Enzymes as highly efficient electrocatalysts
Rates and efficiency
In biology, energy management via the interconversion of protons and H2 is catalysed by metalloenzymes called hydrogenases.19,20 The active sites, which contain only non-precious metals (nickel and/or iron) are buried deeply within the protein, and chains of FeS clusters mediate long-range electron transfer to or from a redox partner. Most hydrogenases are reversible electrocatalysts, although all display some degree of catalytic bias (their relative ability to catalyse H2 oxidation vs. H2 production). In general, the so-called [FeFe]-hydrogenases are more active than [NiFe]-hydrogenases, particularly for H2 production.19 Enzymes called carbon monoxide dehydrogenases (CODHs) catalyse the reversible oxidation of CO to CO2.21 We are interested here in Ni-containing CODHs, which have a [Ni4Fe–4S] cluster as the catalytically active site (see later section and Fig. 18). Like hydrogenases, the catalytically active site of CODHs is deeply buried and a chain of [4Fe–4S] clusters electronically ‘wire’ it to the surface.
In many respects, redox enzymes such as hydrogenases and CODHs set performance benchmarks for synthetic catalysts.15 To generalise across several types of enzymes, three attributes in particular stand out, all of which are fundamental properties of good electrocatalysts: (i) high substrate specificity; (ii) high rates, with turnover frequencies of the order of thousands per second at room temperature being common19,22 (e.g. H2 oxidation kcat = 6000 s−1 by Allochromatium vinosum [NiFe]-hydrogenase;23 H2 production kcat = 6000–9000 s−1 by [FeFe]-hydrogenases;24 CO oxidation kcat = 33000 s−1 by CODH (CODH I from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (Ch)25)); (iii) excellent efficiencies are often observed, i.e. only a small overpotential is required to drive the reaction at an acceptable rate. Protein film electrochemistry (Fig. 2(A)) using small amounts of sample (typically less than a picomole) is an ideal technique for investigating and demonstrating these properties.26,27 Enzyme molecules are immobilised on an electrode surface at which the potential is precisely controlled, and in the presence of substrate, the measured current is directly proportional to the catalytic turnover. As an example, Fig. 2(B) shows a pair of cyclic voltammograms from an experiment with Ch CODH I (hereafter simply referred to as CODH) adsorbed on an electrode surface. In the presence of CO, sweeping the electrode to more positive potentials drives CODH-catalysed CO oxidation, which is recorded as a positive current. Likewise, CO2 reduction is driven at lower potentials, indicated by negative current. Fig. 2(C) shows two voltammograms (separate experiments) of the same CODH enzyme (red) and a [NiFe]-hydrogenase from Escherichia coli (Ec Hyd-2, blue) in mixtures of their substrates. In each case, the voltammogram cuts the zero-current axis sharply, indicating that almost no overpotential is required in order to drive net catalysis in either direction. In view of enzymes fulfilling roles as electrocatalysts in devices, the upshot of this is significant, since lower overpotential translates into lower energy input requirement. Not only does this have beneficial cost implications, it also broadens the range of feasible processes because the thermodynamic margins are maximised (i.e. relatively little energy is wasted).15
 Fig. 2  (A) Cartoon representation of the technique of protein film electrochemistry, in which enzyme molecules are adsorbed onto an electrode surface. The potential can be precisely controlled, and in the presence of substrate the current is proportional to the enzymatic turnover rate. Experiments are usually carried out in a sealed cell, so conditions such as gas atmosphere and temperature can be controlled, and the potential is often imposed in a cyclic manner which reveals any deviations from steady-state behaviour. (B) Cyclic voltammograms recorded at a graphite electrode modified with Ch CODH I under 1 atm. CO or 1 atm. CO2. (C) Typical cyclic voltammograms (from separate experiments) showing the reversibility of electrocatalysis by Ch CODH I and Ec Hyd-2. Conditions for all experiments: pH 6.0, 30 °C, scan rate 10 mV s−1, electrode rotation rate 2500 rpm. For CODH the cell buffer was 0.2 M MES, and for the hydrogenase a mixed buffer system was used (0.1 M NaCl, 15 mM MES, 15 mM HEPES, 15 mM TAPS, 15 mM CHES, 15 mM sodium acetate). Panel C is adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Despite these excellent characteristics, enzymes have several disadvantages as electrocatalysts. In particular, they are giant molecules (e.g. hydrogenases typically have molecular weights of around 50–100 kDa),20 and so whereas the activity of each molecule may be very high, the turnover per unit volume/footprint on a surface may not be so remarkable. For this reason, considerable efforts are made to incorporate enzymes into three-dimensional electrode structures28–30 in order to maximise current densities, which is crucial in devices such as enzyme fuel cells.31 Stabilities are also often poor over long periods of time, and for certain classes of enzymes (including hydrogenases and CODHs) oxygen tolerance is sometimes very low. Most importantly, once isolated, there is no mechanism for repairing enzymes, whereas in the living cell they may be continuously replaced according to needs.
The severity of these drawbacks (not least the high cost of protein purification) leads to a general consensus that isolated enzymes are unlikely to be suitable for industrial energy applications, even of small to medium size. We concur with this view, and would urge those hoping for this Perspective to suggest otherwise to read no further! On balance, precious metals such as Pt (0.01 ppm in Earth's crust), Ir (0.001 ppm) or Ru (0.01 ppm) are equally inappropriate, and catalysts made from common metals such as iron (50000 ppm) or nickel (75 ppm), as in the active sites of enzymes, are the only long-term options for large-scale solar fuel production.32
A practical demonstration of the high efficiencies of enzymes as electrocatalysts
On balance, the general properties outlined above suggest that redox enzymes, although not ideal, are worthwhile candidates for electrocatalysts in prototype devices. Even if fragility and lack of long-term stability renders these devices impractical for industrial or commercial use, there is value in ‘proof of concept’ demonstrations, both in terms of design and for setting benchmarks for fully synthetic devices that are more robust. We will describe one such device that we designed in our laboratory, a proof of concept catalyst for the water–gas shift (WGS) reaction (CO + H2O → CO2 + H2), to demonstrate some of the implications of using enzymes as highly efficient and rapid catalysts. In our construct (Fig. 3), complementary pairs of redox enzymes (CODH to catalyse the oxidation of CO to CO2, Ec Hyd-2 for the reversible reduction of protons to H2) are attached to conductive graphite platelets to form a suspension in buffered aqueous solution. The reaction is initiated by an injection of CO into the vessel headspace. Low-potential electrons released from CODH-catalysed CO oxidation are transferred through the graphite platelet to the hydrogenase, which catalyses the reduction of protons to H2.
 Fig. 3  (A) Cartoon representation of an enzymatic device for catalysis of the water–gas shift reaction. Electrons released by CODH-catalysed CO oxidation are transferred through a graphite particle to a CO-tolerant hydrogenase that reduces protons to H2. (B) H2 production and CO depletion over the course of 55 h at pH 6.0, 30 °C, as quantified by GC analysis. Fresh aliquots of CO were introduced at the times indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Rates of H2 production with this system (2.5 (mol H2) s−1 (mol adsorbed Hyd-2)−1 at 30 °C) are comparable to existing synthetic WGS reaction catalysts, but here we are operating at room temperature instead of the elevated temperatures usually required by synthetic catalysts.34,35 The success of this device lies, of course, with the fact that each half-reaction is catalysed by an enzyme that has been perfected for the purpose through evolutionary pressure. Both enzymes display only very small overpotential requirements, and the high activities mean that despite the small Gibbs energy difference for the reaction (equating to a driving force of only around 0.1 V, taken directly from Fig. 2(C) as the difference in zero-current intersection potential) the reaction still takes place at a good rate. It also highlights a worthwhile design principle for redox catalysts in general – that at the expense of the simplicity of a single catalyst for an entire reaction, there can be merit in designs which incorporate the wiring together of two half-reaction-specific electrocatalysts. Importantly, constructs of this kind are only possible with catalysts that are highly efficient, i.e. able to provide high rates of catalysis with minimal overpotential – the WGS reaction catalyst described here would not function if either of the enzymes required even just 0.1 V to activate oxidation or reduction.
The ability of enzymes to operate well with just a small driving force allows photocatalytic systems to maximise turnover rates with marginal energy input. In addition, there is an important advantage of having oxidation and reduction catalysts co-attached to a conducting particle because differences in the activities of either catalyst can be compensated for by adjusting their relative quantities. These concepts are highly relevant for the photo-excitable particulate systems discussed later, but first we briefly consider the aspects of light harvesting and charge separation.
Sunlight to electrochemistry
Light harvesting
In natural photosynthesis, plants absorb solar radiation using pigments such as chlorophyll, carotenes and xanthophylls. The hierarchical structure and unique architecture of each element at macro-, micro- and nano-scale in the leaf greatly enhances light harvesting, and the epidermis layer of leaves further creates local irradiances which can lead to a theoretical maximum total intensification of 20 times the irradiance of incident light.36 The first steps of light absorption and charge separation that occur in the natural system are mimicked in solar technologies based on semiconductors, often incorporating transition-metal based photosensitisers such as Ru–bipyridine complexes. The action of visible light on such complexes results in a ligand-centred electron (which is injected into the semiconductor) and a metal-centred hole. Sensitisation of wide-bandgap semiconductors with metal complexes has been well developed due to the commercialisation of the dye-sensitised solar cell.6 An early example of this technology was demonstrated in 1971 when chlorophyll-sensitised zinc oxide was incorporated into a dye-sensitised solar cell,37 although the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was low and limited by the poor adsorption of the monolayer of dye onto the flat ZnO surface. A dramatic improvement in the adsorption of dye (and hence of the IPCE) was made when a monolayer of a trimeric Ru photosensitiser complex was coated onto a mesoporous and rough TiO2 film.38 Such mesoporous structures mimic the function of thylakoid vesicles stacked in green leaves, allowing better interaction between the chlorophyll and solar radiation, thereby enhancing light harvesting. Further improvements in efficiencies were obtained by using (cis-bis(4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine) dithiocyanato ruthenium(II)) (commonly known as N3 dye) as the photosensitiser on mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2.37 The monolayer coating of dye on mesoporous films, comprised of ultra-small TiO2 particles (several nm in diameter), allows high transparency with low scattering loss, enabling the light harvesting efficiency (LHE) to approach 90%.39 Narrow bandgap semiconductors are able to absorb visible light; here, electrons are promoted directly from the valence band (bandgap excitation).
Forming a separate class of materials, polymeric organic semiconductors, which contain delocalised π-electron systems, have found use as the light absorbing components in organic solar cells.40–42 Originally used in organic LEDs, these polymers are promising components in photovoltaic devices because they are compatible with low-cost, high-throughput fabrication methods (standard printing techniques can be used).43 Although absorption coefficients of the polymers are generally high (>105 cm−1),44 their poor stabilities towards O2 and water mean that the devices generally suffer from having lifetimes of less than a year. The most successful cells are polymer–fullerene cells45 that contain mixtures of a ‘donor’ polymer and a fullerene derivative as the ‘acceptor’ material, but efficiencies to date have barely exceeded 5%.46,47 A major contributing factor is that the polymers only absorb a small portion of the solar spectrum (λ < 650 nm), and so in terms of light harvesting efficiencies inorganic materials (including silicon) are generally preferable. Tandem organic polymeric devices (comprised of two cells with different absorption ranges connected together) have been designed to improve the overall efficiency, although improvements beyond 6% remain difficult to achieve.48
In fuel producing systems, photoexcited electrons migrate to catalytic sites to drive the reductive half-cell reaction (2H+/H2 or CO2/energy rich C-compounds). Likewise, photo-generated holes migrate to sites at which the oxidative half reaction occurs. Ideally, this oxidation is the challenging four-electron conversion of water to oxygen, although simple ‘sacrificial’ electron donors (typically amines or ascorbate) are usually used to facilitate study of the reductive half-cell reaction. Similarly, to focus on water oxidation catalysts, sacrificial electron acceptors such as S2O82−, Ag+ or Fe3+ may be used. A schematic representation of the various processes involved in artificial photosynthesis is shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of various steps involved in artificial photosynthesis: light harvesting and charge separation, electron transfer to a reduction catalyst at which a fuel-forming process occurs, and hole transfer to a water oxidation catalyst (or to a site at which a sacrificial electron donor can quench the hole). Some examples of catalysts are shown. 
The maximum IPCE of single bandgap semiconductor systems is limited to 31% due to the loss of a fraction of the kinetic energy of excitons through phonon emissions.49 Recently, however, multiple exciton generation (MEG, Fig. 5) has been observed in semiconducting quantum dots (QDs). In this process, electrons or holes with kinetic energy significantly greater than the QD band gap give rise to one or more additional excitons via a phenomenon known as impact ionisation.50 Electrons having this excess kinetic energy can be generated either by the application of an electric field or by the absorption of a photon with energy considerably greater than the semiconductor band gap Eg (i.e. hν ≥ nEg, where n could be 2, 3, etc.). Additionally, the discrete quantised energy levels in QDs allow slower relaxation of the excitons compared to bulk semiconductors, favouring lower recombination probabilities. The combined effect of MEG and slower exciton cooling in QDs has recently resulted in a IPCE of 114% in a PbSe QD-based solar cell.51
 Fig. 5  Multiple exciton generation (MEG) via impact ionisation in semiconductor quantum dots. 
Charge transport, recombination processes and regeneration of light harvesters
Efficient transfer of electrons and holes from light harvesters to catalytic sites requires a favourable energetic alignment: the reduction potentials of the reactions (2H+/H2 or CO2/CO, etc.) should lie below the conduction band edge of the semiconductor. Similarly, the valence band edge should be at a more positive potential than the oxidation half reaction (D+/D or O2/H2O). In the case of photocatalysis at dye-sensitised semiconductors, a ‘hot’ electron from the π* orbital of the anchoring group of the dye is injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor, on the picosecond timescale.52–55 For effective charge separation, the back reaction (electron transfer from conduction band to oxidised dye) should be much slower than the rate of dye reduction by the electron donor. Electron transfer within the semiconductor usually takes place via electronic conduction. In less ordered semiconductors or biological macromolecules, charge transfer may also take place via hopping and dispersive processes. The hopping process by which photo-generated excitons are transferred in photosynthesis, as first explained by the Dexter electron-exchange mechanism, requires a close spatial arrangement of relay centres.56,57
As with photovoltaic solar cells, recombination of photo-generated excitons lowers the efficiency of photocatalysis. The three major recombination pathways are (Fig. 6): (a) bulk recombination at bandgap states; (b) direct electron recombination with holes in the valence band; (c) surface recombination. If an electron scavenger is present (O2 in Fig. 6), electrons can be removed from the conduction band (d), or photo-corrosion and dissolution of the semiconductor can occur (e). An ideal catalyst may compete well with some recombination pathways, most obviously the surface processes (d) and (e).
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of possible recombination processes in an illuminated semiconductor system for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Blue arrows show recombination processes (a, b and c) between electrons (−) and holes (+) or undesired surface processes (d and e); D represents a sacrificial electron donor that is usually used in place of H2O. 
The recombination rate depends upon the degree of crystallinity and the size of semiconductor particles. Semiconductor materials of lower crystallinity possess larger numbers of grain boundaries or defects that act as recombination (‘trapping’) sites for the photogenerated charge carriers. Smaller particles (in particular ‘quantum dots’ having dimensions of only a few nm) decrease recombination probabilities, as the photo-generated electrons and holes must migrate smaller distances to reach reaction sites and are therefore less likely to encounter grain boundaries (Fig. 7). Furthermore, the recombination probability also depends upon the architecture of the semiconductors. Nanowires or nanotubes (one-dimensional nanostructures) enable directed (vectorial) electron transport, reducing the possibilities of recombination events and facilitating more efficient charge transport.58,59
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of recombinations of photogenerated holes (+) and electrons (−) at grain boundaries or defects in bulk semiconductor catalysts (top). These events are minimised in nanostructured materials (bottom), in which one or more dimensions is of the order of a few nm (nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanorods, etc.) since there are fewer grain boundaries/defects. 
Recent studies undertaken on the charge carrier dynamics for TiO2 photoanode-based systems60,61 suggest that the lifetimes and average diffusion lengths of photo-generated holes and electrons are sensitive to the chemical environment (nature of hole scavenger) and strongly depend upon light intensity (Tang et al. reported lifetimes to increase from ns to μs upon lowering the light intensity from 530 μJ cm−2 to 60 μJ cm−2). Such enhanced lifetimes of the photo-generated charge carriers consequently reduce recombination probabilities. Unlike TiO2, the lifetimes of photo-generated holes in Fe2O3 appear relatively insensitive to the chemical environment but increase to around 3 s upon application of an external positive bias.62 Unlike a conductor, the potential is not constant throughout a semiconductor but bends close to the solution interface to be continuous with that of the electric double layer of the solution (the bending region is known as the space-charge region).63 The efficiency of photocatalysis therefore depends upon the competition between charge separation in the space-charge region and recombination. However, the smallest nanoparticles (such as quantum dots) cannot support a space-charge region because it would be larger than the nanocrystal dimensions, so fast interfacial electron-transfer kinetics are necessary for charge separation.
Systems for solar fuel production
In this section, we outline selected examples of systems focused on the fuel-forming reactions in which enzymes, or catalysts based on their active site structures, have been used. These systems include devices in which the catalysts are attached to electrodes and incorporated into photoelectrochemical cells, and particle-based systems, in which the catalysts are attached to light harvesting materials suspended in solution. When using enzymes, these must be linked to the surface in an electroactive orientation, in order to allow direct, non-mediated interfacial electron transfer. Directed immobilisation of enzymes on surfaces (i.e. having control over the orientation of binding/adsorption) is generally difficult to achieve, and applications (such as photoelectrochemical cells) as well as fundamental electrochemical studies commonly rely on non-specific interactions that include non-productive orientations. A notable exception is the oriented immobilisation of [NiFe]-hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio gigas on carbon electrodes, which made use of a significant dipole moment in the enzyme molecule.64
Photoelectrochemical cells for H2 production
In common with Grätzel solar cells, photoelectrochemical cells contain a light sensitive anode, which is usually a semiconductor sensitised to visible light by the adsorption of a dye.5 The photogenerated electrons flow from the anode to the cathode which is modified with a catalyst to facilitate a fuel-forming reduction reaction (usually the reduction of protons to H2). The cycle is completed by an electron donor (ideally water) that reduces the photogenerated holes in the anode, thus allowing continuous fuel production.
One obvious cathode catalyst is a hydrogenase, and Joo and Yoon have used a [NiFe]-hydrogenase from Pyrococcus furiosus in both a methyl viologen mediated cell,65 and in a cell in which the enzyme was directly attached to an anodised tubular titania cathode.66 In this example, a greater than 50% increase in the rate of H2 evolution was achieved by a cross-linked system in which an aryl azide formed a covalent attachment between the enzyme and the electrode, compared with one in which the hydrogenase was simply adsorbed via electrostatic interactions. At the TiO2 photoanode, regenerative electrons were provided from water, although an external bias of 1.5 V (from a solar cell) was required to drive oxidation.
Hambourger et al. have carried out extensive development of photoelectrochemical biofuel cells.67–69 As the name suggests, these devices contain features found in both photoelectrochemical cells and biofuel cells. Following photoexcitation, holes in the porphyrin-sensitised TiO2 anode are reduced using electrons liberated from the oxidation of a biofuel (methanol, ethanol, glucose or glucose-6-phosphate) catalysed by the appropriate dehydrogenase enzyme. Fuel production in the cell is therefore sustainable and does not rely on a non-renewable sacrificial agent. In this work, NADH (or NADPH) serves as a mediator between the biocatalyst and the photoanode (it is oxidised to NAD(P)+ at the photoanode, and reductively regenerated in solution upon the enzymatic oxidation of the biofuel). Hydrogen is produced at the platinum cathode, and the overall process is therefore photo-driven conversion of biomass into H2. Similar hydrogen production rates have been observed whether using platinum (19.8 nmol H2 min−1) or Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase on carbon felt (23.4 nmol H2 min−1) as the catalyst.70 Considering the fact that each Pt catalytic unit is much smaller than for the hydrogenase, it can be assumed that the turnover frequency is greater for the enzyme. The cell using hydrogenase is shown schematically in Fig. 8 (it should be noted that for simplicity in this instance, NADH was used sacrificially as an electron donor, instead of as an electron transfer agent). Since NAD(P)H functions as a strict two-electron mediator in biology, a significant overpotential (over 1 V) is required to achieve two successive one-electron oxidations in this system, so this is far from being a practical and efficient cell. The researchers highlight the attraction of carbon felt as an electrode material, especially in applications such as the cell described here – the porous, three-dimensional structure is expected to allow high adsorption of hydrogenase due to its large surface area as compared to a solid electrode.
 Fig. 8  Schematic drawing of the photoelectrochemical cell used by Hambourger et al., in which [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum was used as the hydrogen production catalyst at the cathode. In this instance, NADH was used as a sacrificial electron donor at the photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. 
While Hambourger's approach in general uses NAD(P)H as a soluble mediator between the photoanode and the biocatalyst, a recent advance in a separate H2-producing photoelectrochemical biofuel cell involves the direct photonic wiring of glucose oxidase to a gold anode.71 An N-hydroxysuccinimide ester-functionalised Ru(II)–tris-bipyridine complex was tethered to glucose oxidase, which was attached to the electrode with glutaric dialdehyde as a crosslinker (Fig. 9). Oxidation of glucose provides electrons for photoanode regeneration. The photocurrent was proportional to glucose concentration, and from the surface coverage of enzyme (determined by quartz crystal microbalance measurements) a turnover rate of 8 electrons s−1 was calculated using constant illumination at λ = 462 nm. Under anaerobic conditions, H2 was produced at a gold electrode modified with Pt nanoparticles with a quantum yield of 3.5%. Under O2, however, no H2 was detected and it was suggested that this was due to the presence of H2O2 which is formed during the dark glucose oxidase-catalysed aerobic oxidation of glucose. The depletion of hydrogen atoms at the Pt electrode by H2O2 (H–Pt–H + H2O2→ Pt + 2H2O) or, simply, the faster competing H2O2 reduction, are possible reasons for the lack of H2 production.
 Fig. 9  Assembly of a photoelectrochemical biofuel cell using glucose, featuring a [Ru(bpy)3]2+-tethered glucose oxidase monolayer-modified Au electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2010) John Wiley and Sons. 
Semiconductor particle systems
An alternative approach for solar fuel production is to use powder-based systems in which light-sensitive particles (usually semiconducting) are modified with a catalyst. In addition to advantages of simplicity and low cost, powders (typically comprising nanoscale sized particles) in aqueous suspension promote high levels of light absorption and maximise the number of reaction sites. Review papers detail inorganic semiconducting materials for H2 production and CO2 reduction.72–76 High surface area supports are particularly important when using an enzyme as catalyst, due to the large footprint they make on a surface. Next, we discuss examples of systems in which enzymes themselves are used (‘bio-hybrid’) and those featuring catalysts inspired by the active sites of enzymes (‘bio-inspired’).
Bio-hybrid particulate systems
King and co-workers designed a self-assembling construct (Fig. 10) for solar hydrogen production, in which an [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum is bound to a 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) capped CdTe nanocrystal.77 Above pH 4.3, the deprotonated MPA capping ligands provide a negative charge at the nanocrystal surface, which leads to directed binding of the hydrogenase (the protein surface around the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster contains an excess of lysine (pKa ≈ 10.8) and arginine (pKa ≈ 12.5) residues). Using ascorbic acid as a sacrificial electron donor, the turnover frequency was 25 mol H2 (mol hydrogenase)−1 s−1, although the activity dropped considerably after 5 min of irradiation. It was suggested that this was due simply to depletion of ascorbic acid, as supported by a strong dependence of rate on ascorbate concentration.
 Fig. 10  Functional and structural models for nanocrystal (nc)–CdTe–hydrogenase hybrids. (A) The proposed scheme for light-driven H2 production by the nc–CdTe:hydrogenase complex. X represents a sacrificial hole scavenger. The hydrogenase structures are homology models of Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase to Clostridium pasteurianum [FeFe]-hydrogenase CpI (PDB entry 3C8Y). (B) Electrostatic surface model of the hydrogenase generated using VolMap. Regions of positive and negative charge are shown in blue and red, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
The hydrogenase-catalysed proton reduction in this CdTe system used electrons promoted from the valence band to the conduction band. The bandgap of CdTe is narrow (around 1.4 eV), and so all wavelengths of visible light provide sufficient energy for excitation of electrons. For wide band-gap materials like TiO2, a strategy for photosensitising the system to visible light is required: one such approach, as described earlier, is to incorporate a dye complex. In our laboratory, Reisner et al. co-attached a ruthenium bipyridyl photosensitiser (RuII(bpy)2(4,4-(PO3H2)2-bpy)]Br2 (‘RuP’); λmax = 455 nm) and a hydrogenase to TiO2 nanoparticles (Degussa P25) (Fig. 11(A)).78,79
 Fig. 11  Cartoon representations of enzyme–TiO2 nanoparticle hybrids for: (A) hydrogen production using [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from Desulfomicrobium baculatum, highlighting aspects which are desirable for efficient and practical operation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society; (B) CO production from CO2 using CODH I from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (Ch). Both systems are driven by visible light, with a ruthenium bipyridyl complex as a photosensitiser. Panels (i)–(iv) show examples of electrochemical experiments carried out to examine the separate TiO2–dye and TiO2–CODH interactions: (i) photocurrents obtained upon illumination (λ > 420 nm) of a TiO2 electrode held at −0.52 V vs. SHE, onto which RuP is adsorbed (TiO2–RuP); (ii) experiment showing the decrease in photocurrent at RuP–TiO2 over 4 h, during which time the electrode was illuminated (λ > 420 nm) and poised at −0.52 V vs. SHE; (iii) ten successive cyclic voltammograms (overlayed) of Ch CODH I adsorbed onto a TiO2 electrode with CO2 bubbling through the cell solution (scan rate 10 mV s−1); (iv) experiment showing the decrease in CO2 reduction activity over 4 h at a TiO2 electrode modified with Ch CODH I. The electrode was poised at −0.52 V vs. SHE. For all experiments, the cell buffer was 0.2 M MES (pH 6.0) at 20 °C. 
Photoexcitation of the dye (metal-to-ligand charge transfer) produces an electron that transfers spontaneously into the TiO2 conduction band and from there to the enzyme where protons are reduced to H2. The oxidised dye molecule is restored to its initial state by a sacrificial electron donor (triethanolamine or EDTA). As well as allowing visible light to drive the process, this mechanism has the advantage of avoiding the formation of highly oxidising holes in the valence band. Adsorbed amino acids are oxidatively damaged by valence band holes,80–82 and it is therefore likely that proteins will not survive long periods of bandgap irradiation on semiconductors having a very positive valence-band potential, like TiO2. The dye-sensitised system has a turnover frequency of 50 mol H2 (mol hydrogenase)−1 s−1, under mild conditions (25 °C, pH 7.0). The hydrogenase, from Desulfomicrobium baculatum, contains a NiFeSe active site and was shown to be by far the most active hydrogenase in this system. The enzyme also shows reasonable O2 tolerance and low product inhibition83 – a combination of characteristics that is uncommon for good H2-producers.84
This approach can be extended beyond hydrogen production. In analogous systems, we have investigated the attachment of CODHs to sensitised semiconductors for visible-light driven CO2 reduction to form CO (Fig. 11(B)).85,86 We again used RuP as the photosensitiser, and attached CODH as the CO2 reduction catalyst. Turnover frequencies of up to 0.2 s−1 (averaged over 4 h) were recorded, using EDTA as an electron donor. Using electrodes consisting of mesoporous thin films of TiO2 nanoparticles, it is possible to carry out electrochemical studies of the separate TiO2–dye and TiO2–enzyme interactions, and example experiments are shown in panels (i)–(iv) of Fig. 11(B). In our typical RuP–TiO2–CODH systems, nmol quantities of RuP are adsorbed onto the nanoparticles. Over several hours, μmol quantities of CO2 are reduced to CO, and therefore each RuP complex must complete thousands of cycles of photoinjection (RuPII + hν → RuPII* → RuPIII + e−[TiO2]) and regeneration (RuPIII + e− → RuPII). In panel (i), the injection of electrons from RuII* into the TiO2 conduction band is detected (as a photocurrent). The photocurrent is only present during periods of irradiation, and decreases over time (this lack of stability is more apparent over a longer time period, as shown in panel (ii)). Contrasting with this instability is the relatively high stability of CODH on the same electrode surface, shown in panel (iii). Here, ten successive cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 10 mV s−1) of a CODH-modified electrode under a CO2 gas atmosphere are overlayed. During this time no decrease in CO2 reduction activity is observable (the voltammograms completely overlay). A chronoamperometry experiment (panel (iv)) reveals some loss in activity after 4 h, but this is small (∼30%) compared to the decrease in photocurrent (∼80%).
These types of experiments, involving electrodes prepared from TiO2 nanoparticles, can therefore be useful tools in the investigation of the behaviour of particulate solar fuel systems. Like the WGS catalyst detailed earlier, these enzymatic light-driven systems are not only models for practical systems; they also serve to highlight the intrinsic efficiencies of the enzymes. Fig. 12 shows the potential difference (i.e. driving force) available for each system, and while the thermodynamics are marginal for H2 production, they are even less favourable for CO2 reduction. Such devices would not function if overpotential requirements were significant.
 Fig. 12  Scheme comparing the thermodynamic driving forces for CO2 and H+ reduction mediated by anatase. Potentials shown are standard reduction potentials corrected to pH 6, 20 °C. Sred* and Sox represent photoexcited and oxidised states of a photosensitiser. 
In a further development of our CODH-catalysed solar fuel system based on TiO2, we recently demonstrated CO2 reduction using a range of CdS particles as light harvesting units.87 The requirement for dye sensitisation was therefore eliminated (since CdS absorbs visible light), and a further advantage was the greater thermodynamic driving force for CO production: the conduction band of CdS lies around 0.35 V more negative than that of TiO2. Earlier, we mentioned the influence of size and shape on exciton recombination, and in experiments involving CODH attached to a range of CdS morphologies we observed significant variation in activity depending on whether CODH was attached to quantum dots (∼5 nm in diameter), bulk CdS particles (>100 nm), or nanorods. The relative sizes of CdS quantum dots and CODH molecules means that each enzyme was associated with several (up to ∼10) quantum dots, whereas in the TiO2 experiments the reverse was true: each nanoparticle was surrounded by several CODHs. The CODH-modified clusters formed by calcination of the CdS quantum dots showed no detectable CO2 reduction activity, attributable to the greater opportunity for electron–hole recombination at grain boundaries. The turnover frequency of CODH-modified nanorods (1.2 s−1) was higher than when quantum dots were used (0.25 s−1), with a likely influencing factor being the lower exciton recombination probability owing to the lower dimensionality of the nanotubes.
Systems using Photosystem I for light harvesting
Photosystem I (PS I) is a naturally occurring photosynthetic complex which absorbs all wavelengths below 700 nm.88 Furthermore, its quantum yield is almost 1,89 and its charge-separated state is long lived,90 so the incorporation of PS I into artificial or engineered H2 production systems is appealing. Golbeck and co-workers have used dithiol ‘molecular wires’ to connect PS I to both platinum nanoparticles91 and to a mutated [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum (Fig. 13).92
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the PS I-molecular wire–[FeFe]-hydrogenase nanoconstruct, in which the connecting wire is 1,6-hexanedithiol. Arrows indicate electron transfer through the system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
At PS I, a solvent-exposed cysteine residue (Cys 13) on PsaC, which ligates the terminal FeS cluster, was mutated to a glycine. The resulting PsaC variant, which lacks the native cysteine, could then be ‘chemically rescued’ by the dithiol, which acted as the molecular wire. Using 1,6-hexanedithiol as the wire between the PS I variant and a Pt nanoparticle, light-driven H2 production occurred at rates of up to 49.3 μmol H2 (mg Chl)−1 h−1, equivalent to 1.17 mol H2 (mol PS I)−1 s−1. Ascorbate was used as a sacrificial electron donor to PS I. In the hydrogenase system, the dithiol was attached to the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster which, like PS I, had also been engineered to replace a cysteine by glycine. Hydrogen was now produced at 30.3 μmol H2 (mg Chl−1) h−1, this time using a combination of Cyt c6, ascorbate and phenazine methosulfate as sources of electrons. The system was reported to be remarkably stable, showing almost no loss of activity over a period of 64 days.
In contrast to Golbeck's wired device, Krassen et al. have demonstrated a PS I–hydrogenase hybrid device which does not contain a synthetic linker molecule (Fig. 14).93 Instead, PS I and the membrane-bound hydrogenase (MBH) from Ralstonia eutropha were electronically coupled by genetic engineering – the extrinsic PsaE subunit being joined to the electron-transferring subunit of the hydrogenase. The resulting enzyme, MBHPsaE, was then incubated with PS I lacking the PsaE subunit (PS IΔPsaE) to form the hybrid. This complex was immobilised on a gold electrode via a histidine/Ni–NTA interaction, so that electrons could be supplied to PS I (a mediator, N-methylphenazonium methyl sulfate (PMS), was also required to facilitate this). Upon irradiation and excitation of PS I, electrons are transferred to the hydrogenase, which catalyses the reduction of protons to H2. In the experiment, the gold electrode was poised at a potential of −90 mV vs. SHE: not sufficiently reducing to drive proton reduction, but low enough to reduce the PMS which served as the electron donor for P700. Hydrogen production (detected by gas chromatography) occurred at a rate of 75 mol H2 (mol hybrid complex)−1 s−1.
 Fig. 14  Schematic view of a PS I–hydrogenase hybrid device. Electrons provided by the gold electrode reduce the oxidised form of N-methylphenazonium methyl sulfate (PMS). PMS transfers an electron to the chlorophyll a dimer P700 in PS I, which is promoted to a higher energy level upon illumination. The electrons are then transferred via the iron–sulfur cluster at the acceptor site to the distal iron–sulfur cluster of the hydrogenase (MBH). Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Bio-inspired systems
The most proficient hydrogen-producing hydrogenases are [FeFe]-hydrogenases.19 The mechanism of H2 formation at the active site is thought to proceed via an Fe–hydride species, in which the pendant amine group is protonated, as depicted in Fig. 15(A).94,95 Synthetic catalysts for the heterolytic formation of H2 are being designed with this intermediate in mind96–99 – an important consideration being hydridicity (a term expressing the thermodynamics of the dissociation process: M − H → M+ + H−). Hydridicity (in contrast to proton affinity) generally decreases left-to-right across a period. It is essential that M+ is easily reduced in order to bind another proton (and then a further electron) and complete the catalytic cycle. DuBois and co-workers have developed a suite of electrocatalysts focused around this feature,100–102 the most recent of which (Fig. 15(B)) produces hydrogen at impressive turnover rates in excess of 100000 s−1.103 This surpasses the highest reported rate for an [FeFe]-hydrogenase by an order of magnitude,24 but it is not the ultimate H2 production catalyst, since it requires a significant overpotential of 625 mV (measured at the half-wave potential). Nevertheless, it is clear that the role of a suitably positioned pendant amine group is crucial to the high rates achieved by this and similar complexes.
 Fig. 15  (A) The active site of [FeFe]-hydrogenase, showing the binding position (or position of formation) of H2.103 (B) The structure of [Ni(PPh2NPh)2](BF4)2, (PPh2NPh = 1,3,6-triphenyl-1-aza-3,6-diphosphacycloheptane), which provides turnover frequencies for H2 production in excess of 100000 s−1.103 (C) The structure of [Ni(P2PhN2Ph)2](BF4)2 (P2PhN2Ph = 1,3,5,7-tetraphenyl-1,5-diaza-3,7-diphosphacyclooctane).105 
A homogeneous system incorporating a similar nickel(II) complex (also first described by DuBois et al.),104 has been used for photogeneration of H2.105 The catalyst, [Ni(P2PhN2Ph)2](BF4)2 (P2PhN2Ph = 1,3,5,7-tetraphenyl-1,5-diaza-3,7-diphosphacyclo-octane) (Fig. 15(C)), was combined with a photosensitiser (Eosin Y) with ascorbate as sacrificial electron donor to give 2700 turnovers over 150 h (equivalent to 0.0005 s−1). In their characterisation, DuBois and co-workers reported a much higher electrocatalytic turnover rate (>350 s−1),104 although this was under more acidic conditions (protonated dimethyl formamide in acetic acid) compared to the photocatalytic system (1:1 water:acetonitrile). Nevertheless, this recent report provides the highest turnover number yet for a photocatalytic system using a synthetic catalyst consisting only of Earth-abundant elements.
Cobalt complexes with diglyoxime ligands (‘cobaloximes’) and cobalt tetraimines have also been demonstrated to catalyse proton reduction to H2,106 including their use in photochemical systems.107 Most studies have used non-aqueous solvents, although more recently there have been reports of these complexes operating as electrocatalysts in water with modest overpotentials as small as 100 mV.108,109
Many structural analogs of [FeFe]-hydrogenases have been reported that contain the binuclear 2Fe core of the active site.97 In general, these compounds are often only stable in non-aqueous solutions and under dark conditions, and therefore they are not well suited as hydrogen producing catalysts in photochemical water splitting.110 Out of the numerous [FeFe]-hydrogenase mimics that have been prepared, only some have shown significant activity for H2 production.111–116 Even fewer operate when combined with photosensitisers, and here we will highlight two examples of functional systems.
Pickett and co-workers have reported a nanophotocathode for hydrogen production which operates in aqueous solution, using the catalyst Fe2S2(CO)6 incorporated into an InP nanocrystal-modified gold electrode.117 The device (Fig. 16) was constructed by layer-by-layer adsorptions of 1,4-benzenedithiol and InP nanocrystals, to form a light-sensitive network, before introduction of the Fe2S2(CO)6 cluster. The photocathode was illuminated at 395 nm while poised at −400 mV vs. Ag/AgCl at pH 7 (this potential is sufficiently reducing to fill valence band holes in InP, but not negative enough to drive proton reduction).
 Fig. 16  Cross-section of a InP nanocrystal-modified gold electrode with adsorbed/intercalated [Fe2S2(CO)6]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2010) John Wiley and Sons. 
The production of H2 over the course of one hour was therefore attributed to the photochemical process, and a current yield of 60% was calculated from the amount of charge passed (2.58 μC) and hydrogen produced (16.2 nmol).
Wang et al. have recently reported a system that represents a significant breakthrough for photocatalytic H2 production by a hydrogenase mimic (Fig. 17).118 Nanocrystal quantum dots of CdTe were used to capture visible light: excited electrons were transferred to the [FeFe]-hydrogenase active site mimic, and ascorbate provided electrons to fill holes. Three hydrophilic ether chains were attached via a cyanide group in order to enhance the aqueous solubility of the catalyst. The system produced H2 steadily for 10 h with a turnover frequency of 50 h−1, and it is therefore one of the most promising artificial photocatalytic hydrogenase systems reported to date.
 Fig. 17  The system reported by Wang et al. using an artificial [FeFe]-hydrogenase mimic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. 
These studies highlight the large gulf still remaining between state-of-the-art photocatalytic H2 production by chemical systems and what is undoubtedly feasible, based on the high performance of enzymes.
Synthetic catalysts for CO2 reduction
In this Perspective, the focus is mainly on H2 production as opposed to CO2 reduction, reflecting the greater number of systems containing, or inspired by, hydrogenases as compared to CODH. The only active structural ‘mimic’ of the Ni-containing CODH active site that we are aware of is a bimetallic palladium complex reported by DuBois and co-workers.101,119 This complex was actually designed and studied before the structure of the CODH active site was known, but it shares a key feature with the enzyme in that a stable, seven-membered ring is formed upon binding CO2 (Fig. 18). The turnover number of this complex was only around 10, and it was suggested that this may be due to metal–metal (Pd–Pd) bond formation, which has a higher tendency to occur for 2nd and 3rd row transition metals. Bridged NiII–L–FeII molecules have been synthesised,120 although there are no reports of these systems being catalytically active for either CO oxidation or CO2 reduction, and it was suggested that this may be due to the intermetal separations being too large for bridged hydroxycarbonyl formation.
 Fig. 18  Comparison between the active site structure of Ni-containing CODH (left), and the structure of a bimetallic Pd electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction (right) prepared by DuBois and co-workers. On binding CO2, both structures form stable seven-membered rings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
In general, development of effective electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction remains a difficult challenge. Copper metal is the best electrode surface121,122 despite the fact that mixtures of products are formed (CH4, C2H4, CO, HCOOH) and with large overpotential requirements (up to ∼1 V).123,124 Nevertheless, Cu-doped TiO2 suspensions have been demonstrated to operate at reasonable rates in photochemical experiments.125,126 A promising development is the reduction of CO2 to methanol reported by Bocarsly, involving multiple steps catalysed by pyridinium ions at an overpotential of only ∼200 mV.127 Other electrocatalysts, such as Kubiak's binuclear copper complex, [Cu2(μ-PPh2bpy)2-(MeCN)2][PF6]2 (PPh2bpy = 6-diphenylphosphino-2,2′-bipyridyl),128 tend to suffer from low turnover and/or high overpotential requirements, both of which are major drawbacks in view of suitability for CO2 reduction with minimal solar energy input.
Aside from CODH, a second class of CO2-reducing enzymes that so far have not been discussed are formate dehydrogenases, catalysts for the oxidation of formate to CO2 in biology.129–131 The tungsten-containing enzyme is an excellent electrocatalyst that works well in either direction.17 To date, there have been no reported structural mimics of these tungsten or molybdenum-containing enzymes, although some functional mimics of the type [Ni(P2RN2R′)2(CH3CN)]2+ have been developed.132 These complexes only work in the direction of formate oxidation, with the pendant amine involved in deprotonation of bound formate, as a PCET reaction. A catalyst for CO2 reduction to formate would require both a CO2 binding site, and a site capable of PCET or hydride transfer.
Water oxidation
While most of the systems that have been described here for light-driven H2 production or CO2 reduction rely on sacrificial electron donors, achievement of true artificial photosynthesis requires the use of water as an electron source. Water represents a virtually limitless resource, particularly if sea water can be used. The development of an efficient water oxidation catalyst is critical, and so far provides the greatest challenge in creating a complete water splitting system. The direct oxidation of water to molecular oxygen (E0 = 1.23 V)18 is kinetically challenging because it requires the removal of four protons and four electrons from two water molecules, which must be in close enough proximity to form an O–O bond. Referring to Fig. 1, transfer of all four electrons and protons in a single step would require the catalyst to first accumulate all four oxidising equivalents. Alternatively, since the reduction potentials (to H2O) of all free intermediates are more positive than the four-electron value, a good electrocatalyst (i.e. one avoiding a large overpotential cost), could be one that binds and sufficiently stabilises one or more of these intermediate states, such as peroxide.
Catalyst requirements
In artificial photosynthesis, single photon/electron processes associated with light driven charge generation must be coupled to multi-electron catalysts. For direct O2 production the requirement to accumulate four oxidising equivalents at a catalytic centre greatly limits what type of complexes can function as water oxidation catalysts. Transition elements on the left of the d-block are too stable in high oxidation states and could not evolve O2. Ideally, Earth-abundant first-row transition metals should be employed as catalysts; however, it is not possible to increase the oxidation number of a 3d metal by four units without significantly changing its coordination sphere. For first-row transition metals, it is also important to avoid low oxidation states that are prone to ligand dissociation and dissolution. The solution is to construct multi-nuclear complexes that accumulate and distribute oxidising power over several metal centres. In the case of 4d and 5d elements, catalyst design is less restricted as these are stable in a larger range of oxidation states (so catalysts having lower nuclearity are feasible). Second and third-row transition metals also exhibit stronger bonding (resulting in more robust complexes). While these properties make metals such as Ru and Ir extremely useful for mechanistic studies and small-scale demonstrations, catalysts based on these heavier elements cannot be scaled up to meet serious demand, and as previously mentioned, a solar fuel solution with an iridium catalyst (one of Earth's rarest elements) is no more viable than one using an enzyme.
Another consideration is the nature of the molecules that ligate the metal centre, as complexes based on organic ligands will be unstable to oxidative degradation under the highly oxidising conditions required for water oxidation. The obvious solution is to avoid organic ligands and focus instead on non-oxidisable alternatives based on inorganic chemistry, particularly oxoanions and oxides themselves. Answers may indeed stem from a closer consideration of the surface electrochemistry of metal oxides and related mineral-like phases. Representative structures of some examples of O2-evolving metal-oxido clusters, which we will refer to later, are shown in Fig. 19.
 Fig. 19  Structural similarities between oxygen evolving catalysts, all of which are metal-oxido clusters (Co–Pi and Ru–POM are discussed later). The Mn4CaO5 cluster in PS II is the naturally occurring catalyst for O2 evolution. While the location of alkali metal ions (shown as grey circles) in the Co–Pi structure has not been confirmed, it has been proposed that they complete the cubane structure by co-ordination to the three oxido ligands.139 Only the tetra-ruthenium core of Ru–POM is shown. 
Natural photosynthesis and semi-artificial systems
By far the most active catalyst for water oxidation is that found in Photosystem II (PS II), a protein complex located in the thylakoid membranes of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms. In contrast to hydrogenases, biology has used only one catalyst for water oxidation, the Mn4CaO5 cluster of PS II, which is represented in Fig. 19. The water splitting reaction takes place during photosynthesis, generating the ‘hydrogen’ (in the form of NADH) needed for CO2 fixation to organic molecules. Reaching turnover frequencies as high as 1000 s−1in vivo,133 PS II performs at rates that are an order of magnitude higher than the best reported IrO2 catalyst,134 and typically at least three orders of magnitude greater than the majority of other synthetic catalysts.135 An understanding of the processes occurring at PS II is important for the development of future water splitting technologies.
Photosystem II is a huge dimeric protein complex, with each monomer containing 19 subunits.136 Light harvesting is achieved by chlorophylls and other pigments, and energy is rapidly transferred to the reaction centre to give the charge-separated state P680˙+Pheo˙− (the chlorophyll known as P680 in PS II is the primary electron donor, Pheo is pheophytin, a chlorophyll lacking Mg2+).137 Repeated cycling via the P680˙+ species drives water oxidation by successively withdrawing four electrons from the Mn4CaO5 cluster, thus accumulating the complete requirement for converting two H2O molecules to O2. Electrons exit PS II at the ‘acceptor site’ (QB), and are then transferred along an electron relay chain to PS I. In simplest electrochemical terms, PS II is an anode and PS I is a cathode. A design for a semi-artificial water splitting system, directly using Nature's catalysts, has already been envisaged. A proposed system is depicted in Fig. 20 and features PS II immobilised directly onto an electrode surface, which is wired to a cathode modified with PS I and hydrogenase.138
 Fig. 20  Proposed model for a solar driven water splitting device employing PS II as the solar water oxidation catalyst, PS I as a light absorber and a hydrogenase enzyme as a hydrogen production catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2006) John Wiley and Sons. 
In this system, PS II harvests light energy to catalyse water oxidation at the Mn4CaO5 cluster. Electrons are then transferred from the acceptor site into an external circuit, where they flow to the PS I/hydrogenase modified cathode for solar hydrogen production. In such a system, the two electrodes can be separated into different compartments, which is essential if O2-sensitive hydrogenases are used. The complexity and instability of PS II means that examples of its direct use in artificial devices are rare. A few studies into the attachment of PS II onto electrodes have focused on its application as a herbicide biosensor,140,141 and there have been even fewer examples of work aimed at the construction of a semi-artificial water splitting device. Badura et al. reported the successful immobilisation of His-tagged PS II from Thermosynechococcus elongatus onto a gold electrode modified with long chain (C16) carboxyalkylthiolates bearing a Ni–nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni–NTA) linker.138 A mediator (2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone) was used to achieve the long distance electron transfer between the electrode and the acceptor site of PS II. In this study, the photocurrent density generated upon irradiation of the electrode with 675 nm light at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl was in the region of 14 μA cm−2. This current corresponded to a turnover frequency of roughly 125 O2 molecules (PS II dimer)−1 s−1, based on the surface coverage of PS II (determined by surface-enhanced infra-red absorption spectroscopy). This high rate (similar to the highest recorded rate for as-isolated PS II)142 indicated that no activity was lost in the immobilisation procedure.
A further improvement in photocurrent generation was achieved by using an osmium-containing redox polymer to immobilise PS II onto the electrode surface.143 In this case, current densities of 45 μA cm−2 were measured. The 3D matrix allowed for a greater amount of PS II to be immobilised at the surface. Additionally, a redox mediator was not required in this system, removing diffusion-controlled kinetic limitations and improving electron-transfer rates.
Despite its unchallenged efficiency, several drawbacks make PS II impractical for use in technological applications for solar water splitting, even at the bench level. Firstly, there is the problem of the photoinstability of PS II. The half-life of PS II in vivo is in the region of 20–30 minutes,144 and the active site must be replaced regularly by the organism due to photoinhibition and 1O2 damage. Therefore, while natural photosynthesis is an extremely efficient process owing to this ‘self-repair’ mechanism, PS II is inherently unstable and its use in artificial devices is limited to small-scale proof-of-principle devices. Secondly, we must also consider the size of this protein; with a total molar mass in the region of 450000 g mol−1 and dimensions in the region of 17 nm × 10 nm,145 each dimer would clearly take up a relatively large footprint area on an electrode, limiting the current densities that can be achieved in these types of devices. Instead, research efforts have followed an inspirational approach and sought to design active-site mimics and replicate the two-stage photoexcitation and efficient charge separation processes occurring during photosynthesis. The various lessons which have been learnt from studying the chemistry of photosynthesis are being applied in the design of synthetic biomimetic catalysts, as we discuss next.
Bio-mimetic manganese based water oxidation catalysts
Recently, the crystal structure of PS II at 1.9 Å resolution was reported,146 providing more detailed information about the arrangement of the Mn4CaO5 cluster than had previously been possible. This study, employing a procedure designed to minimise radiation damage, confirmed and elaborated upon earlier work by Ferreira et al. that had revealed a cubane type structure with 3 Mn ions and a Ca ion linked by oxido-bridges, and a fourth Mn located outside the cubane.136 The new structure showed that the fourth ‘dangling’ Mn is linked to the cubane by a di-μ-oxido bridge, involving a fifth oxygen atom. Sequential extraction of the four electrons by P680˙+ is mediated by a nearby tyrosine (Yz) residue, in the so called ‘S-state cycle’ mechanism.7 The four oxidising equivalents accumulated at the Mn4CaO5 cluster are distributed over all four Mn ions.
Since the discovery of the Mn4CaO5 cluster of PS II, there have been many attempts to synthesise structural and functional mimics of the active site including bi-, tri- and tetra-metallic species.135,147–149 Although many Mn-based mimics have been developed, the majority of these species do not exhibit catalytic water oxidation, undergoing only one turnover. Of the active catalysts, one of the best documented is [H2O(terpy)Mn(O2)Mn(terpy)H2O](NO3)3, which carries out multiple-turnover O2 evolution in the presence of O-atom donating two-electron oxidants such as oxone or ClO−.150 When immobilised in a clay support, catalytic activity was also observed in the presence of the one electron oxidant Ce4+, with a turnover number of 17.151 The clay support seemed to play a vital role in stabilising the dimeric species; in its absence the Mn dimer was oxidised to MnO4− by Ce4+ with no O2 evolution observed. The first steps towards incorporating this catalyst into a solar fuel device have been taken by Crabtree and co-workers, who anchored the complex to TiO2via a chromophoric linker (phenyl terpyridine attached to 3-phenyl-acetylacetone via an amide bond).152 The oxidation states of the Mn ions advanced from MnIIIMnIV to MnIVMnIV during visible light excitation of the linker and electron injection into TiO2.
Another bio-mimetic species, more closely resembling the oxygen evolving active site of PS II, is that developed by Dismukes and co-workers. The complex consists of a [Mn4O4]n+ core with six bidentate dpp (dpp = diphenylphosphinate) ligands co-ordinating the Mn ions, as shown in Fig. 21.153,154 The mechanism of O2 release in the gas phase proceeds via photodissociation of a dpp ligand (following UV excitation) with subsequent loss of two oxido species, yielding O2 and the butterfly type structure (dpp)5Mn4O2+.153 Only a single turnover was observed in the gas phase, and there was no activity in solution. However, catalytic water oxidation by [Mn4O4L6]+ (L = (MeOPh)2PO2−) was achieved upon immobilisation in a Nafion matrix on an electrode (such as glassy carbon).155,156 Upon polarising the electrode at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, and under irradiation, the complex evolved O2 at a turnover frequency of up to 270 molecules O2 h−1 cluster−1 with a turnover number in excess of 1000. Following dissociation of O2, two more water molecules bind to the complex and application of an oxidising potential reforms the [Mn4O4L6]+ cubane structure. The Nafion membrane is essential for catalytic activity, and may function by promoting ligand dissociation and assisting deprotonation. In this way, the Nafion support mimics the protein environment surrounding the Mn4CaO5 complex of PS II.
 Fig. 21  Structure of the catalyst of type Mn4O4L6. In this case, L = Ph2PO2−.153 
Photocatalytic O2 evolution by the Mn4O4L6 (L = (MeOPh)2PO2−) complex has also been achieved by doping the catalyst into a Nafion film coated onto a TiO2 electrode sensitised with the dye [Ru(bpy)2(bpy(COO−)2)], as illustrated in Fig. 22.157 Upon excitation with visible light, the ruthenium complex injects an electron into the TiO2 electrode; electrons then flow to a Pt cathode. The photogenerated RuIII species (Ered = 1.4 V vs. SHE) drives successive one-electron oxidations of the Mn-cluster, resulting in water oxidation. In this system, water oxidation is driven solely by visible light; no external bias has to be applied to the electrode. Oxygen evolution at the anode was confirmed using a Clark electrode. The average peak photocurrent density of 31 μA cm−2 corresponded to a minimum turnover frequency of 47 cluster−1 h−1. However, recent work by Spiccia and co-workers has shown that the catalytically active species is not the ‘as-doped’ Mn4O4L6 cluster, but rather a disorded Mn(III/IV)-oxide.158 Upon doping into a Nafion membrane, the cluster dissociates to give MnII ions, which are subsequently oxidised to give nanoparticles of the mixed oxide. Similar results were observed when [(bpy)2Mn(O)2Mn(bpy)2]3+ and Mn2+ ions were doped into Nafion. It therefore seems likely that other molecular bio-mimetic catalysts actually form solid metal-oxide species when doped into solid supports (e.g. Nafion or clay), and this is the reason behind the apparent enhancement in stability.
 Fig. 22  Diagram of an anode consisting of a dye-sensitised TiO2 layer coated with a Nafion film which has been doped with [Mn4O4((MeOPh)2PO2)6]+. The figure illustrates the basic principles by which this cell operates. Electrons flow via an external circuit to a Pt cathode, where proton reduction occurs. FTO = fluorine-doped tin oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
Ruthenium based water oxidation catalysts
Numerous other oxygen-evolving catalysts are not directly ‘bio-mimetic’ but nonetheless exhibit structural similarities with the Mn4CaO5 cluster of PS II. In this section, some of the best performing synthetic O2-evolving catalysts are discussed, and their structural and mechanistic resemblances to the Mn4CaO5 cluster of PS II are highlighted.
Ruthenium is one of the most widely used elements in molecular water oxidation catalysts,104 with early interest stimulated by the ‘blue dimer’ [(bpy)2(H2O)Ru–O–Ru(H2O)(bpy)2]4+, which was the first reported homogeneous catalyst for water oxidation.159,160 While this catalyst was limited to only 13 turnovers (using CeIV as the oxidant) due to competing side reactions, it proved valuable for mechanistic studies and inspired the development of a large range of water oxidation catalysts based on either one or two Ru centres.135,161,162 Several mononuclear Ru complexes have been developed (Ru is stable in a greater range of oxidation states than its 1st row counterpart) and some of these achieve hundreds of turnovers with no sign of degradation.163,164 Among the most notable is [(4,4′-((HO)2P(O)CH2)2bpy)2Ru(bpm)-Ru(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ (Mebimpy = 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)pyridine; bpm = 2,2′-bipyrimidine)165 where the (4,4′-((HO)2P(O)CH2)2bpy)2Ru(bpm) centre serves as an electron mediator, and the other Ru serves as the catalytic centre. The phosphonate groups provide a linkage to the surface of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) electrode. The surface-attached species underwent over 28000 turnovers over a thirteen hour period at a turnover frequency of 0.6 s−1, showing no deterioration in activity during electrolysis at 1.8 V vs. SHE in 1 M HClO4. Sustained O2 production was also achieved when the catalyst was instead attached to a TiO2 electrode. The next stage therefore is to take advantage of this activity by incorporating the catalyst into a photoelectrochemical cell (similar to that shown in Fig. 23) to achieve overall water splitting using visible light. This will prove challenging, since four oxidising equivalents must be accumulated at the catalytic centre, while maintaining a 2+ oxidation state at the other Ru, allowing MLCT and subsequent electron injection into TiO2 to drive each oxidation step.
 Fig. 23  A proposed water splitting device in which the catalyst [(4,4′-((HO)2P(O)CH2)2bpy)2Ru(bpm)-Ru(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ is attached to a TiO2 electrode via two phosphonate groups, and wired to a H2-evolving cathode. 
Iridium complexes
Iridium based water oxidation catalysts are among the most active non-oxido molecular species developed to catalyse this reaction. Crabtree has focused on IrIII species complexed by Cp* ligands. One such catalyst, [Cp*Ir(ppy)Cl], is amongst the best reported homogenous catalysts reported to date, maintaining activity for over 7.5 hours, although over this time period the turnover frequency of this species decreases more than ten-fold, from 54 min−1 to 4.54 min−1.166 Surprisingly, the simpler species [IrCp*(H2O)3]2+ showed even higher long-term activity, around three times greater than that of [Cp*Ir(ppy)Cl].167 Apart from the low abundance of iridium, another problem associated with using these types of catalysts lies in the instability of the organic ligands. Carbon based ligands such as Cp* are particularly susceptible to degradation under the highly oxidising conditions required for water oxidation.
Polyoxometalate ligands
A solution to the problem of catalyst degradation is provided by developing complexes based on ‘inorganic’ polyoxometalate (POM) ligands, which are highly robust and resistant to oxidation. Two well characterised O2-evolving catalysts have been developed by the groups of Hill and Bonchio, namely [{Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4}(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− (Ru–POM) and [Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10− (Co–POM).169–171 Both complexes contain tetrametallic centres linked by oxide bridges and, in this sense, structurally resemble the active site of PS II. The Ru4 core of Ru–POM is illustrated in Fig. 19.
The mechanism of water oxidation at the Ru–POM catalyst (illustrated in Fig. 24) has been studied electrochemically and spectroscopically, and was found to proceed via four sequential oxidations coupled with deprotonations (e.g. Ru(IV)–OH2 to Ru(V)–OH), mirroring the S-state cycle of PS II.168 The O–O bond forming step is proposed to occur via attack of H2O at these electrophilic centres.
 Fig. 24  The catalytic cycle for water oxidation by Ru–POM, illustrating the four sequential oxidation steps. The structure of the Ru4-core is depicted in the centre, with the POM ligands omitted for clarity. Central illustration adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Both these POM complexes are promising candidates for the O2-evolving catalyst in an artificial photosynthetic system. The Co–POM catalyst exhibits high turnover frequencies in near-neutral solutions (5 s−1 in pH 8 phosphate buffer with [Ru(bpy)3]3+ as the oxidant, corresponding to one of the highest values reported to date for a molecular catalyst),172 and both Co and Ru complexes exhibit visible light driven water oxidation in the presence of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and S2O82−.173,174 In addition, Ru–POM can rapidly regenerate oxidised dye molecules at ruthenium dye-sensitised TiO2 films.175 In the case of the Co–POM system, it is not clear what the true water oxidation catalyst is. Recent evidence from electrochemical, UV-vis, kinetic, scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy studies strongly suggests that the catalytically active species during electrochemical water oxidation at a glassy carbon electrode in pH 8 phosphate buffer is heterogeneous CoOx, produced from the dissociation of Co2+ from the POM complex.176
Cobalt-phosphate water oxidation catalyst
Another well documented catalyst for water oxidation is that developed by Nocera and Kanan, consisting of a cobalt oxide film (‘Co–Pi’) which self assembles on an electrode upon anodic polarisation in the presence of Co2+ and phosphate.177 A significant advantage of this catalyst is that it can function in both river water and seawater, making it the most promising material developed to date for use in a commercial device.178 The Co–Pi catalyst is commonly thought of as heterogeneous, but studies have revealed that it actually consists of Co-oxido/hydroxido clusters with molecular dimensions. Studies by EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure) showed that each cluster is made up of edge-sharing CoO6 octahedra containing, on average, seven Co ions.179 The relationship between this structure and that of the Mn4CaO5 cluster of PS II is evident from Fig. 19, which also includes the Ru4-core of Ru–POM.
Phosphate is also found in the film, most likely as a terminal ligand to Co, and its presence is essential for activity, suggesting that phosphate plays a crucial role in proton transfer. The proposed mechanism for O2 formation proceeds via a CoIV-oxido species that undergoes nucleophilic attack by water/hydroxide. A potential problem with this catalyst is that Co2+ is an intermediate (high-spin Co2+ is substitutionally labile). However, since the catalyst self-assembles from aqueous Co2+ at high potential, it is able to reform following dissolution of Co2+ providing the electrode is held at a sufficiently oxidising potential. Such self-healing ability is emerging as an important component in the design of robust O2-evolving catalysts based on abundant 1st-row transition metals.
Using high-surface-area Ni foam electrodes on which the Co–Pi catalyst is deposited, a current density of 0.1 A cm−2 was achieved at an overpotential of 442 mV (in pH 7 phosphate electrolyte) and 363 mV (in pH 9.2 borate electrolyte). In this case, the catalyst loading was determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry, allowing a lower limit for the turnover frequency to be calculated at 1.5 × 10−3 mol O2 (mol Co)−1 s−1.178 Cobalt oxide films have also been deposited onto semiconductor thin film electrodes, both electrochemically (at Fe2O3,180 WO3,181 and Si182) and photochemically (on ZnO)183 from aqueous solutions of Co2+ and phosphate.
Iridium oxide
Despite the fact that heterogeneous catalysts are generally less active on a per site basis compared with homogeneous species (since only surface atoms are active), solid state devices appear to promise better long term stability. Metal oxides such as RuO2, Co3O4 and IrO2 are highly robust catalysts for water oxidation.184,185 Iridium oxide is typically the most active and stable of these materials, and also exhibits one of the lowest overpotentials known for the water oxidation reaction. When deposited on a glassy carbon electrode, 2 nm diameter IrO2 particles begin to evolve O2 at an overpotential of only 0.15 V.186 Colloidal IrO2 particles in solution with [Ru(bpy)3]2+/S2O82− achieved rates of 40 O2 molecules (surface Ir atom)−1 s−1 during visible light irradiation.134 Iridium oxide nanoparticles have also been incorporated into a photoelectrochemical cell for overall water splitting (Fig. 25),187,188 in which a Ru dye was covalently linked to the IrO2 surface via a malonate group. The dye was then loaded onto a TiO2 coated electrode via phosphonate linkages, and the photoanode was connected to a Pt cathode. Upon irradiation, excited electrons are injected from the dye into TiO2, and the dye is regenerated by oxidation of the IrO2 species, which subsequently carries out water oxidation. Despite employing one of the most efficient materials known to catalyse the O2-evolving reaction, the cell performed poorly (<1% quantum efficiency), due to recombination pathways outcompeting accumulative charge separation. The timescales of each electron-transfer process are indicated in Fig. 25: they show the difficulties in building a device such as this in which charge accumulation must compete favourably with electron–hole recombination.
 Fig. 25  (Left) Schematic representation of the water splitting photoelectrochemical cell. (Right) Energy level diagram illustrating timescales of charge recombination pathways. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
Complete water splitting systems
In the final goal of creating an integrated water splitting device, one key difficulty is the mismatch in the optimal pH at which each catalyst operates. Oxygen-evolving catalysts tend to work best at high pH, whereas many H2 evolving catalysts only operate in strongly acidic conditions. If catalysts are used at extreme pH values, then large driving forces may be required to drive one of the half reactions. For this reason, catalysts which operate close to neutral pH are highly desirable.
Although still few in number, some devices which couple both proton reduction and water oxidation half reactions to achieve overall water splitting have been developed. Among the best performing examples are a photoelectrochemical device based on a GaInP2/GaAs p/n tandem cell (reaching solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies of 12.4%),189 and a ‘Z-scheme’ system consisting of an aqueous suspension of WO3 and ZrO2/TaON particles (reaching efficiencies of 6.3%).190 However, both of these systems use Pt co-catalysts for proton reduction and water oxidation.
Recently, Nocera and co-workers have developed a solar water splitting device that avoids the use of expensive noble metal catalysts, instead using the Earth-abundant Co–Pi catalyst (described earlier) for water oxidation, and a NiMoZn-alloy as a H2-production catalyst.191 In their ‘artificial leaf’, visible light is absorbed by amorphous triple-junction silicon deposited onto a stainless steel support and coated with an indium tin oxide (ITO) layer. The Co–Pi water oxidation catalyst is subsequently electrodeposited onto the ITO. The NiMoZn hydrogen producing catalyst was either formed directly on the reverse side of the stainless steel substrate, or deposited onto a Ni mesh that was then wired to the stainless steel anode (Fig. 26). The device achieved solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies of 4.7% and 2.5% for the wired and wireless configurations respectively, when driven by a solar cell.
 Fig. 26  Diagram illustrating the wired (left) and wireless (right) water splitting devices developed by Nocera and co-workers. Adapted from ref. 191. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As well as avoiding the use of expensive catalysts (Pt, Ru) and expensive light absorbing materials (GaInP, GaAs), this system is also able to function at near neutral pH (demonstrated in pH 9.2 borate buffer). Hence, both catalysts are able to operate in the same solution which greatly simplifies the design. Another point to note is the performance of the NiMoZn catalyst which, when formed on a rotating Ni disc electrode, achieves higher current densities at lower overpotentials for H2 production compared with pure Ni. Although the mechanism is not yet established, the cooperation between two different metal atoms to produce a catalyst is a common feature of enzymes. For example, [NiFe]-hydrogenases and the Ca–O–Mn unit of PS II both take advantage of the differing chemistries of adjacent metal centres, each of which fulfils a specific role in catalysis (for example, Mn undergoes redox changes while the Ca presents a constant, stable site to bind one of the reactant water molecules). The instability of the artificial leaf (80% initial activity observed after 24 h) was attributed to the corrosion of Si, since stability was found to depend on the nature of the transparent conducting oxide coating. However, another source of instability may arise from the solubility of CoII which could result in the slow dissolution of the catalyst film. While the film can be re-formed upon application of an anodic potential, the need for frequent electrical regeneration is not ideal in a commercially viable device.
Conclusions
Heterogeneous solar fuel systems are multi-component, comprising light harvesting and catalytic units. In this Perspective we have mainly focussed on the catalytic aspects of these devices, and in particular the involvement and examples set by enzymes. It is likely that any major breakthrough in catalysis for solar fuel production will not be bio-hybrid (i.e. enzyme-containing), but instead ‘bio-inspired’, containing units that mimic the functional ‘tricks’ of the active sites of enzymes. Indeed, synthetic chemists do not regard active-site structures as ultimate structural targets; they instead look to them to provide clues on the route to creating effective electrocatalysts. A key example is the [FeFe]-hydrogenase inspired range of H2-producing catalysts devised by DuBois and co-workers: approximately square planar around a nickel atom, they ignore the bimetallic Fe–Fe arrangement of the actual enzyme. Instead the catalyst incorporates the vital structural feature, i.e. a pendant amine-H+ that overlooks the metal as the latter is successively reduced and protonated to generate H−. Similarly, the same researchers noted promising activity for CO2 reduction at a bimetallic palladium complex. Again, the structure bears no immediate relationship with the [Ni4Fe–4S] active site of CODH, but the common feature is the formation of a stable, seven-membered ring upon binding CO2.
This is not to say that there is no value to be gained from developing enzymatic, bio-hybrid devices. In theory, the access to enzymes (exquisite electrocatalysts, in terms of rate, efficiency and selectivity) and their incorporation into solar fuel devices ought to mean that alternative aspects of the system (light harvesting, charge separation, scaffold stability, etc.) can be focussed on, in the knowledge that catalysis is not rate-limiting. As excellent electrocatalysts, enzymes ought to compete more effectively with recombination processes occurring at the semiconductor surface. Yet, as we have learned first-hand from our own efforts, the incorporation of enzymes is not straightforward, and controlling their interactions with surfaces is complex. In any case, despite the fact that enzymes are renewable, short of major breakthroughs in the biotechnology of protein purification it will never be possible to scale enzyme use to the gigantic level that is ultimately required (industrial, world-wide). Likewise, synthetic processes should be straightforward – while it is not feasible to scale up technologies based on isolated hydrogenases, neither is it practical to develop synthetic H2 production catalysts that suffer from intricate synthetic procedures.
A further limitation of enzymes is size, and in particular ‘footprint’ dimensions. We would argue, however, that the crucial parameter should be the activity:footprint ratio, and so while enzymes are generally large, this might be tolerable in view of their high turnover frequencies and other advantages. In fact, this bulk – due to surrounding protein folds protecting the deeply buried active site – may actually be a key requirement which is missing from organometallic mimics to date. An equivalent protective feature will probably be necessary before any of these compounds achieve long-term stability in aqueous solution (which must surely be a long-term target). Burying catalytic centres to shield them from bulk water necessitates the inclusion of electron relays: here again, redox enzymes can provide inspiration, as hydrogenases and CODHs use chains of FeS clusters to connect buried active sites to the protein surface. These relay centres can act as sinks – trapping electrons and making them unavailable for wasteful processes on the semiconductor surface.
To date, there is no truly satisfactory synthetic electrocatalyst for either H2 production from water, nor for CO2 reduction, and all reported efforts fall short in at least one of the crucial aspects – turnover frequency, efficiency (overpotential requirement), stability and reliance on precious metals. As we have made clear, the enzymes that catalyse these transformations have considerable drawbacks, but they do, at least, excel in fundamental catalytic activity. They will therefore continue to have a key role to play in the design of future fuel-forming catalysts, at least for demonstrating achievable benchmarks.
Similar challenges exist in the development of water oxidation catalysts, where it is necessary to achieve stability under highly oxidising conditions. Later transition metals (Ru/Ir) are better suited to this role since they exhibit stronger bonding and are stable in a larger range of oxidation states, but these elements are also extremely rare. Heterogeneous metal oxide materials seem to promise better long term stability than molecular catalysts and, significantly, the natural catalyst in PS II is itself a fragment of metal oxide.
The ultimate goal remains to create a complete water splitting device, comprising a light-absorbing component, a water oxidation catalyst and a fuel-forming catalyst. For this reason, it is essential to develop catalysts that work in aqueous solution (ideally in natural water) at near-neutral pH, so that both catalysts can function in the same solution. Nocera's artificial leaf is an exciting development in this area, although it still suffers from stability issues, and so far, efficiencies are low. Fine-tuning of this technology is required before it can be suitable on a large scale with practical lifetimes, and further conception of alternative catalysts may be needed before efficient and affordable solar fuel production is realised on a large scale.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank BBSRC (Grants H003878-1 and BB/I022309), EPSRC (Supergen 5) and European Commission Marie Curie Programme (PIIF-GA-2009-253602) for supporting research on enzymes in energy technologies.
Notes and references
S. Shafiee and E. Topal, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 181–189 CrossRef .

2010 Survey of Energy Resources, World Energy Council,  2010 Search PubMed.

BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2011, BP,  2011 Search PubMed.

Key World Energy Statistics, International Energy Agency,  2011 Search PubMed.
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
G. Liu, L. Wang, C. Sun, X. Yan, X. Wang, Z. Chen, S. C. Smith, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1266–1274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454–456 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4908–4911 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. Belser and A. Vonzelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 84, 85–277 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 347–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Polo, M. K. Itokazu and N. Y. M. Iha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1343–1361 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Armstrong and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14049–14054 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard, R. Parsons and J. Jordan, Standard Potentials in Aqueous Solution, Dekker, New York,  1985 Search PubMed .
T. Reda, C. M. Plugge, N. J. Abram and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 10654–10658 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Wood, Biochem. J., 1988, 253, 287–289 CAS .
K. A. Vincent, A. Parkin and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4366–4413 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Vignais and B. Billoud, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4206–4272 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Ragsdale, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 2004, 39, 165–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Pershad, J. L. C. Duff, H. A. Heering, E. C. Duin, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Biochemistry, 1999, 38, 8992–8999 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jones, E. Sillery, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2002, 866–867 RSC .
M. Frey, ChemBioChem, 2002, 3, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
V. Svetlitchnyi, C. Peschel, G. Acker and O. Meyer, J. Bacteriol., 2001, 183, 5134–5144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Léger, S. J. Elliott, K. R. Hoke, L. J. C. Jeuken, A. K. Jones and F. A. Armstrong, Biochemistry, 2003, 42, 8653–8662 CrossRef .
F. A. Armstrong, H. A. Heering and J. Hirst, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 169–179 RSC .
J. Baur, A. Le Goff, S. Dementin, M. Holzinger, M. Rousset and S. Cosnier, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12096–12101 CrossRef CAS .
V. Flexer, N. Brun, R. Backov and N. Mano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1302–1306 CAS .
M. Frasconi, A. Heyman, I. Medalsy, D. Porath, F. Mazzei and O. Shoseyoy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12606–12613 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krishnan and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1015–1023 RSC .

          B. H. Mason and C. B. Moore, Principles of Geochemistry, Wiley,  1982 Search PubMed .
O. Lazarus, T. W. Woolerton, A. Parkin, M. J. Lukey, E. Reisner, J. Seravalli, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14154–14155 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kim and L. T. Thompson, J. Catal., 2005, 230, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
R. Burch, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5483–5500 RSC .
R. A. Bone, D. W. Lee and J. M. Norman, Appl. Opt., 1985, 24, 1408–1412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsc and M. Calvin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1971, 14, 95 CrossRef .
B. Oregan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef .
R. Kroon, M. Lenes, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and B. De Boer, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 531–582 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mayer, S. R. Scully, B. E. Hardin, M. W. Rowell and M. D. McGehee, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yanmin, W. Wei, L. Xin and G. Yijie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 129–145 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guenes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Jin, B. V. K. Naidu, H.-S. Jeon, S.-M. Park, J.-S. Park, S. C. Kim, J. W. Lee and Y.-S. Gal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1187–1193 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6893–6899 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, R. J. Ellingson, H. N. Ghosh, S. Ferrere, A. J. Nozik and T. Q. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3110–3119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Benko, J. Kallioinen, J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 489–493 CrossRef .
G. Ramakrishna, D. A. Jose, D. K. Kumar, A. Das, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15445–15453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 20056–20062 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Zamborini, L. E. Smart, M. C. Leopold and R. W. Murray, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 496, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, S. E. Koops, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1126–1136 CAS .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Graetzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley and Sons, USA,  2001 Search PubMed .
O. Rudiger, J. M. Abad, E. C. Hatchikian, V. M. Fernandez and A. L. De Lacey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16008–16009 CrossRef .
J. Yoon and H. Joo, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2007, 24, 742–748 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoon, S. Bae, E. Shim and H. Joo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1296–1301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, A. Brune, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 1015–1020 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, G. Kodis, M. D. Vaughn, G. F. Moore, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9979–9989 RSC .
M. Hambourger, P. A. Liddell, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 431–437 CAS .
M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, D. Svedruzic, P. W. King, D. Gust, M. Ghirardi, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tel-Vered, H. B. Yildiz, Y.-M. Yan and I. Willner, Small, 2010, 6, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745–758 CAS .
K. Koci, L. Obalova and Z. Lacny, Chem. Pap., 2008, 62, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
R. M. Navarro Yerga, M. C. Alvarez Galvan, F. del Valle, J. A. Villoria de la Mano and J. L. G. Fierro, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 471–485 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 550–552 RSC .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Tran, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25525–25531 CrossRef CAS .
E. Szabo-Bardos, B. Baja, E. Horvath and A. Horvath, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 213, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hidaka, T. Shimura, K. Ajisaka, S. Horikoshi, J. C. Zhao and N. Serpone, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 109, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Parkin, G. Goldet, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13410–13416 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Armstrong, N. A. Belsey, J. A. Cracknell, G. Goldet, A. Parkin, E. Reisner, K. A. Vincent and A. F. Wait, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 36–51 RSC .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132–2133 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2393–2399 CAS .
Y. S. Chaudhary, T. W. Woolerton, C. S. Allen, J. H. Warner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 58–60 RSC .
A. W. Rutherford and P. Heathcote, Photosynth. Res., 1985, 6, 295–316 CrossRef CAS .
L. O. Palsson, C. Flemming, B. Gobets, R. van Grondelle, J. P. Dekker and E. Schlodder, Biophys. J., 1998, 74, 2611–2622 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Chitnis, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol., 2001, 52, 593–626 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Grimme, C. E. Lubner, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6308–6309 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Lubner, P. Knoerzer, P. J. N. Silva, K. A. Vincent, T. Happe, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 10264–10266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krassen, A. Schwarze, B. Friedrich, K. Ataka, O. Lenz and J. Heberle, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4055–4061 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruschi, C. Greco, P. Fantucci and L. De Gioia, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6056–6071 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. De lacey, V. M. Fernandez, M. Rousset and R. Cammack, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4304–4330 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Barton, M. T. Olsen and T. B. Rauchfuss, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2245–2274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Small, D. L. DuBois, E. Fujita and J. T. Muckerman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3008–3020 CAS .
D. L. DuBois and R. M. Bullock, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1017–1027 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 62–72 RSC .
M. R. Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef .
A. D. Wilson, R. H. Newell, M. J. McNevin, J. T. Muckerman, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 358–366 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Helm, M. P. Stewart, R. M. Bullock, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Science, 2011, 333, 863–866 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Wilson, R. K. Shoemaker, A. Miedaner, J. T. Muckerman, D. L. DuBois and M. R. DuBois, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 6951–6956 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. McLaughlin, T. M. McCormick, R. Eisenberg and P. L. Holland, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7989–7991 RSC .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dempsey, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1995–2004 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Berben and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 398–400 RSC .
B. D. Stubbert, J. C. Peters and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18070–18073 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Chen, X. Li and L. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 12793–12800 RSC .
D. S. Chong, I. P. Georgakaki, R. Mejia-Rodriguez, J. Samabria-Chinchilla, M. P. Soriaga and M. Y. Darensbourg, Dalton Trans., 2003, 4158–4163 RSC .
R. Mejia-Rodriguez, D. S. Chong, J. H. Reibenspies, M. P. Soriaga and M. Y. Darensbourg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12004–12014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ott, M. Kritikos, B. Akermark, L. C. Sun and R. Lomoth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1006–1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1664–1676 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gloaguen, J. D. Lawrence and T. B. Rauchfuss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9476–9477 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gloaguen, J. D. Lawrence, T. B. Rauchfuss, M. Benard and M. M. Rohmer, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 6573–6582 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nann, S. K. Ibrahim, P.-M. Woi, S. Xu, J. Ziegler and C. J. Pickett, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1574–1577 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, W.-G. Wang, X.-J. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3193–3197 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Steffey, C. J. Curtis and D. L. DuBois, Organometallics, 1995, 14, 4937–4943 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang and R. H. Holm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4693–4701 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 1695–1698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1986, 897–898 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 CAS .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Norskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
B. Srinivas, B. Shubhamangala, K. Lalitha, P. A. K. Reddy, V. D. Kumari, M. Subrahmanyam and B. R. De, Photochem. Photobiol., 2011, 87, 995–1001 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Tseng and J. C. S. Wu, Catal. Today, 2004, 97, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Cole, P. S. Lakkaraju, D. M. Rampulla, A. J. Morris, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11539–11551 CrossRef .
R. J. Haines, R. E. Wittrig and C. P. Kubiak, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 4723–4728 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boyington, V. N. Gladyshev, S. V. Khangulov, T. C. Stadtman and P. D. Sun, Science, 1997, 275, 1305–1308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jormakka, S. Tornroth, B. Byrne and S. Iwata, Science, 2002, 295, 1863–1868 CrossRef .
H. Raaijmakers, S. Macieira, J. M. Dias, S. Teixeira, S. Bursakov, R. Huber, J. J. G. Moura, I. Moura and M. J. Romao, Structure, 2002, 10, 1261–1272 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Galan, J. Schoeffel, J. C. Linehan, C. Seu, A. M. Appel, J. A. S. Roberts, M. L. Helm, U. J. Kilgore, J. Y. Yang, D. L. DuBois and C. P. Kubiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12767–12779 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ananyev and G. C. Dismukes, Photosynth. Res., 2005, 84, 355–365 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Morris, M. Suzuki and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 9115–9119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamazaki, A. Shouji, M. Kajita and M. Yagi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2483–2491 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Q. Rev. Biophys., 2003, 36, 71–89 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, B. Esper, K. Ataka, C. Grunwald, C. Wöll, J. Kuhlmann, J. Heberle and M. Rögner, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Symes, Y. Surendranath, D. A. Lutterman and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5174–5177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maly, J. Masojidek, A. Masci, M. Ilie, E. Cianci, V. Foglietti, W. Vastarella and R. Pilloton, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 21, 923–932 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maly, A. Masci, J. Masojidek, M. Sugiura and R. Pilloton, Anal. Lett., 2004, 37, 1645–1656 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kuhl, J. Kruip, A. Seidler, A. Krieger-Liszkay, M. Bunker, D. Bald, A. J. Scheidig and M. Rogner, J. Biol. Chem., 2000, 275, 20652–20659 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, B. Esper, T. Kothe, S. Neugebauer, W. Schuhmann and M. Rogner, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1043–1047 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Aro, I. Virgin and B. Andersson, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1993, 1143, 113–134 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Boekema, B. Hankamer, D. Bald, J. Kruip, J. Nield, A. F. Boonstra, J. Barber and M. Rogner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1995, 92, 175–179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–U65 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. M. Hou, J. Integr. Plant Biol., 2010, 52, 704–711 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Crabtree, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 595 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kanady, E. Y. Tsui, M. W. Day and T. Agapie, Science, 2011, 333, 733–736 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Narita, T. Kuwabara, K. Sone, K. I. Shimizu and M. Yagi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23107–23114 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Li, E. M. Sproviero, W. R. McNamara, R. C. Snoeberger, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14214–14222 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353–10357 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Ruettinger, C. Campana and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6670–6671 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269–7279 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892–2894 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L. Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CAS .
S. W. Gersten, G. J. Samuels and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4029–4030 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gilbert, D. S. Eggleston, W. R. Murphy, D. A. Geselowitz, S. W. Gersten, D. J. Hodgson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 3855–3864 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. M. Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9374–9384 RSC .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. R. Norris, Z. F. Chen, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1277–1279 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462–16463 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9473–9476 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730–8731 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savini, G. Bellachioma, G. Ciancaleoni, C. Zuccaccia, D. Zuccaccia and A. Macchioni, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9218–9219 RSC .
A. Sartorel, P. Miro, E. Salvadori, S. Romain, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Di Valentin, A. Llobet, C. Bo and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16051–16053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Koegerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Q. S. Yin, Y. Hou, Z. Q. Huang, H. Y. Ma, J. Song, C. Besson, Z. Luo, R. Cao, K. P. O'Halloran, G. B. Zhu, C. C. Zhao, J. W. Vickers, Y. Ding, S. Mohebbi, A. E. Kuznetsov, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian and C. L. Hill, Isr. J. Chem., 2011, 51, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522–7523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. S. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Q. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068–2071 CrossRef CAS .
M. Orlandi, R. Argazzi, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3152–3154 RSC .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14872–14875 CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reece and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499–504 CAS .
M. W. Kanan, J. Yano, Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13692–13701 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Young, R. Costi, S. Paydavosi, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2058–2061 CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K. S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795–2806 RSC .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 CAS .
T. Nakagawa, C. A. Beasley and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12958–12961 CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Thomas W. Woolerton	Thomas Woolerton graduated with an MChem from Christ Church, University of Oxford, in 2008, and is now completing his DPhil with Fraser Armstrong. His main research interests are in the application of enzymes as electrocatalysts in proof-of-concept systems for fuel production, particularly solar-driven devices.
Sally Sheard	Sally Sheard graduated with an MChem from St. Hilda's College, University of Oxford, in 2010. Her main research interest is in the incorporation of water oxidation catalysts into model solar fuel devices, to produce a fully integrated device for oxygenic artificial photosynthesis.
Yatendra S. Chaudhary	Yatendra S. Chaudhary earned his Ph.D for work on nanostructured semiconducting photocatalysts at Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra in 2004. After postdoctoral research at the TATA institute in Mumbai he joined IMMT (CSIR) in 2008 as an independent scientist to undertake research in materials chemistry. He is currently a Marie Curie Research Fellow in Fraser Armstrong's group at Oxford, working on the design of bio-hybrid photo/electro-catalysts for solar fuel generation. In 2011 he was recipient of a Green Talent-2011 Award from BMBF Germany. His research interests lie in functional nanomaterials, development of artificial photosynthesis systems and multi-ferroelectric nanostructures.
Fraser A. Armstrong	Fraser Armstrong is Professor of Chemistry at Oxford University and a Fellow of St. John's College. His interests are in biological redox chemistry, in particular in applications of dynamic electrochemical techniques to study complex electron-transfer and catalytic reactions in enzymes, and in the mechanisms and exploitation of biological H2 cycling and CO2 reduction. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2008.

 	Fig. 1  Frost diagram showing the redox reactions of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen species at pH 7. The inset summarises the positions at which different types of species are found on Frost diagrams. Potential values taken from ref. 15–18. The diagram also indicates the overpotential requirements that might arise in reactions occurring in a step-wise manner and involving free intermediate species. For example η represents the minimal overpotential that would be required for the reduction of CO2 to CO via the free CO2˙− radical (see main text).	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Cartoon representation of the technique of protein film electrochemistry, in which enzyme molecules are adsorbed onto an electrode surface. The potential can be precisely controlled, and in the presence of substrate the current is proportional to the enzymatic turnover rate. Experiments are usually carried out in a sealed cell, so conditions such as gas atmosphere and temperature can be controlled, and the potential is often imposed in a cyclic manner which reveals any deviations from steady-state behaviour. (B) Cyclic voltammograms recorded at a graphite electrode modified with Ch CODH I under 1 atm. CO or 1 atm. CO2. (C) Typical cyclic voltammograms (from separate experiments) showing the reversibility of electrocatalysis by Ch CODH I and Ec Hyd-2. Conditions for all experiments: pH 6.0, 30 °C, scan rate 10 mV s−1, electrode rotation rate 2500 rpm. For CODH the cell buffer was 0.2 M MES, and for the hydrogenase a mixed buffer system was used (0.1 M NaCl, 15 mM MES, 15 mM HEPES, 15 mM TAPS, 15 mM CHES, 15 mM sodium acetate). Panel C is adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Cartoon representation of an enzymatic device for catalysis of the water–gas shift reaction. Electrons released by CODH-catalysed CO oxidation are transferred through a graphite particle to a CO-tolerant hydrogenase that reduces protons to H2. (B) H2 production and CO depletion over the course of 55 h at pH 6.0, 30 °C, as quantified by GC analysis. Fresh aliquots of CO were introduced at the times indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of various steps involved in artificial photosynthesis: light harvesting and charge separation, electron transfer to a reduction catalyst at which a fuel-forming process occurs, and hole transfer to a water oxidation catalyst (or to a site at which a sacrificial electron donor can quench the hole). Some examples of catalysts are shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  Multiple exciton generation (MEG) via impact ionisation in semiconductor quantum dots.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of possible recombination processes in an illuminated semiconductor system for photoelectrochemical water splitting. Blue arrows show recombination processes (a, b and c) between electrons (−) and holes (+) or undesired surface processes (d and e); D represents a sacrificial electron donor that is usually used in place of H2O.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of recombinations of photogenerated holes (+) and electrons (−) at grain boundaries or defects in bulk semiconductor catalysts (top). These events are minimised in nanostructured materials (bottom), in which one or more dimensions is of the order of a few nm (nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanorods, etc.) since there are fewer grain boundaries/defects.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic drawing of the photoelectrochemical cell used by Hambourger et al., in which [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum was used as the hydrogen production catalyst at the cathode. In this instance, NADH was used as a sacrificial electron donor at the photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Assembly of a photoelectrochemical biofuel cell using glucose, featuring a [Ru(bpy)3]2+-tethered glucose oxidase monolayer-modified Au electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2010) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Functional and structural models for nanocrystal (nc)–CdTe–hydrogenase hybrids. (A) The proposed scheme for light-driven H2 production by the nc–CdTe:hydrogenase complex. X represents a sacrificial hole scavenger. The hydrogenase structures are homology models of Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase to Clostridium pasteurianum [FeFe]-hydrogenase CpI (PDB entry 3C8Y). (B) Electrostatic surface model of the hydrogenase generated using VolMap. Regions of positive and negative charge are shown in blue and red, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cartoon representations of enzyme–TiO2 nanoparticle hybrids for: (A) hydrogen production using [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from Desulfomicrobium baculatum, highlighting aspects which are desirable for efficient and practical operation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society; (B) CO production from CO2 using CODH I from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (Ch). Both systems are driven by visible light, with a ruthenium bipyridyl complex as a photosensitiser. Panels (i)–(iv) show examples of electrochemical experiments carried out to examine the separate TiO2–dye and TiO2–CODH interactions: (i) photocurrents obtained upon illumination (λ > 420 nm) of a TiO2 electrode held at −0.52 V vs. SHE, onto which RuP is adsorbed (TiO2–RuP); (ii) experiment showing the decrease in photocurrent at RuP–TiO2 over 4 h, during which time the electrode was illuminated (λ > 420 nm) and poised at −0.52 V vs. SHE; (iii) ten successive cyclic voltammograms (overlayed) of Ch CODH I adsorbed onto a TiO2 electrode with CO2 bubbling through the cell solution (scan rate 10 mV s−1); (iv) experiment showing the decrease in CO2 reduction activity over 4 h at a TiO2 electrode modified with Ch CODH I. The electrode was poised at −0.52 V vs. SHE. For all experiments, the cell buffer was 0.2 M MES (pH 6.0) at 20 °C.	 

 	Fig. 12  Scheme comparing the thermodynamic driving forces for CO2 and H+ reduction mediated by anatase. Potentials shown are standard reduction potentials corrected to pH 6, 20 °C. Sred* and Sox represent photoexcited and oxidised states of a photosensitiser.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the PS I-molecular wire–[FeFe]-hydrogenase nanoconstruct, in which the connecting wire is 1,6-hexanedithiol. Arrows indicate electron transfer through the system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic view of a PS I–hydrogenase hybrid device. Electrons provided by the gold electrode reduce the oxidised form of N-methylphenazonium methyl sulfate (PMS). PMS transfers an electron to the chlorophyll a dimer P700 in PS I, which is promoted to a higher energy level upon illumination. The electrons are then transferred via the iron–sulfur cluster at the acceptor site to the distal iron–sulfur cluster of the hydrogenase (MBH). Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) The active site of [FeFe]-hydrogenase, showing the binding position (or position of formation) of H2.103 (B) The structure of [Ni(PPh2NPh)2](BF4)2, (PPh2NPh = 1,3,6-triphenyl-1-aza-3,6-diphosphacycloheptane), which provides turnover frequencies for H2 production in excess of 100000 s−1.103 (C) The structure of [Ni(P2PhN2Ph)2](BF4)2 (P2PhN2Ph = 1,3,5,7-tetraphenyl-1,5-diaza-3,7-diphosphacyclooctane).105	 

 	Fig. 16  Cross-section of a InP nanocrystal-modified gold electrode with adsorbed/intercalated [Fe2S2(CO)6]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2010) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  The system reported by Wang et al. using an artificial [FeFe]-hydrogenase mimic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  Comparison between the active site structure of Ni-containing CODH (left), and the structure of a bimetallic Pd electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction (right) prepared by DuBois and co-workers. On binding CO2, both structures form stable seven-membered rings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structural similarities between oxygen evolving catalysts, all of which are metal-oxido clusters (Co–Pi and Ru–POM are discussed later). The Mn4CaO5 cluster in PS II is the naturally occurring catalyst for O2 evolution. While the location of alkali metal ions (shown as grey circles) in the Co–Pi structure has not been confirmed, it has been proposed that they complete the cubane structure by co-ordination to the three oxido ligands.139 Only the tetra-ruthenium core of Ru–POM is shown.	 

 	Fig. 20  Proposed model for a solar driven water splitting device employing PS II as the solar water oxidation catalyst, PS I as a light absorber and a hydrogenase enzyme as a hydrogen production catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2006) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of the catalyst of type Mn4O4L6. In this case, L = Ph2PO2−.153	 

 	Fig. 22  Diagram of an anode consisting of a dye-sensitised TiO2 layer coated with a Nafion film which has been doped with [Mn4O4((MeOPh)2PO2)6]+. The figure illustrates the basic principles by which this cell operates. Electrons flow via an external circuit to a Pt cathode, where proton reduction occurs. FTO = fluorine-doped tin oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  A proposed water splitting device in which the catalyst [(4,4′-((HO)2P(O)CH2)2bpy)2Ru(bpm)-Ru(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ is attached to a TiO2 electrode via two phosphonate groups, and wired to a H2-evolving cathode.	 

 	Fig. 24  The catalytic cycle for water oxidation by Ru–POM, illustrating the four sequential oxidation steps. The structure of the Ru4-core is depicted in the centre, with the POM ligands omitted for clarity. Central illustration adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (Left) Schematic representation of the water splitting photoelectrochemical cell. (Right) Energy level diagram illustrating timescales of charge recombination pathways. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Diagram illustrating the wired (left) and wireless (right) water splitting devices developed by Nocera and co-workers. Adapted from ref. 191. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
