Role of theory in the design of semiconducting nanostructures   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM12827B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM12827B
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1724-1732Show Chemical TermsRole of theory in the design of semiconducting nanostructures†

        
          
            Vladan 
            Mlinar
          
          
        
      *ab
aResearch Institute for Advanced Materials Design, Boulder, CO 80302, USA. E-mail: vladan.mlinar@riamd.org
bSchool of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 02906, USA. E-mail: vladan_mlinar@brown.edu;   Tel: (+1)401-863-5231
Received 
      19th June 2011
    , Accepted 5th October 2011First published on 3rd November 2011AbstractUnderstanding the structure–property relationship in semiconducting nanostructures is key to tailoring the technologically important physical properties and can lead to the design of new nanostructured materials. Examples include nanostructures in optoelectronic devices ranging from solar cells, novel lasers, and optical amplifiers to physical representations of a quantum bit, or single polarized photon sources emitting quantum bits. The complexity of the problem is reflected in the fact that these nano-systems contain >104 atoms, suggesting an extremely large phase space of sizes, shapes, and constituent materials. In this paper, we will (i) show how to establish the relationship between structure and properties in nanostructures; (ii) discuss the role of theory in the design of nanostructures with targeted physical properties, including the review and limitations of typically employed methods for electronic structure calculations; (iii) discuss possibilities to use predictive theory to “guide” nanostructures' fabrication; and (iv) address application of nanostructures for renewable energy issues and single-photon sources.Vladan MlinarVladan Mlinar received his PhD. from the University of Antwerp (Antwerp, Belgium) in 2007, and was a visiting researcher at the Technische Universität at Berlin (Berlin, Germany) in 2005. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (Colorado, USA) during 2007-2009, a researcher at the University of Colorado (Colorado, USA) during 2009-2010, and led research in computational nanoscience at the Research Institute for Advanced Materials Design (Colorado, USA). He joined the School of Engineering at Brown as an Assistant Professor of Engineering (Research) in 2011. Vladan's research interests include theoretical and computational nanoscience, design of nanomaterials, and devices for energy and quantum information applications.
1 Introduction
The idea of the design of new materials, including nanostructures, with targeted physical properties has been attracting a lot of attention, especially because of potential industrial pay-offs. Traditional approaches based on the Edisonian approach, the accidental discovery of new materials, and subsequent development of new technologies, have been shown to be slow and costly. In the light of recent developments in computer technology, an alternative strategy has been proposed. It is based on combining quantum mechanical methods and search/machine learning algorithms, such as genetic algorithms, data mining, or neural networks.1–6 The approach works as follows: Firstly, a targeted physical property is defined, then the quantum mechanical and search/machine learning algorithms are employed to deduce the structure. Finally, it has been suggested that such theoretically deduced structures can be used to fabricate new materials/nanostructures. Of course, this sounds very appealing. The computer generates one or a few best candidate materials/nanostructures, which could be counterintuitive and difficult to discover otherwise, and the actual fabrication of a large number of structures and their processing can be avoided. The main premise behind this approach is that theory is able to correctly link the structure and the property. Only in that case, the deduced structures could be potentially used to “guide” fabrication of materials/nanostructures.
The goal of this paper is to discuss, in the case of semiconducting nanostructures, the structure–property relationship and potential design of novel nanostructures with targeted physical properties using theory. From a practical point of view, the motivation lies in the persistent interest in semiconducting nanostructures, driven by their many existing and potential applications in optoelectronic devices. These range from solar cells,7–12 novel lasers,13–16 and optical amplifiers17 to physical representations of a quantum bit,18–20 or single polarized photon sources emitting quantum bits.21
The idea of connecting structure and physical property using theory has been already implemented in several areas of science and in industrial design. For molecules, the structure–property relationship is well understood. This means that it is possible to deduce structural motifs starting from a (measured) spectrum.22 Specifically, the spectrum can be separated into sets of spectral features that are due to the different structural motifs, such as vibrations of different molecular groups. Given that all of these structural features and their expected energetic positions were tabulated, it becomes easy to identify an unknown molecule using spectra. Also, understanding the structure–property relationship in molecules led to the deliberate design of molecules with targeted properties.23For complex systems, the atomic configuration was deduced starting from a target electronic-structure property using a predictive theory.2 For example, it was found that the configuration of an Al0.25Ga0.75 As alloy that has the largest optical bandgap is a (GaAs)2(AlAs)1(GaAs)4(AlAs)1 superlattice oriented in the [201] direction.2For crystal structures, it became possible to predict it at arbitrary P–T conditions, given just the chemical composition of the material.3 The method is based on an evolutionary algorithm, that searches for the structure corresponding to the global minimum of the ab initio free energy.3 Typically, this methodology is limited to systems containing up to 100–200 atoms in the unit cell.3,24In materials science it could be possible that physical models either do not exist or are difficult to implement. Thus, linear regression or neural networks have been used to interpret experimental data.25 The underlying equations do not have to be physically justified, and the equations' parameter set gets determined by fitting the equations to a large set of experimental data. In industrial design, input of an automated system was linked to output to create a “closed-loop system”. This is often used to improve and optimize the system (“feedback design”),26 where input = structure and output = physical property, in our language.
So, can theory be used for the design of novel semiconducting nanostructures?
The complexity of the design of nanostructures is reflected in the fact that these nano-systems contain >104 atoms, limiting structural characterization measurements and theoretical predictions. It is difficult to get precise input from experiments given that the position of each and every atom within the nanostructure cannot be probed or controlled during the fabrication process.27–30 Also, methods for structural characterization have problems with extracting structural information with an atomic resolution.31–35 Thus, the relevant structural information for the understanding of underlying physics and for technological applications is often limited to structural motifs such as materials, size, shape, and chemical composition profile. From a theoretical viewpoint, the size of the system limits the usage of the atomistic first principle calculations and prevents application of the previously employed predictive theoretical methods, e.g., from computational molecular spectroscopy, now commonly used to establish structure-spectra relationships in molecules.22
In this paper, we (i) show how to establish relationships between the structure and properties in nanostructures (Sec. 2); (ii) discuss the role of theory in the design of nanostructures with target physical properties (Sec. 3), including the review and limitations of the typically employed methods for the electronic structure calculations (Sec. 4); (iii) discuss possibilities to use predictive theory to “guide” nanostructures' fabrication (Sec. 5); and (iv) address application of the nanostructures for renewable energy issues (Sec. 6.1) and single-photon sources (Sec. 6.2). A detailed review of the methods used for the electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures is given in the Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI).†
2 Structure–property relationship

Fig. 1 illustrates how structure and property are linked using experiment and theory. Experimentally, structural characterization measurements and measurements of the physical property are performed (region I in Fig. 1). Depending on the size of the system, the structural characterization measurements can extract full structural information, including positions of each and every atom within the material, or, for large nano-systems (>104 atoms), only partial structural information, e.g., size and chemical composition profile. Theoretically, quantum mechanical models should be, in principle, able to find relationships between the nanostructures' structural properties at atomic or molecular scales and their macroscopic properties (region II in Fig. 1). Depending on the complexity of the nanostructure, different levels of approximation for theoretical models can be used to calculate the physical property (see Sec. 4 and ESI).† For systems with >104 atoms,27–30e.g., embedded self-assembled quantum dots (QDs) contain 105–106 atoms,27 semi-empirical theoretical methods have been typically employed. The empirical nature of the methods, as well as various levels of approximations, introduce uncertainties in theoretical predictions. Thus, it could happen that the loop between the experiment and theory, shown in Fig. 1, is not closed. This suggests that theory and experiment can get only partial information about such large systems.
 Fig. 1  The structure–property relationship for semiconductor nanostructures, as seen by experiment (region I) and theory (region II). Two theoretical approaches: (a) the direct approach (Sec. 3.1) – use structure as an input to predict the physical property, and (b) the inverse approach (Sec. 3.2) – use physical property as an input to predict the structure. 
The best way to illustrate this problem is using the following two examples:
(i) Deducing the structural feature responsible for the absence of blinking in photoluminescence (PL) of CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystals

          PL of nanocrystals, e.g., CdSe/ZnSe, can exhibit unusual intensity fluctuations, known as blinking. It is common understanding that the PL blinking in semiconducting nanocrystals is caused by the presence of extra charges that enhance non-radiative decay rates. For example, a charge carrier can reside at the nanocrystal surface in deep-trap energy states.36 The photoluminescence would resume only after the nanocrystal becomes neutralized again. A typical example of blinking in PL is shown in Fig. 2 for the case of the CdSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.‡ It was shown recently that an alloyed CdZnSe nanocrystal capped with a semiconductor shell of ZnSe led to the complete suppression of PL blinking.38Fig. 2 shows a typical electron micrograph and a typical time-dependent photoluminescence (PL) of a ternary core/shell CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.
 Fig. 2  (a) Electron micrograph of a CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal with diameter ∼5nm and length ∼6.7nm.38 (b) Photoluminescence (PL) image from a single CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.38 Time dependent PL intensity traces from a (c) single CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal and (d) a CdSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.38 [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, 2009, 459, 686, copyright 2009]. 
From our viewpoint, it is interesting to discuss the structure–spectra relationship of CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystals. On the one hand, PL measurements clearly showed absence of blinking (Fig. 2(c)), but on the other hand, only partial structural information was obtained from the electron micrograph (Fig. 2(a)). This suggests that experimental data alone do not reveal the structural features responsible for the absence of blinking. Furthermore, such experimentally obtained incomplete structural information cannot be used as an input to a theoretical model to calculate spectra. The loop between experiment and theory (Fig. 1) was not closed.
An assumption was made about the structure of core/shell CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystals, suggesting that the structure is a radially graded alloy of CdZnSe into ZnSe (instead of an abrupt change in composition from CdZnSe to ZnSe at the core-shell interface).38 Numerical calculations based on the effective-mass theory were performed and confirmed absence of blinking in calculated PL spectra of assumed radially graded structure.38
(ii) Structure–spectra relationship in self-assembled QDs
The structure of QDs was probed with cross-sectional scanning tunneling microscopy (XSTM) and spectroscopy with multi-exciton PL. XSTM experimental data were used to deduce several model QD structure (all agreeing well with the available XSTM data).39 Using atomistic many body pseudopotential calculations, a multiexcitonic spectrum was calculated and compared with the measured spectrum. For comparison, only exciton energy and sequence of several multiexcitonic lines was used. Information about distances between peaks and peak intensities was neglected. It was found that all of the few XSTM-deduced model QDs fit, via the theoretical calculations, the measured energy, ∼1 eV of the exciton. However, zooming into a finer-resolution, ∼20 meV, range, none of the XSTM deduced models captured the observed sequence of multiexciton lines.39 Thus, the loop between experiment and theory (Fig. 1) was not closed.
Interestingly, it was suggested that the measured excitonic spectra could contain some structural information.5,6 The recently developed theoretical technique that gives spectra–structure links, spectral barcoding,6 was extended to include QD size, “seen” by X-STM measurements. Using this procedure, new spectroscopically-consistent structural model QDs were deduced. They fit well with all the available experimental data: (i) a good agreement with the measured QD relaxation profile from XSTM was found, and (ii) the measured sequence of multi-exciton lines was reproduced. Thus, it was concluded that XSTM responded to the geometrical size and shape, spectroscopy to the constructs that control wave function confinement, such as the composition profile. It was shown that these partial views could be reconciled only when structure-sensitive probes were linked with a predictive theory.39
Establishing the structure-property relationship in semiconducting nanostructures can lead to a better understanding of underlying physical processes.
3 Role of theory in the design of nanostructures
If theory can close the loop with experiment (Fig. 1), then the theory alone can be used to design new nanostructures, without need for actual fabrication of a large number of structures and their processing. Under this assumption, two approaches for discovery and design of new nanostructures can be implemented: (i) the direct approach (Sec. 3.1) – use structure as an input to predict the physical property, and (ii) the inverse approach (Sec. 3.2) – use physical property as an input to predict the structure.
However, if the theory and experiment can get only partial structural information, e.g., as discussed in Sec. 2, then theoretical predictions are not sufficient. Thus, in that case, the synergy between predictive theory and experiment would be required for the design of nanostructures (Sec. 3.3).
3.1 The direct approach
A model structure is created and used as an input to the theoretical model to calculate the physical property (Fig. 1, region II, route a).
The idea is to vary structural parameters of the input model and calculate the physical property, so to be able to tune it. For example, QDs were proposed as sources of single photons (emits one and only one photon in each pulse, see Sec. 6.2 for details). It was investigated how QDs’ structural properties such as height and shape,40,41 and QDs' growth conditions, e.g., growth on high index surfaces,42 or effect of atomic scale randomness,43 influence the splitting of the exciton lines needed to achieve single photon emission.
Thus, tuning of the property (for use as a single-photon source) and discovery are based on the trial-and-error search and accidental discovery. Even if new nanostructures get developed using this approach, which mainly depends on the experience and intuition of the researcher, development of technologies based on the given nanostructures can be long and costly.
3.2 The inverse approach
The targeted physical property is used as an input to the predictive theory and the structure is deduced (Fig. 1, region II, route b).
This is a challenging problem given the size of the nanostructures, suggesting an extremely large phase space of sizes, shapes, and constituent materials. It is very difficult, if not impossible, to directly scan such a large space. Thus, theory is typically combined with data mining methods or genetic algorithms to deduce the structure.4–6 For example, Goldoni and Rossi4 combined a quantum mechanical method with a genetic algorithm, to optimize semiconductor quantum devices, i.e., to find the structure for the targeted optical property. This was achieved by mapping the nanostructure's structural property onto a chromosome, where each layer of the nanostructure was in one-to-one correspondence with a gene.§ As a result, optimally designed asymmetric heterostructure was deduced. In general, it was shown that the inverse approach does not necessarily lead to a unique solution.5,6
The potential advantage of this inverse approach lies in the fact the theoretically-deduced structure can be used to “guide” fabrication of a nanostructure with a targeted physical property (see Sec. 5 for more details).
3.3 The synergistic predictive theory–experiment approach
In the case of nanostructures, it is possible that experiment and theory “see” different aspects of the structure, or that the calculated and measured property do not match. This means that only by combining both experiment and theory, is it possible to get the structure-property relationship (Sec. 2).¶ The design of new nanostructures in this case should be like a dance between theory and experiment. Theory should be used to narrow-down the large phase space of materials, size, and shapes, and fabrication and measurements to validate theoretical prediction and offer feedback to the theory.
4 Electronic structure calculations
Theoretical models should be sophisticated enough to handle nano-systems of few thousands up to hundreds of thousands of atoms, including excitations and many-body effects. They should be able to handle realistic structural information obtained from the structural characterization measurements, e.g., geometry and composition profile of the system, and take into account all the relevant effects, including the strain45–47 and piezoelectric effects,45 and external magnetic,44,48,49 and electric fields.50 Given the size of the system and complexity of the problem, instead of using the atomistic first-principles calculations, e.g., Hartree–Fock, Density Functional Theory, GW, that are limited to systems with a couple of hundred atoms, semi-empirical models have been used extensively. These semi-empirical methods require certain inputs from experiment, e.g., deformation potentials, effective masses, and band gaps. The full review of widely used semi-empirical methods for the electronic structure calculations of nanostructures is given in the ESI.†

Fig. 3(a) shows a flowchart of the methodology typically used for the electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures. First, a model structure is defined, typically using available experimental data [Sec. 1 of ESI]. Next, if present in the system, the strain is minimized in and around the model nanostructure [Sec. 2 of ESI], and then the single particle states are calculated [Sec. 3 of ESI]. Typically, empirical atomistic, tight-binding51,52 and pseudopotentials,43,53–56 and continuum, envelope function,48,49,57–62 models have been employed. The nature of the many-particle interaction is probed, including the electron–hole Coulomb effects, electron–hole exchange interaction, and correlations. This is done using the configuration-interaction (CI) method [Sec. 4 in the ESI]. Finally, the output of CI calculations is used in different post-processing tools, depending on the problem [Sec. 5 of ESI]. For example, this includes the calculation of the multiexcitonic emission spectra,5,6,63 fine structure splittings of exciton complexes, energy transfer for semiconductor nanocrystals,64 charging energies, entanglement50,65 to name just a few.
 Fig. 3  (a) Flowchart of the methodology used for electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures. The review of the (empirical) methods for strain minimization, single-particle states, exciton complexes, and the typical post-processors (electronic energy transfer, optical properties), is given in the ESI. (b) An example: calculation of the optical properties of QDs, specifying at which point experimental data are linked to the theory.44 
Although the idea behind semi-empirical approaches is rather simple, complexity arises in their practical implementations. Uncertainties in theoretical predictions of those models come not only from the different levels of approximations used, but also from the experimental data-dependent parametrization procedures. For example, there is an ongoing discussion about the validity of the multiband effective mass model, used for the electronic structure calculations of PbSe nanostructures. The effective-mass theory predicted that, for PbSe nanocrystals, spacings between the valence band levels equal those between conduction band levels. However, this method did not include inter-valley coupling, so the more detailed, empirical pseudopotential, method found the non-negligible inter-valley coupling between the hole states in the L- and Σ valleys, resulting in different conduction and valence band levels.66 Unfortunately, both of these methods are empirical and depend on experimental data for parameters fitting. This fitting influences e.g., effective-masses, inter-band, and inter-valley mixing, etc. Interestingly, recent ab initio calculations suggested a much larger energy separation between the band extrema in the corresponding valleys,67 thus suggesting the inter-valley coupling in the atomistic empirical pseudopotential method could have been overestimated.
The dance between the experiment and theory in the modeling of nanostructures can be illustrated using an example of calculating optical properties of self-assembled QDs. Fig. 3(b) shows the steps in the modeling, specifying at which point experimental data are linked to the theory.44
The model self-assembled QDs that enter our calculations are defined through their geometry and chemical composition profile. Next, the strain distribution in and around the model QD is calculated. The strain distribution is calculated under the assumption that a QD is already formed, i.e., the QD made of one material is embedded in a surrounding material with different lattice constants and the elastic energy of such a system is minimized giving us the components of the strain tensor. Typically, continuum elasticity or valence force field methods have been used. The elastic constants that characterize the constituent materials forming the QD, have values extracted from experiment, and enter the calculations regardless of the employed model. In Fig. 3(b), this is illustrated with gray boxes. Also, it is possible to extract strain components from high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of the sample, enabling a comparison between calculated components of the strain tensor and strain components extracted from these HRTEM images.44
Then, the single particle states are calculated using a semi-empirical approach. Irrespective of the choice of the model, they are all parameterized by a set of experimentally obtained band structure parameters from the bulk materials [gray box in Fig. 3(b)]. From the calculated electron and hole energy levels of the QD, one can establish their dependence on e.g., QDs' size, shape, or interfacial strain. A comparison to the experimental data at this stage can be retrieved from PL experiments, used to probe the absorption in the empty states of the QD, or wave function mapping. If measurements on QDs are performed in an external electric or magnetic field, these external field effects enter the calculations at this step [see details of magnetic field implementation in Sec. 3.4 of the ESI].
The many particle states are obtained from CI calculations and consequently the multiexcitonic spectrum is calculated. At this stage the direct comparison between the calculated and measured single-dot multi-excitonic spectra is possible.
Recently, a straight-forward implementation of this methodology (Fig. 3) on the example of (In,Ga)As/GaAs QDs, was reported.39 Structural information is extracted from XSTM, and used to create model QD structure (Fig. 3b). Using atomistic many body pseudopotential calculations, a multiexcitonic spectrum was calculated and compared with the measured spectrum (Fig. 3b). Interestingly, it was found that the measured excitonic spectra encoded structural information, which combined with the geometric size and shape from XSTM, made it possible to determine the main structural motifs of a QD.39
5 Can theory be used to “guide” fabrication of nanostructures?
For technological applications, once the underlying physical processes in a nanostructure are understood, the nanostructure has to be optimized with respect to the targeted physical property. This is usually a long and costly process that includes nanostructures' fabrication and characterization. This process could be avoided if we used the inverse approach discussed in Sec. 3.2. For a given target physical property, the structural information would be deduced. The question is: Can a theoretically-deduced structure be used to “guide” fabrication?

Fig. 4 illustrates such a scenario. Firstly, the targeted physical property is defined. Next, the predictive theory is employed to deduce structural information. This structural information is then used to guide fabrication. Once fabricated, structural characterization measurements and measurement of the physical property can be performed. To verify the procedure, we have to determine: (i) whether the experimentally extracted structure matches the theoretically-predicted nanostructure; and more importantly (ii) whether the measured physical property matches the targeted one. This is of fundamental importance because the agreement between the targeted and measured property can show whether the theoretically guided design of nanostructures can be a viable alternative to the conventional trial-and-error search.
 Fig. 4  Theoretically predicted structural information of a nanostructure is used to guide fabrication. Structural characterization measurements can be performed on the fabricated nanostructure to determine if its structure matches the theoretical prediction. Measurement of the property can also be performed. Agreement between the targeted and measured property can show whether the theoretically guided design of nanostructures can be a viable alternative to conventional trial-and-error search. 
Possibilities of using theory to guide fabrication of nanostructures are discussed next in light of two cases of the inverse approach, where the predictive theory was used to predict the structure given the targeted physical property.

          Case I
The effective-mass model and genetic algorithm were combined to design a semiconductor-based device for a second-harmonic generation in the resonance condition.4 The targeted properties are transition energies at resonance. More specifically, the equally spaced three-level system, in which the lowest intersubband transition energies, e2−e1 = e3−e2, are in resonance with pumping radiation, ħω, and light emission takes place at e3 − e1 = 2ħω. At resonance, the emitted power is proportional to μ = |μ12μ23μ31|, where .4 A search for a structure which maximizes the power (i.e., μ) was performed. This type of optimization is a complex multidimensional problem, which grows with the number of parameters of the structure, e.g., number and width of the nanostructure's layers, constituent materials, dopant concentrations. Thus, certain initial assumptions about the structure were made.4 The structure was chosen to be a conventional multilayer structure formed by a fixed number of layers (Nl) of an AlxGa1−xAs alloy. Two parameters of the structure were varied, the Al concentration xi and the number of AlxGa1−xAs monolayers, ni for layer i.4 This is an excellent example of how nanostructures could be designed.|| Of course, a more accurate description of electronic states can be implemented by use of, e.g., tight-binding or pseudopotential methods. Also, there is room for improvement, e.g. to optimize three-dimensional structures, consider more than one material (not only (Al,Ga)As), etc. However, it is necessary for this approach to get experimental validation. For example, it is not clear whether the employed effective mass method links the structure (Al concentration and number of monolayers) and transitions energies in resonance correctly.
Case II
Sequences of multiexcitonic lines in the PL spectrum of a single QDs were used to deduce structural motifs – size, shape, and chemical composition.5,6 First, a library of QDs was created, which covered a wide range of possible structural motifs, and the corresponding multiexcitonic spectra were calculated. Then, data mining techniques were used to distill from the library the links between structural motifs and sequences of multiexcitonic lines.6 Once these links were known, it was possible to predict the structural motifs of another measured or calculated spectra as an input. The deduced structural motifs were not unique. Typically, a range of sizes, shapes, and chemical profiles were found. This by itself is not bad, because it opens more possibilities for experiment and potential fabrication. However, it was found that this methodology, for a given sequence of multiexcitonic lines gives just partial QD structural information and that input from structural characterization methods is needed to obtain the more detailed structural information.39
The real test for all those predictive methods would be to fabricate nanostructures using information from the theoretically predicted structure, and then check how their measured physical properties correspond to the targeted ones (Fig. 4).
Neither of the above discussed two cases gives full atomistic potential of the system, but rather partial structural information. It is very difficult to search for the full atomistic potential of those large systems (>104 atoms), however it was also shown (Case II) that partial structural motifs are not sufficient and that some input from experiment is needed.
6 Applications
The growing interest in semiconducting nanostructures is driven by their broad applications in optoelectronic devices, ranging from solar cells,9–11,69 novel lasers,13–16 and optical amplifiers17 to physical representations of a quantum bit,18–20 or single polarized photon sources emitting ”quantum bits”.21 To illustrate the importance of the theoretical modeling, we address the applications of nanostructures for solar cells (Sec. 6.1) and single photon sources (Sec. 6.2).
6.1 
          Nanostructures for renewable energy issues
The solar spectrum contains photons with energies ranging from about 0.5 eV to 3.5 eV. Conventional single-junction photovoltaic solar cells benefit from one electron–hole pair for each absorbed photon, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Those based on crystalline silicon routinely achieve a relatively good efficiency of ∼22%. The maximum thermodynamic efficiency for single-bandgap devices assuming detailed balance, is 31%, the Shockley–Queisser limit.70,** The two major factors limiting the conversion efficiency are the inability to absorb photons with an energy less than the bandgap (see I in Fig. 5(a)) and thermalization of photon energies exceeding the bandgap (see II in Fig. 5(a)). When a photon is absorbed with energy greater than the bandgap of a semiconductor, the resultant carrier undergoes fast-cooling via phonon scattering and emission. There are also, always present, radiative recombination losses (see III in Fig. 5(a))
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a conventional single-junction solar cell. Absorbed light with photon energies greater than the bandgap produces carriers, electrons and holes. Loss processes are: (I) nonabsorption of below-bandgap photons; (II) lattice thermalization losses; (III)- radiative recombination losses, and junction and contact voltage losses. (b) Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals can exhibit multiple exciton generation from a single photon with an energy greater than twice the bandgap. (c) The intermediate band solar cell. Simultaneous with normal operation of the cell, below-bandgap photons get absorbed by the two transitions to and from the intermediate level contributing to the photocurrent. 
Three approaches have been put forward to address this loss of efficiency:9 (i) increasing the number of energy levels, typically by using a stack of multiple p-n junctions in different semiconductor materials. In this way higher-energy photons are absorbed in the higher-bandgap semiconductors and lower-energy photons in the lower-bandgap semiconductor; (ii) capturing carriers before thermalization, yielding a higher photo-voltage; and (iii) multiple carrier pair generation per high energy photon or single carrier pair generation with multiple low energy photons, leading to the enhancement of the photocurrent.
Carriers generated from high-energy photons, at least twice the bandgap energy, absorbed in a semiconductor, can generate one or more additional electron–hole pairs close to the bandgap energy through a scattering process, known as impact ionization (an inverse to Auger recombination). Unfortunately, the impact ionization has a vanishingly small probability in bulk materials. Thus, it was suggested that this process can be more efficient in semiconducting nanostructures, Fig. 5(b). Given the unique electronic structure properties of nanostructures, e.g., for nanocrystals – atomic-like electronic structure and size dependent bandgap energies, it was proposed that the relaxation dynamics of photogenerated carriers may be affected by quantization effects, and lead to more efficient solar cells. For example, hot carrier cooling rates of impact ionization could become competitive with the rate of carrier cooling.9,11
Once underlying physical processes are understood, the search for optimal materials and geometries can start, for example using the inverse design of nanostructures, as discussed in Sec. 5. This can be illustrated using the example of intermediate level solar cells. The idea is to introduce one or more energy levels within the bandgap such that they absorb photons in parallel with the normal operation of a single-bandgap cell.9 These additional sub-bandgap absorbers can either exist as discrete energy levels in, e.g., an impurity PV cell (IPV), or as a continuous band of levels isolated from the conduction and valence bands – the intermediate band solar cells (IBSC), as shown in Fig. 5(c). The IPV cell is made by incorporation of deep-level defects in a cell, e.g., B in SiC, or In in Si.9 Formation of an IBSC has been attempted experimentally using (In,Ga)As/GaAs QD superlattices. Interestingly, these devices have demonstrated some features of IBSC operation, but have not yet achieved an efficiency advantage. Theoretical work has to be done to clearly formulate the conditions required for a QD system to work.
The design of nanostructure-based solar cells is far from being straightforward. It could be that underlying physics is not fully understood, and at the same time the promise of “superior” solar cells is at stake. A typical example is the multiple exciton generation (MEG),9,11,69 where the excitation of a semiconductor nanocrystal by a single, high-energy photon may result in a few electron–hole pairs. Reported experimental probes of MEG have relied only on the indirect evidence of the existence and efficiency†† of MEG (the signature of Auger recombination within the exciton population decay traces), and theoretical studies cause confusion regarding the basic mechanisms of MEG. For solar energy conversion, it is important to predict any size dependence and explain how MEG is influenced by the coupling of the nanocrystal to its environment. Thus, the loop between experiment and theory (Fig. 1) has not yet been established.
6.2 Single– and entangled–photon sources
An ideal source of single photons emits one and only one photon in each pulse This is quite different from a “classical” source where the number of photons in each pulse typically follows a Poisson distribution.71–73 Complete characterization of a single-photon source should address the issues such as reduction of the two-photon probability relative to a Poisson distribution, the collection efficiency is enough to allow high repetition frequency, or the radiative lifetime of the emission is short enough to have good coherence and indistinguishability.71–73
Usually self-assembled InAs QDs in GaAs have been investigated for use as single photon sources. These structures have advantages as single-photon emitters, including larger quantum confinement energies and high radiative efficiency.
One problem with QDs as single-photon sources is that each one has a unique emission wavelength and radiative lifetime. Therefore, two single-photon sources built with QDs would not likely be compatible with each other for information processing operations. So, can theory be used to identify relevant structural motifs and ultimately design reproducible QD-based single-photon sources?
The semiconducting nanostructures, particularly QDs, were proposed for the entangled-photon sources. This is closely related to the generation of entangled photons in single atoms. In such radiative decay processes, photons emit entangled photons with a certain polarization that can be controlled. In QDs, electrons and holes form exciton complexes (see also Sec. 4 in ESI)† that suffer radiative decay similarly to atomic cascades.74
For a single QD, the main requirement to create an on-demand entangled photon source, is that photons are distinguishable by polarization only, i.e., the linear polarization must be less than the homogeneous linewidth of the emission. However, the existence of the spin splitting of the intermediate exciton level, fine structure splitting (FSS), results in polarization correlated photon pairs. Such a splitting is attributed to the breaking of the in-plane symmetry of the electron-hole exchange interaction originating from e.g. QDs' atomistic effects, and shape and strain anisotropies.74,75
Variation of the exciton FSS with the QD size by one order of magnitude and by the sign inversion was recently reported.76 Furthermore, it was also proposed that the exciton FSS of an individual QD can be tuned through zero by thermal annealing.40,41Fig. 6(a) shows how the exciton FSS decreases with annealing. The problem with postgrowth techniques such as thermal or laser annealing, is that they are inefficient and expensive. Thus, it was recently proposed to use QDs grown on high index surfaces, in particular (111) grown QDs. Schliwa et al. found that, in contrast to QDs on (001)-oriented substrates, the symmetry of the confinement potential of (111) QDs is not lowered by piezoelectric effects.42 Thus, it was predicted that the excitonic FSS would vanish for (111) grown QDs, as shown in Fig. 6(b)
 Fig. 6  (a) Polarization dependent PL from a QD for successive anneals. The excitonic fine structure splitting (FSS) decreases from 170 ± 20 μeV to less than 20 μeV after the second annealing step.40 [Reprinted with permission from R. Seguin et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 263109 (2006). Copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.] (b) The exciton FSS as a function of the vertical aspect ratio for lens-shaped InAs/GaAs QDs grown on (111) substrates.42 [Reprinted figure with permission from A. Schliwa et al., Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 161307(R). Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society.] 
Given the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms for QD-based single-photon sources, theory could be used to design optimal QD structures. A parameters space in the search for optimal structures should include QD size, shape, and composition profile, as well as the growth on high index planes, and the effect of atomic scale randomness.
7 Conclusions
Understanding the structure–property relationship in semiconducting nanostructures is key to tailoring technologically important physical properties and can lead to the design of new nanostructured materials. Examples include nanostructures in optoelectronic devices ranging from solar cells, novel lasers, and optical amplifiers to physical representations of a quantum bit, or single polarized photon sources emitting quantum bits.
Because these nano-systems contain >104 atoms, there is an extremely large phase space of sizes, shapes, and constituent materials. Thus, it is very difficult if not impossible to directly scan such a large space, and previously developed predictive theoretical methods, e.g., from computational molecular spectroscopy, are not applicable.
Here, we showed how to establish the relationship between the structure and properties in nanostructures, determined the role of theory in the design of nanostructures with target physical properties, and discussed possibilities to use predictive theory to “guide” fabrication of nanostructures.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NASA EPSCoR and the Research Institute for Advanced Materials Design (http://www.riamd.org).
References
D. M. Deaven and K. Ho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 288 CrossRef CAS .
A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Nature, 1999, 402, 60 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oganov and C. Glass, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 244704 CrossRef .
G. Goldoni and F. Rossi, Opt. Lett., 2000, 25, 1025 Search PubMed .
A. Schliwa, M. Winkelnkemper and D. Bimberg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 075443 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 035328 CrossRef .
V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 5934 .
V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635 CrossRef CAS .
G. Conibeer, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard and R. J. Ellingson, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 377 Search PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora and J. M. Pietryga, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 424 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledentsov, M. Grundmann, D. Bimberg, V. Ustinov, S. Ruvimov, M. Maximov, P. Kop'ev and Z. Alferov, Electron. Lett., 1994, 30, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bimberg, N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledentsov, Z. I. Alferov, P. S. Kopapos;ev and V. M. Ustinov, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 1997, 3, 196 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tatebayashi, N. Hatori, M. Ishida, H. Ebe, M. Sugawara, Y. Arakawa, H. Sudo and A. Kuramata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 53107 CrossRef .
F. Heinrichsdorff, C. Ribbat, M. Grundmann and D. Bimberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 556 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Uskov, E. O'Reilly, R. Manning, R. Webb, D. Cotter, M. Laemmlin, N. Ledentsov and D. Bimberg, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2004, 16, 1265 CrossRef CAS .
F. Troiani, E. Molinari and U. Hohenester, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 206802 CrossRef .
D. DiVincenzo, Science, 1995, 270, 255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imamoglu, D. D. Awschalom, G. Burkard, D. P. DiVincenzo, D. Loss, M. Sherwin and A. Small, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 4204 CrossRef CAS .
O. Benson, C. Santori, M. Pelton and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2513 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Gribov, J. Mol. Struct., 1984, 113, 11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Hu, D. N. Beratan and W. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3228 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lyakhov, A. Oganov and M. Valle, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2010, 181, 1623 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. D. H. Bhadeshia, ISIJ Int., 1999, 39, 966 Search PubMed .

          J. S. Freudenberg and D. P. Looze, Frequency Domain Properties of Scalar and Multivariable Feedback Systems, SpringerLink,  1988, vol. 104 Search PubMed .

          D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann and N. N. Ledentsov, Quantum Dot Heterostructures, Chichester: Wiley,  1998 Search PubMed .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Allivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stangl, V. Holy and G. Bauer, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2004, 76, 725 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Kumah, S. Shusterman, Y. Paltiel, Y. Yacoby and R. Clarke, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 835 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Molina, A. M. Sanchez, A. M. Beltran, D. L. Sales, T. Ben, M. F. Chisholm, M. Varela, S. J. Pennycook, P. L. Galindo, A. J. Papworth, P. J. Goodhew and J. M. Ripalda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 263105 CrossRef .
A. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Blokland, M. Bozkurt, J. M. Ulloa, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, P. M. Koenraad, P. C. M. Chirstianen and J. C. Maan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 023107 CrossRef .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Weder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Ren, K. Kahen, M. A. Hahn, M. Rajeswaran, S. Maccagnano-Zacher, J. Silcox, G. E. Cragg, A. L. Efros and T. D. Krauss, Nature, 2009, 459, 686 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mlinar, M. Bozkurt, J. M. Ulloa, M. Ediger, G. Bester, A. Badolato, P. M. Koenraad, R. J. Warburton and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 165425 CrossRef .
R. Seguin, A. Schliwa, T. D. Germann, S. Rodt, K. Pötschke, A. Strittmatter, U. W. Pohl, D. Bimberg, M. Winkelnkemper, T. Hammerschmidt and P. Kratzer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 263109 CrossRef .
D. J. P. Ellis, R. M. Stevenson, R. J. Young, A. J. Shields, P. Atkinson and D. A. Ritchie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 011907 CrossRef .
A. Schliwa, M. Winkelnkemper, A. Lochmann, E. Stock and D. Bimberg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 161307 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115416 CrossRef .

          V. Mlinar, Ph.D. thesis, Department of Physics, University of Antwerp,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. Grundmann, J. Christen, N. N. Ledentsov, J. Böhrer, D. Bimberg, S. S. Ruvimov, P. Werner, U. Richter, U. Gösele, J. Heydenreich, V. Ustinov, A. Y. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, P. S. Kopev and Z. I. Alferov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 4043 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Khoo, J. T. Arantes, J. R. Chelikowsky and G. M. Dalpian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075311 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar and F. M. Peeters, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 021910 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar, M. Tadic, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 205305 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar and F. M. Peeters, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3687 RSC .
G. Bester and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 165334 CrossRef .
G. Klimeck, F. Oyafuso, T. B. Boykin, R. C. Bowen and P. von Allmen, CMES-computer modeling in engineering and sciences, 2002, 3, 601 Search PubMed .
G. Bryant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 48, 8024 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Chelikowsky and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 14, 556 CrossRef CAS .
L.-W. Wang and A. Zunger, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 2158 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Wang and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 15806 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bester, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 023202 CrossRef .
O. Stier, M. Grundmann and D. Bimberg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 5688 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pryor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, 2869 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Kurdi, S. Sauvage, G. Fishman and P. Boucaud, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 195327 CrossRef .
S. Tomić, A. G. Sunderland and I. J. Bush, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1963 RSC .
N. Vukmirovic, D. Indjin, V. Jovanovic, Z. Ikonic and P. Harrison, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 75356 CrossRef .
N. Vukmirovic, Z. Ikonic, I. Savic, D. Indjin and P. Harrison, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 74502 CrossRef .
V. Mlinar and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 205311 CrossRef .
C. Curutchet, A. Franceschetti, A. Zunger and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bayer, P. Hawrylak, K. Hinzer, S. Fafard, M. Korkusinski, Z. R. Wasilewski, O. Stern and A. Forchel, Science, 2001, 291, 451 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. An, A. Franceschetti, S. V. Dudiy and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2728 CrossRef CAS .
A. Svane, N. E. Christensen, M. Cardona, A. N. Chantis, M. van Schilfgaarde and T. Kotani, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245120 CrossRef .
S. Tomic, V. Milovanovic and Z. Ikonic, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 56, 1033 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .
J. Kim, O. Benson, H. Kan and Y. Yamamoto, Nature, 1999, 397, 500 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santori, M. Pelton, G. S. Solomon, Y. Dale and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 1502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santori, D. Fattal, J. Vuckovic, G. S. Solomon and Y. Yamamoto, Nature, 2002, 419, 594 CrossRef .
O. Benson, C. Santori, M. Pelton and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2513 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton, G. S. Solomon and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 045308 CrossRef .
R. Seguin, A. Schliwa, S. Rodt, K. Pötschke, U. W. Pohl and D. Bimberg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 257402 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm12827b‡ The existence of PL ‘off’ periods limits the number of photons that can be detected in a given time period and also makes photon arrival times from a single nanocrystal highly unpredictable. Consequently, this limits potential applications of nanocrystals in optoelectronic devices. Adding surface bound ligands or growing thick semiconductor shells around the nanocrystals led only to reduction of blinking, but not full elimination.37§ A genetic algorithm is an optimization strategy inspired by the Darwinian evolution process. The population represents a pool of possible solutions to the problem. Chromosomes are the solutions that belong to the populations. These chromosomes are allowed to mate in pairs to cross their genomes, while random mutations that take place at a given rate ensure genetic diversity. The fittest chromosomes are given more chances to mate and pass their genomes to the next generation.4¶ This is true under the assumption that theoretical model is correctly chosen (Sec.4).|| We note that analytical optimization methods were also proposed for a second-harmonic-generation device working in resonance conditions.68** It is based upon the reduction of the ultimate efficiency limit of 44% due to entropic losses.9,11†† The single photon generation of multiple excitons occurs on a very short time scale following photon absorption, where the efficiency increases with the energy of the photon.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Vladan Mlinar	Vladan Mlinar received his PhD. from the University of Antwerp (Antwerp, Belgium) in 2007, and was a visiting researcher at the Technische Universität at Berlin (Berlin, Germany) in 2005. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (Colorado, USA) during 2007-2009, a researcher at the University of Colorado (Colorado, USA) during 2009-2010, and led research in computational nanoscience at the Research Institute for Advanced Materials Design (Colorado, USA). He joined the School of Engineering at Brown as an Assistant Professor of Engineering (Research) in 2011. Vladan's research interests include theoretical and computational nanoscience, design of nanomaterials, and devices for energy and quantum information applications.

 	Fig. 1  The structure–property relationship for semiconductor nanostructures, as seen by experiment (region I) and theory (region II). Two theoretical approaches: (a) the direct approach (Sec. 3.1) – use structure as an input to predict the physical property, and (b) the inverse approach (Sec. 3.2) – use physical property as an input to predict the structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electron micrograph of a CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal with diameter ∼5nm and length ∼6.7nm.38 (b) Photoluminescence (PL) image from a single CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.38 Time dependent PL intensity traces from a (c) single CdZnSe/ZnSe nanocrystal and (d) a CdSe/ZnSe nanocrystal.38 [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, 2009, 459, 686, copyright 2009].	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Flowchart of the methodology used for electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures. The review of the (empirical) methods for strain minimization, single-particle states, exciton complexes, and the typical post-processors (electronic energy transfer, optical properties), is given in the ESI. (b) An example: calculation of the optical properties of QDs, specifying at which point experimental data are linked to the theory.44	 

 	Fig. 4  Theoretically predicted structural information of a nanostructure is used to guide fabrication. Structural characterization measurements can be performed on the fabricated nanostructure to determine if its structure matches the theoretical prediction. Measurement of the property can also be performed. Agreement between the targeted and measured property can show whether the theoretically guided design of nanostructures can be a viable alternative to conventional trial-and-error search.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a conventional single-junction solar cell. Absorbed light with photon energies greater than the bandgap produces carriers, electrons and holes. Loss processes are: (I) nonabsorption of below-bandgap photons; (II) lattice thermalization losses; (III)- radiative recombination losses, and junction and contact voltage losses. (b) Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals can exhibit multiple exciton generation from a single photon with an energy greater than twice the bandgap. (c) The intermediate band solar cell. Simultaneous with normal operation of the cell, below-bandgap photons get absorbed by the two transitions to and from the intermediate level contributing to the photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Polarization dependent PL from a QD for successive anneals. The excitonic fine structure splitting (FSS) decreases from 170 ± 20 μeV to less than 20 μeV after the second annealing step.40 [Reprinted with permission from R. Seguin et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 263109 (2006). Copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.] (b) The exciton FSS as a function of the vertical aspect ratio for lens-shaped InAs/GaAs QDs grown on (111) substrates.42 [Reprinted figure with permission from A. Schliwa et al., Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 161307(R). Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society.]	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electronic structure calculations of semiconducting nanostructures. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm12827b
‡ The existence of PL ‘off’ periods limits the number of photons that can be detected in a given time period and also makes photon arrival times from a single nanocrystal highly unpredictable. Consequently, this limits potential applications of nanocrystals in optoelectronic devices. Adding surface bound ligands or growing thick semiconductor shells around the nanocrystals led only to reduction of blinking, but not full elimination.37
§ A genetic algorithm is an optimization strategy inspired by the Darwinian evolution process. The population represents a pool of possible solutions to the problem. Chromosomes are the solutions that belong to the populations. These chromosomes are allowed to mate in pairs to cross their genomes, while random mutations that take place at a given rate ensure genetic diversity. The fittest chromosomes are given more chances to mate and pass their genomes to the next generation.4
¶ This is true under the assumption that theoretical model is correctly chosen (Sec.4).
|| We note that analytical optimization methods were also proposed for a second-harmonic-generation device working in resonance conditions.68
** It is based upon the reduction of the ultimate efficiency limit of 44% due to entropic losses.9,11
†† The single photon generation of multiple excitons occurs on a very short time scale following photon absorption, where the efficiency increases with the energy of the photon.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
