Recent advances in semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells for power generating window applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE00154E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE00154E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1688-1709Recent advances in semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells for power generating window applications

        
          
            Qifan 
            Xue
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruoxi 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christoph J. 
            Brabec
          
          
        
      *bcd and 

        
          
            Hin-Lap 
            Yip
          
          
        
      *ae
aInstitute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China
bInstitute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (I-MEET), Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: christoph.brabec@fau.de
cBavarian Center for Applied Energy Research (ZAE Bayern), Haberstrasse 2a, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
dResearch (ZAE Bayern), Immerwahrstr. 2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
eInnovation Center for Printed Photovoltaics, South China Institute of Collaborative Innovation, Dongguan 523808, P. R. China. E-mail: msangusyip@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      16th January 2018
    , Accepted 24th April 2018First published on 24th April 2018AbstractSemi-transparent photovoltaic (ST-PV) technologies can be applied to replace facades and roofs in conventional buildings and coatings on vehicles to produce energy from sunlight. Current ST-PV technology is Si-based, but although Si achieves adequate efficiencies, it compromises on aesthetic appeal; its color is intrinsically difficult to tune. However, this presents an opportunity for semi-transparent polymer and perovskite-based PVs, the optical properties of which can be modulated easily by tuning their material compositions. In this review article, we summarize recent progress made in the material selection, optical engineering and device architecture design for high-performance, semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells and discuss challenges for the commercialization of these semi-transparent solar cells for power-generating applications in windows.
Qifan Xue
Qifan Xue received his BS degree (2013) and PhD degree (2017) in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from the South China University of Technology (SCUT) under the supervision of Prof. Hin-Lap Yip and Prof. Yong Cao. He is currently a lecturer in the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, SCUT. His research focuses on interface, materials and device engineering for highly efficient polymer solar cells and perovskite solar cells.
Christoph J. Brabec
Christoph J. Brabec holds the chair “materials for electronics and energy technology (i-MEET)” in the materials science department of the Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg. Further, he is the scientific director of the Erlangen division of the Bavarian research institute for renewable energy (ZAE Bayern, Erlangen). He is co-founder of the Energy Campus Nürnberg (EnCN), member of the EnCN e.V board, spokesman of the interdisciplinary center for nanostructured films (IZNF) and member of the ZAE Bayern board. He received his PhD (1995) in physical chemistry from Linz university, joined the group of Prof. Alan Heeger at UCSB for a sabbatical, and continued to work on all aspects of organic semiconductor spectroscopy as assistant professor at Linz university with Prof. Serdar Sariciftci. He joined SIEMENS research labs as project leader for organic semiconductor devices in 2001 and joined Konarka in 2004, where he held the position of CTO before joining the university. He is author and co-author of more than 500 papers, has a Hirsch factor >90 and app. 100 patents and patent applications which are held by Konarka Technologies Inc. and further licensed to Merck Chemicals. He finished his habilitation in physical chemistry in 2003. His major research interests are on the correlation between microstructure and functionality, solution processed semiconductors and devices, high throughput materials engineering, non-destructive and spectroscopic imaging methods, large scale printing methods for device production, photovoltaics and renewable energy systems.
Hin-Lap Yip
Hin-Lap Yip is a Professor in the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices and the Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Department at the South China University of Technology (SCUT). He studied MSE at the Chinese University of Hong Kong (BSc 2001 and MSc 2003) and completed his PhD degree in MSE in 2008 under the guidance of Prof. Alex Jen at the University of Washington, Seattle. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the same group before joining SCUT through the “Young Thousand Talents” program in 2013. His main research interests are in the fields of polymer and perovskite optoelectronic materials and devices.

Broader context
Integration of semitransparent photovoltaic (ST-PV) products as power generating windows in buildings and automobiles is a new market that will continue to grow owing to the increasing demand for renewable energy. Unlike conventional PV modules whose performance mainly depends on power conversion efficiency, PV systems for solar window applications are evaluated by their color properties, transparency levels and efficiencies. Current ST-PV technology based on silicon may not fulfill the requirements for many window applications as its optical properties are intrinsically difficult to tune. In response to this challenge, polymer solar cells and perovskite solar cells have emerged as new semitransparent PV technologies as the optical absorption of polymer and perovskite semiconductors can be easily tuned through their chemical structures. In addition, they can be printed with low-cost and high-throughput manufacturing processes on plastic substrates, which provide better cost and form factors for this new PV application. In this review article, we summarize recent progress made in the material selection, optical engineering and device architecture design for high-performance semitransparent polymer and perovskite solar cells and discuss challenges for their commercialization. By overcoming these hurdles, we can expect the commercialization of these new semitransparent PV technologies in the near future.

1. Introduction
The quest for new sustainable energy sources has become one of the most challenging problems for the scientific community in recent years. Industrialization and the rapid rise in global population growth rates have triggered a search for practical sources of sustainable energy to replace fossil fuels. Due to its cleanliness, abundance and accessibility, solar energy has emerged as one of the most promising candidates for sustainable energy. However, one major barrier to the further growth of solar energy and the widespread adoption of photovoltaic technologies is the relatively low energy density of solar illumination. Given that only ∼1% of the worldwide energy demand can be satisfied by the current installed area of PV technologies in remote and sunny regions, it is necessary to further install large areas of PV cells, capable of capturing enough energy to compensate for a significant portion of non-renewable energy consumption.1 One way to do this would be to integrate semi-transparent photovoltaic modules (ST-PV) onto the under-utilized transparent surfaces of skyscrapers and automobiles or on the window panels of individual homes. It was reported that the total amount of rooftop area suitable for conventional PV installation in the United States is larger than 8 billion m2.2 Assuming a module power efficiency of 16%, it can be conservatively estimated that rooftop-mounted PV has the potential to cover nearly 40% of the total electricity generation of the United States (∼0.16 TW). Besides this substantial rooftop-mounted PV application, the currently underutilized additional surface area of buildings (e.g. facades and windows) indeed accounts for more than double the rooftop area, which provides a tremendous opportunity for further PV installation in order to achieve the ultimate goal of building with net zero energy consumption.3,4
Currently the most widely used ST-PV products on the market are based on silicon. There are two types of silicon-based ST-PVs. The most commonly used one is based on crystalline-Si (c-Si) cells mounted on glass. Crystalline-Si based ST-PVs are produced by adopting a partial shading approach. The transparency and electricity output are controlled by tuning the space between the cells of the ST-PV panel. Diffuse daylight can transmit through the uncovered area of the ST-PV panel and therefore it provides both shading and natural lighting while producing electricity. Despite the absorption coefficient of c-Si being relatively low, its high charge mobility of 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 enables the use of thick films (>300 μm) to compensate for its weak absorption, leading to c-Si solar cells with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) as high as 26.6% (Table 1). Despite these adequate performance metrics, c-Si ST-PV modules have been found not to be aesthetically appealing; they are inflexible in terms of color choice due to their intrinsically band-like absorption spectrum. It is thus unsurprising that this type of ST-PV module is usually installed on the ceilings and roofs of buildings instead of on the side walls to create power-generating solar windows, because the latter usually require a more appealing appearance.
Table 1 The comparison of optical and electrical properties of different types of solar cells




Photovoltaic material
Thickness (μm)
Absorption properties
Charge mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Certified PCE (%)




c-Si
300
Broad band
103
26.6


Absorption coefficient: 103


a-Si
1
Broad band
10−1
14.0


Absorption coefficient: 104


Perovskite
0.3
Broad band
101
22.7


Absorption coefficient: 105


Polymer
0.1
Confined band absorption
10−3
11.5


Absorption coefficient: 105–106




The second type of ST-PV is based on amorphous Si (a-Si) thin-films. These can be made directly into modules by sputtering the cell material and transparent conductive oxide (TCO) electrodes onto a substrate of glass. Due to the direct bandgap nature of a-Si, its absorption coefficient is approximately an order of magnitude higher than that of c-Si and its thickness can be easily controlled to fabricate semi-transparent a-Si thin film. Compared to the c-Si based ST-PVs, a-Si is optically more homogeneous and visually more comfortable (Fig. 1), making it more suitable for integration as solar windows in buildings. Nevertheless, the charge carrier mobility and performance of the a-Si type ST-PVs are much lower than those of c-Si based ST-PVs. The color of Si-based ST-PVs can be partially modulated by inserting external dichroic filters with wavelength-dependent reflectance.5–8 However, it is still inconvenient to tune the colors of Si-based ST-PVs and they typically show brownish or reddish colors, which make them less appealing and thus has hindered their widespread adoption.
 Fig. 1  Visual comparison of c-Si based semi-transparent PV (a), a-Si based semi-transparent PV (b), ST-PSC (c) and ST-PVSC (d). 
In response to these challenges facing Si-based ST-PVs, polymer solar cells (PSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have begun to emerge as cost-effective candidates that can be printed in high-speed and high-throughput manufacturing processes.9–13 Instead of just being installed on top of surfaces like glass windows, these novel photovoltaic technologies could soon start to be integrated into other materials owing to their mechanical flexibility. Organic semiconductors are excitonic in nature, with a typical absorption bandwidth of ∼250–350 nm determined by the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) characteristics within the organic molecule or polymer. By modifying the chemical structure, the ICT absorption can be shifted into the NIR regime, resulting in significantly higher transparency in the visible regime.14,15 Compared with PSCs, which have relatively poor charge carrier mobility and efficiency levels, perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) are being hailed as a major breakthrough in low-cost photovoltaics. Their combination of some key attributes, including large absorption coefficients (105 cm1), high charge carrier mobilities (101 cm2 V−1 s−1), the tunability of optical properties and various deposition protocols, enables perovskite solar cells to reach a certified efficiency of 22.7%. Both ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs thus hold great promise as power-generating semi-transparent films for building windows, foldable curtains, automobile windshields, and other architectural and fashion elements, as they promise flexibility, neutral coloring and a pleasing appearance.
This review focuses on recent developments in ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs, including transparent electrodes, light harvesting materials and their film formation. In contrast to opaque cells, the performance characterization of ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs depends not only on their PCE but also on their optical parameters to ensure visual comfort. Optical assessment and simulation, and current challenges in the development and commercialization of semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells are also discussed.
2. Optical assessment
Semi-transparent PV facades and windows are assumed to be an effective solution for integrating PV into both existing and new buildings to balance daylight requirements with energy generation. Daylight is only a portion of total solar illumination, with a spectral power distribution (SPD) in the wavelength range 380–780 nm. The SPD of the light transmitted through glazing into buildings and houses has a great impact on humans’ visual comfort. Therefore, in addition to the electric PCE, other essential parameters can be used in evaluating the overall performance of ST-PV devices, such as optical assessments, which include the average visible transmittance (AVT), transparency color perception, corresponding color temperature (CCT) and color rendering index (CRI). A universally accepted standard has yet to be adopted, owing to the versatile applications of ST-PVs. The preference is for ST-PV displays to only effect limited chromatic alternations of the light source, as this allows for occupants to view outside scenes with natural colors. However, in some applications where aesthetic and decorative purposes are taken into consideration, ST-PV windows with tunable colors may be preferred.
2.1 Average visible transmittance
Average visible transmittance (AVT) can be determined by taking an average of the transparency of the device in the visible wavelength range from 400–700 nm based on the spectrally dependent response of the human eye. Although the transmittance needed for ST-PVs depends on the actual application requirement, it is generally suggested that an AVT of 20–30% be the minimal requirement for window applications.16 In practical applications, however, the experimental value of AVT may vary from the human perception of color and transparency, owing to the spectrally dependent response of the human eye. Therefore, in order to further analyze the perceived transmittance, it is necessary to calibrate the measured transmittance spectra of ST-PV devices with regards to human sensitivity to obtain the ST-PV devices’ luminosity or visible transmittance. The luminosity of an ST-PV device corresponds to the transmittance integral, weighted by the product of the illumination from a white standard illuminant with the human eye photonic spectral response,17,18  where I is the spectrum of the illuminant, and V is the photonic spectral response of the human eye.
2.2 Transparency color perception
A measure of ST-PV's transparency color perception can be determined by calculating the color coordinates (r, g, b) from the ST-PV transmittance pattern based on the normalized CIE 1931 RGB standard. The color coordinates can be calculated by the formulas:    where R, G, B are tristimulus values, φ(λ) is the SPD of the tested transmittance light, and (λ), ḡ(λ), (λ) are color-matching functions; their spectra can be found in Fig. 2a. In fact, the sum of r, g, b is equal to one so that the color coordinates can be simplified as two-dimensional coordinates (r, g). To avoid negative tristimulus values resulting from the negative color-matching functions in Fig. 2a, the normalized CIE 1931 XYZ standard is established through a tristimulus values conversion relationship and the corresponding color-matching functions can be seen in Fig. 2b. Similarly, the coordinates can be found through:    
 Fig. 2  The spectral response of the color matching functions of (a) CIE 1931 RGB and (b) CIE 1931 XYZ. (c) Spectral power distribution of CIE Standard illuminant D65. (d) The CIE 1931 chromaticity space and also the chromaticities of a black body light source with different temperatures (Planckian locus). 
As incident light strongly determines color perception, these two scenarios are usually compared by folding the transmittance spectrum mathematically within the respective spectrum of the incident light source by using (1) the CIE standard illuminant D65, and (2) the AM 1.5 global solar spectrum. D65 is a commonly used standard illuminant that tries to portray standard illumination conditions in different parts of the world in the open air. Its corresponding color coordinates are x = 0.3128, y = 0.3290, which is close to a “white point” in the CIE diagram (Fig. 2c).
2.3 Corresponding color temperature (CCT)
The human eye is capable of adjusting white light recognition to almost any black body radiator. The black body locus or Planckian locus is defined as the trace of the black body emission as a function of temperature in a particular color space (Fig. 2d). The light source color temperature of the nearest point on the Planckian locus is known as the corresponding color temperature (CCT) when its color coordinates lie in the CIE 1931 color space chromaticity. We can calculate the CCT by transferring the Planckian locus and the CIE 1931 XYZ coordinates into the CIE 1960 UCS color space. Notably, the calculated value of CCT is considered effective only if the distance between the Planckian locus and the color coordinates of the light source is within 0.05, as recommended by the CIE. Herein, we also introduce a simple calculating method with negligible error for CCT proposed by McCamy:  where x, y are the color coordinates under CIE 1931 XYZ. The CCT of an incandescent lamp is about 2700 K, which generates a yellow-orange color, whereas sunlight above the atmosphere is about 6500 K and appears to be bluish white.
2.4 Color rendering index (CRI)
Color constancy is a property of human vision, which has the ability to compensate for color deviations caused by different illumination conditions.19 The chromaticities of black body radiators in the range of 4000–25000 K are close to those associated with particular phases of daylight.20 Due to the excellent color constancy of the human vision system under daylight illumination, black body radiators are often used as a light source for perfect color rendering capabilities in colorimetry. Therefore, the value of a color rendering index (CRI) can be obtained by comparing the color rendering of a black body radiator to that of a test source. This quantitatively depicts the ability of a light source to reveal the color of an object in comparison with a natural or reference light source.
CRI values range from 0 to 100 and reveal the capability of the light transmitted by the ST-PV to produce the true colors of the viewed objects. A higher CRI represents transmitted light that is more capable of rendering colors properly while a lower CRI represents a poorer color rendering capacity. The CIE Standard illuminant D65 delivers a CCT of 6504 K and a CRI of 100.
To calculate the CRI, the CCT of the test illuminant should be achieved firstly to determine the reference illuminant.21 Then the colors of the standard test color sample under the test and the reference illuminant can be found. By taking the human eye's chromatic adaptation effect into account, the color coordinates of the test illuminant and the corresponding sample color should be adjusted. After that, the resultant color shift (ΔEi) can be obtained through comparison between the sample color from the reference illuminant and the adjusted sample color from the test illuminant. Finally, the color rendering index for each sample is defined as:Ri = 100 − 4.6 × ΔEiand the general CRI can be found with the average CRI from CIE provided by 8 standard samples:  The detailed calculation procedure can be found in ref. 21.
3. Optical simulation
Applying ST-PVs to windows as a power-generating source in buildings typically requires customized properties and a balance between electricity generation and optical transparency, which involves sophisticated selection of materials and careful design of the corresponding device architecture. Given that the wavelengths of visible light are comparable to the film dimensions of a ST-PSC or ST-PVSC, the local electromagnetic field and the charge generation within the light-harvesting film will depend on the amount of interference from coherent transmitted and reflected waves at the internal interfaces. Optical simulation thus offers a powerful tool for clarifying the optical potential of ST-PV devices, providing a better sense of the illumination direction and the thickness effects of each layer on the optical transparency of the device and its performance in generating electricity. The most commonly used optical model for both ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs is the transfer matrix method (TMM). This assumes that all layers are homogeneous and their interfaces are flat and parallel such that each layer can be described by its thickness and optical parameters, the so-called complex refractive index (N = n + k × i), which consists of a refractive index (n) and an extinction coefficient (k). All of these parameters can be determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry measurements. The incident light should be described as plane waves. Based on the aforementioned assumptions, light propagation in the medium or at the interface can be skillfully described by matrices because of the linearity and continuity of the electric field components. TMM takes account of the effects of the light wave character, reflection and transmission at the medium-interface, which means it can give a precise description of the light propagation in the layer stack. The TMM optical model can calculate the optical electric field intensity |E|2 at each position of the entire multilayered structure.22 We can further predict the color properties or rendering capability by analyzing the calculated transmittance spectrum with CIE theory.
A number of studies have used the TMM optical model to examine the characteristics of different materials. Ameri et al. used optical simulation to predict the color variation range and characteristics of semi-transparent devices made with low-bandgap material PCPDTBT.23 Forberich et al. later on extended that model to calculate different EQE shapes and examined the interplay between efficiency, transparency and color. They found that high efficiency is achievable for a wide range of colors and that the material bandgap should be carefully optimized, especially for transparency higher than approximately 40% (Fig. 3a).24 Jen et al. successfully used the optical model to accurately portray the behavior of an inverted PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM based ST-PSC.25 With the same model, they also found that the light-harvesting capability can be retained with a 50 nm BHJ layer (PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM) when the Ca/Al cathode is replaced with a hybrid electrode that consists of an ultra-thin fullerene-containing surfactant and Ag metal.26 Combining the advantage of a thin active layer with the high transparency of the hybrid electrode, a series of ST-PSCs with good PCE and AVT with neutral color were fabricated (Fig. 3b). Lin et al. reported a microcavity-embedded structure, which utilizes a single transparent organic layer sandwiched between a cathode of thin silver films. By fine tuning the organic layer thicknesses under the guidance of the optical model, a series of colorful and semi-transparent devices were realized (Fig. 3c).27
 Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency of semi-transparent OSCs plotted over x and y color coordinates for all transparency values between 10% and 80%, calculated for the model of spectrally limited EQE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. (b) The optical modeling simulation of current density versus active layer thickness under different cathode configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (c) Calculated EQE, transmission spectra (upper inset) and color coordinates (lower insert) of devices with various metal (Ag) thicknesses in a MOM structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. (d) Analysis of optical property within a STOPV including the portion of absorption, reflectance and transmission in the device. Preprinted with permission from ref. 29. (e) Profile of normalized exciton generation rates (obtained for incidence of sunlight with AM 1.5G assumed). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. (f) Optical simulated average reflected sunlight (400–800 nm) of semi-transparent perovskite solar cells. The white square encloses the combination of CH3NH3PbI3 and LiF thicknesses that simultaneously reduces the ARF, enhances the AVT and keeps a high Jsc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. 
Martorell et al. used optical modelling to design a non-periodic one-dimensional photonic crystal (1DPC) on top of an ST-PSC to trap near-infrared and near-ultraviolet photons, which can recover 80% of the photon-to-charge conversion of its opaque counterpart while maintaining 30% visible light transmission.18 Similarly, Shen et al. used 1DPC to simultaneously improve the PCE and CRI of a ST-PSC. They used optical simulation to provide direct evidence that PCE enhancement was the result of the enhanced light absorption.28 Hou et al. used both a bottom 1DPC and a top solution-processed highly conductive PEDOT:PSS layer to form a microcavity structure to improve the photocurrent in a ST-PSC. They also used optical simulation to investigate the transmission, reflection and absorption of the device and found that there is still much room for improvement due to parasitic absorption (Fig. 3d).29 Lin et al. acquired the optical constants of a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite thin film for the first time. Performing an optical simulation based on this optical constant information, they found that power conversion efficiencies of up to 20% and 29% are feasible in planar-type single and tandem cells.30
Yoo et al. used optical simulation to reveal that ST-PVSCs have a lower charge generation efficiency in the long wavelength range than their opaque counterparts, but can have comparable Jsc and PCE values due to a significant constructive interference effect associated with the finite but non-zero reflectance of the proposed top transparent electrode (Fig. 3e).31 With a design strategy to selectively maximize electrode transmission in the visible range and reflectance in the NIR region, heat-blocking and “cool-to-touch” operations with a NIR-SER (solar energy rejection ratio in the near infrared region) as high as 85.5% were demonstrated to have virtually no transparency sacrifice when an advanced electrode structure incorporating a thick Ag layer in conjunction with ZnS as a high-index capping layer was used.31 Bolink et al. modeled the dependence of AVT and Jsc on the varied thickness of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite films, both with and without a protective LiF layer. They concluded that a LiF capping layer of ∼100 nm is optimal for enabling greater transparency while also reducing the energy loss resulting from the specular reflection of the device. This resulted in a high Jsc for any given thickness of the light-harvesting layer (Fig. 3f).32
4. Semi-transparent polymer solar cells
In contrast to silicon, chemical modification-equipped organic conjugated semiconductors, with bandgap and color tunability, are more feasible because they allow for the manufacture of different colored devices for a variety of specific applications.25,33 A typical PSC sandwiches a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) film, composed of a polymer donor and a fullerene acceptor, between a transparent electrode (e.g. indium tin oxide (ITO)) and a reflective, opaque-back electrode (such as argentum (Ag) or aluminum (Al)).34 The interfacial layer is always inserted between the BHJ layer and the electrode to improve the charge selectivity and also to determine the polarity of the solar cells.35,36 Research interest into PSCs has been growing rapidly due to the development and synthesis of novel donors and acceptors, morphology control and interfacial engineering, which have yielded high PCEs of over 13%.37–42
In opaque devices, the incoming light enters at the ITO transparent electrode and is reflected back by the metal mirror electrode, therefore doubling the optical path within the light-harvesting layer. In the case of ST-PSCs, the mirror electrode is replaced by another transparent electrode to enable the incoming light to be transmitted through the cell for a semi-transparent appearance. Nevertheless, the light absorption of the BHJ film is reduced in such cases because only a small portion of the light is reflected by the back electrode. This leads to an inevitable loss in the photocurrent and the PCE. Therefore, new low-bandgap (LBG) material development, transparent electrode optimization and device engineering approaches, including tandem-structure and photonic crystal light management, all play an important role in simultaneously achieving both a high PCE and a high AVT for ST-PSCs.
4.1 Low bandgap organic semiconductors
It is preferred that most photons from near-infrared (NIR) and ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths be absorbed, while those in the visible range of the solar spectrum should be transmitted for an ideal light-harvesting layer in ST-PVs. Inorganic semiconductors and perovskite materials cannot fulfil this requirement because they always exhibit broad band-absorption. However, low bandgap (LBG) organic semiconductors show great potential for fulfilling this strict requirement because their absorption spectrum can be tuned to localize in the NIR region instead of spreading over the entire spectrum. This can be achieved by utilizing novel chemical design and bandgap engineering. For example, a straightforward strategy to design LBG polymer donors is to incorporate both electron-deficient and electron-rich moieties in the conjugated backbone. The bandgap of the polymers can be adjusted by modulating the intramolecular charge-transfer characteristics between the electron-rich moiety and the electron-deficient moiety.43 Normally, the stronger the electron-deficient and electron-rich moieties, the smaller the bandgap of the polymers.
The chemical structures of some highly efficient polymer donors and nonfullerene acceptors, with bandgaps ranging from 1.8 to 1.2 eV in ST-PSCs, are shown in Fig. 4. The corresponding ST-PSC structures and performance data are summarized in Table 2. Because 5-octylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD) obtains some stabilization energy by forming a quinoidal thiophene-maleimide structure in the excited state, the new polymer PBDTTPD was developed by introducing TPD as a novel acceptor in benzodithiophene (BDT)-based copolymers, with an absorption peak and edge at 610 nm and 700 nm (Eg = 1.8 eV), respectively.44 McGehee et al. developed a ST-PSC that uses PBDTTPD:PC71BM as a BHJ film and a composite of ZnO nanoparticles and Ag nanowire as the top transparent electrode. These allow the device to achieve a high photovoltaic performance (PCE: 5.0%) with minimal optical losses (AVT: 37%).45 The transmission of the composite Ag nanowire–ZnO nanoparticle electrodes, and a photograph of the device, are shown in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 4  The chemical structures of some highly efficient polymer donors and nonfullerene acceptors. 
Table 2 A summary of different ST-PSC structures with corresponding performances and optical properties




ST-PSC device architecture
ST-PSC PCE @ AVT
CRI @ CCT, CIE (x, y)
Ref.




ITO/MoO3/PBDTTPD:PC71BM/ZnO/Ag NW
5.0% @ 37% AVT
—

45



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/C70-bis/Ag (20 nm)
4.2% @ 32% AVT
98 @ 4711 K (0.359, 0.355)

26



PDMS/PMMA/graphene/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/ZnO-NP/PEDOT:PSS/graphene/glass
3.4% @ 40% AVT
(0.3109, 0.3357)

46



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/BCP/Ag (10 nm)/1-D photonic crystal
5.6% @ 28% luminosity
—

12



1-D photonic crystal/Au (13 nm)/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag (10 nm)/ARC (MoO3, LiF)
5.3% @ 21.4% luminosity
—

39



ITO/PFPA-a/P3TI:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS (PH1000)
2.2% @ 50% (at 550 nm)
—

47



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTT-DPP:PC71BM/TiO2/Ag NW
4% @ 66% (at 550 nm)
—

48



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTT-SeDPP:PC71BM/TiO2/Ag NW
4.5% @ 58% AVT
—

49



ITO/ZnO/PCPDTFBT:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/UTMF
5.0% @ 47.3% AVT
99 @ 5365 K

50



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/PF3N-2TNDI/Ag
6.3% @ 24% AVT
95.2 @ 6417 K (0.315, 0.316)

51



ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:ATT-2/MoO3/Ag
7.74% @ 37% AVT
—

52



ITO/PEDOT:PSS /PTB7-Th:IEICO-4Cl/PFN-Br/Au
8.38% @ 25.7% AVT



53





 Fig. 5  (a) Transmission of Ag NW–ZnO NP composite electrodes with different sheet resistances. The inset shows a photograph of the PBDTTPD-based ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. (b) A digital photograph taken through the PIDT-PhanQ-based ST-PSC incorporating a surfactant/20 nm Ag hybrid cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (c) A photograph of the PTB7-based ST-PSC with all-graphene electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. (d) A photograph of the PBDTTT-C-T-based power-generating glass tested from the backside, outdoors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. (e) A photograph taken through PBDTTT-C-T-based ST-PSCs with different Ag thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. (f) A photograph of the PBDTT-DPP-based ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. 
Other high performance low-bandgap polymers, including PIDT-PhanQ and PTB7, have also been explored as donor materials in ST-PSCs.18,26,46,55 There are two peaks with maxima at 644 and 442 nm, with the absorption onset at 744 nm for the PIDT-PhanQ thin film, with an optical bandgap of 1.67 eV.56 Jen et al. demonstrated a high-performance ST-PSC by synergistically combining a PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM blend film and a top semi-transparent electrode. Thin Ag metal was deposited on top of a fullerene-containing surfactant using a solution process. This not only modifies the energy level alignment at the cathode interface, but also serves as an effective nucleation-inducing seed-layer to improve thin film growth and the formation of Ag.26 Champion opaque cells with 100 nm thick Ag showed a Voc of 0.87 V, a Jsc of 11.78 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.64, leading to a PCE of 6.56%. The PCE of ST-PSC with 20 nm thick Ag dropped to 4.2% with a major loss in Jsc to 7.98 mA cm−2. This resulted in a decent AVT of 32% (calculated from 380 to 740 nm in the visible range) and good color coordinates of (0.359, 0.355). A digital photograph, taken through an ST-PSC that incorporated a surfactant/20 nm Ag hybrid cathode, is shown in Fig. 5b.
PTB7, another high-performance LBG polymer, was developed by alternating benzodithiophene and ester-substituted thieno[3,4-b]thiophene units. This yielded a bandgap of ∼1.6 eV, owing to the stabilization of the quinoidal structure from thieno-[3,4-b]thiophene.57 In addition to PTB7's high-hole mobility with a rigid backbone, it also has excellent solubility in organic solvent and suitable miscibility with a fullerene-type acceptor was realized due to the side chains on the benzodithiophene and ester. Wu et. al. demonstrated high performance inverted PSCs with a certified efficiency of 9.2%, using PTB7:PC71BM as the BHJ film and poly [(9,9-bis(3-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN) as the cathode interlayer.58 Yan et al. developed ST-PSCs with PTB7:PC71BM as a BHJ film and all-graphene electrodes, which showed an average transmittance of ∼40% with neutral colors and PCEs up to ∼3.4% when illuminated from either side (Fig. 5c).46 Martorell et al. also demonstrated high performance PTB7-based ST-PSCs using some layered light-trapping architectures, which will be discussed in greater detail later.18,55 By alternating thienyl-substituted benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) with alkylcarbonyl-substituted thieno-[3,4-b]thiophene (TT-C), LBG polymer PBDTTTC-T (Eg: 1.58 eV) was developed and applied in a PSC with an excellent PCE of 7.6%.59 Later on, Chen et al. reported ITO-free ST-PSCs. These were developed by introducing PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM as a BHJ film and using thin Ag and silver nanowire, and MoS2 nanosheets, as anode and cathode, respectively. This effort achieved an excellent PCE of 6.55% and a corresponding AVT of 21.18%, with color coordinates of (0.313, 0.329). To prove the applicability of this ST-PSC for power-generating windows, a power-generating glass composed of eight 0.65 cm2 ST-PSCs was fabricated. The photocurrent of this power-generating glass was found to be sufficient to light an LED chip, irrespective of illumination direction (Fig. 5d).54 By modulating the thickness of the reflective back electrode, Jen et al. were able to regulate the PCE of ST-PSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM as a BHJ film ranging from 4.25% to 7.56% with the corresponding AVT from 36% to 2% (Fig. 5e).25 The device with 12 nm-thick Ag showed color coordinates similar to the standard daylight illuminant D65, with a CRI close to 100, suggesting extremely high quality illumination with achromatic sensation and properly rendered colors.
Isoindigo-based polymers are another promising light-harvesting material for photovoltaic applications owing to their high extinction coefficients, broad absorption spectra, appropriate energy levels and substantial supply from natural sources.60 By choosing the appropriate isoindigo as the acceptor and the electron-rich unit terthiophene as the donor, Wang et al. designed and synthesized a novel alternating LBG polymer, P3TI (Eg: 1.5 eV), that delivered PCEs of up to 6.3% in PSCs.47 The corresponding ST-PSC showed a relatively low PCE of 2.2%, which was probably attributable to the device structure, which had not been optimized. Nevertheless, a high transmittance of 50% at a wavelength of 550 nm was achieved. This was due to the low absorbance of the polymer in the visible region.61
PBDTT-DPP and PBDTT-SeDPP represent another class of high performance LBG polymers, with backbones composed of a weak benzodithiophene (BDT) donor and a strong diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) acceptor. By substituting the alkoxyl side chain in the BDT unit with a thiophene-functionalized alkyl side chain to form the thienylbenzodithiophene (BDTT) unit, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels of PBDTT-DPP and PBDTT-SeDPP were both deepened. These modifications of the polymers resulted in an enhanced device Voc without deteriorating the driving force for efficient charge separation. These polymers both show bandgaps within the ideal range with absorption mainly in the NIR range.48,49,62,63 As a result, Yang et al. have achieved ∼4% PCE and excellent transparency (66% at 550 nm) for the ST-PSC using the near-infrared light-harvesting material PBDTT-DPP and a solution-processed Ag nanowire-based composite film as the transparent top electrode. A photograph of a representative ST-PSC is shown in Fig. 5f. Substitution of the thiophene spacers in the case of PBDTT-DPP with selenophene in the case of PBDTT-SeDPP further decreases the bandgap, from 1.46 eV to 1.38 eV, with absorption extended from 850 nm to 900 nm. A very encouraging result was obtained for the PBDTT-SeDPP-based ST-PSC, with a PCE of 4.5% and a recorded high AVT of 58%. These results suggest that the development of new materials is fundamental to improving the optoelectronic properties of ST-PSCs.
A modified low bandgap polymer, PCPDTFBT, with a CPD donor and a fluorine-substituted BT acceptor was designed by introducing an electron-withdrawing fluorine atom to the electron-deficient unit such that the HOMO level of the polymer was lowered.50 The opaque PCPDTFBT device showed an PCE of 6.6%, while ST-PSC delivered a high PCE of 5.0% with an impressive AVT of 47.3%. Most recently, Yip et al. used a synergic interface and optical engineering approach to develop highly efficient ST-PSCs by using a versatile PF3N-2TNDI ETL as both an optical spacer and an additional charge generation layer; this enabled the use of an ultrathin BHJ film of PTB7-Th:PC71BM as the light harvesting layer while maintaining very good ST-PSC performance (PCE: 6.3%, AVT: 24%).51 These findings all suggest that the exploitation of high-performance LBG materials in ST-PSCs is a very promising approach to optimize both efficiency and transparency. The future challenge will lie in further pushing the bandgap of these polymers to below 1.4 eV as a way to harvest a larger portion of the NIR light.
To match this requirement, LBG nonfullerene small molecules with exceptional NIR response have emerged as very promising electron acceptors for replacement of fullerene derivatives to improve the performance of ST-PSCs.52,53,64 By introducing 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile with strong electron-accepting ability, Zhu et al. designed and synthesized a new nonfullerene electron acceptor ATT-2 with an optical bandgap of 1.32 eV, which was successfully applied in ST-PSCs with a high PCE of 7.74% and an AVT of 37%.52 Most recently, Hou et al. developed a novel nonfullerene acceptor IEICO-4Cl (Eg: 1.23 eV) with an absorption spectrum mainly located in the NIR region. When this acceptor is blended with different polymer donors, the colors of the BHJs can be tuned from purple to blue to cyan with the corresponding devices yielding a decent PCE of 8.38% with a high AVT of 25.7%.53 These demonstrations suggested that the versatility of tuning the absorption properties of organic semiconductors through chemical design provided a very powerful means for optimization of the performance of ST-PSCs.
4.2 Transparent electrodes (TEs)
Both the anode and cathode need to be transparent for ST-PVs, and the choice of transparent electrode (TE) pairs significantly affects the performance of ST-PSCs. The selection principles of TEs are based on the optical transparency, electrical conductivity and processing properties, and there are several types of TEs that have been applied to ST-PSCs.
Transparent conductive oxides (TCOs), such as indium-tin oxide (ITO), fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and Al-doped zinc oxide (AZO), are the most commonly used TEs for optoelectronic devices.65,66 Among them, ITO, which can be coated on either a glass or plastic substrate, is the most commonly used transparent electrode for both opaque and semi-transparent cells, due to its commercial availability and excellent optoelectronic properties, which include low sheet resistance (Rs) on the order of 10 Ω □−1 and high optical transmittance (∼90%). In one of the earliest demonstrations of the ST-PSC concept, Huang et al. used two transparent plastic substrates coated with ITO as both the bottom and top electrodes, facilitated by an electronic glue-based lamination process.67 One of the appealing advantages of this structure is that the plastic substrates at both sides of the device provide an effective way to encapsulate the cell, preventing moisture and oxygen from penetrating into the active layer for stable ST-PSCs. However, ITO suffers from some serious drawbacks, including limited indium sources and an incompatibility with flexible electronic devices owing to its high mechanical brittleness. It also entails high preparation costs for evaporation, electroplating, sputtering and pulsed laser deposition.68,69 ITO has been recognized as being responsible for almost 45% of the energy cost and over 50% of the energy content in the lab-scale process of fabrication.70,71 Therefore, it is urgently desirable to explore transparent conductive alternatives to ITO.
There are some emerging TEs, including conducting polymers, ultrathin metal films (UTMFs), and metal nanowires, that have been applied in ST-PSCs. As a conducting polymer with fairly high transparency and conductivity, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is recognized as a promising material for organic optoelectronic devices because it enables flexible and cost-effective devices in large-scale roll-to-roll production. Even though PEDOT is insoluble in most solvents, poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS) as a counter ion can serve as an excellent charge compensator and oxidizing agent, and as a template for polymerization to disperse PEDOT in water.72,73 There are several approaches to further improve the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. These include the treatment of PEDOT:PSS films with a polar organic compound and the incorporation of an organic compound into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution.74–78 Ouyang et al. have reported the highest conductivity of a PEDOT:PSS film – up to 3065 S cm−1 – by using an H2SO4 treatment method.79 The PEDOT:PSS film can be prepared by spin-coating, spray-coating or roll-to-roll coating. It can be used in conjunction with graphene or carbon nanotubes as a hybrid electrode with enhanced electrical and optical properties.80,81 The most frequently adopted ST-PSC structure is glass/ITO/ZnO/BHJ film/PEDOT:PSS, which is composed of a highly conductive PEDOT:PSS film (Clevios™ PH500 or PH1000, Heraeus) as the top semi-transparent electrode and ITO as the bottom electrode.82–85 To reveal the potential for constructing ITO-free, fully solution-processed devices, highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films were applied as both top and bottom transparent electrodes in ST-PSCs.86,87 Although the PEDOT:PSS film provided decent transparency and a good processing window, its relatively low electrical conductivity when compared with ITO significantly limits the ST-PSC's performance, especially when the size of the cell increases. Therefore, PEDOT:PSS film by itself is not an ideal transparent electrode for large-area solar panels. The combination of conductive metal grids with PEDOT:PSS could provide a good solution to improve the charge collection efficiency and to obtain ITO-free and ambient stable PSCs.88
Due to their high electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical flexibility, UTMFs are one of the more widely studied candidates for TEs in ST-PSCs. Metal films are highly conductive, ductile and transparent for visible light when the thickness remains under ∼20 nm. However, there is a tradeoff between making the metal films thin enough to transmit light without becoming so thin that they become discontinuous and suffer from high sheet resistance due to electron scattering from the grain boundaries and film surface.89 To enhance the optical transmittance of UTMFs without sacrificing their electrical properties, UTMFs can be sandwiched by two dielectric layers with high refractive indices. These dielectric/metal/dielectric (DMD) multilayer structures, such as ZTO/Ag/ZTO,90 MoO3/Ag/WO3,91 WO3/Ag/WO3,92 ZnS/Ag/WO3,93 and V2O5/Ag/V2O594 have been explored as the top TEs for ST-PSCs. The inner dielectric layer adjacent to the light-harvesting layer serves as a buffer to improve selective charge extraction and defines the electrode polarity, while the outer dielectric layer acts as a light-coupling layer to modulate the optical properties and opto-electrical response of ST-PSCs.
Recently, silver nanowire (Ag NW)-based TEs have been shown to provide high flexibility, electrical conductivity and transparency comparable to ITO. However, Ag NW electrodes suffer from a rough surface topology. This is especially problematic when Ag NWs are applied as the bottom (substrate-facing) electrode, as the mesh delivers an extremely rough surface which can lead to significant inter-electrode shunting. There are several proof-of-concept strategies reported for improving the rough surface topology of Ag NW electrodes, including polymer matrices such as poly-acrylates or polyvinyl alcohols, high pressure to mechanically flatten the surface, and a combination thereof.95–97 Furthermore, to avoid negative interactions between the solution-deposited top Ag NWs and the underlying photoactive layer, Lee et al. used a lamination method to transfer Ag NWs to the top of an organic solar cell, thereby demonstrating the first ST-PSC with an Ag NW top electrode.95 Chen et al. and Krantz et al. successively produced ST-PSCs using spray-coated Ag NWs as top electrodes, which significantly simplified the device fabrication.48,98 Guo et al. used a doctor blading technique to deposit the bottom Ag NWs and a spray-coating technique to deposit the top Ag NWs; this allowed for only negligible interactions with the underlying interface and active layers. As a result, a high shunt resistance of 86.1 kΩ cm2 was obtained and the fully printed semi-transparent devices showed a high FF of >60% with a PCE of 2.9% and a high transmittance of 56% at 550 nm.99 Later on, they demonstrated semi-transparent organic solar modules using printed Ag NWs as the top electrode, on both rigid glass and flexible PET substrates. In combination with high resolution fs-laser patterning, large-area modules (64 cm2) with a high geometrical fill factor of more than 95% and a total width of the interconnection regime of less than 200 micron were manufactured.100
4.3 Semi-transparent tandem PSCs
Compared with inorganic solar cells and PVSCs, the lower efficiencies obtained in single-junction PSCs arise primarily from the relatively narrow absorption spectra and poor carrier mobility of the polymers. The narrow absorption spectra lead to an inefficient utilization of the full solar spectrum, while poor carrier mobility constrains the thickness of the light-harvesting layer for the sake of high charge-extraction efficiency, which inevitably leads to an insufficient absorption of incident photons. Moreover, PSCs are usually subject to thermalization losses, where incident photons with higher energies than the optical bandgap relax to the excitonic ground-state energy.101,102 By stacking individual cells in a series with complementary absorption characteristics, tandem architectures have proven to be an effective approach to tackling the limitations of single-junction PSCs due to their broader absorption spectrum. Furthermore, low-energy photons can be converted by the low-bandgap sub-cell at a lower Voc, while high-energy photons can be converted by the large bandgap sub-cell at a high Voc, which suppress thermalization losses. The Voc produced by an optimized tandem cell is equal to the sum of the Voc of the individual sub-cells. According to the results obtained by Dennler et al., a polymer-tandem cell with optimally selected materials can be expected to achieve a PCE of up to 15%.103 Polymer-tandem cells with PCEs over 11% had already been demonstrated prior to this work, suggesting that the tandem architecture provides a highly effective path to advance high-performance PSCs.104–106
The tandem cell concept can also be adopted to improve ST-PSCs. The performance data are summarized in Table 3. By using a multilayer configuration of PFN/TiO2/PEDOT to electrically connect the sub-cells and Ag nanowires as the top transparent electrode, Chen et al. demonstrated a tandem ST-PSC that featured two new low-bandgap polymers, PBDTT-SeDPP and PBDTT-FDPPC12, which sensitize well in different regions of the infrared (IR) spectrum and minimize optical absorption in the visible spectrum (Fig. 6a–c).107 The major difference in chemical structure between these two polymers is the flank group between the BDT and DPP units; this is furan in the case of PBDTT-FDPP-C12, and selenophene for PBDTT-SeDPP. The absorption of PBDTT-FDPP-C12 was blue-shifted by ∼50 nm when compared with PBDTT-SeDPP, but the major absorption was still localized in the IR range of 650–800 nm due to the weaker electron donating capability of furan. A tandem ST-PSC composed of a PBDTT-FDPPC12:PC61BM front sub-cell and a PBDTT-SeDPP:PC61BM back sub-cell delivered a high PCE of 6.4% with an AVT of 43%. Given that PC71BM has better absorption properties than PC61BM in the visible range, tandem ST-PSC performances can be tuned by replacing the PC61BM in the rear cell with PC71BM, resulting in a higher photocurrent, a PCE of 7.3% but a lower AVT of 30%.
Table 3 A summary of different tandem ST-PSC structures with corresponding performances and optical properties




Front cell
Rear cell
PCE @ AVT
CRI @ CCT, CIE (x, y)
Ref.




PBDTT-FDPP-C12:PC61BM
PBDTT-SeDPP:PC61BM
6.4% @ 43% AVT
—

107



PBDTT-FDPP-C12:PC61BM
PBDTT-SeDPP:PC71BM
7.3% @ 30% AVT
—

107



PIDT-phanQ:PC61BM
PIDT-phanQ:PC71BM
6.7% @ 40% AVT
97 @ 5622 K (0.330, 0.339)

108



TQ1:PC71BM
P3TI:PC71BM
4.4% @ 25% AVT
—

61





 Fig. 6  (a) Tandem ST-PSC device structure, (b) absorption spectra of donor and acceptor materials, and (c) photograph of the sub-cells and tandem devices, revealing their various colors and shades of gray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. (d) Schematic representation of the tandem device architecture as well as (e) optical transmittance and photograph of the tandem ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. (f) Schematic device architecture of an ST-tandem solar cell with n sub-cells connected in parallel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. 
Considering that PC61BM and PC71BM exhibit different absorption properties in the visible region, the combination of the same polymer donor with PC61BM and PC71BM acceptors as the BHJ layer is an alternative approach to achieve complementary absorption characteristics (Fig. 6d and e). Chang et al. demonstrate highly efficient tandem ST-PSCs based on the same polymer donor PIDT-phanQ blended with PC61BM and PC71BM as active layers in two sub-cells, which are electrically connected in series via an interconnection layer (PEDOT:PSS/PH1000/ZnO).108 The ST-PSC composed of a PIDT-phanQ:PC61BM (70 nm) front-cell and a PIDT-phanQ:PC71BM (85 nm) back-cell, with a thin Ag film of 10 nm thickness as the top transparent electrode, was found to deliver a high PCE of 6.7% and an AVT of 40%. The color rendering property of this ST-PSC device is also very good, showing a CRI of 97 at CIE (x, y) coordinates of (0.330, 0.339) and a CCT of 5622 K, which is very close to the “white point,” suggesting its applicability for power-generating window designs.
There is another commonly used tandem architecture that stacks two or more prepared ST solar cells separately with the same or different light-harvesting layers on top of each other, as illustrated in Fig. 6f. Tang et al. constructed ST tandem solar cells by mechanically stacking two prepared cells separately, based on a TQ1:PC71BM front-cell to harvest visible light, and a P3TI:PC71BM back-cell to harvest IR light.61 The PCEs of the ST tandem solar cells outperformed the PCEs of the single ST solar cells by approximately 50%, while the corresponding transparency remained decent (∼25%). These promising performance results from ST-PSCs clearly suggest that an organic-based PV technology offers a significant potential for power-generating window applications.
4.4 Photonic crystal-enhanced ST-PSCs
The introduction of LBG materials to harvest NIR photons, as mentioned above, is indeed an efficient approach to improving the performance of ST-PSCs. Nevertheless, only part of the NIR light spectrum is absorbed due to the relatively thin harvesting layer used in ST-PSC devices. Therefore, it is important to develop new methods to re-harvest the lost NIR photons as a way to further improve the performance of ST-PSCs. Coupling the ST-PSC with a reflector, made of photonic crystals (PCs) capable of reflecting light with selected wavelengths back into the cell, was demonstrated as an effective approach to improve the light-harvesting properties of ST-PSCs.18,55,109–112 One-dimensional photonic crystals (1-D PCs, also called Bragg reflectors or dielectric mirrors), consisting of alternating dielectric thin films with different refractive indexes, provide an effective way to manipulate light propagation inside the films. 1-D PCs block incident photons with energies lying in the photonic bandgap. We can define the alternate thicknesses and refractive indexes as d1, d2, n1 and n2, respectively. The optical path of every layer is exactly 1/4 of the center wavelength λ0 and the mathematical relationship between d1, d2, n1 and n2 for a quarter-wave stack in the periodic structure is shown as follows:  where c is the vacuum speed of light. If the reflected light from every interface has an identical phase, then the constructive interference condition is fulfilled when the mathematical relationship above is met. A high reflectance of close to 100% around the center wavelength λ0, is expected for these quarter-wave stack 1-D PCs.113 The optical properties of 1-D PCs can be designed, specifically, by selecting proper dielectric materials with the assistance of optical modeling. For their application in ST-PSCs, rationally designed reflectors can reach nearly 100% transmittance in the visible range and can simultaneously reflect light at different wavelengths, such as in the UV and NIR regions.18,55 Betancur et al. introduced an optimized non-periodic 1-D PC composed of alternating LiF/MoO3 layers with the appropriate thicknesses selected to enhance the UV and NIR reflection for ST-PSCs (Fig. 7a).18 Using PTB7:PC71BM as the photoactive layer and ITO and 10 nm-thick Ag as the two semi-transparent electrodes, they found that the PCE of the ST-PSC device dropped to 3.6% with an AVT of 32%, mainly due to the reduction in Jsc from 14.0 to 8.5 mA cm−2 when compared with the opaque cell. However, photonic crystal-enhanced ST-PSCs showed that the transmittance in the UV and NIR regions drops significantly with a recovered EQE below 400 nm and above 650 nm, resulting in an improved Jsc of 10.5 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 5.2%, while still maintaining an AVT of ∼29% (Fig. 7b and c). To further demonstrate the versatility of using PCs for optical management in ST-PSCs, the appearance of the ST-PSCs may be tuned by adjusting the photon crystal structures and altering the shape of the transmission curves. Therefore, the color of the device can be broadly tuned with a very limited PCE alteration (Fig. 7d). This paves the way for the design and fabrication of novel photovoltaic modules with great potential to be integrated into windows in buildings with esthetic considerations.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic view of the typical ST-OPV device structure and the photonic crystal-enhanced ST-OPV device structure. (b) Experimentally measured transmission for a semi-transparent cell where the top electrode is a 10 nm-thick silver layer (Tn-Ag, red circles) and for a cell that incorporates the photonic crystal (PC-Tn-Ag, green circles). (c) Experimentally measured EQEs for an opaque cell (Tk-Ag, black circles), a semi-transparent cell where the top electrode is a 10 nm-thick silver layer (Tn-Ag, red circles) and a cell incorporating the photonic crystal (PC-Tn-Ag, green circles). (d) Four PC-Tn-Ag devices fabricated with different relative layer thicknesses to tune the color of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. 
5. ST-PVSCs
Since the pioneering discovery by Miyasaka et al. in 2009 disclosing the potential of perovskite photovoltaics, the tide of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites has surged.114 Organometallic perovskite semiconductors posses several desirable properties for photovoltaic applications, including their low exciton binding energy,115,116 their high absorption coefficient115 and their long-charge diffusion lengths and facile tunable bandgaps.115,117,118 Certified efficiencies of the record perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have already reached as high as 22.7% under 1000 W m−2 air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination.119
Compared with inorganic silicon PV technology, halide perovskites can easily be manipulated by adjusting the precursor formula of the three cationic and anionic components. Instead of the partial shading approach, semi-transparent perovskite solar cells (ST-PVSCs) can be fabricated by creating micro-structured perovskite islands or reduced continuous perovskite films.120,121
Similar to organic PV technology, PVSCs can also be processed with low-cost solution processes and are easily scalable. Organic PV technology involves an inherent voltage loss due to the energy required to dissociate tightly bound excitons into free electrons and holes in the device. By contrast, perovskite, in which excitons are easily dissociated, does not exhibit such losses. In addition, perovskite materials are extremely cheap, meaning that up-scaling should be commercially attractive once the concerns of their toxicity and stability are solved. Furthermore, perovskite technology will offer unprecedented short module payback times.122–124 More importantly, it is easier for ST-PVSCs to obtain a spectrally flat absorption across the whole visible spectrum with great color neutrality and high efficiencies.
Significant progress has been achieved in the field of ST-PVSCs over the past few years with most research activities focused on the investigation of transparent electrode (TE) selection and perovskite film formation.
5.1 Transparent electrodes (TEs)
As illustrated in Fig. 8, a LiF could serve as a capping layer on top of an ultra-thin gold electrode (6 nm thick). This would yield high-efficiency single-junction ST-PVSCs, which not only protect the thin gold layer but also enhance device transparency by specular reflection.32 With the help of the optical model based on the transfer matrix formalism, a LiF layer about 100 nm thick was found to be optimal for allowing more transmittance and maintaining a high Jsc for any given thickness of the perovskite layer while also reducing the specular reflection of the device. The opaque device showed a PCE of 11.63%, while the PCE of the ST-PVSC device dropped to 7.3% with an AVT of 22% and neutral color properties (0.36; 0.37). These results could be attributed to the reduction in perovskite film thickness and Jsc from 18.38 to 13.43 mA cm−2. A dielectric–metal–dielectric (DMD) multilayer composed of a MoO3–Au–MoO3 stack has also been developed as the top electrode for ST-PVSCs, with PCEs of 5.5% and 13.6% and AVTs of 31% and 7%, respectively.125 A transparent conductive oxide, In2O3:H, prepared by radio-frequency room-temperature magnetron sputtering has been shown to be a promising TE for ST-PVSC due to its high mobility and superior visible and NIR transmittance. The corresponding ST-PVSC showed a steady-state efficiency of 14.2% and a 72% AVT in the NIR region.126 By taking advantage of the plasmon coupling between Ag nanocubes and the thin transparent electrode, Tatsuma et al. developed a high performance ST-PVSC with a PCE of 6% and a visual transparency index of 28% by by considering the human luminosity function.127
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic layout of a ST-PVSC and chemical structures of the organic hole and electron blocking materials. (b) Photograph of a ST-PVSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. (c) Energy diagram of the devices with a ZnO layer between the PC61BM and the Ag (or Ag NWs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. (d) Schematic illustration of the ST-PVSC architecture. (e) Optical transmittance and photograph of a ST-PVSC. (f) Stability investigation of ST-PVSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. (g) Photos of ST-PVSCs with transparent graphene electrodes. (h) The average PCEs of ST-PVSCS as a function of transmittance at a wavelength of 700 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
In order to demonstrate “heat-rejecting and energy-generating” ST-PVSCs by reflecting or rejecting the NIR part of solar energy for interior cooling with minimal electrical energy consumption, Yoo et al. introduced a new TE made of MoOx/Ag/ZnS, which shows high reflectance in the NIR and selective transmittance in the visible regions. The corresponding ST-PVSCs with thermal-mirror functionality delivered a promising PCE of 13.3% and an AVT of 7.42% (wavelength range = 380–750 nm), accompanied by an excellent NIR rejection rate of 85.5%.31 Riedl et al. reported air-resilient and self-encapsulating thermostable ST-PVSCs based on a SnOx/Ag/SnOx top electrode. This exhibited an efficiency of 11.8% along with an average transmittance of 17% in the visible region (λ = 500–750 nm) and ∼70% average transmittance in the near-infrared region (λ > 800 nm).128
Despite the many advantages of thin metal films, they are prepared by an energy-intensive vacuum evaporation process. So it is also important to explore in parallel solution-processed TEs, which are compatible with roll-to-roll high-throughput coating techniques, for the construction of ST-PVSCs. As one of the most promising alternatives to commercial ITO electrodes, silver nanowires (Ag NWs) exhibit excellent electronic and optical properties of <20 ohm sq−1 sheet resistance and ∼90% transmittance at 550 nm, respectively. They have already been successfully demonstrated as a TE in copper indium gallium diselenide solar cells, silicon solar cells, dye sensitized and polymer solar cells.129–133 Nevertheless, their application for PVSCs is subject to the light-harvesting layer's high susceptibility to solution-processed Ag NWs.134,135 Guo et al. reported a unique spray-coating of Ag NWs, used as the top electrode for ST-PVSCs, with an ultra-fast drying time (on the order of microseconds) to avoid solvent damage to the underlying layers.135 The AgNWs were applied on the ZnO-coated PCBM ETL, in which ZnO served as an energy modifier to facilitate better electron transport and as a capping layer to suppress possible leaking paths where the perovskite is not covered by the PCBM. As a result, a high PCE of 8.5% along with an AVT of 28.4% for ST-PVSCs (Fig. 8c) was achieved. One of the disadvantages of AgNW TEs is their ease of degradation in ambient conditions due to oxidation. To circumvent this problem, Chang et al. demonstrated an encapsulation layer of Al2O3 with the atomic layer deposition method and low gas-permeability to enhance the stability of Ag NWs (Fig. 8d and e).136 Besides a high PCE of 16.5% for the opaque cell, the resulting ST-PVSC showed not only a record high PCE of 10.8% along with a decent AVT of 25.5%, but also excellent stability after being exposed to the ambient environment (30 °C, 65% relative humidity) for over 40 days (Fig. 8f).
Conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS is one of the most widely explored TEs because of its high conductivity (over 1000 S cm−1), high transmittance (over 90% at 100 nm) and solution processibility.138,139 To avoid damage to the perovskite film by direct contact with the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution, a film-transfer lamination technique was used to achieve a ST-PVSC with a PCE of 2.9% at an area of 1 cm2 and 10.1% at an area of about 0.06 cm2, along with an AVT of 7.3%.140
Due to its smooth surface, good conductivity and high transparency, graphene is another candidate for transparent electrodes in ST-PVSCs.141 By laminating double-layer graphene as the top transparent electrodes, prepared by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) approach, the graphene-modified devices delivered maximum PCEs of 5.98% (AVT: 21.76%) and 12.02% ± 0.32% (AVT: 5.84%), respectively (Fig. 8g and h). The lamination method can also be applied to demonstrate hysteresis-free and ambient stable ST-PVSCs by laminating FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA and PEDOT:PSS/ITO with the assistance of additives. The resultant devices showed AVTs ranging from 17.3% to 6.3% and the corresponding PCE varied from 12.55% to 15.8%.137
5.2 Perovskite film formation
Tuning the transparency of devices by simply reducing the thickness of the perovskite layer has been studied extensively.121,141 In the first report of ST-PVSCs, however, Eperon et al. de-wetted the perovskite films to generate a micro-structured array of MAPbI3−xClx islands.120 The de-wetting regions are free of perovskite, therefore they were visibly transparent while the perovskite islands absorbed visible light. PCEs of ∼5% were achieved for an AVT of ∼20% in full devices with semi-transparent gold cathodes (Fig. 9a–c). The corresponding color coordinates (A–C) were very close to the AM 1.5 spectrum and the reference D65 daylight illuminant in the low colorfulness region of the chromacity diagram, representing excellent color neutrality (Fig. 9d). Later on, they further demonstrated a neutral-colored micro-structured ST-PVSC with a PCE of 5.2% and an AVT of 28% by incorporating a FAPbI3 perovskite layer and a transparent conductive electrode based on a nickel mesh (Fig. 9e) fabricated by the lamination method.142 In order to pattern perovskite thin films with periodic structure on a photonic length scale, a double templating approach was introduced, achieving a PCE of 9.5% at a 28% AVT for a ST-PVSC (Fig. 9f and g).143 To deposit a semi-transparent perovskite film with a grid pattern, a direct mesh-assisted assembly deposition technique was introduced. The working principle is to wet the perovskite precursor solution along the walls of a screen printing mesh on top of the mesoporous TiO2 electron-transporting layer, which resulted in a patterned perovskite film.144 The transparency could be adjusted by modulating the precursor solution concentrations and mesh openings of the printing screen, resulting in a PCE of 4.98% at a 19% AVT (wavelength range = 400–800 nm) for ST-PVSCs. By filling anodized aluminum oxide pores with a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx precursor solution via a spin-infiltration process, Moon et al. demonstrated facile adjustment of optical transparency and device performance enabled by control of the relative volume fraction and the spatial distribution of the vertically aligned perovskite pillars. As a result, excellent PCEs of 9.6% and a whole-device AVT of 33.4% (wavelength range = 400–800 nm) were achieved.145 Brabec et al. introduced two robust protocols for the preparation of perovskite films with sub-100 nm feature sizes; one using a solvent-induced crystallization procedure with a rapid drying step to afford ST-PVSCs with a PCE of 7.8% and an AVT of 37%, while another is a solvent–solvent extraction procedure to yield a PCE of 3.6% and an AVT of 46%.146 Nakamura et al. reported that polyvinyl-pyrrolidone (PVP) doping decreases the perovskite crystal size (from 40 to 15 nm), enhancing the thermal stability against decomposition into PbI2, to achieve a high-performance ST-PVSC with a PCE of 5.36% and a total AVT of 34%.147
 Fig. 9  (a) Semi-transparent neutral-colored perovskite solar cells. (b) SEM image of the top surface of a representative film of perovskite islands (paler regions) on a TiO2-coated FTO substrate. (c) Photograph through a typical semi-transparent perovskite film formed on glass, demonstrating neutral color and semi-transparency. (d) Color coordinates of a perovskite film, a D102 dye-tinted cell, the D65 standard daylight illuminant, and AM 1.5 illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. (e) Photograph of a fully semi-transparent FAPbI3 device, including the laminated transparent cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. (f) Fabrication steps for patterned oxide scaffolds. (g) SEM image of SiO2 honeycomb scaffolds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. 
5.3 Cathode and anode modification
For the cathode, Chang et al. presented an effective and facile approach to enhance the performance and stability of ST-PVSCs by incorporating a solution-processed thiol-functionalized cationic surfactant (11-mercaptoundecyl)trimethylammonium bromide (MUTAB) as a cathode buffer layer.148 The covalent Ag–S bonds formed by the thiol functional groups on MUTAB and incidental Ag atoms led to a decrease in contact resistance between the active layer and the Ag electrode, as well as an improvement in ambient and thermal stability and a reduction in the percolation threshold of the ultrathin Ag film. This resulted in a highly efficient ST-PVSC, with a PCE of 11.8% and an AVT of 20% (Fig. 10a and b). At the anode, thiourea vapor was reported to serve as a ‘molecular glue’ leading to favorable surface interactions between the PEDOT:PSS film and the polarizable, soft inorganic species (e.g. I, Pb) in the perovskite precursors. This resulted in a defect-free perovskite film with high coverage and an overall high-performance ST-PVSC, with a PCE of 8.2% and an AVT of 34% (wavelength range = 400–800 nm).149 Jen et al. replaced PEDOT:PSS with a CuSCN hole transport layer with superior transparency across the UV-Vis-NIR spectrum to achieve high-performance ST-PVSCs.150 The corresponding opaque device delivered a high PCE of up to 16.0% with enhanced ambient stability. By optimizing the perovskite film thickness in the ST-PVSC, a PCE of 10.3% and a 25% AVT were demonstrated (Fig. 10c). Most recently, Yip et al. modified both the anode and cathode interfaces of p-i-n CH3NH3PbI3 PVSCs to achieve large Voc and FF (Fig. 10d). At the anode, a surface-modified NiO served as an efficient hole transport layer with the appropriate surface properties for promoting the formation of a smooth perovskite film with high coverage. At the cathode, a fullerene bisadduct, C60(CH2)(Ind), with a shallow LUMO level was introduced to replace the commonly used PC61BM as an alternative electron transport layer. This yielded better energy-level matching with the conduction band of the perovskite layer. Therefore, the Voc, FF and PCE of the opaque cells increased from 1.05 V, 0.74 and 16.2% to 1.13 V, 0.80 and 18.1% when the PCBM was replaced by C60(CH2)(Ind). With the advantages of high Voc and FF, ST-PVSCs using an ultrathin transparent Ag film as the TE showed an outstanding PCE of 12.6% with a corresponding AVT of 21.5%.151 This is among the highest reported so far for single-junction semi-transparent solar cells (Table 4).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture and chemical structures of CBL materials. (b) Photographs of MUTAB CBL-based ST devices with 8 nm Ag. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. (c) Photovoltaic and optical performance of a CuSCN-modified ST-PVSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. (d) Photovoltaic and optical performance of a ST-PVSC with dual interfacial modification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
Table 4 A summary of different ST-PVSC structures with corresponding performances and optical properties




ST-PVSC device architecture
Opaque cell PCE (%)
ST-PVSC PCE @ AVT
Ref.




ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD/CH3NH3PbI3/PC60BM/Au/LiF
11.63
7.3% @ 22% AVT

32



6.4% @ 29% AVT


FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3–Au–MoO3
—
13.6% @ 7% AVT

125



5.5% @ 31% AVT


FTO/ZnO/PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/In2O3:H
—
14.2% @ 72% AVT (near-infrared region)

126



FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Ag/ZnS
14.9
13.3% @ 7.42% AVT (85.5% NIR rejection)

31



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/AZO/SnOx/Ag/SnOx
—
11.8% @ 29% AVT

128



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/ZnO NPs/Ag NWs
10.68
8.5% @ 28.4% AVT

135



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/ALD ZnO/Ag NWs/ALD Al2O3
16.5
10.8% @ 25.5% AVT

136



FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS
—
10.1% (0.06 cm2), 2.9% (1 cm2) @ 7.3% AVT

140



FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS + D-sorbitol/graphene
—
12.02% @ 5.84% AVT

141





5.98% @ 21.76% AVT


FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/PEDOT:PSS/ITO
—
15.8% @ 6.3% AVT

137





12.55% @ 17.3% AVT


FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
—
8% @ 7% AVT

120





3.5% @ 30% AVT


FTO/TiO2/HC(NH2)2PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/Ni mesh/PET
—
5.2% @ 28% AVT

142



FTO/compact-TiO2/SiO2 honeycomb/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
—
9.5% @ 28% AVT

143



FTO/compact-TiO2/Mesoporous-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 grid/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
—
4.98% @ 19% AVT

144



FTO/compact-TiO2/anodized aluminum oxide/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
—
9.6% @ 33.4% AVT

145



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/ZnO/Ag NWs
—
7.8% @ 37% AVT

146





3.6% @ 46% AVT


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx + PVP/CYTOT/PC61BM/PEIE/Ag
—
5.36% @ 34% AVT

147



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/MUTAB/Ag
16.5
11.8% @ 20.8% AVT

148



ITO/PEDOT:PSS + thioureavaportreatment/CH3NH3PbI3/PC71BM/C60/Al
10.3
8.2% @ 34% AVT

149



ITO/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/bis-C60/Ag
16.0
10.3% @ 25% AVT

150



ITO/NiO/DEA/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/PN4N/Ag
18.1
12.6% @ 21.5% AVT

151





6. Conclusion
This review provides an overview of recent advancements in semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells for power-generating window applications. Specific emphasis was placed on separately discussing the physical phenomena govering the performance of semi-transparent PVs, including the optical assessment required for applications, the selection of transparent electrodes and device architectures, as well as the microstructure and absorption properties of the light-harvesting materials. Integration of semi-transparent photovoltaic products as power-generating windows in buildings is a new market that will continue to grow because of the increasing demand for sustainable energy in parallel to reducing the area footprint of PV technology. In contrast to opaque cells, the performance characterization of ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs does not only depend on the electric power conversion efficiency (PCE) but also on their optical parameters to ensure visual comfort. Although the current Si-based ST-PV technology achieves adequate electric performance, it compromises on the choice of colors and aesthetic appeal. This suggests a huge opportunity for polymer-based and perovskite-based PVs. The optical properties of organic semiconductors can be adjusted by modulating their chemical structures and it is even possible to design polymers with absorption localized only in the infrared region. This makes them capable of achieving high efficiency without sacrificing transparency in the visible range for ST-PSCs. Halide perovskites can be easily adapted by manipulating their bandgap via adjusting their compositions. The excellent combination of high PCE, low-cost solution processibility and the tunability of optical properties also makes ST-PVSCs a strong candidate for power generating window applications. However, many challenges remain to be solved before semi-transparent polymer and perovskite solar cells can be considered for real-life applications.
First, the ST-PV performance should be further improved by incorporating novel light harvesting materials and optimizing device architectures. It is preferred that most photons from the NIR and UV wavelengths be absorbed, while those in the visible range of the solar spectrum should be transmitted for an ideal light-harvesting layer in ST-PVs. LBG organic semiconductors show great potential for fulfilling this strict requirement as their absorption can not only extend to over 1000 nm, their absorption spectrum can also be tuned to localize in the NIR region instead of spreading over the entire spectrum. These unique properties can be achieved through novel chemical design and bandgap engineering of organic materials. Similarly, the bandgap of halide perovskites can easily be manipulated by adjusting the precursor formula of the three different cationic and anionic components. However, the environmental toxicity of Pb in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells still remains an issue, which has triggered intensive research on seeking alternative Pb-free perovskite materials for solar cell applications. In addition to the choice of light harvesting materials, the device structure also critically affects the overall performance of ST-PVs and the optical properties of the cells can be tuned by the device architectures. For example, the color and transparency of the devices can be tuned by introducing periodic 1D dielectric mirrors with enhanced optical reflection in a selected wavelength range for re-harvesting unabsorbed photons. With the increasing complexity of device structures, optical simulation offers a powerful tool to predict the optical properties of ST-PVs, providing important guidelines to design ST-PVs with the desired balance between power generation and optical transparency.
Second, highly transparent and conductive materials for the transparent electrodes of ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs are urgently needed. Scaling ST-PVs to the sizes necessary for window integration with minimal reduction in performance also requires improvement in transparent electrodes. Ideally, the transparent electrodes should be composed of low cost and abundant elements, have good tolerance to defects and be easy to pattern. However, the high cost of vacuum sputtering and evaporating technology for transparent conductive oxide and thin metallic film electrodes may limit the mass-production of ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs. Many ST-PV architectures are subjected to damage from solution-based transparent electrodes including nanowires and nanotubes. Therefore, ultimately, new transparent electrodes with the desired optical, electrical and processing properties are required for ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs.
Third, the long-term stability of ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs is a prerequisite for real applications, which should be substantially improved in future studies. It is well known that organic semiconductors and perovskite materials are vulnerable to oxygen and moisture, particular under light illumination. Particular attention should be paid to the synergic optimization of the blend microstructure of organic films, the composition of perovskite materials and the device interface contact for highly stable ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs. Eventually, development of reliable encapsulation methods will be the key factor to prolong the lifetime of ST-PSCs/ST-PVSCs. For buildings and windows, an expected lifetime of at least 5–25 years must be assured for smart windows (e.g. low-E and electrochromic windows) from the building industry's perspective.152–154 The replacement of these conventional smart windows typically requires complete renewal of the window glass once they reach the end of their lifetime. However, ST-PSCs and ST-PVSCs may provide greater flexibility for installation and replacement as they can be either integrated directly into facades or other areas of buildings as replacements for conventional building materials or retrofitted onto existent areas as laminates on the inside of windows. Therefore, the specific lifetime targets and replacement logistics depend on the different integration procedures of ST-PVs and windows, which will ultimately be defined by both the energy and cost payback times. The predicted energy payback times for both organic and perovskite PV technologies are as low as only weeks or months, making them a great candidate for power generating window applications.155–159
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
The work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21761132001, 91633301, and 51573057), the Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2017YFA0206600 and 2014CB643505), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (No. 201607020010 and 2017A050503002), and Peacock Team Project funding from Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant No. KQTD2015033110182370). CJB acknowledges funding from DFG within the Sino-German project cooperation.
Notes and references
A Snapshot of Global PV (1992–2014) Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme, International Energy Agency, 2014, http://www.iea-pvps.org/fileadmin/dam/public/report/technical/PVPS_report_A_Snapshot_of_Global_PV_-_1992-2014.pdf.
P. Gagnon, et al., Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Technical Potential in the United States Report no. NREL/PR 6A20 65586, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2016.
Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) Data, US Energy Information Administration, 2012, http://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/data/2012/8.
2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) Data, US Energy Information Adminstration, 2009, http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/index.php?view=characteristics.
G. Y. Yoo, J.-s. Jeong, S. Lee, Y. Lee, H. C. Yoon, V. B. Chu, G. S. Park, Y. J. Hwang, W. Kim, B. K. Min and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14817–14826 CAS .
L. Wen, Q. Chen, X. Hu, H. Wang, L. Jin and Q. Su, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11076–11086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Lee, J. Y. Lee, S. Seo and L. J. Guo, Light Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e215 CrossRef .
C. J. Traverse, R. Pandey, M. C. Barr and R. R. Lunt, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 849–860 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Larsen-Olsen, F. Machui, B. Lechene, S. Berny, D. Angmo, R. Søndergaard, N. Blouin, W. Mitchell, S. Tierney and T. Cull, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Schmidt, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. E. Carlé, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500569 CrossRef .
K. Hwang, Y.-S. Jung, Y.-J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. Lin, K. Zhang, X. F. Jiang, K. Mahmood, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502563 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chueh, S.-C. Chien, H.-L. Yip, J. F. Salinas, C.-Z. Li, K.-S. Chen, F.-C. Chen, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, S. Zhang, W. Zhao, H. Yao and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3603–3605 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Drolet, Organic Photovoltaic: Efficiency and Lifetime Challenges for Commercial Viability, 2012 MRS Spring Meeting & Exhibit, San Francisco, CA, Moscone West Convention Center, Marriott Marquis, 2012.
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Waldauf, H. Azimi, A. Seemann, K. Forberich, J. Hauch, M. Scharber, K. Hingerl and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1592–1598 CrossRef CAS .
R. Betancur, P. Romero-Gomez, A. Martinez-Otero, X. Elias, M. Maymó and J. Martorell, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 995–1000 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Geusebroek, R. van den Boomgaard, A. W. M. Smeulders and T. Gevers, Pattern Recognit. Lett., 2003, 24, 1653–1662 CrossRef .

          J. Schanda, Colorimetry Understanding the CIE System, John Wiley & Sons, USA,  2007, pp. 2071–2073 Search PubMed .
N. Lynn, L. Mohanty and S. Wittkopf, Build. Sci., 2012, 54, 148–158 Search PubMed .
L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Waldauf, H. Azimi, A. Seemann, K. Forberich, J. Hauch, M. Scharber, K. Hingerl and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1592–1598 CrossRef CAS .
K. Forberich, F. Guo, C. Bronnbauer and C. J. Brabec, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 1051–1058 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Chen, J.-F. Salinas, H.-L. Yip, L. Huo, J. Hou and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9551–9557 CAS .
C. C. Chueh, S. C. Chien, H. L. Yip, J. F. Salinas, C. Z. Li, K. S. Chen, F. C. Chen, W. C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li, Y. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301645 CrossRef .
W. Yu, X. Jia, M. Yao, L. Zhu, Y. Long and L. Shen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23732–23740 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Peng, C. Cai, Z. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Zheng, J. Yang, L. Hou and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11821–11828 CAS .
C.-W. Chen, S.-Y. Hsiao, C.-Y. Chen, H.-W. Kang, Z.-Y. Huang and H.-W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9152–9159 CAS .
H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, J. Ha, N.-G. Park and S. Yoo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502466 CrossRef .
C. Roldan-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, R. Betancur, G. Longo, C. Momblona, F. Jaramillo, L. Camacho and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2968–2973 CAS .
F. Guo, X. Zhu, K. Forberich, J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, M. Halik, S. Spallek, B. Butz and E. Spiecker, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, Z. Hong, Z. Xu, G. Li, R. A. Street and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6642–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C.-C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Liao, H.-J. Jhuo, P.-N. Yeh, Y.-S. Cheng, Y.-L. Li, Y.-H. Lee, S. Sharma and S.-A. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Chen, C. Cui, Y. Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q. D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1562–1564 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip, Y. Sun, O. Acton and K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2696–2698 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Beiley, M. G. Christoforo, P. Gratia, A. R. Bowring, P. Eberspacher, G. Y. Margulis, C. Cabanetos, P. M. Beaujuge, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 7020–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, P. You, S. Liu and F. Yan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wang, Z. Ma, Z. Zhang, K. Vandewal, P. Henriksson, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang and M. R. Andersson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14244–14247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, L. Dou, R. Zhu, C.-H. Chung, T.-B. Song, Y. B. Zheng, S. Hawks, G. Li, P. S. Weiss and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7185–7190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, J. Gao, C.-C. Chen, J. You and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 825–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H. L. Yip, Y. Li, C. Z. Li, C. S. Hsu, Y. J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5084–5090 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bel Hadj Tahar, T. Ban, Y. Ohya and Y. Takahashi, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2631–2645 CrossRef .
F. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Hu, T. Vergote, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606574 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, C. Yang, H. Yao, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, G. Jia, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703080 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, L. Chen, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, L. Hu, B. Xie and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pastorelli, P. Romero-Gomez, R. Betancur, A. Martinez-Otero, P. Mantilla-Perez, N. Bonod and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400614 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Zou, H.-L. Yip, K.-S. Chen, D. F. Zeigler, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2289–2291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S. T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 CrossRef .
L. Huo, S. Zhang, X. Guo, F. Xu, Y. Li and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 9871–9876 CrossRef .
E. Wang, L. Hou, Z. Wang, S. Hellström, F. Zhang, O. Inganäs and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5240–5244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, Z. George, Z. Ma, J. Bergqvist, K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, E. Wang, L. M. Andersson, M. R. Andersson and F. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1467–1476 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C.-C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huo, J. Hou, S. Zhang, H. Y. Chen and Y. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1500–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Yan, T.-K. Lau, J. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701308 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bauer, T. Wahl, J. Hanisch and E. Ahlswede, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 073307 CrossRef .
A. Colsmann, A. Puetz, A. Bauer, J. Hanisch, E. Ahlswede and U. Lemmer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 415–419 CrossRef CAS .
O. Inganäs, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 201–202 CrossRef .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
B. Azzopardi, C. J. Emmott, A. Urbina, F. C. Krebs, J. Mutale and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3741–3753 Search PubMed .
R. García-Valverde, J. A. Cherni and A. Urbina, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 535–558 Search PubMed .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077–2088 RSC .
A. M. Nardes, R. A. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, X. Mei and J. Ouyang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5971–5973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 474–483 CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4927–4936 RSC .
Y. Xia, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5325–5332 CAS .
Y. Xia, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2436–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Zhou, J. Pei, Z. Liu, Y. Li, S. Yao, J. Zhang and W. Tian, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1327–1331 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nickel, A. Puetz, M. Reinhard, H. Do, C. Kayser, A. Colsmann and U. Lemmer, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 535–538 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Kim, H. J. Lee, A. R. b. Mohd Yusoff and J. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. Li, S. Barrau, W. Tian, O. Inganäs and F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Czolk, A. Puetz, D. Kutsarov, M. Reinhard, U. Lemmer and A. Colsmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 386–390 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zou, H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 203301 CrossRef .
E. H. Sondheimer, Adv. Phys., 1952, 1, 1–42 CrossRef .
T. Winkler, H. Schmidt, H. Flügge, F. Nikolayzik, I. Baumann, S. Schmale, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, H.-H. Johannes and T. Rabe, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, S. Ruan, Y. Xu, F. Meng, J. Wang, W. Chen and L. Shen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tao, G. Xie, C. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Dong, F. Meng, X. Kong, L. Shen, S. Ruan and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 053303 CrossRef .
D. Han, H. Kim, S. Lee, M. Seo and S. Yoo, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A513–A521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, Y. Xu, F. Meng, F. Li, S. Ruan and W. Chen, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1223–1226 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1276–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Zeng, Q.-K. Zhang, R.-M. Yu and C.-Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4484–4488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Richter, S. Spallek, I. Litzov, G. J. Matt, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1711–1717 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, P. Kubis, T. Stubhan, N. Li, D. Baran, T. Przybilla, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18251–18257 CAS .
F. Guo, P. Kubis, T. Przybilla, E. Spiecker, A. Hollmann, S. Langner, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401779 CrossRef .
J. Jo, J.-R. Pouliot, D. Wynands, S. D. Collins, J. Y. Kim, T. L. Nguyen, H. Y. Woo, Y. Sun, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4783–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E67–E71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, T. Ameri, P. Denk, K. Forberich, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. b. M. Yusoff, D. Kim, H. P. Kim, F. K. Shneider, W. J. da Silva and J. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 303–316 CAS .
C. C. Chen, W. H. Chang, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, J. You, J. Gao, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5670–5677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, K. Gao, R. Xia, Z. Wu, C. Sun, J. Cao, L. Qian, W. Li, S. Liu and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chen, L. Dou, J. Gao, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 9, 2714–2720 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H. L. Yip, C. Z. Li, Y. Li, C. S. Hsu, Y. J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 464–470 Search PubMed .
Y. Galagan, M. G. Debije and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 3093–3102 CrossRef .
W. Yu, L. Shen, Y. Long, W. Guo, F. Meng, S. Ruan, X. Jia, H. Ma and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 153307 CrossRef .
W. Yu, L. Shen, P. Shen, Y. Long, H. Sun, W. Chen and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 6, 599–605 Search PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Shen, P. Shen, F. Meng, Y. Long, Y. Wang, T. Lv, S. Ruan and G. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 198–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Bendickson, J. P. Dowling and M. Scalora, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1996, 53, 4107–4121 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Research Cell Efficiency Records, NREL (http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/), accessed on February 2018.
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, S. Wang, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3989–3993 CAS .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 Search PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, The, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Kim and T. Tatsuma, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10699 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, K. O. Brinkmann, T. Hu, N. Pourdavoud, T. Becker, T. Gahlmann, R. Heiderhoff, A. Polywka, P. Görrn, Y. Chen, B. Cheng and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602599 CrossRef .
D.-S. Leem, A. Edwards, M. Faist, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. de Mello, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4371–4375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stubhan, J. Krantz, N. Li, F. Guo, I. Litzov, M. Steidl, M. Richter, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 248–251 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kim, Y. Won, K. Woo, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2462–2471 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Jung, J.-S. Huang, T. Goh and A. D. Taylor, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400186 CrossRef .
G. Y. Margulis, M. G. Christoforo, D. Lam, Z. M. Beiley, A. R. Bowring, C. D. Bailie, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xue, Z. Hu, J. Liu, J. Lin, C. Sun, Z. Chen, C. Duan, J. Wang, C. Liao, W. M. Lau, F. Huang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19598–19603 CAS .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, K.-T. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y.-C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7119 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, M. Lee, M. Song, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2922–2927 CAS .
Y. Xia, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2436–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bu, Z. Liu, M. Zhang, W. Li, A. Zhu, F. Cai, Z. Zhao and Y. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17776–17781 CAS .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, S. D. Stranks, M. B. Johnston, T. Watson, D. A. Worsley and H. J. Snaith, The, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 129–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Horantner, W. Zhang, M. Saliba, K. Wojciechowski and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2041–2047 CAS .
S. Aharon, M. Layani, B.-E. Cohen, E. Shukrun, S. Magdassi and L. Etgar, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500118 CrossRef .
H.-C. Kwon, A. Kim, H. Lee, D. Lee, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601055 CrossRef .
C. O. R. Quiroz, I. Levchuk, C. Bronnbauer, M. Salvador, K. Forberich, T. Heumüller, Y. Hou, P. Schweizer, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24071–24081 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, K. Shoyama, W. Sato and E. Nakamura, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502317 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chang, Y.-C. Chang, W.-K. Huang, K.-T. Lee, A.-C. Cho and C.-C. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7119–7127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bag and M. F. Durstock, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 542–548 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jung, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500486 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, Y. Bai, M. Liu, R. Xia, Z. Hu, Z. Chen, X.-F. Jiang, F. Huang, S. Yang, Y. Matsuo, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602333 CrossRef .
C. M. Lampert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 52, 207–221 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, S.-H. Lee, C. Edwin Tracy, J. Roland Pitts, B. A. Gregg and H. M. Branz, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2125–2130 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ng and N. Mithraratne, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 736–745 CrossRef .
N. Espinosa, M. Hosel, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5117–5132 CAS .
R. Rosch, D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Jorgensen, M. Seeland, M. Barenklau, M. Hermenau, E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, U. Wurfel, M. Hosel, H. F. Dam, S. A. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, R. Andriessen, G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoglu, D. Germack, B. Andreasen, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman, H. Hoppe and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6521–6540 Search PubMed .
W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, G. F. Burkhard, R. Cheacharoen and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 404–407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, P. Cossari, G. E. Eperon, S. Colella, F. Fiorito, G. Gigli, H. J. Snaith and A. Listorti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2682–2719 Search PubMed .
J. Gong, S. B. Darling and F. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1953–1968 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Qifan Xue
	Qifan Xue received his BS degree (2013) and PhD degree (2017) in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from the South China University of Technology (SCUT) under the supervision of Prof. Hin-Lap Yip and Prof. Yong Cao. He is currently a lecturer in the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, SCUT. His research focuses on interface, materials and device engineering for highly efficient polymer solar cells and perovskite solar cells.

Christoph J. Brabec
	Christoph J. Brabec holds the chair “materials for electronics and energy technology (i-MEET)” in the materials science department of the Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg. Further, he is the scientific director of the Erlangen division of the Bavarian research institute for renewable energy (ZAE Bayern, Erlangen). He is co-founder of the Energy Campus Nürnberg (EnCN), member of the EnCN e.V board, spokesman of the interdisciplinary center for nanostructured films (IZNF) and member of the ZAE Bayern board. He received his PhD (1995) in physical chemistry from Linz university, joined the group of Prof. Alan Heeger at UCSB for a sabbatical, and continued to work on all aspects of organic semiconductor spectroscopy as assistant professor at Linz university with Prof. Serdar Sariciftci. He joined SIEMENS research labs as project leader for organic semiconductor devices in 2001 and joined Konarka in 2004, where he held the position of CTO before joining the university. He is author and co-author of more than 500 papers, has a Hirsch factor >90 and app. 100 patents and patent applications which are held by Konarka Technologies Inc. and further licensed to Merck Chemicals. He finished his habilitation in physical chemistry in 2003. His major research interests are on the correlation between microstructure and functionality, solution processed semiconductors and devices, high throughput materials engineering, non-destructive and spectroscopic imaging methods, large scale printing methods for device production, photovoltaics and renewable energy systems.

Hin-Lap Yip
	Hin-Lap Yip is a Professor in the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices and the Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Department at the South China University of Technology (SCUT). He studied MSE at the Chinese University of Hong Kong (BSc 2001 and MSc 2003) and completed his PhD degree in MSE in 2008 under the guidance of Prof. Alex Jen at the University of Washington, Seattle. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the same group before joining SCUT through the “Young Thousand Talents” program in 2013. His main research interests are in the fields of polymer and perovskite optoelectronic materials and devices.

Broader context
Integration of semitransparent photovoltaic (ST-PV) products as power generating windows in buildings and automobiles is a new market that will continue to grow owing to the increasing demand for renewable energy. Unlike conventional PV modules whose performance mainly depends on power conversion efficiency, PV systems for solar window applications are evaluated by their color properties, transparency levels and efficiencies. Current ST-PV technology based on silicon may not fulfill the requirements for many window applications as its optical properties are intrinsically difficult to tune. In response to this challenge, polymer solar cells and perovskite solar cells have emerged as new semitransparent PV technologies as the optical absorption of polymer and perovskite semiconductors can be easily tuned through their chemical structures. In addition, they can be printed with low-cost and high-throughput manufacturing processes on plastic substrates, which provide better cost and form factors for this new PV application. In this review article, we summarize recent progress made in the material selection, optical engineering and device architecture design for high-performance semitransparent polymer and perovskite solar cells and discuss challenges for their commercialization. By overcoming these hurdles, we can expect the commercialization of these new semitransparent PV technologies in the near future.


c-Si	300	Broad band	103	26.6
Absorption coefficient: 103
a-Si	1	Broad band	10−1	14.0
Absorption coefficient: 104
Perovskite	0.3	Broad band	101	22.7
Absorption coefficient: 105
Polymer	0.1	Confined band absorption	10−3	11.5
Absorption coefficient: 105–106

 	Fig. 1  Visual comparison of c-Si based semi-transparent PV (a), a-Si based semi-transparent PV (b), ST-PSC (c) and ST-PVSC (d).	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  The spectral response of the color matching functions of (a) CIE 1931 RGB and (b) CIE 1931 XYZ. (c) Spectral power distribution of CIE Standard illuminant D65. (d) The CIE 1931 chromaticity space and also the chromaticities of a black body light source with different temperatures (Planckian locus).	 

 		 
Ri = 100 − 4.6 × ΔEi

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency of semi-transparent OSCs plotted over x and y color coordinates for all transparency values between 10% and 80%, calculated for the model of spectrally limited EQE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. (b) The optical modeling simulation of current density versus active layer thickness under different cathode configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (c) Calculated EQE, transmission spectra (upper inset) and color coordinates (lower insert) of devices with various metal (Ag) thicknesses in a MOM structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. (d) Analysis of optical property within a STOPV including the portion of absorption, reflectance and transmission in the device. Preprinted with permission from ref. 29. (e) Profile of normalized exciton generation rates (obtained for incidence of sunlight with AM 1.5G assumed). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. (f) Optical simulated average reflected sunlight (400–800 nm) of semi-transparent perovskite solar cells. The white square encloses the combination of CH3NH3PbI3 and LiF thicknesses that simultaneously reduces the ARF, enhances the AVT and keeps a high Jsc. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32.	 

 	Fig. 4  The chemical structures of some highly efficient polymer donors and nonfullerene acceptors.	 

ITO/MoO3/PBDTTPD:PC71BM/ZnO/Ag NW	5.0% @ 37% AVT	—	
45

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PIDT-PhanQ:PC71BM/C70-bis/Ag (20 nm)	4.2% @ 32% AVT	98 @ 4711 K (0.359, 0.355)	
26

PDMS/PMMA/graphene/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/ZnO-NP/PEDOT:PSS/graphene/glass	3.4% @ 40% AVT	(0.3109, 0.3357)	
46

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/BCP/Ag (10 nm)/1-D photonic crystal	5.6% @ 28% luminosity	—	
12

1-D photonic crystal/Au (13 nm)/ZnO/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag (10 nm)/ARC (MoO3, LiF)	5.3% @ 21.4% luminosity	—	
39

ITO/PFPA-a/P3TI:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS (PH1000)	2.2% @ 50% (at 550 nm)	—	
47

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTT-DPP:PC71BM/TiO2/Ag NW	4% @ 66% (at 550 nm)	—	
48

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDTT-SeDPP:PC71BM/TiO2/Ag NW	4.5% @ 58% AVT	—	
49

ITO/ZnO/PCPDTFBT:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/UTMF	5.0% @ 47.3% AVT	99 @ 5365 K	
50

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/PF3N-2TNDI/Ag	6.3% @ 24% AVT	95.2 @ 6417 K (0.315, 0.316)	
51

ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:ATT-2/MoO3/Ag	7.74% @ 37% AVT	—	
52

ITO/PEDOT:PSS /PTB7-Th:IEICO-4Cl/PFN-Br/Au	8.38% @ 25.7% AVT	
	
53


 	Fig. 5  (a) Transmission of Ag NW–ZnO NP composite electrodes with different sheet resistances. The inset shows a photograph of the PBDTTPD-based ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. (b) A digital photograph taken through the PIDT-PhanQ-based ST-PSC incorporating a surfactant/20 nm Ag hybrid cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (c) A photograph of the PTB7-based ST-PSC with all-graphene electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. (d) A photograph of the PBDTTT-C-T-based power-generating glass tested from the backside, outdoors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. (e) A photograph taken through PBDTTT-C-T-based ST-PSCs with different Ag thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. (f) A photograph of the PBDTT-DPP-based ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48.	 

PBDTT-FDPP-C12:PC61BM	PBDTT-SeDPP:PC61BM	6.4% @ 43% AVT	—	
107

PBDTT-FDPP-C12:PC61BM	PBDTT-SeDPP:PC71BM	7.3% @ 30% AVT	—	
107

PIDT-phanQ:PC61BM	PIDT-phanQ:PC71BM	6.7% @ 40% AVT	97 @ 5622 K (0.330, 0.339)	
108

TQ1:PC71BM	P3TI:PC71BM	4.4% @ 25% AVT	—	
61


 	Fig. 6  (a) Tandem ST-PSC device structure, (b) absorption spectra of donor and acceptor materials, and (c) photograph of the sub-cells and tandem devices, revealing their various colors and shades of gray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. (d) Schematic representation of the tandem device architecture as well as (e) optical transmittance and photograph of the tandem ST-PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. (f) Schematic device architecture of an ST-tandem solar cell with n sub-cells connected in parallel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic view of the typical ST-OPV device structure and the photonic crystal-enhanced ST-OPV device structure. (b) Experimentally measured transmission for a semi-transparent cell where the top electrode is a 10 nm-thick silver layer (Tn-Ag, red circles) and for a cell that incorporates the photonic crystal (PC-Tn-Ag, green circles). (c) Experimentally measured EQEs for an opaque cell (Tk-Ag, black circles), a semi-transparent cell where the top electrode is a 10 nm-thick silver layer (Tn-Ag, red circles) and a cell incorporating the photonic crystal (PC-Tn-Ag, green circles). (d) Four PC-Tn-Ag devices fabricated with different relative layer thicknesses to tune the color of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic layout of a ST-PVSC and chemical structures of the organic hole and electron blocking materials. (b) Photograph of a ST-PVSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. (c) Energy diagram of the devices with a ZnO layer between the PC61BM and the Ag (or Ag NWs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. (d) Schematic illustration of the ST-PVSC architecture. (e) Optical transmittance and photograph of a ST-PVSC. (f) Stability investigation of ST-PVSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. (g) Photos of ST-PVSCs with transparent graphene electrodes. (h) The average PCEs of ST-PVSCS as a function of transmittance at a wavelength of 700 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Semi-transparent neutral-colored perovskite solar cells. (b) SEM image of the top surface of a representative film of perovskite islands (paler regions) on a TiO2-coated FTO substrate. (c) Photograph through a typical semi-transparent perovskite film formed on glass, demonstrating neutral color and semi-transparency. (d) Color coordinates of a perovskite film, a D102 dye-tinted cell, the D65 standard daylight illuminant, and AM 1.5 illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. (e) Photograph of a fully semi-transparent FAPbI3 device, including the laminated transparent cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. (f) Fabrication steps for patterned oxide scaffolds. (g) SEM image of SiO2 honeycomb scaffolds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the device architecture and chemical structures of CBL materials. (b) Photographs of MUTAB CBL-based ST devices with 8 nm Ag. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. (c) Photovoltaic and optical performance of a CuSCN-modified ST-PVSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. (d) Photovoltaic and optical performance of a ST-PVSC with dual interfacial modification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD/CH3NH3PbI3/PC60BM/Au/LiF	11.63	7.3% @ 22% AVT	
32

6.4% @ 29% AVT
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3–Au–MoO3	—	13.6% @ 7% AVT	
125

5.5% @ 31% AVT
FTO/ZnO/PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/In2O3:H	—	14.2% @ 72% AVT (near-infrared region)	
126

FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Ag/ZnS	14.9	13.3% @ 7.42% AVT (85.5% NIR rejection)	
31

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/AZO/SnOx/Ag/SnOx	—	11.8% @ 29% AVT	
128

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/ZnO NPs/Ag NWs	10.68	8.5% @ 28.4% AVT	
135

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/ALD ZnO/Ag NWs/ALD Al2O3	16.5	10.8% @ 25.5% AVT	
136

FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS	—	10.1% (0.06 cm2), 2.9% (1 cm2) @ 7.3% AVT	
140

FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS + D-sorbitol/graphene	—	12.02% @ 5.84% AVT	
141


	5.98% @ 21.76% AVT
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	—	15.8% @ 6.3% AVT	
137


	12.55% @ 17.3% AVT
FTO/compact-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	—	8% @ 7% AVT	
120


	3.5% @ 30% AVT
FTO/TiO2/HC(NH2)2PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/Ni mesh/PET	—	5.2% @ 28% AVT	
142

FTO/compact-TiO2/SiO2 honeycomb/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	—	9.5% @ 28% AVT	
143

FTO/compact-TiO2/Mesoporous-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 grid/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	—	4.98% @ 19% AVT	
144

FTO/compact-TiO2/anodized aluminum oxide/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	—	9.6% @ 33.4% AVT	
145

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/ZnO/Ag NWs	—	7.8% @ 37% AVT	
146


	3.6% @ 46% AVT
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx + PVP/CYTOT/PC61BM/PEIE/Ag	—	5.36% @ 34% AVT	
147

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/MUTAB/Ag	16.5	11.8% @ 20.8% AVT	
148

ITO/PEDOT:PSS + thioureavaportreatment/CH3NH3PbI3/PC71BM/C60/Al	10.3	8.2% @ 34% AVT	
149

ITO/CuSCN/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/bis-C60/Ag	16.0	10.3% @ 25% AVT	
150

ITO/NiO/DEA/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/PN4N/Ag	18.1	12.6% @ 21.5% AVT	
151


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
