A perspective on photoelectrochemical storage materials for coupled solar batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00461A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00461A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2432-2447A perspective on photoelectrochemical storage materials for coupled solar batteries

        
          
            Yan-Xi 
            Tan†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Zhang†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Lin
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Yaobing 
            Wang
          
        
      *abc
aCAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, and Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou 350002, Fujian, P. R. China. E-mail: wangyb@fjirsm.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
cFujian Science and Technology Innovation Laboratory for Optoelectronic Information of China, Fuzhou 350108, Fujian, P. R. China
Received 
      12th February 2023
    , Accepted 12th May 2023First published on 12th May 2023AbstractSolar-to-electrochemical energy storage in solar batteries is an important solar utilization technology alongside solar-to-electricity (solar cell) and solar-to-fuel (photocatalysis cell) conversion. Integrated solar batteries that integrate photoelectrodes with redox-electrodes realize indirect solar energy storage based on dual energy matching (photo-carriers and redox couples) and two distinct processes (electricity generation and redox reaction). In contrast, the emerging coupled solar batteries allow direct solar energy storage via a photo-coupled ion transfer at photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials with both light harvesting and redox activity. However, issues of rapid charge recombination of these photoelectrochemical storage materials and misaligned band energy of the devices have resulted in a limited efficiency that hampers the development of coupled solar batteries. In this review, we describe how photoelectrochemical storage materials and coupled solar batteries can be designed to promote the coupling between photogenerated charges and redox reactions for high efficiency. We discuss the characteristics of recent photoelectrochemical storage materials in coupling basic functions such as light harvesting and redox activity, along with new approaches to promote charge separation. We also assess the mechanisms and limitations of current device design (e.g., photo-assisted and photo-charged solar batteries), based on which opportunities for a new device with matched band alignments are proposed. Finally, we translate these mechanistic insights and key metrics into standardized protocols for future modifications, innovations, and ultimately, commercialization of coupled solar batteries.

Broader context
Solar energy has been recognized as an abundant and economical alternative energy source to meet the rapidly growing energy demand for the development of human society. The study of light-harvesting, catalysis and energy storage processes in natural photosynthesis has led to the applications of solar-to-electricity and solar-to-fuel conversion, as well as the flourishing of solar-to-electrochemical energy storage. Direct solar-to-electrochemical energy storage in coupled solar batteries is an important solar utilization technology. In this system, solar energy can be stored as electrochemical energy via a photo-coupled ion transfer process using photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials with both light harvesting and redox activity. The stored solar energy can also be released as electricity on demand, completing and re-initiating the loop. However, the rapid charge recombination of photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials and the misaligned band energy of the devices limit the efficiency of coupled solar batteries. In this review, we provide timely a summary of (1) the relationship between the basic functions (e.g., light harvesting, charge separation and redox activity) and the material composition, and (2) the mechanism of photo-coupled ion transfer in coupled solar batteries, and (3) challenges and directions for the rational design of electrode materials and devices. This review aims to provide insight into the coupling mechanism between photocarriers and redox reactions to help explore new types of efficient photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials and coupled solar batteries, and to describe applicable design principles to achieve practical solar-to-electrochemical energy storage efficiency.

1. Introduction
Currently, human society heavily relies on energy, with fossil fuels accounting for approximately 82% of the total consumption.1–4 However, the reserves of non-renewable fossil fuels are limited, and they will eventually be unable to meet the world's rapidly growing energy demands.5,6 Consequently, shifting towards sustainable alternatives derived from renewable resources represents an effective and feasible way to address the energy crisis.7 Solar energy has been recognized as an economical alternative due to its non-polluting nature, low operating cost, and abundant supply.8–11 Nevertheless, the intermittency and diffusivity of sunlight lead to fluctuations in power output, which is a critical challenge for grid applications.12 To address this issue, practical solar energy utilization systems require simultaneous solar energy conversion and storage for on-demand energy supply.13,14 Despite this, storing the electricity generated from solar energy in an efficient and economical way remains a significant challenge for the scientific community.15–18
Solar-to-electrochemical energy storage represents an important solar utilization pathway alongside the well-known solar-to-electricity (solar cell) and solar-to-fuel (photocatalysis cell) conversion.19 Conventional solar-to-electrochemical energy storage technology involves connecting solar cells with batteries, but this method suffers from significant external loss. In recent years, there has been a lot of interest in compacted devices that enable solar-to-electrochemical energy storage, such as integrated solar batteries and solar rechargeable supercapacitors.13,20–25 For example, integrated solar (flow) batteries (Fig. 1a) combine photovoltaic technology with electrochemical energy storage systems by converting solar energy into photo-carriers and electricity using photoelectrodes (PE), followed by charging up redox couples for indirect solar energy storage in photo-charging. This method relies on energy matching between photo-carriers and redox potentials and requires additional redox-electrodes (e.g., carbon cloth, CC) to ensure energy release in discharge.26–29 It also require large-volume electrolytes with a certain concentration of redox species to provide reliable capacity, and are therefore more suitable for stationary applications.13
 Fig. 1  The schematic structures of integrated solar flow battery (a) and coupled solar battery (b). (c) The working principle of photo-assisted and photo-charged coupled solar batteries with two electrodes, respectively. PE: photoelectrode; PSC: photoelectrochemical storage cathode; CC: carbon cloth. M: metal anode, C: cathode, Red.: reduction reaction, Ox.: oxidation reaction, ΔE1: external electric charging voltage, ΔE2: photo-assisted charging voltage, ΔE3: photo-charging voltage, Cx is the reduced state of cathode. 
Unlike integrated solar batteries, coupled solar batteries that couple photoelectric conversion unit and electrochemical redox unit at one photoelectrochemical storage electrode can enable direct and flexible solar energy storage, making it potentially applicable to a variety of fields, such as electric vehicles, mobile/portable electronic devices, and many other areas.1,8,20,21,30–34 Several studies have explored the concept of coupled solar batteries, inspired by a related work in 1976 that utilized a three-electrode battery configuration,35 with a S/S2− cathode, an Ag2S/Ag anode, and a polycrystalline CdSe photoelectrode. However, this approach was limited by issues such as toxicity, complex device structure, high cost, and low energy conversion efficiency. Currently, researchers have developed several strategies to simplify device configuration by designing photoelectrochemical storage cathodes (PSC) that combine the function of photoelectrical conversion and energy storage. PSCs are then coupled with a metal anode to create a two-electrode coupled solar battery (as shown in Fig. 1b), which is expected to achieve high-efficiency, stability, flexibility and cost-effectiveness.11,21,24,31,33,36–39 Generally, PSCs generate abundant electron–hole pairs under illumination, with the electrons migrating to the anode via the external circuit for metal planting, while the holes drive the oxidation reaction (e.g., deintercalation of metal ions) through a process known as photo-coupled ion transfer (PCIT).40 The stored solar energy can be released as electric power in the subsequent discharge, completing and restarting the loop.
While two-electrode coupled solar batteries have been widely studied, achieving efficient solar-to-electrochemical energy storage in practice remains extremely challenging.13,21 One of the key challenges is generating charge carriers with sufficient lifetimes for redox reactions, which is a critical factor in determining efficiency in the photoelectrochemical storage process. However, there is an inherent mismatch between the lifetimes of photoexcited charges (∼ns) and the timescale of surficial redox reactions (>μs) in photoelectrochemical storage materials, resulting in a significant waste of charge carriers. Another challenge is the energetic mismatch between the PSC and anode. In a typical photo-charging process, photoelectrons generated by the PSC can act as reductant sources for the reduction of metal at the anode. However, only photoelectrons with energies of the redox potentials relative to vacuum energy level, which should be higher than those required for metal reduction (e.g., Li/Li+ = −1.46 eV, Zn/Zn2+ = −3.74 eV), can smoothly move to the anode and participate in metal reduction, while the remaining photoelectrons are lost through recombination to the ground state, resulting in significant energy loss. From a materials and device perspective, many strategies have been proposed to address the above challenges, such as extending charge lifetime, accelerating redox reactions of PSC, and promoting charge transfer from PSC to the coupled anode. However, the efficiency of photoelectrochemical storage remains at only ∼1%.21 To achieve efficient photoelectrochemical storage, it is necessary to synergize the coupling between photogenerated charges and redox reactions while promoting charge transfer from the PSC to the anode. Unfortunately, this area has not received sufficient attention.
In this review, we briefly introduce the general concept and principles of coupled solar batteries. We then comprehensively survey the latest advancements in the design of photoelectrochemical storage materials and PSCs for coupled solar batteries. Our objective is to provide insights into the path towards achieving high efficiency and future commercialization by examining various aspects such as the relationships between material fabrication and elementary reactions, device architectures and working mechanisms, and issues related to kinetic/energetic mismatch and long-term stability. Furthermore, we propose a new prototype for coupled solar battery and perform an analysis on a new limiting factor, namely the effectiveness of charge transfer between electrodes. Finally, we present design strategies and standardized protocols to align research efforts towards achieving our goals.
2. General concept and principles of coupled solar battery
One of the modern solar energy conversion and storage technologies is integrated solar battery. The term “integrated” refers to the merging of photovoltaic and redox battery into a single system using a shared redox-active electrolyte. While this technique has proven to be effective, it does require a significant amount of electrolyte, which presents challenges in terms of volumetric energy density and flexibility. These challenges are currently being overcome by the development of photoelectrochemical storage materials. These materials “couple” the functions of light-harvesting and redox capability, allowing for an intimate cascade from solar capture, conversion, and in situ storage, without the need for a massive redox-active electrolyte. Generally, the excited photo-carriers would travel through a transport path to the redox reaction center to complete the solar-to-electrochemical energy storage process. To ensure the efficiency of this process, the rate of photo-carriers transport and redox reaction should be well synergized, given the rapid charge recombination and the sluggish surficial redox reactions. Therefore, the rational design of photoelectrochemical storage materials regarding composition, structure and properties is of great importance.
Solar batteries using photoelectrochemical storage materials can therefore be referred to as coupled solar batteries. Typically, these batteries consist of a metal anode, a separator, and a photoelectrochemical storage cathode (PSC), as illustrated in Fig. 1c. During photo-charging, the PSC is excited by light, which generates electrons and holes. The holes oxidize the reductive cathode (Red) to an oxidation state (Ox), while the photo-generated electrons move through the external circuit to the anode, reducing Mn+ cations to metallic M. This process stores solar energy as electrochemical energy. During discharge, the anode is oxidized to form Mn+ and the cathode is restored to its Red. state, thus producing electricity from the stored solar energy. Coupled solar batteries can be operated with a photo-charging or photo-assisted charging mode. When the LUMO of the PSC is close to or above the redox potential of the metal anode, the majority of photo-generated electrons can move from the cathode to the anode, participating in the metal reduction reaction without external bias, i.e., in a photo-charging mode. When the LUMO is well below the redox potential of the negative metal electrode, the photogenerated electrons can only move to the anode with the assistance of an external bias, i.e., in a photo-assisted charging mode. The charge voltage is determined by the potential difference between the M/Mn+ couple and the LUMO of the PSC, which is lower than the required value of rechargeable batteries (Fig. 1c). Solar batteries designed with photoanodes have light absorption and electron storage taking place in the anode, while holes are extracted to the counter electrode by the redox shuttle of the electrolyte. This review does not cover this area and the interested readers can refer to the excellent works of Prof. Bettina V. Lotsch.41–44
3. Photoelectrochemical storage materials: coupling photo-carriers to redox reactions
Photoelectrochemical storage materials are those designed with a photoelectric conversion unit for light absorption and photo-carriers production and a redox-active unit for storing photo-carriers. Careful design of photoelectrochemical storage materials with accessible photo- and redox-active units is crucial to the synergy between photo-carriers and redox reactions. Until now, researchers have looked into a variety of photoelectrochemical storage materials, ranging from inorganic to organic materials, as well as composites consisting of photoelectric and redox-active materials (Fig. 2a),21 and these materials have been applied as the PSC for several types of coupled solar batteries (Fig. 2b). In this section, how photoelectrochemical storage materials were designed to couple photo-carriers to redox reactions will be discussed in detail.
 Fig. 2  (a) Diagram of the research progress of photoelectrochemical storage materials served as both photoelectrodes and redox couples. Type I: single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials; Type II: multi-component photoelectrochemical storage materials; Type III: photoelectrochemical storage materials with donor–acceptor (D–A) structures. (b) Diagram of the research progress of coupled solar batteries. 
3.1 Single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials
Single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials, also known as bifunctional materials, can be classified into three classes: (i) inorganic metal oxides, (ii) small organic molecules with redox sites and (iii) organic–inorganic hybrid materials. These photoelectrochemical storage materials demonstrate different approaches to enable solar energy storage as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Three stored charge approaches in single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials: (a) the intercalation of metallic ions into the lattice of inorganic metal oxides. (b) The coordination of metallic ions with the redox sites in an organic molecule. (c) The coordination of metallic ions with the redox sites in organic–inorganic hybrid materials. 
Inorganic compounds with clear and diversified structures are considered ideal photoelectrochemical storage materials for solar energy storage. Inorganic bifunctional materials can store solar energy by their photoelectric effect and redox-active lattices. When they absorb light, they create electron–hole pairs that participate in redox reactions of ion insertion/desertion to allow for storing solar energy into electrochemical energy within the lattices (Fig. 3a). For example, V2O5 has been considered a potential bifunctional material for PSC because of its high theoretical capacity, reversible vanadium intervalence charge transfer, as well as dual functions of light harvesting and redox activity. In 2022, Bo Liu et al. developed a γ-LiV2O5 PSC for photoelectric conversion and energy storage.45 Under illumination, γ-LiV2O5 stored photogenerated holes by the intervalence electron transfer between V4+/V5+ and delithiation/lithiation of LiV2O5. In 2017, C. Laberty-Robert et al. developed 3D crystalline anatase semiconducting LixTiO2 thin film as a photoanode.46 The photogenerated holes of LixTiO2 were expected to oxidate Ti3+ to Ti4+ for the formation of Li-poor tetragonal phase (tetragonal LiαTiO2) and the de-insertion of lithium ions. Photoelectrons should then reduce Li+ at the counter electrode. The mesoporous pores of TiO2 nanoparticles further allowed for fast Li+ insertion and e− transport, which enhance the overall charge kinetics. MoO3 is also a potential photoanode for a photo-charging battery for its semiconducting property and ion storage capability.47
Compared to conventional inorganic metal oxide-based materials, organic molecules offer several advantages, such as safety, low cost, and design flexibility, as they can be constructed with a variety of building blocks, allowing for finely tuned visible light responsibility, band gap, and band edge. Organics with considerable redox-active sites and sterling photoelectrochemical reversibility are promising candidates for solar-to-electrochemical energy storage.48 Organic materials with abundant redox-active sites can serve as preferential cathodes in reversible metal–organic batteries, while their semiconducting behaviors can be synthetically tuned to enable efficient solar harvesting (Fig. 3b). Hence, some organic materials have been investigated as photoelectrochemical storage materials with dual functionalities of light harvesting and energy storage.49 For example, organic materials with adjustable redox functional groups, such as CO, possess steady and reversible Li+ coordination properties, making them ideal bifunctional materials for PSC. M. Ajayan et al. investigated the photo induced delithium process of small organic molecule lithiated tetrakislawsone (Li-TKL) with abundant CO groups.50 The photogenerated holes (TKL˙+) oxidize the Li-TKL to TKL with Li+ desertion while the generated electrons flow from the TKL to the anode to reduce Li+ into Li metal, enabling solar-to-electrochemical energy storage.
Compared to organic molecules, conjugated organic polymers derived from bifunctional organic molecules offer several unique advantages. Firstly, they retain their original redox functional groups, which makes them ideal for energy storage and conversion applications. Additionally, these polymers provide appropriate and regular pores that allow for metallic cations diffusion and extended electrons storage.51 Wang's research group has recently developed a novel conjugated polymer, known as TQ-COP, which incorporates flexible crown ethers and pyrazine redox-active sites. The bandgap of this polymer is 2.84 eV, which enhances its ability to absorb visible light and transfer charge carriers.52 The presence of crown ethers effectively separates photo-excited charge carriers and reduces the loss of recombination energy, which can be attributed to the extended conjugated degree. After capturing sunlight, the pyrazine-redox components in TQ-COP PSC are capable of transferring up to six photogenerated electrons per active site, while accomplishing its lithiation reaction. The photogenerated holes flow to the anode, and further oxidize Li metal into Li+ cation. In 2018, Bettina. V. Lotsch et al. and her colleagues developed a remarkable two-dimensional cyanamide functionalized polyheptazine imide (PHI). This innovative material combines two important optoelectronic properties, including light capturing (band gap of 2.76 eV) and electrical energy storage, to be used as a photo-anode for a full solar battery.41,42 The PHI's pore size of 3.8 Å is highly advantageous for Na+ (1.84 Å) and K+ (1.25 Å) penetration into the structural pores, thus enabling the stabilization of electron storage. Upon light excitation, the photogenerated holes are moved to the counter electrode through an appropriate hole shuttle. Meanwhile, the photogenerated electrons can reduce the carbon nitride backbone in PHI, producing a light-induced negative charge in the form of stable π-radicals. These radicals are further attracted and absorbed alkali cations inside the pores of PHI layers, fulfilling the cation storage.
Except for single inorganic metal oxide materials or organic materials, organic–inorganic hybrid materials have aroused great concern among solar utilization technology because of their excellent photoelectric performance, including controllable energy bandgap, long charge transport length and high absorption coefficient.53–57 In 2022, Wang's groups reported an organic–inorganic perovskite material (DAPbI) by insetting large-size organic cation molecule (DAAQ) with redox active sites to insert the inorganic layers (PbI2), in which the functional group CO of cation DAAQ is the redox active site for fast delithiation/lithiation to energy storage (Fig. 3c).58 A bandgap of 2.34 eV endowed DAPbI material with the ability of solar energy harvesting. After illumination of sunlight, electron–hole pairs were generated within lithiated DAAQ. The holes oxidized the lithiated DAAQ to DAAQ with Li+ desertion for the charging process while the generated electrons flowed from the DAAQ to the anode and reduced Li+ cation into Li metal.
Although many single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials made from inorganic semiconductors and organic materials have shown great potential for converting and storing solar energy, they still have significant disadvantages that make practical applications challenging. For example, the high-energy holes in inorganic materials have a strong oxidation ability that can react with the electrolyte, leading to reduced solar energy storage efficiency and stability issues. Similarly, organics results in poor conductivity and weak intermolecular electronic coupling, leading to the formation of cohesive electron–hole pairs that are prone to recombination and energy loss. More importantly, the generated electron–hole pairs of either organic or inorganic materials cannot be separated efficiently and thus, their energy tends to be consumed by the competing recombination process. As a result, it has become essential to modify photoelectrochemical storage materials with a second component to achieve effective charge separation.
3.2 Multi-components photoelectrochemical storage materials
An effective strategy for harnessing solar energy is to combine photoelectric conversion materials with energy storage materials.59 To achieve this, the substrate material (or current collector) is also crucial for efficient charge separation and transfer. The layer-by-layer assembly design of multi-component photoelectrochemical storage materials, as shown in Fig. 4a, offers a promising solution. Com. 1, the photoactive layer, is the most critical component of high-efficiency multi-component photoelectrochemical storage materials. It possesses a suitable bandgap energy in the visible light spectrum that facilitates the generation of electron–hole pairs under light irradiation. The ideal Com. 2 acts as an optoelectronic transport layer with well-matched LUMO energy levels relative to the Com. 1 layer. This ensures efficient interfacial electron transfer from Com. 1 to Com. 2 and, subsequently, to the current collector. Meanwhile, the Com. 2 layer also blocks holes in Com. 1 layer to achieve charge separation. These photoelectrochemical storage materials must be thermally and photochemically stable and have good electronic mobility. These materials are typically classified into four categories: (i) inorganic semiconductors, (ii) organic polymer, (iii) small organic molecules and (iv) organic and inorganic complex molecules. Fig. 4b summarizes the energy-level diagram for the most commonly employed photoelectrochemical storage materials in coupled solar batteries.
 Fig. 4  (a) The typical layer-by-layer assembly of multi-component PSCs and the electron/hole transfer process under light illumination. (b) An energy-level diagram highlighting the representative photoelectrochemical storage materials used in coupled solar batteries. The energy level has been converted vs. vacuum. Note: C. C.: current collector, Com.: component, CC: carbon fiber. 
TiO2 can be easily modified and combined with other materials to create photoelectrodes. For example, as a typical inorganic semiconductor material, TiO2 and LixTiO2 are highly stable photo-response components and can easily generate electron–hole pairs when exposed to light. In 2008, Chien-Tsung Wang et al. successfully synthesized a core–shell structure of TiO2/V2O5 composites, where TiO2 was responsible for photovoltaic conversion, and V2O5 for energy storage.60 Under UV illumination, the photo-generated electrons derived from TiO2 are transferred to the V2O5 matrix, forming a bronze structure of V2O5 through the intercalation of H+ or Li+ ions. Lv's groups developed a TiO2/dye/Cu2S composite as a PSC for a coupled solar battery.61 Once illuminated, the dye molecule was excited to dye* and then injected generated electrons to the external circuit through the interface between TiO2 and FTO, which reduced Li+ ion to form Li metal at the anode. Simultaneously, dye+ as the Cu/Li2S to Cu1.96S/Li+ directly. Jiang Hao et al. designed and product after electron injection facilitated the oxidation reaction of synthesized SnO2/TiO2 heterojunction nanoarrays on carbon cloth (CC) substrate by a two-step hydrothermal route.62 TiO2 showed a more negative LUMO position than SnO2, which was conducive to charge separation and electrochemical reactions. The electron–hole pairs generated by the LixTiO2 (x ≥ 0) under light irradiation synergistically enhance the lithiation kinetics and electrochemical reversibility of both SnO2 and TiO2. The photogenerated electrons can quickly pour into the SnO2 and the generated Sn due to the more positive LUMO positions (vs. TiO2) to accelerate the lithiation process. The remaining holes in turn enhanced the Li+ migration to the TiO2 by achieving charge balance. To explore a high-potential PSC, Kohei Shimokawa et al. reported the preparation of TiO2/LiMn2O4, where TiO2 nanoparticles were the photoactive material responsible for photovoltaic conversion, and LiMn2O4 was for energy storage.63 Once illuminated by UV-visible light, the photo-generated electrons within TiO2 were transferred from HOMO to LUMO. The HOMO energy level for TiO2 was high enough to extract Li+ cations from LiMn2O4.
Vanadium-based materials offer a good charge storage capacity and reversible insertion/extraction of zinc (Zn) ions with fast kinetics. Michael De Volder et al. mixed vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) nanofibers with P3HT and rGO for solar energy conversion as well as Zn2+, Li+ storage and capacitors.64 The PSC was fabricated by mixing V2O5 nanofibers with P3HT, rGO, and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) in a 93:1:1:5 ratio and drop casted on carbon fiber (CF) current collectors. V2O5 is responsible for the energy storage function and light harvesting function at the same time due to its high reversible capacity and suitable bandgap energy in the visible light spectrum, respectively. Under light illumination, the photo-excited electrons from V2O5 nanofibers transferred to P3HT due to the matching energy levels between V2O5 (−2.4 eV) and P3HT (−3.2 eV), and further traveled through rGO (−4.4 eV) to the current collector. Meanwhile, the HOMO of P3HT was lower than that of V2O5, which blocked the unpaired photo-induced holes and resulted in the accumulation of holes in V2O5. Similarly, VO2 with suitable band gap and fast charge–discharge kinetics is also an attractive bifunctional material that has been combined with electron-conducting rGO/CF and zinc oxide (ZnO) electron transport layer for efficient PSC.65,66
Organic materials, such as dyes and organic semiconductors, can also be used as light capture agents in dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells. These materials have several advantages over inorganic photo-absorbers, such as their low cost, ease of processing, and tunable optical and electronic properties. In hybrid PSCs, organic and inorganic materials are combined to take advantage of the unique properties of each material. For example, Paolella et al. reported a hybrid PSC with LiFePO4 (LFP, lithium-ion battery cathode materials)) and N719 dye (visible light absorption),67 where the photo-generated holes from the N719 dye enabled the delithiation of LiFePO4 because of the higher HOMO (−5.0 eV) of N719 dye than that (−5.2 eV) of LiFePO4. Dye-sensitization also showed compatibility with LiMn2O4, where the dye provides photoelectrons for the insertion of Li+ ions into LiMn2O4. Jonathan E. Halpert et al. reported the inorganic halide perovskite Cs3Bi2I9 nanocrystals with PCBM in a PSC for a Li-ion battery.68 Under illumination, the photogenerated electrons within Cs3Bi2I9 (−3.4 eV) transferred to PCBM (−3.8 eV) and then to CF (−5.0 eV), while the photogenerated holes retained in the HOMO of Cs3Bi2I9 perovskite can repulse the intercalated Li+ back into the electrolyte or oxidized metallic Bi0 to high valence state Bi3+. By combining photoelectric materials with energy storage materials, we can create composites that can efficiently convert and store solar energy. However, a micrometre level diffusion length for photo-carriers in hetero-junctional PSCs can result in rapid charge recombination, which leads to lower energy conversion and storage efficiency.
3.3 Photoelectrochemical storage materials with donor–acceptor (D–A) structures
An efficient bifunctional photocathode material must fulfill two essential functions: serving as an active site for redox reactions and efficiently trapping light to separate holes and electrons. Both of these functions are crucial for the application of coupled solar devices. Recently, D–A heterogeneous crystalline materials, formed by organic electron donors and acceptors, have gained significant attention in the field of photoelectrochemistry. These materials demonstrate the characteristics of exciton energy transfer and charge transfer/separation between different domains, owing to the moldability of their composition and structure. Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) and porous organic cages (POCs) are emerging crystalline porous materials that possess diversified and stable structures. Due to their ordered framework, strong π-stacking interaction, and polarized electric field, they can introduce D–A alignment to promote intermolecular charge separation and transportation.70 This kind of material has the potential to unite the advantages of both organic semiconductors as a photoelectrode and redox-active sites for electrochemical energy storage.71 The chemical and electronic structures of D and A groups, along with their arrangement, jointly determine their properties of harvesting light and reversible electrochemical energy storage. For photoelectrochemical storage materials with D–A structures, there are four major steps in the carrier migration process: (1) photon exciton, (2) charge relaxation, (3) charge separation and (4) charge transport (Fig. 5a, left). Especially, the critical 3rd step largely decides the energy conversion and storage efficiency in their final coupled solar battery.72 The interaction between the excited states for both donor and acceptor groups should mainly depend on their LUMO orbitals/interaction during charge separation step 3. Thus, proper interaction between these two LUMO orbitals should favor an efficient charge separation. The energy-level diagram of some functional groups used for constructing photoelectrochemical storage materials with D–A structures is summarized in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the charge transfer process in photoelectrochemical storage materials with donor–acceptor structures (left) and the energy-level diagram of some functional groups used for constructing COFs and POCs (right). (b) Assembly strategy of NT-COF and intramolecular charge transfer from the TPA to NDI in ref. 36 (c) Assembly strategy of TN-COF@CNT and the photo-generated electrons/holes coupled ions transfer process. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022. 
COFs with electron donor–acceptor units, redox sites and well-defined pores prove an ideal platform for optoelectronics and batteries. Wang et al. designed a covalent organic framework (NT-COF) by integrating electron-poor naphthalenediimide (NDI) and electron-rich triphenylamine (TPA) units (Fig. 5b).36 The 2D NT-COF exhibited packing porous nanosheets with a hexagonal aperture of about 2.4 nm and a high specific surface area of 1276 m2 g−1. Photo/electrochemical measurements for NT-COF were carried out to reveal ultrahigh efficient intramolecular charge transfer from TPA to NDI units, and extremely reversible Li+ insertion/desertion processes upon illumination. These results endowed NT-COF potential for efficient solar conversion. However, intrinsic drawbacks regarding conductivity and aggregation have impaired the charge separation efficiency and redox kinetics of COFs. Carbon nanotube (CNT) can offer high electron conductivity and flexibility but a limited energy-storage capability. Therefore, the combination of CNT and COFs with D–A structures will enable a long-range charge transfer relay and prolonged charge separated state for more effective solar conversion than single COFs. In their future research, Wang's groups reported TN-COF@CNT synthesized via the polycondensation of TPDA and NTCDA with CNT, giving an interconnected network structure with thin-layered (∼2 nm) TN-COF growing on the exterior surface of CNT (Fig. 5c).69 Under illumination, photo-excited electrons from TPPALUMO migrate to NDILUMO due to the higher energy level of TPPALUMO that follows an intramolecular charge transfer. Subsequently, electrons from both TPPALUMO and NDILUMO migrate to CNT due to its lower Femi level (Ef), forming a long-range intermolecular transfer relay, where photoexcited 3[TPPA-NDI] endows electrons to NDI−via intramolecular charge separation, and the resultant NDI− further donates electrons to the CNT through hetero-interfaces. As a result, the average fluorescence lifetimes (τave.) for the TN-COF@CNT is 3.0 ns. In addition, this hybrid enabled reversible and high-rate redox of –CO/–C–O− and –C–N/–CN+ with facile kinetics. These advantages attributed to the enhanced synergy between charge generation and redox reaction.
C60 has effectiveness in promoting electronic conductivity, charge separation and charge transfer efficiency. Wang's groups encapsulated C60 as an electron acceptor into a porous organic cage with reversible redox-active CO sites to form an organic material C60@POC, whose host-guest interaction promoted electronic conductivity, charge separation and charge transfer efficiency for effective light-harvesting and energy storage functions.73 The encapsulation C60 significantly quenched the fluorescence of POC and prolonged the charge recombination (τCR = 171.17 ps), indicating the favored dynamics within C60@POC for the intermolecular charge transfer. The HOMO/LUMO values for POC and C60@POC were ca. −5.53/−3.47 eV and −5.43/−3.56 eV, verifying that the encapsulation of C60 into POC caused a narrowed bandgap energy because C60 possessed very strong electron withdrawing ability. Upon illumination, the electron–hole pairs were generated and immediately separated, forming the expected charge-separated state of C60−@POC+. Hence, the C60@POC can direct the exciting energy towards effectively dissociated charge carriers, which promoted the feasibility of photo-excited electrons and holes separation to enhance the efficiency of solar storage and conversion. The above results reveal that the D–A structures are favorable for effective charge separation, which is expected to improve the kinetics synergy between charge lifetime and redox reaction.
3.4 Design guidelines for photoelectrochemical storage materials
We summarize the basic design principle of photoelectrochemical storage materials: (1) photoelectrochemical storage materials must have suitable bandgap (1.5–3 eV) for efficient solar light harvesting; (2) photoelectrochemical storage materials must have redox activit store photogenic electrons or holes; (3) energy levels of different components or groups in photoelectrochemical storage materials should be validly matched, which will endow the capability of photogenerated electrons and holes separation to accelerate energy storage reactions; (4) long life and short travel distance of excited holes/electrons would overcome the mismatch between charge lifetime (<μs) and rate of redox reaction (>ms) to improve energy storage efficiency. Therefore, the matched degree of HOMO/LUMO energy level and the redox potential of the photoelectrochemical storage materials are crucial to efficient photoelectrochemical energy storage. Compared to the redox potential of energy storage reactions, a higher HOMO energy level induces photogenerated holes to oxidize the photoelectrochemical storage materials for metallic ions desertion, while a lower LUMO energy level induces the photogenerated electrons to reduce the photoelectrochemical storage materials for the insertion of metallic ions. The efficient coupling of photogenerated charges and redox reactions is imperative to the development of photoelectrochemical storage materials. By optimizing these factors, researchers can design more efficient and effective PSCs for sustainable solar energy storage.
4. Coupled solar batteries based on PSCs
To date, various prototypes of solar energy conversion and storage devices have been proposed, and metal-based solar batteries have gained significant attention for their high energy storage capabilities. Among them, metal Li is particularly notable due to its highest specific capacity of 3860 mA h g−1, making it one of the most promising options for solar energy storage. Another promising choice is metal Zn-based rechargeable batteries, which boast excellent safety performance, earth-abundance, and environmental friendliness. It is expected that the combination of high energy density metal anodes and PSCs will bring new development opportunities for the efficient utilization of solar energy. The coupled solar batteries with PSCs can be operated with a photo-charging or photo-assisted mode, which is discussed in detail in the following sections.
4.1 Photo-charging mode
Coupled solar batteries can realize solar energy storage in a bias-free photo-charging process (Fig. 6a). During photo-charging, the PSC is excited by light, which generates electrons and holes. The photo-generated electrons move through the external circuit to the anode, reducing Mn+ cations to metallic M, storing solar energy as electrochemical energy. During discharge, the anode is oxidized to form Mn+ and the PSC is restored to its Red. state, producing electricity. The charging voltage increases under illumination to convert solar energy to electrochemical energy, and the discharge voltage decreases under dark to convert chemical energy to electric energy (Fig. 6b). This operation mode requires the PSCs that have a LUMO close to or above the redox potential of the Li anode (Li/Li+ = −1.46 eV). These PSCs provide high-energy photoelectrons to reduce the Li anode, which in turn leaves behind a large number of holes for self-oxidation. For example, a two-electrode photo-charged LIB was developed based on the reaction of photo-oxidation of LiFePO4 (LFP) by N719 dye (LUMO = −3.0 eV, HOMO = −5.0 eV) in an LFP/CNTs/N719 PSC. The battery had a discharge capacity of 340 mA h g−1, which was about twice as theoretical value due to continuous photo-charging during the galvanostatic discharge process, but showed low overall efficiency (0.06% to 0.08%, Table 1) because of large charge recombination at the LFP/dye/electrolyte interface and possibly, the low energy of photoelectrons.67 Michael De Volder etc. developed a PSC consisting of (FTO)/rGO/P3HT/V2O5/Ag for photo-charged LIBs (Fig. 6c and d).64 Due to the elevated LUMO level of V2O5 (−2.4 eV), the photogenerated electrons can migrate more smoothly through the external circuit to drive Li+ ion reduction, while the availability of holes for driving the oxidation of LixV2O5 also increased. As a result, capacity was enhanced by more than 57% under illumination (Fig. 8f), and the photo-conversion efficiency was ∼0.22% at 1 sun illumination.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Schematic representation of a photo-charged battery and its typical solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. (c and d) The photo-charging mechanism of photo-LIB with rGO/P3HT/V2O5 photoelectrode and its photo-charge and discharge under illuminated and dark conditions. Reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (e and f) The proposed photo-charging mechanism of hν-ZIBs with MoS2/ZnO photoelectrode and its photo-charge and discharge under illuminated and dark conditions. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
Table 1 Typical PSCs for coupled solar batteries and their performances




Materials
Working mode
Light source

η



Calculation method
Ref.





a Solar energy conversion efficiency.
b 
η = I × ΔU/P × 100%, where ΔU is the voltage difference with and without illumination during charge or discharge processes, P is the power of 1 sun, 100 mW cm−2.
c 
η = A1 × I/A2 × t × P × 100%, where A1 is the integral area of the discharge curve, I is discharge current, A2 is the is the illuminated surface area, t is illumination time, P is the power of one sun, 100 mw cm−2.
d 
η = Eout/(Pin × t × A) × 100%, where Eout is the discharge energy, A is the active photocathode area, Pin represents illuminated light intensity, and t denotes photo-charging time.
e 
η = EAA1/PintA2 × 100%, where, EA is the areal energy density, Pin the light intensity, t is photo-charging time, A1 is the surface area and A2 is the illuminated surface area.
f 
η = EB × B1/(Pin × T × B2) × 100%, where EB is area energy density, B1 is surface area of the device, T is photo-charging time, B2 is surface area of the illuminated area.





TN-COF@CNT
Photo-assisted
1 sun
∼1.1%

η = I × ΔU/P × 100%b

40



C60@POC
Photo-assisted
1 sun
∼1.0%
The same to ref. 40

73



TA-PT
Photo-assisted
1 sun
∼1.6%
The same to ref. 40

74



LFP/CNTs/N719
Photo-charged
1 sun
0.06–0.08%

η = A1 × I/A2 × t × P × 100%c

67



rGO/P3HT/V2O5
Photo-charged
455 nm
∼2.6%

η = Eout/(Pin × t × A) × 100%d

64



1 sun
∼0.22%

η = EAA1/PintA2e


rGO/P3HT/V2O5
Photo-charged
455 nm
∼1.2%
The same to ref. 64

75



rGO/VO2
Photo-charged
455 nm
∼0.18%
The same to ref. 64

65



ZnO/MoS2
Photo-charged
455 nm
∼1.8%
The same to ref. 64

76



1 sun
∼0.2%


ZnO/VO2
Photo-charged
455 nm
∼0.51%
The same to ref. 64

66



PCBM/Cs3Bi2I9
Photo-charged
1 sun
∼0.43%

η = EB × B1/(Pin × T × B2) × 100%f

68





Coupled solar batteries with a Zn anode can be a suitable choice for photo-charging applications because the Zn/Zn2+ couple has a low redox potential of −3.74 eV, which decreases reliance on a high LUMO level of the PSC materials.77 Researchers have investigated photo-charged ZIBs based on various photoactive materials, such as vanadium oxides (V2O5, VO2) and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and zinc oxide (ZnO), of which the LUMO levels are close to or above −3.74 eV.65,75,76 The photogenerated holes drive the deintercalation of Zn2+ ions from the PSC, while the photoelectrons are energetically favored to be transported to the anode for Zn2+ ions reduction (Fig. 6e and f). The photo-charged ZIB allowed a capacity enhancement of more than 38.8% and reached up to ∼0.92 V. The overall solar-to-electrochemical energy storage efficiency reached a highest value of 1.8% using a 455 nm light source, and ∼0.2% under simulated sunlight. These results demonstrate the potential for photo-charged ZIBs for solar energy storage.
To sum up, photo-charged solar batteries based on a PSC and a metal anode can realize direct solar-to-electrochemical energy storage without the help of external bias. However, the success of this technology depends on careful tuning of the band positions to ensure that high-energy electrons are available to drive the reduction reactions at the metal anode. If the Fermi level of the anode is more negative or larger than the conduction band of the PSC, only a few photoelectrons will participate in the photoelectrochemical reduction reaction, while most of them will be lost due to charge recombination. It is also important to note that electron energy can degrade during the stepwise charge separation process, and the overall efficiency of these solar batteries is limited by poor transport efficiency of the photogenerated carriers on multiple interfaces. Therefore, obtaining well-separated high-energy electrons is a critical issue for the success of these solar batteries operating in a photo-charged mode.
4.2 Photo-assisted mode
For coupled solar batteries with a PSC of a low LUMO energy level, a photo-assisted mode is more applicable. An applied bias can increase the number and the energy of separated charges but requires an extra energy input. Coupled solar batteries operating in photo-assisted mode typically exhibit reduced charging voltage and increased discharging voltage under illumination, leading to increased battery efficiency (Fig. 7a and b). In 2015, Yu et al. first reported an aqueous lithium-iodine flow battery capable of photo-assisted charging, which reduced the charging voltage and saved up to 20% energy.78 This breakthrough opened up new possibilities for developing photo-electrode based photo-assisted charging for various types of redox batteries.79
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Schematic representation of a photo-assisted battery and its typical solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. (c and d) The construction of a photo-assisted Li-organic battery with NT-COF as the PSC and its solar-responses of charge curves. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2018. (e and f) The construction of a photo-assisted Zn-organic battery with TN-COF@CNT as the PSC and its solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022. 
In 2020, Wei Lv et al. reported the use of a hybrid TiO2/N719/Cu2S PSC for a photo-assisted LIB.61 Once illuminated, the photo-excited N719+ promoted the oxidation reaction during the processes of photo-assisted charging and discharging at a current density of 100 mA g−1. For the photo-assisted charging, the charge voltage was reduced by 0.2 V and the bifunctional electrode improved the charge capacity. For the discharging, the discharge capacity was improved from 6 to 209 mA h g−1 with the assistance of illumination and remained at 150 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles. The present structure of the bifunctional compatible electrode paves the way for exploring more efficient and stable photo-assisted solar batteries. In 2021, Pulickel M. Ajayan et al. reported a photo-assisted LIB with a TKL PSC.50 The TKL with an optical window was first discharged in the dark to 1.5 V versus Li/Li+ to lithiate the TKL molecule. After the discharge process, a constant voltage of 3 V versus Li/Li+ was applied in the presence and absence of 405 nm violet laser irradiation, and the charging-current increased under light irradiations and decreased in dark conditions, indicating the acceleration of the charging process by light irradiation. A larger discharge capacity (332 mA h g−1) under light illumination was obtained compared to that under dark conditions (296 mA h g−1), representing an extra capacity of around 12%.
The studies discussed above have focused on the photo-assisted charging process for a coupled solar battery, but it is worth noting that a photo-assisted discharging process can also be utilized to realize solar energy storage. In 2018, Wang et al. demonstrated the use of 2D NT-COF as the PSC to fabricate a photo-assisted LIB, in which the NT-COF was designed with photoactive and electroactive components composed of naphthalenediimide (NDI) and triphenylamine (TPA) units. This design displayed quick intramolecular charge transfer and extremely reversible electrochemical reactions (Fig. 7c), leading to efficient photo-assisted discharging.36 During this process, the strong intramolecular charge transfer between TPA and NDI groups in the NT-COF promoted the generation of a charge-separated TPA+-NDI− complex. The photogenerated NDI− then participated in Li+ ion storage reactions within the NT-COF, while the remaining photogenerated TPA+ recombined with electrons from the Li anode through an external circuit to release Li+ ion. The charging voltage of this photo-LIB decreased from 2.53 to 2.02 V, while the discharging voltage rose from 2.42 to 2.96 V under light illumination, leading to an increased total battery efficiency of 38.7% (Fig. 7d). Moreover, the battery exhibited a capacity beyond its theoretical capacity of 129 mA h g−1 and a high discharge potential of about 2.7 V.
While COFs with electron D–A units, redox-active sites, and uniform pores have proven to be ideal platforms for coupled solar batteries, their intrinsic defects, including poor electron conductivity and low aggregation, can impair their charge separation efficiency and redox kinetics, ultimately affecting the solar energy storage efficiency of the batteries. In comparison, carbonaceous materials offer high electron conductivity but low energy-storage capability. In this context, Wang et al. combined CNTs with D–A COFs for a porous-shell/core hybrid TN-COF@CNT PSC in a photo-assisted Zn-organic battery (Fig. 7e).69 The resulting device showed an increase in discharge voltage by 130 mV (0.56 V vs. 0.43 V) and a decrease in charge voltage by 150 mV (1.06 V vs. 1.21 V) under illumination, corresponding to an extra 17.8% of round-trip efficiency (Fig. 7f). Furthermore, the light response performances of the TN-COF@CNT were well maintained over 40 hours for 1400 cycles and a remarkable SES efficiency of 1.1% at 1 sun, which is 5-fold that of their counterparts. Also reported by Wang et al., a photo-assisted LIB with the C60@POC PSC realized highly-effectiveness in solar-to-electrochemical energy storage.73 The discharging/charging voltage of the photo-assisted Li-organic battery was elevated/lowered by 470/410 mV under illumination, corresponding to an increase of 24.2% in round-trip efficiency. The photo-promoted discharge/charge capacity of the C60@POC is 184/193 mA h g−1, which is 115%/114% of the discharge/charge capacity without illumination. The battery achieved a high solar to the electrochemical energy conversion efficiency of ∼1% along with a 13.2% decrease in input power and an 81.4% increase in output power, demonstrating the highly-efficient solar to electrochemical energy storage in both photo-assisted charging and discharging processes.
Taken together, coupled solar batteries working in a photo-assisted mode can realize solar-to-electrochemical energy storage. Despite an increasing number of reports on this topic, the highest efficiency value achieved so far is only 1.1% due to the significant challenges in charge separation and the acceleration of redox reaction. While designing photochemical energy materials and rationally assembling electrodes will remain critical to achieving high photoelectrochemical storage efficiency, it is also urgent to conduct mechanistic studies through a combination of in situ characterization and theoretical calculations to further characterize critical reaction states.
4.3 Design principles for coupled solar batteries
The difference between these two types of solar batteries lies in the way that they store energy. In a photo-charged solar battery, the process of energy storage involves the excitation of photoelectrons to higher energy levels. These photoelectrons are excited by photons from sunlight and are then transferred to the LUMO of the PSC. The excited electrons then participate in redox reactions with the electrolyte, resulting in the storage of solar energy. However, only a few of the high-energy photoelectrons (denoted as Ln, Fig. 8a) are able to match the redox potential of the M/M+ couple of the anode. This limits the efficiency of energy storage. In contrast, photo-assisted solar batteries use an external bias to compensate for the energy of the electrons, allowing more of them to participate in the anodic reduction reaction (Fig. 8b). This potentially leads to a higher efficiency of solar energy storage. However, the energy mismatch between the photogenerated electrons of PSCs and the redox potential of metal anodes still exists. To maximize the utilization of photo-carriers, there are certain principles that should be followed.
 Fig. 8  Working principles for coupled solar batteries. (a) Photo-charged mode. (b) Photo-assisted mode. 
First, as mentioned above, the efficiency of PSCs is closely related to their ability to effectively use electrons, especially high-energy electrons, which are produced when the PSCs absorb light. Therefore, PSCs should have a high LUMO energy level (i.e., L0) with a suitable band gap to produce more energy-matched electrons while ensuring that they can be excited by visible light, which could reduce the reliance on external bias. In particular, when these electrons are separated from their parent molecules, either through heterojunctions or D–A structures, there can be a significant loss of energy. Therefore, there is a need to balance the gain in charge separation and the loss in the energy of the separated charges, in order to optimize the overall efficiency of the device.
Second, the redox potential of the anode should be as low as possible to reduce the reliance on high-energy electrons, which would require a greater input of energy to reduce the anode during charge. However, if the redox potential of the anode is lower than the redox Fermi level of the PSC, then the anode cannot discharge, as there would not be enough potential energy to drive the reduction reaction. On the other hand, a low redox potential is advantageous for injecting electrons during photo-charging, as it would make it easier to reduce the anode and store solar energy. However, a low redox potential also has a negative impact on battery voltage, which limits energy and power density. Therefore, the design of the anode involves balancing the competing factors of low redox potential for efficient charge migration and high enough potential for effective energy storing of the battery.
When these principles are used, one remaining challenge is to select redox couples with faster kinetics so that the coupling between photogenerated charge transport and metal ion transport can be facilitated, thus improving the solar energy storage efficiency. One of the major challenges in selecting redox couples is to ensure that the transfer of electrons is facilitated between the photogenerated charge transport and metal ion transport. Photogenerated charge transport refers to the movement of electrons generated by the absorption of light by the PSCs, while metal ion transport refers to the movement of charged electrolytes through the membrane, the electrode to the active sites of the PSCs. The use of smaller diameter ions as electrolytes (Li+, H+, etc.) or increasing the openness of the PSC (porous structures, nanostructures, etc.) are wise choices for achieving this goal.
5. Conclusion and outlooks
In conclusion, an overview of photoelectrochemical storage materials for coupled solar batteries, regarding the working mechanism, structure design, and performance, is presented. Photoelectrochemical storage materials have been developed from simple integration to an atomic or molecular-level coupling of multifunction such as light absorption, charge separation, and redox reactions. At the same time, new battery systems, including photo-assisted and photo-charged batteries, have also developed to realize direct and continuous solar-to-electrochemical energy storage process. With continued research on novel electrode materials, device designs and operation modes, we foresee that higher photoelectrochemical energy storage efficiency for practical use will be achieved. However, the main limiting factor of photoelectrochemical energy storage efficiency, i.e., the limited synergy between photogenerated charge and redox reactions, is still one of the essential problems that need to be addressed at present. We provide herein our new understanding of the coupling between photo-carriers and redox reactions in the photoelectrochemical storage process and describing new perspective for addressing fundamental challenges.
In such a rapidly expanding field, where not all researchers use the same methods or definitions to understand the nature and determine the efficiency of photoelectrochemical storage processes, the establishment of a standardized protocol has emerged as a necessity. A standardized protocol will improve our understanding of the synergy between photogenerated carriers and redox reactions in photo-coupled ion transfer (PCIT) reactions, while directing research toward the most promising material and device candidates to make the research more efficient and advance the field toward practicality. Presented here are our new thinking on the definition of PCIT reactions efficiency (ηPCIT) and its relationships with the photoelectrochemical storage efficiency (ηPES). The ηPCIT describes the ability of photoelectrochemical storage materials to store the absorbed photons. The three factors determining the ηPCIT are proposed to be the charge separation efficiency (ηsep), the efficiency of charge transfer to the interface (ηtrans), and the efficiency of interfacial redox reaction (ηredox):ηPCIT = ηsep × ηtrans × ηredoxIn contrast, the ηPES is the number of incident photons to be stored by the system, which can be described as:ηPES = ηabs × ηPCIT × ηETE = ηabs × (ηsep × ηtrans × ηredox) × ηETEwhere the ηabs is the absorption efficiency of electrodes, and the ηETE is the efficiency of charge transfer from electrode to electrode. These definitions are similar to the internal/external quantum efficiency of a PV and photocatalytic cell with certain features in common. However, the ηredox of PCIT is much lower than that of PV (denoted as ηcollection in most case, close or equal to 1 due to the sluggish ion storage reactions, yet higher than that of photocatalytic cells because no adsorption/desorption process is required. In addition, ηETE is another characteristic indicator in coupled solar batter systems, which is related to the band structure of the electrodes and the application of external fields. Moreover, the ηabs of coupled solar batteries can be optimized by existing photovoltaic technologies. Strategies include surface engineering, material optimization, design of devices with different properties in series, etc. These elementary parameters can be obtained theoretically or experimentally; and jointly, they help to establish a better understanding of the links between light harvesting, photo-carriers generation and redox reaction on scales from materials to devices.
The design of photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials is critical to the ηPCIT. Strategies such as heterojunction or electron donor–acceptor structures, nanofilms/arrays designs, and porous homogeneous surface interfaces play an important role in extending the lifetime of charge separation state, shortening photogenerated carrier travel distances, and accelerating interfacial redox reactions. The high crystallinity and structure stability of the materials are also essential to enhance the coupling of these functions. We argue that highly crystalline porous organics, especially COFs with a great flexibility in structure and function designs, as well as nanoscale porous interface and robust skeleton, would be one of the promising candidates that would fulfill the requirements for a high ηPCIT. In a qualified COF, the electron donor unit and the acceptor unit can act as a photoelectrochemical oxidation and reduction site, respectively, to provide a platform for coupling photogenerated carriers to redox reactions at an atomic/molecular level. Combining COFs materials with conductive substrates by electrostatic interaction or chemical bonding can further improve the conductivity and homogeneity of COFs materials and enhance the overall battery performance. Although the multi-function coupling of COFs is effective, they face challenges of low atomic economy, high threshold for preparation, and difficulties in large-scale synthesis, and these restrictions have left ample room for future improvement.
Regardless of the value of ηPCIT, achieving a higher ηPES has always been a long-term pursuit for researchers in this field. For a given electrode materials, the value of ηETE determines the ηPES for different systems. Here, we propose a new type of coupled solar batteries assembled by a PSC and a photoelectrochemical storage anode (PSA) (Fig. 9a). Under co-photo-pumping, the photo-generated electrons in the lower LUMO of PSC can recombine with photo-generated holes in the HOMO of PSA, and meanwhile, photo-generated holes in the HOMO of PSC and photo-generated electrons in the higher LUMO of PSA perform oxidation and reduction reactions, respectively. In such a design, the value of ηETE is boosted because all of the photoelectrons will flow downhill and spontaneously from the cathode to the anode, which in turn, boosts the anodic reduction and cathodic oxidation reactions. In contrast, the value of ηETE can be very low in the photo-assisted and photo-charged batteries as hindered by the required high energy of M/M+. A coupled solar battery with an integration of D–A COFs with dual-redox activity to the respective PSC and PSA represents a potential alternative for efficient solar energy storage. This approach offers multiple benefits: on one hand, combining D–A COFs materials with conductive substrates or semiconductors can improve the homogeneity, conductivity and charge separation of D–A COFs and enhance ηPCIT. On the other hand, the dual-redox activity of COFs allows solar energy storage via light-driven disproportionation reactions of the respective PSC and PSA, resulting in a high ηETE. To inspire future designs, we summarized the key requirements for a high efficiency of coupled solar batteries by a flow chart in Fig. 9b. A material or device that can satisfy these requirements in this flow chart will be a particularly promising candidate for the achievement of high solar electrochemical storage efficiencies and the development of practical applications. We hope that this flowchart will better align research efforts to identify promising candidates at a faster and more ordered pace.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed PSC-PSA coupled solar batteries. (b) Requirements and considerations for the realization of a high ηPES in a coupled solar battery. PSA: photoelectrochemical storage anode. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 22022110, 21872147, 22279141 and 22205238), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS (no. ZDBS-LY-SLH028), National key Research & Development Program of China (2021YFA1501500), Fujian Science & Technology Innovation Laboratory for Optoelectronic Information of China (no. 2021ZZ106, 2021ZR123), Science and Technology Service Network Initiative (KFJ-STS-QYZD-2021-09-003), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (2022I0037, 2022J05094).
Notes and references
D. Schmidt, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1500369 CrossRef .

          F. Birol, IEA Publications, 2020, rue de la Federation, Paris, France.
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, C. Pornrungroj, S. Linley and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2021, 7, 13–24 CrossRef .
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
P. K. Halder, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 65, 568–576 CrossRef .
B. Luo, D. Ye and L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700104 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Liu, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Nano Today, 2017, 16, 46–60 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Dirk Jordan, N. Haegel and I. Repins, Nature, 2021, 600, 215–217 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Segev, J. W. Beeman, J. B. Greenblatt and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1115–1121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, Y. Lai, L. Jiang, F. Liu, X. Hao, L. Wang and M. A. Green, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903930 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and S. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2611–2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, Y. C. Li, A. Aspuru-Guzik, C. P. Berlinguette, C. J. Chang, R. Cogdell, A. G. Doyle, J. Flick, N. M. Gabor, R. van Grondelle, S. Hammes-Schiffer, S. A. Jaffer, S. O. Kelley, M. Leclerc, K. Leo, T. E. Mallouk, P. Narang, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, G. D. Scholes, A. Vojvodic, V. W.-W. Yam, J. Y. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 828–846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 4, 6–21 CrossRef .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
S. J. Davis, N. S. Lewis, M. Shaner, S. Aggarwal, D. Arent, I. L. Azevedo, S. M. Benson, T. Bradley, J. Brouwer, Y. M. Chiang, C. T. M. Clack, A. Cohen, S. Doig, J. Edmonds, P. Fennell, C. B. Field, B. Hannegan, B. M. Hodge, M. I. Hoffert, E. Ingersoll, P. Jaramillo, K. S. Lackner, K. J. Mach, M. Mastrandrea, J. Ogden, P. F. Peterson, D. L. Sanchez, D. Sperling, J. Stagner, J. E. Trancik, C. J. Yang and K. Caldeira, Science, 2018, 360, 1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, J. Xie, A. G. A. Mohamed, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, L. Jiao, E. Zhou, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2023, 7, 91–105 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Feng, D. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Shi, O. C. Esan, Q. Li, R. Chen and L. An, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200469 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, J. Xie, A. G. A. Mohamed, X. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1511–1528 RSC .
D. Yu, L. Zhi, F. Zhang, Y. Song, Q. Wang, Z. Yuan and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2209390 Search PubMed .
G. Nazir, S. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, A. Rehman, J. K. Lee, S. I. Seok and S. J. Park, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2204380 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Stanley, F. Sixt and J. Warnan, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2207280 Search PubMed .
W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Hu, H. C. Fu, M. Hu, A. Veyssal, Y. Zhao, J. H. He, T. L. Liu, A. Ho-Baillie and S. Jin, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1326–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, J. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. R. Lin, F. Qi, Q. Li, Z. Peng, W. Kaminsky, S.-H. Jang, J. Yu, X. Deng, H. Hu, D. Shen, F. Gao, H. Ade, M. Xiao, C. Zhang and A. K. Y. Jen, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 1076–1086 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paul Ayeng'o, H. Axelsen, D. Haberschusz and D. U. Sauer, Sol. Energy, 2019, 183, 120–131 CrossRef .
X. Yu, G. Liu, T. Wang, H. Gong, H. Qu, X. Meng, J. He and J. Ye, Chemistry, 2022, 28, e202202104 CAS .
Z. Fang, X. Hu and D. Yu, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 600–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan and X. Gao, Energy Environ. Mater., 2021, 5, 439–451 CrossRef .
A. Gurung and Q. Qiao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1217–1230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Chen, Z. Ma, F. Pan, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1031–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nature, 1976, 261, 403–404 CrossRef .
J. Lv, Y. X. Tan, J. Xie, R. Yang, M. Yu, S. Sun, M. D. Li, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12716–12720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lau, N. Song, C. Hall, Y. Jiang, S. Lim, I. Perez-Wurfl, Z. Ouyang and A. Lennon, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 13, 22–44 CrossRef .
X. Guo, Y. Ding and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2100052 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, Z. Huang, B. B. Trang, J. Lu, K. Amine and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2766–2782 RSC .
W. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Lin, L. Zhu, E. Zhou, Y. Feng, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202214816 CAS .
A. Gouder, F. Podjaski, A. Jiménez-Solano, J. Kröger, Y. Wang and B. V. Lotsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1520–1530 RSC .
F. Podjaski, J. Kroger and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705477 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sridhar, F. Podjaski, J. Kroger, A. Jimenez-Solano, B. W. Park, B. V. Lotsch and M. Sitti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 24748–24756 CrossRef CAS .
F. Podjaski and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Zhu and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 4071–4078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Nguyen, E. Courtin, F. Sauvage, N. Krins, C. Sanchez and C. Laberty-Robert, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5927–5933 RSC .
S. N. Lou, N. Sharma, D. Goonetilleke, W. H. Saputera, T. M. Leoni, P. Brockbank, S. Lim, D. W. Wang, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700545 CrossRef .
J. Sun, E. Zhao, J. Liang, H. Li, S. Zhao, G. Wang, X. Gu and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2108048 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Banerjee, F. Podjaski, J. Kröger, B. P. Biswal and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 6, 168–190 CrossRef .
K. Kato, A. B. Puthirath, A. Mojibpour, M. Miroshnikov, S. Satapathy, N. K. Thangavel, K. Mahankali, L. Dong, L. M. R. Arava, G. John, P. Bharadwaj, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 907–913 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, N. Chandrasekhar, B. P. Biswal, D. Becker, S. Paasch, E. Brunner, M. Addicoat, M. Yu, R. Berger and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901478 CrossRef .
X. Cao, Q. Shi, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, E. Zhou, L. Zhu and Y. Wang, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 26, 101082 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kuai, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qin, T. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Li, T. Song, X. Gao, L. Wang and B. Sun, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900053 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photon., 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, B. Wenger, M. G. Christoforo, Y.-H. Lin, M. T. Klug, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 855–861 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, C. George, D. J. Beesley, J. J. Baumberg and M. De Volder, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1856–1862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Chen and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10903–10909 RSC .
M. Wilhelm, R. Adam, A. Bhardwaj, I. Neumann, S. H. Cho, Y. Yamada, T. Sekino, J. Tao, Z. Hong, T. Fischer and S. Mathur, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2023, 25, 2200765 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Wang and H.-H. Huang, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 3336–3342 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Duan, X. Zhang, X. Li and W. Lu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 530–537 RSC .
C. Hu, L. Chen, Y. Hu, A. Chen, L. Chen, H. Jiang and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2103558 CrossRef .
K. Shimokawa, S. Matsubara, A. Okamoto and T. Ichitsubo, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 9634–9637 RSC .
B. D. Boruah, B. Wen and M. De Volder, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3527–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Deka Boruah, A. Mathieson, S. K. Park, X. Zhang, B. Wen, L. Tan, A. Boies and M. De Volder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100115 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deka Boruah and M. De Volder, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23199–23205 RSC .
A. Paolella, C. Faure, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, A. Guerfi, A. Darwiche, P. Hovington, B. Commarieu, Z. Wang, M. Prato, M. Colombo, S. Monaco, W. Zhu, Z. Feng, A. Vijh, C. George, G. P. Demopoulos, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tewari, S. B. Shivarudraiah and J. E. Halpert, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5578–5585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Lin, L. Zhu, E. Zhou, Y. Feng, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202214816 CAS .
Y. Yusran, Q. Fang and V. Valtchev, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002038 CrossRef .
C. Y. Lin, D. Zhang, Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703646 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wan, C. Li, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2828–2842 RSC .
X. Zhang, K. Su, A. G. A. Mohamed, C. Liu, Q. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Wang, W. Xue and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 780–785 RSC .
E. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Zhu, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 2213667 CrossRef .
B. D. Boruah, A. Mathieson, B. Wen, S. Feldmann, W. M. Dose and M. De Volder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2414–2421 RSC .
B. D. Boruah, B. Wen and M. De Volder, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16616–16624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Manokar, D. P. Winston, J. D. Mondol, R. Sathyamurthy, A. E. Kabeel and H. Panchal, Sol. Energy, 2018, 169, 206–216 CrossRef .
M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8332–8335 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, P. Thakur, R. Sharma, A. B. Puthirath, P. M. Ajayan and T. N. Narayanan, Small, 2021, 17, e2105029 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Yan-Xi Tan and Xiang Zhang contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy has been recognized as an abundant and economical alternative energy source to meet the rapidly growing energy demand for the development of human society. The study of light-harvesting, catalysis and energy storage processes in natural photosynthesis has led to the applications of solar-to-electricity and solar-to-fuel conversion, as well as the flourishing of solar-to-electrochemical energy storage. Direct solar-to-electrochemical energy storage in coupled solar batteries is an important solar utilization technology. In this system, solar energy can be stored as electrochemical energy via a photo-coupled ion transfer process using photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials with both light harvesting and redox activity. The stored solar energy can also be released as electricity on demand, completing and re-initiating the loop. However, the rapid charge recombination of photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials and the misaligned band energy of the devices limit the efficiency of coupled solar batteries. In this review, we provide timely a summary of (1) the relationship between the basic functions (e.g., light harvesting, charge separation and redox activity) and the material composition, and (2) the mechanism of photo-coupled ion transfer in coupled solar batteries, and (3) challenges and directions for the rational design of electrode materials and devices. This review aims to provide insight into the coupling mechanism between photocarriers and redox reactions to help explore new types of efficient photoelectrochemical storage electrode materials and coupled solar batteries, and to describe applicable design principles to achieve practical solar-to-electrochemical energy storage efficiency.


 	Fig. 1  The schematic structures of integrated solar flow battery (a) and coupled solar battery (b). (c) The working principle of photo-assisted and photo-charged coupled solar batteries with two electrodes, respectively. PE: photoelectrode; PSC: photoelectrochemical storage cathode; CC: carbon cloth. M: metal anode, C: cathode, Red.: reduction reaction, Ox.: oxidation reaction, ΔE1: external electric charging voltage, ΔE2: photo-assisted charging voltage, ΔE3: photo-charging voltage, Cx is the reduced state of cathode.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Diagram of the research progress of photoelectrochemical storage materials served as both photoelectrodes and redox couples. Type I: single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials; Type II: multi-component photoelectrochemical storage materials; Type III: photoelectrochemical storage materials with donor–acceptor (D–A) structures. (b) Diagram of the research progress of coupled solar batteries.	 

 	Fig. 3  Three stored charge approaches in single-component photoelectrochemical storage materials: (a) the intercalation of metallic ions into the lattice of inorganic metal oxides. (b) The coordination of metallic ions with the redox sites in an organic molecule. (c) The coordination of metallic ions with the redox sites in organic–inorganic hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The typical layer-by-layer assembly of multi-component PSCs and the electron/hole transfer process under light illumination. (b) An energy-level diagram highlighting the representative photoelectrochemical storage materials used in coupled solar batteries. The energy level has been converted vs. vacuum. Note: C. C.: current collector, Com.: component, CC: carbon fiber.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the charge transfer process in photoelectrochemical storage materials with donor–acceptor structures (left) and the energy-level diagram of some functional groups used for constructing COFs and POCs (right). (b) Assembly strategy of NT-COF and intramolecular charge transfer from the TPA to NDI in ref. 36 (c) Assembly strategy of TN-COF@CNT and the photo-generated electrons/holes coupled ions transfer process. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Schematic representation of a photo-charged battery and its typical solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. (c and d) The photo-charging mechanism of photo-LIB with rGO/P3HT/V2O5 photoelectrode and its photo-charge and discharge under illuminated and dark conditions. Reprinted from ref. 64 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. (e and f) The proposed photo-charging mechanism of hν-ZIBs with MoS2/ZnO photoelectrode and its photo-charge and discharge under illuminated and dark conditions. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 


TN-COF@CNT	Photo-assisted	1 sun	∼1.1%	
η = I × ΔU/P × 100%b	
40

C60@POC	Photo-assisted	1 sun	∼1.0%	The same to ref. 40	
73

TA-PT	Photo-assisted	1 sun	∼1.6%	The same to ref. 40	
74

LFP/CNTs/N719	Photo-charged	1 sun	0.06–0.08%	
η = A1 × I/A2 × t × P × 100%c	
67

rGO/P3HT/V2O5	Photo-charged	455 nm	∼2.6%	
η = Eout/(Pin × t × A) × 100%d	
64

1 sun	∼0.22%	
η = EAA1/PintA2e
rGO/P3HT/V2O5	Photo-charged	455 nm	∼1.2%	The same to ref. 64	
75

rGO/VO2	Photo-charged	455 nm	∼0.18%	The same to ref. 64	
65

ZnO/MoS2	Photo-charged	455 nm	∼1.8%	The same to ref. 64	
76

1 sun	∼0.2%
ZnO/VO2	Photo-charged	455 nm	∼0.51%	The same to ref. 64	
66

PCBM/Cs3Bi2I9	Photo-charged	1 sun	∼0.43%	
η = EB × B1/(Pin × T × B2) × 100%f	
68


 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Schematic representation of a photo-assisted battery and its typical solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. (c and d) The construction of a photo-assisted Li-organic battery with NT-COF as the PSC and its solar-responses of charge curves. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2018. (e and f) The construction of a photo-assisted Zn-organic battery with TN-COF@CNT as the PSC and its solar-responses of charge and discharge curves. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 8  Working principles for coupled solar batteries. (a) Photo-charged mode. (b) Photo-assisted mode.	 
ηPCIT = ηsep × ηtrans × ηredox
ηPES = ηabs × ηPCIT × ηETE = ηabs × (ηsep × ηtrans × ηredox) × ηETE

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed PSC-PSA coupled solar batteries. (b) Requirements and considerations for the realization of a high ηPES in a coupled solar battery. PSA: photoelectrochemical storage anode.	 
Footnote
† Yan-Xi Tan and Xiang Zhang contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
