Challenges and recent advancements of functionalization of two-dimensional nanostructured molybdenum trioxide and dichalcogenides  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR03072G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR03072G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15709-15738Challenges and recent advancements of functionalization of two-dimensional nanostructured molybdenum trioxide and dichalcogenides

        
          
            Zihan 
            Wei
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Serge 
            Zhuiykov
          
          
        
      *ab
aGhent University Global Campus, Department of Green Chemistry & Technology, 119 Songdomunhwa-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21985, South Korea. E-mail: serge.zhuiykov@ugent.be
bFaculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, Ghent 9000, Belgium
Received 
      10th April 2019
    , Accepted 25th July 2019First published on 26th July 2019AbstractAtomically thin two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are the thinnest functional semiconducting materials available today. Among them, both molybdenum trioxide and chalcogenides (MT&Ds) represent key components within the family of different 2D semiconductors for various electronic, optoelectronic and electrochemical applications due to their unique electronic, optical, mechanical and electrochemical properties. However, despite great progress in research dedicated to the development and fabrication of 2D MT&Ds observed within the last decade, there are significant challenges that affected their charge transport behavior and fabrication on a large scale as well as there is high dependence of the carrier mobility on the thickness. In this article, we review the recent progress in the carrier mobility engineering of 2D MT&Ds and elaborate devised strategies dedicated to the optimization of MT&D properties. Specifically, the latest physical and chemical methods towards the surface functionalization and optimization of the major factors influencing the extrinsic transport at the electrode-2D semiconductor interface are discussed.Zihan Wei received her M.Sc. degree from Micro and Nano System Research Center of Taiyuan University of Technology in 2016. She is currently working toward her Ph.D. degree at the Department of Applied Analytical & Physical Chemistry of the Ghent University Global Campus, Korea. Her main research studies focus on two dimensional materials, nanostructure semiconductor oxides and their functionalization.Professor Serge Zhuiykov received his Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering in 1991. He has more than 26 years of combined academic and industrial experience working at different universities in Australia, Japan, Korea and Europe and in industrial environments. Since 2015 he has been a Senior Full Professor at the Department of Applied Analytical & Physical Chemistry of the Ghent University Global Campus, Korea and a Director of Environmental & Energy Research Center. His research interests lie in the area of the development, design and fabrication of new two-dimensional nanomaterials for solid-state environmental sensors and other advanced functional devices. He has published more than 250 peer-reviewed scientific publications including 3 monographs in 2007, 2014 and 2018, respectively. He is a recipient of the 2007, 2011, and 2013 Australian Academy of Science/Japan Society for Promotion of Science and 2010 Australian Government Endeavour Executive Awards for his work on nanomaterials for chemical sensors. In 2017, he was selected as one of the recipients of very prestigious “100 Talents” Program of the Shanxi Province, P.R. China.
1. Introduction
Over the past few years, layered transition metal oxides and dichalcogenides have attracted extensive attention in the research communities due to their unique layered architectures and ability to be exfoliated or fabricated into atomically thin 2D nanostructures containing mono-1–6 or multiple-layers.7–10 Among them, molybdenum trioxide and dichalcogenides (MT&Ds) have unambiguously shown unusual physical, chemical and electronic properties as well as great prospects for a variety of applications.11 2D MT&Ds with a reduced nano-meter thickness exhibited markedly different thickness-dependent properties, e.g., their electronic characteristics can span from metallic to insulating and structural anisotropy allows for mechanical exfoliation. It is noteworthy that the planar structure and chemical stability of 2D MT&Ds also offer full compatibility to conventional semiconductor processing. Therefore, following the success of graphene, a lot of strategies have been recently developed for the fabrication of layered 2D MT&Ds, which can be broadly classified into two major categories: top-down and bottom-up methods.12–14
Mechanical cleavage, as a traditional and efficient method, can yield pristine, clean and high-quality single- and few-layer 2D MT&D nanosheets, which are suitable for fundamental characterization and for the fabrication of individual devices.9,15 However, the key challenges of this method are the difficulties in controlling the thickness and scaling up and the size of nanosheets.16 The ultra-sonication-assisted liquid exfoliation technique has been widely used to produce large scale and few-layered nanosheets in organic solvents, which possesses similarly good prospects for making flexible electronics and composite nanomaterials.17–19 Nevertheless, this method is normally used for the fabrication of multi-layered forms instead of single-layered nanosheets and commonly employs organic solvents as stabilizing agents with high boiling points, which in turn are hard to remove completely. This resulted in relatively poor performance of the devices fabricated by this technique.20,21 Another top-down method, chemical intercalation has also been explored for the preparation of single-layered 2D MT&Ds on a large scale with a variable success rate, as this intercalation approach is not only time-consuming but sometimes needs high temperature.8,22,23
As alternatives, different vapour phase deposition methods such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), thermal evaporation, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), electron beam evaporation (EBE) and others have also been engaged in the fabrication of 2D MT&Ds.24–30 However, most of these techniques, except of ALD, have been reported to produce MT&Ds in the morphologies of nanoparticles, nanorods, nanotubes, etc. rather than layered defect-free nano-films.18–20 The ALD technique is considered as one of the most promising deposition methods especially in microelectronics, mainly due to the layer-by-layer nature of the deposition. It achieves pin-hole and particle-free deposition, allows precise film thickness control with near perfect conformity and offers the benefit of wafer scale fabrication, not achievable by other deposition techniques.31–33 The main disadvantage of ALD for application is its relatively low deposition rate.
On the other hand, liquid phase techniques such as different bottom-up approaches include many promising methods, for example, electrodeposition, the solvothermal method and the hydrothermal method.34–36 Although the solvothermal method so far has paved the way towards the fabrication of 2D MT&Ds on a large scale, in this process organic ligands are still used to influence the size and morphology of 2D MT&Ds. These ligands coated on the surface of 2D MT&Ds are also hard to remove, which still represents a great challenge and hinders their further practical applications.20,37 The hydrothermal method, conducted in a sealed autoclave at elevated temperatures with high pressure, is also attractive due to its simplicity and wide applicability.36,38–40 However, so far this method for the synthesis of 2D MT&Ds has only been used in the laboratory and the production quantity is still very small.
According to the developing strategies mentioned above, different preparation methods can be utilized in the different application fields. For example, for electronic and/or photonic applications where semiconductor monolayers are preferable,31 well-annealed ion-exfoliated nanosheets can be useful. In contrast, for applications such as composite semiconductor nanomaterials where large quantities are required it is possible that liquid exfoliation will be a better choice.41,42 Notwithstanding so much attention and efforts dedicated to this developing research area and outstanding physical and chemical properties reported for 2D MT&Ds, a lot of challenges still remain, such as difficulties in finding an effective synthetic method which is simple and can be scaled up, low yield production of single-layer 2D MT&Ds, and their intrinsic low electric conductivity, which presently disable these 2D nanostructures to meet most of the commercial requirements. Thus, in order to improve their performances and broaden the scope of their applications, research on 2D MT&D-based heterostructures has attracted more and more attention during the last few years.43–45 In the preparation of 2D nanocomposites, due to their ultrathin thickness and large special surface area, 2D MT&Ds could be used as the universal template for the fabrication of hybrid nanostructures with a lot of materials, including noble metals, metal oxides and chalcogenides and organic molecules.46–48 Other materials, such as carbonaceous nanomaterials, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and polymers, could also be incorporated with 2D MT&Ds owing to their high conductivity and unique physico-chemical properties. Moreover, doping and intercalation of other elements into 2D MT&Ds have been widely accepted for regulating their intrinsic properties without changing their structural features.49,50 Specifically, due to the same honeycomb structure with a closely matched lattice constant, molybdenum dichalcogenides (MDs) can form in-plane heterostructures and alloys with some other transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), which are particularly useful for some applications.51,52 Thus, Fig. 1 schematically summarizes modern state-of-the-art approaches towards the carrier mobility engineering in 2D MT&Ds.
 Fig. 1  Modern state-of-the-art approaches to the carrier mobility engineering in 2D MT&Ds. 
The review will discuss most of these approaches and highlight the successful examples of their practical implementation. In addition, the origin of the high thickness dependence of electronic performance exhibited in 2D MT&Ds and theoretical insight and summary of the devised strategies to minimize its effect will be provided. Then, we will focus on the role of 2D MT&Ds as electroactive channels based on the crystalline structures of the layered MT&Ds and overview the strategies and new avenues for improvement of the hybrid 2D MT&Ds and their potential applications in catalysts, various sensors, batteries and supercapacitors.
2. Structures of 2D MT&Ds
2.1. 2D MoO3
The band structures of 2D nanomaterials are modified considerably owing to the quantum confinement effect compared to their bulk and micro-structured counterparts. The reducing thickness changes the electrostatic surroundings of the mono- or few-layered materials and can alter the carrier screening and electrical permittivity (dielectric constant ε) developing different charge transport. For example, for MoS2, carrier injection into the monolayer is more difficult than into bulk due to a broader bandgap,53 whereas the trend is opposite for the black phosphorus which possesses a narrower bandgap in the monolayer.54 Among 2D semiconductor oxides, MoO3 has a high dielectric constant (high-k), which enables a solution for obtaining high electron mobility55 and modulating of its bandgap by various chemical and physical approaches.56 Such manipulations can offer an attractive alternative to graphene and to other dichalcogenides as valuable 2D nanomaterials with the reported carrier mobility value of ∼1100 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ∼11.0 nm thick MoO3.57
Specifically, orthorhombic α-MoO3, as one of the three polymorphs of molybdenum trioxide (the other two being monoclinic β-MoO3 and hexagonal h-MoO3) with an indirect wide bandgap (>2.7 eV),11,58–60 has been the focus of many researchers in recent years due to the desired layered structure, which can be resolved or exfoliated into 2D nano-crystals with the thickness at the atomic level. It consists of double-layers of MoO6 octahedra linked by edge and corner-sharing along the (001) and (100) axes and by weak van der Waals forces along the (010) direction61,62 (Fig. 2a and b). This kind of structure can also enable tunability of the bandgap and stoichiometry via ion intercalation, such as H+, Li+, Na+ and K+.11,63
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the orthorhombic lattice structure of layered α-MoO3 (red spheres, oxygen atoms). The three possible positions of oxygen atoms are denoted as O1–3, and the unit cell is shown dashed. (b) Schematic of the unit cell of α-MoO3; the lattice constants are a = 0.396 nm, b = 1.385 nm and c = 0.369 nm. Blue spheres, molybdenum atoms. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Structure of the monolayer 2H-MoX2 (X = S, Se, and Te). (d) Top- and (e) side-view of the structure of the monolayer of 2H-MoX2. Red and yellow spheres denote Mo and chalcogen (S, Se, and Te) atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2015, AIP Publisher. 
2.2. 2D MDs
MDs are made of stacking of graphene-like layers of the general formula MX2 in which M is the metal of Mo forming hexagonal layers sandwiched between two sheets of X, where X is a chalcogen (X = S, Se, Te). Commonly studied polymorphs of MoX2 compounds are tetragonal 1T-MoX2, hexagonal 2H-MoX2 and rhombohedral 3R-MoX2, respectively, which are different in the stacking sequence in their unit cell. The stacking sequence of 1T-MoX2 is AbC, 2H-MoX2 is vertically stacked in the AbA BaB sequence, while 3R-MoX2 comprises the AbA CaC BcB sequence.8,65,66 The transition between different phases is possible, for example, 2H-MoX2 to 1T-MoX2 by ion intercalation and 3R-MoX2 to 2H-MoX2 upon heating.11,66 Among these three polymorphs, 2H-MoX2 is naturally occurring and relatively stable4,64 (Fig. 2(c–e)). The layer-dependent properties of MDs have been recently intensively investigated for their transition from an indirect bandgap in bulk to a direct gap in the monolayer. For MoS2 the bulk indirect bandgap of 1.3 eV increases to a direct bandgap of 1.8 eV in the single-layer form.53 On the other hand, for MoSe2 and MoTe2, the bulk indirect bandgap increases from 1.1 eV to 1.5 eV, and 1.0 eV to 1.2 eV, respectively.57 It was reported that the electron effective mass reduced from 0.551 to 0.483me as MoS2 is thinned from bulk to 1 L, where me is the electron mass.67 The slight reduction of the carrier effective mass is a stipulated achievement of the high mobility value of ∼500 cm2 V−1 s−1.53 However, it is noteworthy that even for a specific sample large discrepancies still exist among the different research groups, which results in tremendous variation in adopting the ε value when calculating the field effect mobility.
3. Approaches to functionalization of 2D MT&Ds
3.1. Surface modification

3.1.1. Noble metals. 
The approach of using noble metal nanostructures for the functionalization of different nanostructures has been used in various applications such as catalysis, electronics, sensors and biomedicine.68–71 Even though the scarcity and expensiveness of noble metals limit their wide-spread commercialization, it is still a big challenge to find materials that can fully functionally replace noble metals for certain applications, especially for catalysis.72–74 Recent studies on the 2D MT&Ds decorated by noble metal nanoparticles have clearly demonstrated that these 2D nanostructures possess much better properties than their undecorated counterparts.46,75–77 In contrast to the traditional deposition techniques used for the epitaxial growth of noble metal nanoparticles on the surface of 2D MT&Ds, the in situ wet chemical growth route offers several advantages, including relatively low cost, high throughput capability, ability to control the distribution, size and morphology of the metal nanostructures and opportunities to suppress the migration and aggregation of nanoparticles.75,78
In fact, 2D MT&Ds have been considered as promising templates for direct growth of the noble metal nanostructures due to their large specific surface area, strong adsorption ability, and excellent thermal stability. For example, the solution-processable molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) nanosheets were used as templates for direct liquid-phase growth of platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) under ambient conditions. Results show that the Pt NPs with a size of 1–3 nm were uniformly grown and distributed on the MoO3 surface.79 As another example, a simple one-pot wet-chemical approach is developed for the synthesis of well-defined monodisperse Pd nanotetrahedra on ultrathin MoO3−x nanosheets.80 The solution processable MoS2 nanosheets were employed to direct the epitaxial growth of Pd, Pt and Ag nanostructures under ambient conditions via wet chemical syntheses (Fig. 3(a–c)). Specifically, Pd NPs (5 nm), Pt NPs (1–3 nm) and silver triangular nanoplates were epitaxially grown on MoS2 nanosheets using poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), sodium citrate and cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as the surfactants, respectively.75 Unfortunately, these synthetic strategies require a reduction agent to assist the growth of noble metal nanostructures. As MT&Ds have rich redox chemistry, they themselves could directly react with the metal precursors to allow a very straightforward and clean synthesis of metal-decorated nanomaterials. The spontaneous reduction of Au NPs on MoS2 nanosheets without any reducing agent was also demonstrated,77,81 and the results highlighted that Au nanoparticles tend to grow at the defect-rich edge sites with high surface energy. It was reported that well-dispersed noble metal (Au, Ag, Pd, Pt) nanocrystals on the whole surface of MoS2 nanosheets were homogeneously synthesized in the aqueous solution using sodium carboxymethyl as a stabilizer. In addition, bimetallic nanohybrids that often display enhanced properties compared to their monometallic counterparts have recently attracted more and more researchers’ attention.46,82–84 In this regard, MoS2–PtAg nanohybrids were fabricated by decorating ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets with octahedral Pt74Ag26 alloy nanoparticles,82 as illustrated in Fig. 3(d–f).
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of Pt NPs synthesized on a MoS2 nanosheet (scale bar, 100 nm). (b) The magnified TEM image of Pt NPs with a size of 1–3 nm on MoS2 nanosheets (scale bar, 5 nm). (c) SAED pattern of a Pt–MoS2 hybrid nanosheet with the electron beam perpendicular to the basal plane of the MoS2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Representative (d) TEM image, (e) HRTEM image and (f) EDX spectrum of as-prepared MoS2–PtAg hybrid nanomaterials. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.2. Metal oxides/chalcogenides. 
During the last few years constructing heterojunctions of 2D MT&Ds with other semiconductor materials such as metal oxides (e.g. MoO3, Co3O4, SnO2, Fe3O4)48,85–89 and metal chalcogenides (e.g. MoS2, WS2, Bi2S3, Ag2S, CdS) has also been considered as an interesting research direction owing to the ability of fabrication of p–n heterojunctions, changing semiconducting behavior from the n-type to p-type, or altering band structures.48,90–92
Recently, hybrids of 2D MT&Ds with TMDs have been reported because of their unique properties and potential in optoelectronics and clean energy applications.93–99 Stacking other TMD layers on the surface of 2D MT&Ds via mechanical transfer offers a convenient way for designing 2D MT&D heterojunction systems. MoSe2/MoS2 heterostacked bilayers were formed by transferring monolayer MoS2 and MoSe2 grown on a SiO2/Si wafer by CVD, using an aqueous KOH and HF solution, followed by removing the PMMA layer using acetone and baking the sample at 80 °C for 30 min for each transferring.97 The stacked heteromultilayers consisting of 1 L MoSe2 and 1 L MoS2 exhibited the simultaneous presence of positive trions and negative trions and a greatly enhanced photoluminescence (PL) emission compared to 1 L MoSe2 and 1 L MoS2. Besides the transfer method, one-step or two-step CVD growth is the other efficient approach to building 2D MT&D heterostructures.99 A two-step CVD method for growing WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructures with the synthesis of MoSe2 was demonstrated for the first time, followed by epitaxial growth of WSe2 on the edge and on the top surface of MoSe2. This two-step growth has the capability of the spatial and size control of each 2D component, leading to a much larger (up to 169 μm) heterostructure size. Furthermore, this two-step growth produces well-defined 2H and 3R stacking in the WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer regions and much sharper in-plane interfaces.
Besides the aforementioned TMDs, other metal oxides and chalcogenides can also be modified on the surface of 2D MT&Ds using different approaches. The n-type CdS nanocrystals uniformly grown on both surfaces of the p-type MoS2 nanosheets were developed by a one-pot solvothermal reaction in a dimethyl sulfoxide suspension containing well-dispersed MoS2 nanosheets and Cd(Ac)2·H2O.92 Interestingly, the band gap of MoS2/CdS monohybrids decreased relative to bare CdS, suggesting a strong electronic coupling between the two components. Ag2S/MoS2 composites with different molar ratios were constructed by in situ growth of monoclinic crystallographic Ag2S nanoparticles on the MoS2 nanosheets.90 The improved electrical conductivity resulted from the stretched MoS2 nanosheets and the enriched active sites due to the decorated Ag2S particles. A novel nano-composite consisting of graphene-like MoS2 nanosheets and ultra-small Fe3O4 nanoparticles with an average size of ∼3.5 nm is synthesized by a two-step hydrothermal process,86 while Fe3O4 nanoparticles can act as spacers to stabilize the composite structure.
It is noteworthy that there is one straightforward and effective way for the preparation of metal oxide-based MD hybrid nanostructures. It is based on the partial oxidation of MDs themselves due to their instability in air. A facile two-step preparation strategy without any additional agent for MoS2–MoO3 hybrid nanomaterials was developed by the heat-assisted partial oxidation of electrochemically exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets in air, followed by the subsequent thermal-annealing-driven crystallization.100 The obtained MoS2–MoO3 material is composed of (100)-dominated MoS2 and (021)-dominated α-MoO3, exhibiting p-type conductivity. This method might be extended to the preparation of MoSe2–MoO3 and MoTe2–MoO3 nanostructures. Another novel approach is one-step oxidation/exfoliation to synthesize bi- or tri-layer MoS2 nanosheets with MoO3 NPs.101 It was reported that using H2O2 as the oxidizing agent for partial oxidation of the in-plane MoS2 into MoO3 leads to the formation of MoO3 NPs decorated on the expanded bulk MoS2. Then the atomically thin MoS2 nanosheets with MoO3 NPs are exfoliated by ultrasound treatment.101


3.1.3. Carbonaceous nanomaterials. 
Loading of 2D MT&Ds on the surface of carbonaceous materials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and porous carbon, has exhibited various potential applications due to their high electronic conductivity, good flexibility, high charge mobility, large surface area, good flexibility and high chemical stability.102–107 Therefore, the hierarchical nanostructures of 2D MT&Ds on carbonaceous materials could be a feasible and promising way to improve their performance.
Among these carbon materials, chemically treated graphene-based materials, like graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), have been considered as very effective templates for the nucleation and subsequent growth of nanoparticles owing to the coupling interactions between the nanoparticle precursors and oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface of GO or rGO.108,109 Various methods for the preparation of the composites have been recently developed and the most popular strategy commonly used nowadays is the hydrothermal method.110 For example, a novel solvent-evaporation-assisted intercalation method to fabricate MoS2/rGO composites was introduced, in which the nanosize of the MoS2 nanosheets can be effectively controlled by leveraging the confinement effect within the 2D graphene layers.111 Initially, intercalation of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate ((NH4)2MoS4) into GO was assisted by solvent evaporation and then confined growth of MoS2 by the solvothermal method and nanosized MoS2/rGO composites were achieved. In this case, the graphene sheets provided chemical functional groups for strong coupling between the MoS2 precursor and graphene sheets, a confinement environment for MoS2 nucleation and growth. The synthesis of the MoO3–rGO composite using a hydrothermal method was reported.112 Few-layer MoO3 that was synthesized by oxidation of the few-layer MoS2 at 500 °C for 15 min was dispersed in the GO suspension with stirring and sonicating for 1 h, followed by transferring the homogeneous mixture to a Teflon lined autoclave, and heated to 180 °C for 4 h, GO is reduced and a MoO3–rGO nanocomposite is formed.112 In addition, MoSe2/graphene and MoTe2/graphene hybrids can also be developed by a similar hydrothermal approach.110,113
Moreover, in addition to the chemically treated graphene-based materials, CNTs, carbon fibres and amorphous carbon have also been utilized to carry out the hybridization with 2D MT&Ds.114–121 Directly growing ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of active carbon fibre (ACF) cloth to obtain the hierarchical MoS2/ACF cloth composite was reported (Fig. 4(a and b)).117 More importantly, the ACF cloth here acts as both the template and the conductive framework, and the MoS2/ACF cloth can be used directly as a free-standing and binder-free electrode. On the other hand, a sheet-like MoSe2/C composite was successfully synthesized using Na2MoO4 2H2O, Se powder and glucose as the source materials by a simple hydrothermal method followed by the subsequent annealing treatment.120 2D α-MoO3-single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) composite films have also been recently fabricated by dispersing SWCNTs in isopropanol solution of 2D α-MoO3 synthesized using a scalable liquid-phase exfoliation method followed by ultra-sonication.114
 Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) the original ACF cloth and (b) the as-obtained hierarchical MoS2/ACF cloth. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the in situ synthesis of MoS2–ZIF-8 nanocomposites. FESEM images of (d) ZIF-8 and (e) MoS2–ZIF-8 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.4. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). 
MOFs are very versatile nano-materials in which the metal ions are linked by coordinating organic species with a high surface area and large pore volume. They have been the focus of many researchers during the last two decades due to their rich surface chemistry, structural versatility and tuneable pore size.122 It is expected that embedding 2D MT&Ds and their hybrids into the MOFs can further broaden their potential applications.
With regard to 2D MT&Ds, it has been recently reported that a ZIF-8 MOF can be easily coated on MoS2 nanosheets by a facile process.122 2D MoS2@ZIF-8 core–shell structures based on functional MoS2 as a core and MOFs as a shell were fabricated by mixing an aqueous solution of 2-methylimidazole and Zn(OAc)2 with mild shaking and the reaction was performed at room temperature for 2 h. More importantly, this facile and general method is also feasible to coat ZIF-8 on other 2D materials. However, the growth of MOFs on MoS2 has not yet been explored adequately, which may be owing to the inert nature of its basal-plane. Other researchers have generated single layers of metallic octahedral phase (1T) MoS2 that contain excess negative charge on the sulphur atoms of the basal-plane for the coordination modulation with the ZIF-8 metal precursors by lithium-ion intercalation, followed by the reaction of the 1T-MoS2 nanosheets with the precursors of ZIF-8 to form nanocomposites with the Zn–S bond, as illustrated in Fig. 4(c).123 In this process, the change in the morphology of ZIF-8 nanocrystals from rhombic dodecahedral to spherical in nanocomposites that can be observed in Fig. 4(d and e) indicated that there is an interaction between the individual components.
In addition, MOFs have become both promising precursors and templates for the synthesis of heteroatom doped porous carbon materials due to flexible tunability in compositions, structures and properties of MOFs. It was demonstrated that MoS2 thin nanosheets were grown on the as-prepared N-doped carbon by a hydrothermal method with an N-doped carbon support prepared by pyrolysis of ZIF-8 using ZnCl2 as an activating agent.124 During this process, the obtained carbon contained a high level of nitrogen and comprised plenty of mesopores owing to the activation by ZnCl2 in the pyrolysis process, which can result in enhanced conductivity. Similarly, ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets@MOF-derived N-doped carbon nanowall array hybrids on flexible carbon cloth (CC@CN@MoS2) were fabricated through a facile hydrothermal method. During this process, the porous N-doped carbon nanowall arrays on carbon cloth are derived from cobalt-based MOF precursors by a solution route and a subsequent thermal treatment plus acid etching process.125
Furthermore, the combination of MOFs and MoO3 has also been recently developed for the applications of catalysts including photocatalysts and electrocatalysts.126,127 A heterogeneous MoO3/ZIF-8 core–shell nanorod composite was prepared via a facile method by mixing MoO3 nanowires and PVP with Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 2-methylimidazole in methanol for 24 h stirring. MoO3-TMU-5 composites were synthesized by dispersing an appropriate amount of MoO3 into DMF, followed by adding the mixture of Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, H2oba, and 4-bpdh with sonication for 60 min126 However, the combination of 2D MoO3 and MOFs has also not been fully explored. Consequently, we can envisage more breakthrough developments towards MOFs-2D MT&Ds in coming years.


3.1.5. Organic materials. 
In general, it is difficult to attach functional organic groups on the surface of 2D MTs due to absence of the dangling bonds on their basal plane.128 However, sulphur-containing groups can be bonded with unsaturated Mo edges or sulphur vacancies (or Se or Te in other MDs).129 For example, a facile approach to covalently functionalize MoS2 monolayers with 4-fluorobenzyl mercaptan and other thiol-containing molecules via thiol conjugation at sulfur vacancies on the basal plane was illustrated (Fig. 5(a)), and by controlling the amount of sulfur vacancies via sulphur annealing, the degree of MoS2 functionalization can be effectively tuned.130 Such methods are interesting but clearly limited in their utility. Very recently, the reaction has been reported that allows functionalization of layered MoS2 on its basal plane without the need for defects. A functionalization route that results in organic groups bonded to the MoS2 surface via covalent C–S bonds was developed, which is based on lithium intercalation, and chemical exfoliation of the negative charges residing on the MoS2 by electrophiles such as diazonium salts131 and the schematic process is illustrated in Fig. 5(b). Importantly, this approach is not limited to MoS2 but is applicable to any MDs or indeed any layered compound, which can be intercalated with lithium. In addition, rather than coordinating as a thiol at S-vacancies or forming bonds in the 2D MDs, simple physisorption on the nanosheet was also investigated.132 A general route for the functionalization of 2H-MoS2 nanosheets with cysteine by blending a dispersion of liquid-exfoliated 2H-MoS2 with a solution of cysteine was achieved. These observations open a promising way for other organic thiols, and indeed other TMDs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of ligand conjugation on sulfur vacancies on the basal plane of 2H-MoS2 monolayers. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2015, The American Chemistry Society. (b) Schematic representation of the basal-plane functionalization of MoS2. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2015, The American Chemistry Society. (c) A scheme showing the fabrication process of MoS2-PEG. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Conducting polymers such as polypyrrole and polyaniline have drawn much attention for the applications of supercapacitors, electrochemical sensors, gas sensors and drug carriers due to their low cost, good conductivity and high storage capacity.133,134 Hybridizing 2D MT&Ds with polymers can combine the advantages of 2D MT&Ds with the inherent characteristics of conducting polymers. The methods for the preparation of 2D MT&Ds/polymers can be categorized into physical blending, non-covalent in situ polymerization and covalent functionalization.134 Physical blending of 2D MT&Ds with polymers is the simplest method to prepare MoS2/polymer nanocomposites, and consequently, 2D MT&Ds with different conducting polymers have been developed using this method.135–137 However, for this method the effect of mixing is also dependent on the solubility of the polymer and for most polymers poor solubility limits their application in fabricating the nanocomposites.134In situ polymerization is a facile approach for the fabrication of MT&Ds/polymer nanocomposites. For example, MoS2/polypyrrole nanocomposites were prepared by in situ oxidative polymerization of pyrrole monomers on single-layered MoS2 in the presence of ammonium persulphate ((NH4)2S2O8, APS) solution.138 Black-MoO3/polyimide was synthesized by onepot thermos-polymerization of monomers, ammonium molybdate and thiourea at mild temperature.133 In addition, formation of covalent linkages between the polymer matrix and MoS2 was also reported. The functionalization of MoS2 nanosheets synthesized through the chemical exfoliation with lipoic acid modified PEG (LA-PEG) using the thiol reaction at the defect sites of 2D MoS2 nanosheets was also investigated139 and the scheme of the fabrication process for MoS2-PEG is shown in Fig. 5(c).

3.2. Doping
Nano-doping is a very popular approach for modification of properties of nanostructured semiconductors. It has been widely used to potentially regulate their intrinsic properties, such as changing the conductivity type of semiconductors from n to p by using a lower valence cation as acceptor dopants to produce holes and increase hole concentration, achieving tuneable p–n junctions, modifying the band structure, tailoring the electronic characteristics and so on.140,141 In relation to 2D MT&Ds, this approach can also retain their morphology, topology and crystalline features without phase separation of 2D MT&Ds. The main doping methods can be classified as follows: (1) substitution of the transition metal or oxide/dichalcogenides of 2D MT&Ds with appropriate elements,49,142 (2) incorporation of surface adatoms or layers of another material,143 (3) surface transfer doping144 and (4) plasma-based doping.145
Until now, several types of metals including Er, Mn, Nb, Fe, Pt, Re and Au have been demonstrated as dopant atoms to substitute the Mo atoms in 2D MT&Ds.140,141,143,146–148 Among them, Pt–MoS2 nanosheets have been developed recently for the first time through the one-pot chemical method, as schematically presented in Fig. 6(a–d).149 The experimental and theoretical results have clearly demonstrated that the catalytic activity of the inert basal planes could be triggered via the single-atom metal doping. As a typical example of non-metal dopants with a small atomic size to replace oxide/dichalcogenide atoms, it was also reported that in the non-metal element of P-doped MoS2 nanosheets P dopants could improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity and enlarge interlayer spacing.150 Oxygen incorporation into MoS2 nanosheets using a facile one-pot hydrothermal method reduces the bandgap and at the same time enhances the intrinsic conductivity of MoS2.151 The surface charge transfer doping via thiol-based binding chemistry for modulating the electrical properties of vacancy-containing MoS2 was also reported.152 The electrical properties of MoS2 can be systematically engineered by exploiting the tight binding between the thiol group and sulphur vacancies and by choosing different functional groups with the significant enhancement (NH2-containing thiol molecules) or reduction (fluorine-rich molecules).
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of Pt–MoS2 with the inset showing a typical MoS2 layer distance of 0.62 nm. (b and c) High-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images of Pt–MoS2 showing that the single Pt atoms (marked by red circles in figure b) uniformly disperse in the 2D MoS2 plane. (d) Magnified domain with a red dashed rectangle in (c) showing a honeycomb arrangement of MoS2, and the single Pt atoms occupying the exact positions of the Mo atoms (marked by red arrows). The bottom inset shows the simulated configuration of Pt–MoS2. The green, yellow and blue balls represent Mo, S and Pt, respectively. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) HAADF and the (f) ABF image of MoS2 upon Na intercalation. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. 
3.3. Intercalation
Generally speaking, intercalation investigates the insertion/extraction of the small guest species like ions into host materials, while retaining their structural features. Intercalation in 2D MT&Ds could alter the crystal phases and band structures of these few-layered nanomaterials, leading to further enhancement of their electronic, optical, and other various physicochemical properties.153,154 The essential prerequisite for guest species to intercalate into 2D host materials is the relative scale between the intercalant and the van der Waals gap of the 2D host. Specifically, besides the typical ionic intercalants such as H+, Li+, Na+, K+ and Mg2+,50 small molecules like H2 and ammonia could also be employed for intercalation of 2D MT&Ds.155,156
The phase transition from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2 due to the Na+ ion intercalation is confirmed at the atomic scale with the intercalation partially staged process.157 The structure of 2D MoS2 can be partially recovered to 1T-MoS2 if the intercalation depth is less than 1.5 Na+ ions, as shown in Fig. 6(e and f).157 Otherwise, the composition of NaxS and metallic Mo was obtained. The phase transition phenomenon was also reported for MoSe2 using Li+ ion intercalation.158 MoO3 is an indirect wide bandgap semiconductor. It is well known that MoO3 can be reduced to sub-stoichiometric MoO(3−x) and increasing x can lower the bandgap, due to the additional electrons from the reduction of Mo6+ to Mo5+ or Mo4+ and give rise to gap states in between the valence and conduction bands of MoO3 hence narrowing its band gap.55 In this recent example, the bandgap tunability is achieved by hydrogen intercalation into the crystal lattice. Upon exposure to H2 gas, the absorbed H atoms form HyMoO3, which loses H2O to the ambient atmosphere producing the desired sub-stoichiometry MoO(3−x) as illustrated in Fig. 7.55 The progress of the liquid phase intercalation with time in Fig. 7(b) generated a change of appearance from transparent to Prussian blue. Raman spectra reveal the evolution of the MoO(3−x) from α-MoO3 (Fig. 7(c)) in which a sharp peak of MoO3 at 820 cm−1 gradually disappeared and a broad peak at ∼780 cm−1 emerged instead, which is a strong indication of the presence and strength of sub-stoichiometric crystal formation. The MoO3 bandgap was reduced from 3.25 to 2.65 eV upon exposure to H2 gas for 40 minutes as presented in Fig. 7(d).55
 Fig. 7  (a) 1.4 nm α-MoO3 used for intercalation for sub-stoichiometry. (b) Optical microscopy images showing evolution of a thin MoO3 flake with the duration of H+ intercalation. (c) Micro-Raman spectra corresponding to optical images in (b). (d) Photon energy vs. (αhν)2 curves derived from the absorbance spectrum of a MoO3 flake with progression of catalyzed H+ intercalation. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
Other alkali metals such as Li+, Na+, and K+ as well as organic compounds have also been adopted as intercalants to manipulate the stoichiometry and band structure of 2D MoO3. Similar to MoO3, there are also reports on the chemical intercalation of MoS2 using ions such as Li+ to reduce its bandgap.159 In fact, ion intercalation has been demonstrated to be one of the best methods to increase the free charge carrier concentrations in 2D nanomaterials in order to achieve plasmon resonances at the commercially useful wavelengths. Two plasmon resonance peaks associated with the thickness and the lateral dimension axes in the near-infrared and visible light range could be tuned by the choice of the solvent in exfoliating 2D MoO3, which is related to the level of proton intercalation.160 Plasmon resonances in the visible and near UV wavelength ranges are achieved by electrochemical intercalation/deintercalation of Li+ ions into and out of 2D MoS2 nanoflakes.145 The intercalation level was controlled by the electrochemical forces, allowing the emergence of the plasmon resonance peaks due to the formation of semi metallic states.
3.4. In-plane heterostructures
2D MDs can form lateral heterostructures with some other TMDs because they have the same honeycomb structure with a closely matched lattice constant, in which a planar triangular lattice of metal atoms is sandwiched between two planes of dichalcogenides atoms. Several dichalcogenide-changing (e.g., MoS2/MoSe2),161,162 metal-changing (e.g., MoS2/WS2 or MoSe2/WSe2)51,52,163–165 and dual-changing (e.g., MoS2/WSe2)166 lateral heterostructures grown by CVD have been recently reported.
For instance, in-plane heterostructures of MoS2–WS2 and MoSe2–WSe2 were synthesized by the one-step CVD growth technique.167 Direct synthesis of the lateral heterostructures of monolayer MoS2–WS2 and MoSe2–WSe2 was performed using ambient-pressure CVD with aromatic molecules as seeding promoters. Then, the growth of W-based atomic layers was initiated from the edges of as-grown Mo-based monolayers and they follow the domain shape for their subsequent lateral growth. A one-step growth strategy for the creation of high-quality vertically stacked as well as in-plane interconnected WS2/MoS2 heterostructures via control of the growth temperature was developed, as schematically shown in Fig. 8(a–d).52 Vertically stacked bilayers are preferred at ∼850 °C, whereas in-plane lateral heterojunctions dominate when the synthesis is carried out at a lower temperature of ∼650 °C. Compared with the one-step growth process, the two-step growth approaches have the advantages that the structured growth process and experimental setup can be remarkably simplified and the shapes and structures of the resulting heterostructures can be controlled. A unique in-plane heterostructure with a monolayer MoS2 core wrapped by multilayer WS2 was also obtained by the two-step epitaxial ambient-pressure CVD technique using MoO3 and (NH4)10W12O41·xH2O as Mo and W precursors, respectively.52
 Fig. 8  (a) WS2/MoS2 in-plane heterojunctions. (b) Optical image of triangular or star crystals wrapped by the relatively bright edges showing the lateral heterostructures. Scale bar: 30 μm. (c) SEM image of heterostructure crystals. Scale bar: 30 μm. (d) AFM image of a triangular domain showing a core region with a thickness of 0.78 nm and a shell region with a thickness of 2 nm. Scale bar: 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the experimental steps for the formation of MoSe2/MoS2 heterojunction arrays. (f) Low-magnification Z-contrast image of the nanosheet showing the MoSe2 and MoS2 regions with a finite boundary across the domains (scale bars, 5 nm). Reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Schematic illustration of the sequential growth of the monolayer WSe2-MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. (h) As shown in the optical image, the WSe2 and MoS2 can be distinguished by their optical contrast. (i) High-resolution STEM images taken from the WSe2-MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. Reproduced with permission166 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition, lateral heterostructures between MDs with different chalcogenides have also been implemented. The MoS2–MoSe2 lateral heterostructures were grown by a two-step CVD process using MoO3, S and Se powder as the solid source precursors. In this process, the vapour-phase S first reacts with MoO3 to form MoS2 domains, followed by the introduction of Se for successive epitaxial growth of MoSe2.161 Specifically, electron beam lithography can also be used to pattern MoSe2 monolayer crystals with SiO2 and the exposed locations are selectively and totally converted to MoS2 using pulsed laser vaporization of S to form MoSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions in the predefined patterns, as displayed in Fig. 8(e and f).162 The starting monolayer MoSe2 crystals with the lateral sizes ranging from 10 to 100 mm were synthesized using PLD-assisted and conventional vapour phase transport (VTG) techniques. The crystals were then simply masked by conventional patterning processes, followed by selective conversion of the unmasked MoSe2 to MoS2 by pulsed laser S vaporization.
However, the processes discussed above only allow the growth of heterostructures with either different metals or chalcogens, making it difficult to grow p–n heterostructures such as WSe2–MoS2. Recently, a promising alternative route in the form of a monolayer in-plane p–n junction was introduced via a two-step epitaxial growth of p-type WSe2 and n-type MoS2.166 The 2D lateral WSe2–MoS2 heterostructures were synthesized on c-plane sapphire substrates by sequential CVD of WSe2 and MoS2 without the precursors coexisting in vapour phases, where WSe2 is grown on substrates at a higher growth temperature of 925 °C through the van der Waals epitaxy, followed by the edge epitaxy of MoS2 along the W growth front at 755 °C (Fig. 8(h–i)).166 Moreover, a general synthetic strategy for the highly robust growth of diverse heterostructures (such as WS2–WSe2 and WS2–MoSe2), multi-heterostructures (such as WS2–WSe2–MoS2 and WS2–MoSe2–WSe2) and super-lattices (such as WS2–WSe2–WS2–WSe2–WS2) from 2D atomic crystals was reported.168 A reverse flow during the temperature swing stage in the sequential CVD growth process allowed cooling the existing 2D crystals to prevent undesired thermal degradation and uncontrolled homogeneous nucleation, thus, enabling highly robust block-by-block epitaxial growth.
3.5. In-plane alloys
Apart from binary and the in-plane MDs heterostructures, ternary 2D MD alloys have also attracted great attention from researchers.169–171 Alloying has been demonstrated to be an effective way to manipulate the band gap continuously, modulate the carrier type and phase transition and enhance the catalytic activity of 2D MDs.172–174 Previous calculations have shown that monolayer alloys of the Mo(S,Se,Te)2 type are thermodynamically stable at room temperature for all compositions.169,175,176
In this regard, several approaches have been applied to the design of MD-based alloys including mechanical exfoliation, CVD, ALD and chemical vapour transport (CVT).177–180 It was demonstrated that among them, CVD and ALD are appealing routes to synthesize high quality MD-based alloy films with tuneable compositions and thicknesses.178,180 A low-pressure CVD (LP-CVD) method to grow a Mo1−xWxS2 (x = 0–1) monolayer with a wide range of Mo/W ratios was developed.180 The optical band gaps of the monolayer Mo1−xWxS2 crystals strongly depend on the Mo/W ratios and tuneable band gaps could be achieved by controlling the W or Mo portion by LP-CVD. A synthesis method of Mo1−xWxS2 alloys by sulfurization of the super-cycle ALD Mo1−xWxOy alloy thin films has also been reported.178 Using this approach, the composition and layer number (from mono- to tri-layers) of Mo1−xWxS2 alloys can be systematically controlled by manipulating the cycle ratio between the ALD-fabricated MoOx and WO3. The bandgaps of Mo1−xWxS2 alloys were precisely controlled as functions of the composition and layer numbers of each respective alloy. However, the synthesis of scalable single-layer 2D TMD alloys with high spatial uniformity as well as an accurately controlled composition has been rarely explored. Recently, the synthesis of optically uniform and scalable single-layer Mo1−xWxS2 alloys by a two-step CVD method followed by a laser thinning process has been reported.181 The amount of W content (x) in the Mo1−xWxS2 alloy is systemically controlled by the co-sputtering technique. In addition, the post-laser treatment enabled scaling few-layered Mo1−xWxS2 alloys down to a single-layer. Such a 2D nanostructure exhibited tuneable properties with the optical bandgap ranging from 1.871 to 1.971 eV with the W content of x varying from 0 to 1. Furthermore, the number of excessive charge carriers was also discovered to decrease with the increase of x, which ultimately resulted in the change of the predominant component of PL emission from trions for the single-layer MoS2 to the neutral excitons in single-layer WS2.
In addition of the bandgap tunability, the transition from semiconducting to metallic state in 2D MDs has also been reported, which inspired the synthesis of novel 2D materials with metal–semiconductor transition for applications in nano-electronics and nano-photonics.182 A unique ternary 2D material with tunable semiconductor-metal transition, preferably controlled by its chemical composition, is urgently required to fill such a gap. In the recent studies, it was found that CVD growth of 1T–1H two phase Mo1−xWxS2 monolayers is possible by controlling thermal strains and alloy compositions.173 The in-plane compressive thermal strains arising from the difference in the coefficients of thermal expansion between monolayers and bulk substrates played a vital role in the transition from the 1H to 1T phase. A high fraction of up to 60% 1T phase could be achieved in large-scale CVD grown monolayer Mo0.4W0.6S2 by optimizing the substrate and chemical composition.
Nevertheless, the widespread applications of MD-based alloys are still severely limited due to their extremely low production and the high cost of CVD and ALD methods. Recently, few studies have demonstrated the feasibility of the mass production of MD-based alloys by solution-based routes.174,183 A simple one-step and bottom-up wet-chemistry method to grow nano-sized, ultrathin ternary MoxW1−xS2 nanosheets with good stability and a high metallic phase concentration on a gram-scale level was developed.183 Interestingly, the Mo0.75W0.25S2 nanosheets, with the largest interlayer spacing of ∼10.35 Å, exhibited the most efficient hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance in acidic media. Alloyed Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheets assembled into a flower-like structure with tunable 1T/2H phase ratios were synthesized via hydrothermal reactions, and contain 3–10 atomic layers with the interlayer spacing ranging from 0.6 to 1.0 nm, as presented in Fig. 9(a and b).174 Based on the structure of Mo0.92W0.08S2 nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 9(c–f), both 1T and 2H structural domains can be observed. These alloyed nanosheets demonstrated the composition- and phase-dependent electrochemical and electronic properties. Thus, by tuning the Mo/W ratio, an optimized combination of high-density active sites and low charge transfer resistance for different applications can be achieved. However, the development of monolayer MD-based alloys using solution-based strategies is not easy to implement and has not yet been fully investigated.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of typical Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheets and (b) TEM image of a typical Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheet. (c) Cs-corrected STEM image of a thin Mo1−xWxS2 layer, revealing both 2H and 1T phase domains, the red (d) and blue (e) squares represent the 2H and 1T structures. Structure models of (g) 2H and (h) 1T structures. Reproduced with permission174 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Applications
4.1. Catalysts

4.1.1. Electrocatalysts. 
Electrocatalysis is one of the most promising applications for 2D layered MT&Ds especially for the HERs.184 The electrochemical HER is a highly efficient way for hydrogen generation in the presence of Pt, Pd, or Rh catalysts.77 However, the scarcity and the cost of noble metals limit their commercialization and hence shift the research interests toward looking for alternative cheaper HER catalysts. Specifically, layered semiconducting MDs, as a member of the group of 2D nanomaterials, with their unique optical, mechanical, electronic and catalytic features have been recently explored as an alternative HER catalyst owing to their optimal affinity to H2.185 However, the limited accessibility of catalytically active sites and lower conductivity severely hinder their catalytic performance. Thus, two main strategies have been proposed to improve the HER catalytic performance of 2D MoX2:
(1) increasing the number of active sites of catalysts;
(2) improving the electrical conductivity of the catalysts.186
It was demonstrated that the active edge sites could be greatly increased by forming defects on the basal planes of these 2D MDs, as edges of layered materials with dangling bonds are catalytically active while the basal planes are electrochemically inert in the HER. Fabrication of novel defect-rich structures of MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets with additional exposure of active edge sites, which significantly improves their electro-catalytic performance for the HER, has also been reported.187 In addition, the alternative primary strategy for increasing the number of active sites is nanosizing layered 2D MDs.188 However, poor intrinsic conductivity of MDs still restricts the overall HER activity. Hence, balancing the benefits between the rich active sites and good conductivity is one of the most promising but very challenging tasks for developing efficient HER electro-catalysts. To this end, a lot of different strategies have been developed to engineer functional hybrid nanomaterials.
The formation of alloys has also been proven effective in enhancing the catalytic activity of 2D MDs. The electrocatalytic HER activity of MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanoflakes with fully tunable chemical composition is highly active with small over-potentials of 80–110 mV.189 In particular, the chemical composition of MoSSe exhibits improved performance in comparison with either MoS2 or MoSe2. Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheets with enlarged interlayer spacing and high metallic phase concentration were demonstrated.189Interestingly the Mo0.75W0.25S2 nanosheets, with the largest interlayer spacing of ∼10.35 Å, exhibited the most efficient HER performance with the lowest over-potential of 155 mV and the smallest Tafel slope of 67 mV per decade. Alloyed Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheets have a mixed 1T/2H structure, in which 1T concentration can be controlled by varying the reaction temperature.190 Among these alloyed TMD nanosheets, Mo0.92W0.08S2 nanosheets with a 1T concentration of ∼60% exhibited the best performance towards the HER with a Tafel slope of 43.8 mV per decade and an onset over-potential of 190 mV. It is also smaller than those of 80% 1T MoS2-based catalysts (with a Tafel slope of 55.8 mV per decade and an onset over-potential of 23 mV) and 80% 1T WS2-based catalysts (with a Tafel slope of 45.4 mV per decade and an onset over-potential of 180 mV).
2D MoX2 growth on highly conductive materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes and activated carbon can significantly enhance the catalytic activity, which could offer a wide electrochemical path, a high surface-to-volume ratio and excellent chemical stability.110 So far, several strategies have been proposed to create MoX2–carbon composite materials.110 As a typical example, amorphous carbon supported MoS2 with unique morphology of MoS2 nanosheets vertically on the carbon nanosphere was prepared, and consequently, the optimized catalyst employing an amorphous carbon substrate exhibited enhanced catalytic activity for the electrocatalytic HER with an onset potential as low as 80 mV and a Tafel slope of 40 mV per decade (Fig. 10(a and b)), which are comparable to those of platinum.107 In this structure, amorphous carbon acts as the substrate which can not only disperse the MoS2 nanosheets to warrant the exposure of active edge sites but also facilitate the electron transfer during the electro-catalysis and ensure highly improved conductivity of the composite as exhibited. In a report, it was shown that MoSe2 has higher intrinsic electrical conductivity than MoS2 due to the more metallic nature of Se. And the unsaturated Se-edges in MoSe2 are found to be electrocatalytically active and beneficial for the HER as S-edges in MoS2.186 As an alternative, MoSe2/rGO hybrids developed by a facile hydrothermal approach showed superior HER activity with a small onset potential of 50 mV, about 20–30 mV lower than those of MoS2 and its graphene hybrids reported previously, and a Tafel slope of 69 mV per decade.110 Better performance is attributed to the fact that the Gibbs free energy for atomic hydrogen adsorption on MoSe2 edges is closer to thermos-neutral than that of MoS2. These results indicate that MoSe2 has valuable potential to be a better HER catalyst than MoS2.
 Fig. 10  (a) Polarization performance curves and (b) the Tafel plots on a rotating glassy carbon disk electrode; reproduced with permission107 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Polarization curves and (d) the corresponding Tafel plots of pure MoS2, N-doped MoS2 and platinum. Reproduced with permission191 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (e) Polarisation curves and (f) the corresponding Tafel plots of Pt–MoS2, Pt–C and MoS2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
As was pointed out in the previous section, chemical doping is a well-known effective way to enhance the catalytic performance via multiple mechanisms in electrochemical reactions. In this regard, a series of metals such as Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Pt, V and so on are doped into MoX2 to replace the Mo atoms, which improved the HER activity via enhancing the conductivity or simultaneously inducing the additional active sites.149,191 Unfortunately, it was difficult to insert the metal dopants with a large atomic size into the MoX2 matrix. Metal dopants in the basal plane of MoS2 may also lead to promotion on the terrace sites or growth of the MoS3 phase, which is unfavorable for maintaining the stable MoS2 structure. To overcome this issue, nonmetal dopants with a small atomic size (N, P, O, S, etc.) were used for replacement of X atoms instead of replacing Mo atoms by metal dopants.150,151,186,191,192 An economical, eco-friendly, and most efficient N-doped MoS2 nanosheet-based hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalyst has been recently achieved with an onset overpotential of 35 mV and a Tafel slope of 41 mV per decade, as given in Fig. 10(c and d).191 Here, the dual-functions of N dopants activate the catalytic activity of the S-edge of MoS2 and enhance the conductivity of the MoS2 basal plane to promote the rapid charge transfer. In addition, it was demonstrated that the P dopants in P-doped MoS2 nanosheets not only could be the new active sites in the basal plane of MoS2 and help improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity but also show enlarged interlayer spacing which can facilitate hydrogen adsorption and release progress, leading to a significantly improved activity for hydrogen evolution.159
All the above-mentioned strategies can greatly improve the overall electrocatalytic performance. However, the catalytic efficiency of nano-hybrids still cannot be compatible with the efficiency of commercial Pt catalysts. Thus the combination of Pt NPs and MoX2 is a very promising strategy for implementation of high catalytic efficiency for the HER. It is noteworthy that a highly active and stable HER catalyst of ultrafine Pt NP decorated basal planes of MoS2 nanosheet arrays was proposed by a hydrothermal growth route for MoS2 and a subsequent ALD process. The optimized Pt/MoS2 catalyst with 2.2 wt% Pt loading presented exceptional HER performance in terms of a low onset overpotential of 31 mV and a small Tafel slope of 52 mV per decade, which is comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst.193 Here, the vertical MoS2 nanosheet arrays with a large exposed surface area are ideal supports for Pt NPs. Another typical example is the epitaxial growth of well-dispersed 1–3 nm Pt nanostructures on the surface of 2D MoS2 nanosheets.75 Compared to the commercial Pt catalysts with the same Pt loading, this approach has demonstrated much higher electrocatalytic activity towards the HER with a negligible overpotential and a low Tafel slope of 30 mV per decade (Fig. 10(e and f)).75 The distinguished performance of the Pt–MoS2 composite is ascribed to the strong coupling effects between Pt NPs and MoS2 nanosheets and the exposed high-index facets of Pt NPs.
On the other hand, α-MoO3 is a low-cost and environmentally friendly compound, which is easy to obtain at mass production, making it attractive for wide applications of the HER. In this regard, a variety of different strategies have been recently developed to improve MoO3 electrocatalytic activity.192,194 For example, a HER catalyst based on a P doped MoO3−x nanocomposite with rich oxygen vacancies was successfully fabricated by a two-step intercalation method.192 Its superior catalytic activity and outstanding stability are due to the synergistic effect between the P element doping and the oxygen vacancies. Moreover, it was also confirmed that the high concentration of oxygen vacancies enabled improvement of electrical conductivity and provided more active sites for the HER.


4.1.2. Photocatalysts. 
Until now it has been well documented and reported that CdS, TiO2, Cu2O and C3N4 are the most promising nano-materials used for photocatalysis.195–198 However, the low photocatalytic efficiency owing to high-rate recombination of photoexcited charges and poor stability caused by photo-corrosion have limited their practical applications. To solve these problems, an attractive way is loading co-catalysts on the surface of these materials to form nanostructured heterostructures.48,87,91,92 MDs have been proved to be an excellent semiconductor to combine with the above-mentioned materials, which could not only promote the separation of photoexcited electrons and holes but also offer more active sites. A recent report clearly showed that a unique configuration of MoS2 nanosheets vertically standing on the CdS nanowires leads to high exposure of the active edge sites and increases the charge separation and transfer rate.48 As expected, the 1D/2D nearly vertical CdS/MoS2 heterostructures exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity and good durability even after being reused five times.
Another interesting example is the development of MoS2 nanosheet decorated p-type Cu2O nanoparticles as a co-catalyst for the efficient solar hydrogen production under visible light.87 Results confirmed that 1.0 wt% MoS2 nanosheet decorated Cu2O nanoparticles present the maximum reduction photocurrent density of 0.17 mA cm−2, which is about 7-fold higher than that of pristine Cu2O, as shown in Fig. 11(a–c). The excellent performance of MoS2@Cu2O is caused by the introduction of the active sites of MoS2 nanosheets as a co-catalyst onto the surface of Cu2O nanoparticles, which promoted the dissociation of water and photocurrent density and the production of hydrogen by lowering the electrochemical proton reduction overpotential and inhibited photo-induced corrosion during the measurement.87
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of the MoS2@Cu2O composite; (b) mechanism and (c) transient photocurrent-time profiles at a bias of −0.1 V versus SCE for the MoS2@Cu2O composite and pristine Cu2O nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission87 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of MoS2/UiO66–CdS; (e) schematic illustration of the charge transfer in the MoS2/UiO66–CdS composite and (f) photocurrent spectra of the pure CdS, UiO66–CdS and MoS2/UiO66–CdS under visible light irradiation (≥420 nm). Reproduced with permission199 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Science. 
In fact, most of the 2D MT&Ds due to their suitable bandgap possess an extraordinary photo-induced catalytic ability; for example, the MoO3 bandgap can be reduced by intercalation to cover a wide range of the visible and infrared spectrum. For MDs, when their thicknesses are reduced down to one layer, their bandgaps widen and can be transformed from indirect to direct in this transition. Thus, to improve MD photocatalytic performance, they are often combined with carbon materials or loaded with noble metals or metal oxides to further inhibit the rapid electron–hole recombination.127 Unfortunately, their photocatalytic activity is still far from the level of acceptance by practical applications. However, MOFs, as an emerging new class of porous nanomaterials, have a matrix which can create more catalytic sites and make better contact between reactants and active sites.126 The MOF nano-porous structures can also enable an extra pathway for migration of photo-induced electrons, and consequently, facilitate the charge carrier separation.123,126,199
Excellent photocatalytic activity in the model oil photo-oxidative desulfurization (PODS) reaction of the MoO3-MOF composite was investigated by introducing 5 wt% of MoO3 into a Zn(II)-based MOF, [Zn(oba)(4-bpdh)0.5]n·1.5DMF (TMU-5).126 The synergic effects of the active surface of TMU-5 together with the active sites of MoO3 have led to the further enhancement of the PODS activity of the MT-5 photocatalyst. Another alternative is a novel and highly efficient MoS2/UiO-66/CdS photocatalyst for H2 evolution under visible light irradiation.199 It was demonstrated in Fig. 11(d–f) that under the same reaction conditions its photocatalytic activity was nearly 60 times higher than the H2 evolution rate with pure CdS. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of Pt/UiO-66/CdS was ascribed to the larger surface area of UiO-66/CdS composites provided by the introduction of UiO-66 that efficiently hinders aggregation of CdS during the synthesis. Moreover, the synergic action of MoS2 and UiO-66 stipulated the efficient separation of the photo-generated charge carriers and simultaneously provided a larger number of active reactive sites.

4.2. Sensors

4.2.1. Electrochemical sensors. 
During the last few years, 2D MT&Ds have also gained significant interest for the development of a different range of highly sensitive, selective, reliable and low-cost sensors, which mainly include electrochemical, gas and optical sensors. Since the first discovery that the electrochemically reduced single-layer MoS2 nanosheets can be utilized for glucose detection and selectively measure dopamine in the presence of ascorbic acid (AA) and uric acid (UA),200 2D MT&D-based nanostructures have become a good electrode material for various electrochemical sensors, especially for the application in bio-sensing.201 Due to the existence of a suitable bandgap, the overall sensitivity of devices based on 2D MDs is much larger than that of graphene and graphene oxides which have either no or small bandgap.202 Owing to the high isoelectric points (IEP), 2D MoO3 can also be potentially used for immobilizing a wide range of biomolecules with relatively lower IEPs, such as H2O2, glucose, AA, nitrate, dopamine (DA) and so on 1. Recently, our group successfully developed 2D α-MoO3 nano-films with a thickness of ∼4.9 nm, which demonstrated great sensitivity towards H2O2 detection.1 For further improvement of the electrochemical sensing performance of 2D MT&Ds, hybridization of 2D MT&Ds with functional materials such as noble metals, carbon materials and polymers has become one of the most effective strategies for enhancing the intrinsic properties of the individual components and generation of novel functionalities and properties.46,82,203
For example, 2D MT&Ds with the thickness of just a few nm are also a novel template for the fabrication of functional nano-composites owing to their high specific surface area. Noble metal nanoparticles, as zero-dimensional functional particles, exhibit the large percentage of active surface atoms and extraordinary electronic structure and the size. Thus, the distribution of noble metal nanoparticles plays a vital role in electrochemical performance.76 Different methods were developed for the growth of noble metal nanostructures on the surface of 2D MT&Ds.204–207 As one example, 0D–2D heterostructures of AuNPs@MoS2-NSs prepared by a spontaneous redox reaction from HAuCl4 and MoS2-NSs at room temperature208 were utilized to construct a novel electrochemical biosensor for the simultaneous determination of AA, DA, UA, and nitrite, attributed to the synergistic effect of the large surface of MoS2-NSs and superior electron transfer rate of AuNPs. A recent report shows that Au–MoS2, Pt–MoS2 and Au@Pt–MoS2 modified electrodes exhibited better catechol detection performances than the pure MoS2 nanosheet and metallic nanoparticle modified electrodes due to their synergistic effect, as demonstrated in Fig. 12.203 As expected, the Au@Pt–MoS2 nanocomposite modified electrode exhibited a linear range of 2–1000 mM and a detection limit of 0.44 mM for catechol, which were better than those of all MoS2-based nanomaterials.
 Fig. 12  The differential pulse voltammograms of various concentrations of CC at (a) MoS2/GCE, (b) Au–MoS2/GCE, (c) Pt–MoS2/GCE and (d) Au@Pt–MoS2/GCE in 0.1 M PB (pH 7.0). Inset figures: plot of oxidation peak currents derived from DPVs vs. CC concentrations. TEM images of the (e) MoS2 nanosheet, (f) Au–MoS2 nanocomposite, (g) Pt–MoS2 nanocomposite and (h) Au@Pt–MoS2 nanocomposite. Inset figures: histograms of Au, Pt and Au@Pt nanoparticles’ diameters in the corresponding MoS2-based nanocomposite. Insert figures: histograms of Au, Pt and Au@Pt nanoparticles’ diameters in the corresponding MoS2-based nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission203 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to noble metal nanoparticles, carbon materials and polymers are also gaining attention to be used as a conductive platform for improving the electrochemical sensing properties.209–211 Layered MoS2–graphene composites, showing more favourable electron transfer kinetics than graphene modified glassy carbon and bare glassy carbon electrodes, exhibit excellent analytical performance for acetaminophen detection with a detection limit of just 0.02 μM (S/N = 3) and a wide linear range of 0.1–100 μM.210 The superior electrochemical performance of MoS2–graphene composites is attributed to their robust composite nanostructure and to the synergistic effects between the layered MoS2 and graphene. AuNP-polypyrrole co-decorated 2D MoS2 nanosheets were used for rapid determination of glucose with a detection limit of 0.08 nM and a quantification limit of 0.26 nM.212 Surface modification of 2D single-layered MoS2 nanosheets with thioglycollic acid (TGA) also can be performed for obtaining a simple sensing system for highly selective, fast, direct detection of dopamine and was established with a wide detection range of 0.05 M to 20 M, a comparable detection limit of 27 nM and an extremely short response time of 3 min.134


4.2.2. Gas sensors. 
2D MT&Ds have also been extensively studied for various gas sensing applications due to their high surface-to-volume ratio.44,213 For example, it was reported that the gas response of the 2D MoO3-based sensing electrode to 100 ppm ethanol increases from 7 to 33 at an operating temperature of 300 °C compared to bulk MoO3.214 However, 2D MoO3 requires high operation temperature, which increases the power consumption as well as posing a safety risk to the flammable gas testing, such as H2 and CO. Moreover, the previous report dedicated to the development of 2D MDs showed that their unique physicochemical properties can make them a very promising electrode candidate for sensing at room temperature.215 Specifically, a highly sensitive and selective gas sensor based on the CVD-synthesized monolayer MoS2 was developed for the detection of NH3 and NO2 at room temperature.216 However, its sensing performances are strongly influenced by the significant adsorption of oxygen in air, which led to the limited stability of the MoX2-based sensing devices.217
To solve the problems mentioned above, the development of heterojunctions has been proven to be effective in achieving enhanced sensing performance in gas sensors and it can be expected that 2D MT&D phase heterostructures with abundant metal/semiconductor junctions might be promising for the fabrication of gas sensors. As a proof-of-concept, the response of Mo0.87W0.13S2 nanosheets with a 1T concentration of ∼10% towards 1–1000 ppm acetone at room temperature is 10 times higher than that of the sensor based on the annealed Mo0.87W0.13S2.190 The observed superior sensing performance of the 1T/2H Mo0.87W0.13S2 nanosheets can be attributed to the presence of metal/semiconductor phase junctions. A novel nano-hybrid of SnO2 nanocrystal (NC)-decorated MoS2 nanosheets (MoS2/SnO2) and its outstanding stable sensing performance for the room temperature NO2 detection in a dry air environment are reported.85 SnO2 NCs not only significantly enhanced the stability of MoS2 nanosheets in dry air by increasing their work function and creating a passivation layer to prevent the interaction between the oxygen and the MoS2 but also served as strong p-type dopants for MoS2, leading to p-type channels in the MoS2 nanosheets. As a different example, it was demonstrated that the solution-processed MoS2 nanosheet–Pd nanoparticle composite possesses high sensitivity towards H2 at room temperature.207Fig. 13(a and b) show that MoS2–Pd shows a strong response 50000 ppm of H2, in which MoS2 nanosheets do not show any significant response to H2 exposure, and exhibited excellent sensing performance at different H2 concentrations ranging from 50000 to 500 ppm. Furthermore, when comparing the sensing performance of MoS2–Pd with that of the graphene–Pd composite film fabricated in a similar fashion, MoS2–Pd outperforms the graphene–Pd composite film. It has been reported recently that by changing the carrier type in MoS2 using the Au dopant, an Au-doped MoS2 sensor positively responding to hydrocarbon molecules lacking oxygen groups (namely, hexane and toluene) and negatively responding to the oxygen-functionalized reducing gases (namely, ethanol, acetaldehyde, and acetone) was developed, as shown in Fig. 13(c and d). The change in the gas response in VOC chemisorption behavior is due to the n-doping of MoS2 with Au nanoparticles, which facilitates the electron charge transfer and also leads to tunable sensing of MoS2, enabling it to distinguish between hydrocarbon-based and oxygen-functionalized VOCs. This study has thus made a significant step toward solving the limitations imposed by present MoS2-based sensors, which mostly exhibit a single response to various VOC analytes.205
 Fig. 13  (a) Electrical responses of pristine MoS2 nanosheets and MoS2–Pd composite to 50000 ppm H2. (b) I–V characteristics of the MoS2–Pd composite before and after H2 exposure. Reproduced with permission207 Copyright 2015, Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Au-doped MoS2 gas sensor, photograph of pristine MoS2 and Au-doped MoS2 solutions and SEM images of the Au-doped MoS2 films; (d) real-time resistance of the pristine MoS2 and Au-doped MoS2 sensors exposed to various VOCs. Reproduced with permission205 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (e) Optical image of a graphene/MoS2 heterostructured device on a bent polyimide substrate and (inset) SEM image of the MoS2 device with interdigitated graphene electrodes; (f) comparison of the gas response characteristics of the flexible heterostructured device before/after the bending cycle test; (inset) 3D schematic images showing the bending test condition. Reproduced with permission219 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. 
Recently, flexible gas sensors have also been favorable for practical smart electronics such as wearable devices.218 The novel sensing structure based on a 2D MT&D heterostructure promises to provide a simple route to an essential sensing platform for wearable electronics.219–221 Instead of metal electrodes, patterned graphene was used for charge collection in the MoS2-based sensing devices in Fig. 13(e and f).219 Compared to the exfoliated MoS2 flake-based gas sensor, the gas-response characteristics of the flexible graphene/MoS2 device were well maintained without any serious performance degradation with a detection limit of 1.2 ppm for NO2 detection. A flexible gas sensor for the detection of formaldehyde (HCHO) at room temperature based on rGO/MoS2 hybrid films was fabricated on polyethylene naphthalate substrates by a simple self-assembly method.220 The sensing test results indicated that the rGO/MoS2 sensors showed higher sensitivities than rGO sensors. Furthermore, two kinds of MoS2 nanosheets were prepared by either hydrothermal synthesis or chemical exfoliation and were compared for their detection of HCHO, which revealed that the hydrothermally produced MoS2 nanosheets with rich defects led to enhanced sensitivity of the rGO/MoS2 sensors. For example, the sensing response of the rGO/MoS2-HT (hydrothermal) sensor to 10.0 ppm HCHO was 4.8%, about 1.7 and 2.2 times higher than those of rGO/MoS2-CE (chemically exfoliated) and rGO sensors.


4.2.3. Photodetectors. 
Photodetectors represent a light sensor that can transduce the incident radiation into an electrical signal. Photodetectors have been widely used in various fields including military applications and commercial products for everyday life.222 So far, photodetectors based on graphene have reported responsivity as high as 107 A W−1 through the enhanced light absorption with covering semiconductor quantum dots.223 However, the gapless graphene structure determines the large dark current and the unsatisfactory photo-responsivity, which is critical for the device to detect weak signals.223,224 In contrast to graphene, 2D MT&Ds have also been widely explored for photodetector applications owing to their high transparency, flexibility and tunable bandgap.225 However, the development of photodetectors based on 2D MT&Ds is still greatly hindered by the relatively lower light response and sluggish electron-transfer pathways.226
As an approach, coupling graphene with MDs can produce a hybrid nanomaterial that can utilize the high photon absorption capability of MDs and high electron mobility of graphene to realize a highly efficient photodetector. For example, transfer-free MoS2/graphene heterostructures developed as photodetectors in Fig. 14(a–c) exhibited extraordinary short photoresponse rise/decay times of 20/30 ms, which are more than 10 times faster than those (0.28–1.5 s) of previously reported MoS2/transferred-graphene heterostructures.227 Moreover, a high photoresponsivity of up to 835 mA W−1 was obtained in the visible spectrum for the fabricated transfer-free MoS2/graphene heterostructures, which is much higher than that of exfoliated layered MoS2 (0.42 mA W−1), high-crystallinity graphene (6.1 mA W−1) and transfer-free MoS2/graphene/SiC heterostructures (∼40 mA W−1). The reason for the enhanced performance is the clean interface at the transfer-free MoS2/graphene heterostructures. Furthermore, the MoTe2/graphene heterostructure based flexible photodetector was also demonstrated for efficient near-infrared (NIR) light detection.105 The time-dependent photocurrent response of MoTe2/graphene heterostructures under 1064 nm light illumination is 20 times enhancement of photocurrent as compared to pure MoTe2 with good repeatability of photo-switching. Importantly, a high responsivity of 970.82 A W−1 can be obtained while a low laser power of 202.4 μW was used, which is the highest value reported for the MoTe2-based photodetector at the same wavelength as presented in Fig. 14(d–f).
 Fig. 14  (a) Optical image of a typical MoS2/graphene heterostructure film, (b) photograph of an array of printed MoS2/graphene heterostructure photodetectors on fused silica. The inset (lower left) is a schematic diagram of the photodetector. (c) Dynamic photocurrent measured in response to 540 nm light on and off. The inset is the enlarged version. Reproduced with permission227 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the MoTe2/graphene phototransistor. (e) Time-dependent photocurrent of the MoTe2/graphene heterostructure and pure MoTe2 devices. (f) Photocurrent and photoresponsivity versus incident light power at 1064 nm. Reproduced with permission105 Copyright 2017, Wiley. (g) Photo-image of the MoS2/WS2 vertical heterojunction device arrays on the PDMS substrate. Schematic of a MoS2/WS2 vertical heterojunction phototransistor. (i) Dependence of photocurrent and photoresponsivity on incident light power (at 405 nm); the green and black dots correspond to original data. Reproduced with permission228 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society. 
As a recent modern trend, great efforts have been devoted to the development of lateral or vertical heterostructures for 2D TMDC materials with adjustable compositions.226,228 Such a combination of different components with an appropriate band diagram is a very effective way to improve the photodetector performance due to the presence of multiple electron- or hole-transfer pathways. Specifically, flexible photodetector devices using MoS2/WS2 vertical heterojunction arrays in Fig. 14(g–i) have exhibited a high photoresponsivity of 2.3 A W−1 at an excitation wavelength of 450 nm.228 The mosaic MoS2/MoSe2 lateral heterojunction film photodetector showed optimal performance giving rise to responsivity (up to 1.3 A W−1) and an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 263.1%, respectively, under a bias voltage of 5 V with 0.29 mW cm−2 (λ = 610 nm).226 It was possibly due to the matched band alignment of MoS2 and MoSe2 and the strong donor–acceptor delocalization effect between them.226

4.3. Batteries
Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are one of the most important rechargeable energy storage technologies. They can be used for a variety of mobile equipment, including cell phones, laptop computers and power tools.229–231 They can also be considered as the valuable candidate for potential green applications in electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs). However, the commercially used anode material in LIBs, graphite, with a theoretical specific capacity of only 372 mA h g−1 and a relatively poor rate capability cannot meet the increasing demand for reliable EVs and HEVs.232 As an alternative nanostructure, 2D MDs, which have an X–Mo–X type compound comprising the metal layers sandwiched between two X layers and stacked together by weak van der Waals interactions, can be utilized in updated improved LIBs. Their layered structure and the weak van der Waals interaction between layers enable the easy intercalation of Li+ ions without a significant increase in volume. For example, MoS2 exhibited high Li storage capacities (∼670 mA h g−1 with 4 mol of Li+ insertion per formula).233 However, the intrinsic low electric conductivity, large volume changes and severe restacking during repeated charge–discharge cycling of the hierarchical MoS2 anodes result in poor cycling stability and low rate capability, and seriously impede their practical applications.234,235
Constructing uniform hybrid structures of MoS2 with carbonaceous materials (graphene, graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes and amorphous carbon)104,108,116–120,232,236–239 or metal oxide (TiO2, Fe3O4 and SnO2)86,234 matrices has turned out to be a very effective way for improving the conductivity and structural integrity of active materials. Layered MoS2/graphene (MoS2/G) composites with a Mo:C molar ratio of 1:2 show the highest specific capacity of ∼1100 mA h g−1 at a current of 100 mA g−1, which is higher than that of both the individual components, as well as excellent cycling stability and high-rate capability.108 Their robust composite structure and the synergistic effects between layered MoS2 and graphene can explain the superior electrochemical performances of MoS2/G composites as Li-ion battery anodes. A sheet-like MoSe2/C composite was successfully synthesized by a facile solution-phase process,119 which exhibited improved Li storage properties compared to the pure MoSe2 electrode, including good cycling stability and high rate capacity, owing to the layered structure, the high surface area and the improved electrical conductivity. In addition, hybrid nanostructures of metal oxides and MDs used for LIBs have also been extensively studied. For instance, a novel Fe3O4/MoS2 composite by decorating ultra-small Fe3O4 nanoparticles (∼3.5 nm) on the surface of graphene-like MoS2 nanosheets demonstrated superior cycling and rate performances with delivering 1033 and 224 mA h g−1 at the current densities of 2000 and 10000 mA g−1, respectively.86 Here, Fe3O4 nanoparticles primarily acted as spacers to prevent the restacking of 2D MoS2 nanosheets, making the active surfaces of MoS2 nanosheets accessible for electrolyte penetration during charge/discharge processes and thus improving the cycling performance of composites.
It has been reported recently that in-plane 2D MD alloys could be a new class of electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, as Li can be adsorbed on the surface of the 2D MD alloy monolayer, maintaining the metallic nature of the system and their layered nature shows higher adsorption energy for Li ions and a negligible Li diffusion barrier.240 As an example, Mo1−xWxS2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) alloy composites developed by an effective microwave-assisted solvothermal method exhibited superior rate performance and improved specific capacity.241 Typically, the Mo0.6W0.4S2 alloy electrode delivered capacities of 847.3 and 428.4 mA h g−1 at the current densities of 0.1 and 1 A g−1, respectively. In addition, Mo1−xWxS2 alloys improve the cycling stability of the TMD anode materials compared to pure MoS2 and WS2 for lithium storage, which can be explained by the larger interlayer spacing of the Mo1−xWxS2 alloys. The intrinsic expanded interlayer spacing of the alloy composites provides sufficient and stable crystal host lattice structures, which is beneficial for the Li+ diffusion and volume accommodation.
In traditional batteries, an extra volume or weight percentage of up to about 30% is invalid due to the use of other auxiliary components (e.g., binders, conductive carbon, foils) for only the purpose of obtaining better electric conductivity and better physical contacts, significantly reducing the volumetric capacity and gravimetric capacity of the overall electrode.86,239 Therefore, recently there has been increasing interest in the development of binder-free and conductive additive-free film electrodes that can be directly used for LIBs. A novel hierarchical MoS2/ACF cloth composite obtained by directly growing ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of active carbon fiber (ACF) cloth that can serve as a free-standing and binder-free anode showed high specific capacity and excellent reversibility.117 A discharge capacity as high as 971 mA h g−1 is obtained at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 with a fading rate of 0.15% per cycle within 90 cycles. The composite still displayed a capacity of 418 mA h g−1 even after 200 cycles at a high current density of 0.5 A g−1. It is its robust structure and the synergistic effects of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets and ACF that lead to the superior electrochemical performance of MoS2/ACF.
On the other hand, α-MoO3 has also demonstrated great potential as an alternative anode for LIBs owing to its structure and chemical stability. The theoretical lithium storage capacity value of MoO3 is very high (1117 mA h g−1) being three times higher than that of graphite (372 mA h g−1).242 However, the poor electronic conductivity of MoO3 and sluggish kinetics of ions may detrimentally affect its electrochemical performance, especially in LIBs. It was reported that 2D MoO3 nanosheets exhibited high reversible capacities of 1110 mA h g−1 (3.0 to 0.01 V) and 841 mA h g−1 (2.0 to 0.01 V), and good rate capability and cycling performance.243 Vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on a graphene surface achieved via a nucleation-growth approach exhibited remarkable electrochemical performance for lithium storage with a high gravimetric capacity of ∼1500 mA h g−1 and fine volumetric capacity of ∼750 mA h cm−3 and prominent cycling stability (up to 1000 cycles), as shown in Fig. 15.244 Owing to the unique hierarchical structure, these hybrids can not only efficiently prevent the aggregation of electrode materials, but also facilitate the rapid diffusion of both lithium ions and electrons.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process for vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene. (b) Scheme for the lithiation and delithiation process of vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene. (c) Capacity retentions of vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene for 1000 cycles at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission244 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nevertheless, concerning the limited global natural resources, cost and safety of lithium for widespread usage in rechargeable battery technologies, sodium-ion batteries have attracted increasing alternative attention.245 Compared to lithium, sodium is not only the fourth most abundant element in the Earth's crust but also has a very negative redox potential (2.71 V vs. SHE) and a small electrochemical equivalent (0.86 g A h−1), which make it the most advantageous element for battery applications after lithium.120 Recently, sodium-ion batteries using MT&D-based hybrid materials have been reported.112,246 A new type of MoS2/graphene hybrid obtained directly from commercial bulky MoS2 and graphite combining a ball-milling technique with the following exfoliation process was used as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries.109 The as-prepared MoS2/graphene hybrids exhibited remarkably high rate capability (284 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1 (∼30 °C) and 201 mA h g−1 at 50 A g−1 (∼75 °C)), and excellent cycling stability (capacity retention of 95% after 250 cycles at 0.3 A g−1). It is the heterostructures with a low degree of defects and the residual oxygen-containing groups in graphene that result in the impressive rate capacity of the as-prepared MoS2/graphene hybrids. In addition, the 3D MoO3–rGO composite with MoO3 nanosheets chemically tagged with optimum amounts of rGO, which is essentially owing to the Mo–O–C linkages between MoO3 and rGO, exhibited remarkable electrochemical stability, and cyclability and high rate capability over a wide range of operating currents (0.05–1 C). This novel design of the 3D composite comprising a 2D electroactive compound and its integration are expected to pave the way for the design of many more 2D-electroactive material based 3D-composites for prospective applications in sodium-ion batteries.
4.4. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors combining the advantages of traditional capacitors and rechargeable batteries have also attracted tremendous attention owing to their excellent electrical properties of fast charging, high power density and long cycling life.247,248 There are two types of electrochemical capacitors, one is electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) which use carbon as the active material, and another one is pseudo-capacitors that consist of transition metal oxides, hydroxides and conducting polymers.
2D MDs such as MoS2 have been investigated for employment in electrochemical storage. The use of the metallic 1T phase of MoS2 obtained from the semiconducting 2H phase of MoS2 during chemical exfoliation of the bulk material can achieve higher electrochemical energy storage performance for supercapacitors because the 1T MoS2 phase is hydrophilic and 107 times more conductive than the semiconducting 2H phase.249–251 It was shown that chemically exfoliated nanosheets of MoS2 containing a high concentration of the metallic 1T phase could be electrochemically intercalated by ions such as H+, Li+, Na+ and K+ with extraordinary efficiency and ultimately achieve capacitance values ranging from ∼400 to ∼700 F cm−3 in a variety of aqueous electrolytes.249 However, due to the semi-insulating nature of MoS2, it is not an immediately attractive electrode material for energy storage. One possible approach to avoid this shortcoming is to extend MoS2 into the heterostructure with another 2D nanomaterial. As an example, the MoS2–rGO heterostructure-based binder-free electrode has been fabricated252 with a high specific capacitance (387.6 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1) and impressive cycling stability (virtually no loss up to 1000 cycles). The synergistic interplay between layered MoS2 and rGO in the MoS2–rGO hybrid leads to a superior supercapacitor performance.252 Conducting polymer based supercapacitors are receiving specific attention, so it is expected that the rational combination of 2D MDs and conducting polymers may produce desirable 2D composites for high performance supercapacitor electrodes. 2D mesoporous nanocomposites of polyaniline/MoS2 with an average spherical pore size of 12 nm and a large specific surface area of 258 m2 g−1 (mPANi/MoS2-1) show a maximum capacitance of 500 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, good rate performance, and excellent stability with ∼94% of initial capacitance after 5000 charge–discharge cycles, which is illustrated in Fig. 16(a–c). This superior performance is better than that of pure MoS2, polyaniline and MoS2− or graphene-based 2D nanocomposites.253
 Fig. 16  (a) Structural characterization of mPANi/MoS2-1 with a spherical pore structure. (b) Capacitance retention with increasing current density for the various mPANi/MoS2 samples, pure PANi, and thin MoS2 nanosheets, measured under similar conditions. (c) Cycling stability of the mPANi/MoS2 samples evaluated at a high current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the fabricated device of the rGO/MoO3 composite. (e) CV curves of the device under different bending status. Inset: Photograph of a bent device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 2 A g−1 for 5000 cycles. Reproduced with permission255 Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
More recently, α-MoO3 has also been investigated as a supercapacitor electrode in a Li-ion based electrolyte and its high charge storage was attributed to ion intercalated pseudo-capacitance.114 It was due to the α-MoO3 layered structure suitable for ion intercalation and various oxidation states of Mo (Mo6+, Mo5+, Mo4+, Mo3+), which can make MoO3 store energy by undergoing redox activity.254 However, drawbacks such as slow kinetics, high irreversibility and poor cycling stability still prevent α-MoO3 practical application. In order to improve its charge storage capacity, α-MoO3 has been nanostructured and combined with carbon-based materials.255 A porous rGO/MoO3 composite by using Mo-MOFs as the precursor shown in Fig. 16(d–f) has a high rate capability with the good electrochemical stability from the testing of different bending statuses and excellent capacitance retention of about 80% after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1.255 The enhanced electrochemical performances were ascribed to the fact that the prepared rGO/MoO3 composite with hierarchical porous nanostructures not only shorten the diffusion length of electrolyte ions but also provided more active surface area for the redox reaction. Moreover, the rGO film that wrapped around MoO3 not only enabled electrically conductive networks for electron transport but also prevented the aggregation of MoO3 nanomaterials.
5. Conclusion and outlook
Research dedicated to the development of efficient fabrication methods of 2D MT&Ds and their heterostructures has grown explosively and achieved impressive progress during the last few years. With basic understanding of the transport physics and developing delicate mobility and phase engineering strategies, some remarkable performances of 2D MT&Ds have been achieved in the wide range of applications including catalysts, sensors, batteries, supercapacitors, etc. However, notwithstanding the valuable results obtained so far, there are still significant challenges that prevent wide commercialization of the laboratory results. They remain to be overcome. For instance, chemical strategies concerning interfacial and molecular engineering are still highly unexplored. Although the addition of the second phase to the 2D heterojunction seems to be a feasible approach for achieving high carrier mobility, and consequently, better electrochemical characteristics of heterojunctions, the process of choosing the additive becomes a challenge due to the lack of fundamental understanding. Moreover, the improvement of the fabrication methods should minimize the density of interfacial impurities and thus the extrinsic impurity scattering. In this regard molecular design and engineering, more advanced functional molecules and convenient defect healing techniques are to be further exploited.
In this study, various methods aiming to address the above challenges of the devices based on different 2D MT&Ds and their heterostructures have been reviewed and summarized, including the combination of methods for the fabrication of heterostructured functional 2D materials, doping, intercalation and formation of in-plane heterostructures with other 2D nanomaterials. The importance of molecular and phase engineering is reflected by the requirements for degenerate doping at the contact area. In fact, the long-term stability of doping onto the ultrathin 2D channels is the key for realizing practical high-performance devices.
Although some exciting results have been reported in this appealing research area, challenges still remain in the rational design of 2D MT&D based heterostructures. First of all, despite many methods that have been developed for the 2D MT&D preparation, most of them have their limits. For example, as the commonly used methods, mechanical exfoliation has low yield, the hydrothermal method for the growth of 2D MT&Ds requires high temperature and pressure and the flake thickness normally is not shown to be monolayers. CVD is expensive and was reported to produce 2D MT&Ds in the morphologies other than layered. Developing a novel synthetic strategy with control on the thickness, size and morphology as well as using simple experimental conditions is crucial for the commercial applications. In this regard, ALD represents a valuable alternative for the fabrication of wafer-scale mono- or few-layered conformal defect-free nano-structures and p–n semiconductor heterostructures with precise control of their thickness.
2D α-MoO3, an oxide semiconductor among the group of MT&Ds, has also been demonstrated as a potential alternative to graphene for various practical applications owing to its attractive structure and chemical stability. The combination of MoO3 and MOFs has recently been demonstrated but the combination of 2D MoO3 and MOFs has not yet been fully explored. In addition, forming the lateral heterostructures of 2D MDs with some other 2D TMDs has also been sufficiently studied and showed good properties in electronic and optoelectronic fields. However, forming 2D MTs with other layered metal oxides or 2D TMDs has not yet been investigated.
In the framework of holistic mobility and phase engineering strategies, we expect that the performance of 2D MT&D-based devices will be further improved to the level of their intrinsic behavior. In this instance, the molecular and interfacing chemistry is a key direction to be exploited. The synergistic improvement of fundamental physicochemical properties of 2D MT&Ds and their heterostructures with chemically optimized dielectric supports and functionalized electrodes is the best solution to improve their performance. It has to be admitted that using more than one method of interfacing nano-engineering and more than one additive in 2D MT&Ds allows achieving a better result at the expense of different effect combination. However, it is necessary to realize that success in this direction is unpredictable. It greatly depends on the researcher's capability and experience to select wisely the combination of additives and nano-structural engineering methods for optimal result attainment.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study was partially supported by the research and development program of the Ghent University Global Campus, South Korea. Z. W. acknowledges the support from the Ghent University BOF Grant (BOF17/STA/015). S. Z. acknowledges the support from the “100 Talents Program” of Shanxi province, P.R. China.
References
Z. Wei, Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, D. Qi, K. Xing, Q. Zhao, F. Verpoort, J. Hu, L. Hyde and S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 334–344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, M. K. Akbari, Z. Hai, Z. Wei, L. Hyde, F. Verpoort, C. Xue and S. Zhuiykov, Mater. Des., 2018, 149, 135–144 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, C. Xue, H. Xu, S. Depuydt and S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 954–962 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, J. Hu, L. Hyde, S. Depuydt, F. Verpoort and S. Zhuiykov, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, X. Hai, H. Pang, H. Zhang, L. Shi, G. Liu, H. Liu, G. Zhao, M. Li and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10033–10041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kasprzak, T. Jakubczyk, C. Faugeras, M. Potemski, K. Nogajewski, M. Koperski, V. Delmonte and W. Langbein, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5333–5339 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhuiykov, E. Kats, B. Carey and S. Balendhran, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15029–15036 RSC .
S. Zhuiykov and E. Kats, Ionics, 2013, 19, 825–866 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Strano, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, Q. H. Wang and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ataca, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3952–3970 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
X. Li, J. Shan, W. Zhang, S. Su, L. Yuwen and L. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602660 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Choudhary, W. Choi, D. Akinwande, Y. H. Lee, G. H. Han and J. Park, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zeng, T. Sun, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Yin, G. Lu, Z. Fan, Q. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052–9056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chang, S. Yang, J. Lee, L. Tao, W. S. Hwang, D. Jena, N. Lu and D. Akinwande, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5446–5452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5892–5899 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, J. Chen, J. Wang, A. I. Minett, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Small, 2015, 11, 605–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. Bark, G. H. Ryu, Z. Lee and C. Lee, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 184002 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bergeron, V. K. Sangwan, J. J. McMorrow, G. P. Campbell, I. Balla, X. Liu, M. J. Bedzyk, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 053101 CrossRef .
L. K. Tan, B. Liu, J. H. Teng, S. Guo, H. Y. Low and K. P. Loh, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10584–10588 RSC .
S. Balendhran, J. Z. Ou, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram, S. Ippolito, Z. Vasic, E. Kats, S. Bhargava, S. Zhuiykov and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 461–466 RSC .
A. Roy, H. C. P. Movva, B. Satpati, K. Kim, R. Dey, A. Rai, T. Pramanik, S. Guchhait, E. Tutuc and S. K. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7396–7402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma and M. Shi, Nano-Micro Lett., 2013, 5, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
N. Choudhary, J. Park, J. Y. Hwang and W. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21215–21222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhuiykov, L. Hyde, Z. Hai, M. K. Akbari, E. Kats, C. Detavernier, C. Xue and H. Xu, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 6, 44–53 CrossRef .
M. Saly, G. Sundaram, D. Moser, A. Bertuch and R. Kanjolia, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2014, 32, 01A119 CrossRef .
Z. Wei, M. K. Akbari, Z. Hai, R. K. Ramachandran, C. Detavernier, F. Verpoort, E. Kats, H. Xu, J. Hu and S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 287, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, N. Liu, P. Li, J. Shi, G. Li, N. Xi, Y. Wang and L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8361–8370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hai, X. Wang, H. Ruan, M. Li, Z. Lu, Q. Zhang and Y. Liu, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 270, 98–103 CrossRef .
S. Muralikrishna, K. Manjunath, D. Samrat, V. Reddy, T. Ramakrishnappa and D. H. Nagaraju, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 89389–89396 RSC .
X. Feng, Q. Tang, J. Zhou, J. Fang, P. Ding, L. Sun and L. Shi, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2013, 48, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wei, G. L. Hao, Y. D. Liu, L. Ren, X. Qi, J. X. Zhong, L. W. Yang and J. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 571, 37–42 CrossRef .
L. Ye, H. Xu, D. Zhang and S. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 55, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte and U. Maitra, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13162–13185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Bang, K. W. Nam, J. Y. Kim, J. Shin, J. W. Choi and S. Y. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7084–7089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, P. Xu, D. Zhou, Y. Sun, Y. C. Li, M. A. T. Nguyen, M. Terrones and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5956–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng and Z. Liu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700335 CrossRef .
J. Ping, Z. Fan, M. Sindoro, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605817 CrossRef .
A. Yu, J. Wang, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar and J. Azadmanjiri, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13509–13537 RSC .
S. Su, C. Zhang, L. Yuwen, X. Liu, L. Wang, C. Fan and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 602–608 RSC .
D. Zhang, C. Jiang, P. Li and Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6462–6471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Wang, T. Cai, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Song, X. Dong and L. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 321, 366–374 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Laskar, D. N. Nath, L. Ma, E. W. Lee, C. H. Lee, T. Kent, Z. Yang, R. Mishra, M. A. Roldan, J. C. Idrobo, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, R. C. Myers, Y. Wu and S. Rajan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 104–108 CrossRef .
M. Rahm, R. Hoffmann and N. W. Ashcroft, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14625–14632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, M. H. Lin, I. T. Chen, N. M. Estakhri, X. Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Y. Chen, C. A. Chen, C. K. Shih, A. Alu, X. Li, Y. H. Lee and S. Gwo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Kang, J. Wen, J.-B. Xu, X. Wan, H. Chen, W. Xie, X. Zeng and K. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9868–9876 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Li, K. Tsukagoshi, E. Orgiu and P. Samorì, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 118–151 RSC .
M. S. Strano, K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, N. Medhekar, M. R. Field, S. Russo, K. L. Wang, S. Zhuiykov, J. Deng, S. Balendhran, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran, S. Walia, J. Tang and J. Scott, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 109–114 Search PubMed .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 210–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hussain, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Lee, Y. Zhang, Y.-T. Cui, H. Lin, F. Schmitt, S.-K. Mo, B. Zhou, T.-R. Chang, Z.-X. Shen, H.-T. Jeng, A. Bansil, H. Yan and R. Moore, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9, 111–115 Search PubMed .
C. Lu, H. Song, D. Zhang, H. Ding, X. Yan, H. Tang, X. Yang, J. Qin and R. Zhang, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2011, 46, 1195–1201 CrossRef .
H. N. Abdelhamid, L. Wang, X. Zou, Y. Yuan, J. Sun and A. S. Etman, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 2193–2201 CrossRef .
L. Mai, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Qi, C. Lao, R. Yang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712–3716 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, S. Vélez, S.-T. Lee, P. Alonso-González, Q. Bao, S. Li, J. Martín-Sánchez, I. Amenabar, Z. Dai, R. Hillenbrand, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, S. Sriram, C. Tollan, A. Y. Nikitin, J. Yuan, P. Li, J. Taboada-Gutiérrez and Y. Zhang, Nature, 2018, 562, 557–562 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, G. Cao, C. Liu, H. Song and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 3, 3547–3558 Search PubMed .
M. Wang and K. J. Koski, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3226–3233 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Rhim, Y. S. Kim and A. J. Freeman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 241908 CrossRef .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hai and S. Zhuiykov, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701385 CrossRef .
W. S. Yun, S. W. Han, S. C. Hong, I. G. Kim and J. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 033305 CrossRef .
S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 129, 431–441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 136, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 240–264 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-sayed and M. A. El-sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 7–9 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, X. Huang, X. Zhang, D. Zhao, X. Zhu, G. Lu, S. Guo and K. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601705 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luo, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. Li, Y. Li, C. Li, Y. Yang, L. Wang, P. Gao, G. Lu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705515 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jia, J. Li, K. Caldwell, D. E. Ramaker, J. M. Ziegelbauer, R. S. Kukreja, A. Kongkanand and S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 928–938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, S. Bao, M. Wang, X. Qi, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1444 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Su, F. Xu, W. Huang, L. Yuwen, B. Bao, Z. Luo, L. Weng and B. Xue, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5762–5769 RSC .
J. Kim, S. Byun, A. J. Smith, J. Yu and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1227–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. MacFarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Luo, X. Huang, C. Tan, H. Li, B. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Huang, J. Yang, Y. Zong, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12340–12344 RSC .
X. Zhou, H. Y. Zhou, T. Y. Cheang, Z. W. Zhao, C. C. Shen, K. Liang, Y. N. Liu, Z. K. Yang, M. Imran and A. W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27528–27534 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, C. Zhang, L. Yuwen, J. Chao, X. Zuo, X. Liu, C. Song, C. Fan and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18735–18741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qi, Q. Han, R. Yang, S. Cai, Z. Lian, X. Jia and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3685–3693 RSC .
X. Zhong, H. Yang, S. Guo, S. Li, G. Gou, Z. Niu, Z. Dong, Y. Lei, J. Jin, R. Li and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13925–13927 RSC .
Z. Sun, Q. Zhao, G. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 10352–10357 RSC .
S. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Huang, J. Chang and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 2305–2313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Song, X. Tang, L. Lu and J. Xue, Small, 2014, 10, 1536–1543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhao, Z. Y. Yang, Y. X. Zhang, L. Jing, X. Guo, Z. Ke, P. Hu, G. Wang, Y. M. Yan and K. N. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14238–14245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, Z. Li, D. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang, W. Peng and X. Fan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5175–5182 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. P. Vattikuti, P. C. Nagajyothi, P. Anil Kumar Reddy, M. Kotesh Kumar, J. Shim and C. Byon, Mater. Res. Lett., 2018, 6, 432–441 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Ju, W. Li, Y. Zhao and X. Han, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 483–490 RSC .
C. Li, H. Wang, J. Ming, M. Liu and P. Fang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 16968–16978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhu and X. Feng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10632–10635 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, K. T. Rim, G. W. Flynn and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4831–4837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Chiu, C. Zhang, H.-W. Shiu, C.-H. Chen, C.-P. Chuu, C.-H. Chen, C.-Y. S. Chang, C.-K. Shih, M.-Y. Chou, C.-K. Shih and L.-J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rivera, A. J. Marsden, N. D. M. Hine, P. V. Nguyen, G. C. Constantinescu, N. R. Wilson, V. Kandyba, D. H. Cobden, K. Seyler, A. Barinov, Z. P. L. Laker and X. Xu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601832 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-K. Shih, L.-J. Li, X. Ren, C. Zhang, C. Jin, M.-Y. Chou, C.-P. Chuu and M.-Y. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601459 CrossRef .
M. S. Kim, C. Seo, H. Kim, J. Lee, D. H. Luong, J. H. Park, G. H. Han and J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6211–6219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Chiu, M. Y. Li, W. Zhang, W. T. Hsu, W. H. Chang, M. Terrones, H. Terrones and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9649–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vajtai, Y. He, Z. Liu, S. Lei, X. Zhang, W. Zhou, G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lou, Q. Wang, K. Keyshar, B. Li and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6135–6141 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, Z. Zeng, H. Zhang, B. Zheng, H. Y. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Cai, J. I. Wong, J. Wu, Y.-Y. Tay and J. Chai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12560–12565 CAS .
J. M. Yun, Y. J. Noh, C. H. Lee, S. I. Na, S. Lee, S. M. Jo, H. I. Joh and D. Y. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 2319–2324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya, D. Dinda and S. K. Saha, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 145303 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, N. Li, H. Zhao and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19706–19710 RSC .
G. Huang, T. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Chang, L. Ma, F. Huang, D. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Small, 2013, 9, 3693–3703 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yu, S. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Ma, T. Sun, J. Yuan, K. Fu and Q. Bao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700268 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ji, X. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Yan, L. Chen, Y. Xie, C. Liu, W. Hou and G. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1886–1894 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Zhu and X. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10680–10685 RSC .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, D. Ye, P. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Guo, L. Wang and H. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702383 CrossRef .
H. Tang, K. Dou, C. C. Kaun, Q. Kuang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 360–364 RSC .
X. Zheng, J. Xu, K. Yan, H. Wang, Z. Wang and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2344–2353 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Sreedhara, A. L. Santhosha, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9466–9471 RSC .
Y. Wu, M. Xu, X. Chen, S. Yang, H. Wu, J. Pan and X. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 440–450 RSC .
J. Coleman, H. Pettersson, B. Mendoza-Sánchez, S. O. Brien, V. Nicolosi, D. Hanlon and J. Coelho, 2D Mater., 2016, 4, 015005 CrossRef .
S. Y. Tai, C. J. Liu, S. W. Chou, F. S.-S. Chien, J. Y. Lin and T. W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24753–24759 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13142–13145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, W. Wan, Y. Huang, J. Chen, H. H. Zhou and X. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5351–5358 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, A. Y. S. Tan, C. L. Hsu, L. J. Li, Y. C. Lu and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2169 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Zhu and D. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11857–11862 RSC .
C. Zhu, X. Mu, P. A. Vanaken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2152–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, K. H. Seng, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, Z. Guo, D. Wexler, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10730–10733 RSC .
H. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Li, F. Huo, B. Chen, X. Huang, Z. Fan, B. Zheng, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Huang, W. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Tan, L.-H. Xie, J. Chen and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8695–8701 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Pramoda, M. Kaur, U. Gupta and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13810–13816 RSC .
J. Tong, Q. Li, W. Li, W. Wang, W. Ma, B. Su and L. Bo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10240–10247 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, C. Guan and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702116 CrossRef .
M. Bagheri, M. Y. Masoomi and A. Morsali, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6949–6956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and S. J. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 92–101 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sim, M. Kim, S. Yim, M. Choi, J. Choi, S. Yoo and S. Jung, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12115–12123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Lauritsen, M. Nyberg, R. T. Vang, M. V. Bolinger, B. S. Clausen, H. Topsøe, K. W. Jacobsen, E. Lægsgaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Besenbacher, Nanotechnol., 2003, 14, 385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Monolayers, Q. Ding, K. J. Czech, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12734–12742 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Knirsch, N. C. Berner, H. C. Nerl, C. S. Cucinotta, Z. Gholamvand, Z. Wang, I. Abramovic, P. Vecera, M. Halik, S. Sanvito, S. Georg, V. Nicolosi, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, J. N. Coleman and C. Backes, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6018–6030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, N. C. Berner, C. Backes, G. S. Duesberg and A. R. McDonald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5803–5808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, J. Zhou, H. Zhu, W. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14628–14637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baia, Y. Zhaoa, J. Sun, Z. Tong, R. Luo, D. Li and A. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 131–138 CrossRef .
S.-K. Kim, J. J. Wie, Q. Mahmood and H. S. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7430–7435 RSC .
X. Feng, W. Xing, H. Yang, B. Yuan, L. Song, Y. Hu and K. M. Liew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13164–13173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, Y. Li, J. Peng, H. Hu, Q. Cheng and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 708–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, J. Wang, H. Yin, H. Zhao, D. Wang and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1117–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Shi, L. Feng and B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bai, S. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Z. Yang, S. Y. Choi, Y. Chai, S. F. Yu, S. P. Lau and J. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Suenaga, Y. Niimi, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang, H.-P. Komsa, A. V. Krasheninnikov and Y.-C. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2857–2861 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Q. Sun, Y. J. Li, J. L. He, W. Yang, P. Zhou, H. L. Lu, S. J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 093104 CrossRef .
D. Sarkar, X. Xie, J. Kang, H. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Navarrete, M. Moskovits and K. Banerjee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2852–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Javey, P. Zhao, M. Tosun, D. Kiriya and J. S. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7853–7856 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Z. Ou, A. F. Chrimes, B. J. Carey, T. Daeneke, M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, M. Mortazavi, S. Zhuiykov, N. Medhekar, M. Bhaskaran, J. R. Friend, M. S. Strano and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 883–890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Feng, J. Wang, A. Azcatl, N. Lu, R. Addou, N. Wang, C. Zhou, J. Lerach, V. Bojan, M. J. Kim, L. Q. Chen, R. M. Wallace, M. Terrones, J. Zhu and J. A. Robinson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6586–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Feng, X. Ma, C. An, Y. Sun, J. Li, Y. Chi and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2284–2293 CrossRef .
H. Shu, P. Luo, P. Liang, D. Cao and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7534–7541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
P. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, P. Xi, K. Tao, D. Gao and D. Xue, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Sim, M. Kim, M.-J. Chao, J. Choi, S. Yoo and Y. S. Jung, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12115–12123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, W. Bao, M. S. Fuhrer and L. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6742–6765 RSC .
Y. Xue, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Cao, Q. Yang and L. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602684 CrossRef .
J. Z. Ou, J. L. Campbell, D. Yao, W. Wlodarski and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Wang, M. J. Zheng, B. Zhang, C. Q. Zhu, Q. Li, L. Ma and W. Z. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Shen, Z. Wang, R. Yu and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11394–11400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8450–8453 RSC .
F. Xiong, H. Wang, X. Liu, J. Sun, M. Brongersma, E. Pop and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6777–6784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, A. F. Chrimes, W. Zhang, B. J. Carey, K. J. Berean, S. Walia, J. Van Embden, B. Zhang, K. Latham, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and J. Z. Ou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3482–3493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, A. R. Lupini, K. Xiao, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, J. Lee, L. Basile, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, K. Wang, M. Yoon, M.-W. Lin and D. B. Geohegan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gradečak, S. Garaj, K. Bogaert, D. Titow, S. Liu and J. Chesin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5129–5134 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Kang, J. Xu, J. Wen, W. Xie, K. Chen, X. Wan, X. Zeng and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6431–6437 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Cobden, J. J. P. Peters, S. Wu, J. S. Ross, R. Beanland, X. Xu, A. M. Sanchez, C. Huang, P. Rivera and W. Yao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Tseng, K.-H. Huang, Y.-H. Lee, C.-H. Lin and X.-Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 15, 410–415 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, Q. Zhang and U. Schwingenschlögl, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2208–2214 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Kc, Y. Nie, C. Liang, W. G. Vandenberghe, R. C. Longo, Y. Zheng, F. Kong, S. Hong, R. M. Wallace and K. Cho, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7370–7375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Duan, X. Wu, X. Zhuang, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, W. Hu, P. Ren, P. Guo, L. Ma, X. Fan, X. Wang, J. Xu, A. Pan and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3756–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Shen, S. Ning, Y. Ito, P. Liu, Z. Tang, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29438–29444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. Ito, Y. Zhang, J. Du, T. Fujita, A. Hirata, Z. Tang and M. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1571–1579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, X. Wang, H. Li, B. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Li, N. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Huang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5102–5109 RSC .
B. Rajbanshi, S. Sarkar and P. Sarkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26166–26174 RSC .
H. Liu, K. K. A. Antwi, S. Chua and D. Chi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 624–629 RSC .
D. O. Dumcenco, H. Kobayashi, Z. Liu, Y. S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1351 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Song, G. H. Ryu, S. J. Lee, S. Sim, C. W. Lee, T. Choi, H. Jung, Y. Kim, Z. Lee, J. M. Myoung, C. Dussarrat, C. Lansalot-Matras, J. Park, H. Choi and H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Xi, D. O. Dumcenco, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, D. Wang, Z. Shuai, Y. S. Huang and L. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4610–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Ito, S. Ning, Y. Tan, T. Fujita, A. Hirata and M. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. S. Kim, B. Park, S. H. Oh, S. Roy, J. Kim and W. Choi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6301–6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, J. Lin, L. Sun, Q. L. Le, X. Yu, G. Gao, C.-H. Hsu, D. Wu, T.-R. Chang, Q. Zeng, F. Liu, Q. J. Wang, H.-T. Jeng, H. Lin, A. Trampert, Z. Shen, K. Suenaga and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603991 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. He, Y. Wan, H. Jiang, C. Wu, Z. Sun, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Chen, D. Liu, Y. A. Haleem, B. Ge and X. Wu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1687–1698 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lei, K. Yu, H. Li, Z. Tang and Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15096–15104 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, S. Peng, C. Tan, H. Ang, H. Tan, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5597–5601 RSC .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Koski, D. Kong, Y. Cui, M. Pasta, H. Wang, J. J. Cha and J. Yao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yang, X. Wang, H. Li, B. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Li, N. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Huang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5102–5109 RSC .
J. Li, H. Yan, W. Wei and L. Meng, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 15148–15154 RSC .
W. Xiao, P. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Song, Y. P. Feng, D. Gao and J. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602086 CrossRef .
L. Li, T. Zhang, J. Yan, X. Cai and S. F. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700441 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ren, H. Zhang and C. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 316–322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, R. Miao, T. D. Huan, I. M. Mosa, A. S. Poyraz, W. Zhong, J. E. Cloud, D. A. Kriz, S. Thanneeru, J. He, Y. Zhang, R. Ramprasad and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600528 CrossRef .
Q. Sun, N. Wang, J. Yu and J. C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804368 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shayegan, C. S. Lee and F. Haghighat, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 2408–2439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, C. M. A. Parlett, M. A. Isaacs, D. V. Jowett, R. E. Douthwaite, M. C. R. Cockett and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Jing, L. Shen and M. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 166, 445–453 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, Z. Zeng, Q. He, Z. Wang, S. J. Wang, Y. Du, Z. Yin, X. Sun, W. Chen and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2264–2270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, H. Zhao and X. Quan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 56–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-Zadeh and J. Z. Ou, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 5–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, W. Cao, C. Zhang, X. Han, H. Yu, D. Zhu, J. Chao, C. Fan and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76614–76620 RSC .
X. Q. Qiao, Z. W. Zhang, F. Y. Tian, D. F. Hou, Z. F. Tian, D. S. Li and Q. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 3538–3547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Cho, H. J. Koh, H. W. Yoo, J. S. Kim and H. T. Jung, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 183–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, A. Sharma, M. Kaur and S. Husale, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700009 CrossRef .
C. Kuru, C. Choi, A. Kargar, D. Choi, Y. J. Kim, C. H. Liu, S. Yavuz and S. Jin, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1–5 Search PubMed .
H. L. Zou, B. L. Li, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 253, 352–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, C. Xia, S. Wang, F. Han, M. K. Akbari, Z. Hai and S. Zhuiykov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 267, 93–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Huang, L. Wang, J. Li and Y. M. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 178, 671–677 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. da Silveira Firmiano, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N. Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira, W. H. Schreiner and E. R. Leite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301380 CrossRef .
K. Ma, A. Sinha, X. Dang and H. Zhao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, B147–B154 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
F. Ji, X. Ren, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, L. Pang, J. Jiang and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8696–8703 RSC .
S. N. Shirodkar, J. Acharya, U. V. Waghmare, D. J. Late, J. Luo, V. P. Dravid, B. Liu, D. Charles, A. Yan, Y.-K. Huang and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4879–4891 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, L. Chen, G. Liu, A. N. Abbas, M. Fathi and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5304–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Park, J. Park, J. Jang, H. Lee, H. Jeong, K. Cho, S. Hong and T. Lee, Nanotechnol., 2013, 24, 095202 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Briand, A. Oprea, J. Courbat and N. Bârsan, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cho, J. Yoon, S. K. Lim, A. R. Kim, D. H. Kim, S. G. Park, J. D. Kwon, Y. J. Lee, K. H. Lee, B. H. Lee, H. C. Ko and M. G. Hahm, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16775–16780 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Wang, D. Xie, J. Xu, Y. Xia, W. Li, L. Xiang, Z. Li, S. Xu and S. Komarneni, Nanotechnol., 2017, 28, 325501 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. G. Song, G. H. Ryu, K. Y. Ko, W. J. Woo, Y. Kim, D. Kim, J. H. Lim, S. Lee, Z. Lee, J. Park and H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9338–9345 RSC .
P. K. Kannan, D. J. Late, H. Morgan and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13293–13312 RSC .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. De Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Li, W. Xu, S. Xu, S. Lin, S. Zhang, Y. Lu and Z. Xu, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 89–96 CrossRef .
P. Vabbina, N. Choudhary, A. A. Chowdhury, R. Sinha, M. Karabiyik, S. Das, W. Choi and N. Pala, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15206–15213 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Qiu, H. Yang, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. Cao, W. Hu and P. A. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1684–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Cook, M. Gong, Y. Gong, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12728–12733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Song, J. Sophia, J. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. Liu, S. Li and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 573–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Winslow, S. J. Laux and T. G. Townsend, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2018, 129, 263–277 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, F. Huang, K. Chang, L. Ma, H. Li, J.-Y. Lee, Z. Xu, Q. Zhang and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6251 RSC .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, X. Rui, Q. Yan, J. Kong and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, E. Liu, F. He, C. Shi, C. He, J. Li and N. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 541–549 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan and U. Maitra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7809–7832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1838–1840 RSC .
Z. Luo, J. Zhou, L. Wang, G. Fang, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15302–15308 RSC .
K. Chang and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252–4254 RSC .
D. Kong, H. He, Q. Song, B. Wang, W. Lv, Q. H. Yang and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3320–3325 RSC .
G. Barik and S. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25837–25848 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Yan, W. Wei and L. Meng, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 15148–15154 RSC .
S. Hariharan, K. Saravanan and P. Balaya, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 5–9 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Gao and Y. Gong, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 52, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Bi and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 672–679 RSC .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, F. Zhang, J. Li and Y. Tang, Small, 2018, 14, 1801335 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Sun, J.-G. Wang, H. Liu, H. Wang, B. Wei and W. Hua, Carbon, 2017, 127, 85–92 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Zhao, Z. Tang, H. Tang, D. Wang and H. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 27, 1117–1123 Search PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, Y. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Li, L. Yang, M. Benamara, L. Chen and H. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1825–1832 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Xiao, X. Luo, Z. Wu, Y. J. Wang and B. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2509–2515 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saraf, K. Natarajan and S. M. Mobin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16588–16595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, S. Zhu, F. Xu, W. Mao, H. Wei, Y. Mai and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43975–43982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mendoza-Sánchez, T. Brousse, C. Ramirez-Castro, V. Nicolosi and P. S. Grant, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 253–260 CrossRef .
Q. Yan, X. Cao, W. Shi, B. Zheng, X. Rui, H. Zhang, J. Yang, B. Chen, Z. Luo and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
	Zihan Wei received her M.Sc. degree from Micro and Nano System Research Center of Taiyuan University of Technology in 2016. She is currently working toward her Ph.D. degree at the Department of Applied Analytical & Physical Chemistry of the Ghent University Global Campus, Korea. Her main research studies focus on two dimensional materials, nanostructure semiconductor oxides and their functionalization.
	Professor Serge Zhuiykov received his Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering in 1991. He has more than 26 years of combined academic and industrial experience working at different universities in Australia, Japan, Korea and Europe and in industrial environments. Since 2015 he has been a Senior Full Professor at the Department of Applied Analytical & Physical Chemistry of the Ghent University Global Campus, Korea and a Director of Environmental & Energy Research Center. His research interests lie in the area of the development, design and fabrication of new two-dimensional nanomaterials for solid-state environmental sensors and other advanced functional devices. He has published more than 250 peer-reviewed scientific publications including 3 monographs in 2007, 2014 and 2018, respectively. He is a recipient of the 2007, 2011, and 2013 Australian Academy of Science/Japan Society for Promotion of Science and 2010 Australian Government Endeavour Executive Awards for his work on nanomaterials for chemical sensors. In 2017, he was selected as one of the recipients of very prestigious “100 Talents” Program of the Shanxi Province, P.R. China.

 	Fig. 1  Modern state-of-the-art approaches to the carrier mobility engineering in 2D MT&Ds.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the orthorhombic lattice structure of layered α-MoO3 (red spheres, oxygen atoms). The three possible positions of oxygen atoms are denoted as O1–3, and the unit cell is shown dashed. (b) Schematic of the unit cell of α-MoO3; the lattice constants are a = 0.396 nm, b = 1.385 nm and c = 0.369 nm. Blue spheres, molybdenum atoms. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Structure of the monolayer 2H-MoX2 (X = S, Se, and Te). (d) Top- and (e) side-view of the structure of the monolayer of 2H-MoX2. Red and yellow spheres denote Mo and chalcogen (S, Se, and Te) atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2015, AIP Publisher.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of Pt NPs synthesized on a MoS2 nanosheet (scale bar, 100 nm). (b) The magnified TEM image of Pt NPs with a size of 1–3 nm on MoS2 nanosheets (scale bar, 5 nm). (c) SAED pattern of a Pt–MoS2 hybrid nanosheet with the electron beam perpendicular to the basal plane of the MoS2 nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Representative (d) TEM image, (e) HRTEM image and (f) EDX spectrum of as-prepared MoS2–PtAg hybrid nanomaterials. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) the original ACF cloth and (b) the as-obtained hierarchical MoS2/ACF cloth. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the in situ synthesis of MoS2–ZIF-8 nanocomposites. FESEM images of (d) ZIF-8 and (e) MoS2–ZIF-8 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of ligand conjugation on sulfur vacancies on the basal plane of 2H-MoS2 monolayers. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2015, The American Chemistry Society. (b) Schematic representation of the basal-plane functionalization of MoS2. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2015, The American Chemistry Society. (c) A scheme showing the fabrication process of MoS2-PEG. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of Pt–MoS2 with the inset showing a typical MoS2 layer distance of 0.62 nm. (b and c) High-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images of Pt–MoS2 showing that the single Pt atoms (marked by red circles in figure b) uniformly disperse in the 2D MoS2 plane. (d) Magnified domain with a red dashed rectangle in (c) showing a honeycomb arrangement of MoS2, and the single Pt atoms occupying the exact positions of the Mo atoms (marked by red arrows). The bottom inset shows the simulated configuration of Pt–MoS2. The green, yellow and blue balls represent Mo, S and Pt, respectively. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) HAADF and the (f) ABF image of MoS2 upon Na intercalation. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) 1.4 nm α-MoO3 used for intercalation for sub-stoichiometry. (b) Optical microscopy images showing evolution of a thin MoO3 flake with the duration of H+ intercalation. (c) Micro-Raman spectra corresponding to optical images in (b). (d) Photon energy vs. (αhν)2 curves derived from the absorbance spectrum of a MoO3 flake with progression of catalyzed H+ intercalation. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) WS2/MoS2 in-plane heterojunctions. (b) Optical image of triangular or star crystals wrapped by the relatively bright edges showing the lateral heterostructures. Scale bar: 30 μm. (c) SEM image of heterostructure crystals. Scale bar: 30 μm. (d) AFM image of a triangular domain showing a core region with a thickness of 0.78 nm and a shell region with a thickness of 2 nm. Scale bar: 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the experimental steps for the formation of MoSe2/MoS2 heterojunction arrays. (f) Low-magnification Z-contrast image of the nanosheet showing the MoSe2 and MoS2 regions with a finite boundary across the domains (scale bars, 5 nm). Reproduced with permission162 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Schematic illustration of the sequential growth of the monolayer WSe2-MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. (h) As shown in the optical image, the WSe2 and MoS2 can be distinguished by their optical contrast. (i) High-resolution STEM images taken from the WSe2-MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. Reproduced with permission166 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of typical Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheets and (b) TEM image of a typical Mo1−xWxS2 nanosheet. (c) Cs-corrected STEM image of a thin Mo1−xWxS2 layer, revealing both 2H and 1T phase domains, the red (d) and blue (e) squares represent the 2H and 1T structures. Structure models of (g) 2H and (h) 1T structures. Reproduced with permission174 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Polarization performance curves and (b) the Tafel plots on a rotating glassy carbon disk electrode; reproduced with permission107 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Polarization curves and (d) the corresponding Tafel plots of pure MoS2, N-doped MoS2 and platinum. Reproduced with permission191 Copyright 2016, Wiley. (e) Polarisation curves and (f) the corresponding Tafel plots of Pt–MoS2, Pt–C and MoS2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of the MoS2@Cu2O composite; (b) mechanism and (c) transient photocurrent-time profiles at a bias of −0.1 V versus SCE for the MoS2@Cu2O composite and pristine Cu2O nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission87 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of MoS2/UiO66–CdS; (e) schematic illustration of the charge transfer in the MoS2/UiO66–CdS composite and (f) photocurrent spectra of the pure CdS, UiO66–CdS and MoS2/UiO66–CdS under visible light irradiation (≥420 nm). Reproduced with permission199 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Science.	 

 	Fig. 12  The differential pulse voltammograms of various concentrations of CC at (a) MoS2/GCE, (b) Au–MoS2/GCE, (c) Pt–MoS2/GCE and (d) Au@Pt–MoS2/GCE in 0.1 M PB (pH 7.0). Inset figures: plot of oxidation peak currents derived from DPVs vs. CC concentrations. TEM images of the (e) MoS2 nanosheet, (f) Au–MoS2 nanocomposite, (g) Pt–MoS2 nanocomposite and (h) Au@Pt–MoS2 nanocomposite. Inset figures: histograms of Au, Pt and Au@Pt nanoparticles’ diameters in the corresponding MoS2-based nanocomposite. Insert figures: histograms of Au, Pt and Au@Pt nanoparticles’ diameters in the corresponding MoS2-based nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission203 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Electrical responses of pristine MoS2 nanosheets and MoS2–Pd composite to 50000 ppm H2. (b) I–V characteristics of the MoS2–Pd composite before and after H2 exposure. Reproduced with permission207 Copyright 2015, Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Au-doped MoS2 gas sensor, photograph of pristine MoS2 and Au-doped MoS2 solutions and SEM images of the Au-doped MoS2 films; (d) real-time resistance of the pristine MoS2 and Au-doped MoS2 sensors exposed to various VOCs. Reproduced with permission205 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (e) Optical image of a graphene/MoS2 heterostructured device on a bent polyimide substrate and (inset) SEM image of the MoS2 device with interdigitated graphene electrodes; (f) comparison of the gas response characteristics of the flexible heterostructured device before/after the bending cycle test; (inset) 3D schematic images showing the bending test condition. Reproduced with permission219 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Optical image of a typical MoS2/graphene heterostructure film, (b) photograph of an array of printed MoS2/graphene heterostructure photodetectors on fused silica. The inset (lower left) is a schematic diagram of the photodetector. (c) Dynamic photocurrent measured in response to 540 nm light on and off. The inset is the enlarged version. Reproduced with permission227 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the MoTe2/graphene phototransistor. (e) Time-dependent photocurrent of the MoTe2/graphene heterostructure and pure MoTe2 devices. (f) Photocurrent and photoresponsivity versus incident light power at 1064 nm. Reproduced with permission105 Copyright 2017, Wiley. (g) Photo-image of the MoS2/WS2 vertical heterojunction device arrays on the PDMS substrate. Schematic of a MoS2/WS2 vertical heterojunction phototransistor. (i) Dependence of photocurrent and photoresponsivity on incident light power (at 405 nm); the green and black dots correspond to original data. Reproduced with permission228 Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process for vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene. (b) Scheme for the lithiation and delithiation process of vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene. (c) Capacity retentions of vertically oriented MoO3 nanosheets on graphene for 1000 cycles at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission244 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Structural characterization of mPANi/MoS2-1 with a spherical pore structure. (b) Capacitance retention with increasing current density for the various mPANi/MoS2 samples, pure PANi, and thin MoS2 nanosheets, measured under similar conditions. (c) Cycling stability of the mPANi/MoS2 samples evaluated at a high current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the fabricated device of the rGO/MoO3 composite. (e) CV curves of the device under different bending status. Inset: Photograph of a bent device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 2 A g−1 for 5000 cycles. Reproduced with permission255 Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
