Review on new horizons of aggregation induced emission: from design to development  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00825G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00825G
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1541-1584Review on new horizons of aggregation induced emission: from design to development

        
          
            Suman 
            G. R.
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mayank 
            Pandey
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            A. S. Jeevan 
            Chakravarthy
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Physics, School of Sciences, Jain (Deemed to be University), Bangalore-560027, India. E-mail: grs.suman@gmail.com
bDepartment of Electronics, Kristu Jayanti College (Autonomous), Bangalore-560077, India. E-mail: mayank01081989@gmail.com
cDOS in Chemistry, Central College Campus, Bangalore University, Bangalore 560001, India
Received 
      14th October 2020
    , Accepted 5th November 2020First published on 6th November 2020AbstractAn unusual behavior of some organic luminophores in which intensity of emission is enhanced in aggregated condition is known as aggregation induced emission (AIE). The exposure of this concept to the scientific community significantly changes the perception towards conventionally used photophysical phenomena. Due to the high quantum yield and tunable emission properties, AIE luminogens (AIEgens) have become promising candidates for biosensors, opto-electronics and energy applications. The excellent stimuli responsiveness of AIE luminogens (AIEgens) provides them with a key edge for sensitive measurements such as intracellular temperature, pH, etc. In recent times the immense research interest in the AIE phenomenon stems from the inherent solid-state emission as well as its constructive effect on many other phenomena such as mechanochromism, thermally activated delayed fluorescence and circularly polarized luminescence. Many AIE fluorophores readily exhibit mechanochromism but still their interaction with external stimuli results in aggregation caused quenching (ACQ). However, the latest reports shed some light on designing and developing mechanochromophores with enhanced emission. With the inclusion of bright emission, photostability, great signal to noise ratio and non-invasiveness into one package of aggregation induced emission, a significant contribution for the enrichment of the field of photodynamic therapy and theranostics can be foreseen. Hence, the aim of this review is to provide a comprehensive study on recent developments in AIE materials and their mechanochromic, photodynamic therapeutic and theranostic, sensing and electroluminescence applications which offers new possibilities to utilize AIE materials. This review article is devoted to future research perspectives and challenges towards the development of AIE materials for modern technological and therapeutic applications.
Suman G. R.
Dr Suman G. R. received his PhD from CHRIST (Deemed To be University) on “Synthesis, spectroscopic and DFT studies of some Benzimidazole and Benzothiazole derivatives”. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, School of Sciences, JAIN (Deemed to be University), Bangalore, Karnataka, India. His research interests include design and synthesis of novel π-conjugated fluorescent molecules, and also understanding their photophysical and chemical behavior to achieve efficient solid-state emission characteristics for chemical sensing and light conversion applications.
Mayank Pandey
Dr Mayank Pandey is a material physicist. He pursued his PhD at VIT University, India. His research interests include synthesis of graphene quantum dot (GQD) based polymeric composites, polymer nanocomposites, polymer composite/blend electrolytes, and organic semiconductor/organic solar cells. Besides, much emphasis of his research is given to contributing towards the development of new approaches in the field of nano carbon derivatives. He completed his postdoctoral research at CHRIST (Deemed to be university), Bangalore, Karnataka, India, where he worked on luminescent carbon dots. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor in the Department of Electronics, Kristu Jayanthi College, Bangalore, India.
A. S. Jeevan Chakravarthy
Mr A. S. Jeevan Chakravarthy is a CSIR Senior Research Fellow, pursuing his PhD, at the Department of Chemistry, Central College Campus, Bangalore University, Bangalore, India. His research interest lies in the synthesis and application of organo silicon reagents for coupling reactions, and palladium catalyzed regiospecific cross coupling reactions. Over a short period of time he has also served as a chemist at LGC Promochemie, gaining hands on experience on synthesis, purification and characterization of pharmaceutical impurities in accordance with EP and BP standards.
1. Introduction
Organic fluorophores are playing a vital role in biomedical, optoelectronic and sensing applications. Understanding the phenomenon of fluorescence and henceforth utilizing it for multifunctional applications has been an interesting field for researchers. Fluorophores exhibiting various photophysical and chemical mechanisms resulting in fluorescence emission such as intramolecular charge transfer, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), and excited state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT) have been well documented.1–3 Traditional fluorophores which exhibit emission quenching upon aggregation were fine tuned for many applications by employing surfactants to control the aggregation size and shape4 and also developing water soluble fluorescent probes.5,6 These fluorophores, which generally undergo inter and intramolecular energy transfer, have found significant applications as probes for chemical and biological samples7,8 towards light conversion applications.9 Though they are luminescence active in solution, they turn out to be a poor performer in the solid state because of aggregation which causes emission quenching. The emission resistance in the solid state makes them a bad choice for real world problems. The π–π coplanar interactions in these molecules in the aggregates lead to the formation of an exciplex which dissipates through non-radiative relaxation. Hence, the low signal to noise ratio and photobleaching observed in these fluorophores are a major setback to practical usage.
However, a constructive effect of aggregation was observed from the aggregation induced emission (AIE) phenomenon discovered by the Tang group in 2001.10 It was observed that propeller shaped molecule pentaphenylsilole exhibited enhanced emission in large water fractions due to the restriction of intramolecular motion (RIM) (Fig. 1). The molecular packing plays a great role in obtaining AIE properties. The general AIE mechanism which has been exhibited by the molecular designs proposed so far was due to the formation of J-type aggregation, restriction of intramolecular motions, twisted structures and excited state intramolecular proton transfer from the proton donor to the acceptor.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structure and conformational rotamers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. 
Small molecules such as tetraphenylethene (TPE) derivatives and 2,5-bis(4-alkoxycarbonylphenyl)-1,4-diaryl-1,4-dihydropyrrolo[3,2-b]pyrrole (AAPP) groups, polymers and inorganic nanoparticles have been widely subjected to investigation of their AIE abilities. The synthesis and development of AIEgens such as tetraphenylpyrazine (TPP), thiophenes and 9,10-distrylanthracene (DSA) derivatives has been rapidly increased by many research groups (Fig. 2).11–13
 Fig. 2  Some of the important AIEgens. 
AIEgens exhibit excellent photostability and minimal background noise in the aggregated and solid state. This is another very important reason to choose AIEgens as an ideal candidate for biosensors or biomedical applications. After the very first investigation of AIEgens in the year 2001 as mentioned above, they have been extensively researched in the field of biomedicine and also became promising candidates in this area.14–17 Compared to conventional fluorescent dyes, AIEgens are more sensitive analytical substrates, which is required for the development of efficient biosensors. To determine specific images of organelles, the cell environment and in vivo images in tumors, AIEgens can play an effective role as a visual tool for bio-imaging applications. The visual tool and photosensitizer role of AIEgens can also be useful in drug delivery through image guided processes for cancer theranostics and cancer photodynamic therapy. Also, manifesting the two contrasting processes of twisted intramolecular charge transfer and aggregation induced emission to balance the radiative and nonradiative paths is significantly acting as a new avenue for photothermal (PT) theranostic applications.18,19 Specifically, NIR absorbing molecules have great capability to act as PT agents due to their ability to harvest the absorbed light into heat efficiently.20 As a proof of concept, photothermal energy induced by intramolecular motion in the solution state of donor–acceptor type small molecule based NIR absorbing nano agents has been utilized efficiently for photoacoustic imaging-guided photothermal therapy for both in vitro and in vivo environments.21 Hence, there is great scope for biocompatible NIR absorbing PT probes which have deep tissue penetrating ability. In addition, AIE materials are also interesting for many other applications such as bioactive molecules,22,23 biometric imaging,24 and metal ion sensors.25–27
In the year 2017, Mei et al. reviewed the progress and development of bio-probes based on AIE materials.28 The review report was mainly concentrated towards the types and compositions of AIEgens and their functions. A wide range of applications for biomolecule detection and biomedicines were summarized. The review report also discussed AIEgen dots, polymers, small molecule AIEgens and their applications. Many successful approaches have been taken for developing AIE based biosensors. The latest developments in AIE research, which has prominence in materials as well as biological science, such as synthesis and structural aspects, and phototherapeutic and theranostic applications, have not been reviewed to date.
This review report will give insight into further challenges and opportunities to develop AIEgens for the upgradation of research in mechanochromic, therapeutic and theranostic applications. The design strategies, structure–property relations and application of AIEgens for cell imaging, sensing and optoelectronic devices have been discussed.
2. Mechanochromism and photophysical properties
One of the aesthetic characters of AIEgens is mechanochromism (MC), which is the capability to exhibit color modification under external stimuli.29,30 The change in conjugation under the influence of external force is one of the guiding factors in mechanochromism. The alteration in color of the mechanochrome can be recovered by subjecting it to annealing temperatures or solvent vapors. Though strong intermolecular interactions due to external stimuli induced conformational planarization result in quenching of the emission intensity even in AIE fluorophores, however, there are a few reports on AIE molecules which can exhibit both MC and enhanced mechanoluminescence (ML). Thus, MC in combination with ML makes suitable materials for mechanical sensors, memory chips and luminescent switches, which is currently being developed using conventional MC materials.31–34
A twisted conformation in molecules enables an enhancement in intensity in the aggregation state. External stimuli which deform the twisted structures into planarized or more twisted conformations due to the availability of enough space35,36 result in planarized charge transfer and may lead to a blue or red shift.
It is generally observed that many AIEgens studied so far have a tendency to undergo a red shift with reduced emission intensity with increased mechanical pressure. However, the Yang group37 for the first time reported a blue shift with enhanced emission in a π-conjugated 9-(3-(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)phenyl) anthracene crystal upon an increase in pressure (Fig. 3). The discrete π–π anthracene (AN) dimer stacking with tetraphenyl ethylene (TPE) as a spacer framework produced a cooperative effect of suppressed energy transfer from TPE to the AN dimer and the AIE mechanism of TPE units to exhibit enhanced blue-shifted emission. This work gives a new strategy to design aggregation induced emission-mechanochromic (AIE-MC) molecules and explore the fundamental photophysics.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structure of mTPE-AN and fluorescence variation upon a change in external pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. 
Guo et al. (2019) synthesized four TPE functionalized pyrazolines (Fig. 4a) in which TPEB, TPEF and TPEN upon grinding were red-shifted with an increase in intensity, whereas TPECN resulted in reduced intensity with a redshift in its emission.38 The combination of conformational planarization and destructive π–π interactions upon grinding led to the enhancement of the intensity. The mechanisms in their studies were explored and explained by the structural properties. Their results also demonstrated that the red shifted peaks with reduced fluorescence of TPECN were due to the increased intermolecular interaction and conformational planarization phenomenon. As for TPEB, the increase in the solid state PL intensity upon grinding was attributed to a relatively loose interface between layers, which led to weak π–π interactions. These results clearly demonstrated that the translation of packing arrangements (Fig. 4b) was an efficient method to design mechanochromic materials with enhanced emission.
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthesized molecules and (b) change in molecular packing and quantum yield upon grinding. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. 
The multi crystalline states existing due to different molecular arrangements in polymorphic molecules emit various colors. The combination of polymorphism and AIE helps in obtaining multiple colors with the MC property. Wang et al. developed an asymmetric 4H-pyran derivative AMP and it was found to display the AIE property originating from the RIR mechanism in the aggregated state.39 It also exhibited three crystalline polymorphs resulting in three different colors, yellow (AMP-y), red (AMP-r) and orange (AMP-o) (Fig. 5). The fluorescence color changes in AMP-y and AMP-r were attributed to the destroyed π⋯π interactions in the zigzag packing arrangements, which led to the planarization of the molecular conformations and a change of the packing arrangements, whereas, in the case of AMP-o, the solid state emission may be due to its complete planar conformation rather than its packing arrangement because of the absence of π⋯π stacking interactions in the crystal structure.
 Fig. 5  Fluorescence emission of AMP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. 
The donor–acceptor type polymorphs DMTCS-AC and DBTCS-AC with electron donor 9,9-dimethyl-9,10-dihydroacridine and electron acceptor dicyanodistyrylbenzene developed by Cheng et al. exhibited polymorph dependent mechanochromism (MC) which arises from planarized intramolecular charge transfer.40 Their studies explained the fluorescence changes of polymorphous powders from bright orange to red and FR/NIR with a tremendous spectral shift. The MC behavior of DMTCS-AC and DBTCS-AC is generated with the transformation between the crystalline and amorphous state and simultaneously a large photoluminescence shift was observed due to the degree of π-conjugation. Significant MC can be observed in DBTCS-AC compared to DMTCS-AC due to the extended distortion and strong charge transfer (Fig. 6a–c). The study also claimed to be useful for designing novel dyes on the basis of the structure property relationship.
 Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structures. (b) Dihedral angle changes and (c) representation of MC under UV light for DMTCS-AC and DBTCS-AC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. 
The position of the isomer significantly alters the AIE property. Wang et al. described the same concept by studying the photoluminescence properties and molecular stacking of m-BPCDM and p-BPCDM, which are two active AIE positional materials.41 The group explains that the presence of the carbazole group as an electron donor and the dicyanovinyl unit as a strong electron withdrawer suggests a D–π–A structure of m-BPCDM and p-BPCDM (Fig. 7a). The carbazole group connected with a single bond and the presence of an adjacent benzene ring explains the structure of these two molecules in detail. In this study the carbazole group in the non-aggregated form plays a role of rotors, which makes it easy to absorb more energy through rotation and subsequently reduces the emission. As per the RIR phenomenon of AIE, these two molecules can also show the AIE effect. To understand the polarity with different solvent and the photoluminescence property of D–π–A conjugates, UV studies were also investigated by the group. Larger π–π stacking interactions were observed in p-BPCDM than m-BPCDM (Fig. 7b), which also resulted in an enhanced AIE nature in p-BPCDM whereas better mechanochromism in m-BPCDM. Whereas, m-BPCDM has non-face to face stacking, which is responsible for its reversible mechanochromic properties. This suggested the position isomerism greatly alters the AIE and mechanochromism. These studies can be a guide for the synthesis of other systems.
 Fig. 7  (a) Molecular structures and (b) molecular stacking and packaging of m-BPCDM and p-BPCDM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. 
Tunable luminescence and low molecular weight soft materials can be a potential candidate for sensing, drug delivery and tissue engineering, and also due to their responsiveness to external stimuli like mechanical pressure,42,43 light44 and heat45,46 need great attention for utilization in various applications. However, very few reports are available on low molecular weight AIE materials and gels. Jana et al. synthesized a series of pyrene containing acrylonitrile derivatives and a cyano acceptor on the double bond with chiral and racemic citronellol groups on the aromatic phenyl ring (Fig. 8).47 They have explained the emission and absorption properties of the series of pyrenes using organic solvent and water. Mono-substituted derivatives MA and MC showed bundle/ribbon like aggregates and the di-substituted compounds formed interconnected spheres (Fig. 9). The mono and di-alkyl derivatives formed effective gels in cyclohexane due to the π–π interactions in pyrene and hydrophobic interactions of the citronellol chain. The favorable self-assemblies of the pyrene-citronellol derivatives open a new perspective to develop smart AIE-chiral luminogens.
 Fig. 8  Molecular structures of the pyrene containing acrylonitrile derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. 
 Fig. 9  Cryo-SEM images of racemic cyanostilbenes (A) MA, (B) DA, and (C) TA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. 
Design and synthesis of low molecular weight gels (LMWG) with self-assembly properties is one of the fascinating fields of studies which has been used for white light generation48 and soft optoelectronic device49 applications. However, developing LMWG with 3-D microstructure possessing mechanochromism is still a great challenge. Suganya et al. put forward that the non-planar phenothiazine could exhibit mechanochromism (MC) in its gel state due to its loose packing.50 A grinding and fuming process was carried out to understand the MC property. Functionalized phenothiazine is basically a solid-state emitter, in which the face to face interactions of aromatic rings are ignored. They reported two phenothiazine structures (Fig. 10a) which could accomplish self-assembly, superhydrophobic surface formation and MC properties. Aromatic rings of poly aryl ether groups were replaced by long alkyl chains to obtain a superhydrophobic surface (Fig. 10b). Also, structure correlation studies suggested that the non-planar conformation and loose molecular packing which can undergo partial planarization resulted in MC. These low molecular weight gels have great potential for hydrophobic surfaces with MC properties.
 Fig. 10  (a) Molecular structures of functionalized phenothiazines and (b) superhydrophobic surface formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. 
The external stress applied on AIE fluorophores can induce mechanochromism (MC) and mechanoluminescence (ML). These properties are highly influenced through intermolecular interactions. Huang et al. investigated the role of intermolecular interactions and molecular packing in the MC and ML properties in a series of TPE derivatives (Fig. 11).51 Single crystal structure studies disclosed that carboxyl modified 1 and 2 were MC-active, but ML-inactive due to the porous structure of 1 and defective hydrogen-bond network observed from the single crystal of 2. Meanwhile, the carboxyl ester modified crystal of 3 exhibited self-reversible MC and ML activity, possessing an intact three-dimensional hydrogen-bond network and moderate packing density which effectively blocked non-radiative energy loss.
 Fig. 11  Molecular structures of TPE derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. 
Conjugated polymer films due to their flexibility can exhibit variations in the luminescence property in response to physical forces, which can be useful for sensing technologies. However, obtaining a single-component polymeric material which concurrently offers solid-state luminescence and stimuli-responsiveness is still a challenging task based on conventional strategies. Hence, for realizing solid state luminescent polymers with stimuli-responsiveness, Suenaga et al. synthesized linear and zigzag-type copolymers based on boron ketoiminates (Fig. 12).52 They synthesized alternating copolymers by coupling four different kinds of aryl boronate esters. In this particular study, the linear polymer exhibited a large red shift in comparison to the zig-zag polymer in view of the emission wavelength. But with the addition of bithiophene, known as a strong electron donor, naturally lead to the red shift in both absorption and emission. These polymers exhibited thermochromic luminescence in solution and mechanochromic luminescence in the amorphous solid due to the mechanism of assembly and release of polymer chains.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of linear and zigzag-type FBKI copolymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. 
Design of molecular frameworks fluorescing in the deep red or NIR region offers multidimensional advantages. They can act as a very good fluorescent probe due to their deep tissue penetrating ability and negligible autofluorescence, which evades cell damage during probing. Generally, fluorophores have a tendency to undergo emission quenching in the red emission region. Hence, fluorophores which exhibit enhanced emission in the red and NIR region find great application in realizing superior display technology, efficient white light generation and bioimaging probes. Chaudhary et al. synthesized a highly emissive red/NIR triphenylamine (TPA)-styryl cyanine derivative (Fig. 13a and b) which exhibited pH dependent color tunability resulting in white light emission, known as holochromic-white light emission, upon interaction with an acidic environment.53 It was collectively due to the presence of red-orange emission from protonated TPA-SCY, greenish-yellow from neutral TPA-SCY and blue emission from dimer formation or intermolecular hydrogen bonding between N–H of the protonated and N of the neutral system (Fig. 13b), which was further supported by theoretical studies. These studies suggested that the molecule can act as an intracellular acidity tracker. Multichromic/white light emissive fluorophores can find potential application in multiple disciplines, which include biomedical, sensing, forensics and the opto-electronics industry. Multichromaticity can be achieved in various molecular designs through host–guest interaction, interaction of small molecules with external stimuli or the surrounding environment,54–56 covalent molecular frameworks and so on.
 Fig. 13  (a) Acid–base equilibria of TPA-SCY, and (b) white-light emission from TPA-SCY (methanol–acetic acid at pH 3.5) under UV light of 365 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. 
Li et al. for the first time reported non-covalent supramolecular organic frameworks (SOFs) with triphenyl benzene (TPB), pyrene (Py) and tetraphenylmethane (TPM) as the rigid core and pyridinium units as the arms encapsulated with cucurbit[8]uril (CB[8]) (Fig. 14a).57 The average hydrodynamic diameters (DH) recorded by dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments suggested that the SOFs are composed of 2D supramolecular network-type layers or 3D diamondoid frameworks in aqueous solution. The SOFs were able to self-assemble into various shapes with a variation in concentration, pH and temperature, which paves a new way to tune the self-assembly properties. All three homo-SOFs exhibited an AIE nature due to host–guest interactions of the three core substituents with CB[8] or the restriction of intramolecular motion (RIM) effect of the host. Inspired by this excellent fluorescence behavior, they also studied the AIE abilities of hetero SOFs by preparing hetero hosts in combination with CB[8] which exhibited multicolor as well as white color luminescence (Fig. 14b). The fluorescence behavior at different temperatures also suggested that effective hetero host–guest complexation between CB[8] and the different guests resulted in a stable hetero-SOF framework.
 Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structure of CB[8]. (b) The 1931 CIE chromaticity coordinate changes of SOF-(TPB and TPM) in water at different ratios. Inset: Fluorescence images of SOF-(TPB and TPM) in different ratios under UV light (365 nm) with ratios of (A) 10:1; (B) 9:1; (C) 8:2; (D) 7:3; (E) 6:4; (F) 5:5; (G) 4:6; (H) 3:7; (I) 2:8; (J) 1:9; and (K) 0:10. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. 
Understanding the spatio-temporal arrangements of molecules helps in developing new generation supramolecular fluorophores. The nucleation of aggregates leading to structural evolution which manipulates the molecular properties is challenging to observe; however, temporal changes in fluorescence were used by Wang et al. in 2020 to understand crystal nucleation.29 The group reported the spatiotemporal control of aggregation-induced emission enhancement (AIEE) of a protonated tetraphenylethene (TPE) derivative by optical manipulation. The conformation of the molecular clusters in aggregates can be changed by using the optical force of a focused laser beam. They have considered this concept for triggering AIEE. Upon irradiation of a single aggregate of a protonated tertiary ammonium-appended tetraphenylethene (TA-TPE) trapped at an air/solution interface, the fluorescence intensity was hardly observed. Further irradiation by the manipulation laser increases the size of the trapped aggregate to a few micrometers and leads to drastic emission enhancement of yellow fluorescence (Fig. 15). This suggested that the emission intensity could also be enhanced by optical manipulation, which could give an alternate way to enhance the emission rather than using insoluble solvents. Meanwhile, upon switching off the manipulation laser, the immediate dispersion of the constituent molecules in the solvent was evidenced, which resulted in the disappearance of the enhanced fluorescence. Overall, the change in molecular association upon alternation of the manipulation laser power will affect the fluorescence intensity. As the laser power gets reduced, the aggregates show minimal enhanced emission due to relaxation. The research group also concluded that the reversible approach of molecular association can help to achieve arbitrary control over AIEE activation by laser power alteration.
 Fig. 15  The proposed mechanism of TA-TPE molecule aggregation with AIEE activation by optical manipulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. 
Dwivedi et al. synthesized a new set of BODIPYs using a facile synthetic technique (Fig. 16a).58 These BODIPYs exhibited a single emission band around 530 nm in polar solvent, which is in comparison with the emission from related monomer BODIPY, whereas in non-polar solvent dual emission around 530 nm and 560 nm was observed, suggesting that the emission was due to dimers. The methylene carbon bridging between two BODIPY moieties has reduced conjugation along with excimer formation and J-aggregation. In addition, the molecular packing supported the enhancement in emission due to the presence of bulky alkoxy substituents. The synthesized bulky alkoxy substituent chromophore with multiple boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) units in the framework was an important part of the research work. These fluorophores also exhibited concentration dependent color tuning in both solution and in films (Fig. 16b). They showed unusual AIE behavior which is in contrast to many available monomer-BODIPY molecules undergoing ACQ.
 Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of BODIPYs and (b) concentration dependent color tuning under 365 nm light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. 
White light generation in a single molecular entity is also gaining much importance. Since the majority of fluorophores are capable of narrow emission, hence a tedious process of combining multiple chromophores can be used to emit primary colors. Deniben et al. made use of an interesting unimolecular multichromic system exhibiting aggregation induced dual emission characteristics.59 The complex molecules were synthesized by a simple consecutive three-component reaction between o-bromo anilidines, phenylacetylene and N-substituted piperazines (Fig. 17). The consecutive steps involve intramolecular Heck type coupling of o-bromo anilidines in the presence of PdCl2(PPh3)2, CuI and triethylamine (TEA) to give the intermediate. Alkynylation between the sp2 carbon of the intermediate and phenylaceylene in the presence of a palladium catalyst would result in the second intermediate, which now undergoes Michael addition with N-substituted piperazines to give the indolone bichromophores 4a–4f.
 Fig. 17  Consecutive one-pot three-component insertion-alkynylation-Michael addition synthesis of 3-piperazinyl propenylidene indolone bichromophores 4, and consecutive four-component synthesis of 3-piperazinyl propenylidene indolone bichromophores 4 by an insertion-alkynylation-Michael addition-Suzuki coupling sequence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. 
The group also developed an alternate strategy to synthesize indolone bichromophores 4a–4f, which involves a consecutive four component synthesis, similar to the above process, i.e. insertion-alkynylation-Michael addition with the use of one single piperazine: 1-(4′-bromo)phenylpiperazine followed by Suzuki–Miyaura cross coupling with four different Bpin moieties. Bichromophores 4a–4f display only the typical orange red merocyanine emission in the solid state; however, in the solution state 4e was able to exhibit white light emission. A detailed solvatochromic study on 4e suggested that it was emissive upon aggregation in an acetonitrile:water mixture with maximum energy transfer from triphenyl amine to merocyanine. A dual emissive behavior upon aggregation was observed in solvents which is due to dye aggregation combined with partial intra- and intermolecular energy transfer, which helps in achieving white light emission in these molecular designs. This study guides in developing white light emissive uni-molecules with bi-chromophores for white OLEDs.
Traditional fluorophores such as coumarin, fluorescein, and anthracene have found significant importance in photochemistry. But the solid-state fluorescence quenching in these fluorophores prompted researchers to explore the alternative fluorescence mechanism of AIE. However, Feng et al. accidentally discovered strong solid-state yellow and orange-red emission in conventional fluorescein with minimal structural modification.60 Allyl functionalized fluorescein and 2,7-dichlorofluorescein were found to be AIE active (Fig. 18). Upon further variation of the alkyl chain substituents, all these fluorophores were also found to be solid state emissive. Crystal structure studies gave insight about the reason for the AIE behavior; unlike conventional fluoresceins, in these molecular designs face-to-face stacking was not prevalent due to steric repulsion between the benzoic ester moiety and the xanthenone planes. This study gives new insight to convert ACQ behavior into AIE in conventional fluorophores.
 Fig. 18  The structure of Fl-AIEgens and DCFl AIEgens and their solid-state emission under 365 nm UV light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. 
The AIEgens most widely developed so far are mostly based on small molecules; however, realizing AIE in polymer matrices has a great advantage as they can readily form films. They can be thermally as well as morphologically stable, which finds a great advantage in the optoelectronic industry. Hence, there is great demand for synthetic strategies as well as molecular designs which can be thermally stable and can maintain the intrinsic AIE ability in the polymeric phase. Based on all these requirements, Zhou et al. synthesized TPE conjugated polyimides in the para and meta positions (Fig. 19), which exhibited highly efficient luminescence characteristics in thermostable amorphous polymers.61 A distinguished emission property was observed between para (p) and meta (m) substituted polyimides. The alicyclic imide rings were found to be capable of balancing the donor–acceptor property features between the rigid spacer and the AIE-active fluorophore. The non-planar and rigid AIE-active core, rigid polymer matrix and the suppressed intramolecular CT effects rendered the polymers high solid-state emission with PLQYs of up to 89%; however, they were fairly emissive in the film state.
 Fig. 19  Chemical structures of the PhTPE-based polyimides. The inset shows the flexible films under 365 nm light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. 
Among various AIE fluorophores, those having an excited state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT) nature have created a great impression due to low self-absorption, large Stokes shift and bright solid-state luminescence, which find use as sensors and imaging probes.62–64 The hydroxyl group acting as the proton donor plays a major role in exhibiting AIE properties.65,66 Most of the ESIPT molecules developed so far are based on π-conjugated structures such as 2-(2′-hydroxyphenyl)benzimidazole (HBZ) and 2-(2′-hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole.67 However, Gobel et al. discovered an ESIPT molecule with a very minimum π-conjugated structure (Fig. 20).68 The nitrile-substituted ortho-hydroxy-2-phenyloxazolines exhibited a large Stokes shift up to 11310 cm−1 and that observed in most solvents was mainly due to keto emission. 1-CN having a lower molecular weight than the other molecules studied in this work was found to be AIE active with a quantum yield of 41.3% and it was also found to possess a highest solid-state quantum yield of 87.3% in the crystalline state. These fluorophores synthesized by a facile synthetic technique give a new way to design molecular frameworks with minimum conjugation and efficient solid-state emission.
 Fig. 20  Synthesis of nitrile-substituted ortho-hydroxy-2-phenyloxazolines (a) (1) 2-amino-2-methylpropan-1-ol, 4 Å MS, CH2Cl2, 25 °C, 20 h; (2) NBS, CH2Cl2, 25 °C, 4 h; (b) (1) TMPMgCl·LiCl, THF, 25 °C, 1 h; (2) O2 (1 atm), 25 °C, 24 h. NBS = N-bromosuccinimide, TMP = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. 
Functional π-conjugated molecules with strong emission solvatochromism and an aggregation-induced emissive nature have great importance in molecular electronics, sensing and photonics applications. Geenen et al. envisaged that incorporation of donor and acceptor moieties in positions 5 and 8 of psoralen could result in an X-shaped orthogonal bis(donor–acceptor) cruciform which can be a potential fluorophore for multifunctional applications.69 A sequential one-pot reaction scheme was brilliantly executed for the synthesis of a variety of fluorescent donor–acceptor-psoralen analogues shaped like cruciforms. The team has successfully designed the starting compound with two reaction sites, which vary in reactivity (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Bromo-triflato functionalized psoralen scaffold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. 
The variation of the order of reactivity in the reaction sites was achieved by varying the carbon-leaving group bond strengths, which in turn dictates the order of the reaction. A bromo-triflato functionalized psoralen scaffold was used for site selective consecutive Suzuki–Suzuki and Sonagashira–Sonagashira type cross coupling reactions, to produce the required products (Fig. 22). The participation of a group in the coupling reactions is decided by several factors and the bond strengths are one among many. It is evident from the recent findings that the order of reactivity of several organic halides and pseudohalides in the coupling reactions is: carbon–bromine > carbon–triflate > carbon–chlorine.70 Using the above protocol the team has functionalized psoralen, suitable for a doubly selective sequence: carbon–carbon coupling of C–Br and C–OTF bonds using suitable palladium catalysts and conditions.
 Fig. 22  (1) Selective consecutive sequential Pd-catalyzed Suzuki–Suzuki three-component synthesis of 5-donor substituted 8-acceptor psoralens. (2) Selective consecutive Sonogashira–Sonogashira three-component synthesis of alkynyl-expanded 5-donor substituted 8-acceptor psoralens. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. 
A distinct red shift in florescence emission from 455 nm for the p-methoxy substituent to 600 nm for p-dimethylamino in fluorescence emission was observed and the corresponding quantum yield was high in the case of the p-dimethyl amino substituent. All (hetero)aryl psoralen cruciforms 1 exhibited solid state luminescence with tunable emission color from blue over green to yellow and orange. Compared to psoralens 1, π-extended psoralen 2 exhibited a greater red shift and quantum yield with the strong acceptor (2a and 2b) possessing a relatively higher quantum yield than the nitro substituents (2c and 2d). The solution inactive 1a was found to be AIE active in water/acetonitrile mixtures. The evidenced charge transfer character as observed from dipole-moment calculations using the Lippert–Mataga model was dependent on the donor–acceptor substituents. The substituents 1b and 2b also exhibited acidochromicity as observed from the addition of trifluoroacetic acid and the emission was reversed with added triethylamine (Fig. 23). These novel psoralen derivatives absorbing efficiently in the range of visible light with tunable electronic properties can be applied for PUVA therapy, and also for sensing studies.
 Fig. 23  Cruciforms (a) 1b (top) and (b) 2b in dichloromethane and with addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequently with addition of triethylamine under a hand-held UV lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. 
Multidentate ligands such as 1,1-biisoquinolines possess significant photophysical properties. However, achieving different derivatives meets various challenges such as tedious synthetic procedures, inability to functionalize C–H groups based on transition metal catalysts and many more. In order to overcome these barriers, for the first time the Li group synthesized a library of 1,1′-biisoquinolines by direct C–H activation in the presence of RhIII as transition metal catalysts using a bidirecting group.71 The synthesis was carried out by site selective C–H activation of an unsymmetrical dioxime: benzyl O-acetyl dioxime, a suitable reactant for a consecutive reaction, with two different alkynes (Fig. 24). By using the following strategy, more than thirty differently substituted 1,1′-biisoquinolines, rather difficult to synthesize by a conventional route, were easily obtained. The route is also marked by high chemo- and regioselectivity. The intensity of the photoluminescence spectrum of 3a in THF was enhanced 16 fold upon increasing the water fraction (fw) to 70%, confirming the AIE characteristics.
 Fig. 24  Synthesis schemes of a variety of 1,1-biisoquinolines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. 
Most of these multiaryl structures exhibited AIE characteristics with the photoluminescence intensity enhanced more than 5-fold (Fig. 25). They successfully reported an economical and efficient way of synthesizing a wide variety of 1,1′-biisoquinolines and further exploration of their usage in OLEDs is in the testing phase.
 Fig. 25  PL spectra of (a) 3a, (b) 4h, and (c) 5ah (10 μM) in THF and THF/water mixtures with different water fractions (fw). (d) Fluorescence responses (I/I0) to different compounds (I0 for fw = 0% and I for fw = 90%). Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. 
3. Photodynamic therapeutic and theranostic applications
Self-illuminating therapy is currently a hot topic in nanomedicine research. The non-invasive technique72 is a better alternative compared to currently used chemotherapy and surgical methods, which have the possibility of affecting normal tissues. So far, various photodynamic therapeutic agents such as semiconductor quantum dots,73 nanographene oxide,74 and photosensitizer loaded nanoparticles75 have been studied; however, in most of these systems the most common enemy is aggregation quenching. Hence, the most powerful alternative is based on aggregation induced emission photosensitizers due to their enhanced emission in aggregation, and dual characteristics of drug delivery and diagnosing agents. Twisted propeller structures, which are generally AIE active, turned out to be promising compared to conventional fluorophores due to the low toxicity,76 the exceptional brightness77 and tunable colors appropriate for different backgrounds and photostability suitable for long-term in situ imaging.78 Recently many researchers have developed polymer dots of D–A type for various applications due to their optical properties, nontoxicity and excellent photostability.79,80 Among all D–A type materials, luminescent polymer dot probes became an important member especially because of their fluorescent properties,81,82 sensitivity and selectivity and electro-chemiluminescent properties.83 Wang et al. used three conjugated polymers loaded with anticancer drug paclitaxel encapsulated in polymer dots for photodynamic therapy of cancer.84 They synthesized D–A type conjugated polymers (P1 to P3) by adjusting the electron donor moieties. The design of multicolored AIE-active materials can be used for drug delivery systems. The two therapeutic agents P1 and P2 were able to locate the tumor by a yellow- or red-colored fluorescence signal and also exhibit almost two times in vivo antitumor efficacy, high biocompatibility and better tumor-targeting behavior compared to the commercially available anticancer drug Taxol. The paclitaxel (PTX) added polymer dots can be used for self-illuminating cancer treatment. Fig. 26 presents the AIE behavior, drug delivery mechanism and molecular structure of P1 to P3. These studies revealed a potential drug delivery system based on AIE for photodynamic therapy (PDT) of cancer cells. The results also provide an efficient strategy for multicolored AIE-active materials which reveal potential applications as a drug carrier, feasible for different drugs. The overall study explains a significant approach for developing D–A structures for novel drug delivery systems.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic representation of the drug release mechanism and (b) molecular structure of P1 to P3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. 
Triphenylamine was modified to exhibit color tuning from green to red and the AIE property depending on the acceptor substituents. The cytotoxicity studies carried out by Dai et al. on the three photosensitizers (PS) evaluated by 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay suggested their low cytotoxicity (Fig. 27a).85 Also, the AIEgens were found to be biocompatible with HepG2 cells, A549 cells, and HeLa cells. These photosensitizers were also found to be photostable as observed from the laser irradiation studies. In order to use an AIEgen for photodynamic therapeutic applications, one of the deciding factors is reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. The ROS generation (1O2) capability of MPAT was initially determined by using the indicator H2DCF-DA. The low intensity of emission of H2DCF-DA or MPAT recorded individually was found to gradually enhance with increasing irradiation time, reaching a 36.6-fold enhancement in 10 min relative to the original emission intensity, suggesting effective ROS generation of MPAT under green light irradiation. The AIEgens in HepG2 cells, A549 cells, and HeLa cells under different concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60 and 100 μM) showed low cytotoxicity even for higher concentration, suggesting the biocompatibility of the AIEgens, and they are useful for long-term monitoring of lysosome dynamic processes in living cells. Also, when the AIEgens in cells were irradiated from 0 to 20 min (Fig. 27b) with a laser they exhibited excellent photostability compared to the commercial probe LysoTracker Green DND-26. Particularly, MPAT had no significant changes in its fluorescence images even after 20 minutes, suggesting that it can be a better fluorescent probe. The phototherapy of MPAT was very efficient as observed from the rapid decrease in HeLa cell viability. This suggested that red emitting MPAT can be an efficient photosensitizer for photodynamic therapy.
 Fig. 27  (a) TPA based photosensitizers and (b) fluorescence imaging and fluorescence intensity variation in A549 cells at different time intervals and normalized average fluorescence intensity of the AIEgens (20 μM) and LysoTracker Green DND-26 at different time points. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. 
Photosensitizers (PS) used in therapeutic applications need to be biocompatible and biodegradable. Recently, PS based AIE materials have been developed which exhibit an excellent ability of photosensitization and a strong fluorescence property in the aggregation state.86,87 There are two important categories of AIE nanodots primarily prepared by physical coating: (1) encapsulating AIE molecules with silica like materials (inorganic and hydrophilic in nature)88,89 and (2) use of amphoteric co-polymers to produce AIE nanoparticles. Most AIE nanoparticles are not soluble in water and cannot be used for biological application as is. There have been many reports to date on the preparation of AIE–protein complexes.90,91
Protein conjugated AIEgens have synergic effects of enhanced emission with biocompatibility and can be a good candidate for PDT as reported by Min et al.92 A DNA-binding protein from starved cells (Dps) of Listeria innocua, which belongs to the ferritin superfamily, was complexed with a red emitting AIEgen based on tetraphenylethylene with carbonitrile acceptors (RAIE). The ability of Dps-RAIE nanodots to overcome the biological membrane, known as cellular uptake, was understood using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). It was observed that the strong red emission from nanodot in all the studied cell lines suggested that the nanodot was able to penetrate through all the tested cell lines and located in the cytoplasm. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation was studied using the absorption spectrum of Dps-RAIE in PBS using 9,10-anthracenediylbis (methylene) dimalonic acid (ABDA) and singlet oxygen sensor green (SOSG) as the indicator. All these studies indicated that Dps has desirable properties for in vivo environments. The ROS generation of the nanodots in HeLa cells was tested by irradiation with white light (Fig. 28), which resulted in intense green light emission, indicating effective singlet oxygen generation. Also, the efficient cytotoxicity as observed from the detachment of cells in the culture plate suggested that Dps-RAIE can be used for PDT to kill cancer cells.
 Fig. 28  ROS generation of nanodots in HeLa cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. 
In order to tackle the inherent problems in PDT such as the presence of cells in tumors which are deficient in oxygen (hypoxia), B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), which is an anti-apoptosis protein in cells, and intrinsic oxidative resistance, various strategies have been proposed. Nanoparticles which exhibit physicochemical changes in response to pH, temperature and light are quite useful for the tumor microenvironment. In order to address the multiple problems in PDT, Shi et al. developed a hybrid system containing an AIE molecule coordinated with Fe3+ nanospheres in the presence of sabutoclax, which inhibits Bcl-2.93 The hybrid system composed of tetraphenyl ethylene and the nanoparticle system was prepared based on the co-precipitation method. The hybrid sphere was efficiently able to generate 1O2 tested using ABDA as an indicator (Fig. 29). The in vivo imaging carried out using MDA-MB-231 tumor cells in mice showed that the hybrid nanospheres exhibit decent tumor passive targeting ability and possess great potential for image-guided PDT.
 Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the hybrid nanospheres taken up by tumor cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. 
Developing photosensitizers for PDT applications needs to take into account various design aspects such as tuning the triplet and singlet energy levels to obtain emission in the NIR range, and generation of singlet oxygen upon exchange of the triplet energy with the surrounding oxygen. TADF-AIE molecules can elevate the intersystem crossing of excitons from the singlet to the triplet state, in which energy is shared with the surrounding oxygen, resulting in efficient ROS production. However, TADF-photosensitizers used for PDT applications are limited. Xiao et al. prepared two AIE-TADF molecules based on phenothiazine (PT) and acridine (AT) which showed increased quantum yield in the film state than in the aggregation state.94 PT and AT nanoparticles (NPs) were prepared by encapsulating in the copolymer DSPE-PEG 2000 and tested for their singlet oxygen generation ability. Single and two photon excitation sources were used with dichlorofluorescein (DCFH) as an indicator, suggesting that PT NPs can more effectively generate singlet oxygen than AT nanoparticles upon both types of excitation. The two photon excitation images of PT and AT NPs using an 800 nm laser in confocal microscopy (Fig. 30) show that PT NPs are more prone to ROS generation after 40 scans due to the smaller singlet to triplet energy gap as well as oscillator strength in PT nanoparticles. The PT nanoparticles also proved their prominence for PDT applications due to their more cytotoxic nature as seen from the more dead HeLa cells. This gives a new strategy to design exciting TADF-AIE based nanoparticles to treat cancer cells based on two photon excited photodynamic therapy.
 Fig. 30  (a) Molecular structures and (b) two photon excitation images of PT and AT NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. 
Ideal photosensitizers must be able to exhibit a large Stokes shift to avoid self-absorption, a high quantum yield and two-photon absorption characteristics to suppress the scattering problem in single photon absorption.95,96 It is challenging to obtain these properties in currently used normal fluorophores for photodynamic therapy studies. Hence, for obtaining such photosensitizers, Zheng et al. developed a series of AIEgens based on positively charged pyridinium and quinolinium moieties with different donor–acceptor (D–A) strength (Fig. 31a).97 The hypothesis of introduction of a positively charged moiety along with the strong D–A structure has proved to be efficient in improving the photophysical properties and therapeutic abilities and realizing water soluble AIEgens which will be highly compatible in the physiological environment compared to standard dyes.98–100 Four PS (CPy, CQu, DCPy and DCQu) were developed based on different D–A strengths with emission wavelength ranging from yellow to NIR, respectively, and a large Stokes shift of 209 to 229 nm and profound solid-state quantum yield. All the PS incubated in HeLa cells have great specificity for mitochondrial staining as observed from the high Pearson's correlation coefficients (Fig. 31b). The lower singlet to triplet energy level in the case of DCQu than the other three PS facilitates pronounced singlet oxygen generation. It was also found to be more efficient to generate 1O2 than the commercially available dyes Ce6, TPPS and Rose Bengal. The cell up-take ability was more in the case of cancer cells than the normal cell lines tested. This suggested that DCQu can selectively affect the diseased cells over the healthy cells. DCQu was also found to exhibit superior two photon absorption characteristics and in vitro two photon imaging ability towards mitochondria cells. The NIR emitting DCQu was also used to treat melanoma tumors in mice; it was found to show an astonishing cell inhibition rate of 89.5% in the presence of light, which is pretty high compared to the tumor treated with the standard PS Ce6. Another important observation in this work was that the survival rate of the mice treated with light irradiation along with DCQu was prolonged to 45 days compared to that with only light irradiation or Ce6. All these studies indicated that the photo sensitizer DCQu can be a very promising candidate for photodynamic therapeutic applications.
 Fig. 31  (a) Positively charged pyridinium and quinolinium moieties and (b) co-localization images of HeLa cells in the presence of photosensitizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. 
Effective generation of ROS and subcellular distribution, and effective penetration of tissues decide the fate of photodynamic therapy (PDT). Nanoparticles with encapsulated drugs are one of the most widely used drug delivery systems in PDT. In order to address some of the key issues in these systems, such as the different rate of drug delivery, and bad reproducibility, Guo et al. synthesized two AIE based photosensitizers (TN and TM) integrated with mitochondria targeting platinum (PT) based drugs (TNPT and TMPT) (Fig. 32).101
 Fig. 32  Chemical structure of TN, TNPT, TM and TMPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. 

TNPT exhibited an emission peak at 595 nm with a Stokes shift of 212 nm, whereas, in the case of TMPT, the emission wavelength was Stokes shifted by 266 nm to 686 nm. However, the fluorescence intensity in a DMSO/water mixture was enhanced in both TNPT and TMPT, attributed to the AIE activity, and the emission features were similar in both probes. The PDT studies carried out using the ROS indicator 9,10-anthracenediyl-bis(methylene)dimalonic acid (ABDA) suggested that upon white light irradiation the decomposition rate was large in the case of TNPT, which was higher than TMPT. This is because of the strong intermolecular charge transfer (ICT) characteristics of TMPT, which generally inhibits ROS generation. However, both TNPT and TMPT were found to be more photostable than the commercial photosensitizer Ce6. The cellular uptake abilities of TN, TNPT, TM and TMPT in C6 glioma cells studied using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) imaging indicated that the presence of PT helped both TNPT and TMPT to achieve better cell uptake ability than TN and TM. Upon co-staining with commercial MitoTracker, the high Pearson's coefficient (0.85) for TNPT and MitoTracker (Fig. 33) indicates better co-localization between TNPT and MitoTracker signals in cells. Hence, it was more obvious that TNPT was highly efficient towards targeting mitochondria by accumulating in them, whereas TMPT was just randomly distributed. This behaviour of TNPT was attributed to its greater hydrophilic nature than TMPT as observed from DFT and dynamic laser scattering studies. Hence, TNPT can effectively disperse in the cellular environment, which leads to targeting mitochondria. Following all these features, cancer cell ablation studies at different inhibitory concentrations as well as incubation times under dark conditions showed that TNPT exhibited significant dark and light cytotoxicity as compared to the other sensitizers studied (Fig. 34). Also, TNPT has high potential to act as an anticancer agent as observed from its double-staining apoptotic analysis. Upon light irradiation, TNPT produced an apoptotic population of around 67%, which was higher than TN, PT or TN + PT. TNPT was also found to selectively target cancerous cells, leaving behind the normal cells, due to the higher fluorescence intensity for the C6 cells than that of normal cell groups (HEK 293 and NIH-3T3). All these studies suggested that careful design of fluorogens with balanced donor–acceptor substituents can result in efficient molecular cancer drugs.
 Fig. 33  Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of TM, TMPT, TN and TNPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. 
 Fig. 34  Inhibitory effects of TM, TMPT, TN and TM + PT on C6 cells under (a) dark conditions and (b) light irradiation at 50 mW cm−2 for 5 min at 6 h; the total time of incubation is 48 h. Inhibitory effects of TN, TNPT, PT, and TN + PT on C6 cells under (c) dark conditions and (d) light irradiation (15 J cm−2) at 50 mW cm−2 for 5 min; the total time of incubation is 48 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. 
Photosensitizers emitting in the second near infrared window (NIR II) have remarkable abilities of deep penetration, negligible auto fluorescence and superior imaging resolution, which makes them apt for photodynamic therapeutic applications especially based on two-photon absorption. NIR II emission requires the absorption to be in the long wavelength region, and most AIEgens, which often have a twisted propeller structure, have the possibility of absorbing at low wavelength. The most widely used strategy of separating the HOMO–LUMO levels to increase the ROS generation capability also has the tendency to lead to absorption at low wavelength. Hence, it needs a careful design strategy to develop efficient NIR II emitting fluorogens. In this perspective Wang et al. developed a photosensitizer (TQ-BTPE) (Fig. 35) to obtain high ROS generation, absorption at long wavelength and emission in the NIR II range for two-photon photodynamic cancer cell ablation.102 Tetraphenyl ethylene, which acts as both AIE agent and electron donor was coupled with the strong acceptor [1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-g]quinoxaline (TQ) and linked with two hexoxy-trimethylamine moieties, which improves the dispersibility in aqueous solution.
 Fig. 35  Chemical structure of photosensitizer TQ-BTPE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. 
The results also demonstrated that the molecule absorbed broadly with maximum absorption at 450 and 560 nm. In the aggregation state (90% water fraction) it exhibited enhanced intensity. Bright two-photon fluorescence was significant when excited with a femtosecond laser. The variation in the two-photon fluorescence with the laser power resulting in a slope confirms the two-photon absorption process. TQ-BTPE was found to be highly photostable. Continuous irradiation using a femtosecond laser for 20 min could deplete the initial two-photon fluorescence intensity of TQ-BTPE by only 8%, whereas in the case of the standard photosensitizers Qtracker 705 and Alexa Fluor 647, it was 16% and 35%, respectively. The reactive oxygen species (1O2) generation of TQ-BTPE in an aqueous environment under white light irradiation was efficient in the presence of commercial indicator 9,10-anthracenediylbis(methylene) dimalonic acid (ABDA). The decomposition of ABDA in the presence of Ce6 was at 8.8 nmol. Compared to this, efficient 1O2 generation was observed in the presence of TQ-BTPE as the decomposition was better at 26.5 nmol. This was attributed to aggregation enhanced 1O2 generation. The ROS generation upon two photon absorption with excitation in NIR II was visualized using a specially constructed microscope. The intensity of two-photon fluorescence (2PF) under NIR II excitation of DCF obtained from DCFDA in the presence of aqueous TQ-BTPE was enhanced 7 fold compared to that of Ce6, indicating the capability of TQ-BTPE to act as a photosensitizer. In aqueous TQ-BTPE and DCF, NIR-I excitation can produce a larger 2PF intensity from DCF, whereas, in the presence of fresh pork tissue, excitation with NIR II results in intense 2PF from DCF (Fig. 36). This was attributed to the larger two-photon absorption cross section in NIR-I and larger penetration depth of NIR-II light in biological tissues, respectively.
 Fig. 36  (a) Schematic setup for the detection of 1O2. (b) Two-photon fluorescence image of TQ-BTPE in a glass capillary. Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE and DCFDA after (c) 0 and (d) 100 NIR-II laser scans. (e) Overlay of panels (b and d). (f) Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE and DCFDA after NIR-I and NIR-II laser scanning without pork tissue on the capillary. (h) Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE (5 μm) and DCFDA after NIR-I and NIR-II laser scanning with pork tissue on the capillary. (g and i) Two-photon fluorescence intensities of DCF in panels (f and h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. 
Intracellular 1O2 production was monitored by comparison of TQ-BTPE and Ce6 incubated in HeLa cells co-stained with DCFDA. An increase in the scanning rate using the NIR II laser increased the intensity of two photon green emission from DCF in TQ-BTPE in HeLa cells, indicating remarkable 1O2 production, which is not so in the case of Ce6 incubated HeLa cells (Fig. 37). Similar to in vitro studies, NIR II light also penetrated through fresh pig tissue kept on TQ-BTPE incubated HeLa cells. Following its excellent intracellular photosensitization, two photon photodynamic therapy (PDT) was carried out in fluorescein diacetate (FDA) and propidium iodide (PI) for live/dead cell two-photon imaging. This suggested that after 120 laser scans most of the cells were killed in the scanned area. Also, in both the presence of pork tissue and its absence precise ablation of cancer cells can take place in the presence of TQ-BTPE. This first report sheds light on developing NIR-II light excited photosensitizers for two-photon PDT.
 Fig. 37  (a) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE and Ce6 treated HeLa cells after different NIR-II laser scans. The overlay is the merge of the first and fourth columns in panel (a). (b) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE treated HeLa cells after different NIR-II laser scans. (c and d) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE treated HeLa cells after different NIR-I and NIR-II laser scans and with pork tissue on the cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. 
4. Electroluminescent devices
Highly efficient electroluminescent materials play important roles in organic electronics as well as the bio and chemosensing industry.103 Bright aggregation induced emission fluorophores are attractive for the development of organic light emitting devices (OLEDs) due to their unique properties such as: (i) they can cover a wide range of the visible-light region, and they have exceptional performance (ii) in the solid state and (iii) in the film form unlike conventional fluorophores.104,105 AIE plays a major role in order to tackle some of the key issues such as aggregation caused quenching, low efficiency roll-off at high current density and scarcity of deep blue and red emitting materials.106 Also, the low-lying local excited (LE) state with AIE nature can be extremely useful in achieving efficient blue emission. This material can also be incorporated as an emissive layer to obtain high-performance non-doped blue organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). In lieu of this the Tang group in the year 2020 designed and synthesized 1-(4-(tert-butyl)phenyl)-5,10-bis(4-(2,2-diphenylvinyl)phenyl)-2-phenyl-1H-phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole (2TriPE-BPI) and 4-(1-(4-(tert-butyl)phenyl)-5,10-bis(4-(2,2-diphenylvinyl)phenyl)-1H-phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazol-2-yl)-3-methylbenzonitrile (2TriPE-BPI-MCN) (Fig. 38).107 Photophysical studies presented enhanced emission intensities in the aggregated state and moreover in neat films the fluorescence quantum yield for 2TriPE-BPI was 62.5% and for 2TriPE-BPI-MCN it was 45.8%, describing the potential solid-state luminescence. The observed photophysical behaviour from transient PL decay studies was attributed purely to fluorescence emission. Local excited state (LE) characteristics were persistent in the S1 state. However, in order to completely describe the nature of the excited states they made use of the efficient high-pressure spectroscopy measurement method. According to this the LE character was more dominant in 2TriPE-BPI, whereas in the case of 2TriPE-BPI-MCN it consisted of high lying charge transfer (CT) states.
 Fig. 38  Molecular design of 2TriPE-BPI and 2TriPE-BPI-MCN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. 
In a non-doped OLED configuration, blue emission was observed for 2TriPE-BPI (462 nm) and 2TriPE-BPI-MCN (452) (Fig. 39) with Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.152, 0.185) and (0.153, 0.147), respectively. The non-doped OLED fabricated using 2TriPEBPI-MCN is found to possess a high external quantum efficiency (4.6%) as well as low efficiency roll-off (1.7% at 1000 cd m−2) compared to competitive blue non-doped OLEDs. Also, a small singlet to triplet energy gap of 0.03 eV for 2TriPEBPI-MCN suggests that it can be further tuned to obtain efficient reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) to make use of triplet to singlet conversion of excitons. Overall, this study helps in designing efficient blue luminogens for non-doped electroluminescent devices.
 Fig. 39  (a) Energy band diagram and (b) electroluminescence spectra of nondoped OLEDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. 
Recent developments have been made in aggregation induced emission as well as AIE coupled with delayed fluorescence, resulting in integrated aggregation induced delayed fluorescence [AIDF] characteristics. This characteristic is breaking all the barriers to achieve excellent electroluminescence efficiencies.108 Particularly, in order to achieve short and long wavelength emission as well as stimuli responsive AIDF molecules, Yang et al. synthesized a series of donor–acceptor type D–A type stimuli-responsive AIDF luminogens using the electron accepting imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-2-yl(phenyl)methanone (pipd) group and electron donating phenoxazine (PXZ), phenothiazine (PTZ), and 9,9-dimethyl-X, 9,10-dihydroacridine (DMAC) groups.109 Surprisingly, two types of single crystals emerged out of pipd-BZ-PTZ during the single crystal growth with one emitting in green (G) and another with orange (O) emission comprised of two different space groups. Both pipd-BZ-PTZ and pipd-BZ-DMAC exhibited a more twisted conformation than pipd-BZ-PXZ (Fig. 40).
 Fig. 40  Molecular structure of pipd-BZ-PXZ, pipd-BZ-PTZ and pipd-BZ-DMAC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. 
There was notable mechanochromo luminescence (MCL) in pipd-BZ-PTZ and pipd-BZ-DMAC due to the loosely packed molecules compared to pipd-BZ-PTZ (O-crystal) and pipd-BZPXZ, which naturally exhibited poor MCL behaviour. PL spectra in toluene under degassed and air conditions exhibited delayed fluorescence due to reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) of excitons quenched by oxygen, which is not the case in normal solutions. All the molecules exhibited AIE behaviour attributed to twisted intramolecular charge transfer characteristics. The electroluminescence performance shows a high external quantum yield of 7.04% and 6.90%, respectively, for pipd-BZ-PXZ and pipd-BZ-PTZ. However, pipd-BZ-DMAC did not give any encouraging results due to the weak RISC process resulting from the large singlet to triplet energy gap. Thus, the studies suggest that molecular and device engineering play key roles for developing efficient OLEDs. Fabricating non-doped organic light emitting devices based on AIDF can also help in avoiding concentration quenching as well as exciton annihilation leading to low efficiency roll-off. Therefore, Fu et al. engineered two carbazole-phenoxazine derivatives viz. (4-(10H-phenoxazin-10-yl)phenyl)(9-(3-(5-(3-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)pyridin-3-yl)phenyl)-9H-carbazol-3-yl)methanone (35DCPP-BP-PXZ) and (4-(10H-phenoxazin-10-yl)phenyl)(9-(3-(6-(3-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)pyridin-2 yl)phenyl)-9H-carbazol-3-yl)methanone (26DCPP-BP-PXZ) (Fig. 41a).110 The photoluminescence efficiency of both the emitters was found to be larger in the neat film than in solution, suggesting surfacing of AIE in films, which is also supported by detailed AIE studies in THF–water mixtures. An increase in the water content also resulted in delayed fluorescence as observed from lifetime measurements. In the neat films the fluorescence lifetime was of the order of microseconds, confirming the aggregation induced delayed fluorescence (AIDF). In the neat films more excitons are capable of undergoing RISC, causing AIDF. Inspired by the excellent photoluminescence properties they further tested the non-doped electroluminescence property of both 35DCPP-BP-PXZ and 26DCPP-BP-PXZ as emitters. Both exhibited yellow luminescence with an external quantum efficiency (ηext) of the order of 16% and low efficiency roll off and also the same hole–electron mobilities. The excitons located at the ketone cores of both compounds and the presence of long bipolar carrier transport segments could not allow excitons to come closer (Fig. 41b); this can suppress high-concentration exciton quenching in these non-doped device structures.
 Fig. 41  (a) Chemical structure and (b) spatial distribution of the HOMO and LUMO for 35DCPP-BP-PXZ and 26DCPP-BP-PXZ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. 
Non-doped OLEDs are at present inferior in their performance compared to doped-OLEDs. However, they simplify many tedious tasks such as the careful selection of host guest systems and their stoichiometric ratios to avoid the phase separation problem. Moreover, they give space for a solution processable fabrication technique, which can be used to produce large area OLEDs, making them economically viable. With the discovery of the aggregation induced delayed emission phenomenon it has given hope that the OLED performance can be improved in non-doped OLEDs. In order to realize deep blue emitting non-doped OLEDs, Kim et al. made use of a triangulene boron structure because aryl-borons are capable of restricting red shifted emission.111 In this regard they developed three novel boron structures (electron-acceptor core-TB) coordinated with carbazole derivatives (electron donors) as emitters such as 9′-(2,12-di-tert-butyl-5,9-dioxa-13b-boranaphtho[3,2,1-de]anthracen-7-yl)-9′H-9,3′:6′,9′′-tercarbazole (TB-3Cz), 9′-(2,12-di-tert-butyl-5,9-dioxa-13b-boranaphtho[3,2,1-de]anthracen-7-yl)-9,9′′-diphenyl-9H, 9′H,9′′H-3,3′:6′,3′′-tercarbazole (TB-P3Cz), and 9-(2,12-di-tert-butyl-5,9-dioxa-13b-boranaphtho[3,2,1-de]anthracen-7-yl)-N3,N3,N6,N6-tetraphenyl-9H-carbazole-3,6-diamine (TB-DACz) (Fig. 42a). PL studies in non-doped films exhibited similar absorption behavior for the three molecules. However, the fluorescence emission was observed to vary from deep blue to sky blue for TB-3Cz (433 nm), TB-P3Cz (460 nm) and TB-DACz (494 nm). TADF behavior was evident as observed from the dual lifetime in the nanosecond regime as well as in microseconds. TADF was obtained from the transient PL spectra of non-doped films for all three luminophores and the PL quantum yield of TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz, and TB-DACz was sequentially 99.0%, 93.0% and 90.0%. AIE studies reveal that all the emitters have a general trend of enhanced emission at higher water fractions in THF. In the nano-aggregation state, the interaction between the solvent and molecules is more dominant than the ICT characteristics with blue shifts, suggesting that these fluorophores can be employed as the emissive layer in non-doped blue OLEDs. The electroluminescence performance was assessed by fabricating non-doped OLEDs at different concentrations of these emitters (Fig. 42) and for the optimized device structure the wavelength and Commission Internationale de l’Éclairage (CIE) coordinates for TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz were found to be 424 nm and (0.17, 0.07), 448 nm and (0.15, 0.08), and 492 nm and (0.18, 0.42), respectively (Fig. 42d). The CIE coordinate values of TB-3Cz and TB-P3Cz are in accordance with the National Television System Committee (NTSC) recommended value for deep blue emission. Both TB-3Cz and TB-P3Cz emitted with an intense deep blue wavelength due to the narrow FWHM of 2960 cm−1 and 2565 cm−1, respectively. The maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) for TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz is calculated to be 9.90%, 6.13% and 6.04%, respectively, suggesting that these studies can guide in developing deep blue emissive luminophores for non-doped OLED applications.
 Fig. 42  (a) Molecular structure of TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz. (b) Energy level diagram. (c) Electroluminescence spectra and (d) CIE diagram and images of the EL emission of TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. 
Despite the various advantages of NIR/red emissive electroluminescent materials in display and imaging technology, the non-radiative relaxation and concentration quenching of fluorophores in this emission range are delaying their fully fledged utilization in these fields.112 However, some of the well-known aggregation induced emission fluorophores with structural modifications have shown distinguished NIR/red emission which can be utilized in developing non-doped electroluminescence devices. Funchien et al. modified the popular propeller shaped molecule tetraphenyl ethylene (Fig. 43a) using naphthothiadiazole (TPE4HN and TPE3HN), which was used as a non-doped emitter for OLED application. Strong intramolecular charge transfer characteristics were evidenced from strong NIR emission at 761 nm for TPE4HN and deep red emission at 692 nm for TPE3HN.113 Both the emitters in the aggregated state have maintained a high PL efficiency exceeding 20%. With a high solid-state PL efficiency of the order of 22% with emission in the NIR region, TPE4HN stands as the best fluorophore in this wavelength range. Further they fabricated non-doped OLEDs with TPE3HN and TPE4HN as emitters, which exhibited deep red (EQE = 0.83%) and intense NIR (EQE = 1.48) emission, respectively, with high radiance and stability factors (Fig. 43b and c). All these approaches can be used in realizing efficient deep red and NIR emitting diodes.
 Fig. 43  (a) Chemical structure of TPE4HN and TPE3HN, (b) energy level diagram and (c) electroluminescence spectra of TPE4HN and TPE3HN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. 
Non-doped solution processed OLEDs require easily soluble emitters and low/non-crystalline materials, which are not much reported based on AIE-TADF characteristics, suggesting much improvement needed in this direction. Liu et al. developed three novel dendrimer core structures 3-(4-((6-(9,9′-spirobi[fluoren]-2-yloxy)hexyl)oxy)-9H-carbazol-9-yl)-2,4,5,6-tetra(9H-carbazol-9-yl)benzonitrile (5CzBN-SSP), 3,5-bis(4-((6-(9,9′-spirobi[fluoren]-2-yloxy)hexyl) oxy)-9H-carbazol-9-yl)-2,4,6-tri(9H-carbazol-9-yl)benzonitrile (5CzBN-DSP) and 2,3,4,5, 6-5 (4-((9,9′-fluorene)-2-hydroxyl) ethyl)-9h-carbazole-9-yl)benzonitrile (5CzBN-PSP) using 2,3,4,5,6-penta(9H-carbazol-9-yl)benzonitrile (5CzBN) as a TADF emitter and spirobifluorene with an alkyl chain as a dendrimer (Fig. 44).114 All three exhibited good thermal stability, high glass transition temperatures (Tg) and amorphous nature observed from XRD, which can help to form uniform amorphous films during the solution process. Also, the electrochemical stability of these emitters is advantageous for long term device operational stability. Photoluminescence studies showed a large solvatochromic shift attributed to typical ICT characteristics. All three dendrimers possessed TADF abilities as observed from PL decay experiments.
 Fig. 44  Molecular structure of 5CzBN-SSP, 5CzBN-DSP and 5CzBN-PSP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. 
The AIE phenomenon was more predominant in dendrimers than in pure 5CzBN. Also, the three emitters exhibited more blue shifted emission in the aggregation phase due to the restriction of intramolecular rotation and the less polar local environment. The photoluminescent quantum yield (PLQY) of 5CzBN-SSP, 5CzBN-DSP and 5CzBN-PSP in thin films is 38.0%, 45.7%, and 69.6%, respectively. The additional alkyl chain-linked dendron in 5CzBN-PSP has suppressed collision in the core, leading to a higher PLQY than the other materials. This is also in correlation with the efficient AIE nature in 5CzBN-PSP. Non-doped OLED devices were fabricated by a solution-processing method using all three dendrimers as emissive layers. However, 5CzBN-PSP turned out to be highly efficient with a great external quantum efficiency of 20.1%, which is reported to be the highest among non-doped solution processed OLEDs. This study gives insight to develop dendrimer-based alkyl substituted elongated structures for efficient OLEDs. Though dendrimers possessing AIE-TADF ability are suitable for non-doped solution processed OLED fabrication, there are also much simpler synthetic approaches such as developing small molecule based AIE-TADF molecules. Sun et al. addressed the efficiency roll-off issue of 2,4,5,6-tetra(carbazol-9-yl)-1,3-dicyanobenzene (4CzIPN) and it was tuned by inserting a methoxy group on donor-carbazole to form 2,4,5,6-tetrakis(3-methoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)isophthalonitrile (4CzIPN-MO) and a phenyl bridge between the donor and acceptor to form 4,4′′-bis(3-methoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)-4′,6′-bis(4-(3-methoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)-[1,1′:2′,1′′-terphenyl]-3′,5′-dicarbonitrile) 4CzPhIPN-MO (Fig. 45).108 The phenyl bridge can have a great impact on converting the rigid structure to a twisted structure, which can naturally impart AIE characteristics, which is also true as observed from AIE studies. In the case of 4CzPhIPN-MO, the PL intensities were enhanced by 300 times in THF and water mixtures due to the intermolecular π–π stacking interactions in aggregates, which is not the same in the case of 4CzIPN-MO. This suggests efficient AIE characteristics in 4CzPhIPN-MO compared to 4CzIPN-MO, which is also reflected in the form of high PL efficiency of the order of 86% for 4CzPhIPN-MO and 35% for 4CzIPN-MO in thin films.
 Fig. 45  Chemical structure of 4CzIPN, 4CzIPN-MO and 4CzPhIPN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. 
An efficient RISC process can be evidenced from the low ΔEST values calculated from the onset fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra at 77 K in toluene, found to be 0.09 eV for 4CzIPN-MO and 0.02 eV for 4CzPhIPN-MO, and also a larger RISC rate (KRISC) than the non-radiative rate (Knr) for 4CzPhIPN-MO. All these convey the integrated AIE and delayed fluorescence components in these luminophores, which can play a great role as emitters in non-doped OLEDs. The electroluminescence activity was studied by constructing a non-doped device using both 4CzPhIPN-MO and 4CzPhIPN-MO with the architecture shown in Fig. 46, which presents a maximum external quantum efficiency (EQEmax) for 4CzPhIPN-MO of 14.5%. The roll-off of the EQE calculated using a luminance of 100 cd m−2 and 1000 cd m−2 is as small as 3.8% and 3.9%, respectively, suggesting that AIE coupled with TADF can be used to obtain low efficiency roll-off.
 Fig. 46  Device configuration and energy level of 4CzPhIPN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. 
Phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole (PI) is one of the most extensively explored π-conjugated rigid structures capable of exhibiting deep blue to green luminescence.116,117 Though many structurally modified photochromic PIs can be encountered in the literature, intense red/NIR emissive ones are rarely observed. Liu et al. used phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole (PI) (donor) and phenothiazine (PTZ) (acceptor) to develop thermally stable D–A–D′ type emitters (PIBz-10-PTZ, PIBz-10P-PTZ and PIBz-3-PTZ) (Fig. 47).118
 Fig. 47  Molecular structure of PIBz-10-PTZ, PIBz-3-PTZ and PIBz-10P-PTZ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. 

PIBz-10P-PTZ and PIBz-3-PTZ in neat films were highly emissive in the red and deep red region with PL quantum yields of 14% and 35%, respectively. The non-doped OLED device of PIBz-3-PTZ exhibited deep red electroluminescence at 672 nm with Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.67, 0.32) and managed to exhibit a high EQE of 2.02%. Even at a strong luminance of 100 cd m−2 and brightness of 1000 cd m−2, the EQE of the non-doped PIBz-3-PTZ device was able to maintain an EQE of 1.69%. Also doped PIBz-3-PTZ exhibited efficient EL with an EQE of 4.13%. This study suggested the possibility of tweaking the limit of the energy-gap law to obtain efficient deep red emission.
Phenanthroimidazoles (PIs) are also versatile chromophores which in combination with AIE blocks can tune the OLED performance. Qui et al. synthesized three novel D–π–A structured emitters (TPEO1-PPI, TPEO4-PPI and TPEO6-PPI) using PI bonded to TPA coupled with alkoxy chains (Fig. 48a).119 The crystal structure shows that both TPEO1-PPI and TPEO6-PPI have a twisted conformation which confirms the AIE phenomena. The fluorescence in THF solution recorded for the three fluorophores showed identical features such as an emission wavelength around 429 nm and a fluorescence quantum yield of less than 1%. This suggests that the length of the alkoxy chain has no influence on the fluorescence behavior in THF solution.
 Fig. 48  (a) Molecular structure and (b) energy level diagram of TPEO1-PPI, TPEO4-PPI and TPEO6-PPI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. 
However, in the aggregated state and in neat films the alkoxy chains have different lengths, which makes clear the difference in the fluorescence features. The length of the chain is proportional to the solubility of the compound, which increases the water requirement to cause aggregation. In neat films, as the length of the alkoxy chain is larger (TPEO6-PPI), the π–π stacking interaction decreases due to decreased molecular motion, which leads to a larger value of the quantum yield (65.4%). Electroluminescent devices fabricated using TPEO1-PPI, TPEO4-PPI and TPEO6-PPI individually as emitters (Fig. 48b) exhibited a maximum EQE of 3.75%, 4.07% and 3.87%, respectively. The increased hole–electron transport hinderance in TPEO6-PPI resulted in the decreased EQE, whereas TPEO4-PPI showed significant performance.
The well-known iridium complexes also exhibit deep red emission based on phosphorescence. Kim et al. formulated some iridium complex molecular designs with various substituents on cyclometalated (benzo[b]thiophen-2-yl)quinolines based on their previous findings on developing deep-red luminophores based on ancillary ligands.120 They reported iridium complexes of (benzo[b]thiophen-2-yl)quinoline without any substitution, and with weak electron-withdrawing phenyl (Ir2), strong electron-withdrawing ethyl ester (–CO2C2H5, Ir3) and trifluoromethyl (–CF3, Ir4) substituents (Fig. 49). The complexes Ir2–Ir3 were found to possess distorted coordination octahedral structure around the Ir3+ center. The effects of fair and strong electron withdrawing substituents were visible from the small and appreciable red shifts in the absorption bands of Ir2 and Ir3/Ir4, respectively. Ir3 and Ir4 were able to exhibit NIR emission bands, whereas Ir2 and Ir3 were able to show deep red emission. The delocalized LUMO level was responsible for such emission characteristics of Ir3. Complexes Ir2 and Ir4 were found to exhibit aggregation induced phosphorescence emission. An interesting observation from AIE studies was made that, in the case of Ir2, it exhibited aggregation induced phosphorescence emission due to the π–π interactions, which is generally not observed in any AIE molecules. This was due to the highly emissive MLLCT excited state resulting from the spatially separated molecular packing, which does not allow direct contact of triplet spin density states. The electroluminescence performance of Ir2 showed deep-red emission with an excellent EQE of 7.29%. Thus, deep-red phosphorescent devices can be achieved by further design and development of Ir2 related complexes.
 Fig. 49  Molecular structure of the iridium(III) complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. 
Recent developments in printing techniques are facilitating the development of efficient, flexible and wearable electronic devices, attractive displays in electronic gadgets and large area OLED fabrication. Due to the easy film forming ability of polymers and their adoptability to printing techniques,121,122 they can be the right choice for all those multifunctional applications. Conjugation of aggregation induced emission rotamers with a suitable polymer is currently a hot topic, especially in polymer LED (PLED) research. However, PLEDs with low efficiency roll off and efficient luminescence need to be investigated. Gu et al. synthesized two tetraphenyl ethylene and triphenyl amine (pTPE-TPA-Cz and pTPE-TPA-Flu) coupled polymers using a Suzuki–Miyaura polycoupling reaction (Fig. 50a).123 The AIE abilities were confirmed from the increased PL quantum yield in the aggregated film compared to in the pure solution for both the polymers. These polymers in the CBP host were able to form a smooth surfaced film as observed from the small root mean square values obtained from the AFM morphologies (Fig. 50b). In the CBP host, due to the suppressed intermolecular dipole–dipole interaction and weakened intramolecular charge transfer, a minute blue shift while going from more polar neat films to less polar doped films is observed. However, in the case of 30 wt% pTPE-TPA-Flu, the interaction between its functional groups and CBP might have led to a marginal red-shift in its emission. An excellent PLQY of up to 63% and 59% was observed for pTPE-TPA-Cz and pTPE-TPA-Flu in the CBP host, respectively, suggesting their capability for use as an emissive layer in OLED construction.
 Fig. 50  (a) Synthesis route and (b) AFM morphology of pTPE-TPA-Cz and pTPE-TPA-Flu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. 
The PLED fabricated using non-doped pTPE-TPA-Cz displayed a maximum CE, PE, and EQE of 3.69 cd A−1, 2.28 lm W−1 and 1.46%, respectively. A much smaller efficiency roll-off is achieved with CE, PE, and EQE values of 3.67 cd A−1, 2.13 lm W−1 and 1.44% at a luminance of 500 cd m−2. The low roll-off efficiencies exhibited by the studied polymers can be promising for developing non-doped polymer based emissive layers. The exceptional chemical stability of conjugated polymers and high fluorescence efficiency behavior have rendered their usage in various solution phase applications. However, due to their aggregation caused quenching behavior, they need to be further tuned with an AIE fluorophore for their usage in widespread applications. On the other hand, non-conjugated luminescent polymers have also been used for many applications.124–126 However, there are only a few reports on intrinsic aggregation induced emission characteristics in non-conjugated polymer chains,127,128 which have the capability to perform exceptionally for bioimaging and OLED applications due to their biocompatibility, solubility and so on, which needs to be investigated.
In light of this, Liu et al. synthesized nonconjugated linear poly(hydroxyurethane) microspheres (PHUMs) via a one-pot crosslinking reaction of trimethylolpropane tri(cyclic carbonate) ether (TPTE) and 1,6-hexanediamine at different temperatures of 130 °C (PHU-130), 150 °C (PHU-150), 180 °C (PHU-180) and 200 °C (PHU-200) in chloroform (Fig. 51).129 Also, in the absence of chloroform and in similar reaction conditions non-conjugated crosslinked polymers (CPHU-100) were prepared at 100 °C. Morphological studies showed CPHU-100 as a block solid with a smooth surface, while the PHUMs were spherical solids with uniform size distribution.
 Fig. 51  Synthesis route of PHUMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. 
As the reaction temperature was varied, consequently there was a variation in the crosslinking degree and H-bonding strength (Fig. 52a), which resulted in varying emission colors of the microspheres under 365 nm UV lamps (Fig. 52b). The emission peaks in the case of PHUM-180 and 200 have more contribution from yellow and green than blue. Meanwhile, the spectrum at lower temperature of the microspheres gets broadened at higher temperature, which is also evident from the CIE co-ordinates falling in the white region for PHUM-180: (0.233, 0.267) and PHUM-200: (0.275, 0.324); for other microspheres it was in the blue region. The electroluminescent device fabricated also exhibited CIE coordinates in the white light region, at (0.342, 0.354) for PHUM-180 and at (0.346, 0.374) for PHUM-200, which were close to those of pure white light (0.33, 0.33). Also, their high color rendering index suggested that these devices are one of the best performing among white OLEDs.
 Fig. 52  (a) Cluster size distribution and (b) change in color photograph under daylight (a1–e1) and UV light (365 nm) (a2 and e2) of PHUMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. 
5. Sensing studies (chemical and temperature)
Monitoring biological and chemical analytes and physiological changes such as pH and temperature serves a great purpose in environmental protection, the pharmaceutical industry and biomedical applications, respectively.130,131 The fluorescence based technique is the most robust technique, which can rapidly sense analytes and is also simple in its operation. Sensors which can detect multiple species with better quantum yield in higher aggregation and large Stokes shift are highly desirable and can be realized based on D–π–A structures. Even having so many advantages, the fluorescence technique is still facing difficulties such as in spontaneous aggregation; the many face to face molecular arrangements in π-conjugated systems lead to exciplexes or excimers by creating electron delocalization, which absorb the excitation energy and release it through non-radiative relaxation pathways. This universal effect of ACQ restricts the use of sensory molecules to specifically in dilute solutions, resulting in weak sensitivity.132 Also, some analytes such as nitroaromatic based explosives, acids and amines are difficult to detect in the vapour phase. In order to overcome this issue, AIEgens open the door for detecting nitroaromatic compounds, acid vapours and amines.133,134 Amines play a significant role in assessing food quality, and industrial and environmental samples. Debsharma et al. developed an AIEgen based on an indenopyrrole (PYROMe) derivative (Fig. 53), since it has a twisted structure which can lead to enhanced emission.135 The presence of a free carbonyl group and photoinduced electron transfer between the D and A moieties could help in simultaneous detection of amine and acid vapours. The self-assembled thin film of PYROMe was able to detect trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) by forming protonation with the carbonyl group.
 Fig. 53  Fluorescence emission behavior and amine vapor sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. 
The change in porosity as observed from SEM suggested destruction of the morphology leading to the interaction between PYROMe and TFA. The PYROMe film was also able to detect amine vapours such as aniline, N,N-dimethylaniline and N-methylaniline through photoinduced electron transfer as well as physical adsorption of aromatic amine vapours. Nitroaromatic explosives such as 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) and picric acid are widely used for constructive as well as destructive applications. However, their wide usage in explosives can damage the environment as well as society.136 Hence the detection of trace amounts of these explosives lies in the national interest. However, due to their low vapour pressure, their detection in the vapour phase is highly complex. Hence, the most versatile technique of fluorescence can be adopted because of its operational ease and sensitivity. Sengottuvelu et al. designed and synthesized conjugated mesoporous oligomers (CMOs 1 and 2) (Fig. 54) which can be ultrasensitive to nitroaromatic compounds due to their macroporosity and electronic interconnectivity with aggregation-induced enhanced emission (AIEE) characteristics.137 CMO1 in a 90% water fraction and 10% THF has a greater quantum yield (45.9%) than CMO2 (24.6%). The TPE moiety possessing an interlocked structure in the polymer matrix leads to a high quantum yield. In the same solvent conditions the addition of picric acid (PA) resulted in complete quenching of the fluorescence intensity. The fluorescence quenching was attributed to resonance energy transfer. Also, the energy transfer was more efficient in CMO1 than CMO2. In addition, a thin film of CMO1 exposed to PA vapours for 24 hours observed under FESEM shows that macroporous sites in these films were filled with PA particles (Fig. 55), which is also supported by the change in peak positions in the FT-IR spectrum. In the case of the CMO2 film, it shows less porous structure. CMO1 exhibited a larger quenching constant of 2.6 × 106 M−1 for PA than that of TNT due to better overlap of the absorption spectrum of PA and emission spectrum of CMO1 than with TNT, leading to better energy transfer to PA. CMO1 was able to detect PA on test strips, in the micromolar to nanomolar concentration range (Fig. 56). It was able to sense PA in the solid state as well (Fig. 56). CMO1 exhibited very good selectivity towards PA compared to other competitive explosives and non-explosives (Fig. 57) tested on filter paper. All this suggested the ability of mesoporous oligomers to be used as a portable and selective detecting agent for explosives.
 Fig. 54  Molecular structures of conjugated mesoporous oligomers 1 and 2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
 Fig. 55  (a) FESEM images of the CMO1 thin film before exposing to PA vapours. (b) FESEM images of CMO1 after exposure to the PA vapours. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. 
 Fig. 56  Top: Photographs of CMO1 impregnated test strips with varying concentrations of PA upon illumination at 365 nm; from left to right: blank (B), 1 × 10−4 M, 1 × 10−5 M, 1 × 10−6 M, 1 × 10−7 M, 1 × 10−8 M, 1 × 10−9 M, 1× 10−10 M, 1 × 10−11 M. Below: Image taken upon illumination at 365 nm. (1) Gloves without a trace of picric acid. (2) Impregnated test strips without any contact of PA. (3) Gloves showing the powder of picric acid on thumbs (marked with a red circle). (4) Image of the CMO1 impregnated test strips while applying the PA traces. (5) Image of CMO1 impregnated test strips rubbed with PA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
 Fig. 57  Photograph of CMO1 impregnated test strips at ten different places exposed to the powder of various explosives [(1) blank CMO1, (2) picric acid, (3) 4-nitrobenzene, (4) 3,5-dinitrobenzoic acid, (5) 2-amino-4-nitrophenol, (6) 2,6-trinitrotoluene, (7) 2,4-dinitrophenol, (8) 4-nitrotoluene, (9) benzoic acid, (10) boric acid]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
In another study, Li et al. developed a portable device using an AIEE active conjugated polymer to detect nitroaromatic compounds (NAC) based on fluorescence quenching.138 An AIEE active small molecule (PA-2PhAn) (Fig. 58a) was prepared by using 9,10-diphenyl anthracene linked to phosphoric acid as an anchor group through an alkyl chain. A monolayer of PA-2PhAn was self-assembled on a flexible substrate prior to covalent bonding with a HfO2 adhesive layer for better stability (Fig. 58b and c). Due to the AIEE behaviour the denser films were able to show strong fluorescence intensity. Also, a homogeneous distribution on the substrate surface was evidenced by similar emission profiles for the excitation and emission spectra recorded at different analysis wavelengths (Fig. 58d). The fluorescence emission of PA-2PhAn was more effectively quenched by nitrobenzene on a silicon wafer than on flexible PET (Fig. 59a) due to the less compact arrangement on PET than the silicon wafer. The fluorescence quenching was attributed to static quenching from the stable lifetime values irrespective of the varied time of exposure of NB. PA-2PhAn layers have great reversibility in their emission, as only a 10% quenching loss was reported upon the NB exposed substrates being immersed in ethanol and repeating for several cycles; this enables its usage in wearable sensors. The sensitivity of PA-2PhAn for trinitrotoluene (TNT) was found to be 1.4 ppm, and 8.4 ppm for dinitrotoluene (DNB) and 224 ppm for nitrobenzene (NB), suggesting that an increase in the nitro group can make a stable complex with PA-2PhAn. It was also highly selective towards NB compared to common chemical reagents clearly (Fig. 59b).
 Fig. 58  (a) Molecular structure of PA-2PhAn (top) and the SAM sensor on the poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate (down). (b) Schematic cross section of the formation of the PA-2PhAn SAM on the HfO2 adhesion layer. (c) Quenching model of the flexible SAM sensor by NACs and (d) fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of the PA-2PhAn SAMs recorded at various excitation and analysis wavelengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. 
 Fig. 59  (a) Quenching efficiency and τ/τ0 as a function of exposure time in NB for SAMs both on the silicon wafer and flexible PET and (b) selectivity of the SAM sensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. 
Hydrogen and halogen bonding interactions, π–π stacking, and van der Waals and dipolar interactions enable self-assembled molecular structures, which is also one of the important techniques to control the AIE properties along with other mechanisms. However, AIEgens obtained using self-assembled structures due to halogen interactions have rarely been investigated. Ghosh et al. designed and synthesized a series of peptides containing halogenated bithiophenes (Fig. 60).139 The three fluorophores (4a–4c) underwent gelation and were found to be luminescent, whereas 3a–3c did not form any gel. Fluorophores 4a–4c exhibited AIE behavior in the gel state, confirmed from temperature and concentration dependent fluorescence studies. The solid state emission and structure property relation suggested that the AIE behavior originated from the self-assembled molecules involving different noncovalent interactions and the restricted interannular rotation of the bithiophene skeletons. The halogenated bithiophene was used to detect cyanide ions in highly aqueous medium. Upon addition of aqueous NaCN to a 1a solution in acetonitrile, a blue shift occurred in the absorption band to 334 nm with a new absorption band observed at 497 nm and the corresponding fluorescence emission intensity was quenched (Fig. 61a–d). Also, the molecule was highly selective towards cyanide ions as there was no interaction observed in the presence of the strong nucleophilic anions hydrazine and thiocyanate (Fig. 61e). There was no sensing behavior observed in the case of 3a–b, 4a–b and 8, suggesting the role of aldehyde and halogens in sensing CN−. The sensitivity, determined using a paper strip soaked with 1a and dipped in cyanide solution, was found to be 18 μM, which was mentioned as less than the related reported chemosensors. These studies foster halogen based self-assembled AIEgens for multifunctional applications.
 Fig. 60  Halogenated bithiophene nano-building blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. 
 Fig. 61  (a) Absorbance spectra of compound 1a in CH3CN with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 10 μM). (b) Absorbance spectra of compound 1a in CH3CN–H2O (1:1 v/v) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 15 μM). (c) Emission spectra of 1a in CH3CN (10.0 μM) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 10 μM). (d) Emission spectra of 1a in CH3CN–H2O (1:1 v/v) solution (10.0 μM) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 15 μM) and (e) fluorescence intensities of 1a in ACN (10.0 μM) after addition of different anions (10.0 equiv). Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. 
Physiological temperature change is a microenvironment process that requires a sensitive probe to monitor. The common temperature probes available so far such as thermography, inorganic clusters, fluorescent nanoparticles, quantum dots and supramolecular polymers have many drawbacks such as high cytotoxicity, low spatial resolution, hydrophobicity etc. Whereas, AIE based small molecules can act as efficient temperature probes for biological conditions due to their high sensitivity, enhanced spatial resolution, and substantial quantum yield. Gao et al. reported a novel nano-thermometer constructed using an aggregation-induced-emission (AIE) fluorophore (HPS) as the reporter in a household butter matrix stabilized by the surfactant DSPE-PEG-biotin.140 The HPS/butter/DSPE-PEG-biotin nanorods (Fig. 62) behaved as a robust reversible temperature sensor which showed an appreciable 2% reduction in its fluorescence intensity and lifetime (0.11 ns) per °C increase in physiological temperature. It was also found to show excellent biocompatibility as observed from 10% reduction of cell viability below a concentration of 10 mg mL−1. The practical applicability of the nanorod was demonstrated based on fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) using HUVEC cells. This first-time approach could guide further development of AIE systems for intracellular temperature sensing.
 Fig. 62  HPS/butter/DSPE-PEG-biotin nanorod. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. 
Probes with great spatio-temporal resolution have more advantage for intracellular temperature measurements as they can avoid autofluorescence issues and reduce the spectral disturbance from tissues. In this scenario utilizing NIR-emissive fluorophores which can be realized from molecules with twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) structures makes more sense. Also, the lack of reports on AIE and TICT based NIR emissive organic ratiometric fluorescent thermometers prompted Meng et al. to develop a new AIEgen, 2-([1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)-3-(4-((E)-4-(diphenylamino)styryl)phenyl) fumaronitrile (TBB), with a rotatable electron donor–π–accepter (D–π–A) (Fig. 63a) structure and investigate the temperature-dependent luminescence properties for cellular temperature sensing.141 The molecular aggregates exhibited enhanced emission at a 70% water fraction. Temperature dependent fluorescence studies in the range 20 °C to 75 °C suggested that the increase in temperature made the aggregates show reduced PL intensity as well as lifetime. This behaviour was due to the incomplete restriction of molecular motion upon aggregation, which leads to enhanced molecular motion upon an increase in the temperature. It is synchronous with an increase in the non-radiative rate constant with the increase in temperature. A ratiometric temperature sensor TBB&R110@F127 nanoparticles (TRF NPs) was developed by employing amphiphilic polymer matrix F127 embedded with thermo-sensitive NIR fluorophore TBB and Rhodamine 110 dye (R110) (Fig. 63b). The stable NPs exhibited temperature dependent PL quenching (Fig. 63c) at 680 nm with a sensitivity of 2.37% °C−1 in the range 25 to 65 °C.
 Fig. 63  (a) Synthesis of TBB. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of TRF NPs and (c) PL spectra of TRF NPs with the temperature increasing from 25 to 65 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. 
Monitoring the intracellular temperature helps in avoiding collateral damage during photothermal therapy. Hence TRF-NPs exhibited a thermal sensitivity of 1.634% °C−1 during the temperature rising process of the PTT agent Au nanorods (Au NRs) under 808 nm laser irradiation. Based on the low toxicity of TRF NPs they further studied intracellular temperature changes in TRF-Au NRs incubated with Hep-G2 cells for 4 h at 37 °C. Upon an increase in temperature under the CLSM imaging the red colour emission among the red and green dual emission was found to be decreased (Fig. 64), suggesting the potential of the temperature probe for microenvironment thermometry applications.
 Fig. 64  Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of TRF NP incubated Hep-G2 cells at 25.4 °C (A), 29.5 °C (B), 40.7 °C (C), 43.4 °C (D) and 50.3 °C (E); scale bars = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. 
6. Chiral structures
The orientations of a molecule resulting in two asymmetric structures referred to as enantiomeric forms are responsible for chirality. Chirality is a ubiquitous feature which can be seen in DNA, proteins, sugars and so on.142–144 At the molecular level most living entities possesses chirality. Proteins were found to be selective towards drugs delivered based on their enantiomeric response. Thus, chirality plays a major role in drug delivery systems.145 Circularly polarized light emission, an analogue of the circular dichroism phenomenon, is obtained from chiral structures and is one of the important fields of research in optoelectronics and quantum teleportation.146–148 The dissymmetry factor of luminescence (glum) is an indexing parameter for gauging the performance of CPL based devices. However, the compromised emission efficiency while tuning glum can be compensated for based on coupling chiral molecules with aggregation induced emission molecules. Wu et al. envisaged and synthesized a series of dicyanodistyrylbenzene-cholesterol derivatives (DCS-Chols) wherein DCS displays an AIE property, and two cholesterols and eight or five methylene units as linkers (α-8C, α-5C, β-8C and β-5C) can be a chiral framework (Fig. 65).149 The space between DCS and cholesterol has affected the CPL direction. Molecules with 8 methylene linkers have exhibited left-handed CPL, whereas those with 5 methylene linkers were found to exhibit right handed CPL. These helical structures exhibited a simultaneous high glum value and large emission efficiency, which gives an insight into the trade-off between CPL and AIE performance.
 Fig. 65  Chirality in a series of dicyanodistyrylbenzene-cholesterol derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. 
BODIPY and equivalent compounds are generally emissive in solution but inefficient in the solid state. However, the asymmetrical structure makes it brighter in the solid state. BODIPY fluorophores with AIE ability as well as circularly polarized luminescence are rare to encounter. Maeda et al. reported a series of asymmetrical BODIPY analogues using carbazole-Schiff bases prepared from formylcarbazoles and anilines (Fig. 66) which exhibited strong solid-state fluorescence and the fluorine groups replaced by binaphthyl resulted in CPL activity in both solution and the solid state.150 Electron donating groups (1a to c) exhibited a blue shift in fluorescence emission, whereas electron withdrawing groups (1e to g) exhibited red shifted absorbance as well as fluorescence.
 Fig. 66  Asymmetrical BODIPY analogues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. 
Shang et al. reported an optically pure single crystal metal organic framework (MOF) based on tetrakis(4-pyridylphenyl)ethylene (TPyPE) and chiral camphoric acid (Cam).151 The MOF was found to be CPL active due to through-space chirality transfer. The reversible manipulation of either the local or global dynamics of the AIEgen rotors in the chiral frameworks exhibited dual mechano-switchable FL/CPL in the presence of external mechano-stimuli (Fig. 67). The overall results suggested the complete perspective of the AIE mechanism as well as a versatile and efficient strategy for the development of reversibly switchable CPL materials.
 Fig. 67  Mechano-switchable FL/CPL AIEgen MOF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. 
The CPL-AIE molecules designed so far based on liquid crystals or polymer structures due to their complex structure–property relations have limited applications; however, the small molecules developed so far may lag in association between the constituents, resulting in low glum. The intrinsic CPL property obtained using small molecule based helical structures can be far off from the CPL moiety tethered-AIEgens. Shen et al. synthesized a series of helicene based molecules with variation in the substituent position (Fig. 68). All the 2- (or 2, 15-) substituted AIE-helicene structures were found to be CPL active; however, it was opposite in the case of all the 4- (or 4, 13-) substituted molecules.152 Also, increased conjugation tunes the colour to the higher wavelength range with a large glum value and good luminescence intensity. In addition, the linkage length affects the CPL activity. The prepared AIE-helicene adducts can be used for the development of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) with anti-fake polarized light and circularly polarized emitted light. The structural performance and preparation methods can also be useful for the development of advanced CPL materials.
 Fig. 68  AIE-CPL active helicene structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. 
In order to overcome tedious synthesis procedures in architecting circularly polarized luminescent chiral molecules with colour tunability and high glum, Shang et al. developed a pyridine functionalized cyanostilbene bonded to a chiral cholesterol group through an ester (Chol-CN-Py) (Fig. 69a) single molecular system which self-assembled into a chiral supramolecular gel.153 The weakly emissive and non-CPL solution state Chol-CN-Py turned out to be strongly blue emissive and right-handed circularly polarized luminescent (CPL) upon gelation (Fig. 69b and c). In comparison with the reported self-assembled structures, Chol-CN-Py exhibited a high glum of −3.0 × 10−2 attributed to chirality transfer from the cholesterol substituent to the cyanostilbene in the gel state. Upon protonation of Chol-CN-Py using TFA the fluorescence emission was tuned from blue to yellow, which was recovered by deprotonation using TEA, and this was able to be repeated for different cycles. Similar behaviour was also observed in a xerogel film with a gradual colour tuning ability from blue to orange upon exposing to TFA vapour along with a righthanded CPL nature similar to the gel conditions. These studies shed light on developing novel smart CPL tunable materials in a single molecular system.
 Fig. 69  (a) Chemical structure of Chol-CN-Py, (b) hot solution and gel fluorescence spectra (λex = 410 nm) and fluorescence image under UV light and (c) CPL spectra of the Chol-CN-Py gel (λex = 370 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. 
7. Conclusions
Materials with excellent properties including AIE features have grabbed the attention of researchers towards many biomedical applications in recent times. We have mainly focussed and explained many approaches towards the development of AIE based materials and applications. This review is the first to summarize a broad range of research work in detail and draw an outline of the most appealing progress for developing AIE based materials. We have discussed initially the synthesis, spectroscopic characterization and applications of AIE based nonconventional complexes. The photophysical properties were reviewed in detail to understand the effect of non-chromophoric ligands and complex behaviour. AIE photosensitizers for in vitro and in vivo imaging, and photodynamic therapeutic and theranostic applications are a major part of the present review article. This review article also provides a detailed description of many design strategies which are derived from the synergistic RIM effect for producing red/NIR emitting AIE materials. This could have been done by converting conventional ACQ materials into AIEgens by decorating conjugated fluorogens with electron acceptors and donors. Intercalating the strategies and properties of AIE, TADF and phosphorescence discussed here can lead to further development of novel, efficient blue and red/NIR AIE fluorophores which can be used for electroluminescent devices. Apart from the basic investigation of synthesis, chemical structure and properties, discovering sensing studies in view of chemicals and temperature is a major part of this review article. Moreover, the study of AIE-based photosensitizers, mechanochromism/photophysical properties, sensing and electroluminescent studies and modalities of chiral structures in one platform will provide excellent methods and will surely help to develop more practical, selective and precise AIEgens. The development of organelle imaging, bacteria imaging, and cancer cell recognition techniques are some of the important applications which are discussed here. This review about overwhelming recent research work on usage of AIE-based fluorophores suitable for multifunctional applications enlightens future researchers for enriching the field of aggregation induced emission.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Author Mr Jeevan Chakravarthy thanks the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Govt. of India, New Delhi, India, for providing him a Senior Research Fellowship.
References
E. M. S. Stennett, M. A. Ciuba and M. Levitus, Photophysical processes in single molecule organic fluorescent probe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1057–1075 RSC .
A. N. Woodward, J. M. Kolesar, S. R. Hall, A. A. Saleh, D. S. Jones and M. G. Walter, Thiazolothiazole fluorophores exhibiting strong fluorescence and viologen-like reversible electrochromism, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8467–8473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shimizu and T. Hiyama, Organic fluorophores exhibiting highly efficient photoluminescence in the solid state, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1516–1531 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Q. Song, X. Huang and J. Huang, A new surfactant-fluorescence probe for detecting shape transitions in self-assembled systems, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 323, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Janjanam, G. Vegesna, F. T. Luo, A. Tiwari and H. Liu, Highly water-soluble BODIPY-based fluorescent probes for sensitive fluorescent sensing of zinc(II), J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1722–1728 RSC .
N. Dorh, S. Zhu, K. B. Dhungana, R. Pati, F. T. Luo, H. Liu and A. Tiwari, BODIPY-based fluorescent probes for sensing protein surface-hydrophobicity, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18337 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R. Guan, M. Guo, P. Ning, R. Shao and X. Meng, A FRET based two-photon fluorescent probe for ratiometric detection of Pd2+ in living cells and in vivo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 949–955 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Hu, S. Genrig, G. Reither, D. Subramanian, M. A. Mall, O. Plettenburg and C. Schultz, FRET-based and other fluorescent proteinase probes, Biotechnol. J., 2014, 9, 266–281 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawata, Y. Chino, N. Kobayashi and M. Kimura, Increased light-harvesting in dye-sensitized solar cells through förster resonance energy transfer within supramolecular dyad systems, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7294–7300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission of 1-methyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenylsilole, Chem. Comm., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
J. He, B. Xu, F. Chen, H. Xia, K. Li, L. Ye and W. Tian, Aggregation-induced emission in the crystals of 9,10-distyrylanthracene derivatives: the essential role of restricted intramolecular torsion, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9892–9899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierschner, L. Luer, B. M. Medina, D. Oelkrug and H. J. Egelhaaf, Highly emissive h-aggregates or aggregation-induced emission quenching? the photophysics of all-trans para-distyrylbenzene, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2686–2697 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, L. Li, H. Nie, J. Tong, L. Yan, B. Xu, J. Z. Sun, W. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Tetraphenylpyrazine-based AIEgens: facile preparation and tunable light emission, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1932–1937 RSC .
H. Wang and G. Liu, Advances in luminescent materials with aggregation-induced emission (AIE) properties for biomedical applications, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4029–4042 RSC .
Z. Wang, L. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Li, B. Xu, X. Fu, Z. Sun and W. Tian, Ultra bright red AIE dots for cytoplasm and nuclear imaging, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 7013–7020 RSC .
D. Li, J. Yu and R. Xu, Mesoporous silica functionalized with an AIE luminogen for drug delivery, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11077–11079 RSC .
W. Qin, D. Ding, J. Liu, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Hu, B. Liu and B. Z. Tang, Biocompatible nanoparticles with aggregation-induced emission characteristics as far-red/near-infrared fluorescent bio-probes for in vitro and in vivo imaging applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 771–779 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Li, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lama and B. Z. Tang, Structural and process controls of AIEgens for NIR-II theranostics, Chem. Sci., 2020 10.1039/D0SC02911D .
Z. Zhao, C. Chen, W. Wu, F. Wang and L. Du, 
            et al., Highly efficient photothermal nanoagent achieved by harvesting energy via excited-state intramolecular motion within nanoparticles, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 768 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-Induced Emission: New Vistas at the Aggregate Level, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9888–9907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Ou, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Liu, L. Shi, D. Ding and B. Z. Tang, Molecular Motion in Aggregates: Manipulating TICT for Boosting Photothermal Theranostics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5359–5368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, B. Liu and Y. Yuan, AIEgen based drug delivery systems for cancer therapy, J. Controlled Release, 2018, 290, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zhang, X. Hou, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Yang, J. You and P. Ju, A novel biomass-based reusable AIE material: AIE properties and potential applications in amine/ammonia vapor sensing and information storage, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8404–8411 RSC .
R. Suresh, S. K. Thiyagarajan and P. Ramamurthy, An AIE based fluorescent probe for digital lifting of latent fingerprint marks down to minutiae level, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fang, G. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Kong, L. Yang, H. Bi and J. Yang, An AIE active probe for specific sensing of Hg2+ based on linear conjugated bis-Schiff base, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 229, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. La, S. V. Bhosale, L. A. Jones and S. V. Bhosale, Tetraphenylethylene-based aie-active probes for sensing applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 10, 12189–12216 CrossRef .
S. Samanta, S. Goswami, M. N. Hoque, A. Ramesh and G. Das, An aggregation-induced emission (AIE) active probe renders Al(III) sensing and tracking of subsequent interaction with DNA, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11833–11836 RSC .
J. Mei, Y. Huang and H. Tian, Progress and trends in AIE-based bioprobes: a brief overview, ACS Appl. Mat. Int., 2017, 10, 12217–12261 CrossRef .
S. F. Wang, J. R. Lin, F. Ishiwari, T. Fukushima, H. Masuhara and T. Sugiyama, Spatiotemporal dynamics of aggregation-induced emission enhancement controlled by optical manipulation, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 7063–7068 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, G. Liu, S. Pu and S. H. Liu, Carbazole-based aggregation-induced emission (AIE)-active gold(I) complex: persistent room-temperature phosphorescence, reversible mechanochromism and vapochromism characteristics, Dye Pigm., 2017, 143, 409–415 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Dia and Y. L. Chen, Recent progress in organic mechanoluminescent materials, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 245–251 CrossRef .
N. Shen, Z. P. Wang, J. Jin, L. Gong, Z. Z. Zhang and X. Huang, Phase transitions and photoluminesence switching
in hybrid antimony(III) and bismuth(III) halides, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 3395–3405 RSC .
X. Hou, X. C. Ke, C. Bruns, P. R. McGonigal, R. B. Pettman and J. F. Stoddart, Tunable solid-state fluorescent materials for supramolecular encryption, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6884 CrossRef .
N. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, N. Xie, S. Chen, H. Su, M. Gao, I. D. Williams and K. S. Wong, Benzothiazolium-functionalized tetraphenylethene: an AIE luminogen with tunable solid-state emission, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8637–8639 RSC .
C. Feng, K. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Liu, B. Zou and P. Lu, Unique piezochromic fluorescence behavior of organic crystal of carbazole-substituted CNDSB, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3836–3839 RSC .
C. Wang and Z. Li, Molecular conformation and packing: their critical roles in the emission performance of mechanochromic fluorescence materials, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2174–2194 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Gu, Y. Dai, K. Wang, S. Zhang, G. Chen, B. Zou and B. Yang, Pressure-induced blue-shifted and enhanced emission: a cooper-ative effect between aggregation-induced emission and energy-transfer suppression, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, G. Zhang, L. Kong, Y. Tian and Y. J. Yang, Molecular packing-controlled mechanical-induced emission enhancement of tetraphenylethene functionalized pyrazolinederivatives, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 3834–3842 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Wang, J. Peng, Y. Xie, M. Liu, W. Gao, Y. Zhaou, X. Huang and H. Wu, Polymorphism and multicolor mechanofluorochromism of a D–π–A asymmetric 4H-pyran derivative with aggregation-induced emission property, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 27742–27751 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheng, D. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Zhaou, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, A. Han and C. Zhang, High contrast mechanochromic luminescence of aggregation-induced emission (AIE)-based 9,9-dimethyl-9,10-dihydroacridine-containing cruciform luminophores, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 173, 107934 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Xiao, L. Qian, M. Han, X. Wu, Z. Guo and H. Han, Diversified AIE and mechanochromic luminescence based on carbazole derivatives decorated dicyanovinyl groups: effects of substitution site and molecular packing, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 2166–2172 RSC .
Y. Chen, B. Bai, Q. Chai, J. Wei, H. Wang and M. Li, Mechano-responsive fluorescent xerogel based on anthracene-substituted acylhydrazone derivative, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 5214–5218 RSC .
Y. Sagara, S. Yamane, T. Mutai, K. Araki and T. Kato, A stimuli-responsive, photoluminescent, anthracene-based liquid crystal: emission color determined by thermal and mechanical processes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1869–1875 CrossRef CAS .
E. Krieg, E. Shirman, H. Weissman, E. Shimoni, S. G. Wolf, I. Pinkas and B. Rybtchinski, Supramolecular gel based on a perylene diimide dye: multiple stimuli responsiveness, robustness, and photofunction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14365–14373 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Li, Q. Wang, M. Yang and C. Li, A novel aggregation-induced-emission-active supramolecular organogel for the detection of volatile acid vapors, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 17524–17532 RSC .
M. Mitani, S. Ogata, S. Yamane, M. Yoshio, M. Hasegawa and T. Kato, Mechanoresponsive liquid crystals exhibiting reversible luminescent color changes at ambient temperature, J. Mater. Chem.
C, 2016, 4, 2752–2760 RSC .
P. Jana and S. Kanvah, Aggregation-induced emission and organogels with chiral and racemic pyrene substituted cyanostyrenes, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 2720–2728 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Zhu, T. Bai, H. Wang, W. Bai, J. Ling, J. Z. Sun, F. Huang, Z. L. Wu and Q. Zheng, Single chromophore-based white-light emitting hydrogel with tunable fluorescence and patternability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39343–39352 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Functional π-gelators and their applications, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1973–2129 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Suganya, K. Debsharma, E. Ravindran, M. K. Mahanto and E. Prasad, Phenothiazine based mechano-fluorochromic gels and solids: superhydrophobic surface formation and crystal-to-crystal phase transition, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 1222–1233 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, Y. Jiang, J. Wang, Z. Li, B. S. Li and B. Z. Tang, The influence of intermolecular interactions and molecular packings on mechanochromism and mechanoluminescence – a tetraphenylethylene derivative case, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12709–12716 RSC .
K. Suenaga, K. Uemura, K. Tanaka and Y. Chujo, Stimuli-responsive luminochromic polymers consisting of multi-state emissive fused boron ketoiminate, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1127–1133 RSC .
J. Chaudhary, V. Mittal, S. Mishra, A. Daiya, R. Chowdhury, I. R. Laskar and R. K. Roy, A new AIE active halochromic white light emissive molecule: combined experimental and theoretical study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 15406–15417 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia and L. Wu, Stimuli-responsive fluorescence switching: aggregation-induced emission (AIE), protonation effect and reversible mechanofluorochromism of tetraphenylethene hydrazone-based, Org. Electrochem., 2020, 76, 105466 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. Zhang, Q. W. Zhang, X. Li, C. X. Zhao, T. Y. Xu, D. H. Qu and H. Tian, Color-tunable single-fluorophore supramolecular system with assembly-encoded emission, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 158 CrossRef .
T. Mori, Y. Yoshigoe and Y. Kuninobu, Control of multicolor and white emission by adjusting the equilibrium between fluorophores, Lewis acids, and their complexes in polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14457–14461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Qin, Q. Li, P. Wang, X. Miao, H. Jin, W. Ao and L. Cao, Supramolecular organic frameworks with controllable shape and aggregation-induced emission for tunable luminescent materials through aqueous host–guest complexation, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902154 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Dwivedi, V. D. Singh and D. S. Pandey, Controlling photophysical properties of systems containing multiple BODIPY units linked by methylene bridge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9056–9067 CrossRef CAS .
M. DeniBen, R. Hannen, D. Itskalov, L. Biesen, N. N. Budau, K. Hoffmann, G. J. Reiss, U. R. Genger and T. J. J. Muller, One-pot synthesis of a white-light emissive bichromophore operated by aggregation-induced dual emission (AIDE) and partial energy transfer, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7407–7410 RSC .
S. Feng, S. Gong and G. Feng, Aggregation-induced emission and solid fluorescence of fluorescein derivatives, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2511–2513 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Y. Long, X. Chen, T. Yang, J. Zhao, Y. Meng, Z. Chi, S. Liu, X. Chen, M. P. Aldred, J. Xu and Y. Zhang, Preserving high-efficiency luminescence characteristics of an AIE-active fluorophore in thermostable amorphous polymers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34198–34207 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Suman, S. G. Bubbly, S. B. Gudennavar and V. Gayathri, Benzimidazole and benzothiazole conjugated Schiff base as fluorescent sensors for Al3+ and Zn2+, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 382, 111947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jayabharathi, V. Thanikachalam and K. Jayamoorthy, Effective fluorescent chemosensors for the detection of Zn2+ metal ion, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 95, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kachwal, I. S. V. Krishna, L. Fageria, J. Chaudhary, R. K. Roy, R. Chowdhury and I. R. Laskar, Exploring the hidden potential of a benzothiazole-based Schiff-base exhibiting AIE and ESIPT and its activity in pH sensing, intracellular imaging and ultrasensitive & selective detection of aluminium (Al3+), Analyst, 2018, 143, 3741–3748 RSC .
G. R. Suman, S. G. Bubbly and S. B. Gudennavar, Benzimidazole and benzothiazole fluorophores with large Stokes shift and intense sky-blue emission in aggregation as Al3+ and Pb2+ sensors, J. Lumin., 2019, 215, 116688 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Q. Feng, G. Niu, W. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Kang, K. Xu, J. He, H. Hou and B. Z. Tang, Benzothiazole-based AIEgen with tunable excited-state intramolecular proton transfer and restricted intramolecular rotation processes for highly sensitive physiological PH sensing, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 920–928 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Padalkar and S. Seki, Excited-state intramolecular proton-transfer (ESIPT)-inspired, solid state emitters, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 169–202 RSC .
D. Gobel, D. Duyinage, T. Stauch and B. J. Nachtsheim, Nitrile-Substituted 2-(oxazolinyl)-phenols: minimalistic excited- state intramolecular proton transfer (esipt)-based fluorophores, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9213–9225 RSC .
S. R. Geenen, T. Schumann and T. J. J. Mueller, Fluorescent donor-acceptor–psoralen cruciforms by consecutive Suzuki–Suzuki and Sonogashira–Sonogashira one-pot syntheses, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 9737–9750 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Keaveney, G. Kundu and F. Schoenebeck, Modular functionalization of arenes in a triply selective sequence: rapid C(sp2) and C(sp3) coupling of C–Br, C–OTf, and C–Cl bonds enabled by a single palladium(I) dimer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 12753–12757 CrossRef .
S. Li, H. Lv, R. Xie, Y. Yu, X. Ye and X. Kong, The C–H activation/bidirecting group strategy for selective direct synthesis of diverse 1,1′-biisoquinolines, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS .
U. Chitgupi, Y. Qin and J. F. Lovell, Targeted nanomaterials for phototherapy, Nanotheranostics, 2017, 1, 38–58 CrossRef .
A. C. S. Samia, X. Chen and C. Burda, Semiconductor quantum dots for photodynamic therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15736–15747 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, C. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Feng and Z. Liu, Photothermally enhanced photodynamic therapy delivered by nano-graphene oxide, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7000–7009 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kamkaew, F. Chen, Y. Zhan, R. L. Majewski and W. Cai, Scintillating nanoparticles as energy mediators for enhanced photodynamic therapy, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3918–3935 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kong, Z. P. Yan, S. Li, H. F. Su, K. Li, Y. X. Zheng and S. Q. Zang, Photoresponsive propeller-like chiral AIE copper(I) clusters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 5336–5340 CrossRef .
G. Feng and B. Liu, Aggregation-Induced Emission (AIE) dots: emerging theranostic nanolights, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1404–1414 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, Z. Chen, Z. Yu, L. Wang, J. Qu and R. Liu, Aggregation-induced emission-active near-infrared fluorescent organic nanoparticles for non-invasive long-term monitoring of tumor growth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17081–17088 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu and D. T. Chiu, Highly fluorescent semiconducting polymer dots for biology and medicine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3086–3109 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Lim, The nanolight revolution is coming, Nature, 2016, 531, 26–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Li, X. Lu, X. Hu, H. Zhao, W. Hu, F. Lu, Q. Fan and W. Huang, Bio-erasable intermolecular donor-acceptor interaction of organic semiconducting nanoprobes for activatable NIR-II fluorescence imaging, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807376 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Sun, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, X. Fang, F. Wang, W. Qin and C. Wu, Cooperative blinking from dye ensemble activated by energy transfer for super-resolution cellular imaging, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 4179–4185 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Quan, Y. Cheng and H. Ju, Dual resonance energy transfer in triple-component polymer dots to enhance electrochemiluminescence for highly sensitive bioanalysis, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6815–6820 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Wang, Q. Gan, Y. Cao, H. Yuan and D. Hua, Donor–acceptor-type conjugated polymer-based multicolored drug carriers with tunable aggregation-induced emission behavior for self-illuminating cancer therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41853–41861 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, F. He, H. Ji, X. Zhao, S. Misal and Z. Qi, Dual-functional NIR AIEgens for high-fidelity imaging of lysosome in cells and photodynamic therapy, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, D. Mao, S. Xu, M. Panahandeh-Fard, Y. Duan, F. Hu, D. Kong and B. Liu, Precise molecular engineering of photosensitizers with aggregation-induced emission over 800 nm for photodynamic therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, C. J. Zhang, M. Gao, R. Zhang, B. Z. Tang and B. Liu, Specific light-up bioprobe with aggregation-induced emission and activatable photoactivity for the targeted and image-guided photodynamic ablation of cancer cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1800–1806 CrossRef .
G. Feng and B. Liu, Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) dots: emerging theranostic nanolights, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1404–1414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faisal, Y. Hong, J. Liu, Y. Yu, J. W. Lam, A. Qin, A. P. Lu and B. Z. Tang, Fabrication of fluorescent silica nanoparticles hybridized with AIE luminogens and exploration of their applications as nanobiosensors in intracellular imaging, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4266–4277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sailaja and P. Amareshwar, Preparation of BSA nanoparticles by desolvation technique using acetone as desolvating agent, Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 5, 1643–1647 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, F. Hu, Y. Pan, L. G. Ng and B. Liu, Bright AIEgen–protein hybrid nanocomposite for deep and high-resolution in vivo two-photon brain imaging, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902717 CrossRef .
X. Min, T. Fang, L. Li, C. Li, Z. P. Zhang, X. E. Zhang and F. Li, AIE nanodots scaffolded by mini-ferritin protein for cellular imaging and photodynamic therapy, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2340–2344 RSC .
L. Shi, F. Hu, Y. Duan, W. Wu, J. Dong, X. Meng, X. Zhu and B. Liu, Hybrid nanospheres to overcome hypoxia and intrinsic oxidative resistance for enhanced photodynamic therapy, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2183–2190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Xiao, J. X. Chen, S. Li, W. W. Tao, S. Tian, K. Wang, X. Cui, Z. Huang, X. H. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Manipulating exciton dynamics of thermally activated delayed fluorescence materials for tuning two-photon nanotheranostics, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 888–895 RSC .
Z. Zheng, T. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Chen, R. T. K. Kwok, C. Ma, P. Zhang, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, J. W. Y. Lam, K. S. Wong and B. Z. Tang, Bright near-infrared aggregation-induced emission luminogens with strong two-photon absorption, excellent organelle specificity, and efficient photodynamic therapy potential, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8145–8159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Anti-Stokes shift luminescent materials for bio-applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1025–1039 RSC .
Z. Zheng, H. Liu, S. Zhai, H. Zhang, G. Shan, R. T. K. Kwok, C. Ma, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, J. W. Y. Lan, K. S. Wong, X. Hu and B. Z. Tang, Highly efficient singlet oxygen generation, two photon photodynamic therapy and melanoma ablation by rationally designed mitochondria specific near-infrared AIEgens, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2494–2503 RSC .
D. Wang, H. Su, R. T. K. Kwok, X. Hu, H. Zou, Q. Luo, M. M. S. Lee, W. Xu, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Rational design of a water-soluble NIR AIEgen, and its application in ultrafast wash-free cellular imaging and photodynamic cancer cell ablation, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3685–3693 RSC .
D. Wang, M. M. S. Lee, G. Shan, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. Su, Y. Cai and B. Z. Tang, Highly Efficient Photosensitizers with Far-Red/Near-Infrared Aggregation-Induced Emission for In Vitro and In Vivo Cancer Theranostics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802105 CrossRef .
M. Kang, C. Zhou, S. Wu, B. Yu, Z. Zhang, N. Song, M. M. S. Lee, W. Xu, F. J. Xu, D. Wang, L. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Evaluation of Structure–Function Relationships of Aggregation-Induced Emission Luminogens for Simultaneous Dual Applications of Specific Discrimination and Efficient Photodynamic Killing of Gram-Positive Bacteria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16781–16789 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, M. Wu, Q. Shi, T. Dai, S. Xu, J. Jiang and B. Liu, All-in-one molecular aie theranostics: fluorescence image guided and mitochondria targeted chemo- and photodynamic cancer cell ablation, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4681–4691 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Chen, J. Liu, C. Chen and B. Liu, NIR-II light activated photosensitizer with aggregation-induced emission for precise and efficient two-photon photodynamic cancer cell ablation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002546 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pandey and B. Manoj, Green luminescence and irradiance properties of carbon dots crosslinked with polydimethylsiloxance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 19835–19843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Xu, X. Zhu, B. Chen, Z. Wang, B. Xiao, J. W. Y. Lam, Z. Zhao, D. Ma and B. Z. Tang, Creation of efficient blue aggregation-induced emission luminogens for high-performance nondoped blue OLEDs and hybrid white OLEDs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17592–17601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, J. Gu, X. Qiao, A. Qin, B. Z. Tang and D. Ma, Highly efficient deep blue aggregation-induced emission organic molecule: a promising multifunctional electroluminescence material for blue/green/orange/red/white OLEDs with superior efficiency and low roll-off, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 767–778 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lo, C. H. Chang, G. Krucaite, D. Volyniuk, J. V. Grazulevicius and S. Grigalevicius, Sky-blue aggregation-induced emission molecules for non-doped organic light-emitting diodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6054–6060 RSC .
H. Zhang, A. Li, G. Li, B. Li, Z. Wang, S. Xu, W. Xu and B. Z. Tang, Achievement of high performance nondoped blue OLEDs based on AIEgens via construction of effective high-lying charge-transfer state, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, X. L. Li, H. Nie, W. Luo, S. Gan, S. Hu, R. Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao, S. J. Su and B. Z. Tang, Achieving high performance nondoped OLEDs with extremely small efficiency roll-off by combining aggregation-induced emission and thermally activated delayed fluorescence, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606458 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, Y. Zhan, Z. Qiu, J. Zeng, J. Guo, S. Hu, Z. Zhao, X. Li, S. Ji, Y. Huo and S. J. Su, Stimuli-responsive aggregation-induced delayed fluorescence emitters featuring asymmetric D-A structure with a novel diarylketone acceptor towards efficient OLEDs with negligible efficiency roll-off, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29528–29539 CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Liu, X. Zhu, J. Zeng, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Efficient aggregation-induced delayed fluorescence materials based on bipolar carrier transport materials for the fabrication of high-performance non-doped OLEDs with very small efficiency roll-off, Efficient aggregation-induced delayed fluorescence materials based on bipolar carrier transport materials for the fabrication of high-performance non-doped OLEDs with very small efficiency roll-off, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9549–9557 RSC .
H. J. Kim, M. Godumala, S. K. Kim, J. Yoon, C. Y. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Kwon, M. Cho and D. H. Choi, Color-tunable boron-based emitters exhibiting aggregation-induced emission and thermally activated delayed fluorescence for efficient solution-processable nondoped deep-blue to sky-blue OLEDs, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902175 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Yun and J. Y. Lee, Recent progress of highly efficient red and near-infrared thermally activated delayed fluorescent emitters, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800255 CrossRef .
P. Funchien, P. Chasing, T. Sudyoadsuk and V. Promarak, Highly efficient near infrared organic solid fluorophore based on naphthothiadiazole derivatives with aggregation-induced emission enhancement for non-doped electroluminescent device, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6305–6308 RSC .
D. Liu, J. Y. Wei, W. W. Tian, W. Jiang, Y. M. Sun, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Endowing TADF luminophors with AIE properties though adjusting flexible dendrons for highly efficient solution- processed nondoped OLEDs, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 7194–7203 RSC .
K. Sun, D. Liu, W. Tian, F. Gu, W. Wang, Z. Cai, W. Jiang and Y. Sun, Manipulation of sterically hindered effect to realize AIE and TADF for high-performing nondoped solution-processed OLEDs with extremely low efficiency roll-off, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11850–11859 RSC .
K. Devarajan, M. Sivakalai, U. M. Narayanan, C. Biswas, S. S. K. Raavi and T. K. Panda, A simple D–π–A system of phenanthroimidazole-π-fluorenone for highly efficient non-doped bipolar AIE luminogens: synthesis, molecular optical, thermal and electrochemical properties, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1785–1794 RSC .
T. Jadhav, J. M. Choi, B. Dhokale, S. M. Mobin, J. Y. Lee and R. Misra, Effect of end-groups on mechanochromism and electroluminescence in tetraphenylethylene substituted phenanthroimidazoles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18487–18495 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Y. Tan, H. Liu, X. Tang, L. Gao, C. Du, J. Min, H. Jina and P. Lu, High-efficiency near-infrared fluorescent organic light-emitting diodes with small efficiency roll-off based on AIE-active
phenanthro[9,10]-dimidazole derivatives, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6883–6890 RSC .
Z. Qiu, Z. Yang, W. C. Chen, L. Xing, S. Hu, S. Ji, Q. Yang, N. Cai, X. Ouyang and Y. Huo, Alkoxy chain regulated stimuli-responsive AIE luminogens based on tetraphenylethylene substituted phenanthroimidazoles and non-doped OLEDs with negligible efficiency roll-off, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4139–4147 RSC .
H. U. Kim, H. J. Jang, W. Choi, S. Park, T. Park, J. Y. Lee and K. S. B. Mohandas, Aggregation-induced phosphorescence enhancement in deep-red and near-infrared emissive iridium(III) complexes for solution processable OLEDs, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4789–4800 RSC .
C. Sekine, Y. Taubata, T. Yamada, M. Kitano and S. Doi, Recent progress of high-performance polymer OLED and OPV materials for organic printed electronics, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 034203 CrossRef .
M. Pandey and B. Manoj, Flexible polymer composite films incorporated with Li-ion/reduced graphene oxide: excellent optical and photoluminescence performance, Appl. Nanosci., 2020, 10, 401–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, Z. Xu, D. Ma, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission polymers for high performance PLEDs with low efficiency roll-off, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1206–1211 RSC .
B. Sun, B. Zhao, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Zhu, B. Yang and H. Sun, Fluorescent non-conjugated polymer dots for targeted cell imaging, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9837–9841 RSC .
X. Guan, B. Lu, Q. Jin, Z. Li, L. Wang, K. Wang, S. Lai and Z. Lei, The AIE-active fluorescent non-conjugated polymer dots for dual-alternating-color live cell imaging, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 14889–14898 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Song, G. Zhang, H. Wang and B. Yang, A general route to make non-conjugated linear polymer luminescent, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10889–10891 RSC .
R. B. Wang, W. Z. Yuana and X. Y. Zhu, Aggregation-induced emission of non-conjugated poly(amido amine)s: discovering, luminescent mechanism understanding and bioapplication, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2015, 33, 680–687 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Lai, Non-conjugated polymers with intrinsic luminescence for drug delivery, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2020, 59, 101916 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, B. Chu, Y. L. Wang, Z. Chen and X. H. Zhang, Crosslinking-induced white light emission of poly(hydroxyurethane) microspheres for white LEDs, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. E. J. Walaszczyk, K. Li, Y. W. Chung-Davidson and W. Li, High-performance liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection and ultra-performance liquid chromatography with electrospray tandem mass spectrometry method for the determination of indoleamine neurotransmitters and their metabolites in sea lamprey plasma, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 721, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, X. Yang, Z. Zhang, J. Zuo, J. S. Moore and L. Zang, Ambient Photodoping of p-type organic nanofibers: highly efficient photoswitching and electrical vapor sensing of amines, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4127–4129 RSC .
S. M. Borisov and O. S. Wolfbeis, Optical Biosensors, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 423–461 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xue, J. Sun, B. Yao, P. Gong, Z. Zhang, C. Qian, Y. Zhang and R. Lu, Strong emissive nanofibers of organogels for the detection of volatile acid vapours, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4712–4720 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, J. Cui, Z. Yang, Y. Huo, W. Duan, S. Gong and Z. Liu, Solvatochromism, acidochromism and aggregation-induced emission of propeller-shaped spiroborates, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 15002–15008 RSC .
K. Debsharma, J. Santhi, B. Baire and E. Prasad, Aggregation-induced emission active donor-acceptor fluorophoreas a dual sensor for volatile acids and aromatic amines, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 48249–48260 CrossRef CAS .
K. Milligan, N. C. Shand, D. Graham and K. Faulds, Detection of multiple nitroaromatic explosives via formation of a janowsky complex and SERS, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 3253–3261 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sengottuvelu, V. Kachwal, P. Raichure, T. Raghav and I. R. Laskar, Aggregation-induced enhanced emission (AIEE) conjugated mesopores oligomers (CMOs) with improved quantum yield and low-cost trace nitro aromatic explosives detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31875–31886 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Chen, S. Li, G. Wang, F. Wei, X. Guo and H. Tu, Active self-assembled monolayer sensors for trace explosive detection, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 1462–1466 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ghosh, S. Mitra, S. K. Maity and D. K. Maiti, Halogen-bonded bithiophene-based nanofibers for luminescent sensing, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3951–3959 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, C. Kam, T. Y. Chou, M. Y. Wu, X. Zhao and S. A. Chen, A simple yet effective AIE-based fluorescent nano-thermometer for temperature mapping in living cells using fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy, A simple yet effective AIE-based fluorescent nano thermometer for temperature mapping in living cells using fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 488–494 RSC .
L. Meng, S. Jiang, M. Song, F. Yan, W. Zhang, B. Xu and W. Tian, TICT-based near-infrared ratiometric organic fluorescent thermometer for intracellular temperature sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26842–26851 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hakkarainen, E. Petronijevic, M. R. Piton and C. Sibilia, Demonstration of extrinsic chirality of photoluminescence with semiconductor-metal hybrid nanowires, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 5040 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, S. Q. Zang and X. Chen, Stereospecific interactions between chiral inorganic nanomaterials and biological systems, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2481–2503 RSC .
L. Lin, S. Lepeshov, A. Krasnok, T. Jiang, X. Peng, B. A. Korgel, A. Alu and Y. Zheng, All-optical reconfigurable chiral meta-molecules, Mater. Today, 2019, 25, 10–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Brooks, W. C. Guida and K. G. Daniel, and The significance of chirality in drug design and development, Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 2011, 11, 760–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Sherson, H. Krauter, R. K. Olsson, B. Julsgaard, K. Hammerer, I. Cirac and E. S. Polzik, Quantum teleportation between light and matter, Nature, 2006, 443, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, R. C. da Costa, M. J. Fuchter and A. J. Campbell, Circularly polarized light detection by a chiral organic semiconductor transistor, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 634–638 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen and B. Yan, Recent theoretical and experimental progress in circularly polarized luminescence of small organic molecules, Molecules, 2018, 23, 3376 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, L. H. You, Z. Q. Yu, J. H. Wang, Z. Meng, Y. Liu, X. S. Li, K. Fu, X. K. Ren and B. Z. Tang, Rational design of circularly polarized luminescent AIEgens: promoting dissymmetry factor and emission efficiency synchronously, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maeda, S. Nomoto, K. Takaishi and T. Ema, Aggregation-induced circularly polarized luminescence from boron complexes with a carbazoyl Schiff base, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 13016–13021 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shang, X. Zhu, T. Liang, C. Du, L. Hu, T. Li and M. Liu, Chiral reticular self-assembly of achiral AIEgen into optically pure MOFs with dual mechano-switchable circularly polarized luminescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12811–12816 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, F. Gan, G. Zhang, Y. Ding, J. Wang, R. Wang, J. Crassous and H. Qiu, Helicene-derived aggregation-induced emission conjugates with highly tunable circularly polarized luminescence, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 837–844 RSC .
H. Shang, Z. Ding, Y. Shen, B. Yang, M. Liu and S. Jiang, Multi-color tunable circularly polarized luminescence in one single AIE system, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2169–2174 RSC .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Suman G. R.
	Dr Suman G. R. received his PhD from CHRIST (Deemed To be University) on “Synthesis, spectroscopic and DFT studies of some Benzimidazole and Benzothiazole derivatives”. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, School of Sciences, JAIN (Deemed to be University), Bangalore, Karnataka, India. His research interests include design and synthesis of novel π-conjugated fluorescent molecules, and also understanding their photophysical and chemical behavior to achieve efficient solid-state emission characteristics for chemical sensing and light conversion applications.

Mayank Pandey
	Dr Mayank Pandey is a material physicist. He pursued his PhD at VIT University, India. His research interests include synthesis of graphene quantum dot (GQD) based polymeric composites, polymer nanocomposites, polymer composite/blend electrolytes, and organic semiconductor/organic solar cells. Besides, much emphasis of his research is given to contributing towards the development of new approaches in the field of nano carbon derivatives. He completed his postdoctoral research at CHRIST (Deemed to be university), Bangalore, Karnataka, India, where he worked on luminescent carbon dots. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor in the Department of Electronics, Kristu Jayanthi College, Bangalore, India.

A. S. Jeevan Chakravarthy
	Mr A. S. Jeevan Chakravarthy is a CSIR Senior Research Fellow, pursuing his PhD, at the Department of Chemistry, Central College Campus, Bangalore University, Bangalore, India. His research interest lies in the synthesis and application of organo silicon reagents for coupling reactions, and palladium catalyzed regiospecific cross coupling reactions. Over a short period of time he has also served as a chemist at LGC Promochemie, gaining hands on experience on synthesis, purification and characterization of pharmaceutical impurities in accordance with EP and BP standards.

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structure and conformational rotamers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10.	 

 	Fig. 2  Some of the important AIEgens.	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structure of mTPE-AN and fluorescence variation upon a change in external pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthesized molecules and (b) change in molecular packing and quantum yield upon grinding. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38.	 

 	Fig. 5  Fluorescence emission of AMP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structures. (b) Dihedral angle changes and (c) representation of MC under UV light for DMTCS-AC and DBTCS-AC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Molecular structures and (b) molecular stacking and packaging of m-BPCDM and p-BPCDM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structures of the pyrene containing acrylonitrile derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cryo-SEM images of racemic cyanostilbenes (A) MA, (B) DA, and (C) TA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Molecular structures of functionalized phenothiazines and (b) superhydrophobic surface formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structures of TPE derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of linear and zigzag-type FBKI copolymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Acid–base equilibria of TPA-SCY, and (b) white-light emission from TPA-SCY (methanol–acetic acid at pH 3.5) under UV light of 365 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structure of CB[8]. (b) The 1931 CIE chromaticity coordinate changes of SOF-(TPB and TPM) in water at different ratios. Inset: Fluorescence images of SOF-(TPB and TPM) in different ratios under UV light (365 nm) with ratios of (A) 10:1; (B) 9:1; (C) 8:2; (D) 7:3; (E) 6:4; (F) 5:5; (G) 4:6; (H) 3:7; (I) 2:8; (J) 1:9; and (K) 0:10. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 15  The proposed mechanism of TA-TPE molecule aggregation with AIEE activation by optical manipulation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of BODIPYs and (b) concentration dependent color tuning under 365 nm light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 17  Consecutive one-pot three-component insertion-alkynylation-Michael addition synthesis of 3-piperazinyl propenylidene indolone bichromophores 4, and consecutive four-component synthesis of 3-piperazinyl propenylidene indolone bichromophores 4 by an insertion-alkynylation-Michael addition-Suzuki coupling sequence. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 18  The structure of Fl-AIEgens and DCFl AIEgens and their solid-state emission under 365 nm UV light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 19  Chemical structures of the PhTPE-based polyimides. The inset shows the flexible films under 365 nm light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61.	 

 	Fig. 20  Synthesis of nitrile-substituted ortho-hydroxy-2-phenyloxazolines (a) (1) 2-amino-2-methylpropan-1-ol, 4 Å MS, CH2Cl2, 25 °C, 20 h; (2) NBS, CH2Cl2, 25 °C, 4 h; (b) (1) TMPMgCl·LiCl, THF, 25 °C, 1 h; (2) O2 (1 atm), 25 °C, 24 h. NBS = N-bromosuccinimide, TMP = 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 21  Bromo-triflato functionalized psoralen scaffold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 22  (1) Selective consecutive sequential Pd-catalyzed Suzuki–Suzuki three-component synthesis of 5-donor substituted 8-acceptor psoralens. (2) Selective consecutive Sonogashira–Sonogashira three-component synthesis of alkynyl-expanded 5-donor substituted 8-acceptor psoralens. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 23  Cruciforms (a) 1b (top) and (b) 2b in dichloromethane and with addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequently with addition of triethylamine under a hand-held UV lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 24  Synthesis schemes of a variety of 1,1-biisoquinolines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 25  PL spectra of (a) 3a, (b) 4h, and (c) 5ah (10 μM) in THF and THF/water mixtures with different water fractions (fw). (d) Fluorescence responses (I/I0) to different compounds (I0 for fw = 0% and I for fw = 90%). Reprinted with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic representation of the drug release mechanism and (b) molecular structure of P1 to P3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) TPA based photosensitizers and (b) fluorescence imaging and fluorescence intensity variation in A549 cells at different time intervals and normalized average fluorescence intensity of the AIEgens (20 μM) and LysoTracker Green DND-26 at different time points. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85.	 

 	Fig. 28  ROS generation of nanodots in HeLa cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the hybrid nanospheres taken up by tumor cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Molecular structures and (b) two photon excitation images of PT and AT NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Positively charged pyridinium and quinolinium moieties and (b) co-localization images of HeLa cells in the presence of photosensitizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97.	 

 	Fig. 32  Chemical structure of TN, TNPT, TM and TMPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101.	 

 	Fig. 33  Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of TM, TMPT, TN and TNPT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101.	 

 	Fig. 34  Inhibitory effects of TM, TMPT, TN and TM + PT on C6 cells under (a) dark conditions and (b) light irradiation at 50 mW cm−2 for 5 min at 6 h; the total time of incubation is 48 h. Inhibitory effects of TN, TNPT, PT, and TN + PT on C6 cells under (c) dark conditions and (d) light irradiation (15 J cm−2) at 50 mW cm−2 for 5 min; the total time of incubation is 48 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101.	 

 	Fig. 35  Chemical structure of photosensitizer TQ-BTPE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Schematic setup for the detection of 1O2. (b) Two-photon fluorescence image of TQ-BTPE in a glass capillary. Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE and DCFDA after (c) 0 and (d) 100 NIR-II laser scans. (e) Overlay of panels (b and d). (f) Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE and DCFDA after NIR-I and NIR-II laser scanning without pork tissue on the capillary. (h) Two-photon fluorescence images of DCF in the mixture of TQ-BTPE (5 μm) and DCFDA after NIR-I and NIR-II laser scanning with pork tissue on the capillary. (g and i) Two-photon fluorescence intensities of DCF in panels (f and h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 102.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE and Ce6 treated HeLa cells after different NIR-II laser scans. The overlay is the merge of the first and fourth columns in panel (a). (b) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE treated HeLa cells after different NIR-II laser scans. (c and d) 2PF images of TQ-BTPE treated HeLa cells after different NIR-I and NIR-II laser scans and with pork tissue on the cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102.	 

 	Fig. 38  Molecular design of 2TriPE-BPI and 2TriPE-BPI-MCN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Energy band diagram and (b) electroluminescence spectra of nondoped OLEDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 40  Molecular structure of pipd-BZ-PXZ, pipd-BZ-PTZ and pipd-BZ-DMAC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Chemical structure and (b) spatial distribution of the HOMO and LUMO for 35DCPP-BP-PXZ and 26DCPP-BP-PXZ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Molecular structure of TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz. (b) Energy level diagram. (c) Electroluminescence spectra and (d) CIE diagram and images of the EL emission of TB-3Cz, TB-P3Cz and TB-DACz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Chemical structure of TPE4HN and TPE3HN, (b) energy level diagram and (c) electroluminescence spectra of TPE4HN and TPE3HN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 44  Molecular structure of 5CzBN-SSP, 5CzBN-DSP and 5CzBN-PSP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114.	 

 	Fig. 45  Chemical structure of 4CzIPN, 4CzIPN-MO and 4CzPhIPN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115.	 

 	Fig. 46  Device configuration and energy level of 4CzPhIPN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115.	 

 	Fig. 47  Molecular structure of PIBz-10-PTZ, PIBz-3-PTZ and PIBz-10P-PTZ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) Molecular structure and (b) energy level diagram of TPEO1-PPI, TPEO4-PPI and TPEO6-PPI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 49  Molecular structure of the iridium(III) complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120.	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Synthesis route and (b) AFM morphology of pTPE-TPA-Cz and pTPE-TPA-Flu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123.	 

 	Fig. 51  Synthesis route of PHUMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129.	 

 	Fig. 52  (a) Cluster size distribution and (b) change in color photograph under daylight (a1–e1) and UV light (365 nm) (a2 and e2) of PHUMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129.	 

 	Fig. 53  Fluorescence emission behavior and amine vapor sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135.	 

 	Fig. 54  Molecular structures of conjugated mesoporous oligomers 1 and 2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) FESEM images of the CMO1 thin film before exposing to PA vapours. (b) FESEM images of CMO1 after exposure to the PA vapours. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130.	 

 	Fig. 56  Top: Photographs of CMO1 impregnated test strips with varying concentrations of PA upon illumination at 365 nm; from left to right: blank (B), 1 × 10−4 M, 1 × 10−5 M, 1 × 10−6 M, 1 × 10−7 M, 1 × 10−8 M, 1 × 10−9 M, 1× 10−10 M, 1 × 10−11 M. Below: Image taken upon illumination at 365 nm. (1) Gloves without a trace of picric acid. (2) Impregnated test strips without any contact of PA. (3) Gloves showing the powder of picric acid on thumbs (marked with a red circle). (4) Image of the CMO1 impregnated test strips while applying the PA traces. (5) Image of CMO1 impregnated test strips rubbed with PA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 57  Photograph of CMO1 impregnated test strips at ten different places exposed to the powder of various explosives [(1) blank CMO1, (2) picric acid, (3) 4-nitrobenzene, (4) 3,5-dinitrobenzoic acid, (5) 2-amino-4-nitrophenol, (6) 2,6-trinitrotoluene, (7) 2,4-dinitrophenol, (8) 4-nitrotoluene, (9) benzoic acid, (10) boric acid]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 58  (a) Molecular structure of PA-2PhAn (top) and the SAM sensor on the poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate (down). (b) Schematic cross section of the formation of the PA-2PhAn SAM on the HfO2 adhesion layer. (c) Quenching model of the flexible SAM sensor by NACs and (d) fluorescence excitation and emission spectra of the PA-2PhAn SAMs recorded at various excitation and analysis wavelengths. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138.	 

 	Fig. 59  (a) Quenching efficiency and τ/τ0 as a function of exposure time in NB for SAMs both on the silicon wafer and flexible PET and (b) selectivity of the SAM sensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139.	 

 	Fig. 60  Halogenated bithiophene nano-building blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139.	 

 	Fig. 61  (a) Absorbance spectra of compound 1a in CH3CN with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 10 μM). (b) Absorbance spectra of compound 1a in CH3CN–H2O (1:1 v/v) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 15 μM). (c) Emission spectra of 1a in CH3CN (10.0 μM) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 10 μM). (d) Emission spectra of 1a in CH3CN–H2O (1:1 v/v) solution (10.0 μM) with the gradual addition of cyanide ion solution (0 to 15 μM) and (e) fluorescence intensities of 1a in ACN (10.0 μM) after addition of different anions (10.0 equiv). Reprinted with permission from ref. 139.	 

 	Fig. 62  HPS/butter/DSPE-PEG-biotin nanorod. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140.	 

 	Fig. 63  (a) Synthesis of TBB. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of TRF NPs and (c) PL spectra of TRF NPs with the temperature increasing from 25 to 65 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141.	 

 	Fig. 64  Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of TRF NP incubated Hep-G2 cells at 25.4 °C (A), 29.5 °C (B), 40.7 °C (C), 43.4 °C (D) and 50.3 °C (E); scale bars = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141.	 

 	Fig. 65  Chirality in a series of dicyanodistyrylbenzene-cholesterol derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149.	 

 	Fig. 66  Asymmetrical BODIPY analogues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150.	 

 	Fig. 67  Mechano-switchable FL/CPL AIEgen MOF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151.	 

 	Fig. 68  AIE-CPL active helicene structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152.	 

 	Fig. 69  (a) Chemical structure of Chol-CN-Py, (b) hot solution and gel fluorescence spectra (λex = 410 nm) and fluorescence image under UV light and (c) CPL spectra of the Chol-CN-Py gel (λex = 370 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 153.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
