Spectroscopic comparison of charge dynamics in fullerene and non-fullerene acceptor-based organic photovoltaic cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC04800G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04800G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 908-920Spectroscopic comparison of charge dynamics in fullerene and non-fullerene acceptor-based organic photovoltaic cells†

        
          
            Silvina N. 
            Pugliese
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Joseph K. 
            Gallaher
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Afsar 
            Uddin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hwa Sook 
            Ryu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Han Young 
            Woo
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Justin M. 
            Hodgkiss
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. E-mail: Justin.Hodgkiss@vuw.ac.nz
bMacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, New Zealand
cDepartment of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea
Received 
      8th October 2021
    , Accepted 1st December 2021First published on 1st December 2021AbstractUntil recently, the many classes of non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) molecules and polymers exhibited lower power conversion efficiencies than polymer:fullerene counterparts in organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. We sought to understand the shortcomings of such NFAs, and provide insights for material design in the new era of efficient NFA acceptors. Our study applies broadband transient absorption spectroscopy to a series of donor:acceptor blends, comprising a fixed donor component (PPDT2FBT), and a varying acceptor component of a NFA polymer (N2200), an earlier generation NFA small molecule (NIDCS-HO), or [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) for reference. Our results show that the poor performance of the polymer:polymer blend is explained by incomplete exciton dissociation and rapid geminate recombination. In the case of the small-molecule NFA (NIDCS-HO), we reveal the presence of CT-excitons in the NFA phase, as well as a significant photocurrent generation channel via hole transfer from the NFA. We find that a simple kinetic model of measured charge separation and recombination rates can adequately account for observed photoccurent quantum efficiencies, but the advantage of hole-transfer mediated charge photogeneration (which is less available in fullerene-based devices) may be offset by higher disorder and sub-optimal thin-film morphology for these NFA materials. These results provide valuable insight into how new intrinsic excited states and interfacial excited states need to be accounted for in charge generation dynamics of NFA based OPVs.
Introduction
Benefitting from the decades of research on fullerene-based acceptor bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic (OPV) systems, non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have been developing rapidly in recent years. These acceptors include molecules and polymers with higher or lower bandgaps than the donors with which they are paired. NFA-based OPVs have now delivered PCEs exceeding 18%1–7 on account of their tuneable and favourable optical and electronic properties.8 Yet until recently, the same design goals produced NFA materials with lower power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) than polymer:fullerene counterparts. With efficient NFAs now inspiring discovery and development of many new classes of NFAs, it is crucial to understand the shortcomings of previous NFA molecule and polymer-based OPV devices.
Efficient solar cells require a high short-circuit current (Jsc) and a high open-circuit voltage (VOC).9 Molecular design can be used to optimise these parameters, for example, energy level matching to enhance VOC,10 and complementary absorption spectrum matching of donor and acceptor components to achieve a higher Jsc.11 Whilst NFA-based OPVs tend to exhibit a higher VOC than fullerene-based counterparts by avoiding the deep LUMO energy levels of fullerenes, NFA-based devices often suffer from poorer Jsc (and/or FF).8,12–14 Moreover, until the advent of fused-ring electron acceptors,15,16 there were only a limited number of reports of NFA devices having reasonable photocurrents and maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) values above 50% for NFA systems.17–19
It has also recently emerged that NFAs have a different range of possible photophysical pathways compared to fullerenes.6,19,20 These processes need to be accounted for in the understanding of charge photogeneration processes in NFA-based OPV devices. In fullerene-based BHJs, charge photogeneration is widely considered to be a two-step process;21 (i) a photoexcited state (i.e., singlet exciton) in the polymer donor undergoes electron transfer at the donor/acceptor interface to create a bound interfacial charge-transfer (CT) state intermediate, and (ii) the bound CT-state dissociates into free charges (i.e., polaron and electron) which migrate through pure donor/acceptor phase domains, and collected by electrodes. Although other effects play a role in charge photogeneration such as charge delocalisation,22–24 triplet states,25,26 and morphology-driven processes,27,28 this two-step scheme explains the charge generation dynamics in various polymer:fullerene systems well.
However, hole transfer from direct excitation of NFA molecules and polymers is emerging as having an equivalent contribution to that of electron transfer from the polymer donor to charge generation in OPV blends with NFAs.6,19,29–31 One underlying factor of this hole-transfer mediated charge generation is that NFA molecules and polymers often exhibit strong absorption in the visible near-infrared wavelength range. Fundamentally, this donor/acceptor complementary absorption spectral profile is an appealing property of NFAs as it provides a means to extend the solar spectral coverage beyond OPV systems using fullerene acceptors. However, the direct excitation of NFAs results in new intrinsic excited states, meaning that a combination of intrinsic and interfacial excited states needs to be accounted for in charge generation dynamics, and may hold a key insight in explaining different device performance and EQE characteristics of NFA-based devices compared to their fullerene counterparts. Since device performance is linked with photocurrent loss mechanisms, it is important to understand the pathways of charge generation and loss channels and, ideally, in a comparative manner with corresponding fullerene-based devices.
We designed our study by first selecting the donor polymer poly[(2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyloxy)phenylene)-alt-(5,6-difluoro-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)] (PPDT2FBT). This material is a semicrystalline low-bandgap photovoltaic copolymer first studied in fullerene devices, where it produces a PCE of 9.4% when paired with [6,6]-phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). We fixed PPDT2FBT as a donor component (and PCBM as fullerene acceptor) and then selected an NFA polymer and a NFA molecule as basis for a comparative analysis of charge dynamics in fullerene and non-fullerene-based OPV blends.
The NFA polymer chosen was the naphthalenediimide-based polymer poly([N,N-9-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,59-(2,29-bithiophene)) (P(NDI2OD-T2)), commercially known as N2200. Recently, a series of PPDT2FBT:N2200 blends have been reported with an optimized device having a PCE of 5.1% and a VOC of 0.85.32 The NFA small-molecule chosen is the dicyanodistyrylbenzene derivative, (2E,2′E)-3,3′-(2,5-bis(hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene)bis(2-(5-(4-(N-(2-ethylhexyl)-1,8naphthalimide)yl)thiophen-2-yl)acrylonitrile) (NIDCS-HO). Recently, NIDCS-HO was paired with the PPDT2FBT donor polymer and optimised devices have shown a maximum PCE of 7.6% and a relatively high VOC of 1.03 V.33 Comparatively, the OPV device using the NFA-polymer N2200 has the lowest PCE reported in the series, whilst the NIDCS-HO based device exhibits the highest VOC, but a lower PCE than the PCBM device.
In this work, we report spectroscopic comparisons of charge generation and recombination in the series of OPV donor:acceptor blends to gain insight into photocurrent losses of non-fullerene acceptor-based OPVs, compared to their fullerene counterparts. Our results show that the NFA polymer-based blend (i.e., N2200) suffers from incomplete exciton dissociation and rapid geminate recombination, consistent with the poorer device performance when compared to the fullerene-based device. In the case of the small-molecule NFA (i.e., NIDCS-HO), our comparative results show relatively efficient charge generation, along with hole transfer from acceptor to donor giving a delayed increase of charges in the donor phase, which may be mediated by a ‘CT-exciton’ intermediate state having excitonic and CT character. Our kinetic modelling of charge separation and recombination adequately accounts for observed quantum efficiency of this NFA device, and suggests the performance of this system may be limited by disorder and sub-optimal morphology.
Results and discussion
Material selection

Fig. 1 shows the molecular structures (Fig. 1A–D), and steady-state optical absorption spectra (Fig. 1F), of materials used to compare fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors in donor:acceptor OPV blends. Molecular acceptors based on a naphthalimide and dicyanodistyrylbenzene moiety (NIDCS-HO), shown in Fig. 1A, emerged as promising non-fullerene acceptor materials owing to their good electron accepting properties and transporting properties, and their compatibility with both polymer and small molecule donor moieties,34,35 with OPV device performances being comparable to PCBM-based devices. Characteristic to donor:NIDCS-HO blended films is the favourable nanoscale phase separation which has been proposed as being a balance between strong self-aggregation of NIDCS-HO molecules and the miscibility of donor molecules.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of (A) non-fullerene small molecule acceptor NIDCS-HO, (B) polymeric acceptor N2200, (C) fullerene acceptor PC[70]BM, and (D) the semicrystalline low-bandgap copolymer donor PPDT2FBT. (E) Energy level diagrams of the different materials. The HOMO levels were measured by cyclic voltammetry and the LUMO levels were estimated from the HOMO values and the optical band gaps of the films. (F) Steady-state optical absorption spectra of neat PPDT2FBT and PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend thin films. The spectra for each blend have been normalized to the absorption maximum peak (655 nm) of neat PPDT2FBT. (G) EQE spectra of each PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend device. 

Fig. 1B shows the molecular structure of the polymeric acceptor moiety of this study is the widely used NDI-based copolymer P(NDI2OD-T2), commercially known as N2200. This polymeric-acceptor was first reported in organic thin film transistors,36 and has drawn attention owing to having high bulk electron mobility, good solubility in commonly used solvents, near-infrared absorption, and well-aligned energy levels compared to commonly used polymer material in OPVs. Early reports showed that the P3HT:N2200 blend exhibited poor OPV device performance, with a PCE of only 0.2%.37 However, more promise has been realised when N2200 is paired with other donor materials, achieving PCEs comparable to corresponding fullerene-based donor:acceptor blends.38

Fig. 1D shows the molecular structure of the donor polymer used in this work; poly[(2,5-bis(2-hexyldecyloxy)phenylene)-alt-(5,6-difluoro-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole)] (PPDT2FBT). PPDT2FBT is a semicrystalline low-bandgap photovoltaic copolymer which was first studied in fullerene devices, and shown to have a well-distributed nanofibrillar network thin-film morphology with balanced hole and electron mobilities.39,40 PPDT2FBT exhibits a high degree of polymer chain planarity and strong intermolecular ordering via intramolecular and intermolecular noncovalent coulombic interactions.39 The versatility of PPDT2FBT in the field of photovoltaics is evident through its use an additive to small molecule-OPVs to increase the charge transport properties of the active layer and, consequentially, increase device performance.41 Additionally, PPDT2FBT has found use as a hole transporting material in perovskite solar cells (PVSCs),42 owing to the observed high carrier mobility, combined with active layer thickness tolerance.
The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of each of the materials are shown in Fig. 1E. When paired with PPDT2FBT as donor, the three PPDT2FBT:acceptor systems exhibit well-matched energy level alignments, with the smallest energy offsets of LUMO–LUMO and HOMO–HOMO in the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO. We note that NIDCS-HO has a higher-bandgap than the PPDT2FBT donor polymer, which contrasts with other NFAs which typically are low-bandgap with respect to the donor material.43
External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements for each of the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends have been reported previously32,33,39 and are shown in Fig. 1G, providing insight into the properties of photocurrent generation. Notably, the fullerene blend exhibits the higher EQE values across the entire visible range and has a value of 80% at 532 nm (which will later be used as an excitation wavelength in spectroscopic measurements). In comparison, the blend using N2200 exhibits the photocurrent generation over a broader range of wavelengths but has a significantly inferior EQE maximum of only 40% at 532 nm. Interestingly, the EQE of the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO is remarkedly similar to that of the fullerene-blend, with an EQE max of ∼70% for the NIDCS-HO blend (vs. ∼80% for the PCBM blend). The structure of the EQE spectra for each of the NFA blends show characteristics of contribution of photocurrent from both donor and acceptor component, owing to the complimentary donor:acceptor absorption in these systems.

Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic characteristics in the optimized OPV devices of the above-mentioned PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends, as reported in the literature.32,33,39 From these results it is apparent that the PPDT2FBT:PCBM device has the highest Jsc and FF, resulting in the highest PCE. Reports in the literature have shown that PPDT2FBT:PCBM devices can achieve power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 7%, and a PCE of 9.4% has been obtained in a conventional single-cell device structure using solvent additive and optimal annealing conditions.39
Table 1 Summary of optimised photovoltaic device characteristics of PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends




Acceptor component

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
EQE (532 nm)




PCBM
16.3
0.79
0.73
9.4
0.8


N2200
11.9
0.85
0.51
5.1
0.4


NIDCS-HO
11.88
1.03
0.63
7.6
0.7




In comparison, OPV devices using non-fullerene acceptors (e.g., NIDCS-HO and N2200) exhibit higher VOC but suffer in all other photovoltaic device characteristics. Devices using a small-molecule non-fullerene as the acceptor component (i.e., the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend) has a maximum PCE of 7.6%, after thermal annealing.33 An improvement in device performance following thermal treatment has been attributed to a more favourable crystalline structure of NIDCS-HO domains in the donor:acceptor blend, without disrupting the face-on packing structure of PPDT2FBT polymeric chains.
These series of devices provide an example of how earlier generation NFAs suffered from poorer device performance compared to their fullerene counterparts. It is well established that these device characteristics are affected by material and device-specific parameters. For example, VOC, can be understood from energy levels, whilst FF has been correlated with the competition between recombination and extraction of free charges.44,45 In this present study we employ transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy to disentangle the different processes to identify, and account for, photocurrent loss channels in fullerene vs non-fullerene acceptor OPV devices.
Excited states in neat materials
Before performing transient absorption (TA) measurements on the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend films, we performed TA experiments on films of PPDT2FBT (donor material), and each of the neat (pristine) acceptor materials. This allows us to identify the spectra and dynamics of excitons, which assists our interpretation of the spectral features on the blends. The TA measurements presented in Fig. 2 were all conducted at sufficiently low fluence to avoid annihilation and bimolecular effects, confirmed by the dynamics are independent of excitation fluence on this range.46
 Fig. 2  Spectral slices at indicated times of transient absorption measurements on neat (pristine) films; (A) PPDT2FBT, (B) N220, and (C) NIDCS-HO, following 100 fs excitation at 532 nm. The spectral regions labelled GSB, PIA-1, and PIA-2 refer to the wavelength integration regions shown in the kinetic traces (insets), which have been normalized by the average value within the first picosecond. 
For the neat PPDT2FBT film (Fig. 2A), the TA spectra have a ground state bleach (GSB) feature in the visible (∼1.8–2.4 eV), and a negative photo-induced absorption (PIA) over the region of 0.8–1.6 eV. This PIA is peaked at ∼0.95 eV (labelled PIA-1), and at early time delays has a shoulder peaked at ∼1.4 eV (labelled PIA-2). The dominance of the 0–0 vibronic peak (∼1.85 eV) compared to the 0–1 vibronic peak (∼2.05 eV) in the GSB is even more pronounced than in the steady-state optical absorption spectrum (see Fig. 1F). The dynamics of the GSB and both PIA features obtained by direct integration over their respective spectral regions are shown in the inset of Fig. 1A. Interestingly, a two-exponential fitting function is required to describe this decay, amplitude-weighted exponential lifetimes (τ) of 12 ps and 126 ps. This implies more than one excited species in neat PPDT2FBT. Charge-transfer exciton states and polaron pairs are considered likely in dono-acceptor polymers, and charge photo-generation has also been reported for neat-conjugated polymers (i.e., without blending with an acceptor moiety), primarily driven by junctions between amorphous and crystalline domains of the polymer.47 We assign this longer lived excited state to generation of charge-transfer states or charge pairs in neat PPDT2FBT. We did also consider the formation of triplet excitons, however, the rate of triplet formation would be much slower than the timescale observed in neat PPDT2FBT.48–51
The corresponding TA spectra and kinetics for pristine polymeric-acceptor, N2200, are shown in Fig. 2B. Consistent with previous studies,37,49 the GSB feature peaked at ∼1.8 eV is accompanied by PIA features at ∼1.5 eV and 1.2 eV (labelled PIA-2 and PIA-1, respectively). The equal decay rates of all features (see inset of Fig. 2B) confirms a single excitonic species with τ = 80 ps. Regarding the fullerene acceptor, PCBM, reports in the literature have shown optical absorption of PCBM thin films is predominately in the energy range higher than the visible region (e.g., >3.1 eV), with an absorption maximum at ∼5.2 eV (∼240 nm).52 Additionally, it has been shown that the PCBM anion has a peak molar absorption coefficient of 6 × 103 M−1 cm−1, which corresponds to an absorption cross-section of 2.3 × 10−17 cm2, an order of magnitude lower than common conjugated polymers.53 Moreover, as will be seen below when discussing the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends, the TA spectral signatures are nearly identical to those of the other acceptor systems. The combination of these factors suggests TA dynamics relate to hole polarons in the PPDT2FBT (donor) phase, and not excitations in the fullerene domains.54
We now move on to the small molecule non-fullerene acceptor material, NIDCS-HO, whose corresponding TA spectra and kinetics are shown in Fig. 2C. The analysis follows a similar pattern as the other materials, with a GSB feature in the visible and a negatively peaked PIA feature over the region of 1.8–0.8 eV. However, important differences are noticeable in the spectra and kinetics compared with the other materials. First, at early times (200 fs) the PIA is peaked at ∼1.1 eV (PIA-1) and undergoes an apparent shift towards 1.6 eV (PIA-2) within the picosecond timescale. Secondly, integrated kinetics over the wavelength regions specified show that not all features decay concomitantly. In this regard, singular value decomposition (SVD) global analysis of the TA data returns singular values that suggests 2 components are required to describe the data matrix. Due to the overlap of the PIA spectral features, the evolving factor analysis and model-free multivariate curve resolution alternating least-squares (MCR-ALS) algorithm was used to globally fit the TA data to extract (and distinguish) overlapping spectral features associated with the various excited state species present (see ESI,† for further details).55,56
The dynamics of the two components in neat NIDCS-HO are shown in the MCR-ALS fitting results in Fig. 3. This highlights a fast and slow two-component system, with the fast component having a PIA spectral feature peaked at 1.15 eV. Meanwhile, the slow component has a PIA peaked at 1.5 eV which decays on the order of 100's of picoseconds. Additionally, the kinetics show the growth of the slow component is on the same timescales as decay of the fast (first) component (i.e., tens of picoseconds). These dynamics are consistent with an initial primary photoexcitation (singlet excitons) being formed and subsequently being converted into another (different) excited state species. Recently, a photophysical study was reported on the related small molecule acceptor NIDCS-MO, however, the PIA spectral dynamics were not resolved owing to the region around 1.6 eV not being accessible with the TA setup of that study.57 This second excited state species is unlikely triplet states, since the formation of triplets would need more time to form via ISC, and would also be expected to have a longer lifetime (100's ns).48,50,51 We propose that following photoexcitation, singlet excitons are formed which we assign as the fast component in the kinetics shown in Fig. 3. With regards to the second (slow) component, we propose this to be a CT-exciton, characterised as an excited state having different degrees of exciton and CT character, which has been reported for other small-molecule non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs),6 and low-band gap polymers.58,59 As will be important in the later discussions regarding the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends, this CT-exciton state is markedly different from an interfacial charge-transfer (CT) state at an interface in donor:acceptor blends.
 Fig. 3  Kinetics resulting from globally fitting the TA spectra in neat NIDCS-HO using MCR-ALS, showing singlet excitons decay on the 10's of picosecond timescale accompanied by a growth in a CT-exciton state. The inset shows the spectral shapes used for the MCR-ALS global fit. 
Charge generation in PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends
Having identified the unique TA spectral signatures and dynamics of excited states in each of the neat materials, we turn attention to probing the comparative photocurrent loss channels in fullerene and non-fullerene-based PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends. TA dynamics of donor:acceptor blends is often more complex than those observed in neat materials, owing to the inherent characteristics of a donor:acceptor interface allowing for different (and multiple) excited species, and various pathways for formation (and relaxation) thereof. As will become apparent in the following discussion, this can result in overlapping spectral signatures meaning kinetic traces cannot be obtained through a simple wavelength integration over a specified region. In this regard, we employed the MCR-ALS algorithm to globally fit the TA data of the blends, in a similar manner to that discussed for neat-NIDCS-HO. However, before discussing these results, we focus on the TA spectral slices and dynamics for each of the donor:acceptor blend system shown in Fig. 4, which we used to guide the interpretation of the global fitting analysis.
 Fig. 4  Spectral slices at indicated times of transient absorption measurements on PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends; wherein the acceptor component is (A) PCBM, (B) N220, or (C) NIDCS-HO, following 100 fs excitation at 532 nm. The spectral regions labelled GSB, PIA-1, and PIA-2 refer to the wavelength integration regions shown in the kinetic traces (insets), which have been normalized by the average value within the first picosecond. 
First we consider the fullerene containing blend (PPDT2FBT:PCBM) with the TA spectra (see Fig. 4A) showing a GSB feature of PPDT2FBT (1.8–2.2 eV), and two PIA peaks at 0.9 eV and 1.25 eV (labelled PIA-1 and PIA-2, respectively). PIA-1 is reminiscent of the PIA spectral signatures observed in neat PPDT2FBT and is consistent with polymer excitons. Charge generation is evident by a longer lived GSB signature (>5 ns) than observed in neat polymer. This is accompanied by a new PIA peak (∼1.25 eV, labelled PIA-2) and a shorter lifetime of excitons (PIA-1), which decay on the order of 10's of picoseconds. Charge generation is further supported by the moderately strong EA signature at 1.75 eV.
The TA spectra and dynamics are similar for the PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend, as shown in Fig. 4B. Spectral signatures at early time delays are consistent with PPDT2FBT excitons, and substantially similar evidence of charge generation is observed to that discussed above for the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend. Namely, a longer lived GSB accompanied by a fast exciton decay, and the presence of a new PIA spectral feature (labelled PIA-2) which persists beyond the 5 ns time resolution of this measurement.
The TA spectral dynamics of the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO (Fig. 4C) are broadly similar to that of the PCBM and N2200 containing blends, however, several key differences are observed. Firstly, the region associated with the GSB signature of PPDT2FBT (1.8–2.2 eV) is dynamic, with a shift in peak intensity; at 200 fs the peak at ∼2.15 eV is dominant but decreases in apparent intensity as the peak at ∼1.9 eV dominants (indicated by guide arrows in Fig. 4C). Additionally, at early time the PIA spectral signature of the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend is peaked at 1.3 eV, and the PIA associated with PPDT2FBT excitons (peaked at ∼0.9 eV) appears as a weak shoulder. The PIA signature evolves over time and at 5 ns is peaked at ∼1.3 eV.
These data highlight the complexity of analysis of TA data comprising multiple excited states and energy pathways. In order to gain insight into the charge generation processes observed in each of the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends, we globally fit each TA data matrix using the MCR-ALS algorithm. This allowed us to extract (and distinguish) overlapping spectral features associated with the various excited state species present in each of the blends.

Fig. 5 shows the extracted spectral components obtained by the MCR-ALS global analysis on thin films of PPDT2FBT blended with each of the three acceptor materials. Focussing first on the fullerene-containing blend (Fig. 4A), SVD analysis suggests that 2 components were required to best describe the TA data for time delays below 6 ns, but only one component at longer time delays (>6 ns). As can be seen from the overlay of the exciton features measured in pristine PPDT2FBT there is significant overlap with one of the early-time components in the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend. This spectral correlation allows us to assign this component as being associated with the population of singlet excitons in the donor phase (i.e., PPDT2FBT excitons). With regards to the second component at early times, this has strong spectral overlap with the component extracted from long time delays. This suggests the same excited state species is present, and decays in the microsecond time scale. Such long-lived species can be due to the formation of triplet states, CT states or polarons. Due to the high EQE characteristic of the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend in an operational OPV device, combined with the fluence dependent decay (discussed in more detail below), this component is assigned as a charge feature, i.e., the population of CT states and charge polarons in the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend. This assignment is also supported by the presence of an electro-absorption (EA) feature in the spectral profile of component 2. This spectral signature is caused by the electric field created by separated charge pairs perturbing the energy levels of surrounding chromophores via the Stark effect.24,60 This appears as a relatively sharp negative feature to the red-side (lower energy) of the GSB, which resembles the derivative of the absorption spectrum. We note the term “charges” used herein encompasses both CT states at a donor:acceptor interface, and free separated charges (i.e., hole polarons within the phase-pure donor domains).
 Fig. 5  MCR-ALS spectral components obtained by global analysis of transient absorption spectroscopy measurements on (A) PPDT2FBT:PCBM, (B) PPDT2FBT:N2200, and (C) PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blended films. The spectra are normalised to 1 at the maximum of the PPDT2FBT GSB signature (peak at ∼1.9 eV). The accompanying kinetic profiles of each component are shown in Fig. 6. 
In the all-polymer PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend, SVD also suggests the presence of 2 components at early time delays and only 1 component in the nanosecond range. Extracted spectral profiles of these two components obtained from the MCR decomposition is shown in Fig. 5B, and their interpretation is like the fullerene blend. The first photo-excited component is attributed to singlet excitons in PPDT2FBT, due to the strong overlap at early times with the spectra measured in a neat donor film. The second component (at early time delays) matches the long-time component and persist into the microsecond timescale. For the same reasoning as the PCBM, we attribute this component to the generation of charges in the PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend.
Turning to the small-molecule non-fullerene acceptor blend (PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO), unlike the previous two blends SVD analysis of the TA data matrix for the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend suggests 4 components are required to satisfactorily describe the TA data. For short time delay (<6 ns), we performed MCR-ALS deconvolution using excited state spectral features profile obtained from TA measurements on neat PPDT2FBT and NIDCS-HO as fitting constraints, i.e., using known spectra of excited states in the deconvolution algorithm. In other words, the spectral basis used to globally fit the data comprises the spectral components associated with PPDT2FBT excitons, NIDCS-HO excitons, and NIDCS-HO polarons (present in neat NIDCS-HO). This allows the fourth component to be obtained without mathematical ambiguity in the global fitting.

Fig. 5C shows the MCR-ALS extracted spectral traces, along with spectra from the pristine materials showing the overlap with the spectra in the blend. The kinetics of each of these species will be discussed in more detail below. However, we firstly note that the spectral overlap of species confirms the presence of donor and acceptor excitons, and charges on NIDCS-HO (i.e., the spectral basis set), as would be expected. Regarding the fourth component, this has significant spectral overlap with the spectrum obtained in the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO at long time-scales (up to microseconds), which can be described by a single components (based on SVD). In accordance with the discussion above for the other acceptor blends, we assign this component as caused by the generation of charges and, specifically, polarons on the PPDT2FBT donor component of the blend. As discussed earlier, the spectral basis set used in the MCR-ALS global fitting comprised spectra associated with excitons in PPDT2FBT and NIDCS-HO, and the CT-exciton state in neat NIDCSHO. Therefore, it is not surprising that the remaining component in the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend corresponds to the donor hole polaron D+, resulting from the formation of charge-pairs with the polaron hole and electron being localised on a donor and acceptor component, respectively. This is further supported through comparison of the spectral profile assigned as PPDT2FBT charges in each of the blends (see ESI†). Each spectrum has a PIA peak at ∼1.2 eV which has the same magnitude with respect to the GSB for all each PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend. In the PPDT2FBT:N2200 we did not use a spectral constraint for charges in the N2200 acceptor, which explains the contribution of the N2200-anion to the MCR-ALS extracted charge spectra (feature around 1.5 eV), consistent with the N2200 polaron band reported in the literature (1.55–1.46 eV).37
Having associated each spectral component extracted using MCR-ALS to an excited state species, we now turn attention to an analysis of the excited states dynamics in each of the PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends. Fig. 6 shows how the individual components evolve with time in each blend, for time delays below 6 ns, which are overlaid with GSB kinetics (obtained from a wavelength integration), and the component weightings have been normalized based on the integrated intensity of the GSB, which is proportional to the change in total excited state population. In all cases the sum of the MCR-ALS extracted dynamics tracks the GSB dynamics.
 Fig. 6  Kinetics resulting from MCR-ALS global fitting for PPDT2FBT blended with (A) PCBM, (B) N2200, and (C) NIDCS-HO. The component weightings have been normalized based on the integrated intensity of ground state bleach (GSB) extracted from the TA data in Fig. 4. The sum of the MCR-ALS extracted dynamics tracks the GSB dynamics, which is a measure of total excited state population. The associated spectral profiles of the global fitting are shown in Fig. 5. 
Starting the discussion with the PPDT2FBT:PCBM, Fig. 6A shows decay of excitons, leads to the growth of a new component, assigned as charges (including CT states and free separated charges). Interestingly, we observe an increasing intensity of the GSB signature between 10 ps and 1 ns, which would imply a growth in total excited state population in the PPDT2FBT polymer phase. Hole transfer from excitons created in PCBM clusters has been previously shown to contribute to photocurrent generation in fullerene OPV systems.60 Moreover, spontaneous photogeneration of charge pairs in PCBM clusters means that delayed hole transfer to the donor polymer can occur from holes in PCBM, rather than excitons.61 Due to the significant absorption of PCBM at 532 nm, diffusion-limited hole transfer from excitons and charge pairs generated in PCBM clusters within the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend is expected to be substantial. To test this, we excited the PPDT2FBT:PCBM using 670 nm excitation pulses and performed the same MCR-ALS global analysis on the TA data matrix (see ESI†). When excited with 670 nm there is no delayed increase in GBS intensity (i.e., the GSB continuously decays). These dynamics are consistent with ‘traditional charge dynamics in OPV blends; following excitation, excitons are created in the donor phase, migrate to a donor:acceptor interface and undergo electron transfer, creating CT states which subsequently either dissociate into free separated charges, or recombine. Using 670 nm excitation also provides insight on the kinetics of charges in the donor, showing that charge loss (e.g., recombination) occurs at times above 100 ps. In contrast, using 532 nm excitation wavelength (Fig. 6A), excitons are created in both donor and acceptor phases. The delayed hole transfer (due to the diffusion of excitons in the acceptor phase), results in a delayed generation of charges in the donor phase. This results in the population of charges in the PPDT2FBT donor phase growing over these timescales (up to 1 ns). In other words, using 532 nm excitation in the PPDT2FBT:PCBM blend results in delayed charge generation, increasing the amount of charges that could contribute to extractable photocurrent.
In the case of the all-polymer PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend (see Fig. 6B), we observe a decay of excitons within 10 ps and a commensurate growth of charges. These charges begin to decay after only 30 ps which is accompanied by a loss of GSB intensity, indicative of loss of excited state species to the ground state. Intensity dependent recombination dynamics (see ESI†) are consistent with geminate recombination. The timescale of this loss is much faster than observed in the fullerene-blend, suggesting stronger geminate recombination in the all-polymer PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend. This relatively rapid geminate recombination indicates that charge separation is not as efficient as in polymer/fullerene blends, as has been observed in other studies using N2200.49

Fig. 6C shows the kinetics of excited states in the small-molecule non-fullerene acceptor blend (PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO) resulting from the MCR-ALS global fit (described earlier). We observe that the excitonic components (PPDT2FBT excitons and NIDCS-HO excitons) are both quenched in the picosecond timescale, whilst the spectral signatures assigned as charges (i.e., holes localised on PPDT2FBT following charge separation at an interface), and CT-exciton states on NIDCS-HO molecules. emerge. Based on our spectral assignments, our analysis reveals a distinct difference in kinetics of photoexcited states in the NIDCS-HO acceptor blend compared to either the PCBM or N2200 containing blends. Photoexcitation of the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend populates singlet excitons of each material, along with the NIDCS-HO CT-exciton state, all of which are formed intrinsically without a donor:acceptor mix (see neat material discussion above). Additionally, the component assigned as PPDT2FBT charges, resulting from charge pair formation, is present within the time resolution of our measurement and increases relatively steadily over the first 1 ns. Interestingly, the population of charges on PPDT2FBT appears to grow on timescales to which the NIDCS-HO CT-exciton states decay (∼100 ps). It has recently been reported that the delocalized nature of intra-moiety excimers can facilitate hole transfer in polymer and small-molecule NFA based blends.19 In this regard, the CT-exciton of NIDCS-HO may provide an alternative pathway to the generation of separated charges by acting as the intermediate state, and the decay dynamics of the CT-exciton state we resolve could be attributed to charge pair separation via hole polaron injection into the donor component, without forming the more traditional interfacial CT state at the donor:acceptor interface. Based on this, we attribute the kinetics of charges on the PPDT2FBT polymer to hole transfer from acceptor to donor which can occur via diffusion of excitons, and also through electronic coupling between the NIDCS-HO CT-exciton and the intermolecular interaction at the donor:acceptor interface. Importantly, insight into the efficiency of this CT-exciton to charge photogeneration/separation process is gained by the dynamics of the total excited state population. Fig. 6C shows that the GSB undergoes significant decay, with only approximately 55% of the initial population remaining at 5 ns. This loss of excited state population could be a result of recombination of charges, and/or decay of CT-excitons to the ground state if the inherent lifetime of this CT-exciton state is faster than the conversion efficiency into charge pairs.
Charge recombination dynamics
Having isolated the contribution of hole polarons in each of the blends, and the associated charge generation dynamics, we turn attention to the fate of these charges and their role in contributing to extractable photocurrent. In this regard, we note that beyond the nanosecond timescale excitons are fully quenched, and TA dynamics can be attributed to charges. Since only a single excited species is presents (as described earlier) charge kinetics can be obtained by simple wavelength integration over the PIA region, without the need of a data matrix decomposition. We note that the term ‘charges’ used herein so far relates to both CT states and hole polarons. Due to the PIA bands of these species typically overlapping we cannot spectrally distinguish these species. However, because CT states recombine monomolecularly whereas separated charges follow recombination kinetics with rate orders equal to (or higher) than 2, they may be isolated using an appreciate kinetic model to best describe the fluence-dependent measurements. A detailed discussion of the kinetic model used is provided in the ESI.† Briefly, we apply a model which assumes vibrationally cold CT states dissociate into separated charges, which recombine non-geminately to the CT state, with all recombination to the ground state occurring via cold CT states at the donor–acceptor interfaces. The main assumption of this model is that charge carriers exist in the same phase domain, rather than holes and electrons existing in different phases within a bulk-heterojunction morphology, e.g., holes in the donor phase and electrons in the acceptor phase. This model is reminiscent of the Onsager-Braun model, which is based on the Onsager theory for the dissociation and recombination of ions in solution.62 Prior to global fitting, TA signals were converted into charge densities using the cross-section value estimated for each blend, derived from the Beer–Lambert law.63

Fig. 7 shows the transient absorption recombination kinetics integrated over the 0.9–1.4 eV wavelength region for each PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend, at the excitation fluences indicated. The solid lines correspond to the global fit using a free-parameter kinetic model, and the dashed lines correspond to the same fit but with the assumption that recombination is bimolecular (i.e., the recombination order is fixed to a value of 2). In the following discussion, we compare the kinetic parameters obtained from the global modelling of the fluence dependent charge decays. In particular, the CT lifetime (1/kr), CT dissociation rate (kd), CT dissociation yield (defined by the ratio of kd over kr + kd),62 and the recombination order (λ + 1), where an order higher than two is indicative of disorder effects. These kinetic parameters are summarised in Table 2.
 Fig. 7  Intensity dependent recombination for (A) PPDT2FBT:PCBM, (B) PPDT2FBT:N2200, and (C) PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO at the fluences indicated in the legend entries. The excitation wavelength was 532 nm. Prior to global fitting, TA signals were converted into charge densities using the cross-section value estimated for each blend (see ESI†). The solid lines are the resulting globally fit curves using the kinetic model described in the text. The dashed lines correspond to the global fit whereby the recombination order is fixed to a value of 2 (i.e., applying the fitting constraint of bimolecular recombination). 
Table 2 Output kinetic parameters from a global for of the fluence dependent transient absorption dynamics of charge decay in PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends




Acceptor component

k
r [×108] (s−1)

k
d [×109] (s−1)
Dissociation yield

β [×10−11] (cm3 s−1)

λ + 1




PCBM
5.8
2.7
0.83
1.0
2.8


N2200
14
2.9
0.67
82
2.0


NIDCS-HO
3.3
1.2
0.78
0.52
2.6




According to the kinetic modelling, in the PPDT2FBT blend with fullerene (Fig. 7A) decay of the CT state to the ground state exhibits a lifetime (1/kr) of 1.7 ns, the N2200 blend (Fig. 7B) has a CT lifetime of 0.7 ns, and the NIDCS-HO blend (Fig. 7C) has the longest lifetime of the series of 3 ns. These CT lifetimes are a proxy for the rate of geminate recombination, with N2200 having the shortest CT lifetime suggesting this blend has the strongest geminate recombination compared to the fullerene and small-molecule acceptor counterparts. The relatively long CT lifetime of the NIDCS-HO blend may be due to the HOMO–LUMO energy levels of this acceptor, leading to a higher energy of the CT state. We have recently demonstrated, for low donor content blends, that a higher lying CT state results in a reduced non-radiative CT decay rate.64 Thus, it is within reason for the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend to exhibit a slow geminate recombination rate.
This kinetic model allows the CT dissociation yield to be estimated by the ratio of kd over kr + kd, where kd is the dissociation rate. For each of the blends, the dissociation yield correlates well with the EQE obtained for the corresponding donor:acceptor OPV device. The trend of dissociation yield is consistent with the device parameters (see Table 1) for each of the blend systems. As seen in Table 2, the best performing device (the fullerene blend) also has the highest dissociation yield (0.83), and the N2200 blend (poorest device) suffers the lowest dissociation yield of 0.67.
From the above analysis, we can speak to some comparisons between fullerene-acceptor and the polymeric-acceptor blends. It is clear from our transient absorption results that the polymer-acceptor based blend (PPDT2BT:N2200) exhibits rapid charge generation, consistent with significant intermixing of donor and acceptor domains. However, our analysis of charge recombination dynamics has revealed the all-polymer blend suffers from rapid geminate recombination, inherently caused by the relatively poor dissociation rate of CT states extracted from our kinetic model. These results indicate inefficient charge separation in the PPDT2FBT:N2200 and is consistent with the poorest CT dissociation yield of the series of blends explored in this study. These factors also likely explain the lower fill factor compared to the fullerene-based and NIDCS-HO based devices, consistent with other reports in the literature.48,49 We propose that if polymeric-acceptor based devices are to rival the efficiencies of fullerene-acceptor counterparts then controlling film morphology (e.g., donor:acceptor domain size and composition) remains the main challenge in all-polymer systems.
We next turn attention to a comparison of the fullerene and NIDCS-HO acceptors. Insight into non-geminate recombination can be gained by modelling the charge recombination TA dynamics to calculate the recombination constant (γ) and recombination order (λ + 1). The recombination process of charges in OPVs is analogous to the recombination of ions in solution which can be described by the Langevin theory, whereby the bi-molecular recombination rate depends on the sum of electron and hole mobilities. For the PPDT2FBT:N2200 blend, our global modelling results in a recombination order equal to 2, consistent with the bimolecular recombination process occurring in this system. However, the recombination order for the fullerene and NIDCS-HO-acceptor systems are greater than 2, suggesting a stronger density dependence to charge recombination. To compare our experimentally modelled non-geminate constant with the Langevin value, we calculated an effective constant (β) equivalent to a recombination order of 2 (see ESI,† for details). Briefly, this was achieved by considering the sum of hole and electron mobilities, and only the slowest charge carriers. For both the fullerene and NIDCS-HO blends, the effective bimolecular constants are in relatively good agreement with the Langevin values,28,65 confirming the validity of our model. To this end, we propose that in the fullerene and NIDCS-HO blends the recombination order greater than 2 arises by trap-assisted recombination. This is facilitated by disorder in the system, whereby charge carriers are trapped in the density of states and the recombination of free charges with trapped charges is an additional recombination pathway. This is in-line with other reports of recombination in bulk-heterojunction OPV found to have recombination orders greater than 2.66–69
Interestingly, the value of the effective recombination constant (β) obtained for the NIDCS-HO acceptor blend is of the same order of magnitude as the recently reported value for achieving best performance in non-fullerene acceptor (NFA)-based devices.70 Motivated by the ability of molecular engineering to design and tune the properties of NFA small-molecule acceptors,71 we varied parameters in kinetic model to form a road-map towards enhancing OPV device performance. For example, by running our numerical model fixing the effective bimolecular constant to the value we have obtained and modifying the recombination order to a bimolecular process, we keep the beneficial low value of β, and can probe the effect on the lifetime of charges in the absence of disorder. In this regard, we determine that if recombination is only bimolecular and the parameters kr, kd and β are fixed, charges would live approximately an order of magnitude longer, increasing their chance of contributing to extractable photocurrent in an operating OPV device (see ESI,† for modelling details). This significant improvement of charge lifetime implies that trap-assisted charge recombination (due to disorder) is a contributing limiting factor in the NIDCS-HO acceptor blend.
Concerning the photocurrent generation efficiency as a function of incident wavelength (e.g., EQE measurements shown in Fig. 1G), recall that the N2200 blend suffers the poorest metrics, whilst the NIDCS-HO blend is remarkedly comparable to the fullerene blend. We speculate that the formation of the intrinsic CT-exciton state in NIDCS-HO may facilitate charge photogeneration from both electron and hole transfer processes in the BHJ blend. In other words, in addition to the traditional interfacial CT-state being an intermediate to free charges, the NIDCS-HO blend has available a charge generation pathway with the intrinsic CT-exciton as an intermediate state, i.e., a hole transfer processes. This intrinsic CT-exciton pathway is not available in the fullerene system due to the weak optical absorption of the PCBM acceptor. For completeness, we note that the complementary absorption of the N2200 polymeric acceptor may also give rise to CT-excitons;58 however, in this PPDT2FBT:N2200 system the rapid recombination events render any contributions of charge generation via this mechanism toward extractable photocurrent moot.
Bringing together our analysis of the OPV blends using fullerene-acceptor and NIDCS-HO acceptor, our transient absorption results have shown that the NFA systems benefits from delayed charge generation via hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor phase. However, despite the complementary donor–acceptor steady-state absorption of the NIDCS-HO based system, the OPV device characteristics (Jsc and FF) are poorer than the fullerene-based system. Since our results identify that charge generation is not a major limiting factor in the NIDCS-HO blend, it is reasonable to point to CT state dissociation and free carrier mobility as contributing to the poorer performance of the NIDCS-HO based device compared to the fullerene-acceptor system.
A question at hand is how NIDCS-HO as a small-molecule NFA compares to the rapid rise of other highly efficient NFAs. Recently, a low-bandgap acceptor comprising a fused-ring benzothiadiazole core unit (known as Y6) has been paired with a certain wide-bandgap polymer donor to harvest most of the visible and NIR light, achieving power conversion efficiencies exceeding 18%.7 One common characteristic of this highly efficient NFA (Y6) is the contribution to photocurrent generation from the hole-transfer channel, via an intrinsic CT-exciton state.6 In fact, the hole-transfer efficiency in a highly-efficient Y6-containing blend exceeds 70%, which has been attributed to a favourable miscibility between donor and acceptor combined with the relatively long lifetime of the CT-exciton intermediate state.19 This hole-transfer channel of charge photogeneration is reminiscent to the findings we report herein for the NIDCS-HO. Naturally, it raises the question as to why other NFA-based OPV blends, such as those containing Y6, are able to surpass the device performance of fullerene counterparts, whereas NIDCS-HO suffers a contrasting fate.
Our analysis of charge recombination (discussed earlier) revealed a slower rate of geminate recombination (and longer CT lifetime) in the NICDS-HO blend compared to the fullerene-acceptor blend. These dynamics suggest that charges should have a high chance of contributing to extractable photocurrent in the NIDCS-HO system. However, the comparatively poorer device performance of the NIDCS-HO speak otherwise. In an operational device, the competition between charge collection/extraction and recombination is influenced by the internal microstructure of the blend.72 We speculate that the PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blend suffers from a thin film morphology lacking sufficient percolation pathways of phase-pure domains, which is critical to charge extraction in an operational device. Furthermore, considering our modelling which shows the significant increase in CT lifetime in the absence of disorder, we propose that disorder, in addition to the morphology issue, is the main limiting factor in the NIDCS-HO acceptor blend. This may explain the lower device performance of the NIDCS-HO acceptor moiety compared to the latest state-of-the-art high efficiency NFA-based OPVs.
Conclusions
In this work we compared charge generation and recombination between three systems featuring the same polymer donor PPDT2FBT matched with three different acceptors, namely the fullerene acceptor PCBM, the small molecule non-fullerene acceptor NIDCS-HO and the polymeric acceptor N2200. Our results provide insight on the processes that limit the performance of each active layer.
Our results show that the polymeric-NFA blend (i.e., N2200) suffers from incomplete exciton dissociation and rapid geminate recombination, consistent with the poorer device performance when compared to the fullerene-based device. In the case of the small-molecule NFA (i.e., (NIDCS-HO)), our comparative results show relatively efficient charge generation, along with hole transfer from acceptor to donor giving a delayed increase of charges in the donor phase, which may be mediated by a ‘CT-exciton’ intermediate having excitonic and CT character. Additionally, our analysis of charge recombination processes reveals the CT-state lifetime is considerably longer for the NIDCS-HO blend compared to the other blends. By modelling an effective bimolecular recombination constant, we propose that in the absence of disorder, charges would have a greater chance of being extracted in a working device before succumbing to recombination. Whilst hole-transfer from acceptor to donor component presents an additional pathway of charge photogeneration, the advantage of hole-transfer (which is not available in fullerene based devices) may be limited by disorder and sub-optimal morphology in the PPDT2FBT:NICDS-HO blend. We show that a combination of intrinsic and interfacial excited states needs to be accounted for in charge generation dynamics, and may hold a key insight in explaining different device performance and EQE characteristics between fullerene and non-fullerene OPV devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. N. P., J. K. G., and J. M. H. acknowledge the support of a Rutherford Discovery Fellowship to J. M. H., as well as an MBIE Catalyst grant for collaboration between New Zealand and Korea. H. Y. W. acknowledges the financial support from the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea (Grants NRF-2019R1A2C2085290, 2019R1A6A1A11044070).
Notes and references
S. Liu, J. Yuan, W. Deng, M. Luo, Y. Xie, Q. Liang, Y. Zou, Z. He, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Shao, R. Ma, Z. Luo, Y. Xiao, T. Yang, X. Lu, Z. Yuan, H. Yan, Y. Chen and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, T. Liu, J. Yu, T. K. Lau, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Su, Y. Tang, R. Ma, B. Liu, J. Liang, K. Feng, X. Lu, X. Guo, F. Gao and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3328–3337 RSC .
X. Li, I. Angunawela, Y. Chang, J. Zhou, H. Huang, L. Zhong, A. Liebman-Pelaez, C. Zhu, L. Meng, Z. Xie, H. Ade, H. Yan and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5028–5038 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and M. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12751–12759 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baran, T. Kirchartz, S. Wheeler, S. Dimitrov, M. Abdelsamie, J. Gorman, R. S. Ashraf, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, N. Gasparini, P. Kaienburg, H. Yan, A. Amassian, C. J. Brabec, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3783–3793 RSC .
Q. An, W. Gao, F. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Zhang, K. Wu, X. Ma, Z. Hu, C. Jiao and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2468–2475 RSC .
A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, A. Marks, M. S. Little, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1596–1625 RSC .
J. Hofinger, C. Putz, F. Mayr, K. Gugujonovic, D. Wielend and M. C. Scharber, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 4291–4302 RSC .
B. He, B. Yang, M. A. Kolaczkowski, C. A. Anderson, L. M. Klivansky, T. L. Chen, M. A. Brady and Y. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1028–1035 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, N. D. Eastham, T. J. Aldrich, B. Ma, E. F. Manley, Z. Chen, L. X. Chen, M. O. de la Cruz, R. P. H. Chang, F. S. Melkonyan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–13 Search PubMed .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Q. He, F. Zhao, L. Huo, J. Mai, X. Lu, C.-J. Su, T. Li, J. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Wang and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganäs, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. Kawashima, Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, I. Osaka and K. Takimiya, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, S. Li, Y. Zhang, T. Li, H. Zhou, F. Jin, C. Sheng, G. Ni, J. Yuan, W. Ma and H. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, S. K. K. Prasad, J.-D. Chen, W. Cai, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Ma, F. Gao, J.-X. Tang, C. Wang, W. You, J. M. Hodgkiss and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706363 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Falke, C. A. Rozzi, D. Brida, M. Maiuri, M. Amato, E. Sommer, A. De Sio, A. Rubio, G. Cerullo, E. Molinari and C. Lienau, Science, 2014, 344, 1001–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gelinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, P. C. Y. Chow, S. Gélinas, C. W. Schlenker, C. Li, H. Yip, A. K.-Y. Jen, D. S. Ginger and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2013, 500, 435–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Gehrig, I. A. Howard and F. Laquai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13509–13515 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Gallaher, S. K. K. Prasad, M. A. Uddin, T. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Y. Woo and J. M. Hodgkiss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2713–2724 RSC .
I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14866–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin, L. Gao, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Xue, C. Yang, M. Xiao and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–11 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, S. Qin, R. Wang, S. Chen, F. Pan, B. Qiu, Z. Shang, L. Meng, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1465–1474 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bin, Y. Yang, Z. G. Zhang, L. Ye, M. Ghasemi, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, C. Sun, L. Xue, C. Yang, H. Ade and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5085–5094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, M. A. Uddin, C. Lee, K. H. Kim, T. L. Nguyen, W. Lee, Y. Li, C. Wang, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2359–2365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Kwon, M. A. Uddin, J. H. Park, S. K. Park, T. L. Nguyen, H. Y. Woo and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 910–916 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Kwon, J. H. Park, D. W. Kim, S. K. Park and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1951–1956 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Kwon, J. H. Park, S. Kyu Park and S. Y. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Moore, S. Albert-Seifried, A. Rao, S. Massip, B. Watts, D. J. Morgan, R. H. Friend, C. R. McNeill and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 230–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Xia, M. J. Ford, F. Jin, D. Liu, H. Zhao, O. Inganäs, G. C. Bazan and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 251–262 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Nguyen, H. Choi, S. J. Ko, M. A. Uddin, B. Walker, S. Yum, J. E. Jeong, M. H. Yun, T. J. Shin, S. Hwang, J. Y. Kim and H. Y. Woo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3040–3051 RSC .
T. H. Lee, S. Y. Park, B. Walker, S. J. Ko, J. Heo, H. Y. Woo, H. Choi and J. Y. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 7476–7482 RSC .
J. Kim, C. Koh, M. Uddin, K. Ryu, S.-R. Jang, H. Woo, B. Lim and K. Kim, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2598 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Koh, J. H. Heo, M. A. Uddin, Y. W. Kwon, D. H. Choi, S. H. Im and H. Y. Woo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43846–43854 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karuthedath, J. Gorenflot, Y. Firdaus, N. Chaturvedi, C. S. P. De Castro, G. T. Harrison, J. I. Khan, A. Markina, A. H. Balawi, T. A. Dela Peña, W. Liu, R. Z. Liang, A. Sharma, S. H. K. Paleti, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, E. Alarousu, D. H. Anjum, P. M. Beaujuge, S. De Wolf, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos, D. Baran, D. Andrienko and F. Laquai, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 378–384 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bartesaghi, I. D. C. Pérez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 2–11 Search PubMed .
N. Tokmoldin, J. Vollbrecht, S. M. Hosseini, B. Sun, L. Perdigón-Toro, H. Y. Woo, Y. Zou, D. Neher and S. Shoaee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried, A. Rao, A. J. Barker, A. R. Campbell, R. A. Marsh and R. H. Friend, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1567–1577 CrossRef CAS .
O. G. Reid, R. D. Pensack, Y. Song, G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 561–575 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hodgkiss, A. R. Campbell, R. A. Marsh, A. Rao, S. Albert-Seifried and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 177701 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. Deshmukh, T. Qin, J. K. Gallaher, A. C. Y. Liu, E. Gann, K. O’Donnell, L. Thomsen, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. E. Watkins and C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 332–342 RSC .
T. M. Clarke, F. C. Jamieson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20934–20941 CrossRef CAS .
F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister, T. D. Kim, K. S. Lee, N. S. Baek and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9469–9479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Keiderling, S. Dimitrov and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14470–14475 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita and S. Ito, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4397–4417 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Marin-Beloqui, K. J. Fallon, H. Bronstein and T. M. Clarke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3813–3819 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaumot, R. Gargallo, A. De Juan and R. Tauler, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2005, 76, 101–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaumot, A. de Juan and R. Tauler, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2015, 140, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, A. Isakova, A. Abudulimu, M. van den Berg, O. K. Kwon, A. J. Meixner, S. Y. Park, D. Zhang, J. Gierschner and L. Lüer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 211–220 RSC .
R. Wang, Y. Yao, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Bin, L. Xue, Z. G. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Li and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 398 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Rolczynski, J. M. Szarko, H. J. Son, Y. Liang, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4142–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Scarongella, J. De Jonghe-Risse, E. Buchaca-Domingo, M. Causa, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, J. E. Moser, N. Stingelin and N. Banerji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2908–2918 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, J. C. Hummelen, M. S. Pshenichnikov and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1653–1660 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shoaee, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–20 Search PubMed .
J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, G. Grancini and G. Lanzani, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5468–5485 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collado-Fregoso, S. N. Pugliese, M. Wojcik, J. Benduhn, E. Bar-Or, L. Perdigón Toro, U. Hörmann, D. Spoltore, K. Vandewal, J. M. Hodgkiss and D. Neher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2329–2341 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 1–3 Search PubMed .
K. Cho, J. Kim, S. Y. Yoon, K. Y. Ryu, S. R. Jang, B. Lim and K. Kim, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1–6 CrossRef .
A. Foertig, A. Baumann, D. Rauh, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 1–4 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O’Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. De Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 3–5 CrossRef .
A. Baumann, T. J. Savenije, D. H. K. Murthy, M. Heeney, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1687–1692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Firdaus, V. M. Le Corre, J. I. Khan, Z. Kan, F. Laquai, P. M. Beaujuge and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802028 CrossRef .
T. Wang and J. L. Brédas, Matter, 2020, 2, 119–135 CrossRef .
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details on spectroscopic methods, fluence dependent TA measurements, additional figures, and global fitting details. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc04800gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of (A) non-fullerene small molecule acceptor NIDCS-HO, (B) polymeric acceptor N2200, (C) fullerene acceptor PC[70]BM, and (D) the semicrystalline low-bandgap copolymer donor PPDT2FBT. (E) Energy level diagrams of the different materials. The HOMO levels were measured by cyclic voltammetry and the LUMO levels were estimated from the HOMO values and the optical band gaps of the films. (F) Steady-state optical absorption spectra of neat PPDT2FBT and PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend thin films. The spectra for each blend have been normalized to the absorption maximum peak (655 nm) of neat PPDT2FBT. (G) EQE spectra of each PPDT2FBT:acceptor blend device.	 

PCBM	16.3	0.79	0.73	9.4	0.8
N2200	11.9	0.85	0.51	5.1	0.4
NIDCS-HO	11.88	1.03	0.63	7.6	0.7

 	Fig. 2  Spectral slices at indicated times of transient absorption measurements on neat (pristine) films; (A) PPDT2FBT, (B) N220, and (C) NIDCS-HO, following 100 fs excitation at 532 nm. The spectral regions labelled GSB, PIA-1, and PIA-2 refer to the wavelength integration regions shown in the kinetic traces (insets), which have been normalized by the average value within the first picosecond.	 

 	Fig. 3  Kinetics resulting from globally fitting the TA spectra in neat NIDCS-HO using MCR-ALS, showing singlet excitons decay on the 10's of picosecond timescale accompanied by a growth in a CT-exciton state. The inset shows the spectral shapes used for the MCR-ALS global fit.	 

 	Fig. 4  Spectral slices at indicated times of transient absorption measurements on PPDT2FBT:acceptor blends; wherein the acceptor component is (A) PCBM, (B) N220, or (C) NIDCS-HO, following 100 fs excitation at 532 nm. The spectral regions labelled GSB, PIA-1, and PIA-2 refer to the wavelength integration regions shown in the kinetic traces (insets), which have been normalized by the average value within the first picosecond.	 

 	Fig. 5  MCR-ALS spectral components obtained by global analysis of transient absorption spectroscopy measurements on (A) PPDT2FBT:PCBM, (B) PPDT2FBT:N2200, and (C) PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO blended films. The spectra are normalised to 1 at the maximum of the PPDT2FBT GSB signature (peak at ∼1.9 eV). The accompanying kinetic profiles of each component are shown in Fig. 6.	 

 	Fig. 6  Kinetics resulting from MCR-ALS global fitting for PPDT2FBT blended with (A) PCBM, (B) N2200, and (C) NIDCS-HO. The component weightings have been normalized based on the integrated intensity of ground state bleach (GSB) extracted from the TA data in Fig. 4. The sum of the MCR-ALS extracted dynamics tracks the GSB dynamics, which is a measure of total excited state population. The associated spectral profiles of the global fitting are shown in Fig. 5.	 

 	Fig. 7  Intensity dependent recombination for (A) PPDT2FBT:PCBM, (B) PPDT2FBT:N2200, and (C) PPDT2FBT:NIDCS-HO at the fluences indicated in the legend entries. The excitation wavelength was 532 nm. Prior to global fitting, TA signals were converted into charge densities using the cross-section value estimated for each blend (see ESI†). The solid lines are the resulting globally fit curves using the kinetic model described in the text. The dashed lines correspond to the global fit whereby the recombination order is fixed to a value of 2 (i.e., applying the fitting constraint of bimolecular recombination).	 

PCBM	5.8	2.7	0.83	1.0	2.8
N2200	14	2.9	0.67	82	2.0
NIDCS-HO	3.3	1.2	0.78	0.52	2.6
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details on spectroscopic methods, fluence dependent TA measurements, additional figures, and global fitting details. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc04800g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
