Effects of water vapor and oxygen on non-fullerene small molecule acceptors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC05475D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05475D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 879-886Effects of water vapor and oxygen on non-fullerene small molecule acceptors†

        
          
            Chuanfei 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shaofei 
            Ni‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Slawomir 
            Braun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mats 
            Fahlman
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xianjie 
            Liu
          
        
      a
aDivision of Surface Physics and Chemistry, IFM, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. E-mail: chuanfei.wang@liu.se; mats.fahlman@liu.se
bDepartment of Chemistry, South University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, People's Republic of China
Received 
      31st October 2018
    , Accepted 11th December 2018First published on 11th December 2018AbstractDue to the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), the efficiency of organic solar cells is steadily being improved. The stability of organic solar cells also is expected to be enhanced with the introduction of the NFAs, yet the stability of NFAs themselves have been less investigated to date. In this paper, the stability of a set of typical NFAs was studied in situ employing photoelectron spectroscopy. The studied molecules show higher resistance to water vapor and thermal stress compared to fullerenes. For water vapor exposure, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of NFAs undergoes only minor and reversible changes and the NFAs/substrate work function stays constant. Exposure to oxygen gas significantly modified the electronic structure of the NFAs and the effect was only partially reversible by annealing. However, the presence of water vapor was shown to slow down the degradation caused by oxygen. This is in stark contrast to fullerenes that undergo irreversible degradation upon water vapor exposure.
Introduction
Organic semiconductors feature properties of light weight, flexibility and easy solution-based processing for mass production and consequently have attracted much attention in the recent decades. To date, organic light-emitting diodes (OLED) have been successfully commercialized, while organic photovoltaics (OPV) are still on the way to large scale commercialization, which is hindered by efficiency and stability issues. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to improving the efficiency of the organic solar cells (OSCs). New materials including new donor materials,1–6 acceptor materials7–10 and interfacial materials as well as developments in device architecture such as ternary solar cells, tandem solar cells and electrode design11,12 pushed the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OSCs to well over 10% by improving photon harvesting ability, charge generation, charge transport and/or charge extraction.12–15 For the polymer-based OPV devices with good performance, fullerene derivatives have dominated in terms of choice of acceptor materials for a long period because of desirable properties such as trap-free transport and high electron mobility. However, the absorption spectrum of fullerene acceptors only covers a narrow part of the solar spectrum, which limits the absorption of photons and hinders further enhancement of PCE. Additionally, the sensitivity of fullerene acceptors to air, heating and illumination make the solar cell degradation comparatively quick,16–18 hindering wide-spread commercialization of printable OSCs.19 The recent rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs),20,21 however, affords more routes for designing efficient OSCs. For instance, the limited photo-absorption has been improved, and the PCE has been pushed to even higher levels, now close to 15% in single layer devices22,23 and over 17% in tandem devices.24
Stability of OSCs is another critically important factor for its commercialization. In general, most OSCs are sensitive to ambient atmosphere, arising mainly from the nature of the organic molecules/polymers. Organic semiconductors can be oxidized by oxygen or water, a process that can be accelerated by illumination and elevated temperature. Even if there is no chemical interaction with the ambient atmosphere, inclusion of oxygen/water molecules into the organic semiconductor films can still affect the electronic structure of organic semiconductors. Because of the “soft” nature of organic semiconductors, even weak interactions can lead to changes in the molecular structure and film morphology, in turn affecting not only the bulk electronic/optical properties but also the surface and interface properties in the devices. In order to help design more stable devices and synthesize more stable materials, many studies have been performed on exploring the stability and degradation mechanisms of OSCs based on fullerene acceptors and the degradation of various types of active layer materials themselves. Several degradation mechanisms have been proposed and detailed insights have been provided on how to improve the stability of OSCs.16,18,25–31 Extensive effort has been invested in improving the efficiency of NFAs containing OPV recently, but the stability and degradation mechanisms are less explored despite their importance.
In this paper, three typical ladder NFAs named o-IDTBR and p/m-ITIC were chosen as model molecules to explore the stability of NFAs because these NFAs and their derivatives were widely used in OSCs yielding high PCE.21,24,32–34 The degradation process of organic films in ambient atmosphere often follows many complicated pathways and at the same time, many factors for degradation are coupled with each other and thus have to be explored separately. The influence of ambient atmosphere on NFA films can be controlled by in situ exposure of oxygen and water vapor, separately. The modifications of the chemical or electronic structure and the interface properties, if any, and the resistance to thermal stress and illumination were probed by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES). This in situ approach enables degradation to be studied in darkness (and in the absence of the UV-light portion of the solar spectrum), which is highly relevant to OPV technology because OPV modules will spend half their time in darkness and UV-blockers are included in the OSC products. Our studies show that the NFAs are significantly less sensitive to water vapor and air exposure and also more resistant to thermal annealing than fullerene acceptors. The origins of the measured effects by PES are discussed combined with density functional theory (DFT) calculations and the expected effects on device performance are commented upon.
Results and discussion
The chemical structure and frontier molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) of the three NFAs are displayed in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Different from the ball structure of the fullerenes, the three NFAs have ladder type structures with fused aromatic electron-efficient backbones and electron-deficient terminal groups. This type of planar conjugated structure is expected to improve charge transport and air stability.35 The difference between the isomers p-ITIC and m-ITIC is the side chain position, which could lead to different intermolecular self-assembly and thus affect the film morphology, device performance32 and even the stability of the OSCs. The frontier orbital properties usually play a key role in the stability of the organic semiconductors.36–40 For these three NFAs, the HOMOs are distributed fairly evenly along the conjugated cores, whereas the LUMOs have higher density located at the terminal groups, which is in accordance with previous reports.34,41 Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) curves of pristine films on AlOx/Al (Al) substrates and illustration of the energy level alignment at the interfaces are shown in Fig. 1. The ionization potential (IP) of o-IDTBR (IPo-IDTBR), p-ITIC (IPp-ITIC), and m-ITIC (IPm-ITIC) deduced from the UPS spectra are around 5.56 eV, 5.60 eV and 5.64 eV, respectively, which are all lower in energy than the IP of PC71BM (IPPCBM) of 5.90 eV. There are four distinct observable molecular orbital features at the low binding energy region and identical frontier orbital features can be found in the UPS spectrum of p-ITIC and m-ITIC because of their identical conjugated structures. All of the bulk electron affinity (EA) values are estimated from the IP and optical gap values (summarized in Table S1, ESI†) as 3.82 eV, 4.01 eV and 4.02 eV, which are shallower but close to the trap-free reference value of PC71BM (4.18 eV).42 In addition to energy levels, energy level alignments at metal/organic or organic/organic interfaces, which can be predicted and explained by the integer charge transfer (ICT) model, are vital to organic photovoltaics, because various electronic processes are dictated by the energy levels at these interfaces. The so-called negative (positive) pinning energies EICT− (EICT+) represent the largest energy gained from reducing (the smallest energy required to oxidize) a molecule at an interface producing a fully relaxed state and are larger (smaller) than the bulk EA (IP) mainly due to the electrostatic interaction with the substrate (image charge or transferred charge at e.g. a donor–acceptor type interface).43 The values of EICT− (EICT+) of a molecule/polymer can be derived from PES43,44 as well as acquired by calculation.45–47 As displayed in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the organic/substrate work function (Φorg/sub) is independent on the substrate work function (Φsub) at the pining regime. The EICT− values of three molecules are around 3.94 eV, 4.16 eV and 4.20 eV, which are all smaller than EICT− of PC71BM (4.35 eV). The smaller EICT− and IP values for these NFAs compared with those of PC71BM (and PC61BM) suggest that they would work well in cascade-type ternary junctions for reduced trap-assisted recombination and increased Voc.33 There will be dipole formation at the PC71BM-donor heterojunction when EICT− of PCBM is larger than EICT+ of the polymer donor, so the smaller EICT− also indicates that for a given donor polymer there will be a smaller interface dipole (or no dipole at all) for all of these NFAs compared with that in the equivalent PC71BM-donor heterojunction in a binary cell and hence, less trap-assisted recombination via ICT states is observed when these acceptors are blended with the donors typically used in fullerene organic solar cells.48,49 In order to explore the stability and degradation processes, neat films of o-IDTBR and p/m-ITIC were exposed to water vapor, oxygen, thermal annealing and even UV-light illumination in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions by controlling each parameter separately.
 Fig. 1  (a) UPS spectra of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC on aluminum substrates. (b) Illustration of energy level alignment between aluminum and NFAs. 
The o-IDTBR/Al and p/m-ITIC/Al work functions (Φo-IDTBR/Al and Φp-ITIC/Al or Φm-ITIC/Al) were measured subsequently as a function of exposure time of water vapor under the controlled pressure of ∼1.0 × 10−5 mbar. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. 2. Φo-IDTBR/Al and IP of o-IDTBR/Al are estimated to be 3.96 eV and 5.56 eV, respectively. As ΦAl is around 3.8 eV (Fig. 1a), negative integer charge transfer states (ICT−) are formed on the o-IDTBR at the interface, introducing an interface dipole and pinning the Fermi energy to the EICT−, i.e., Φo-IDTBR/Al ≈ EICT−. With the increase in exposure time from 20 minutes to 355 minutes, the EICT− and IP of o-IDTBR both remain constant, but the intensity of the second frontier peak at around 2.7 eV appears to be reduced slowly. Even when the exposure time is increased to 25 hours, the EICT− and IP of o-IDTBR remain constant, but the second peak becomes flat and the signal of the frontier electronic structure at 1.59 eV becomes less well-resolved. The same water exposure process was applied to the more rigid p/m-ITIC molecules and the corresponding spectra are depicted in Fig. 2b and c. From the top pristine film spectra, it can be deduced that both the p-ITIC/Al and m-ITIC/Al interfaces are pinned to their respective EICT−. The EICT− and IP of the p-ITIC are 4.16 eV and 5.60 eV, respectively. When the pristine film of p-ITIC is exposed to water vapor for 330 minutes, no change in work function or frontier electronic structure appears as the UPS spectra of the exposed film overlaps completely with that of the original pristine film, as shown in the bottom spectrum of Fig. 2b. The EICT− and IP of the m-ITIC are 4.20 eV and 5.64 eV, respectively, which is in good agreement with the previous results.33 Both the EICT− and IP of m-ITIC stay constant even for up to 10 hours of exposure to water vapor, and the frontier electronic structure remains clear and distinct.
 Fig. 2  (a–c) UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC under water vapor exposure. (d) XPS S2p, C1s, N1s, and O1s core level spectra of pristine and water exposed annealing o-IDTBR (e) XPS S2p, C1s, N1s, and O1s core level spectra of pristine and water exposed p-ITIC films. 
Weak interactions can be removed by thermal annealing, whereas strong, e.g., covalent bonding, cannot be removed.16,37 In order to test the interaction strength, post-exposure annealing was performed. First, we investigated the annealing effect on the pristine films at a safe moderate temperature, i.e., below the thermal decomposition temperature21,32,50 because thermal annealing itself can lead to variation in EICT+,− and/or IP due to modification of inter/intra-molecular order.51 The Φo-IDTBR/Al stays constant (variation within 0.02 eV), i.e., the EICT− of o-IDTBR is unaffected by annealing. The band-edge signal is slightly broadened, but the IP stays constant (variation within 0.03 eV, Fig. S3, ESI†). Φp/m-ITIC and hence the EICT− of the materials, however, increased significantly during thermal treatment. The increase is around 0.19 eV and 0.22 eV for p-ITIC and m-ITIC, respectively, when the temperature is raised to 100 °C. During the cooling process, Φp-ITIC/Al and Φm-ITIC/Al decrease gradually with the decrease in the temperature, and finally return to the original values, possibly with a slight increase (0.05 eV and 0.01 eV for p-ITIC and m-ITIC, respectively), indicating that EICT− of p/m-ITIC recovered after post-annealing. The IP of p-ITIC remains roughly constant (variation of 0.05 eV), but the IP of the m-ITIC post annealing decreases by about 0.23 eV. The decreased IP likely is induced by improved inter-chain stacking after thermal annealing, which is supported by GIWAX measurements.32 The increased EICT− of p/m-ITIC at high temperature can be explained by thermally induced side-chain or interring torsion that will attenuate the conjugation and π–π stacking, particularly at the edges of grains.51 Decreased conjugation and reduced π–π stacking both tend to localize the polarons, leading to stronger electrostatic interaction with the substrate and larger EICT−. The resistance of the energy levels to modification by thermal annealing in addition to the morphological stability will contribute to higher thermal stability of the OSC. As displayed in the bottom of Fig. 2a, after post-exposure annealing, the frontier orbital structure becomes well-resolved again but slightly broadened, the latter being probably caused by the thermal annealing-induced modification of the intermolecular order, as we discussed above (Fig. S3, ESI†). EICT− is slightly increased (∼0.02 eV, within experimental error) and IP is slightly decreased (∼0.03 eV, again within experimental error), implying weak interaction between water molecules and o-IDTBR, i.e., no covalent bonding. The resistance of the o-IDTBR and p/m-ITIC to water vapor was further examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Fig. 2d, thermal annealing treatment of the water vapor exposed o-IDTBR film produces no new features nor any chemical shifts in the C1s, O1s, N1s and S2p core level spectra, and the spectra overlap with that of the pristine film (nearly) completely. None of the XPS C(1s), N(1s), S(2p), and O(1s) core level spectra of p-ITIC show chemical shifts nor any new features before and after water vapor exposure. Based on the above experimental results, it is clear that the three NFAs are stable when they are exposed to water vapor, and the water molecules absorbed into the films can be removed by thermal annealing. The stability of the NFAs to water vapor is higher than the stability of fullerenes as the latter undergo chemical interaction and degrade quickly.16
We next examined the effect of O2 gas on pristine films of o-IDTBR and p/m-ITIC. Fig. 3a depicts the UPS spectra evolution of o-ITDBR. With the increase in oxygen exposure time from 30 minutes to 200 minutes, the Φo-IDTBR/Al and hence o-IDTBR EICT− increases from 3.94 eV to 4.17 eV. The peak at ∼2.7 eV bleaches upon O2 exposure and disappears completely after 60 minutes exposure. The frontier electronic structure feature also disappears gradually, with the tail extending further towards the Fermi level. All of this indicates strong interaction between o-IDTBR and the O2 molecules. When the exposure time is extended to 10 hours, the EICT− increases to 4.43 eV, at which it stabilizes. At the same time, the π-band edge feature disappears completely. In order to show the evolution of the IP during exposure of oxygen, the UPS spectra are aligned at high binding energy (Fig. S4a, ESI†). The IP nearly stays constant, but bleaching of the HOMO signal occurs, which completed after 200 minutes. The IP hence becomes difficult to be identified with precision at long exposure times. When the same process is applied to p/m-ITIC films, similar trends are observed, as shown in Fig. 3b and c. With the increase in exposure time from 30 minutes to 360 minutes, the EICT− of p-ITIC increases by 0.12 eV (from 4.20 eV to 4.32 eV). The second peak near 2.6 eV disappears and the originally sharp well-resolved peak of the frontier electronic structure bleaches until it almost disappears. The IP stays constant, but complete bleaching of the frontier signal occurs at long exposure times (Fig. S4b, ESI†). For m-ITIC (Fig. 3c), the vacuum upshifts to around 0.13 eV on increasing the O2 exposure time from 30 minutes to 300 minutes, i.e., EICT− increases ∼0.13 eV; also, the second frontier peak disappears. The frontier occupied feature also reduces gradually, almost fully disappearing after 400 minutes of exposure. The IP stays constant, but complete bleaching of the frontier signal also occurs in this case at long exposure times (Fig. S4c, ESI†). Thus, the evolution of the electronic structure of the three NFAs upon O2 exposure is similar, but the modification of the pinning energies in p/m-ITIC is not as rapid or large as for o-IDTBR. The effect of the molecule additive TCNQ on the degradation was tested, as filling of voids in organic films may reduce oxygen-species-induced degradation.40 However, the degradation speed shows no difference, indicating that TCNQ cannot inhibit the damage of oxygen on the energy level alignment and electronic structure in the NFA films, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). In order to probe the interaction strength between oxygen and NFAs, post-exposure heating of the samples was performed. As displayed in Fig. 4, after annealing of oxygen-exposed o-IDTBR films, the Φo-ITBR/Al decreases, but does not recover to the original value of the pristine films. Φo-IDTBR/Al increases to 4.39 eV from 3.94 eV due to oxygen exposure and decreases down to 4.14 eV after post-exposure annealing of the films. The frontier occupied feature reappears, but does not recover its original shape completely. The observed effects cannot be caused purely by the thermal annealing-induced modification of the molecular order, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), because the Φo-IDTBR/Al is constant after thermal annealing of the pristine films and the signal from the frontier electronic structure is only broadened slightly. Similar to o-IDTBR, the signal from the frontier electronic structure of oxygen-exposed p-/m-ITIC films does not fully recover to the pristine case after post-exposure annealing treatment. The Φp-ITIC/Al does not decrease; instead, it further increased by the heat treatment. For m-ITIC, there is a decrease in Φm-ITIC/Al after heat treatment, as shown in Fig. 4c, although full recovery is not noted. Overall, the effects induced by O2 exposure are smaller for p/m-ITIC/Al than o-IDTBR/Al. Moreover, as noted, the NFAs studied herein reacted differently to O2 exposure than the fullerene acceptors under the same conditions. When fullerene is exposed to oxygen, oxygen interacts with fullerene, leading to a rapid Φfullerene/Al decrease in Φfullerene/Al, but the frontier electronic structure is not affected.16 Furthermore, the decreased Φfullerene/Al can recover completely after thermal annealing, indicating a weak interaction between O2 and the fullerene cage.16 For all of the NFAs studied herein, the signal from the frontier electronic structure does not recover completely, indicating stronger interaction with oxygen. We can observe that the XPS core level features shift to lower binding energy for o-IDTBR after oxygen exposure, in agreement with the trend for UPS measurement. When the spectra were normalized to vacuum level, the core level features go back approximately to the original position with a slight shift (∼0.1 eV) to higher binding energy. The XPS core level binding energy of p-ITIC remains constant and the signals of N1s and O1s are only slightly broadened, as shown in Fig. 4(e and f), respectively.
 Fig. 3  (a–c) UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC under oxygen exposure. 
 Fig. 4  UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR/Al and p/m-ITIC (a–c) under oxygen exposure (d) under water vapor and oxygen exposure. (e and f) XPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR/Al and p-ITIC under oxygen exposure. 
Finally, we probe the combined exposure to water vapor and oxygen of o-IDTBR. The speed of degradation is reduced, as seen from the UPS spectra in Fig. 4d, initially following the trend of water vapor exposure, but for prolonged exposure (>24 h), the oxygen gas exposure type behavior appears. The post-exposure annealing also follows the oxygen exposure trend, suggesting that absorbed water acts as a “blocker”, slowing down O2 diffusion/interaction, but does not fully prevent it.
In terms of the degradation induced by water vapor and oxygen, the NFAs and fullerene acceptors are different, and the NFAs show significantly higher resistance to water vapor but slightly less resistance to oxygen. It is possible that water molecules form hydrogen bonds or weakly hybridize with the conjugated molecules,37,40,42 inducing energetic and physical disorder in the films, which makes the signal of the frontier electronic structure in UPS spectra less well-resolved, as observed in the figure. The more rigid backbone of the p/m-ITIC should make them less sensitive to this effect as compared to o-IDTBR, as observed. The original electronic structure can be recovered when the water vapor-exposed films are heated, indicating weak interactions that in fact may be blocked via insertion of molecule additives, as demonstrated in organic field effect transistors (OFET).40 The irreversible change under oxygen exposure unlike fullerenes16 indicates that the interaction between NFAs and oxygen is stronger. A shift to a deeper LUMO caused by ozone or hydroxide reactions can lead to an increase in Φorg./Al, but it should be excluded in this study because our experiments were performed in darkness and in situ. The oxygen molecules however can attach to several positions by forming non-covalent bonds to sites on the aromatic rings (Fig. S5, ESI†).39,52 The trends of HOMO and LUMO evolution of NFAs were calculated with one to three oxygen molecules at different positions with intermolecular distance of the order of 3.4 Å.36 In all cases, both HOMO and LUMO levels are pushed deeper, as shown in Table S2 (ESI†). When the oxygen molecule is attached to the terminal aromatic rings, the HOMO levels are less affected as the end aromatic rings contribute little to the HOMO distribution (Fig. S1, ESI†). The LUMO levels are more easily influenced by the attachment of O2 because the contribution of the end and middle aromatic to the LUMO levels is comparable. The deeper LUMO levels can make the pinning energy larger, which is in accordance with the trend deduced from the UPS spectra where EICT− indeed becomes larger with the increase in O2 exposure time. The HOMO level is pushed deeper but the variation is slow, so the IP deduced from the onset remains constant over a short time. Another factor contributing to the increase in the pinning energy is the molecular order at interfaces. The introduction of the oxygen molecules will cause conformational changes of the NFAs because the dihedral between terminal and middle backbone can be changed (Fig. S6, S7 and Table S3, ESI†); hence, the polaron tends to be more localized when the intramolecular planarity decreased. When the films are exposed to water vapor and oxygen at the same time, we suggest that the interaction sites are occupied by water molecules first and the more harmful oxygen interaction is thus hindered/slowed,37,40,42 similar to that observed in OFET films.40 It has been suggested that the formation of hydrogen-bonded water–oxygen complexes can prevent water or oxygen from interacting directly with the semiconductor,42 which could be used to explain the “oxygen-passivating” effect of water vapor in this study. Another explanation is that the interaction between oxygen and NFAs is stronger compared to water vapor, as we observed during the experiments. We speculate that the interaction process between water vapor and the semiconductor is a fast kinetic process, and the interaction process between oxygen and the semiconductor is a slow thermodynamic process. Hence, water vapor interacts with the semiconductor first but the final product i.e., oxygen-semiconductor is more stable. Finally, though UV-resistance is probably not an important issue as noted, high resistance of p-ITIC to UV-illumination was also observed, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†).
Conclusions
In conclusion, we present the effects of three common factors on frontier electronic structure and energy level alignment of organic semiconductor films, namely, water vapor, oxygen gas, and thermal stress that usually lead to degradation of organic semiconductors and changes in energy level alignment. Upon exposure of water vapor, both EICT− and IP of NFAs were hardly affected by water vapor and the HOMO properties changed slowly, but the effect can be removed by thermal annealing, indicating weak interaction between NFAs and water vapor. The results reveal that NFAs o-IDTBR and p/m-ITIC show more tolerance to water vapor, which is a significant advantage compared to the typically used fullerene acceptors that undergo irreversible chemical change. The WF increases under oxygen gas exposure for all these three molecules because the LUMO was pushed to a deeper level and the molecular order of the grain edge was changed. The HOMO feature is extensively broadened and bleached gradually, but the IP appears the same before the HOMO is bleached completely because the interaction between O2 and NFAs push the HOMO deeper. The rigidity of the NFAs will decrease the oxygen effect on energy levels because of the less conformational difference between O2-NFAs and pristine NFAs. The degradation under oxygen exposure is partially reversible after thermal annealing. Under air atmosphere, water vapor plays an oxygen-passivating role and the degradation speed is decreased because of the stronger interaction between oxygen and NFAs in addition to formation of hydrogen-bonded water–oxygen complexes. During the thermal annealing process, the energy levels are affected due to changes in conformation and molecular order, but recover after cooling to room temperature, showing resistance to thermal stress. The findings in this study suggest that the stability of active layers involving NFAs in the dark will be enhanced compared to fullerene-based OPV devices with the same polymer donors.50
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The work was financed by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation project “Tail of the Sun”, by the Swedish Research Council (project grant no. 2016-05498), by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research SE13-0060, by the Ministry of Science and Technology (no. 2016YFA0200700), by the NSFC (21504066, 21534003), by the Swedish Energy Agency (grant. no. 34142) E and by the Swedish Government Strategic Research Area in Materials Science on Functional Materials at Linköping University (Faculty Grant SFO Mat LiU no. 2009 00971). C. W. thanks the China Scholarship Council for a stipend.
Notes and references
H. J. Bin, Z. G. Zhang, L. Gao, S. S. Chen, L. Zhong, L. W. Xue, C. Yang and Y. F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4657–4664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Cheng, S. H. Yang and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. T. Boudreault, A. Najari and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 456–469 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Wang, W. Mammo and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1801–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, W. H. Chang and Y. Yang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, M. T. Trinh, R. S. Chen, G. E. Purdum, P. P. Khlyabich, M. Sezen, S. Oh, H. M. Zhu, B. Fowler, B. Y. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Y. Nam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. T. Black, M. L. Steigerwald, Y. L. Loo, F. Ng, X. Y. Zhu and C. Nuckolls, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Lin, Q. He, F. W. Zhao, L. J. Huo, J. Q. Mai, X. H. Lu, C. J. Su, T. F. Li, J. Y. Wang, J. S. Zhu, Y. M. Sun, C. R. Wang and X. W. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, H. Y. Li, B. A. E. Courtright, S. Subramaniyan and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 124–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wu, D. L. Zhao, A. M. Schneider, W. Chen and L. P. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7248–7251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Liao, H. J. Jhuo, Y. S. Cheng and S. A. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Liao, H. J. Jhuo, P. N. Yeh, Y. S. Cheng, Y. L. Li, Y. H. Lee, S. Sharma and S. A. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. B. Wu, Y. L. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vohra, K. Kawashima, T. Kakara, T. Koganezawa, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and H. Murata, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, J. B. Zhao, Z. K. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. W. Hu, K. Jiang, H. R. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5295 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Y. Bao, X. J. Liu, S. Braun and M. Fahlman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301272 CrossRef .
I. E. Brumboiu, L. Ericsson, R. Hansson, E. Moons, O. Eriksson and B. Brena, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 054306 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Anselmo, A. Dzwilewski, K. Svensson and E. Moons, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 652, 220–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Cheng, A. Pascoe, F. Huang and Y. Peng, Nature, 2016, 539, 488–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. W. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Lin, J. Y. Wang, Z. G. Zhang, H. T. Bai, Y. F. Li, D. B. Zhu and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Che, Y. X. Li, Y. Qu and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 422–427 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Xiao, L. M. Ding and J. Z. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 340–342 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Meng, Y. M. Zhang, X. J. Wan, C. X. Li, X. Zhang, Y. B. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. M. Ding, R. X. Xia, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. S. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chambon, A. Rivaton, J. L. Gardette and M. Firon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 394–398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
M. O. Reese, A. M. Nardes, B. L. Rupert, R. E. Larsen, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef PubMed .
J. U. Lee, J. W. Jung, J. W. Jo and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24265–24283 RSC .
S. Savagatrup, A. D. Printz, T. F. O'Connor, A. V. Zaretski, D. Rodriquez, E. J. Sawyer, K. M. Rajan, R. I. Acosta, S. E. Root and D. J. Lipomi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 55–80 RSC .
P. Cheng and X. W. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2544–2582 RSC .
Y. K. Yang, Z. G. Zhang, H. J. Bin, S. S. Chen, L. Gao, L. W. Xue, C. Yang and Y. F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15011–15018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Wang, X. F. Xu, W. Zhang, S. Ben Dkhil, X. Y. Meng, X. J. Liu, O. Margeat, A. Yartsev, W. Ma, J. Ackermann, E. G. Wang and M. Fahlman, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C. H. Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. R. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usta, C. Risko, Z. M. Wang, H. Huang, M. K. Deliomeroglu, A. Zhukhovitskiy, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5586–5608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Granucci and M. Persico, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 205, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. Xing, M. Fahlman, M. Logdlund, D. A. dosSantos, V. Parente, R. Lazzaroni, J. L. Bredas, R. W. Gymer and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 971–974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. Xing and N. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Di Motta, F. Negri and R. Friedlein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10054–10057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nikolka, I. Nasrallah, B. Rose, M. K. Ravva, K. Broch, A. Sadhanala, D. Harkin, J. Charmet, M. Hurhangee, A. Brown, S. Illig, P. Too, J. Jongman, I. McCulloch, J. L. Bredas and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Nicolai, M. Kuik, G. A. H. Wetzelaer, B. de Boer, C. Campbell, C. Risko, J. L. Bredas and P. W. M. Blom, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 882–887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1450–1472 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fahlman, A. Crispin, X. Crispin, S. K. M. Henze, M. P. de Jong, W. Osikowicz, C. Tengstedt and W. R. Salaneck, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 183202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bokdam, D. Cakir and G. Brocks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113303 CrossRef .
L. Ley, Y. Smets, C. I. Pakes and J. Ristein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 794–805 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oehzelt, N. Koch and G. Heimel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Bao, O. Sandberg, D. Dagnelund, S. Sanden, S. Braun, H. Aarnio, X. J. Liu, W. M. M. Chen, R. Osterbacka and M. Fahlman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6309–6316 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Ouyang, X. Xu, S. Braun, X. Liu and M. Fahlman, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800122 CrossRef .
D. Baran, R. S. Ashraf, D. A. Hanifi, M. Abdelsamie, N. Gasparini, J. A. Rohr, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, S. Lockett, M. Neophytou, C. J. Emmott, J. Nelson, C. J. Brabec, A. Amassian, A. Salleo, T. Kirchartz, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aarnio, P. Sehati, S. Braun, M. Nyman, M. P. de Jong, M. Fahlman and R. Osterbacka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 792–797 CrossRef CAS .
R. Di Pietro, D. Fazzi, T. B. Kehoe and H. Sirringhaus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14877–14889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc05475d‡ Present address: Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia, Tarragona, 43007 Spain.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) UPS spectra of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC on aluminum substrates. (b) Illustration of energy level alignment between aluminum and NFAs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC under water vapor exposure. (d) XPS S2p, C1s, N1s, and O1s core level spectra of pristine and water exposed annealing o-IDTBR (e) XPS S2p, C1s, N1s, and O1s core level spectra of pristine and water exposed p-ITIC films.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR, p/m-ITIC under oxygen exposure.	 

 	Fig. 4  UPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR/Al and p/m-ITIC (a–c) under oxygen exposure (d) under water vapor and oxygen exposure. (e and f) XPS spectra evolution of o-IDTBR/Al and p-ITIC under oxygen exposure.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc05475d
‡ Present address: Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia, Tarragona, 43007 Spain.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
