Au nanoparticle-embedded, nitrogen-deficient hollow mesoporous carbon nitride spheres for nitrogen photofixation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03793A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03793A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16218-16231Au nanoparticle-embedded, nitrogen-deficient hollow mesoporous carbon nitride spheres for nitrogen photofixation†

        
          
            Yanzhen 
            Guo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Yang‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Donghai 
            Wu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Haoyuan 
            Bai
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhi 
            Yang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jianfang 
            Wang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Baocheng 
            Yang
          
        
      c
aLaboratory of Thin Film and Microfabrication (Ministry of Education), Department of Micro/Nano Electronics, School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: zhiyang@sjtu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk
cHenan Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanocomposites and Applications, Institute of Nanostructured Functional Materials, Huanghe Science and Technology College, Zhengzhou 450006, China
Received 
      7th April 2020
    , Accepted 19th May 2020First published on 19th May 2020AbstractAmmonia, one of the most important chemicals and an efficient energy carrier, is industrially synthesized by the energy-intensive Haber–Bosch process. Photocatalytic nitrogen fixation under ambient conditions provides an intriguing approach for the conversion of atmospheric dinitrogen into ammonia. Herein we report a plasmonic hybrid catalyst composed of Au nanoparticles uniformly embedded in the mesopores of nitrogen-deficient hollow carbon nitride spheres for efficient nitrogen photofixation. The nitrogen vacancies in the carbon nitride spheres, serving as the sites for nitrogen chemisorption and activation, capture photoexcited electrons originating from the carbon nitride spheres and the plasmon resonance of the embedded Au nanoparticles for the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia. The designed structure can maximize the utilization efficiency of the plasmonic effect of the Au nanoparticles, as well as the nitrogen activation effect of the nitrogen vacancies in the carbon nitride spheres, therefore promoting the photoreduction of nitrogen. The optima Au-embedded carbon nitride spheres achieve an ammonia production rate of 783.4 μmol h−1 gcat−1 under visible light. The interfacial plasmon-induced charge separation endows the hybrid photocatalyst with the capability of simultaneous production of ammonia and oxygen with a solar-to-ammonia conversion efficiency of 0.032% under simulated sunlight.
1. Introduction
Ammonia, as one of the most common forms of nitrogen in aquatic systems, is not only an important chemical in agriculture and industry for the synthesis of nitrogenous compounds, especially fertilizers,1–4 but also a potential hydrogen carrier owing to its high hydrogen content (17.6 wt%) and low liquefying pressure (∼8 atm).5,6 Atmospheric dinitrogen can be used as a source to produce ammonia. However, the fixation of N2 to NH3 is challenging due to its strong and nonpolar NN bond,1,2 with a bonding energy of 945 kJ mol−1. The industrial Haber–Bosch process for NH3 production, which is carried out using an iron-based heterogeneous catalyst through a dissociative mechanism involving the coactivation of H2 and N2, has led to dramatic changes in the way food is produced. The impact of the Haber–Bosch process is underscored by the fact that about 50% of the N atoms in humans today originate from the industrial process.7,8 However, the process is operated at a high temperature of ∼400 °C and pressure of ∼100 atm, consuming ∼1–2% of the annual energy output from around the world.1 The energy-intensive nature of the Haber–Bosch process and its associated high CO2 emission have spurred recent renewed interest in finding more sustainable and environmentally benign alternative approaches owing to the concerns related to the consumption of fossil fuels and global climate change.7
Nitrogen photofixation with particulate semiconductors is a promising strategy for green and sustainable NH3 production, because the photocatalytic approach employs water as the reducing agent and solvent and solar energy as the driving force.9–14 The NN bond can be readily weakened and activated by photogenerated energetic electrons if N2 molecules are well chemisorbed on active sites.15–19 The active sites for N2 chemisorption act as the bridge for electrons being transferred from the photocatalyst into the antibonding orbitals of the adsorbed N2 molecules. Oxygen vacancies9,20–23 and unsaturated metal atoms10,24 in oxides and nitrogen vacancies (NVs) in nitrides,25 particularly in visible-light-responsive polymeric carbon nitride (PCN) photocatalysts,26–29 have been employed as active sites for N2 chemisorption in nitrogen fixation. In comparison with oxygen vacancies, NVs can provide suitable chemical adsorption sites to accommodate N2 molecules because the size-matched defect cavity can modulate the delocalized π electrons through electron redistribution to achieve the activation of dinitrogen.29 The NVs in two-dimensional W2N3 nanosheets have been reported to be active for electrochemical nitrogen reduction under ambient conditions.25 By virtue of the high nitrogen content in the backbone, PCN is a promising matrix to introduce NV defects for efficient N2 fixation. Dinitrogen molecules can be chemisorbed and activated on the NVs on PCN through the formation of a dinuclear end-on bound structure for spatial electron transfer. Upon activation, the bond length of the triple NN bond of the adsorbed N2 molecule is increased significantly, facilitating the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia.26 The presence of NVs makes PCN photocatalytically active for N2 reduction. In contrast, such photocatalytic activity has scarcely been observed on pristine PCN due to the lack of active sites.27,28 Nevertheless, the overall efficiency of N2 photofixation has still remained limited due to the low light harvesting capacity, rapid charge carrier recombination and weak interaction between photogenerated electrons and active sites for N2 chemisorption. A well-designed catalyst for efficient N2 photofixation, especially N2 conversion in aqueous solutions under mild conditions, is therefore still highly desired.
Nanostructure engineering is a well-acknowledged strategy for improving the performance of photocatalysts, because the architecture has a significant influence on the different steps of photocatalytic reactions.30–33 In particular, the unique hollow nanostructure endows photocatalysts with many fascinating characteristics for the photocatalytic process, including (i) enhancement of solar light harvesting, (ii) suppression of charge carrier recombination, (iii) possession of abundant active sites for redox reactions, and (iv) acceleration of surface reactions.33,34 The merits of hollow nanostructures can be further reinforced in mesoporous nanostructures because of the promotion of both the diffusion of reactants and products and the accessibility of reactive sites.35 The N2 photofixation performances are expected to be optimized if the active sites for N2 chemisorption are uniformly incorporated into hollow mesoporous shells of an appropriate thickness. In addition, the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effects of plasmonic nanoparticles, including the extension of light absorption to the long-wavelength range, hot electron injection and local electric field enhancement, have been employed to drive chemical reactions and/or improve the efficiency of ammonia synthesis.21,22,36,37 The apparent quantum efficiency of TiO2 with oxygen vacancies toward ammonia generation has been significantly improved to 0.82% at 550 nm through the decoration with plasmonic Au nanoparticles, which is 35 times that of bare TiO2 with oxygen vacancies.21 With the Au component employed as a light absorber, plasmonic AuRu core-antenna nanostructures have been reported to be able to efficiently catalyze the formation of ammonia at a rate of 101.4 μmol g−1 h−1 through a dissociative mechanism from N2 in pure water.37 Moreover, oxidation and reduction reactions can stoichiometrically occur at different sites through plasmon-induced charge carrier separation,16,38,39 which boosts the utilization of solar energy.
In this work, Au nanoparticle-embedded hollow mesoporous carbon nitride spheres (HCNSs) with abundant NVs are synthesized and used for N2 photofixation to produce ammonia. The NVs distributed in the thickness-variable carbon nitride shell adsorb N2 molecules and simultaneously serve as the trapping sites for photogenerated electrons for the subsequent activation and reduction of N2. The Au nanoparticles embedded in the mesopores of the HCNS shell can not only enhance the visible-light harvesting ability and generate hot electrons for N2 reduction, but also strongly inhibit the charge carrier recombination to induce the simultaneous occurrence of the oxidation and reduction reactions. The NVs in the HCNS nanostructure cooperatively interact with the embedded plasmonic Au nanoparticles, enabling the hybrid Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures to be a superior catalyst for N2 photofixation. The optimized Au/HCNS-NV sample with a shell thickness of 64 nm and containing 7.4 wt% Au exhibits an apparent quantum yield of 0.64% at 550 nm and a solar-to-ammonia conversion efficiency of 0.032% under simulated AM1.5G sunlight.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Preparation of the photocatalysts
The hybrid Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures were prepared in three steps (Fig. 1a): (i) preparation of the template by coating mesoporous silica on solid silica spheres; (ii) infiltration of cyanamide into the porous channels to prepare HCNS-NV; and (iii) formation of Au nanoparticles in the mesopores of HCNS-NV. The morphologies and inner structures of the as-synthesized samples were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The solid silica spheres, prepared according to the Stöber process40 and employed as the cores of the hard templates, are uniform in size (Fig. 1b) with an average diameter of 175 ± 15 nm (Fig. S1†). The mesostructured silica shell with a thickness ranging from ∼30 to ∼120 nm was coated on the solid silica spheres using cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) as a structure-directing agent (Fig. 1c, S2a and b†). The shell thickness can be readily varied by changing the amount of added CTAC and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) (Table S1†). After the removal of CTAC by calcining in air the solid silica nanospheres coated with the mesostructured silica layer, the core@shell nanostructures, are well maintained (Fig. S3†). The channels are clearly observable in the mesoporous shell, which is beneficial for the access of cyanamide and other adsorbates. The HCNS-NV samples were prepared by thermal condensation of cyanamide41 in the channels of the mesoporous silica shell and the subsequent removal of silica through HF etching (Fig. 1d). Notably, the shell thickness of HCNS-NV is strongly dependent on the thickness of the mesoporous silica shell (Fig. S2 and Table S1†). On the other hand, the hollow structures were found to partially collapse after the removal of the silica template when the shell is thinner than 22 nm.
 Fig. 1  Synthesis of the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process. The channels in the mesoporous silica shell after the removal of CTAC as well as after the embedding of Au nanoparticles are drawn only for illustration. (b) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the solid silica spheres. (c) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the solid silica spheres coated with the mesostructured silica layer with a thickness of 76.9 ± 3.4 nm. (d) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the HCNS-NV sample with a shell thickness of 64.1 ± 4.6 nm. (e) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure sample with a Au loading amount of 7.4 wt%. (f) High-magnification SEM image of Au/HCNS-NV obtained with the secondary electron detection mode. (g) High-magnification SEM image of Au/HCNS-NV obtained with the backscattered electron detection mode at the same position as that in (f). (h) HAADF-STEM image of a single Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure. (i) Elemental mapping images of the same Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure as in (h). The images have the same scale bar. 
The Au nanoparticles were embedded in the mesopores of the HCNS-NV shell by H2 reduction under alkaline conditions.42 The embedded Au amount in the nanostructures, being adjusted by the amount of the added Au precursor, can be estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements (Fig. S4†). The Au nanoparticles are invisible under SEM imaging (Fig. 1e, top) but clearly observable under TEM imaging (Fig. 1e, bottom). The number density of the Au nanoparticles embedded in the HCNS-NV nanostructures increases as the Au loading amount is increased (Fig. S5†). The Au nanoparticles are still individually and uniformly distributed in the mesoporous shell even when the Au loading amount is increased to 19.1 wt%. The size of the Au nanoparticles varies slightly with the Au loading amount. The average sizes of the Au nanoparticles are 2.4 ± 0.6, 5.0 ± 0.6, 4.8 ± 0.6 and 4.8 ± 0.6 nm for the Au/HCNS-NV samples loaded with Au at 3.7 wt%, 7.4 wt%, 12.9 wt% and 19.1 wt%, respectively (Fig. S6†).
To further observe the produced Au nanoparticles in the HCNS-NV shell, high-magnification SEM images obtained with the secondary and backscattered electron detection modes are displayed in Fig. 1f and g. No Au nanoparticles were seen under secondary electron detection, suggesting that most Au nanoparticles are inside the material (Fig. 1f). In contrast, a high contrast was observed between the Au nanoparticles and HCNS-NV under backscattered electron detection (Fig. 1g). These imaging results indicate that Au nanoparticles are successfully embedded in the mesopores of HCNS-NV. High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging and the corresponding elemental mapping further confirm the uniform distribution of Au nanoparticles in the HCNS-NV shell (Fig. 1h and i). The embedded Au nanoparticles are crystalline, as revealed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) imaging (Fig. S7†). Calcination in air was performed to reduce the number of NVs in the HCNS-NV sample. The hollow spherical nanostructure was well preserved even when the calcination time was extended to 10 h, revealing the thermally stable nature of the HCNS-NV sample (Fig. S8a and b†). The energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra indicate that the N/C ratio is increased from 1.39 for HCNS-NV to 1.72 for HCNS (Fig. S8c†), which provides evidence for the existence of nitrogen defects in the as-prepared sample. Elemental analysis was also conducted on the as-prepared and calcined samples. The N/C ratio shows a progressive increase from 1.383 to 1.468 as the calcination time is prolonged, suggesting that the number of NVs is gradually reduced and/or the C atoms are further lost in air (Table S2†). We also tried other methods to produce Au nanoparticles inside the mesopores of HCNS-NV. The Au precursor was driven into the mesopores using CH2Cl2 and then reduced under a 5 vol% H2/N2 flow, following a reported procedure.43 In addition, thermal decomposition and photoreduction were also carried out. All of these approaches failed to produce Au nanoparticles in the mesopores of HCNS-NV (Fig. S9†).
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns reveal the co-existence of the cubic Au phase (JCPDS no. 01-1174) and PCN (Fig. S10a†) in the Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples.44 A slight shift of the (002) peak towards the low-diffraction-angle direction from HCNS-NV to HCNS indicates a slightly loosened network of the conjugated system (Fig. S10b†).45 The average size of the confined cubic-phased Au nanoparticles in HCNS-NV can be estimated using the Scherrer equation, D = Kλ/(βcosθ), where D is the particle size, K is the Scherrer constant, λ is the wavelength of the X-rays, β is the full width at half maximum of the diffraction peak, (111) in our case, and θ is the corresponding diffraction angle.46,47 The estimated size is 6.4 nm, close to that obtained from the TEM images. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the Au-embedded HCNS-NV and HCNS samples are only slightly smaller than those of the corresponding samples without Au (Fig. S11†). The slightly reduced surface area of the Au-embedded samples is believed to be caused by the occupation of mesopores of the HCNS samples by the embedded Au nanoparticles.48 The preservation of the specific surface areas after the embedding of Au nanoparticles allows the active NV sites and the Au nanoparticles to be accessible by the reactant molecules as well as the product molecules to diffuse out. The pore size of the HCNS-NV sample peaks at ∼4 nm, with a long tail extending to the larger sizes (Fig. S11a,† inset). Such pores are believed to confine the growth of the Au nanoparticles, as suggested by the sizes estimated above from both TEM and XRD measurements. Fig. 2a shows the light absorption spectra of the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples. The HCNS-NV and HCNS samples exhibit strong absorption below a wavelength around 410 nm, which can be attributed to the bandgap absorption. The absorption tail beyond 410 nm towards the longer-wavelength direction can be ascribed to defects in the materials. The light absorption in this spectral region is believed to be enhanced by the hollow structure, because the multiple reflections within the hollow structure increase the effective path length for light absorption.41 Upon the embedding of Au nanoparticles inside the pores of the shell, a broad absorption peak, which arises from the LSPR of the Au nanoparticles, emerges around 600 nm. The plasmon excitation of the Au nanoparticles can provide additional photogenerated electrons that contribute to the reduction of N2, as demonstrated in recent plasmon-enhanced N2 photofixation studies.21,22,36 As a result, the introduction of Au nanoparticles can enhance the light absorption of the hybrid nanostructures in the visible range. The bandgaps of the HCNS-NV and HCNS samples, estimated from the Tauc plots (Fig. S12†), are nearly identical, suggesting that the calcination treatment does not change the bandgap.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of the photocatalysts. (a) Absorption spectra of the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples. (b) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS-NV. (c) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS. (d) EPR spectra of the four samples. (e) N2 TPD profiles of the HCNS-NV and HCNS samples. 
The N/C ratio of the as-prepared HCNS-NV sample is lower than that of the calcined HCNS one according to elemental analysis (Table S2†), indicating the nitrogen-deficient characteristics of the as-prepared sample. The nitrogen defects are believed to be generated during the thermal polymerization process under an Ar atmosphere. To examine the NVs and the chemical structure evolution from nitrogen-deficient HCNS-NV to air-calcined HCNS, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on the two samples. The high-resolution C 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS-NV in Fig. S13a† can be deconvoluted into three peaks at 288.3, 286.4 and 284.7 eV, which are associated with the N–CN coordination in the framework of PCN, C–NHx on the edges of the heptazine units and the adventitious hydrocarbons, respectively.49Fig. 2b shows the high-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS-NV. The spectrum can be deconvoluted into three peaks at 401.0, 400.0 and 398.8 eV, which can be assigned to the C–NC, N–C3 and NHx groups in the heptazine framework, respectively.49,50 For the HCNS sample, the binding energy peak associated with C–NC in the N 1s spectrum appears at 398.7 eV (Fig. 2c), which is a little lower than that observed from HCNS-NV. This is probably caused by the removal of the electron-withdrawing groups of CN (Fig. 2c).50,51 The Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were used as additional evidence for the removal of the CN group (Fig. S14†). The absorption peak at 2180 cm−1, corresponding to CN in HCNS-NV, almost disappears after the calcination treatment.50 The peak deconvolution results reveal that the fraction of the integral peak area of the C–NHx group in the total integral area of the C 1s spectrum and that of the NHx group in the N 1s spectrum are both increased from HCNS-NV to HCNS (Fig. 2b and c and S13†), suggesting that amine/imine groups are formed upon the removal of the CN groups. This speculation is further evidenced by the slightly intensified peak of NHx groups in the FTIR spectra (Fig. S14†). The integral area ratio between C–NC and NC3 is increased from 2.7 in HCNS-NV to 4.5 in HCNS, showing that the NVs are preferentially formed at the C–NC (two-coordinated N) site in HCNS-NV.26 Moreover, the fraction of the peak area of the N–CN group in the total area of the C 1s spectrum of HCNS-NV is reduced upon calcination in air, suggesting the loss of the two-coordinated C species. This loss is probably caused by the opening of the NV-adjacent s-triazine heterocycle during the calcination process. Based on the above results, the structural evolution from HCNS-NV to HCNS is proposed and presented in Fig. S15† according to previous reports.26,52 Three types of defects are believed to exist in the as-prepared HCNS-NV sample: (i) the NVs are preferentially generated in the two-coordinated N sites during the synthesis process; (ii) a small number of CN groups are concurrently formed in the tri-s-triazine rings; (iii) amine/imine groups are also formed at the edges of the heptazine units. Three structural changes occur upon the calcination treatment of the HCNS-NV sample to produce the HCNS sample: (i) the N2C-NVs are largely compensated by N2 molecules from air; (ii) the number of CN groups is reduced, which is accompanied by the formation of NHx groups; (iii) the two-coordinated C species are lost in air, leading to the opening of the adjacent s-triazine heterocycle.
Low-temperature electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra were recorded to evaluate the paramagnetic properties of the nitrogen-deficient HCNS-NV sample (Fig. 2d). The HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV samples exhibit stronger EPR signals than the HCNS and Au/HCNS ones. NVs have been reported to possess the ability of re-distributing extra electrons to the adjacent carbon atoms through the delocalized π-conjugated networks of polymeric carbon nitride.26 The stronger signal of the Lorentzian lines at g = 2.004 for the HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV samples can be ascribed to more unpaired electrons on the carbon atoms of the aromatic rings.26,53 The higher concentration of delocalized electrons in the polymeric skeleton is favorable for electron transfer to adsorbates during the catalytic process. Because the chemisorption and activation of N2 molecules is a prerequisite for the N2 reduction reaction, N2 temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) was employed to ascertain the N2 adsorption ability of the catalysts (Fig. 2e). The peak positioned at 130 °C originates from the desorption of physically adsorbed N2 molecules. The peaks centered around 370 and 400 °C for the HCNS and HCNS-NV samples are ascribed to the chemisorption of N2 molecules.54 The desorption peak of HCNS-NV is much stronger than that of HCNS, implying a superior N2 adsorption ability stemming from the existing NVs. The abundant NVs provide plentiful chemisorption and activation sites for N2 molecules, facilitating the reduction of N2 molecules by the electrons trapped at the NV sites.36
2.2. Photocatalytic N2 fixation
The photocatalytic N2 fixation experiments were carried out in N2-saturated water with light irradiation under ambient conditions, where methanol was used as an electron donor to consume the photogenerated holes. The amount of generated ammonia was determined using Nessler's method, for which the calibration relationship between the absorbance at 425 nm and the standard NH4+ concentration was pre-acquired and plotted in Fig. S16.† Prior to light irradiation, the catalyst suspension was continuously bubbled with N2 for 30 min to obtain a N2-saturated suspension. The ammonia concentration over the HCNS-NV samples with different shell thicknesses (HCNSx-NV, with x representing the thickness of the shell in nanometers) increases with the reaction time under both white light and visible light irradiation (Fig. 3a and b). The HCNS-NV with a shell thickness of 64 nm produces the highest amount of ammonia. The ammonia concentration reached 0.55 μmol mL−1 in 1 h under white light irradiation (Fig. 3a). However, the concentration is significantly reduced under visible light (Fig. 3b) due to the limited visible light absorption ability of the HCNSx-NV samples. Fig. 3c and d show clearly that the ammonia production rate first increases with increasing shell thicknesses, reaches the highest value at a shell thickness of 64 nm, and then decreases with a further increase in the shell thickness. The HCNS-NV sample with a shell thickness of 64 nm presents ammonia production rates of 1109.4 and 357.3 μmol h−1 gcat−1 under white and visible light, respectively. The variation trend of the ammonia generation rate with the shell thickness under ultraviolet (UV) light is similar to those obtained under white and visible light (Fig. 3e). The ammonia generation rate under UV light irradiation is the rate difference between those obtained under white light and visible light irradiation. The results demonstrate that the N2 photofixation activity strongly depends on the shell thickness, because the shell thickness determines the charge carrier transport ability of the catalyst55,56 and particularly affects the interplay of the total number of active sites on the outer/inner surface and in the mesopores with ease of access to the active sites.
 Fig. 3  Nitrogen photofixation over the HCNSx-NV samples with different shell thicknesses. (a) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured under white light irradiation. (b) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). (c) Ammonia production rates under white light. (d) Ammonia production rates under visible light. (e) Ammonia production rates under UV light. (f) Photocatalytic ammonia production rate and N/C ratio as functions of the calcination time for HCNS-NV with a shell thickness of 64 nm. The light irradiation in (a and b) was turned on at the zero time point. 
XRD and FTIR spectroscopy were employed to shed light on the relationship between the N2 photofixation activity and the shell thickness of the HCNSx-NV samples (Fig. S17†). The barely observable (100) planes in the XRD patterns (Fig. S17a†) of all of the five samples indicate the absence of the long-range in-plane aromatic structure order,26,51 suggesting the existence of nitrogen defects. The weak intensity of the (002) planes in HCNS64-NV can be ascribed to the reduced long-range order in atomic arrangements.51 The optimal NV concentration in HCNS64-NV can also be revealed by the strong peak intensity corresponding to the NH2 and CN groups in the FTIR spectra (Fig. S17b†). Notably, the HCNS22-NV sample shows no absorption at 2180 cm–1, but it still gives an ammonia generation rate of 364.9 μmol h−1 gcat−1 under white light, implying that the NV defects rather than the CN groups play a dominant role in N2 photofixation in our work. To evaluate the effect of the NV concentration on the N2 photofixation performance, the HCNS-NV sample with an optimal shell thickness of 64 nm was annealed in air for different periods of time. The N/C ratio increases with the calcination time (Fig. 3f), which has been discussed above (Fig. S8 and Table S2†). The ammonia generation rate of the calcined HCNS samples decreases with the prolonged calcination time, which is believed to be caused by the reduction in the number of NVs and/or the further loss of carbon atoms from the NV-adjacent heterocycles. Specifically, the HCNS sample annealed for 10 h in air exhibits an ammonia generation rate of 44.3 μmol h−1 gcat−1 under visible light, which is only 12.4% relative to that of HCNS-NV.
In comparison with HCNS-NV, the Au/HCNS-NV samples with different Au loading amounts exhibit enhanced N2 photofixation activities under visible light (Fig. 4a). The photocatalytic ammonia generation rates of the samples show a nearly volcano-shaped dependence on the Au loading amount (Fig. 4b). The Au/HCNS-NV sample with 7.4 wt% Au shows the highest ammonia generation rate of 783.4 μmol h−1 gcat−1, which is 2.2 times that of the HCNS-NV sample. The further increase in the Au loading amount results in a reduction in the N2 photofixation rate, which can probably be attributed to the weakening or inhibition of N2 adsorption at the NVs by the excessive Au nanoparticles.21 As shown in Fig. 4c, the N2 photofixation activity of Au/HCNS is clearly higher than that of HCNS, suggesting that the plasmon-enhanced light harvesting ability contributes to the enhanced N2 reduction efficiency. The ammonia concentrations of the four samples estimated by ion chromatography are slightly lower than those obtained by Nessler's method (Fig. S18†). The difference between the two methods is probably caused by the interference of methanol and/or its oxidation products,57–59 as discussed below. In both test methods, the Au/HCNS-NV sample shows the highest ammonia concentration after 1 h of irradiation, demonstrating the significance of the synergistic action between the plasmon resonance of the embedded Au nanoparticles and the NVs distributed in the shell in boosting the N2 photofixation efficiency. The control experiments that lacked N2 or light did not produce ammonia (Fig. S19a†), suggesting that the nitrogen element in the produced ammonia comes from adsorbed N2 molecules and that the catalytic reaction is light-driven.26,27 There was a study showing that PCN can serve as a nitrogen source for ammonia generation, which is accompanied by the cyclic regeneration of the CN groups.51 However, the PCN sample in that study was synthesized with the assistance of KOH. In our work, the HCNS-NV samples were prepared at a raised temperature in an Ar atmosphere. In addition, previous studies have shown that ammonia is mainly generated at the NV sites when PCN is used as the photocatalyst for N2 photofixation,26–28 which we believe is also the case in our work. To further verify the nitrogen source for ammonia generation, isotope labeling experiments were carried out using Ar, 14N2 and 15N2 as the feed gases. No detectable ammonia signal was observed in the 1H NMR spectrum of the reaction solution collected under an Ar atmosphere (Fig. S19b†). Triplet peaks and doublet peaks associated with 14NH4+ and 15NH4+ were observed in the 1H NMR spectra of the solutions when 14N2 and 15N2 were used as the feed gases, respectively. No signal corresponding to 14NH4+ was observed in the 1H NMR spectrum obtained under a 15N2 atmosphere, confirming that ammonia originates from nitrogen gas rather than carbon nitride. On the other hand, the selectivity of the N2 reduction reaction over the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction has so far remained challenging and crucial for improving the N2 fixation efficiency in both photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.29,60,61 Hydrogen has been reported to be concurrently produced in previous studies with a hybrid photocatalyst made of CdS nanorods and nitrogenase MoFe proteins and an all-inorganic photocatalyst made of oxygen-deficient TiO2 nanosheets decorated with Au nanocrystals.18,21 To evaluate whether H2 is produced with the Au/HCNS-NV catalyst, the reactor was evacuated, bubbled with N2, and then sealed. Upon irradiation for 1 h under visible light, H2 was found to be produced, with its amount being about one third that of ammonia (Fig. S19c†), indicating the presence of competition between the nitrogen reduction and hydrogen evolution reactions. The water-soluble ammonia can be readily separated from the gaseous H2, which is favorable for the separate collection of both ammonia and hydrogen gas. When N2 was replaced with Ar, the amount of generated H2 was significantly improved while ammonia was not detectable (Fig. S19d†), suggesting that Au/HCNS-NV can also be used as an efficient photocatalyst for H2 evolution.62
 Fig. 4  N2 photofixation with the Au-loaded photocatalysts. (a) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured for the Au/HCNS-NV samples with different Au loading amounts under visible light (λ > 420 nm). (b) Effect of the Au loading amount on the photocatalytic ammonia production rate. (c) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured for the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples under visible light. (d) Estimated AQYs (purple circles) for N2 photofixation with Au/HCNS-NV under monochromatic light irradiation, plotted together with its absorption spectrum (red line). (e) Amounts of the products formed in pure water under AM1.5G light irradiation. The light irradiation in (a and c) was turned on at the zero time point. 
Other N-containing products were detected with diffuse-reflectance FTIR (DR-FTIR) by blowing the reaction products into the diffuse reflectance cell (Fig. S20†). With reference to pure water, two additional sets of absorption peaks were observed in the FTIR spectrum of the aqueous products. The absorption peaks positioned around 2855 and 2950 cm−1 can be ascribed to the characteristic absorption of NH4+ ions.21,23,24 The band at 1030 cm−1 can be attributed to the adsorbed ammonia molecules.9,36 No absorption bands corresponding to the other N-containing products (for example, N2H4) were detected, indicating that NH3 is the main product of N2 reduction. The significance of the embedding of Au nanoparticles within the mesopores towards ammonia generation was further evaluated by comparing the N2 photofixation performance of Au/HCNS-NV with those of the samples prepared by the other methods. In these samples, the Au nanoparticles are not embedded inside the mesopores or are only partially embedded. The Au/HCNS-NV sample shows the highest ammonia generation rate among the four hybrid nanostructure samples (Fig. S21†), while the nanostructures prepared by thermal decomposition show the lowest activity. The difference in the N2 photofixation activity can be attributed to two major reasons. First, the embedded Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures can take advantage of the synergistic action between the N2-activation effect of the NVs and the LSPR effect of the Au nanoparticles, while the Au nanoparticles for the other samples are not embedded inside the mesopores or are only partially embedded. Second, the size of the Au nanoparticles, which affects their plasmon resonance properties,63 has been found to play an important role in the photocatalytic activity.44 The largest size of the non-embedded Au nanoparticles prepared by thermal decomposition is believed to result in the lowest ammonia generation rate. The substitution of aprotic CH3CN for H2O as a solvent nearly quenched the activity of Au/HCNS-NV for ammonia production (Fig. S22a†), suggesting that H2O is the main proton source for ammonia evolution. The pH value of the dispersion was further adjusted by HCl and NaOH solutions to examine the effect of the protonation ability on the N2 photofixation activity. The isoelectric point of Au/HCNS-NV was estimated to be around 6.5 by measuring its zeta potentials under different pH values (Fig. S22b and c†). The ammonia production rate increases as the pH value of the reaction system is reduced (Fig. S22c†), as the decrease of the pH value facilitates the availability of protons on the surface of the photocatalyst.64
To evaluate the light utilization efficiency, the wavelength-dependent apparent quantum yields (AQYs) of Au/HCNS-NV were estimated by measuring the amount of ammonia generated under monochromatic light irradiation (Fig. 4d). The AQYs agree well with the absorption spectrum of Au/HCNS-NV, indicating that ammonia generation is driven by absorbed light. Specifically, the AQY plot shows a peak at 550 nm with an AQY value of 0.64% owing to the enhanced light harvesting capability arising from the embedding of Au nanoparticles. Our AQY value is higher than those obtained in many other studies at this wavelength (Tables S3 and S4†). The N2 photofixation activity of Au/HCNS-NV was also evaluated under simulated AM1.5G solar light irradiation in a sealed reactor filled with N2 (Fig. S23†). The amount of generated ammonia shows a slight reduction in the second 30 min as compared with the first 30 min (Fig. S23a†), which is believed to be caused by the insufficient amount of N2 in the system.23 H2 was simultaneously observed in the gas phase during the process. The liquid oxidation products of methanol were detected using 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra. No chemical shift assigned to formaldehyde was observed even when the irradiation time was prolonged to 6 h (Fig. S23b and c†). The absence of formaldehyde prevents its interference in ammonia detection.57,58 A peak at 8.2 ppm, which can be ascribed to formic acid, appeared when the reaction system was irradiated for 6 h. In addition, a trace amount of carbon dioxide was detected in the reaction system due to the more negative redox potential of CO2/CH3OH (0.03 V vs. the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) at pH = 0) compared to those of HCHO/CH3OH (0.1 V vs. NHE at pH = 0) and HCOOH/CH3OH (0.23 V vs. NHE at pH = 0).65 The result suggests that methanol is mainly oxidized to formic acid and carbon dioxide by photogenerated holes. The solar-to-ammonia (STA) efficiency of Au/HCNS-NV was determined by subjecting the catalyst in pure water to simulated AM1.5G solar light irradiation. O2 and H2 were simultaneously formed during the N2 fixation process in the sealed system, where the amount of O2 was the total stoichiometric amount of NH3 and H2. The calculated STA efficiency is 0.032% in 1 h, again higher than many reported values for N2 photofixation (Table S3†). The lower solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of 0.01% than the STA efficiency indicates the favorable selectivity of the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures for ammonia generation.
The stability of the HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV photocatalysts was evaluated by cyclic tests. As shown in Fig. 5a, the ammonia generation activity of HCNS-NV was well maintained after four cycles of testing due to the well-retained mesoporous hollow spherical structure and the stable characteristics of the nitrogen vacancies (Fig. 5b). The Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures show slightly decreased N2 photofixation activities during the cyclic tests, which is believed to be caused by the slight aggregation of the Au nanoparticles (Fig. 5c). The stability of the photocatalysts can be further confirmed by the almost unchanged FTIR and XPS spectra between the fresh and used samples (Fig. S24†).
 Fig. 5  Stability tests. (a) Cyclic tests for N2 photofixation with HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV. (b) TEM image of HCNS-NV after the fourth cycle of testing. (c) TEM image of Au/HCNS-NV after the fourth cycle of testing. 
2.3. Mechanism of nitrogen photofixation
Effective adsorption and activation of N2 molecules is pivotal for N2 photofixation. DFT calculations were therefore performed to investigate the interaction between N2 molecules and the catalysts (Fig. 6). Nitrogen molecules can be well captured and adsorbed by the NVs at the N2C site of PCN in the dinuclear end-on coordination mode, which is believed to also occur for our HCNS-NV nanostructure. This coordination configuration is similar to that of N2 coordinated to metal complexes (Fig. 6a).26,66 The adsorption facilitates the further activation of the N2 molecules. In contrast, the weak adsorption between N2 molecules and PCN at the openings of two s-triazine heterocycles, which is believed to occur for the calcined HCNS nanostructure with either the carbon atoms lost or the number of NVs reduced, fails to activate the N2 molecules (Fig. 6b and c). The charge density difference was calculated and is displayed in the lower row of Fig. 6a to evaluate the electron transfer behavior between the NVs and the adsorbed N2 molecules. The electrons at the NV site-adjacent carbon atoms are transferred to the captured N2 molecule, leading to the activation of the NN triple bond.2,26 As a result, the bond length of NN is increased to 1.263 Å, much longer than the 1.114 Å for free N2. Remarkably, the bond length of the NN triple bond activated by the NVs is even larger than the 1.173 Å bond activated by the oxygen vacancies in anatase TiO2 (Fig. S25†). The strong activation of N2 molecules by the NVs plays a crucial role in the superior N2 photofixation performance of the HCNS-NV samples.
 Fig. 6  Chemisorption of N2 molecules on PCN with different chemical structures. (a) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the middle row) and charge density difference (bottom row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed at a N2C-NV on the surface of PCN. The yellow and light blue isosurfaces represent charge accumulation and depletion in space, respectively. The isovalue is 0.0025 e Å−3. (b) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the lower row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed on the surface of PCN at the openings of two s-triazine heterocycles. (c) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the lower row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed on the surface of pristine PCN. 
To confirm the synergistic effect of the Au nanoparticles and the NVs in boosting the N2 photofixation performance, photocurrent measurements were conducted on the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples under chopped visible light irradiation in both Ar and N2 atmospheres (Fig. 7a). For the electrode prepared from HCNS-NV, the photocurrent signal is lower in N2 than in Ar, while no clear change is observable for the electrode prepared from HCNS. In the presence of the embedded Au nanoparticles, the photocurrents of both Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS are enhanced in Ar due to the LSPR effect of the Au nanoparticles. There is no clear change in photocurrent for the Au/HCNS electrode when the Ar atmosphere is replaced with N2, which is similar to the case of HCNS, implying that the electron transfer from HCNS to N2 molecules is negligible. The reduced photocurrent intensities for the HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV samples in N2 with respect to those in Ar can be ascribed to the electron consumption by activated N2 molecules at the NV sites. The electronic band structures of HCNS-NV and HCNS were further measured and are shown in Fig. 7b for a deeper understanding of the N2 reduction reaction. The conduction bands (CBs) of the samples, which were obtained from the electrochemical Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. S26†), are more negative than the redox potential of N2/NH3 (0.06 V vs. NHE at pH = 0). This is thermodynamically favorable for the reduction of N2 molecules. By referring to the bandgaps of the catalysts in Fig. S12,† the positions of the valance bands (VBs) can also be determined. The VBs of HCNS-NV and HCNS are, respectively, 2.11 and 2.06 V vs. NHE at pH = 0, implying that the photoexcited holes left in the VB can drive O2 evolution. The photoluminescence spectra of the four samples indicate that the introduction of Au nanoparticles can effectively inhibit the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. S27†), which is beneficial for the simultaneous evolution of ammonia and oxygen.39 Based on all of these results, the plasmon-enhanced N2 photofixation process over the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure is illustrated schematically in Fig. 7c. The NVs on the surface of HCNS-NV chemisorb free N2 molecules. At the same time, the NVs with their localized electronic states typically lying below the CB also serve as the trapping sites for the electrons photogenerated from HCNS-NV itself and the plasmon excitation of the Au nanoparticles. The N2 molecules adsorbed at the NV sites are further effectively activated and finally reduced by the captured photogenerated electrons. The charge carrier separation efficiency is significantly improved by the Au nanoparticles, facilitating the simultaneous occurrence of the oxidation and reduction reactions. In this scenario, the optimal Au/HCNS-NV sample shows a high STA efficiency of 0.032% under simulated solar light irradiation.
 Fig. 7  Proposed mechanism for plasmon-enhanced N2 fixation. (a) Photocurrent measurements of the four samples respectively recorded in Ar and N2 atmospheres under chopped visible light irradiation. (b) Band structures of HCNS-NV and HCNS. (c) Schematic illustrating the N2 photofixation process on Au/HCNS-NV. 
3. Conclusions
In summary, we have synthesized hybrid plasmonic Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures that are composed of hollow mesoporous carbon nitride spheres with Au nanoparticles embedded within the mesopores of the carbon nitride shell. The nanostructures can photocatalytically reduce atmospheric N2 to ammonia under mild conditions. The NVs act as the active sites for the adsorption and activation of N2 molecules and simultaneously capture photoexcited electrons for the N2 reduction reaction. The plasmon resonance of the embedded Au nanoparticles is effectively harnessed for enhancing the N2 photofixation performance in the elaborately designed nanostructure. The optimal Au/HCNS-NV sample with a Au loading amount of 7.4 wt% and a HCNS shell thickness of 64 nm gives a high ammonia production rate of 783.4 μmol h−1 gcat−1 under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. In pure water, the optimal nanostructure acquires a STA efficiency of 0.032% under simulated AM1.5G solar light irradiation. Our work highlights the importance of nanostructure design in N2 photofixation based on the synergistic interaction between N2-activation sites and photogenerated charge carriers. Our results will contribute to the future design of highly efficient plasmonic catalysts for various photocatalytic applications.
4. Experimental
4.1. Coating of solid silica spheres with mesoporous silica
The monodisperse silica spheres as the cores were first synthesized using a slightly modified Stöber process.40 Typically, TEOS (4.5 mL) was rapidly added into a mixture of ethanol (61.75 mL), H2O (24.75 mL), and aqueous ammonia solution (2.0 mL, 25–28 wt%). After the reaction solution was stirred for 2 h, the produced solid silica spheres were collected by centrifugation and washed with H2O and anhydrous ethanol several times separately. The silica sphere powder was obtained after the precipitate was dried in a vacuum oven. For the coating of mesostructured silica onto the solid silica spheres, a certain amount of CTAC powder was added into a mixture of H2O (180 mL), ethanol (180 mL) and aqueous ammonia solution (3.3 mL, 25–28 wt%). The resultant solution was added into the aqueous dispersion of the solid silica spheres (120 mL, 5 mg mL−1). After the solution mixture was stirred for 30 min, TEOS was added, followed by stirring for another 3 h to allow the growth of mesostructured silica on the solid silica spheres. The thickness of the mesostructured silica shell, which determined the shell thickness of the HCNSs, can be readily adjusted by changing the amount of CTAC and TEOS. The product was collected by centrifugation, extensively washed with deionized water and ethanol and then dried in a vacuum oven. Calcination at 550 °C for 4 h at a ramp rate of 10 °C min−1 was performed to remove CTAC from the as-prepared product and produce a mesoporous silica shell coated on the solid silica spheres.
4.2. Synthesis of the HCNS-NV samples
The HCNS-NV samples with different shell thicknesses were synthesized using the mesoporous silica-coated solid silica spheres as the hard templates. Specifically, a mixture of the templating powders (400 mg) and an aqueous cyanamide solution (5 mL, 50 wt%) was sonicated for 2 h and then shaken for 24 h on a vortex oscillator. The suspension was centrifuged and the resultant wet precipitate was transferred to a lidded crucible and heated to 550 °C under flowing Ar for 4 h with a ramp rate of 4.4 °C min−1. The obtained product was further treated with a HF (6 M) solution for 12 h to remove the silica template.41 The powder was then centrifuged and washed several times with deionized water until the pH value of the supernatant approached 7. The HCNSx-NV samples were obtained by drying the products at 60 °C in a vacuum oven overnight. To remove the NVs, the HCNS-NV samples were calcined at 350 °C for different periods of time to yield HCNSs. In this study, for simplicity, HCNS-NV and HCNS are used to denote the samples with a shell thickness of 64 nm unless a particular specification is given.
4.3. Synthesis of the hybrid Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures
The Au nanoparticle-embedded HCNS-NV nanostructures with a shell thickness of 64 nm were prepared by a modified H2 reduction method.42 Typically, a calculated amount of the HCNS-NV powder was dispersed in an aqueous HAuCl4 solution (5 mg mL−1), and the pH value of the dispersion was adjusted to 12 with NaOH. The resultant mixture was then stirred overnight in the dark and evaporated to remove water. The product was then treated under a H2 flow (5 vol% in N2) at 250 °C for 2 h with a ramp rate of 1.5 °C min−1. It was finally washed with water extensively to fully remove the residual NaOH and dried in air. The amount of the embedded Au nanoparticles can be readily varied by the amount of the added HAuCl4 aqueous solution. The NV-deficient sample was prepared following the same procedure, except that the HCNS-NV sample was replaced with the HCNS sample. For simplicity, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS are used in this study to denote the catalysts with a loading amount of Au at 7.4 wt%.
In our work, three other methods were also employed to synthesize Au nanoparticles in the HCNS-NV shell for comparison. The first is the treatment with CH2Cl2. The HCNS-NV powder was first impregnated in the HAuCl4 aqueous solution. After the solution mixture was stirred overnight, water was evaporated and then CH2Cl2 at a volume equal to that of the HAuCl4 solution was added in order to drive the Au salt precursor into the pore channels of the mesoporous shell.43 After the mixture solution was kept for 5 h, CH2Cl2 was removed by evaporation. The impregnated powder was then transferred to a tube furnace and treated with a H2 flow (5 vol% in N2) at 250 °C for 2 h. The second is thermal decomposition. The HCNS-NV powder was impregnated in the aqueous HAuCl4 solution overnight and dried by evaporation in advance. The powder was then annealed at 400 °C for 2 h under an Ar flow. The third is photoreduction. A certain amount of the HAuCl4 solution was added into the HCNS-NV dispersion solution (1 mg mL−1 in a 20 vol% methanol/water mixture). The resultant suspension was irradiated with a 300 W Xe lamp for 1 h. The product was collected by centrifugation, washed several times with water and dried in a vacuum oven.
4.4. Characterization
The SEM images and EDX spectra were acquired on an FEI Quanta 400 FEG microscope. TEM imaging was performed on an FEI Tecnai Spirit microscope. HRTEM imaging, HAADF-STEM characterization, and elemental mapping were performed on an FEI Tecnai F20 microscope operated at 200 kV and equipped with an Oxford EDX analysis system. The XRD patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer. The diffuse reflectance absorption spectra were acquired on a Lambda 950 ultraviolet/visible/near-infrared spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer) equipped with an integrating sphere accessory using BaSO4 as a reference. The concentrations of the ammonia-derived coloured complexes were determined on the same spectrophotometer through measurements of the absorption spectra. TGA was conducted on a Perkin Elmer TGA 6 thermogravimetric analyzer with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Elemental analysis was carried out on an elemental analyzer (Eurovector EA3000). The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were acquired on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 analyzer. The BET specific surface areas were calculated from the adsorption branches. The XPS measurements were performed on an Escalab 250 Xi system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Al Kα (hν = 1486.6 eV) as the X-ray source for excitation. The FTIR spectra were recorded on a Thermo Nicolet NEXUS 670 FTIR spectrometer. The DR-FTIR spectroscopy experiments were conducted on a Thermo Scientific Nicolet IS5 spectrometer equipped with a diffuse reflectance cell. The vapour from pure H2O or the aqueous reaction product with the Au/HCNS-NV sample as the catalyst was blown by Ar into the diffuse reflectance cell with a KBr substrate for 48 h. The photoluminescence spectra were obtained on a Hitachi F-4600 spectrophotometer at an excitation wavelength of 380 nm. The low-temperature EPR spectra were acquired on a Bruker E500 EPR spectrometer at 77 K. N2 TPD analysis was performed on chemisorption apparatus (Tianjin Xianquan TP5080). The ammonia concentration (in mg L−1) estimated by ion chromatography was recorded on a Dionex DX-120 ion chromatograph. The 1H NMR spectra were measured on a Bruker Avance III spectrometer.
4.5. Nitrogen photofixation tests
The N2 photofixation tests were carried out in a photocatalytic reactor with an opening diameter of 6 cm under a N2 atmosphere at room temperature. Typically, the photocatalyst (50 mg) was dispersed into a mixture of water (80 mL) and methanol (20 mL). The resultant solution mixture was sonicated for 10 min to achieve uniform dispersion and then bubbled with ultrapure N2 at a flow rate of 100 mL min−1 for 30 min. The reactor was subsequently irradiated with a 300 W Xe lamp (PLS-SXE300C, Beijing Perfectlight Technology) and bubbled with N2 at a flow rate of 50 mL min−1 with continuous stirring. A small amount of the reaction solution (1.0 mL) was collected at regular intervals using a syringe. The collected solutions were centrifuged to remove the catalyst. The concentration of ammonia in the supernatant at different irradiation times was determined by Nessler's reagent method. Typically, the supernatant solution (0.5 mL) was first diluted with H2O (2 mL), followed by the addition of potassium sodium tartrate (0.25 mL, 0.2 M) and Nessler's reagent (0.25 mL, 0.09 M K2HgI4 in a 2.5 M KOH aqueous solution). The solution was mixed thoroughly and left for 20 min. The produced ammonia can react with iodide and mercury ions under alkaline conditions according to the reaction below 57 2[HgI4]2− + NH3 + 3OH− → Hg2ONH2I + 7I− + 2H2O(1)
The reaction produces a reddish-brown complex. The ammonia concentration was calculated by monitoring the absorbance at 425 nm according to a pre-established calibration curve on an ultraviolet/visible/near-infrared spectrophotometer.

15N2 isotope labelling experiments were performed to further confirm the origin of the generated ammonia. The reactor was sealed when 15N2 was used as the feed gas. Before the blowing of 15N2, the reaction system was sequentially vacuumed, blown with Ar, and vacuumed again. After being irradiated for 2 h, the reaction solution was collected and acidized to pH = 2.0 with HCl. Dimethyl sulfoxide-d6 (DMSO-d6, 0.3 mL) was then added to the solution (0.2 mL) for 1H NMR measurements.
For measurement of the AQY, the N2 photofixation reaction was carried out under monochromatic light using bandpass filters (center wavelengths: 420, 475, 520, 550, 600, 650 and 700 nm, full width at half maximum for all: 20 nm, Beijing Perfectlight Technology). The corresponding power density was measured using an optical power meter (Molectron POWER MAX 5200). The AQY was calculated according to the following equation (2)
To determine the STA and STH efficiencies, the reactions were carried out in a sealed photocatalytic reactor under simulated AM1.5G light irradiation. The photocatalyst (200 mg) was dispersed in pure water (100 mL) without any sacrificial reagent. The reaction system was vacuumed and blown with N2 repeatedly several times to drive the air out completely and then sealed with a rubber plug. N2 was then bubbled for another 1 h with a balloon to make sure that the reaction system was filled with N2. The evolved O2 and H2 were measured on a gas chromatograph (CEAULIGHT GC-7900, TCD detector, Ar carrier gas). The STA and STH reactions are described by (3) (4)
The STA and STH efficiencies were calculated according to the equations below (5) (6)
In the above equations, the ΔG° values for NH3 and H2 generation are 339 and 237 kJ mol−1, respectively. The overall irradiance of the AM1.5G spectrum was 100 mW cm−2 and the irradiation area was 28.26 cm2.
4.6. Electrochemical measurements
The electrochemical measurements were conducted in a three-electrode system on an electrochemical workstation (CHI 760E, Shanghai Chenhua). To prepare the working electrode, the catalyst was first dispersed in an ethanolic solution of Nafion (5.0 vol%) to form an ink (10 mg mL−1). The resultant dispersion (0.2 mL) was then dip-coated on the pretreated fluorine-doped tin oxide substrate with a surface area of 1 × 1 cm2 and allowed to dry in a vacuum overnight at room temperature. A Pt plate and standard Ag/AgCl electrode were employed as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. All measurements were carried out at room temperature in an aqueous Na2SO4 (40 mL, 0.5 M) electrolyte that has been deoxygenated by bubbling high-purity Ar for 30 min. The Mott–Schottky curves were measured using the impedance-potential technique in the potential range from −0.2 to +1.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at different frequencies. The reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) can be converted from the reference electrode potential (vs. Ag/AgCl) according to ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059 pH + EAg/AgCl°, where EAg/AgCl° is 0.197 V at 25 °C.67 The normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) value is equal to the RHE at pH = 0. Photocurrent measurements were performed at a potential of 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) under chopped visible light irradiation.
4.7. DFT calculations
DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) based on spin-polarized density functional theory.68 The generalized gradient approximation of the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional was applied.69,70 An energy cut-off of 500 eV was used for the plane-wave expansion of the electronic wave function. The lattice parameters were fully relaxed, and the geometry of the crystal was fully optimized in advance before the calculation of the electronic structure and total energy. The Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) along the simulated reaction pathway was calculated using ΔG = ΔEad + ΔEZPE − TΔS, where ΔEad is the adsorption energy difference obtained directly from the DFT calculations, ΔEZPE is the change in the zero-point energy calculated from the vibrational frequencies, T is the temperature (298.15 K), and ΔS is the entropy difference between the adsorbed state and the gas state.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (General Research Fund, 14305819) and The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK, Direct Grant, Project Code: 4053350). JHY acknowledges the Impact Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme (IPDFS) of the CUHK for support.
References
C. J. M. van der Ham, M. T. M. Koper and D. G. H. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183 RSC .
H.-P. Jia and E. A. Quadrelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 547 RSC .
V. Rosca, M. Duca, M. T. de Groot and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Rusina, O. Linnik, A. Eremenko and H. Kisch, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lan, J. T. S. Irvine and S. W. Tao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 1482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Klerke, C. H. Christensen, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2304 RSC .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. B. Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360, eaar6611 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hirakawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Chen, N. Li, Z. Z. Kong, W.-J. Ong and X. J. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 9 RSC .
G. Q. Zhang, C. D. Sewell, P. X. Zhang, H. W. Mi and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104645 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19616 RSC .
C. L. Mao, J. X. Wang, Y. J. Zou, H. Li, G. M. Zhan, J. Li, J. C. Zhao and L. Z. Zhang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2852 RSC .
A. J. Medford and M. C. Hatzell, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2624 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, L. H. Zhang, R. E. Ruther and R. J. Hamers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, F. L. Zhou, K. Chen, C. Kotzur, C. L. Xiao, L. Bourgeois, X. Y. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Xue, R. P. Chen, H. W. Chen, Y. Hu, Q. Q. Ding, Z. T. Liu, L. B. Ma, G. Y. Zhu, W. J. Zhang, Q. Yu, J. Liu, J. Ma and J. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yang, Y. Z. Guo, R. B. Jiang, F. Qin, H. Zhang, W. Z. Lu, J. F. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jia, A. X. Du, H. Zhang, J. H. Yang, R. B. Jiang, J. F. Wang and C.-Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, X. Hai, X. Ding, K. Chang, Y. G. Xiang, X. G. Meng, Z. X. Yang, H. Chen and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701774 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. X. Wu, S. M. Chen, Y. F. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. M. Qi, H. X. Ju, C. M. Wang, X. J. Wu, L. Song, J. F. Zhu and Y. J. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jin, L. Q. Li, X. Liu, C. Tang, W. J. Xu, S. M. Chen, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902709 CrossRef .
C. D. Lv, Y. M. Qian, C. S. Yan, Y. Ding, Y. Y. Liu, G. Chen and G. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10246 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Dong, W. K. Ho and C. Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23435 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, S. Shiota, Y. Kofuji, M. Hashimoto, K. Chishiro, H. Hirakawa, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4169 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, X. Hu, Z. Z. Liu, G. J. Zou, G. N. Wang and K. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10260 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294 RSC .
H. Tong, S. X. Ouyang, Y. P. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Z. L. Wang, M. Q. Lyu, B. Luo, S. C. Wang, G. Liu, H.-M. Cheng and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801369 CrossRef .
P. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900281 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11686 RSC .
C. C. Li, T. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao, W. M. Yang, J.-F. Li, A. Li, Z. L. Yang, G. A. Ozin and J. L. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5278 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Hu, X. Chen, J. B. Jin, Y. Han, S. M. Chen, H. X. Ju, J. Cai, Y. R. Qiu, C. Gao, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Qi, R. Long, L. Song, Z. Liu and Y. J. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7807 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zhong, K. Ueno, Y. Mori, X. Shi, T. Oshikiri, K. Murakoshi, H. Inoue and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10350 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3942 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, J. Goebl, M. W. Sun, Y. S. Yan, Y.-S. Liu, C. L. Chang, J. H. Guo and Y. D. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3168 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Sun, J. S. Zhang, M. W. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Z. Fu and X. C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1139 CrossRef .
A. Fukuoka, T. Higuchi, T. Ohtake, T. Oshio, J.-I. Kimura, Y. Sakamoto, N. Shimomura, S. Inagaki and M. Ichikawa, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 337 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Tsung, W. B. Hong, Q. H. Shi, X. S. Kou, M. H. Yeung, J. F. Wang and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Guo, H. L. Jia, J. H. Yang, H. Yin, Z. Yang, J. F. Wang and B. C. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22296 RSC .
D. D. Zheng, C. J. Huang and X. C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 465 RSC .
U. Holzwarth and N. Gibson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhuo, X. Z. Cheng, Y. Z. Guo, H. L. Jia, Y. C. Yu and J. F. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900396 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Liao, J. E. Chen, Y. Isida, T. Yonezawa, W.-C. Chang, S. M. Alshehri, Y. Yamauchi and K. C.-W. Wu, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. P. Du, H. Z. Pan, L. Fu, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. W. Du, N. J. Tang and G. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807540 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yu, R. Shi, Y. X. Zhao, T. Bian, Y. F. Zhao, C. Zhou, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605148 CrossRef .
W. K. Wang, H. M. Zhang, S. B. Zhang, Y. Y. Liu, G. Z. Wang, C. H. Sun and H. J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16644 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. C. Wang and M. J. Bojdys, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Hong, B. Shen, Y. L. Chen, B. Z. Lin and B. F. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11754 RSC .
X. M. Li, X. Sun, L. Zhang, S. M. Sun and W. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3005 RSC .
X. J. Wang, J. Feng, Y. C. Bai, Q. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10983 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prieto, H. Tüysüz, N. Duyckaerts, J. Knossalla, G.-H. Wang and F. Schüth, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14056–14119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhao, R. Shi, X. A. Bian, C. Zhou, Y. F. Zhao, S. Zhang, F. Wu, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802109 CrossRef .
X. Gao, Y. J. Wen, D. Qu, L. An, S. L. Luan, W. S. Jiang, X. P. Zong, X. Y. Liu and Z. C. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5342 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166 RSC .
X. Y. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M.-M. Shi, D. Bao, F. L. Meng, Q. Zhang, Y.-T. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, Y. Zhang, J.-Z. Wang, Z.-W. Chen, D.-P. Liu, Z. Jiang, M. Luo, L. Gu, Q.-H. Zhang, X.-Z. Cao, Y. Yao, M.-H. Shao, Y. Zhang, X.-B. Zhang, J. G. G. Chen, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9464 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, J. X. Xia, M. F. Chisholm, J. Zhong, C. Chen, X. Z. Cao, F. Dong, Z. Chi, H. L. Chen, Y.-X. Weng, J. Xiong, S.-Z. Yang, H. M. Li, Z. Liu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807576 CrossRef .
T. Ming, H. J. Chen, R. B. Jiang, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhao, Y. X. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. R. Zheng, X. Z. Cao, F. Teng, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703828 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603 RSC .
M. P. Shaver and M. D. Fryzuk, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2003, 345, 1061 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Li, P. M. Da, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. C. Wang, X. Lin, X. G. Gong and G. F. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 50, 17953 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM, TEM and HRTEM images; Tauc plots; TGA curves; size distributions; XRD patterns; N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms; XPS spectra; FTIR spectra; chemical structures; absorption spectra; control experiments; zeta potentials; NMR spectra; Mott–Schottky plots; photoluminescence spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03793a‡ Theses authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process. The channels in the mesoporous silica shell after the removal of CTAC as well as after the embedding of Au nanoparticles are drawn only for illustration. (b) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the solid silica spheres. (c) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the solid silica spheres coated with the mesostructured silica layer with a thickness of 76.9 ± 3.4 nm. (d) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the HCNS-NV sample with a shell thickness of 64.1 ± 4.6 nm. (e) SEM (top) and TEM (bottom) images of the Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure sample with a Au loading amount of 7.4 wt%. (f) High-magnification SEM image of Au/HCNS-NV obtained with the secondary electron detection mode. (g) High-magnification SEM image of Au/HCNS-NV obtained with the backscattered electron detection mode at the same position as that in (f). (h) HAADF-STEM image of a single Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure. (i) Elemental mapping images of the same Au/HCNS-NV nanostructure as in (h). The images have the same scale bar.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of the photocatalysts. (a) Absorption spectra of the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples. (b) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS-NV. (c) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of HCNS. (d) EPR spectra of the four samples. (e) N2 TPD profiles of the HCNS-NV and HCNS samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nitrogen photofixation over the HCNSx-NV samples with different shell thicknesses. (a) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured under white light irradiation. (b) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). (c) Ammonia production rates under white light. (d) Ammonia production rates under visible light. (e) Ammonia production rates under UV light. (f) Photocatalytic ammonia production rate and N/C ratio as functions of the calcination time for HCNS-NV with a shell thickness of 64 nm. The light irradiation in (a and b) was turned on at the zero time point.	 

 	Fig. 4  N2 photofixation with the Au-loaded photocatalysts. (a) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured for the Au/HCNS-NV samples with different Au loading amounts under visible light (λ > 420 nm). (b) Effect of the Au loading amount on the photocatalytic ammonia production rate. (c) Time courses of the ammonia concentrations measured for the HCNS-NV, HCNS, Au/HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS samples under visible light. (d) Estimated AQYs (purple circles) for N2 photofixation with Au/HCNS-NV under monochromatic light irradiation, plotted together with its absorption spectrum (red line). (e) Amounts of the products formed in pure water under AM1.5G light irradiation. The light irradiation in (a and c) was turned on at the zero time point.	 

 	Fig. 5  Stability tests. (a) Cyclic tests for N2 photofixation with HCNS-NV and Au/HCNS-NV. (b) TEM image of HCNS-NV after the fourth cycle of testing. (c) TEM image of Au/HCNS-NV after the fourth cycle of testing.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemisorption of N2 molecules on PCN with different chemical structures. (a) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the middle row) and charge density difference (bottom row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed at a N2C-NV on the surface of PCN. The yellow and light blue isosurfaces represent charge accumulation and depletion in space, respectively. The isovalue is 0.0025 e Å−3. (b) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the lower row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed on the surface of PCN at the openings of two s-triazine heterocycles. (c) Adsorption configuration (top view in the upper row and side view in the lower row) of a N2 molecule adsorbed on the surface of pristine PCN.	 

 	Fig. 7  Proposed mechanism for plasmon-enhanced N2 fixation. (a) Photocurrent measurements of the four samples respectively recorded in Ar and N2 atmospheres under chopped visible light irradiation. (b) Band structures of HCNS-NV and HCNS. (c) Schematic illustrating the N2 photofixation process on Au/HCNS-NV.	 
2[HgI4]2− + NH3 + 3OH− → Hg2ONH2I + 7I− + 2H2O	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM, TEM and HRTEM images; Tauc plots; TGA curves; size distributions; XRD patterns; N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms; XPS spectra; FTIR spectra; chemical structures; absorption spectra; control experiments; zeta potentials; NMR spectra; Mott–Schottky plots; photoluminescence spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03793a
‡ Theses authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
