Efficient electrochemical water oxidation in neutral and near-neutral systems with a nanoscale silver-oxide catalyst   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR03147A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR03147A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15033-15040Efficient electrochemical water oxidation in neutral and near-neutral systems with a nanoscale silver-oxide catalyst†

        
          
            Khurram S. 
            Joya
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Zahoor 
            Ahmad
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yasir F. 
            Joya
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Angel T. 
            Garcia-Esparza
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Huub J. M. 
            de Groot
          
        
      a
aLeiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: khurram.joya@gmail.com;  Fax: +(31) 71-527-4603
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Engineering and Technology, GT Road 54890 Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan. E-mail: khurram_joya@uet.edu.pk
cDivision of Physical Sciences and Engineering, KAUST Catalysis Center (KCC), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 4700 KAUST, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
dFaculty of Materials Science and Engineering, Ghulam Ishaq Khan (GIK) Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi 23640, Khyber Pakhtunkhaw, Pakistan
Received 
      17th April 2016
    , Accepted 18th July 2016First published on 19th July 2016AbstractIn electrocatalytic water splitting systems pursuing for renewable energy using sunlight, developing robust, stable and easily accessible materials operating under mild chemical conditions is pivotal. We present here a unique nanoparticulate type silver-oxide (AgOx-NP) based robust and highly stable electrocatalyst for efficient water oxidation. The AgOx-NP is generated in situ in a HCO3−/CO2 system under benign conditions. Micrographs show that they exhibit a nanoscale box type squared nano-bipyramidal configuration. The oxygen generation is initiated at low overpotential, and a sustained O2 evolution current density of >1.1 mA cm−2 is achieved during prolonged-period water electrolysis. The AgOx-NP electrocatalyst performs exceptionally well in metal-ion free neutral or near-neutral carbonate, phosphate and borate buffers relative to recently reported Co-oxide and Ni-oxide based heterogeneous electrocatalysts, which are unstable in metal-ion free electrolytes and tend to deactivate with time and lose catalytic performance during long-term experimental tests.
1. Introduction
The world's primary energy demand of 14 TW is expected to double by 2050. Carbon based fossil fuels do not seem to be the solution, so there is an enormous effort to come up with energy carriers that are renewable, and can be obtained from low-cost and widespread materials.1 Water is present worldwide, and it is a cheap and rich source of electrons and protons. By efficiently harnessing sunlight, ubiquitous water molecules can be oxidized to produce electrons and protons, and effectively converted into renewable fuels.1,2 Thus, the light-driven water transformation into cheap energy carriers is possible through cost effective electrocatalytic and photo-electrochemical (PEC) systems.3,4 Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical water splitting systems to make hydrogen and oxygen with high efficiency and at a moderate overpotential are vital and energetically very challenging. Besides having an efficient light harvesting and charge separation scheme for a PEC based device, development of robust and active water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) is a principle bottleneck in this pursuit.5,6 Recently, many molecular complexes of precious metals like Ru and Ir and their oxides along with other inorganic materials of transition metals have been studied for electrocatalytic water oxidation.7–10 However, due to instability and poor performance, catalytic water oxidation systems are not yet capable of being employed for large scale applications. The overall efficiency of the water oxidation process is largely limited by the slow kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) that requires a high overpotential to drive it.11,12 Thus development of a robust and stable water oxidation electrocatalyst is a key in this regard to make an energy conversion device.11,13
Thermodynamically, water oxidation requires 1.23 V (vs. NHE, pH = 0) for its onset, but to drive the process at a faster rate, an extra driving force in the form of overpotential is needed to enhance the reaction kinetics.5,12 Water electrolysis is conducted at elevated temperatures with expensive electrode assemblies in harsh chemical environments, i.e. highly acidic or strong alkali media.6,13 For widespread use, the catalytic materials should be obtained from earth abundant sources and water oxidation needs to proceed under benign conditions.2,14 A catalytic water oxidation system working under near-neutral pH conditions and at a moderate overpotential would be ideal for application in solar to fuel generation assemblies (Scheme 1).15 In this quest, non-noble transition metal-oxide derived electrocatalytic systems have attracted scientific interest because of their good catalytic activity for anodic oxygen evolution and abundant availability.15–17 Catalytic systems operating under near-neutral pH conditions can be implemented in large terrestrial applications and provide the opportunity to convert water oxidation products (protons and electrons) into easily storable energy carriers for fuel applications.15,18 This approach demonstrates an attractive scheme for direct solar and chemical energy conversion into renewable fuels and clean energy supplies for power generation or automobile application and avoids the problem related to fossil fuel based energy carriers.19
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of water oxidation electrocatalysis (anode) in combination with a H2 evolution system (cathode). 
In order to establish an electrochemical water splitting system where WOC remains stable in metal-ions free neutral or near-neutral phosphate and borate buffers, or in a CO2 enriched environment, a water oxidation electrocatalyst is required to operate under neutral pH conditions with sustained catalytic activity and high efficiency for oxygen evolution.15,19 Recently, cobalt and nickel based electrocatalytic materials have been developed in situ in neutral or near-neutral carbonate, phosphate and borate buffers, however these electrocatalytic systems are not very stable in metal-ions free phosphate and borate electrolytes, thus limiting their application for long-term catalytic operation for H2 generation.17,20,21 Also, the presence of metal ions in the electrolyte system during water electrolysis may induce its reduction and metal deposition at the reduction site which can block and reduce the active catalyst performance.15,19 Therefore, there is a need to develop low-cost heterogeneous electrocatalysts which remain stable and effective for long-term catalytic operation in metal-ions free neutral or near-neutral aqueous systems.
Here we report in situ generation of a robust and efficient water oxidation electrocatalyst, from easily available silver(I) in a neutral bicarbonate electrolyte, that is remarkably stable for a prolonged period oxygen evolution process in metal-ions free carbonate, phosphate and borate buffers under neutral pH conditions. The silver-oxide based nanoparticulate type electrocatalyst (AgOx-NP) was developed on ITO (Indium tin-oxide) or on a glassy carbon disk via anodic electrodeposition from Ag+ solution in a HCO3−/CO2 system. Silver ions readily get precipitated in an electrolyte solution with pH = 7 or above. Bubbling CO2 in a bicarbonate system reduces the pH just about neutral (pH = 6.8–6.9), facilitates the silver complexation and dissolution, and enables the electrodeposition of a AgOx-Np based electrocatalyst as a dark grey layer from Ag+–HCO3−/CO2 combination on a conducting substrate such as ITO. The surface-deposited electrocatalytic film of AgOx-Np displays high catalytic performance in metal-ion free neutral or near-neutral bicarbonate, phosphate and borate based aqueous solutions during long-term water electrolysis compared to Ni-oxide and Co-oxide.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Silver nitrate (AgNO3; 99.999%) and sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3; 99.5–100.5%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Phosphate and borate buffer solutions are prepared as described previously.8 Carbon dioxide gas (CO2; 99.999%) was obtained from Linde, B.V. Netherlands. Indium-tin-oxide (ITO) coated glass slides (8–12 Ω sq−1 surface resistivity) were purchased from Aldrich. A glassy carbon disk (diameter d = 0.5 mm) was obtained from Pine research instrumentation. All solutions were prepared in ultra-pure water (Millipore MilliQ® A10 gradient, 18.2 MΩ cm, 2–4 ppb total organic content) and all electrochemical measurements were performed in deoxygenated aqueous solutions at room temperature. The glassware and the electrochemical cells were cleaned and prepared as described previously.22
2.2 Electrochemical measurements
For the electrochemical measurements, CO2 gas was purged (1 atm) through the NaHCO3 electrolyte solution throughout the course of the entire experiment, and at least 25 minutes before each test (pH = 6.7–6.8). A three electrode configuration pyrex glass cell was employed for cyclic voltammetry (CV). ITO coated glass slides (1 cm × 2.5 cm, exposed surface area 1.0 cm2) were used as working electrodes (WE). The ITO electrodes were cleaned and prepared in succession while ultrasonicating with alcohol (isopropanol/MeOH), water and acetone as described previously.23 The catalytic water electrolysis experiments were carried out in a three electrode double junction H-type glass made electrolysis cell. A platinum wire (thickness: 1 mm), shaped into a spiral, was used as a counter electrode (CE). A silver–silver chloride electrode (SSCE: Ag/AgCl/KCl) was applied as the reference electrode (RE). However, all potentials are referred to as a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Cyclic voltammetry experiments were performed with an Autolab PG-stat10 potentiostat controlled by GPES-4 software.
2.3 Online oxygen measurements
Oxygen evolution during water oxidation catalysis was monitored by means of online gas chromatography (GC) measurements using micro-GC, T-3000 SRI instruments. A homemade Pyrex glass cell was designed for the online GC analyses with a Teflon based cap having three main slots for three electrodes (WE, CE and RE). There were two more openings in the cap for gas inlet and an outlet for the GC. The gas mixture from the GC-cell was delivered directly to the sampling loop of the gas chromatograph. Sampling points were collected every 10 minutes, and the gaseous products were analyzed using a packed mol. sieve 5A coupled with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). Ar (99.9999%) was used as the carrier gas during the GC measurements.
2.4 Generation and characterization of nanoparticulate type silver-oxide water oxidation electrocatalyst
The AgOx-NP electrocatalyst is generated in situ from a CO2 saturated (1 atm) bicarbonate solution (0.1 M–1.0 M) containing Ag+ (0.25 mM–1 mM), on ITO or a glassy carbon disk during constant potential experiment while holding the potential of the working electrode above at 1.3 V (vs. NHE). The catalyst film is also generated during the CV between 0.0 V and 1.35 V (vs. NHE). A better catalytic coverage is obtained on the anode when deposition was undertaken at a potential avoiding the oxygen evolution on the surface. Interestingly, the AgOx-NP catalytic layer does not require the proton abstracting phosphate or borate buffers for electrode position and for anodic oxidation of water, as shown to be essential for the generation and electrocatalytic activity of Co-Pi and Ni-Bi based oxygen evolution electrocatalysts.24 The nanoparticulate electrocatalytic silver-oxide was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), TEM (transmission electron microscopy), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) compositional measurements and EDX elemental mapping. The so-generated AgOx-NP type electrocatalyst is used as such for further electrochemical measurements (the details of the characterization measurements and analyses are described in the ESI†).
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Electrogeneration of nanoparticulate type silver-oxide water oxidation electrocatalyst
Electrocatalytically active nanoparticulate silver-oxide is generated in situ on an ITO substrate during controlled-potential electrolysis (CPE) at about 1.40 V vs. NHE, or via cyclic voltammetry (CV) sweeps from 0.1 V to 1.6 V vs NHE in a CO2 saturated 0.2 M bicarbonate system containing 0.1–1.0 mM Ag+ in a near-neutral pH system (Fig. 1a). The anodic CV shows the generation of a large oxidative current wave in the potential region +0.55 V to +0.75 V (vs. NHE). This is assigned to the formation of a layer of oxide of silver(I) on the anode surface in the bicarbonate/CO2 system.25,26 This catalytic wave declines at 0.71 V (vs. NHE) and is followed by a sharp rise at about 1.28 V (vs. NHE) (η ≈ 450 mV), along with the generation of tiny oxygen bubbles on the ITO surface. This oxygen generation overpotential is lower than the copper based electrocatalyst generated in bicarbonate electrolytes.15 On the AgOx-NP catalytic layer, the oxygen evolution current density attains a value of about 3.5 mA cm−2 at 1.60 V (vs. NHE), showing a substantial catalytic activity of the AgOx-NP type electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system (Fig. 1a). The backward sweep generates a broad reduction wave between 0.99 and 0.81 V vs. NHE (Fig. 1a). After successive CVs, a greyish black layer of the silver-oxide catalyst is deposited on the ITO sample. The background current density remains below 45 μA cm−2 for the bare ITO substrate. This oxygen evolution onset potential and catalytic current density of the silver-oxide based electrocatalyst are comparable to those observed for Ni-oxide and Co-oxide based materials generated electrochemically under near-neutral conditions.17,27
 Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1) and (b) controlled-potential experiment at different potentials for the electro-generation of the AgOx-NP based electrocatalyst layer on an ITO electrode in a CO2 saturated 0.2 M bicarbonate electrolyte (pH 6.8–6.9) with 0.5–1.0 mM AgNO3; (c, d) Scanning electron microscopy images showing the distribution of electrodeposited AgOx-NP on an ITO substrate. Inset (d) shows the enlarged view of a single silver-oxide nanoscale box. 
RuO2 and IrO2 are the benchmark materials for water oxidation under acidic conditions. The catalytic activity data for AgOx-NP and RuO2 and IrO2 in near-neutral borate buffer show that the AgOx-NP sample has a comparable oxygen onset and water oxidation activity (Fig. S1†). However, the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst exhibits remarkable long-term stability and activity for water oxidation in a metal-ions free electrolyte compared to Ni-oxide and Co-oxide based materials (we will discuss this comparative analysis in more detail in the later section). The current–overpotential (logi vs. η) measurements for the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst in the oxygen evolution regime reveal a Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1 and represented in the inset of Fig. 1a. This Tafel slope is lower than observed for NiOx and CoOx based electrocatalysts,17,20 and represents a mechanism of one proton–one electron transfer simultaneously leading to the onset of oxygen evolution during water oxidation.17 A lower Tafel slope also indicates that a smaller potential window is needed to get a current decade which is highly desirable for solar-driven water oxidation.
For the electrodeposition of electrocatalytic AgOx-NP during constant-potential electrolysis experiments (at 1.33 V, 1.37 V and 1.42 V vs. NHE), the current densities in all cases increase with time indicating gradual formation and growth of the AgOx-NP layer on the conducting ITO substrate (Fig. 1b). At low CPE potential (∼1.33 V vs. NHE), the initial current density for the generation of the catalytic film is low compared to higher potentials deposition run. At higher deposition potential (>1.35 V), the current saturation during deposition also reached at faster rate. The deposition current density above 1.55 mA cm−2 at about 1.42 V (vs. NHE) indicates the generation of more catalytic sites at the anode along with high rate of oxygen generation. After a few minutes, a dark catalytic layer is formed on the ITO along with the observation of a rich stream of oxygen bubbles that was coming out of the electrode surface. There is a steady growth in the current reaching >1.1 mA cm−2 in about half an hour of the experiment. This current rise is ascribed to the growth and generation of nanoscale catalytic sites on the catalyst surface that increases the amount of surface active species of the electrocatalytic assembly for water splitting. The small spikes in the CPE current are due to the generation of oxygen bubbles at the silver-oxide catalytic surface (Fig. 1b).
3.2 Characterization of electrodeposited nanoparticulate type silver-oxide film
The morphology of the electrodeposited grayish black Ag-oxide based catalyst film is examined by scanning electron microscopy as presented in Fig. 1c and d. For SEM imaging, the catalytic film is developed on the anode by bulk electrolysis at a constant potential of 1.39 V (vs. NHE) for 19 minutes in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system containing 0.5 mM AgNO3. The silver-oxide derived electrocatalyst on the ITO electrode shows nanostructured particles with a fairly homogeneous shape and size that are uniformly distributed on the anode surface (Fig. 1c). A magnified SEM view shows squared nano-bipyramidal shaped silver oxide units dispersed on the surface of the anode (Fig. 1d). The octahedral elements seem to be constructed starting from smaller nanoparticles on the order of 60–70 nm. The secondary particle size of the AgOx nano-bipyramid is in the range of 300–400 nm and the AgOx-NP can be seen individually on the ITO exterior, however there are few particles with a bigger size (up to 500 nm) as well (Fig. S2†).
TEM in bright-field (BF) mode revealed the nanoparticulate morphology of Ag-oxide electrocatalytic samples (Fig. 2a). The phase of the NPs was confirmed by investigating the diffraction rings present in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern which was acquired from the same area and is shown as an insert in Fig. 2a. The size of silver oxide nanoparticles and their crystal structure were determined with the high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning TEM (STEM) technique and a typical micrograph acquired with this technique is given in Fig. 2b. HAADF-STEM analysis showed that the crystal size of these silver-oxide NPs was 7–8 nm, however irregular distribution of the crystal size was also observed. Furthermore these NPs were crystalline whose structure matches with the one revealed by SAED analysis.
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM (transmission electron microscopy) image and (b) high resolution TEM for the electrodeposited AgOx-NP. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.) 
The surface composition of the AgOx-NP was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The elemental detection in the XPS survey for the AgOx electrocatalyst indicates the presence of silver and oxygen (Fig. S3†). XPS data show the Ag 3d5/2 peak at 367.9 eV and the Ag 3d3/2 peak at 373.8 eV that are in the characteristic range for silver bound to O and indicative of the AgO type species (Fig. 3a).28 There is a single oxygen binding energy peak centered at 531 eV, indicating the presence of metal bound oxide on the surface. As the catalytic film of AgOx-NP is developed in the aqueous phase from Ag+, there is a possibility for the presence of metal bound –OH type oxide species (528–532).29 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the Ag metal and Ag-oxide sample are shown in Fig. 3b and c. The silver-oxide sample reveals the presence of both Ag2O and AgO phases in the catalytic layer, with Ag(II) oxide as the dominating phase (Fig. 3b). It is known that the higher oxide phase AgO usually exists as Ag2O/Ag2O3.30 There are also some signals representing the contribution from the metallic silver phase (Fig. 3c) that might have formed via reduction of some Ag-oxide in air.
 Fig. 3  (a) Enlarged view of the XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) spectrum for Ag 3d in the electrodeposited catalytic layer of the AgOx-NP film on an ITO anode; (b, c) X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern for the electrodeposited AgOx-NP film and for simple Ag substrate. In the XRD spectra, the symbols #, asterisk and @ represent Ag, Ag2O and AgO (Ag2O/Ag2O3), respectively. (For XPS and XRD analyses, the AgOx-Np@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.) 
Furthermore, the catalytic nanoscale silver-oxide material is characterized by Raman spectroscopy (Fig. S4†). The Raman peaks at 231 cm−1, 300 cm−1, 430 cm−1, 467 cm−1, 708 cm−1 and 1059 cm−1 represent the presence of the AgO phase in the catalytic film. However, the Raman features at 430 cm−1, 467 cm−1 and 708 cm−1 also indicate that some Ag2O type materials are present in the catalytic layer. Thus, this film is a mixture of AgO and Ag2O with Ag(II) dominance. Furthermore, the bulk elemental composition of the freshly electrodeposited AgOx-NP layer was analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. EDX measurements show the presence of silver, carbon, and oxygen as the main constituent elements in the AgOx-NP film (Fig. S5†). Compositional analyses of the AgOx-NP EDX reveal a Ag:C ratio of 6:1. Hence the electrodeposited AgOx-NP contains about 11 percent of carbon contents in the catalyst layer. Carbon assimilation in the metal-oxide matrix is thought to induce a high surface area in the catalytic deposit while facilitating good electron transport and enhanced structural flexibility.17a,31 EDX elemental mapping clearly shows the distribution of silver, oxygen and carbon in the catalytic layer (Fig. S5†). The distribution of silver and oxygen in the catalytic matrix is very homogeneous, and there is more carbon contribution (from the carbonate system) on the surface than the bulk indicating the physical adsorption of the carbonate ions on the metal oxide surface during the deposition and/or catalytic operation. There are few nanoscale holes in the catalytic deposit, and carbon contents are more pronounced around that region in the EDX mapping image (Fig. S6†).
3.3 Water oxidation performance of the nanoscale silver-oxide electrocatalyst
The long-term stability and catalytic performance of the AgOx-NP type electrocatalytic material, prepared on ITO by constant-potential electrolysis from Ag+ in neutral bicarbonate solution, were tested in a clean electrolyte system (Fig. 4). The electrocatalytic AgOx-NP@ITO system is also active for the OER in the presence of silver ions in HCO3−/CO2 solution, with an oxygen evolution current density approaching >1.1 mA cm−2 in one hour and sustained for many hours of CPE (Fig. S7†). The AgOx-NP@ITO catalytic system is then subjected to a silver free HCO3−/CO2 solution, and the water oxidation experiment is conducted at 1.39 V (vs. NHE; pH = 6.9). Interestingly, a very stable current density of >1.2 mA cm−2 is achieved that is stable for many hours without a noticeable decrease in the performance (Fig. 4a). There was a rich stream of oxygen bubbles coming out from the anode surface. Surprisingly, the anodic performance of AgOx-NP at neutral pH does not require proton abstracting phosphate or borate buffers for water oxidation, as was shown to be essential for the formation and activity of cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi) and nickel-borate (Ni-Bi) based electrocatalysts.17
 Fig. 4  (a) Controlled-potential water electrolysis with a clean blank ITO and with a AgOx-NP@ITO based electrocatalyst system in deoxygenated and CO2 saturated 0.2 M bicarbonate solution without additional Ag+ (pH = 6.8–6.9) at a constant-potential of 1.39 V (vs. NHE). (b) Online oxygen measurements during long-term controlled-potential water electrolysis in a CO2 saturated bicarbonate electrolyte. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.) 
Following long-term electrolysis tests, online oxygen generation measurements for the AgOx-NP@ITO catalytic system are also conducted in a HCO3−/CO2 based electrolyte. Online gas chromatographic (GC) measurements using a micro-GC (Fig. S8†) show that the electrocatalytic water oxidation test for 11 hours of electrolysis has yielded more than 170 μmol of molecular oxygen during long-term CPE operation (Fig. 4b). This can be translated into an oxygen generation rate of 15.5 μmol of oxygen gas per hour coming out of 1 cm2 area of the AgOx-NP@ITO catalytic surface. Counting the total charge passed through the system during electrolysis, a Faradaic efficiency of >98% is observed by taking into account that the current is generated due to 4e− water oxidation involving two OH2 molecules to make one O2 molecule. Apparently, there was no oxygen detected during the water electrolysis using only a bare ITO substrate (Fig. 4b). The remarkable activity of the AgOx-NP catalytic system for long-term water oxidation is very promising and provides a new opportunity in developing neutral pH based electrocatalytic assemblies for anodic oxygen generation.
3.4 Long-term water electrolysis in phosphate and borate aqueous buffers
Recently, proton abstracting phosphate and borate aqueous buffers are reported as active systems for cobalt and nickel based electrocatalysts.17 However, it is important to note that Co-Pi and Ni-Bi lost their anodic activities in metal-ions free clean phosphate and borate electrolytes.20,21 So, the continuous presence of Co or Ni ions in phosphate or borate aqueous buffers is necessary for the sustained activities of these catalysts. These results lead us to test the performance of AgOx-NP for anodic water oxidation in clean phosphate (pH = 7.1) and borate (pH = 9.2) solutions.
We employed the constant-current water electrolysis (chronopotentiometry) experiments to investigate the performance at a constant current density of 1.0 mA cm−2, and monitored the voltage response of the system to maintain that current density. Interestingly, in oxygen free aqueous sodium-phosphate (Na-Pi) and sodium-borate (Na-Bi) electrolytes, the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst remains amazingly stable for water oxidation. At 1.0 mA cm−2 current in neutral Na-Pi buffer, a constant steady-state potential of ∼1.37 V (vs. NHE) is preserved for more than 10 hours of the catalytic test (Fig. 5). In pH = 9.2 Na-Bi buffer, a steady ∼1.25 V (vs. NHE) potential is observed to abstract a 1.0 mA cm−2 current density for water oxidation. In both metal-ions free phosphate and borate systems, there is no significant change in the voltage, which is a direct indication of the stability and good catalytic activity of the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst for anodic water oxidation. A comparative analysis of the electrochemical water oxidation OER activities and Tafel slopes of electrodeposited RuO2, IrO2, CoOx and NiOx based materials are given in Table S1.† The catalytic performance testing during anodic water oxidation shows that the activity of the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst is comparable to those of benchmark RuO2 and IrO2. However, the electrodeposited CoOx and NiOx based materials have much lower activities compared to the AgOx-NP electrocatalyst sample. Also CoOx and NiOx exhibit much higher Tafel slopes relative to the AgOx-NP based anodic catalyst. A standard current density of 10 mA cm−2 is obtained under 600 mV whereas CoOx and NiOx show much higher overpotentials to achieve those high current densities.
 Fig. 5  Long-term constant-current electrolysis (chronopotentiometry) for AgOx-NP@ITO in deoxygenated 0.2 M phosphate (pH = 7.1) and borate (pH = 9.2) buffer solutions at a controlled current of 1.0 mA cm−2. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.) 
4. Conclusions
To make renewable hydrogen and other non-fossil carbon base alternative energy carriers via a water splitting route, a water oxidation electrocatalyst is desired to operate with high efficiency and at a moderate overpotential. We presented here a unique nanoparticulate type silver-oxide based robust electrocatalyst for high activity water oxidation. The electrocatalytic AgOx-NPs are developed in situ on simple ITO substrates via anodic electrodeposition from a HCO3−/CO2 system containing silver(I) ions. Transition metal based electrocatalytic materials have shown catalytic activities for water oxidation, however their anodic performance is gradually lost in metal-ions free buffers (phosphate and borate) and common electrolytes.17,20,21 The nanoscale AgOx-NP presented here displays very high catalytic stabilities in metal-ions free neutral or near-neutral bicarbonate, phosphate and borate buffer solutions compared to recently reported CoOx and NiOx based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. Silver ions quickly precipitate in neutral pH solution. Our unique approach of bubbling CO2 in a bicarbonate system reduces the pH just below neutral (pH = 6.8–6.9), facilitates the silver complexation and dissolution, and enables the electrodeposition of the AgOx-NP based electrocatalyst on the ITO exterior. On the AgOx-NP@ITO catalytic system, an oxygen evolution current density of >3.0 mA cm−2 is obtained at 1.6 V (vs. NHE; pH = 6.8–6.9). During long-term water electrolysis, a stable oxygen evolution current density of >1.1 mA cm−2 is achieved that is sustained for many hours with no noticeable decrease in the performance. During six hours of electrolysis using the AgOx-NP@ITO catalytic system, 57 μmol of molecular oxygen was generated indicating an attractive Faradaic efficiency of ∼98%. This study presents our continuous research in developing efficient and stable water oxidation electrocatalysts that are active, robust and easily accessible under near-neutral conditions, aiming to produce renewable fuels and easily storable energy carriers.32–35
Acknowledgements
K. S. Joya acknowledges research funding from the Higher Education Commission (HEC), Government of Pakistan and Leiden University/BioSolar Cells for the research support and facilities. The authors are thankful to Mr. Verhoeven Tiny (TU-Eindhoven) for the XPS experiments and greatly acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Dalaver Anjum (Imaging and Characterization Lab, KAUST) in TEM and related analyses.
Notes and references
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya, K. Ocakoglu and R. van de Krol, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 10618 (
            Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
            , 2013
            , 52
            , 10426
          ) CrossRef .

  (a) N. Morlanés, K. S. Joya, K. Takanabe and V. Rodionov, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 2015, 49 CrossRef ; 
  (b) D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Joya and H. J. M. de Groot, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Joya, N. Morlanés, E. Maloney, V. Rodionov and K. Takanabe, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13481 RSC .

  (a) H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Ocakoglu, K. S. Joya, E. Harputlu, A. Tarnowska and D. T. Gryko, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9625 RSC .
M. de Respinis, K. S. Joya, H. J. M. De Groot, F. D'Souza, W. A. Smith, R. van de Krol and B. Dam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7275 CAS .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodŕguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Joya, N. K. Subbaiyan, F. D'Souza and H. J. M. de Groot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9601 (
            Angew. Chem.
            , 2012
            , 124
            , 9739
          ) CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakagawa, N. S. Bjorge and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1853 Search PubMed .
P. Du and R. Eisenberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6012 CAS .
K. S. Joya, L. Sinatra, L. G. AbdulHalim, C. P. Joshi, M. N. Hedhili, O. M. Bakr and I. Hussain, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9695 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Risch, K. Klingan, F. Ringleb, P. Chernev, I. Zaharieva, A. Fischer and H. Dau, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Chen and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. S. Joya and H. J. M. de Groot, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1768 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Dincă, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10337 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Brennaman, P. Kang, M. R. Norris, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya and H. J. M. de Groot, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301929 CrossRef .
K. S. Joya and H. J. M. de Groot, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 1195 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Joya and X. R. Sala, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21094 RSC .
D. González-Flores, I. Sánchez, I. Zaharieva, K. Klingan, J. Heidkamp, P. Chernev, P. W. Menezes, M. Driess, H. Dau and M. L. Montero, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2472 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Lopez, J. R. Vilche and A. J. Arvia, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 691 CrossRef .
T. M. Lopez, J. R. Vilche and A. J. Arvia, J. Electronal. Chem., 1984, 162, 207 CrossRef .
K. S. Joya, K. Takanabe and H. J. M. de Groot, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400252 CrossRef .
A. M. Ferraria, A. P. Carapeto and A. M. Botelho do Rego, Vacuum, 2012, 86, 1988 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Gerken, E. C. Landis, R. J. Hamers and S. S. Stahl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Cloud, L. W. Taylor and Y. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24551 RSC .
S. Mao, G. Lub and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6924 RSC .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4, 5948 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, D. González-Flores, J. Ohms, T. Trost, H. Dau, I. Zaharieva and P. Kurz, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Xiang, D. Yan and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13250 CAS .
N. M. AlYami, A. P. LaGrow, K. S. Joya, J. Hwang, K. Katsiev, D. H. Anjum, Y. Losovyj, L. Sinatra, J. Y. Kim and O. M. Bakr, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16169 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr03147aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of water oxidation electrocatalysis (anode) in combination with a H2 evolution system (cathode).	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1) and (b) controlled-potential experiment at different potentials for the electro-generation of the AgOx-NP based electrocatalyst layer on an ITO electrode in a CO2 saturated 0.2 M bicarbonate electrolyte (pH 6.8–6.9) with 0.5–1.0 mM AgNO3; (c, d) Scanning electron microscopy images showing the distribution of electrodeposited AgOx-NP on an ITO substrate. Inset (d) shows the enlarged view of a single silver-oxide nanoscale box.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM (transmission electron microscopy) image and (b) high resolution TEM for the electrodeposited AgOx-NP. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Enlarged view of the XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) spectrum for Ag 3d in the electrodeposited catalytic layer of the AgOx-NP film on an ITO anode; (b, c) X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern for the electrodeposited AgOx-NP film and for simple Ag substrate. In the XRD spectra, the symbols #, asterisk and @ represent Ag, Ag2O and AgO (Ag2O/Ag2O3), respectively. (For XPS and XRD analyses, the AgOx-Np@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Controlled-potential water electrolysis with a clean blank ITO and with a AgOx-NP@ITO based electrocatalyst system in deoxygenated and CO2 saturated 0.2 M bicarbonate solution without additional Ag+ (pH = 6.8–6.9) at a constant-potential of 1.39 V (vs. NHE). (b) Online oxygen measurements during long-term controlled-potential water electrolysis in a CO2 saturated bicarbonate electrolyte. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Long-term constant-current electrolysis (chronopotentiometry) for AgOx-NP@ITO in deoxygenated 0.2 M phosphate (pH = 7.1) and borate (pH = 9.2) buffer solutions at a controlled current of 1.0 mA cm−2. (The AgOx-NP@ITO based catalyst system is developed by CPE at 1.40 V in a near-neutral HCO3−/CO2 system with 0.5 mM Ag+.)	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr03147a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
