Aqueous redox flow batteries: How ‘green’ are the redox active materials?  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01333E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01333E
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4955-4979Aqueous redox flow batteries: How ‘green’ are the redox active materials?

        
          
            Zachary 
            Deller
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lathe A. 
            Jones
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Subashani 
            Maniam
          
          
        
      *
      School of Science, STEM College, RMIT University, 124 La Trobe Street, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia. E-mail: subashani.maniam@rmit.edu.au
Received 
      16th April 2021
    , Accepted 18th June 2021First published on 18th June 2021AbstractEnergy storage using aqueous organic redox flow batteries (ORFBs) is gaining momentum in recent years parallel with the renewable energy industry, principally to store energy from solar, wind and hydro generation. The safety and environmental effects of active materials utilised in aqueous ORFB systems are vital to stay true to the ultimate aim of producing a ‘green’ technology. In this review, we evaluate the ‘greenness’ of the synthetic methodology employed to prepare the anolyte or catholyte active materials which have been developed for aqueous ORBFs using the 12 principles of green chemistry. Some of the most common synthetic strategies that will be discussed involve acid catalysis, catalyst free procedures, and oxidative polymerisation. Additionally, the ‘greenness’ of several key commercial materials with limited synthetic procedures published will be considered.Zachary DellerZachary Deller is a PhD student at RMIT University under the supervision of Dr Subashani Maniam and Assoc Prof Filippo Giustozzi. After recently completing both his bachelors and honours degrees in applied chemistry at RMIT University, with a special interest in organic chemistry, he has subsequently commenced a PhD exploring bituminous road materials, their emissions, quantification and mitigation.Lathe A. JonesLathe Jones obtained his PhD from the University of Queensland (Australia), and has held positions at the University of Manchester (UK), The University of Zaragoza (Spain) and CIDETEC (Spain). In 2010 he was appointed at RMIT as a Vice Chancellors (Industry) research fellow. He is now a Senior lecturer in the School of Science at RMIT, with research interests in applied chemistry, especially electrochemistry, minerals science, and inorganic chemistry.Subashani ManiamSubashani Maniam obtained her PhD from the Australian National University in supramolecular chemistry under the supervision of Prof Christopher Easton. After a joint postdoctoral fellowship from the University of Melbourne and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) under the mentorship of Prof Andrew Holmes and Dr Gavin Collis working on dye-sensitised solar cells, she worked with Prof Steven Langford in exploring naphthalene diimides- and porphyrin-based photosystems. In 2016, she was awarded the VESKI Victorian Fellowship. Currently, she is a lecturer at RMIT University with research interests in developing small molecules for charge storage devices and cancer research.
1. Introduction
The energy sector has continued to evolve rapidly over the last 50 years as consumer needs have increased significantly.1 As the need for electricity increased, more fossil fuel plants were brought online to meet the demand, and the relative percentages of renewables and energy storage decreased.1 While fossil fuel energy sources, and even hydro and geothermal sources can provide stable energy production, renewable energy production from solar, tidal and wind sources are inconsistent in their energy production.2 They can produce excess energy at some times, and then none at others.3
To combat this, energy storage systems have been employed to reduce total load on the grid when more energy is being produced than is needed and then to supplement energy release when the demand is high.4–6 A range of alternative energy storage techniques have been used on and off grid, such as thermal, mechanical, chemical and electrochemical.5 Among these systems, electrochemical, specifically battery technology, is of much interest largely due to ease of use and flexibility when compared to other prevalent methods such as pumped hydroelectric, compressed air and thermal energy storage systems, which can require large infrastructure to be constructed.2,5
These systems primarily include lead acid, lithium ion and redox flow batteries (RFB).7 The first of these, the lead acid battery, has seen large design improvements and wide application in many industries since its inception over 150 years ago.8 Historically there have been many lead-acid batteries used to help provide consistent energy supply.9 However, lead-acid batteries are not able to meet the needs of the energy sector due to low energy densities and insufficient recharge cycles, leading to a short service life.8 Lithium ion batteries are a more recent product which can achieve significantly higher energy densities and cycles than lead-acid. While these batteries are prolific in small electronics, they are subject to economic constraints due to manufacturing costs and specifcations.9 An alternative to these two systems is RFBs. This system was first conceptualized in the late 1970′s10 while the first system was developed in 1981 at the NASA-Lewis Research Centre.10,11 Flow batteries differ somewhat from these other forms of batteries in that they consist of two redox solutions, the catholyte and the analyte solutions, which are stored in separate tanks that are pumped into a cell that contains an ion exchange membrane, which allows the movement of the balancing electrolyte but not the active species (Fig. 1).4
 Fig. 1  A schematic representation of redox flow battery. 
The RFB developed by NASA-Lewis Research Centre was based on an iron catholyte and a chromium anolyte system.11 During discharge, iron is reduced (Fe3+ to Fe2+) at the positive electrode and chromium is oxidized (Cr2+ to Cr3+) at the negative electrode, leading to electron flow through the circuit. Some of the early RFBs used Zn/Cl and Zn/Br systems, however the only significant commercially established RFB has been vanadium-based. This system was first developed in 19874 and since then has seen further research and improvements.12,13 As research in this area increases, the possibility of organic redox flow batteries (ORFB) using organic- or aqueous-based electrolyte has emerged as an exciting opportunity to expand upon and increase commercial viability.14–17 The operation of the systems is principally the same as seen in the inorganic based systems, however the metal species is replaced by redox active organic compounds.18 ORFBs seek to address some of the drawbacks of current inorganic systems, such as the cost, stability and resource limited nature of active materials such as vanadium19 compared to organic compounds that could be produced from renewable feedstocks.20 Additionally, formation of complexes and dendritic structures of the metal species reduce the capacity of these systems.19 The stability of the active species is still a concern in ORFBs, however the highly customizable nature of organic substances allows more options to successfully managing this problem.18,21–23 In summary, ORFBs can be based on cost-effective, accessible active species and materials, with customization and higher stability possible when compared to metal-based systems by careful design and use of appropriate synthetic procedures.
A consideration when developing ORFBs is the safety and potential environmental impact of the active material. As more research goes toward the development of storage systems, it can be expected that a deeper life-cycle analysis of the environmental impacts will be sought by industry and governments.24 This makes it important to improve chemical processes and applications by bringing them in line with the 12 principles of green chemistry, even at the research and development stages. The 12 green principles of chemistry (Fig. 2 and Table 1), first introduced formally in 1998,25 provide a framework for how chemical processes and substance can be formulated to be safe, sustainable and environmentally friendly. This method also allows greenness evaluation to be done without conducting the experiment if enough details of the substance and protocol are obtained. The construction of the metric begins with the evaluation of a reaction based on each principle in the scale of 1 (minimum) to 3 (maximum) of greenness. This requires the examination of the reaction protocol and making an inventory of all the substances used such as feedstock, products, by-products, auxiliaries including catalyst, solvents, additives etc. and waste. Then, the risks to human, environment and the potential hazard of each substance are analysed. Additionally, information of renewable substance and the degradation products are also collected. Each substance is then classified in a scale of 1 to 3 based on the 12 principles of green chemistry. Methods and substances are commonly referred to as ‘green/greener’ when they meet these 12 principles with each category having a score of 3 whereas when the greenness is minimum, all the scores will be 1 (Table 1). The data can also be visually presented as a radar graph with a fuller version displaying a higher degree of greenness.
 Fig. 2  The 12 principles of green chemistry. 
Table 1 Summary of the 12 principles of green chemistry and the number of points allocated depending on the ‘greenness’ of the reaction. Extracted from ref. 26




GC principle
Criteria
Score




P1 prevention
Waste is innocuous
3


Waste involves a moderate risk to human health and environment
2


Waste involves a high risk to human health and environment
1


P2 atom economy
Reactions without excess of reagents (<10%) and without formation of by-products
3


Reactions without excess of reagents (<10%) and with formation of by-products
2


Reactions with excess of reagents (>10%) and without formation of by-products
2


Reactions with excess of reagents (>10%) and with formation of by-products
1


P3 less hazardous chemical syntheses
All substances involved are innocuous
3


Substances involved have a moderate risk to human health and environment
2


At least one substance involved has a high risk to human health and environment
1


P4 designing safer chemicals
All products involved are innocuous
3


Product involved have a moderate risk to human health and environment
2


At least one product involved has a high risk to human health and environment
1


P5 safer solvents and auxiliaries
Solvents and auxiliary substances are not used, but if used are innocuous
3


Solvents or/and auxiliary substances are used but have a moderate risk to human health and environment
2


At least one solvent or auxiliary substance has a high risk to human health and environment
1


P6 design for energy efficiency
Room temperature and pressure
3


Room pressure and temperature between 0 and 100 °C when cooling or heating is needed
2


Pressure different from room pressure and/or temperature >100 °C or less than 0 °C
1


P7 use of renewable feedstocks
All substances involved are renewable
3


At least one substance involved is renewable, water is not considered
2


None of substances involved are renewable, water is not considered
1


P8 reduce derivatives
Derivatizations are not used
3


Only one derivatization or similar operation is used
2


More than one derivatization or similar operations are used
1


P9 catalysis
Catalysts are not used and if used are innocuous
3


Catalysts are used but have a moderate risk to human health and environment
2


Catalysts are used and have a high risk to human health and environment
1


P10 design for degradation
All substances are degradable and break down to innocuous products
3


All substances not degradable may be treated to render them degradable to innocuous products
2


At least one substance is not degradable nor may be treated to render it degradable to innocuous products
1


P11 real-time analysis for pollution prevention
Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored are innocuous
3


Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored have moderate risk
2


Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored have a high risk to human health and environment
1


P12 inherently safer chemistry for accident prevention
Substances used have a low risk to cause chemical accidents
3


Substances used have a moderate risk to cause chemical accidents
2


Substances used have a high risk to cause chemical accidents
1




Organic active species for applications in ORFBs should seek to adhere to these principles given the large push for these systems in renewable energy sectors. It can be expected that these systems will be heavily scrutinised in relation to their environmental and human health impacts in a similar way as consumer batteries and solar panels have been analysed for their impact.24,27 Here, we have reviewed publications on aqueous ORFBs in the last 10 years, focusing on the core synthesis of the active materials, evaluating the ‘greenness’ of the methodologies using the 12 principles of green chemistry. Some specific reviews on solar RFBs,28 the role of supporting electrolytes,29 parameters influencing RFBs30 and a general summary on next generation of aqueous flow batteries31 have been previously reviewed by others. We will begin this review by evaluating the synthetic strategies to prepare active materials using acid catalysts, followed by catalyst free procedures, and oxidative polymerisation and commercially sourced materials, then finally provide a summary and outlook on this subject.
2. Synthesis strategies of redox active materials
2.1 Catalysts
Utilising catalysts in chemical reactions is seen as a green approach, as the reaction will proceed quickly, often at a lower temperature, increasing the energy efficiency of the reaction.32,33 Acid catalysts in particular play an important role in many organic reactions34–37 and this methodology has been applied in preparing redox active materials for RFBs. There are a variety of acids that can be used, comprising oxides and halides largely, and including different structural forms such as zeolites and ligands.4,5 Some of these are relatively benign while others are less so. A large area of research focuses on developing or improving the green chemistry aspects of these acids by using more abundant precursors, improving recyclability and the safety of the acid used.38,39
Hofmann et al.40 synthesised quinones using a Lewis acid. These included 2,3-diaza-9,10-anthracenedione (DAD), and its two derivatives, 2,3-diaza-5,8-dihydroxy-anthracene-9,10-dione (DADdi(OH)), and 2,3-diaza-6-methoxy-anthracene-9,10-dione (DAD(MeO)) (Scheme 1). The three compounds were synthesised using the same method. Briefly, 1,2,4,5-tetrazine and the accompanying naphthoquinone were added to a nitrogen filled flask along with the bidentate Lewis acid, 5,10-dimethyl-5,10-dihydroboranthrene and benzotrifluoride solvent. The reaction mixture was left at 110 °C overnight, solvents were removed under vacuum with a nitrogen filled cooling trap. DAD and DAD(MeO) were purified by via column chromatography using DCM/MeOH as the eluent. The synthesis for these compounds reports a yield of 76% for DAD and 18% for DADdi(OH), however for DAD(MeO) no yield was reported. The addition of the diaza group, along with functionalisation of the aromatic regions has shown to improve the energy density and stability of the molecules. The research provides a greater understanding of the customisability of quinones for use in aqueous redox flow batteries as a catholyte active material. Considering the green principles relative to the reaction schemes above, the one pot synthesis of the reaction eliminates the need for derivatization steps. Additionally, the high yields improve the atom economy of the reaction providing a chemically efficient reaction. The areas that warrant consideration under the green principles are the use of benzotrifluoride as a solvent and the Lewis acid that is used as a catalyst in this reaction. Both increase safety risks, particularly if the active materials are prepared in large quantities. The synthesised compounds can also pose environmental risks if not contained properly and will require treatment for disposal. Heating of the reaction up to 100 °C is energy intensive, reducing the overall energy efficiency of the reaction. Thus, these series of reactions score (1) for all the green chemistry principles except P2 and P8, both scoring (2), as shown in the radar graph in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Acid catalysed reaction to yield 2,3-diaza-anthraquinones reported by Hofmann et al. and the corresponding radar graph. 
Further studies by Hofmann et al.41 involved the synthesis of hydroquinone, 5,8-dihydroxy-2,3-phthalazine (DHP), along with two of its derivatives, 5,8-dihydroxy-6-methoxy-2,3-phthalazine (DHP(MeO)) and 5,8-dihydroxy-6,7-dimethyl-2,3-phthalazine (DHP(Me)2) (Scheme 2), which were carried out using the similar method as mentioned above. The products were obtained using 1,2,4,5-tetrazine and benzoquinone, 2,3-dimethylbenzoquinone, or 2-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone, in the presence of the bidentate Lewis acid. These were added to a nitrogen filled Schlenk flask, after which the solvent benzotrifluoride was added. This mixture was stirred at 55 °C, then the temperature was increased to 110 °C and left overnight. The solvent and tetrazine were removed under vacuum and the resulting solids were dissolved in 1:1 DCM/MeOH and purified using column chromatography. This method provided excellent yields for DHP (94%) and DHP(Me)2 (88%), while DHP(MeO) gave a poor yield of 23%. The dihydroxyphthalazine derivatives presented here did show increased performance as catholyte active materials in aqueous redox flow batteries relative to the base dihydroxyphthalazine structure. The authors sought derivatives that showed increased performance by the addition of functional groups that improved their chemical stability, redox potential and water solubility. Therefore, these reactions score (1) for all the green principles except for P9 with a score of (2) as displayed in the radar graph in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Acid catalysed reaction to yield dihydroxyphthalazine derivatives reported by Hofmann et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph. 
Wang et al.42 synthesised naphthoquinone derivative, 2-hydroxy-3-carboxy-1,4-naphthoquinone (2,3-HCNQ) (Scheme 3), which showed greatly improved solubility in alkaline solutions, as well as further improved performance characteristics in redox kinetics and stability metrics. The product 2,3-HCNQ was synthesised by dissolving ethyl benzoylacetate and AlCl3 in dry nitromethane under nitrogen. After stirring, a mixture of oxalyl chloride in dry nitromethane was added dropwise. The resulting mixture was heated to 80 °C for 3 hours. Once cooled to room temperature an aqueous solution of oxalic acid was added. The resulting mixture was extracted with ethyl acetate, this extract was then treated with aqueous NaCl solution before being dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate. The ethyl acetate was distilled off and the residue was chromatographed to obtain the precursor, 3-hydroxy-1,4-dioxo-1,4-dihydronaphthalene-2-carboxylate. A solution of the precursor in aqueous KOH was left to stir overnight at 60 °C. Once cooled the mixture was acidified with 1 M HCl, the resulting precipitate was collected and filtered while washing with cold water. The collected product was dried to obtain 2,3-HCNQ in 70% yield. Atom economy and no derivatisation steps score good when considering reagent efficiency in this reaction. The energy efficiency scores well due to moderately low reaction temperature. The solvent and reagent choice lead to lower ratings in safety due to hazard ratings. Thus, a score of (3) is given for P2 and P8, however this reaction scores (2) for P6 and P9, and all the other principles score only (1), as shown in the radar graph in Scheme 3.
 Scheme 3  Lewis acid catalysed reaction to yield naphthoquinone reported by Wang et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph. 
Another quinone-based material was developed by Schlemmer et al.43 through the synthesis of the redox-active quinone 2-methoxy-1,4-hydroquinone (MHQ) (Scheme 4). The material showed promise as an affordable and renewable product synthesised using vanillin from lignin feedstocks. The researchers optimized this reaction by altering peroxide and NaOH concentration, as well as THF and water ratios. The synthesis was carried out in a scintillation vial in which vanillin was dissolved in THF followed by the addition of peroxide and NaOH aqueous solutions. This mixture was then agitated using an ultra-sonic cleaner. After this conversion, the mixture was quenched via acidification to pH 3 using HCl. The solvent, THF, was removed using a nitrogen stream and the remaining aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl acetate and dried yielding 75% MHQ. The reaction was conducted at room temperature which scores well in energy efficiency and the use of renewable feedstocks for vanillin from lignin improved the reactions overall renewability rating. Additionally, the reaction used water as the solvent where possible, however the score for safety is lowered using THF. The reagents used are not notably hazardous and show minimal environmental risks, further improving the safety of the reaction. Therefore, a score of (3) is given for P2, P6, P8 and P9, and a score of (2) is given for P3, P4 and P7, with the other principles scoring (1) as shown in the radar graph.
 Scheme 4  Quinone-based material developed by Schlemmer et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph. 
Pang et al.44 have investigated the synthesis of amino acid-functionalised phenazine (AFP) compounds as anolyte active materials in aqueous RFBs, with 3,3′-(phenazine-1,6-diylbis(azanediyl))dipropionic acid (1,6-DPAP), as the most promising derivative. The synthesis of the AFPs first involves the bromination of phenazine at the appropriate positions before functionalisation with the amino acids. A generalised version of the synthesis for 2,7-dibromophenazine was used to synthesise both 2,7-, 1,8- and 1,6-dibromophenazine. The synthesis involved deprotonation of 4-bromoaniline using tBuOK in THF at −78 °C. This was followed by the addition of 1-bromo-4-nitrobenzene in THF. The reaction mixture was held at −78 °C before quenching with saturated ammonium chloride. The product was isolated using liquid–liquid extraction. The resulting residue was purified via flash chromatography using 0 to 20% ethyl acetate in hexanes gradient. The resulting crude product was added to a high-pressure flask with N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)acetamide in acetonitrile and heated at 100 °C for 16 hours. The reaction mixture was then gradually cooled to room temperature and the precipitate was collected via filtration and recrystallised to produce the pure 2,7-dibromophenazine in 35% yield.
Following this general reaction, the AFPs were prepared by adding dibromophenazine and an amino acid to a high-pressure flask with tBuOK, Pd2(dba)3, Brettphos and t-butanol, and heated to 100 °C for 16 hours (Scheme 5). The mixture was then gradually cooled to room temperature before the precipitate was collected via filtration. The solid was then dissolved in water and HCl was used to adjust the pH to pH 2. The resulting precipitate was collected, then purified using reversed phase column chromatography using 5–10% MeOH in H2O. The AFP products were obtained in yields between 84% to 98%. The use of both low and high temperatures, below 0 °C and up to 100 °C, in these reactions lower the overall energy efficiency of the synthesis. Both the reagents, solvents and auxiliary substances pose human and environmental hazards, this reduces the safety rating of the synthesis. The final product is produced in high yields allowing for less waste to be produced and provide a reliable synthesis. As shown in the radar graph, this synthesis scored (3) only for P9 and (2) for P2, P6 and P8 with the other principles only scoring (1).
 Scheme 5  Amino acid-functionalized phenazine derivatives developed by Pang et al. as anolyte active materials in aqueous RFBs and the corresponding radar graph of the green chemistry principles for this synthesis. 
Zhu et al.45 synthesised and tested a highly water-soluble artificial bipolar molecule containing a cathode-active ferrocene moiety and an anode-active bipyridinium moiety that allowed for a single compound to be used as the active material in both the catholyte and anolyte of an aqueous redox flow system. The synthesis of 1-(4-ferrocenyl-n-butyl)-1′-[3-(trimethylammonio)propyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium trichloride (Fc-bipy3+ trichloride salt) consists of 4 reactions and an anion exchange step. Firstly, to synthesise (4-bromobutanoyl)ferrocene, AlCl3 was added to a solution of ferrocene in DCM and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes. 4-Bromobutyryl chloride in DCM was added slowly to the solution while the reaction temperature was maintained at 0 °C. After an overnight reaction time, water was added, and the subsequent ethyl acetate extract was washed with brine. The worked-up reaction mixture was purified by column chromatography using hexane:ethyl acetate, 100:1. This yielded 70% of (4-bromobutanoyl)ferrocene.
To synthesise (4-bromobutyl)ferrocene, LiAlH4 and AlCl3 in diethyl ether were placed under nitrogen. A solution of (4-bromobutanoyl)ferrocene in diethyl ether was added dropwise while the reaction temperature was maintained at 0 °C, this was stirred for 30 minutes and more, and AlCl3 was added before heating at reflux. Once cooled to room temperature, the solution was poured into ice water and the pH was adjusted to 7 with H2SO4. The product was extracted with diethyl ether and dried with Na2SO4 before purification via column chromatography with hexane as the eluent. This yielded 95% of (4-bromobutyl)ferrocene. To synthesise 1-(4-ferrocenyl-n-butyl)-4-(4-pyridyl)-pyridinium bromide the researchers began by combining (4-bromobutyl)ferrocene and 4,4′-bipyridine in toluene and heating at reflux for 48 hours under nitrogen. The resulting precipitate was collected by centrifuge and washed with hexane and toluene before being dried to give the product in 90% yield.
To synthesise the desired product, 1-(4-ferrocenyl-n-butyl)-1′-[3-(trimethylammonio)propyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium tribromide (Fc-bipy3+ tribromide salt), 1-(4-ferrocenyl-n-butyl)-4-(4-pyridyl)-pyridinium bromide, (3-bromopropyl)trimethylammonium bromide and N,N-dimethylformamide were stirred under nitrogen for 72 hours at 100 °C (Scheme 6). The resulting precipitate was collected by filtration and washed with acetonitrile and DCM, and the product was obtained in 85% yield after drying. Finally, the bromide ions were replaced with chloride by Amberlite® IRA-900 chloride using anion exchange resin to give Fc-bipy3+ trichloride salt in 100% yield. To achieve the range of moieties in this synthesis, there are multiple reactions that reduce atom economy. Although the reaction does deliver high yields, and while a catalyst is used, it is not benign. In these reactions the use of organic solvents and reducing agents diminish the overall safety of the preparation methodology. The energy efficiency is also reduced by using elevated temperatures. Thus, this multiple step synthesis score (1) for all the green chemistry principles expect for P2 and P6 with a score of (2) as shown in Scheme 6.
 Scheme 6  Synthetic protocol using Lewis acid as catalyst for anolyte-catholyte active materials linked ferrocene-based material by Zhu and co-workers. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right. 
2.2 Catalyst free
While catalysts can improve the efficiency of a reaction, it also lowers the atom economy of the reaction. Introducing catalysts can present other hazards that are associated with the safety of the catalyst, or the energy required to recycle the catalyst.46 The development of green and safe synthetic methods in organic chemistry has become an important area of research, and catalyst free reactions are certainly an alternative.47 Many reactions that are carried out with catalysts can be altered to proceed in their absence, although there are limitations and obstacles in such reactions.48 Alterations to the reaction components such as solvents and the reactants used, or methods such as using microwave, mechanochemical reactions or on-water reactions can all allow dismissal of catalysts, resulting in a cleaner and more efficient reaction.48–50
There are several research groups involved in developing ferrocene and viologen as redox active materials in ORFBs.51–59 For example, Kim et al.55 synthesised dimethylethylferrocenylmethylammonium bromide (Fc1N112-Br) as a catholyte active material for aqueous ORFBs. The investigated product showed improved solubility in aqueous solutions compared to ferrocene. The synthesis of Fc1N112-Br involved dropwise addition of bromoethane to a solution of (dimethylaminomethyl)ferrocene in acetonitrile, which was stirred at room temperature for 24 hours (Scheme 7). The solution was then filtered and washed with diethyl ether to collect the Fc1N112-Br as a precipitate, which was dried at room temperature under vacuum to yield the final product. The reaction has a high energy efficiency as it is conducted at room temperature and, the lack of derivatisation steps leads to good scores in both regards. The reagents and solvents are both hazardous, thus reduce the ratings in the safety aspects of green chemistry. Therefore, the radar graph for this reaction gives a score of (3) for P2 and P6, and (2) for P8 with the other principles scoring only (1).
 Scheme 7  Ferrocene-based catholyte active material prepared by Kim et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph. 
Another ferrocene-based redox active materials was developed by Zhao et al.56 They investigated the electrochemical properties of the catholyte active material, 1,1′-bis(sulfonate)ferrocene dianion disodium salt (1,1′-FcDS). When paired with commercially available anthraquinone-2,7-disulfonic acid disodium salt as the anolyte active material, the catholyte 1,1′-FcDS showed high solubility in aqueous solution then ferrocene. The synthesis of 1,1′-FcDS was carried out by dissolving ferrocene bis-sulfonic acid in ethanol, followed by the addition of concentrated NaOH which resulting in precipitation, which was collected via filtration and air dried to give 1,1′-FcDS in 96% yield (Scheme 8). The reaction produces low levels of waste and, as it is not heated or cooled, the energy consumption is good, leading to good ratings for each category. The choice of solvents improves safety ratings providing good scores. The synthesis however lacks the consideration of reagent degradation and renewable feedstocks. Therefore, a score of (3) is given to all the principles, except for P5 scoring (2) and P7, P10 and P11 scoring (1), as shown in the radar graph in Scheme 8.
 Scheme 8  Ferrocene-based redox active materials developed by Zhao et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph. 
Works by DeBruler et al.54,57 examined sulfonate-functionalized viologen molecules as anolyte active materials in ORFBs. Firstly, 1,3-propanesultone in toluene was added to a nitrogen purged Schlenk flask and brought to reflux. To this, a solution of 4,4-bipyridine in toluene was added dropwise and left to stir for 3 hours at 110 °C. The flask was then cooled, and the precipitate was collected and washed with acetonitrile. Upon drying under vacuum, 98% of the product was obtained (Scheme 9). The reaction is quick and produces a high yield however, the high temperature used reduces the energy efficiency of the reaction.
 Scheme 9  Viologen molecules as anolyte active materials investigated by DeBruler et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph. 
Further to this work,58 the authors reported a quantitative yield when scaled to achieve 20 g of product. Referring to the green principles, the reactants pose safety risks related to handling and waste. Temperatures are not excessive, but they are still above 100 °C for multiple hours lowering the efficiency of the reaction. The atom economy and one pot synthesis of this reaction do appreciably increase overall efficiency of the reaction, and good yields were obtained. Looking at the green chemistry principles, this reaction scores (1) for P1, P3, P4, P6, P7, P10, P11 and P12, and (2) for P5. However, scores (3) for P2, P8 and P9 as shown by the radar graph in Scheme 9.
Another extension of viologen derivative from this group59 was the synthesis of a 4,4′-(thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-2,5-diyl)bis(1-(3-(trimethylammonio)propyl)pyridin-1-ium) tetrachloride [(NPr)2TTz]Cl4 as the anolyte active material (Scheme 10). The synthesis can be detailed in 2 steps. Firstly, a solution of rubeanic acid and 4-pyridinecarboxaldehyde in DMF was heated at reflux overnight. The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature before collecting the resulting precipitate via filtration, this was washed with water and dried under vacuum to give 2,5-di(pyridin-4-yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole, (Py2TTz) in 77% yield. Secondly, Py2TTz and (3-bromopropyl)trimethylammonium bromide were added to DMF and the mixture was heated at 100 °C for 3 days. The resulting precipitate was filtered and washed with DMF and acetonitrile before drying under vacuum to give 81% of [(NPr)2TTz]Br4. Finally, [(NPr)2TTz]Br4 was passed through an anion exchange with amberlite IRA-900 chloride to give the final product, [(NPr)2TTz]Cl4 in quantitative yield. This reaction is atom economy with no large excess of reactants used. However, the synthesis requires long reaction times at higher temperatures which lowers the overall energy efficiency of the reactions. The choice of reagents and solvents used reduce the scoring in safety as well as waste production. The synthesis has a score of (3) for P8 and P9, and a score (2) for P2, with the other green chemistry principles scoring only (1).
 Scheme 10  Viologen derivative developed by Luo et al. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right. 
Janoschka et al.60 presented the synthesis of anode and cathode materials, these were N,N′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride (MV) and N,N,N,2,2,6,6-heptamethylpiperidinyloxy-4-ammonium chloride (TEMPTMA), respectively. The researchers observed high capacities and energy densities while employing these materials in aqueous ORFBs. The synthesis for MV was reported as follows. 4,4-Bipyridine and chloroacetic acid were added to DMF and stirred at 140 °C for 24 hours. The resulting precipitate was collected and washed with DMF and DCM in succession to give the product in 94% yield (Scheme 11a). To synthesise TEMPTMA, N,N,2,2,6,6-hexamethylpiperidin-4-amine was dissolved in acetonitrile/toluene 1:1 (v/v) and transferred to a Büchi ecoclave pressure reactor. To this reactor, chloromethane was added at 70 °C in portions to maintain pressure below 3 bar, this was continued until no further consumption of gas was observed. Once cooled to 20 °C, the TEMPTMA precipitate was collected and washed with toluene. An aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, magnesium sulfate and the precipitate, was prepared, then hydrogen peroxide was added dropwise at 90 °C until TLC had indicated quantitative conversion. The pH was then adjusted to 5 and the precipitate removed by filtration. The solution was further stirred at 90 °C and the final product was collected in 96% yield (Scheme 11b). The synthesis has good atom economy and does not use catalysts which reduces overall waste. The synthesis of the anolyte active material requires moderate heating however, the catholyte active material requires higher temperature, lowering the energy efficiency. The solvents used can be hazardous to both human and the environment leading to lower safety and waste ratings. Thus, the radar graph shows an overall rating with a score of (3) for P8 and P9, and a score (2) for P2, with the other green chemistry principles scoring only (1).
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of anode and cathode materials, (a) MV and (b) TEMPTMA, respectively. The corresponding overall green chemistry radar graph for these syntheses is shown on the right. 
A similar body of work has been explored by Hu et al.61 where they have synthesised the anolyte active material 1,1′-bis[3-(trimethylammonio)propyl]-4,4′-bipyridinium tetrachloride ((NPr)2V) and the catholyte active material, 4-trimethylammonium-TEMPO chloride (NMe-TEMPO) to give high voltage of 1.38 V and capacity retention of 97% after 500 cycles in an aqueous ORFB. The [(NPr)2V]Br4 was synthesised by combining 3,3′-bipyrdine and (3-bromopropyl)trimethylammonium bromide in DMSO under nitrogen and heated to 100 °C for 3 hours (Scheme 12a). The resulting precipitate was filtered and washed with sequentially DMSO and acetonitrile, this was then dried and a yield of 68% was reported. An ion exchange column with Amberlite IRA-900 chloride-form anion-exchange was used to give [(NPr)2V]Cl4 in quantitative yield. The catholyte active material, NMe-TEMPO, was synthesised using 2,2,6,6-tetramethyloxy-4-aminopiperidine and methyl iodide in acetone which was stirred at room temperature overnight. The resulting precipitate was washed with acetone and dried. This was then dissolved in deionized water and passed through an anion exchange column. The product, NMe-TEMPO was collected in 36% yield (Scheme 12b). The synthesis of the anode material is simple and efficient, although the energy efficiency is lacking due to the reaction temperature of 100 °C. The solvents used reduce the safety and hazard ratings of the synthesis in the green chemistry scheme. The synthesis for the catholyte material is more energy efficient as the reaction is done at room temperature. Thus, these syntheses score (1) for all the green principles, except for P5, P6 and P12 with a score of (2) and P8 and P9 scoring (3).
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of anolyte active material, (NPr)2V and the catholyte active material, NMe-TEMPO, developed by Hu et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph. 
Recently, Hu et al.62 synthesised a viologen derivative containing a phenyl ring between two pyridinium rings. The resulting structure of their work being, 1,1′-bis[3-(trimethylamonium)propyl]-4,4′-(1,4-phenylene)bispyridinium tetrachloride ((APBPy)Cl4) acted as a two-electron storage mediator that had improved stability and capacity in aqueous ORFB. To synthesise (APBPy)Cl4, 1,4-phenylenebispyridine and (3-bromopropyl)trimethylammonium bromide were dissolved in DMF and was heated at 95 °C for 24 hours (Scheme 13). The resulting precipitate of 1,1′-bis[3-(trimethylamonium)propyl]-4,4′-(1,4-phenylene)bispyridinium tetrabromide ((APBPy)Br4) was filtered and washed with DMF and acetonitrile to give a yield of 76%. The (APBPy)Br4 was then dissolved in water and potassium hexafluorophosphate was added, the resulting precipitate of (APBPy)(PF6)4 was collected before being washed with water. Upon drying, the (APBPy)(PF6)4 was dissolved in acetonitrile and tetrabutylammonium (TBA) chloride was added to precipitate the final product, (APBPy)Cl4, which was then washed with acetonitrile and dried. The energy efficiency of the synthesis is relatively high, and the synthesis does not use unnecessary derivatisations. The solvents and auxiliary substances used are considered hazardous. Thus, a score of (3) is given for P8 and P9, (2) for P2 and P6, and all the other green principles score only (1), as shown in the radar graph in Scheme 13.
 Scheme 13  Synthesis of a viologen derivative containing a phenyl ring between two pyridinium rings by Hu et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph. 
Liu et al.63 presented a viologen based anolyte active material which is paired with the TEMPO derived, 4-[3-(trimethylammonio)propoxy]-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl chloride as a catholyte active material in a ORFB (Scheme 14). The system showed high galvanic power density and columbic efficiency. The synthesised compounds were highly soluble in water and showed minimal degradation during electrochemical analysis. The viologen, BTMAP-Vi-Cl was prepared by firstly dissolving 1,3-dichloropropane and trimethylamine-THF solution at 60 °C and stirring for 96 hours. The mixture was then cooled and diluted with methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) and the resulting precipitate yielded (3-chloro-propyl)-trimethyl-ammonium chloride in 42%. The product and 4,4′-bipyridine were added to DMF and heated at reflux under argon for 1 hour. The reaction mixture was then cooled and the resulting solid was triturated with isopropanol to give the product, BTMAP-Vi-Cl in 30% yield.
 Scheme 14  Synthesis of a viologen and TEMPO derivative by Liu et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph. 
For the TEMPO derivative synthesis, 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (4-OH-TEMPO), TBA bromide and 1-bromo-3-chloropropane were added to a mixture of toluene and 50% aqueous sodium hydroxide which was stirred for 48 hours at room temperature. The resulting crude product was purified using flash column chromatography on silica with ethyl acetate and hexane as the eluent. This yielded the product 4-(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-oxyl-4-piperidoxyl) propyl chloride (Pr-TEMPO) in 33%. To obtain the final product, Pr-TEMPO was added to a solution of trimethylamine-THF which was stirred at room temperature for 48 hours. The mixture was then concentrated. Water was added, and this was washed multiple times with ether before the aqueous layer was collected and evaporated under reduced pressure. This afforded the product TMAP-TEMPO with a yield of 63%. Thus, these syntheses score (1) for all the green principles, except for P8 and P9 with a score of (2).
Further development by this group and co-workers64 led to the synthesis and investigation of a series of viologen derivatives as anolyte active materials paired with the catholyte active material (ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium chloride (FcNCl). Notably, among the derivatives was (1,1′-bis(3-hydroxypropyl) dibromide (BHOP-Vi), which showed excellent capacity retention and power density. Three hydroxylated viologens, BHOE-Vi, BHOP-Vi and BHOH-Vi, were synthesised using the same method with slight variations (Scheme 15). The synthetic method for BHOE-Vi involved a mixture of 2-bromoethanol and 4,4′-bipyridine in acetonitrile which was heated at reflux for 24 hours. After cooling, the resulting precipitate was collected via filtration and washed with MTBE and dried under vacuum to give 97% of the product. BHOP-Vi followed the same procedure, however, 2-bromoethanol was replaced with 6-bromo-1-hexanol and a yield of 90% was recorded. BHOH-Vi was also prepared using the same method but 2-bromoethanol was replaced with 3-bromo-1-propanol and the solvent used was DMF, to yield the product in 95%. The synthesis of the viologen derivatives is high yielding. The high temperature and long reflux time reduce the energy efficiency scores of the synthesis, this is the same for all the viologen compounds outlined here. Some of the viologen synthesis above use different solvents but all score the same in the green chemistry principle. The synthesis uses no derivatisation steps, reducing the potential for waste from auxiliary compounds. Therefore, a score of (3) is given to P8 and P9, (2) for P6 and the other principles only score (1).
 Scheme 15  Synthesis of a series of viologen derivatives as anolyte active materials paired with the catholyte active material by Liu et al. 
The other viologen derivative synthesised was bis[(3-trimethylammonio)-propyl] (BTMAP-Vi-Br). Its preparation involved 1,2-dibromopropane in trimethylamine-THF solution, and the mixture was stirred for 12 hours at room temperature. The resulting precipitate was collected via filtration and washed with MTBE to give (3-bromo-propyl)-trimethyl-ammonium bromide. This was then dissolved in DMF with 4,4′-bipyridine and the mixture was stirred for 3 hours at 100 °C under argon. Once cooled, isopropanol was added to the mixture to precipitate BTMAP-Vi-Br, which was collected via filtration and washed with isopropanol and acetone before drying under vacuum.
Looking at other catalyst free work that requires no derivatisations, Huang et al.65 developed the synthesis for five bipyridyl-based compounds, 2,2-bipyridinium-1,1-dimethyl dichloride (progenitor), diquat dibromide (diquat 2), 5,12-dimethyl-7,10-diazoniatricyclo [8.4.0.02,7] tetradeca-1(10),2(7),3,5,11,13-hexaene dibromide (diquat 3), 4,13-ditert-butyl-7,10-diazoniatricyclo [8.4.0.02,7] tetradeca-1(10),2(7),3,5,11,13-hexaene dibromide (diquat 4) and 4,13-dimethyl-7,10-diazoniatricyclo [8.4.0.02,7] tetradeca-1(10),2(7),3,5,11,13-hexaene dibromide (diquat 5) (Scheme 16). The synthesis of diquat 2–5 follows the same synthesis. Briefly, a mixture of 2,2-bipyridyl or appropriate derivative and 1,2-dibromoethane were heated at reflux for 12 hours. Then, after cooling to room temperature the resulting precipitate was collected and washed with acetonitrile and hexane to produce yields of; diquat 2, 85%, diquat 3, 96%, diquat 4, 88% and diquat 5, 95%.
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of five bipyridyl derivatives (a) progenitor and (b) diquat 2–5, by Huang and co-workers. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right. 
The synthesis of the progenitor varied from the others. Firstly, 2,2-bipyridine and iodomethane were added to ethanol and heated at reflux for 2 days, then cooled. The precipitate formed was collected, this was then stirred in ethanol and recollected, then dissolved in water and re-precipitated by dropwise addition of ethanol. This final precipitate was dissolved in water then filtered through a column of amberlite Cl− exchange resin, to give the isolated product in 6% yield. The presence of extended π-conjugation in the diquat molecules was an important factor in the effectiveness of this class of compound to produce a high cell voltage, and further modification of the base structure is expected to lead to greater voltages. The focus on this compound stems from the readily available nature of the diquat compounds as they are commonly used pesticides. The first 4 syntheses produced high yields with high atom economy and no derivatisation steps showing an efficient reaction, however the boiling point of the solvent/reactant dibromoethane is ∼132 °C and this is maintained for 12 hours reducing the energy efficiency. Furthermore, the reactants are highly toxic, increasing human and environmental risks. For the reaction of the progenitor, low yields were observed. Toxic and flammable reactants were used as well, increasing risks of accidents as well as human and environmental health hazards. The reaction does however use ethanol as a solvent, and this is heated at reflux below 100 °C, making it fairly energy efficient. Thus, these series of reactions only score (1) for all the principles except P8 and P9 with a score of (3) as displayed by the radar graph in Scheme 16.
Similar to previous catalyst free reactions discussed here, Hoober-Burkhardt et al.66 reported the synthesis of 3,6-dihydroxy-2,4-dimethylbenzenesulfonic acid (DHDMBS) without any derivatisation steps (Scheme 17). The work presented a catholyte active material with a scalable and straight forward synthesis. The material was able to sustain high current densities with little chemical degradation while being highly water soluble when coupled with an anthraquinone anolyte material. To synthesise DHDMBS, 2,6-dimethylbenzene-1,4-diol was added slowly to sulfuric acid, then the solution was cooled, diluted, and neutralized with potassium carbonate to precipitate the product, which was filtered and washed with water. The solid was dissolved in acetone and the insoluble potassium carbonate was filtered. The filtrate was collected and concentrated, then the crude product was recrystalized from acetone and washed with water/acetone 90/10, to give the pure product in 85% yield. The reaction demonstrates high energy efficiency and there are no derivatisations in the scheme. Water is the primary solvent used in the reaction. A notable hazard is the use of strong acid in the reaction however the reaction is high yielding and atom economical. Therefore, this reaction scores (1) only for P7, P10 and P11. However, scores (3) for P6, P8 and P9 with the remaining principles scoring (2) as summarised by the radar graph in Scheme 17.
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of DHDMBS as catholyte material by Hoober-Burkhardt et al. and the radar graph of the green principles for the synthesis is shown on the right. 
There have been several efforts of developing quinones and anthraquinones as redox active materials for ORFBs.67–72 Hu et al.71 synthesised 9,10-anthraquinone-2,7-disulfonic diammonium salt as shown Scheme 18. The derivative prepared showed good solubility in water due to the ion-pairing between the ammonium cation and the anthraquinone anion. This improved solubility translated to greater performance when used as an anolyte material in an aqueous RFB operating at neutral pH. To synthesise the redox active material, they passed the quinone in water through a cation exchange column with amberlite resin, then ammonium hydroxide solution was added, and the excess water was dried to give the product in 98% yield. The same method was applied to the synthesis of 9,10-anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium salt, however the quinone and resin were stirred prior to passing it through a cation exchange column, which resulted in a 98% yield of the product. The synthesis is highly atom economical, uses no catalysts and only requires water as the solvent, thus it is chemically efficient and relatively green in many aspects. The only areas lacking the application of green principles are the energy efficiency involved in rotary evaporating water, and safety and environmental concerns of the reactants used in the synthesis. Therefore, this reaction scores (1) for P6, P10, P11 and P12. However, scores (2) for P3, P4 and P7 with the remaining principles scoring (3) as summarised by the radar graph in Scheme 18.
 Scheme 18  Simple anthraquinone sulfonic ammonium salt synthesis by Hu and co-workers and the corresponding radar graph of the green chemistry principles. 
Ng et al.72 examined the electrochemical properties of a quinones, specifically a class of supramolecular self-associated amphiphilic salts paired with TBA and tetramethylammonium (TMA). The synthesis for the investigated quinone (Q-SSA) with each TBA and TMA is detailed as follows. To synthesise [Q-SSA][TBA], 2-aminoanthraquinone and triphosgene were mixed in ethyl acetate and heated at reflux for 4 hours under nitrogen. Then, TBA aminomethane sulfonate in ethyl acetate was added and the mixture was heated at reflux overnight (Scheme 19). Once cooled, the solids were isolated via filtration and dissolved in methanol which as then filtered again. The resulting solid was dissolved in chloroform and washed with water. The organic layer was then evaporated to give [Q-SSA][TBA] in 23%. The synthesis for [Q-SSA][TMA] was similar to the method above, however TMA in ethyl acetate was added and the mixture heated at reflux overnight. The resulting mixture was taken to dryness and water was added, this was then centrifuged, and the supernatant was washed with chloroform, the aqueous layer was then collected, evaporated and the resulting solid was precipitated from methanol to provide [Q-SSA][TMA] with a low yield of 9%. These reactions do not need catalysts and derivatisation steps such as protective groups, therefore reducing unnecessary reagents. The energy efficiencies of the reactions are fair with heating below 100 °C. The reagents and solvents have toxicity or environmental hazard ratings, thus reducing the scoring in safety and waste aspects. Therefore, these reactions score (3) only for P8 and P9. However, score (2) for P2 and P6, with the remaining principles scoring (1) as summarised by the radar graph in Scheme 19.
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of supramolecular self-associated amphiphilic salts, Q-SSA paired with tetrabutylammonium (TBA) and tetramethylammonium (TMA) by Ng et al. The corresponding green chemistry principles radar graph is shown on the right. 
Quinone derivative was explored by Drazevic et al.73 by synthesising a hydroquinone derivative via the addition of electron-withdrawing groups to avoid negatively effecting the redox potential (Scheme 20). The resulting catholyte material showed good water solubility and redox potential in various degrees of protonation. The compound tetramorpholinohydroquinone, (TMHQ) was synthesised using an efficient two step synthesis detailed as follows. Morpholine and paraformaldehyde were added to a mixture of toluene and triethyleneglycol monomethyl ether. The resulting mixture was distilled, and a solution of hydroquinone and methanol was added. Following this, the reaction mixture was heated to 150 °C for 20 hours. Once cooled the precipitate was collected and washed with diethyl ether yielding 37% TMHQ. Therefore this reaction scores (1) for all the green principles expect for P2 scoring (2) and P8, P9 and P12 scoring (3).
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of hydroquinone explored by Drazevic et al. The corresponding green chemistry principles radar graph is shown on the right. 
The natural resource, indigo carmine or 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid sodium salt was investigated by Mukhopadhyay et al.74 as the anolyte active material in ORFBs. The researchers altered the dye to its acid state, 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid, observing significantly improved solubility when using protic solvents. Further manipulation of the molecule was suggested might improve its electrochemical properties and coupled with its affordability and renewability, will increase its potential application in redox flow battery technologies. The method of preparing the 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid sodium salt involved the soaking of plants that contain indican, from which indigo originates, in water to allow fermentation before sulfonation. The researchers work focused on converting the 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid sodium salt to the acid analogue 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid using an ion exchange column with amberlyst 15 hydrogen resin, that yielded 90% of the product (Scheme 21). Therefore, this protocol is an excellent example of green synthesis scoring (3) for all the green principles expect for P4 and P11, scoring (2).
 Scheme 21  Synthesis of indigo carmine-based redox active material for ORFB by Mukhopadhyay et al. and the corresponding radar graph. 
Another class of molecule that is popular as redox active material is phenazines.75–79 Li et al.77 explored the viability of a phenazine-based organic dye basic blue 3 (BB3) as catholyte active material which was paired with vanadium anolyte. The BB3 dye showed significant stability translating to a high-capacity retention in aqueous ORFBs. The synthesis of BB3 involved an asymmetric cyclization reaction detailed as follows (Scheme 22). 3-(Dialkylamino)phenol and NaOH were added to acetonitrile and stirred for 1 hour, then methyl p-toluenesulfonate was added and the mixture was heated overnight at 70 °C. Once completed, the mixture was filtered and the solid was washed with acetonitrile. The filtrate was collected and evaporated, the remaining residue was dissolved in 5% HCl and washed with diethyl ether. The pH of the aqueous layer was adjusted to 9 using K2CO3 and the solution was extracted using diethyl ether to give the ether product. The organic solvent was evaporated, which was then acidified and after 1 hour, NaNO2 was added. After stirring over ice for a further hour the pH was adjusted to 9 using K2CO3. The mixture was then filtered, and the filter residue washed with water before collection and drying. Finally, to a suspension of the nitroso compound and HCl in isopropanol, 3-(dialkylamino)phenol was added slowly over 2 hours and the mixture was heated at 70 °C under nitrogen. The temperature was then held at 100 °C for 10 hours. The crude product was then purified using column chromatography. The final solid was washed with diethyl ether and dried under vacuum yielding BB3 in 60%. The synthesis uses readily available reagents and the BB3 catholyte is a benign compound that is produced in good yields. The reaction uses many benign auxiliary substances and reagents although, the use of some toxic and highly flammable solvents lowers the overall scoring. The energy efficiency of the reaction is good with reaction carried out below 100 °C. Thus, this reaction scores (3) for P8 and P9, (2) for P2, P3, P5 and P6, with the remaining principles scoring (1), as shown in the radar graph in Scheme 22.
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of phenazine-based organic dye basic blue 3 (BB3) as catholyte active material by Li et al. and the corresponding radar graph. 
Another phenazine based anolyte active material was developed by Hollas et al.78 They synthesized three phenazine derivatives (DHPS, DHPC and DHP) (Scheme 23) for testing in RFBs. The derivatives rely on a simple, highly scalable synthesis and showed pleasing performance as anolyte materials, notably DHPS which showed high reversibility, solubility, and current density. DHPS was prepared by slowly adding 3,4-diaminobenzenesulfonic acid to a mixture of 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone and water which was then left to reflux overnight. After cooling, acetone was added to the mixture and the precipitate was filtered and washed with water and acetone, to give the product in 99% yield. DHPC was prepared using the same method with the substitution of 3,4-diaminobenzenesulfonic acid for 3,4-diaminobenzoic acid, to give the same yield of product. DHP was synthesised by combining 1,2-phenylenediamine and 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone in water and degassing the flask before heating at reflux for seven hours. Once cooled, the precipitate was collected and washed with water to give the product in 97% yield. The reactions provide high atom economy, although heating water at reflux lowers the energy efficiency of the reaction. The reactions largely utilize water as a solvent along with acetone. The precursors do pose health risks to humans and environmental hazards if exposure occurs, considering the risk assessment of the product is unknown. Thus, these phenazine syntheses score (3) for P2, P8 and P9, (2) for P5 and P6, with the remaining principles scoring only (1).
 Scheme 23  Condensation reaction to form phenazine-based anolyte materials by Hollas and co-workers with a radar graph showing the scores for the 12 principles of green chemistry. 
The investigation by Winsberg et al.79 used a combination of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-N-oxyl and phenazine to produce the redox active material TEMPO phenazine combi-molecule (Scheme 24). The combi-molecule was synthesised from the products of two preceding reactions. Firstly, 2-(2-(2-((2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-N-oxyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl-4-methylbenzenesulfonate (TEMPO/TEG/phenazine) was synthesised by dissolving TEMPOL and NaH in DMF, which was degassed before heating at 60 °C for 30 minutes. A mixture of triethylene glycol di(p-toluenesulfonate) in DMF were added dropwise to the TEMPOL solution and stirred for a further 6 hours at 60 °C. Once cooled, water was added to convert NaH to NaOH. The solvent was then evaporated under vacuum and the crude product was collected via liquid extraction with ethyl acetate and water, then MgSO4 was added, and the filtered solvent was evaporated under vacuum. The resulting solid was washed with diethyl ether and purified by column chromatography using ethyl acetate/heptane yielding 2-(2-(2-((2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-N-oxyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate in 23%.
 Scheme 24  Synthesis of TEMPO phenazine combi-molecule as redox active material by Winsberg et al. and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph. 
Dihydroxyphenazine was prepared by making a mixture of potassium hydroxide, benzene, o-nitroanisole and o-anisidine, which was degassed and then heated at 90 °C for 16 hours. Once cooled, the organic layer was decanted, and water was added to form precipitate which was filtered and washed with water, acetone, and ethanol. This crude product was dissolved in glacial acetic acid and hydrobromic acid and heated at 140 °C for 72 hours. Once cooled, the pH was adjusted to 5 and the resulting precipitate was filtered. The solid was then dissolved in ethyl acetate, filtered over silica, and dried under vacuum, yielding 13% of dihydroxyphenazine.
Finally, the combi-molecule was prepared by dissolving dihydroxyphenazine and potassium carbonate in DMF, and once this was degassed, 2-(2-(2-((2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-N-oxyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl-4-methylbenzenesulfonate was added dropwise and the solution was then heated at 50 °C for 20 hours. Once the reaction mixture has cooled to room temperature, liquid–liquid extraction with ethyl acetate and water was carried out, the organic phase was dried under vacuum and the product was further purified using column chromatography with DCM/triethylamine 98/2 yielding TEMPO/TEG/phenazine combi-molecule in 45%. The combi-molecule is used as the catholyte-anolyte active materials in a redox flow battery. The connection of the TEMPO and phenazine molecules via TEG linkages allows the oxidation and reduction process to occur individually, providing a novel solution to separating anolyte and catholyte active materials in redox flow cells. When comparing the green principles to the synthesis, the reaction has a low atom economy. The reactions rely heavily on organic solvents. However, the overall reaction is relatively energy efficient with reaction temperatures below 100 °C, though some parts of the reactions still require heating. Thus, these series of reaction only score (1) for P7, P8, P9 and P11, but scores (2) for the remaining green chemistry principles.
Zwitterionic molecules based on radialenes have been investigated by Bejger and co-workers to show good stability in water and display reversible electrochemistry. Turner et al.80 synthesised and investigated the diester-tetracyano[3]radialene catholyte active material (Scheme 25). The researchers reported a high coulombic efficiency when the radialene was paired with a viologen derivative anolyte active material. The radialene showed good solubility in water attributed to the methyl ester moieties. The synthesis consists of two main steps. Firstly, is the preparation of zwiterionic 1,2-bis(methoxycarbonylcyanomethylene)-3-triethylammoniumcyclopropanide done by adding tetrachlorocyclopropene and methyl cyanoacetate to DCM and the mixture was allowed to cool to −30 °C. Then, triethylamine was added, and the mixture was allowed to warm to 0 °C. The crude product was recrystallised from acetonitrile to give a yield of 26%. Next, the product was added dropwise to a cooled solution of sodio-malononitrile which was prepared from sodium metal and methyl cyanoacetate in methanol. Then, the mixture was warmed to room temperature and stirred for 2.5 hours. After this the solution was treated with TBA bromide before the methanol was evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue was diluted with water. The resulting precipitate was collected via filter and the bis(TBA)-salt was recrystallised from acetonitrile. The crystals were then dissolved in acetonitrile and converted to the sodium salt with the addition of sodium iodide in acetonitrile. This yielded 55% of the product, 1,2-bis(methoxycarbonylcyanomethylene)-3-dicyanomethylenecyclopropandiide. Thus, these reactions only score (1) for all the green principles expect for P8 and P9 scoring (2) and (3), respectively.
 Scheme 25  Synthesis of tetracyano[3]radialene catholyte active material by Turner et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph. 
The last two examples in this section are research involving naphthalene dimide as the redox active material. Wiberg et al.81 presented an easily synthesis of naphthalene diimide which showed high solubility in aqueous solutions. To synthesise N,N′-bis-[(3-trimethylamino)propyl]-1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic acid diimide (NDI), 3-(dimethylamino)-1-propylamine was added to water followed by 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride which was added portion-wise at 0 °C. The mixture was left to stir under nitrogen and the temperature was allowed to rise slowly to room temperature. After 40 hours, the mixture was filtered and the product was collected, yielding 87% (Scheme 26). The product was further treated by dissolving in chloroform and excess chloromethane was bubbled through the solution. After being left at room temperature overnight, the resulting precipitate was collected via filtration and dried affording the pure final product, NDI. This reaction is straight forward and provides good yield using minimal excess of reagents allowing for a good atom economy. The energy efficiency is good with temperatures between 0 and 100 °C. Negative impacts on the green chemistry scorings include the reagents and solvents, which are listed as toxic and highly flammable, thus reducing the scoring in safety and waste. Therefore, this reaction score (1) for all the green principles except for P2 and P6 with a score of (2), and P8 and P9 with a score of (3), as displayed in the radar graph in Scheme 26.
 Scheme 26  Synthesis of highly aqueous soluble naphthalene diimide by Wiberg et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph. 
Medabalmi et al.82 synthesised sodium and potassium salts of dicarboxylate naphthalene dimides as two-electron anolyte materials in a neutral ORFB system using 4-OH-TEMPO as the catholyte active material. The NDIs showed excellent cycling performance with minimal capacity fade over time. The synthesis involved a two-step method. Firstly, 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride and glycine were added to glacial acetic acid and heated at reflux for 4 hours, then either K2CO3 or Na2CO3, were combined in a solution of 1:4 (v/v) water and ethanol. This mixture was stirred at 60 °C for 12 hours and the resulting precipitate was washed with ethanol and dried overnight at 70 °C yielding >90% for K2-BNDI and Na2BNDI (Scheme 27). The overall synthesis scores (2) for most of the green principles, expect for P2, P7, P10 and P11 scoring (1) and, P8 and P9 scoring (3).
 Scheme 27  Synthesis of water-soluble naphthalene diimide by Medabalmi et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph. 
2.3 Polymerisation
Another synthetic strategy to obtain redox active materials is to use polymerisation. Most materials become less soluble in the form of a polymer compared to a small molecule, however retain the redox activity and energy density of the system.83,84 Additionally, polymerisation can proceed in a green synthesis using water or alkaline water as the reaction solvent.85–88 However, not all polymerisation reaction can proceed via these solvent systems and here we have highlighted some recent polymers developed for RFBs.
Wang et al.89 synthesised a quinoxaline polymer derivative, poly(6-(1H-pyrrol-1-yl) quinoxaline (PPyQX) as the anode material. The polymer, PPyQX showed good electrochemical cyclability in an alkaline environment. This work provided a positive foundation for the use of polymers in aqueous redox flow systems. The 6-(1H-pyrrol-1-yl)quinoxaline (6-PyQX) monomer was first synthesised by combining 2,5-dimethoxytetrahydrofuran, 6-aminoquinoxaline and iodine with a mixture of DMF and water. This was stirred at room temperature for 2 hours before heating under reflux (130 °C) for 5 hours. After cooling, water was added, and the precipitate was collected to give 6-PyQX in 50% yield.
The polymer, poly(6-(1H-pyrrol-1-yl)quinoxaline) (PPyQX) was synthesised by dissolving 6-PyQX into DMF, followed by dropwise addition of bromine while maintaining the reaction at 60 °C (Scheme 28). After stirring for 5 hours, water was added, and the resulting precipitate was collected to yield 96% of PPyQX. The reaction scheme presented by the authors has middling to good ratings for green principles. The reactions use high and moderate temperatures, and moderate reaction times providing good yield of the polymer. Reagents are not used in excess and there are no derivatisation steps which would reduce atom economy. Therefore, this polymerisation reaction scores (1) only for P6 and P11 and has a high score of (3) for P8, P9 and P10, with the remaining principles scoring (2).
 Scheme 28  Synthesis of quinoxaline derivative polymer via oxidative polymerisation by Wang et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph. 
Cao et al.90 prepared poly(N-anthraquinoyl pyrrole) (PyAQPys) as part of a PyAQPys/graphene composite as the anode polymer material. This composite lead to excellent redox capacity in acidic aqueous mediums and this property was attributed to π-π stacking. To prepare PyAQPy (Scheme 29), firstly the monomer, 2-PyAQ, was synthesised by the addition of 2,5-dimethoxytetrahydrofuran, iodine and 2-aminoanthraquinone to DMF and water mixture, and stirred for 3 hours at 120 °C. Upon cooling to room temperature, water was added to initiate a precipitate which was collected. To prepare the polymer PyAQPy, 2-PyAQ was dissolved in DMSO, bromine was added, and the mixture was stirred for 5 hours at 60 °C. Then, water was added to the reaction mixture and the resulting precipitate yielded 96% of PyAQPys.
 Scheme 29  Polymer/graphene composite as anode active material synthesised by Cao et al. and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph. 
Finally, to prepare the PyAQPys/graphene, firstly a graphene dispersion was made by sonicating commercial graphene nanoparticles in DMSO for 30 minutes. Then, a solution of PyAQPys in DMSO was added and the resulting mixture was further sonicated for 30 minutes. Water was then added, and solid was collected to give a 2:1 PyAQPys/graphene composite which was dried under vacuum at 60 °C. This synthesis shows good ratings throughout the green principles, notably showing good energy efficiency and good atom economy with low wastage. Thus, this polymerisation reaction has a score of (2) for all the green chemistry principles except for P6, P7, P10 and P11 with a score of (1) and P9 with a score of (3).
Another example in this section is the synthesis by Zhou et al.91 of a polyimide from N,N’-diamino-1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic bisimide (DANTCBI) using dianhydride and diamine starting materials. The reported polyimide acts to slow redox-targeting reactions of the anolyte active materials leading to high-capacity in pH neutral electrolytes, reducing the need for highly acidic electrolyte solution. The synthesis was done by first preparing DANTCBI by treating 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA) and hydrazine in 1:1.2 proportions, this was then heated under reflux in N-methylpyrrolidone at 300 °C for 6 hours, the product (DANTCBI) was filtered and washed with ethanol and dried. Then, equimolar proportions of DABTCBI and NTCDA were treated using the same reaction conditions as above to yield the polyimide (Scheme 30). The high temperatures used in the reaction lower the overall energy efficiency of the reaction based on the green chemistry rating table. Additionally, the solvents used also increase the hazard ratings. The reaction lacks derivatisation steps and uses a minimal excess of reagents improving atom economy and allowing an easily scalable synthesis. This reaction has a score of (1) for all the green chemistry principles except for P2 with a score of (2) and, P8 and P9 with a score of (3).
 Scheme 30  Polyimide synthesised by Zhou et al. to prevent redox targeting reaction for anode active material and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph. 
2.4 Commercial source
Compounds that are already available commercially can be an affordable and accessible material for RFBs. However, evaluating the ‘greenness’ of the synthetic method is a difficult task as information may not be available in the published literature. Thus, here, we have classified the commercial materials and, evaluated their cost and hazard to the health and environment based on the SDS from the manufacturer.
Zhang et al.18 compared methylene blue (MB) against a range of phenothiazine based compounds (Fig. 3a), azure A, promethazine (PMZ) and chlorpromazine (CPZ), that were commercially available as redox active material in aqueous RFBs. This work provides detailed analysis on the potential, solubility, capacity and cyclability of a range of these materials in ORFBs. Given these materials are commercial reagents and no synthesis was performed, the safety of each compound and cost can be considered in relation to the green principles. Consulting the SDS, MB shows acute oral toxicity, and this is a low risk of harm if handled appropriately with health and safety guidelines. Azure A is not classified as an environmental hazard whereas PMZ and CPZ are classified as chronic aquatic hazards. These environmental issues should be considered especially when the materials are used on a large scale and if there are possibilities that the compounds may ultimately be released into the environment.
 Fig. 3  Some commercially available redox active materials (a)–(h) used in aqueous ORFBs. Their chemical classification, cost per gram and manufactures are indicated below the structure. 
Cao et al.92 investigated a range of commercially available hydroxyanthraquinone isomers (Fig. 3b), and determined their properties relevant to ORFBs. The detailed analysis provided a good demonstration of the effect of functional group alterations on the electrochemical characteristics and stability of a molecule in a redox cycle. Bauer and co-workers93 also studied anthraquinones however they were equipped with sulfonate salt functional groups, 2-AQS, 2,6-AQDS and 2,7-AQDS (Fig. 3c). These redox active materials showed electrochemical stability and no crossover phenomena. Also utilising 2,7-AQDS, Lee et al.94 discovered that this active material can form hydrogen bonding with ethylene glycol, which is used as the additive, thus increasing its aqueous solubility. This resulted in a high columbic efficiency and device capacity, 98% at 40 mA cm−2 and 17.8 A h L−1, respectively, with low capacity delay rate of more than 99% until the 100th cycle. All the anthraquinone compounds in these studies pose some level of harm to humans who handle the materials without proper safety equipment. Most notably, their toxicity is concerning as large-scale spills or leaks could lead to ecological damage and/or human health impacts. Closely related of quinones, cyclohexanedione isomers (Fig. 3d) were investigated by Leung and co-workers95 as the negative electrode in ORFB. 1,3-Cyclohexanedione recorded the most negative electrode potential (−0.4 V vs NHE) amongst the isomers, with a wide operating pH range (pH 1–5) and reversible redox reactions. Similar to anthraquinones, all cyclohexanediones pose some harm to human and the environment when used in large quantities.
Two quinone isomers, 1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonate sodium salt (NQ-S) and 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone (NQ-SO) (Fig. 3e) were evaluated as the negative active species with high solubility in KOH electrolyte.96 However, full-cell RFB performance was analysed only using 0.6 M and 1.2 M NQ-SO with the redox couple 0.4 M ferrocyanide (FeCN), recording 1.01 V as the cell voltage. The device performances (charge efficiency, discharge capacity, state of charge and power density) using NQ-SO were superior at higher concentrations (1.2 M), however, improved cycle stability was achieved at lower concentration (0.6 M) due to suppression of NQ-SO dimerization. Similar to other quinones, these compounds are not categorised as a dangerous good, however, their toxicity is concerning as they may cause irritation to eyes, skin and the respiratory tract resulting in chronic effects from short- and long-term exposure.
The next two publications used the same redox active materials in their ORFB investigations. Liu et al.97 and Huang et al.98 used methyl viologen (MV) and 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl (4-HO-TEMPO) (Fig. 3f) as the anolyte and catholyte active materials, respectively, with NaCl as the supporting electrolyte. The anolyte and catholyte active materials were purchased from commercial sources with no further synthesis. Liu et al. aimed to provide insight on a cost effective and safe aqueous redox flow battery by drawing comparisons between vanadium and other organic RFBs. Huang et al. on the other hand showed the use of aqueous imidazolium chlorides as supporting electrolytes to significantly improve the properties of redox active materials in aqueous RFBs. Orita et al.99 also utilised 4-OH-TEMPO with Zn-based anolyte. They have shown factors such as pH and atmospheric gases influence side reactions relevant to 4-OH-TEMPO. Five TEMPO derivatives (Fig. 3h), 4-OH-TEMPO, 4OT, 4AT, 4CyT and 4CaT, as the positive electrode was recently extensively studied suggesting that redox potential, diffusion co-efficient, electron transfer rate constant and solubility are influenced by the supporting electrolyte and the functional groups on the TEMPO. Some of these compounds are highly unlikely to be used in large quantities such as that required for ORFBs, as they are relatively expensive.100 Hu and co-workers101 utilised MV as the active material coupled with an organometallic ferrocene-based anolyte material. They studied the effects of ion membrane and supporting electrolyte on the resistance and redox performance of ORFBs, revealing that thin membrane (90 μm) with low resistance (1.07 Ω cm−2) and 2 M KCl as the supporting electrolyte, give the highest battery performance for this redox system.
Molecular design of azobenzene (Fig. 3g) was adapted by Zu and co-workers where they utilised the redox activity of the azo group (NN).102 They used the active material, AADA with hydrophilic groups to increase its aqueous solubility exhibiting ORFB performance of long cycling stability while retaining capacity of 99.95% per cycle over 500 cycles. The azobenzene is again a non-dangerous good however, in large quantities it will be harmful to humans and the environment if it enters the ground water or the drainage system.
3. Conclusions and outlook
Tremendous efforts in the past decade has seen aqueous ORFBs develop to become a potential leader in energy storage. However, the field still encounters issues in utilising ‘green’ active materials for the anolytes or catholytes. Learning from the 12 principles of green chemistry, more control over the synthetic methodology and material processing can be advocated into the field of aqueous RFBs as outlined in this review. The green chemistry principles introduce the key concepts required to understand ways to minimise our impact on human health and the environment whilst gaining experimental progress. While many researchers consider aqueous RFBs as a green technology, they fail to consider these principles in their material synthesis. It thus provides an illusion of the ‘greenness’ of the RFB system as a whole. This review would delineate a true and multidimensional picture of the impact on the environment of these organic syntheses in developing active materials for aqueous RFBs.
We must recognise that the existing information for some active materials is sparse, particularly commercially obtained compounds, as their synthetic methods are absent in the literature, causing a ‘black hole’ in our understanding of the ‘greenness’ of these reactions. However, solid information is readily available in the literature for materials that are synthesised by research groups, allowing a transparent evaluation of their synthetic methodology in producing the active materials. Most reactions are not able to stringently obey all the 12 principles of green chemistry, however the majority of them are heading towards a ‘green’ label with requirement of some adjustment in the synthesis (Table 2), especially in the aspects of using renewable feedstocks (P7), real-time analysis for pollution prevention (P11) and using inherently safer chemistry for accident prevention (P12). Several methodologies including using a microwave reactor and utilising catalysts lead to energy efficient reactions. For some reactions, reducing the use of toxic solvents and avoiding unnecessary chemical transformation are considered as they are important to prevent threat to human health and the environment. In some reactions, maximum incorporation of all the precursors to produce the desired material is an atom economy strategy. While some syntheses have proven to be ‘greener’ than others, many more syntheses to come need to consider the green chemistry principles to truly harness the clean and renewable concept in aqueous RFBs and would also allow a more meaningful comparison with RFBs based on inorganic materials. Such understanding and implementation should become a practical demonstration in future research.
Table 2 Summary of the scores for the 12 principles of green chemistry allocated for the reactions discussed in this review











Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the RMIT ECDF incentive fund and honours scholarship are gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references

          J. Apt and P. Jaramillo, Variable Renewable Energy and the Electricity Grid, Taylor & Francis Group, London, UK,  2014, pp. 19–39 Search PubMed .
A. Evans, V. Strezov and T. J. Evans, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4141–4147 CrossRef .
K. Schmietendorf, J. Peinke and O. Kamps, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2017, 90, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Tomazic and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, in Electrochemical Energy Storage for Renewable Sources and Grid Balancing, ed. P. T. Moseley and J. Garche, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2015, pp. 309–336 Search PubMed .
P. Leung, A. A. Shah, L. Sanz, C. Flox, J. R. Morante, Q. Xu, M. R. Mohamed, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 243–283 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Droste-Franke, in Electrochemical Energy Storage for Renewable Sources and Grid Balancing, ed. P. T. Moseley and J. Garche, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2015, pp. 61–86 Search PubMed .

          X. Li, H. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, Redox flow batteries : fundamentals and applications, Taylor & Francis, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida,  2018, pp. 103–118 Search PubMed .

          J. Jung, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Lead-Acid Battery Technologies : Fundamentals, Materials, and Applications, Taylor & Francis Group, Baton Rouge, US,  2015, pp. 111–137 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li and Y. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Zhang, Q. Liu and Y. Li, in Reactor and Process Design in Sustainable Energy Technology, ed. F. Shi, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2014, pp. 61–97 Search PubMed .

          L. H. Thaller and M. A. Hoberecht, Performance Mapping Studies in Redox Flow Cells, Report DOE/NASA/12726-13 – NASA-TM-82707, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Cleveland, USA. Lewis Research Center,  1981.
S. Roe, C. Menictas and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A5023–A5028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kazacos, M. Cheng and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, B. Hu, M. Hu, Y. Zhao and T. L. Liu, Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2220–2240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Y. Li, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 20, 100634 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Kwabi, Y. Ji and M. J. Aziz, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6467–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, J. Tian, J. Xu and Y. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 13384–13411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Z. Niu, S. Peng, Y. Ding, L. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901052 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hu, C. Debruler, Z. Rhodes and T. L. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1207–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, M. Zhang, H. Cui, B. Yan, Y. Liu and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 4164–4168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, S. Kim, J. Kang and H. R. Byon, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1988–2001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and Y.-C. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, W. Pan, W. Duan, A. Hollas, Z. Yang, B. Li, Z. Nie, J. Liu, D. Reed, W. Wang and V. Sprenkle, Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2187–2204 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Tsang, G. W. Sonnemann and D. M. Bassani, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 156, 37–48 CrossRef CAS .

          P. T. Anastas and J. C. Warner, Green chemistry : Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, Oxford, England,  1998 Search PubMed .
M. G. T. C. Ribeiro, D. A. Costa and A. A. S. C. Machado, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2010, 3, 149–159 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. P. Kang, M. Chen and O. A. Ogunseitan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5495–5503 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wedege, D. Bae, W. A. Smith, A. Mendes and A. Bentien, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25729–25740 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 603–612 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hofmann and D. Schroeder, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2019, 91, 786–794 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Narayan, A. Nirmalchandar, A. Murali, B. Yang, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, S. Krishnamoorthy and G. K. S. Prakash, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 18, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Ünlü, A. Arıkaya and S. Takaç, Green Process. Synth., 2019, 8, 355–372 Search PubMed .
G. K. S. Prakash, T. Mathew and G. A. Olah, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 565–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong, S. Ahles, A. H. Heindl, G. Tiétcha, A. Petrov, Z. Lu, C. Logemann and H. A. Wegner, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 14, 618–625 CAS .
K. Anne, S. Christian and T. Béla, Curr. Org. Synth., 2019, 16, 615–649 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hechelski, A. Ghinet, B. Louvel, P. Dufrénoy, B. Rigo, A. Daïch and C. Waterlot, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1249–1277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, K. Huang, A. Zheng, F.-S. Xiao and S. Dai, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 372–391 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dalpozzo, G. Bartoli, L. Sambri and P. Melchiorre, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3501–3551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Obligacion and P. J. Chirik, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 15–34 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hofmann, F. L. Pfanschilling, N. Krawczyk, P. Geigle, L. Hong, S. Schmalisch, H. A. Wegner, D. Mollenhauer, J. Janek and D. Schroeder, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 762–774 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hofmann, S. Schmalisch, S. Schwan, L. Hong, H. A. Wegner, D. Mollenhauer, J. Janek and D. Schroder, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3427–3438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Zhao, W. Yan, G. Zhu, L. Ma, B. Yu, L. Wang, G. Li, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2404–2409 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schlemmer, P. Nothdurft, A. Petzold, G. Riess, P. Fruhwirt, M. Schmallegger, G. Gescheidt-Demner, R. Fischer, S. A. Freunberger, W. Kern and S. Spirk, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 22943–22946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, X. Wang, P. Wang and Y. Ji, Angew. Chem., 2021, 60, 5289–5298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, F. Yang, Z. Niu, H. Wu, Y. He, H. Zhu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 417, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Begouin and M. Niggemann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8030–8041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kardooni and A. R. Kiasat, Polycyclic Aromat. Compd., 2019, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifácio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5522–5551 RSC .
F. Zhao, X. Jia, P. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Zhou, J. Wang and H. Liu, Org. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 2235–2255 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, V. D. B. Bonifácio, R. Luque, P. S. Branco and R. S. Varma, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 24–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Beh, D. De Porcellinis, R. L. Gracia, K. T. Xia, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Liu, P. Sun, Z. Yang and T. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1295–1301 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Borchers, M. Strumpf, C. Friebe, I. Nischang, M. D. Hager, J. Elbert and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001825 CrossRef CAS .
C. DeBruler, B. Hu, J. Moss, X. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Sun and T. L. Liu, Chem, 2017, 3, 961–978 CAS .
S. Kim, D. Kim, G. Hwang and J. Jeon, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 869, 114131 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, B. Zhang, B. R. Schrage, C. J. Ziegler and A. Boika, Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10270–10277 CrossRef CAS .
C. DeBruler, B. Hu, J. Moss, J. Luo and T. L. Liu, Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 663–668 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, W. Wu, C. Debruler, B. Hu, M. Hu and T. L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9130–9136 RSC .
J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 231–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14427–14430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, Y. Tang, J. Luo, G. Grove, Y. Guo and T. L. Liu, ChemCommun, 2018, 54, 6871–6874 RSC .
S. Hu, T. Li, M. Huang, J. Huang, W. Li, L. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Fu, X. Li and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M.-A. Goulet, L. Tong, Y. Liu, Y. Ji, L. Wu, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Chem, 2019, 5, 1861–1870 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, P. Zuo, Q. Chen, G. Tang, P. Sun, Z. Yang and T. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2245–2249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Yang, V. Murugesan, E. Walter, A. Hollas, B. Pan, R. S. Assary, I. A. Shkrob, X. Wei and Z. Zhang, Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2533–2538 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hoober-Burkhardt, S. Krishnamoorthy, B. Yang, A. Murali, A. Nirmalchandar, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A600–A607 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chai, X. Wang, A. Lashgari, C. K. Williams and J. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4069–4077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Tabor, R. Gomez-Bombarelli, L. Tong, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12833–12841 RSC .
M. R. Gerhardt, L. Tong, R. Gomez-Bombarelli, Q. Chen, M. P. Marshak, C. J. Galvin, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601488 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Lu, S. Chen, H. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Xiang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2469–2474 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, J. Luo, M. Hu, B. Yuan and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16629–16636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. L. Ng, R. Devlia, N. L. Foss, L. S. Alesbrook, J. R. Hiscock and A. T. Murray, ChemCommun, 2020, 56, 11815–11818 RSC .
E. Drazevic, C. Szabo, D. Konya, T. Lund, K. Wedege and A. Bentien, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4745–4754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukhopadhyay, H. Zhao, B. Li, J. Hamel, Y. Yang, D. Cao, A. Natan and H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7425–7437 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Romadina, D. S. Komarov, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, ChemCommun, 2021, 57, 2986–2989 RSC .
Y. Y. Lai, X. Li, K. Liu, W.-Y. Tung, C.-F. Cheng and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2290–2295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Fan, M. Ravivarma, B. Hu, Y. Feng and J. Song, ChemCommun, 2020, 56, 13824–13827 RSC .
A. Hollas, X. Wei, V. Murugesan, Z. Nie, B. Li, D. Reed, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Winsberg, C. Stolze, S. Muench, F. Liedl, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 976–980 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Turner, M. B. Freeman, H. D. Pratt III, A. E. Crockett, D. S. Jones, M. R. Anstey, T. M. Anderson and C. M. Bejger, ChemCommun, 2020, 56, 2739–2742 RSC .
C. Wiberg, F. Owusu, E. Wang and E. Ahlberg, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900843 CrossRef CAS .
V. Medabalmi, M. Sundararajan, V. Singh, M.-H. Baik and H. R. Byon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11218–11223 RSC .
Y. Y. Lai, X. Li and Y. Zhu, Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 113–128 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wedege, E. Dražević, D. Konya and A. Bentien, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saito, G. Sun and H. Nishide, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2007, 1, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otsuka, S.-i. Fujikawa, H. Yamane and S. Kobayashi, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 335–343 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hagemann, J. Winsberg, M. Grube, I. Nischang, T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 546–554 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hagemann, M. Strumpf, E. Schroeter, C. Stolze, M. Grube, I. Nischang, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7987–7999 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y.-M. Shen, W. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Cao and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227788 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, F. Ding, H. Chen, H. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 316–322 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Chen, M. Salla, H. Zhang, X. Wang, S. R. Mothe and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 14286–14291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, M. Tao, H. Chen, J. Xu and Z. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 386, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bauer, J. C. Namyslo, D. E. Kaufmann and T. Turek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 110522 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, A. Permatasari and Y. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5727–5731 RSC .
P. Leung, T. Martin, M. Liras, A. M. Berenguer, R. Marcilla, A. Shah, L. An, M. A. Anderson and J. Palma, Appl. Energy, 2017, 197, 318–326 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, G. Park and Y. Kwon, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 386, 123985 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, X. Wei, Z. Nie, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501449 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, C. W.
M. Kay, B. Kuttich, D. Rauber, T. Kraus, H. Li, S. Kim and R. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104464 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orita, M. G. Verde, M. Sakai and Y. S. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2016, 321, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, W. Liu, M. Qin, Z. Chen, J. Xu, J. Cao and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 21839–21844 RSC .
B. Hu, C. Seefeldt, C. DeBruler and T. L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22137–22145 RSC .
X. Zu, L. Zhang, Y. Qian, C. Zhang and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 22163–22170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Zachary Deller	Zachary Deller is a PhD student at RMIT University under the supervision of Dr Subashani Maniam and Assoc Prof Filippo Giustozzi. After recently completing both his bachelors and honours degrees in applied chemistry at RMIT University, with a special interest in organic chemistry, he has subsequently commenced a PhD exploring bituminous road materials, their emissions, quantification and mitigation.
Lathe A. Jones	Lathe Jones obtained his PhD from the University of Queensland (Australia), and has held positions at the University of Manchester (UK), The University of Zaragoza (Spain) and CIDETEC (Spain). In 2010 he was appointed at RMIT as a Vice Chancellors (Industry) research fellow. He is now a Senior lecturer in the School of Science at RMIT, with research interests in applied chemistry, especially electrochemistry, minerals science, and inorganic chemistry.
Subashani Maniam	Subashani Maniam obtained her PhD from the Australian National University in supramolecular chemistry under the supervision of Prof Christopher Easton. After a joint postdoctoral fellowship from the University of Melbourne and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) under the mentorship of Prof Andrew Holmes and Dr Gavin Collis working on dye-sensitised solar cells, she worked with Prof Steven Langford in exploring naphthalene diimides- and porphyrin-based photosystems. In 2016, she was awarded the VESKI Victorian Fellowship. Currently, she is a lecturer at RMIT University with research interests in developing small molecules for charge storage devices and cancer research.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic representation of redox flow battery.	 

 	Fig. 2  The 12 principles of green chemistry.	 

P1 prevention	Waste is innocuous	3
Waste involves a moderate risk to human health and environment	2
Waste involves a high risk to human health and environment	1
P2 atom economy	Reactions without excess of reagents (<10%) and without formation of by-products	3
Reactions without excess of reagents (<10%) and with formation of by-products	2
Reactions with excess of reagents (>10%) and without formation of by-products	2
Reactions with excess of reagents (>10%) and with formation of by-products	1
P3 less hazardous chemical syntheses	All substances involved are innocuous	3
Substances involved have a moderate risk to human health and environment	2
At least one substance involved has a high risk to human health and environment	1
P4 designing safer chemicals	All products involved are innocuous	3
Product involved have a moderate risk to human health and environment	2
At least one product involved has a high risk to human health and environment	1
P5 safer solvents and auxiliaries	Solvents and auxiliary substances are not used, but if used are innocuous	3
Solvents or/and auxiliary substances are used but have a moderate risk to human health and environment	2
At least one solvent or auxiliary substance has a high risk to human health and environment	1
P6 design for energy efficiency	Room temperature and pressure	3
Room pressure and temperature between 0 and 100 °C when cooling or heating is needed	2
Pressure different from room pressure and/or temperature >100 °C or less than 0 °C	1
P7 use of renewable feedstocks	All substances involved are renewable	3
At least one substance involved is renewable, water is not considered	2
None of substances involved are renewable, water is not considered	1
P8 reduce derivatives	Derivatizations are not used	3
Only one derivatization or similar operation is used	2
More than one derivatization or similar operations are used	1
P9 catalysis	Catalysts are not used and if used are innocuous	3
Catalysts are used but have a moderate risk to human health and environment	2
Catalysts are used and have a high risk to human health and environment	1
P10 design for degradation	All substances are degradable and break down to innocuous products	3
All substances not degradable may be treated to render them degradable to innocuous products	2
At least one substance is not degradable nor may be treated to render it degradable to innocuous products	1
P11 real-time analysis for pollution prevention	Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored are innocuous	3
Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored have moderate risk	2
Real-time analysis is done to monitor and control prior to formation of hazardous substance and when monitored have a high risk to human health and environment	1
P12 inherently safer chemistry for accident prevention	Substances used have a low risk to cause chemical accidents	3
Substances used have a moderate risk to cause chemical accidents	2
Substances used have a high risk to cause chemical accidents	1

 	Scheme 1  Acid catalysed reaction to yield 2,3-diaza-anthraquinones reported by Hofmann et al. and the corresponding radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 2  Acid catalysed reaction to yield dihydroxyphthalazine derivatives reported by Hofmann et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 3  Lewis acid catalysed reaction to yield naphthoquinone reported by Wang et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 4  Quinone-based material developed by Schlemmer et al. and the corresponding scores for the principles of green chemistry as a radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 5  Amino acid-functionalized phenazine derivatives developed by Pang et al. as anolyte active materials in aqueous RFBs and the corresponding radar graph of the green chemistry principles for this synthesis.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthetic protocol using Lewis acid as catalyst for anolyte-catholyte active materials linked ferrocene-based material by Zhu and co-workers. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 7  Ferrocene-based catholyte active material prepared by Kim et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 8  Ferrocene-based redox active materials developed by Zhao et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 9  Viologen molecules as anolyte active materials investigated by DeBruler et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 10  Viologen derivative developed by Luo et al. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of anode and cathode materials, (a) MV and (b) TEMPTMA, respectively. The corresponding overall green chemistry radar graph for these syntheses is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of anolyte active material, (NPr)2V and the catholyte active material, NMe-TEMPO, developed by Hu et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthesis of a viologen derivative containing a phenyl ring between two pyridinium rings by Hu et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthesis of a viologen and TEMPO derivative by Liu et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis of a series of viologen derivatives as anolyte active materials paired with the catholyte active material by Liu et al.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of five bipyridyl derivatives (a) progenitor and (b) diquat 2–5, by Huang and co-workers. The corresponding green chemistry radar graph is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of DHDMBS as catholyte material by Hoober-Burkhardt et al. and the radar graph of the green principles for the synthesis is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 18  Simple anthraquinone sulfonic ammonium salt synthesis by Hu and co-workers and the corresponding radar graph of the green chemistry principles.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of supramolecular self-associated amphiphilic salts, Q-SSA paired with tetrabutylammonium (TBA) and tetramethylammonium (TMA) by Ng et al. The corresponding green chemistry principles radar graph is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of hydroquinone explored by Drazevic et al. The corresponding green chemistry principles radar graph is shown on the right.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthesis of indigo carmine-based redox active material for ORFB by Mukhopadhyay et al. and the corresponding radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of phenazine-based organic dye basic blue 3 (BB3) as catholyte active material by Li et al. and the corresponding radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 23  Condensation reaction to form phenazine-based anolyte materials by Hollas and co-workers with a radar graph showing the scores for the 12 principles of green chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 24  Synthesis of TEMPO phenazine combi-molecule as redox active material by Winsberg et al. and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 25  Synthesis of tetracyano[3]radialene catholyte active material by Turner et al. and the corresponding green principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 26  Synthesis of highly aqueous soluble naphthalene diimide by Wiberg et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 27  Synthesis of water-soluble naphthalene diimide by Medabalmi et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 28  Synthesis of quinoxaline derivative polymer via oxidative polymerisation by Wang et al. and the corresponding green chemistry radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 29  Polymer/graphene composite as anode active material synthesised by Cao et al. and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph.	 

 	Scheme 30  Polyimide synthesised by Zhou et al. to prevent redox targeting reaction for anode active material and the corresponding green chemistry principle radar graph.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some commercially available redox active materials (a)–(h) used in aqueous ORFBs. Their chemical classification, cost per gram and manufactures are indicated below the structure.	 




This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
